Here begins thystorye of ye.vii. wise Masters of rome containing ryghe
fair and right joyous narraco^ns. and to ye reder right delectable^
SOmtyme^ in ye Cite of Rome was an Emperor named Poncianus a man of great
wisdom. He took to his wife a kings daughter that fair and goodly was. and
to all people gracyous and to her husbonde right dear. and conceived of him and
bare him a sone named Dyoclesian The child grew and of all people was
beloved. And when he was of the aege of seven years. his mother thempresse fill
soreseke / feeling herself that she might not live: sent after her lord
the emperor a messenger that he should come without taryenge if ever he would
see her on live. And when he was comen she said unto him. O my lord of this
i^fyrmyte may I not escape. Wherefore I humbly require you of a little petycyon
before my death. He answered. Desire what ye will. for I shall nothing deny
you. Then said she. After my death ye shall take an other wife as it behooves. I
ask and pray you yt she upon my son^ have no governance or power. but yt he
be kept and nourysshed fer from her. and yt he may get to him conning and
wisdom. The Emperor said. My most dear wife. your petycyon in all things
shall be fulfilled and performed. This said she turned her toward the wall
and yaue up the ghost and dyed. Many days after ye Emperor bewailed and
morned her death. and long time after her buryenge he showed his heaviness and
sorrow. and would i^ no wise mary or be joyful.

depiction of an emperor holding court

How the Emperor to the seven wise masters committed and delivered his sone
to learn.
UPon a time as the emperor lay in his bed he bethought him inwardly upon his
sone saying in his heart. I have only. but one sone / ye which shall be mine
heir. It is good whiles he is young that he be set to learn conning and
wisdom by the which he may after my death govern and rule the empire. Erly
when he was risen up from his bed. he let to be called before him his lords
of his counseyll. and of them took advise what best therein was to done. And
they answered. Lord. in Rome are vii. wise masters they excelle and excede all
other men in cunning and lettrature. let them be sent for and and deliver to
them your sone to nourysshe and to learn. That understanding the emperor sent
his letters sealed with his seal to ye^ vii. masters that they incontinent
should come to him without delay. And they anon came before the emperor. and he
demanded them if they knew wherefore yt he had sent for them. They answered
the cause ne your will we know not / but if please you to show us your mind
and intent we ben ready to fulfill it to the vttermoste of our powers. To whom
ye noble Emperor said. I have but one sone the which I shall deliver unto you
to nourysshe and to teache. So that by your doctrine and wisdom he may the
more wysly guide and govern yt empire after my decesse. The first master
named Pantyllas said. Lord deliver too me your sone and I shall teache him as
much conny^ge wtin vii. year as I and all my fellows can Then spoke the
second master that named was Lentulus. Sir of long time I have served you.
and hitherto I have had no manner reward. I demand nothing else of you but
that ye deliver me your sone to learn and govern. and I shall make him as
conning within.vi. year as I and all my fellows be. The third master said
that had to name Craton. My lord many times have I ben with you upon the se in
peril of my life / and of you have I had no manner of reward. if that I might
for my reward obtain that ye would wouchesauf to commytte your sone under my
rule and governance. I should enfourme him as much within.v. year. if his wit
thereto will attain as I and my fellows can. Tho stood up the fourth master /
that to name had Malquydrac right lene of body and said. My lord call to your
remembrance how that I and al my predecessors have served emperors. and have
received no manner of reward. wherefore I shall ask none other thing but yt ye
will deliver me your sone to enfourme and teache / and I shall make him to take
asmoche science and wisdom within four year as I and al my fellows have
learned in all our lives. Than spoke ye fyfth master yt was called Josephus.
lord I am old and many times I am called to your cou^seyl / and yt my
counsel ye know well has auayled and profyted you and yet I follow ye same.
But I desire no more save to deliver me your sone and I shall enstructe and
enfourme hy^ in as much conynge and science that he wtin.iii. year shall
profit and wit as much as I and all my fellows. tho came forth the syxte
master that was named Cleophas which said like the other promising to learn
and enfourme ye child in all their connynges wtin two year. The seventh
muyster rose up and said. which also desired the child and promised for to
learn him wtin one year ye scyences and wisdom of them all. As all this was
done. Than the Emperor said my trusty friends I am much bounden to thank
you all. and every of you. for that eueryche of you have so effectuelly desired
my sone to nouryssh and learn. If I should now commytte him to one and not to
an other / thereof should come ye descencyon and varyaunce among you. Therefore
to you al and every of you I commyt my sone to nourysshe and to teache. The
masters heryng this with great thanky^ges gyuynge to the Emperor took and
received his sone. and ladde him toward the court of Rome. Upon the way
spoke Craton to his fellows. If we this child should learn within the Cite of
Rome there is so great resort and concourse of people that it should hinder
and let him in his learning and fantasyenge. I wot a fair place without
rome three mile right pleasant and delectable. there let us do make a.iiii.
square chamber of stone and put hy^ therein and upon ye walls of ye side let
us pay^te and write ye.vii. arts lyberales. so yt ye child al times may se
and behold therein his doctrine as well as in his book and these advise and
counseyll pleased them all. and was done according in every point. The
masters dylygently every day during.vii. year taught and lettred the child.
which masters determined among them self and said / It is good yt we
examen our dyscyple how he is spedde in conning and science. They al accorded
to the same. Tho said master Pancyllas / how shall we prove him. Craton
said. Let every of us as he slepeth put under every corner of his bed an
olyue leave. and than we shall know if he perceived or felt any thing or not
this done. he waking gretely marueyllynge lyftynge up his eyes toward ye rofe
of the chamber fervently. The masters seeing yt said. Wherefore lift ye up your
eyes so sharply He answered it is no merueyll. for in my sleep I saw the
uppermost part of the chamber inclyned toward the earth. or under me it was
lift up. This hery^ge ye masters said among themself. If this child may
live he shall be a man of great conny^ge and fame.

How the Emperor by the counsel of ye great pry^ces and lords of his Empire
wedded an other wife.
How the emperor took an other Wife
a bishop marries the emperor to the king of Castille's daughter

THe princes and great lords of the Empire in the mean time came to the
Emperor and said. My lord ye have only but one sone. it is possible yt he
might happen to dye. And therefore it were profitable that ye should wedde an
other wife to engendre and make mo children to thentente that the Empire of
Rome be not left without heir. Also ye are so mighty that if it should happen
you to get many children ye may promote and auaunce them all to great
dygnytees and lordshyppes. Thereupon answerde the emperor. It is your counseyll
that I shall take an other wife than seek me one yt is gracyous / pure vyrgyne
/ fair and gentle borne. and than shall I follow your counseyll and advise.
They went and sought and serched many kingdoms and lands. and at the last
they found the kings daughter of Castyle that right fair was and beateuouse.
and her they gave the Emperor to wife. She behad her so well that anon in her
love he was taken so sore that he forgate and put in oblyuyon all the heaviness
and sorrow of of his heart that he had taken for ye death of his first wife.
And they lived long together without children And as Thempresse saw yt she might
not co^ceyue. For she herd yt the emperor had a sone with seven wise masters to
learn and nourysshe to ye behouffe proufyte of Thempyre. she thought in herself
and wysshed his death. And from yt hour forth she ymagyned how she might
conspyre his death. It happened on a night as ye Emperor lay in his bed. he said
to thempresse. My How the emperor rode to mete his sone
the emperor meets the seven masters of Rome on horseback in the country

When the emperor perceived yt his sone was coming upon ye way. he rode with
great Joy to mete him. The masters understanding the coming of the emperor
said to the child. It is best that we depart. and in the mean while we may
provide how we may save your life. The child said it pleases me well that ye
so do. but have mind of me in time of my necessyte. As they that herd. they
took their leave and departed toward ye Cite. The child came after
accompanied right honorably. And as he and his fader the emperor were met.
for joy and gladness he took him about the neck and kyssed him and said. My
dear sone how is it with you / is it long sythen that I saw you. He bowed
down his head and and answered no thing. The fader had great wonder why that he
spoke not. and thought in himself that his masters had him so informed that
he riding should not speak. And when they were comen to the palace and were
descended from their horses. The fader took his sone by the hand and lad him
in to the hall and set him next him and beheld him and said Say me how it is
with your masters. and how they have informed you. for now it is many years
sith I saw ^ou. He enclyned down his head and gave none answer. The fader
said. wherefore speak ye not to me. And when thempresse herd that themperours
sone was comen she was right Joyous and glad. and said I will goo to se him. She
apparaylled her with rich vesture and atyre. and took with her two of her
gentylwymen and How thempresse ladde Dyoclesyan in her chamber for to make
good chere.
the empress bares her breast to tempt her stepson went there as ye emperor
was sytty^ge with his sone she set her down by ye child. and she said to
the emperor is this your sone ye has been nourysshed with ye seven wise masters.
and he said / it is my sone / but he speaks not. She said. Deliver to me your
sone. and if ever he spoke I shall do him speak. Tho said the emperor rise and
go with her. The sone did reverence to ye fader. as though he said I am ready
too acco^plysshe your will. and went with her.

How thempresse ladde Dioclesyan themperours sone with her in her chamber for
to make good chere with him the which he withstode.
THempresse lad him with her in to her chamber and commanded all other to
avoid. and set him by her before her bed and said. O my best beloved
dyoclesyan. I have much of your person and beauty herd. but now I am glad yt
I may se you with mine eyes that my heart coueyteth and loves. for I have caused
your fader to send for you / that I have solace and Joy of your person.
Wherefore I without fault give you knowledge that. I for your love unto this day
have kept my vyrgynyte. Speak to me and let us goo bed together. But he gave
her no word to answer. She seeing that said to him. O good dyoclesyan have the
half of my soul wherefore speak ye not not to me / or at ye leest show me some
token of love / what shall I do speak to me. I am ready to fulfill and perform
your will. and when she had thus said she enbraced hy^ and would have kyssed his
mouth and he turned his vysage from her. and in no wise would consent. Tho said
she again to hy^. O sone wherefore do ye thus with me: behold there is none yt may
se us. let us together sleep / and than shall ye well perceive yt for your love
I have kept my vyrgynyte. and he turned his vysage from her / She seeing yt he
was of her ashamed. showed unto him her naked body and breasts and said.
behold my sone what body I have at your will. give me your consent or else
it shall be herd for me to pass with my right my^de. He neither with sign ne
with countenance of vysage showed her any manner of love. but as much as he
could wtdrewe hy^ from her. wha^ she saw yt she said. O my most sweet sone if
it please you not to consent to me ne yet speak. happily for some reasonable
cause. Lo here is paper pen and ynke if ye will not speak with your mouth than
write your will if I any time herafter may trust in your love or not The child
wrote as hereafter followed. O lady god forbede yt I should defoule my faders
orcheyerde. if I should defoul it: I wot not what fruit I should have of it. I
know well one thing yt I should syn^ in ye syghte of god. and I should ren in
ye maledictyon of my fader. and therefore from hensforth provoke or styre me no
more thereto / When she had yt cedule seen and red. she brake it with her teth:
and tare or rent her clothes with her nails to her nauyll. and her vysage al to
scratched it was al blody. and cast from her al ye orname^tes of her head and
cried with a loud voice: come hither my lords and help me before yt these rude
and evil body / shame and rauyssh me.

How thempresse complained to the emperor of the shame to her done by his sone.


THe Emperor was in his halle and herd the cry and noise of thempresse. he
hastily ran toward his chamber and his knights and other of his servants
followed him after for to see what there was to done. Tho began thempresse to
cry and to speak to the emperor thus. O my lord have pity and compassyon upon
me. behold this young man is not your sone. but ye foulest rybaude and harlot
yt ever was borne. and a defouler of wymmen. for as ye know well I lad and
brought him with me in to my chamber. and should have exhorted and caused him
to have spoken I have done asmoche thereto as I can or may. and why les I with
my words exhorted and meued him for to have spoken. he has endeuoyred himself
with me to have sinned. and by cause I would not to him conse^te. but withstode
as much as I might for to flee the shame. he my vysage has made all blody.
and my vesture and ornaments of my heed broken and all to torn. as ye may
openly se: And if ye had not so sone comen unto my calling / he had
accomplysshed in me his most foul and worste will. when themperoure this
saw and herd. fulfilled with great malice and woodnesse / commanded his
servants that they should led him to the galowes and hang him. And after
his lords herd that. said / Lord ye have no moo but this sone only. It is
not good yt ye thus lyghtely putt him to death / the law is put and ordained
for transgressors and mysdoers. and if it be so that he must deye. let him
by ye law dye leest that it be said yt the emperor in his great furour and Ire
without law and Justice he has put his only sone to death. As the emperor this
herd commanded him to be put in prison unto the time that judgment were given
against him. And when thempresse understood that the child was not put to death
/ she cried and weped bytterly and would have no rest when the night was comen
the Emperor entered in to his chamber to go to bed. and found his wife weeping
and sorowyng. To whom he said. O my most dear lady / for what cause are ye
thus sorrowful. She answered. Know ye not how yt your cursed sone has me thus
much shame done and offended / and ye have commanded him too be hanged and
yet he lived / and your word is not performed ne my shame is not wroken. To
morrow said the emperor he shall dye by ye law. Then said she. Shall he so
long live. Then^e might it happen to you as it did upon a burgeys of Rome of
whom an example is said. The Emperor said I pray you show me that example.
That shall I do gladly said the Empress.

The first example of the Empress.
this was. The gardyner heryng his master obeyed him. and hew down the tree.
And as this was done ye young plant all holy perysshed and came to naught
whereof came great harm. for when ye poor and the seek people perceived yt the
tree was so destroyed they cursed all them that were of counseyll and helpers
thereto / by the which they all before time were heled and cured of their
infyrmytees and maladyes. Then said the Empress understand ye what. I have
said. yes right well. than said she. I shall declare to you what I have said.

The declaratyon of the Example
This tree my lord betokens your most noble person / that with your
counseyll and help many pore and seek folk are greatly helped and conforted.
And the young ympe that under the great tree is up grown is your cursed sone
that now by his cunning begy^nith to grow and studyeth how he first may the
arms and bows of your might cut of / and to win too him the land and
praysynge of the people. and over yt he ymagyneth to destroy your person that
he may himself reygne. But what shall fall than thereof come. all poor and
feeble people shall curse all them the which might have destroyed your sone and
have not done it / I counseyll you whiles ye are in your power and health yt ye
destroy him lest yt the curse of the people fall upon you. Tho said the
Emperor. ye have given me good counseyll. To morrow I shall condemn him to
the most vylest death that can be thought when ye day was come / ye Emperor
went and sat in Iugeme^te. and commanded his servants yt they should led
his sone to be hanged with trompettes blowynge in to kenynge of death. And as
themperours sone was lad through the Cite. the comen people began too weep and
cry alas ye only sone of the emperor is lad toward his death / and
therwithall came Pancyllas rydyng upon a horse ye first master. when the
child saw him / he bowed his head to him. as though he had said. Have mind
upon me when ye come before my fader. se how I am lad to wards the galowes.
Than ye master said to the servants / make no haste. for I hope by the grace
of god this day to deliver him from the death. Then said all the people. O good
master haste you to ye palace and save your dyscyple. he smote his horse with
ye spores till he came to the palace / and kneled before the Emperor and did
him reverence / To whom the emperor said. It shall never be to the good. which
answered I have deserved a better reward. The Emperor said there lie you. for
I delyuerd to the and thy fellows my sone well speaking / and in all thing
well manered. and now he is dompe and that wors is he would have oppressed my
wife. therefore this day he shall dye. and ye all shall dye a shameful death.
The master said. O lord as for your sone yt ye say that he speaks not. yt
knows god. and without a cause it is not as ye shall understand. And that ye
say more / yt he your Empress would have defowled. I shall say you of a
troth. he has been in our company by ye space of xvi years and we never could
perceive such things by him. And therefore my dear lord I shall show you one
thing that if ye put your sone to death for ye words of your wife. it should
happen too you wors than to a knight the which that killed his best gray
hounde through the words of his wife which saved his sone from ye death Tho
said the emperor to ye master tell me yt example. The master said. Lord that
shall I not do / for before or I could make an end thereof your sone might be
deed and then in vain and with out fruit I should reherce it. but if it
please you this notable example to here / call again her sone till to morrow.
and as ye think by reason then do with him your pleasure. As the emperor that
herd anon he let the child too be called again and in the mean time be he
set him in prison whiles the master should fynysshe his tale. And then he
began to say in such manner as folowith.

The example of the first master
the emperor hears a master's example; through the door, his son is seen
surrounded by guards

THere was a valiant knight which had oonly one soon as ye have. The which
he loved so much that he ordained for his keeping three nourysshes. the first
should give him souke and feed him ye second should wasshe him and keep him
clean. ye third should bring him to sleep and to rest. This knight had also
a greyhounde and a fawcon yt he also loved right well. The greyhounde was so
good yt he never ran too no game but he took it. and held it till his master
came. And if his master dysposed him to go to battle. if he should not speed
in ye battle / anon as he should mount upon his horse. ye greyhounde would
take the horse tayll in his mouth and draw bakwarde / and would also cry and
howl meruaylously loud. By thise signs the knight understood if that he
should speed in his iourneye or not. The faucon was so gentle and so hardy
that he was never cast of to his pray but he took it. This same knight had
great pleasure in iustynge and turneynge. so yt upon a time under his castle he
let proclaim a tornement to the which came many good lords and knights. The
knight entered in to ye tourney. and his lady went with her maidens to se it.
And as they went out after went the nourysshes and left the the child lyenge
alone in the cradell in the halle where the greyhounde lay nygh the wall. and
ye hawk or faucon standing upon a perke. In this halle there was a serpente
lurkynge or hid in a hole. to all them of the castle unknown. The which
wha^ he felt that they were all absent he put out his head of his hole. and as
he no man saw but the child lyenge in in ye cradell. he went out of his
cauerne toward ye cradell for the child to have slain. The noble faucon
seeing that. beheld ye grehounde that was slepy^ge / she made such a noise
and rustelynge with her wings or feders yt the greyhounde a woke and rose up.
and when he saw the serpente nyghe the child. anon against him he lepte / and
they both faught so long together. till yt the serpente had grievously hurted
and wounded the greyhounde. that he bled sore. so ye the earth about the
cradell was al be bled with the blood of the greyhounde. The greyhounde when
that he felt himself so grievously hurted and wounded. sterte fyersly upon the
serpente. and faught sore together and so egerly. so that betwyne them the
cradell was over cast with the child the botome up ward. And by because ye the
cradell had four pomelles or fete they saved the chyldes vysage and his life
from any hurty^ge falling to wards the earth. and what shall I say more.
Incontinent thereafter with great pain the greyhounde overcame and slew the
serpente / and went and laid him down again in his place and lycked his wounds
/ And anon after as ye iustes and torneye was done. the nourysshes were the
first that came in to ye castle / and as they saw the cradell reuersed with
blood upon the earth enuyronned. and that the greyhounde was also blody. they
thought and said among themself that the greyhounde had slain the
child. and they were not so wise as too turn up again the cradell with the
child for too have seen what was thereof befallen. But they said / let us fle
or ren away leest that our master put or lay the blame upon us and slay us.
And as they were thus away rennynge / they met with the knights wife. and she
said to them wherefore make ye this sorrow / and whether will ye ren and they
said. O lady woo and sorrow be to us and to you why what is there happened.
show me. The grehounde they said that our lord and master loves so much
has devoured and slain your sone / and lies by the wall all full of the
blood. As ye lady this herd she fell to the earth and began to weep and cry
pyteously: and said alas. O my dear sone be ye thus slain and deed. what shall
I now make that I have my only sone thus lost. her withal came in the
knight from the torneye. and beholding his lady thus cryenge and making
sorrow. he demanded her wherefore that she made so great sorrow and
lamentacyou. She answered him. O my lord your greyhounde that ye love so
much has slain your only sone. and lies by the wall sacyate with blood of
the child. The knight hugely angered went in to the hall. and the greyhounde
went to him to mete and to fawn as he was wont to do And the knight drew
out his sword and with one stroke smote of the hounds heed. and went to ye
cradell and found his sone al hole. and by the cradell the serpente slain.
And by diverse signs perceived that the hounde had foughten against the
serpent for the salvation of ye child. Then with great sorrow and weeping he
tare his here and said woo be to me that for the words of my wife I have
slain my good greyhounde ye which has saved my chyldes life and has slain
the serpente. Herfore I will put my self to penance and brake his sword in
three pieces. and went to wards ye holy land. and abode there all the days of
hes life. Then said ye master to the emperor. Lord understand ye what. I have
said. And he answered and said right well. The master said: If yt ye do your
sone to death for ye words of your wife. it shall come to you wors than it
did too the knight for his greyhounde. The Emperor said ye have showed me a
fair example. and without doubt this day shall not my sone dye. Tho said the
master if ye do so ye do wysly. but I thank you that ye have him spared this
day for my sake:

The second complaynte of the Empress.
When ye thempresse herd yt the child was not yet deed. She began to weep
bytterly and sat her down upon the earth in ye ashes and would not hold
up her heed. As the emperor that herd he entered in to ye chamber and said to
her. O good wife wherefore make ye all this sorrow and trouble your self so
much. She said demand ye me that know ye not well what great despyte and
shame yt I have suffered of your unhappy sone. and have promised me yt ye should
se iustyse over hy^ done and yet he lives of troth. it shall hapne too you as
it happened upon a shepeherde and a boore. The emperor said. I pray you show
me that example for my learning. and she said yesterday I showed one: and I
saw none effect that thereof came. too what entente should I now show.
Nevertheless I shall this notable example tell and declare unto you / in this
manner here after following.

the empress complains to the emperor; his imprisoned son is seen through the
doorway

THere was sometime an Emperor the which had a great foreste / wherein was a
bore yt was so cruel and so fell that all men going through the forest he
killed and devoured. The emperor was thereof right heavy. and let to proclaim
through all his empire. that who soever he was that could sle the bore should
have his oonly daughter too wife. and thereto his Empire after his death. and as
this in all places proclaimed was there was not one man found yt durst meddle or
intromytte. Than was there a shepeherde which in himself thought. might I this
bore sle and wyn^e I should not not only auaunce my self. but also al my
generatyon and kynred he took his shepeherdes staf in his hand. and went in to
the forest. And as the boore had of him a sight. he drew him to wards the herd
man. and he for fere clymmed upon a tree. Than the bore began to byte and gnawe
the tree / so that the herd thought shortly that he should have over throw
it. This tree was laden with great plente of fruit The herd gadred and plucked
thereof and cast them to ye boore. In so much that when he had filled him there
with he put and laid him down to sleep. The which perceiving the herd by
little and little he descended and with the one hand he clawed the bore. and
with ye other he held him self on the tree / and seeing yt the boore slepte
soundly and fast. drew out his knyfe and smote yt bore to ye heart and killed
hy^. and wedded the^perours daughter to his wife: and aft ye death of her fader
he was made emperor. tho said she my lord wot ye not what I have said. He
said right well. Then said she. this mighty bore betokens your most noble
person / against whom may no man with stand. neither by wysdom ne with
strength. This shepeherde with his staff is the person of your ungracious
sone. which with his staff of conny^ge begins to play with you as ye herdman
clawed the bore and made him to sleep and after killed him. In yt same manner ye
masters of your sone by their falls fables and narracyons clawe and gloss unto
the time that your sone slay you. that he may regne. Tho said the emperor god
forbede yt they should do too me as they did to ye bore. and said unto her
this day my sone shall be hanged. And she answered if ye do so ye do wisely.
Than the emperor ye second time sytty^ge in judgment. commanded to lead him to
ye galowes and hang him. And whiles he was goy^ge. the second master came
before the emperor doing him reverence as it is before showed in ye comy^ge of
the first master. To whom ye second master said O my lord the emperor if ye
should do sle your sone for the words of your wife it might worse come to you
than it did to a knight which for the words of his wife was unjustly put in a
pyller. Themperoure said. O good master tell me how it happened. And he said my
lord I shall not say it but if yt ye will do call again your sone from ye
death unto the time yt thexample be told. the which if it turn you not from
your purpose. your will be fulfilled. The emperor commanded yt ye child
should be called again. And under

sorrowful. nevertheless she knocked to have come in. Tho spoke the knight out
of the wyndowe. O you most evil and unclean wife. now I know and am expert
that many a time ye have forsaken my bed and gone and done auoutrye. now
shall ye stand till the bell be rongen and yt the wakers may take you and do
with you according to the law. The wife answered. My lord wherefore lay ye
that to me. In troth I shall say you I was called by my moders maiden and
fetched in the night. and when I saw that ye slepte so swetely I durst not a
wake you because that ye are old. and therefore I took ye keys and went to my
mother the which is sore seek. that I fere too morrow she must be anointed or
aneeled notwithstanding for that I should not you offend or dysplease I have
hasted me aye^ to you and have left her lyenge in great pain and infyrmyte.
Therefore I pray you for the love of god let me in before the bell be rongen. The
knight answered So shall ye not come in. ye must there abide unto the time
that the bell be rongen. and till that ye wakers come and take you. Then she
said that should be to you and to me: to all our friends and kynred a great
shame and rebuke. Therefore at the reverence of almighty god let me come in.
Than said he. Have in thy my^de evil and false wife how oftentimes ye have
forsaken my bed and done auoutrye. It is much better that ye suffer shame
and be wayle for your sins here in this world. thanne for too suffer pain
in hell.

She said again to hy^ I pray you for the love of hy^ yt was crucyfyed and dyed
upon the cross have mercy up on me. The knight answered. ye labor all in
vayn^ for ye shall not come in. but ye shall tarry the coming the wakers. As
she herd that. she said my lord ye know well that by this door standyth a
well. if ye let me not come in I shall therein drown my self. rather thanne
all my friends should be shamed for me. Then^e said he. would god yt ye had be
drowned long before or ye in my bed came. And as they thus spoke together. ye
moan went down and was al derke. Tho said she. if it will none otherwise be I
shall drown miselfe. but yet before as a true christian woman I will make my
testament. First I bequethe to god and to our lady my soul. my body too be
buried in ye church of saint Peter and of all other things and goods yt god
has sent me. I give unto you to dyspose for my soul after your wisdom and
dyscrecyon. and when she had thus said. she went to the well. and a great stone
there being with both her arms she lift up and said. Now I drown my self.
and cast ye stone down in to the well and went again pryuely and stood by the
door. The knight herynge that noise cried with a loud voice saying / alas alas
my wife is drowned. and hastily came down and ran^e to the well. And when she
saw that the door was open. anon she entered and locked and made fast ye yate
/ and went up to ye chamber and lay and looked out of ye wyndowe. The knight
stood by ye well and cried and wept bytterly and said. woo be to me I have
now lost my most beloved wife. cursed be the time that. I made fast the door
against her. The lady herd that and said. O ye cursed old grysarde. why stand
ye there this time on ye night. was not my body to you suffycyent. wherefore goo
ye thus every night out to your harlottes and hores and leave my bed. As he
herd the voice of his wife he was right glad and said Blessed be god that
yet she is not drowned. But my good lady wherefore lay ye such things against
me. I thought to have chastysed you. and therefore I locked the door. But in no
wise I intended your peril / ye know well whatte sorrow I made for you when I
herd you to have fallen in the well. and therefore I came lightly to have
helped you. Thereupon she said. falsely ye lie. I never did such things as ye
lay to me. But it appears by a common proverb. he yt is defectyfe or culpable
himself in a sin. he iugeth every man to be in the same. or else ye fader
sought never his sone in ye oven: but if he had been therein himself. And
therefore ye put that to me yt ye your self have oftentimes done and used. but
one thing I promyt you. ye shall abide there till ye wakers come. and that ye
bell be rongen that they may led you before ye iuges to abide and suffer the
law. Tho said the knight. wherefore lay ye such things too me / I am old and
all my life days I have been conuersaunt in this Cite. and in this was I never
dyffamed. and therefore let me in that to me ne to your self ye do no shame.
She said. ye speak in vain. It is better that ye forthynke your sy^nes in this
world than in hell. Have in mind what the wise man says. A poor man proud.
A rich man a liar. An old man a fool god hatyth. So ye be a liar and rich.
what need was it too you for too lie upon me. And ye are a fool. for ye had ye
flower of my youth at your pleasure. and yet ye must run to hoores and
harlottes. And therefore it is a great grace of god that ye have time and space
too forthynke it. lest that ye should perysshe and be dampened for eurmore. and
for yt suffer your penance pacyently. The knight said. O my best and well
beloved lady all though it be so. yet is god merciful. and he asks no
thing of a sinner. but he amend his life and forthynke and do penance for
his sins. Now let me come in and I will make amends. She said. Which
devil has made you so good a prechour So come ye not in And as they thus
spoke the bell was rongen / ye knight herynge that said. O my most dear lady
the bell ryngeth now. suffer me to come in that I be not a shamed for ever.
which answered. ye ryngy^ge of the bell pretends the health of your soul
take it pacyently in your penance. And as this was said come ye wakers yt
about the cite went and found the knight standyn ge in ye street and said to
hy^. O good man it is not good yt ye in this hour of ye night stand here. And
as she herd the voice of ye wakers / she said. Good fellows venge me on ye
old cursed horehunter and rybaude. for ye know whose daughter and what. I am.
This cursed old man is wont every night to leave my bed. and go the to his
hoores and harlottes. I have long forborne him and would not show it ne
complain upon him too my friends. for I trusted that he would have amended his
mysrule. and it helps not. And therefore take him and punysshe him after the
law. ye all such old dotardes may take example by him. Then ye wakers took
him and all night chastysed him in prison. and on ye morn they put him on ye
pyllery. Tho said to the Emperor. Lord have ye ynderstonde what I have said
and he said right well. Tho said ye master. if ye put to death your sone by ye
excytacyon of your wife. it shall to you worse come than it did to ye knight.
The Emperor said she was the worste woman yt ever I herd of that so falsely
her husband brought to shame and rebuke. I say to you master yt for ye reason
of this example my sone shall this day not dye. The master said to him. if ye
do so than do ye wisely. And yt herafter ye shall joy. and I commend you to
god / and thank you of your pacyent herynge / and of the sparynge of your sone
and so he departed.

The third complaynte of the Empress
When thempresse herd yt the child was not deed she wept bytterly and entered
in to her preuy chamber / and tare her skyn with her nails. and with loud voice
cried and said alas yt ever I was borne. and yt I so great a kings daughter
should thus be entreated and shamed and thereof can have no remedy her
ge^tilwy^men these hery^g went and showed it to the emperor. and he went unto her
and comforted her say^g. O lady weep not so ne cry not. for it becomes you no
thing / which said / the love that I have and owe to you makes me more to
sorrow than the contempt of the deed. for why the inward love of your heart
has hitherto prohybite and let me yt I have not returned again in to my
country to my fader but I fere if I should so do to you it might do harm for
he is mighty to honor me with rychesses. and too venge my quarrel and despyte
in such wise yt ye and youres might forthynke it Thereto said the emperor let
that goo out of your mind. show it not / for as long as I live I shall never
fail you. And she said / lord I pray god that ye may long live. But I fere
me yt it shall hapen upon you as it did of a knight and of his sone that would
not burye his faders head in the chyrcheyerde. and yet his fader was for him
slain / Than said the emperor Show me yt example. how that was that he would
not burye his faders heed / She said I shall do it to your proufyte.

The third example of the Empress
The third example of the Empress.
the empress complains to the emperor; his imprisoned son is seen through the
doorway

THere was in the cite of rome a knight yt had two daughters and one sone.
this knight had so great delight in hauntinge iustynge and turneynge that all
thing that he might win and get he laid it and spente it thereupon. In that
time was an emperor named Octauyan. which in richesse of gold and silver
exceded al other kings and princes In so much that he had a toure full of
gold. and ordained a knight to have ye keeping and charge thereof. This knight
that so haunted iustynge and other ydell games came to so great pouerte that he
was dysposed to sell his heritage. and called to him his sone and said. My sone
it behooves me of your counseyll. for necessyte and pouerte compels me to
sell mine heritage. or else for to find all other way by the which I may
live. for if I should sell mine heritage. ye and your systers should perysshe.
The sone said. Fader if ye can find any other mean without selling of the
heritage. I should be ready to help you. To whom ye fader said I am bethought
upon a good counseyll. The Emperor has a toure full of gold / by night time
let us go thither with instruments and dygge and hew through the toure. and
let us take of the gold as much as shall suffyse us. Thereto answered the sone
and said. that cou^seyl can not be amended. for it is better of themperoures
gold to take to help us than our heritage to sell They rose up both in a
night and went to the toure and with instruments they made there through an
hole and took as much gold as they both could carry away at that time. The
knight paid his dettes and haunted again iustes as he did before till all was
spe^te and consumed. In the mean while the keeper of. ye tresoure went in to
the toure and when he saw the tresoure stolen. and a great hole made through
the wall. he began to wax sore a ferde and went to the emperor and showed how
it was befallen. To whom the emperor said all angrely. What nedest you to show
that have I not delivered to the my tresoure / and therefore of the I will ask
it. Tho anon as the keeper herd that went to the toure again. and set before the
hole a great vessel full of pytche meddled with other gummes so subtely. that no
man might come in at that hole. but that he must needs fall in to that vessel.
and if he therein fill he could no more come out of it. Not long after the
knight had all the gold consumed and spent and went again with his sone to the
toure to stele more gold. and as the fader went in first. anon he was fallen
in ye ves with pytche to the neck. and when he saw that he was taken and
could not get out he said to his sone. follow me not. for if thou do thou
may not escape to be taken. Than ye sone said. god defend it yt I should not
help you: for if ye are founden we are all but deed. and if that ye may not be
helped by me. I shall seek counseyll how that ye may be delivered and helped.
The fader said / there is none other counseyll. but with thy sword smite of
mine heed / and as my body is found without head no man shall know me. and so
you and my daughters may escape and avoid these wordly shame and death. The sone
said. fader ye have given ye best counseyll. For if it were so that any man
might perceive any knolege of you. none of us should escape yt death and
therefore it is expedient that your head be smyten of. Anon he drew out his
sword and smote of his faders head and cast it in to a pytte. and afterward
hyd it therein and yede and showed to his systers all the matter. which many
days after pryuely bewailed the death of their fader. After this ye keeper of
ye tresour came in to the toure and found a body without any head. whereof he
wondered sore. and showed it to ye emperor To whom he said. bind that body
at the tail of an horse. and so draw it by all the streets of the cite. and
dyligently take good head if ye here any cry or weeping. where so ever ye
here that he is lord of the house. take all them and with the body draw them to
the galowes and hang them. The which themperours servants fulfilled
according to his commandment. And as they came against the house of the deed
knight. and as the daughters saw body of their deed fader. they made a
merueylous great shryche and wept pyteously and as there brother that herd. anon
he wounded himself. grievously in the mouth with a knyfe. so that great plente
of blood came out of the wound. The officers when the herd that noise and
cry entered in to the house. and demanded the cause of their noise and
clamor. Tho anwered the sone that I am thus wounded. for when my systers saw
my blood so habundauntly go out as ye see. they began to weep and cry. And
when the offycer saw the wound they byleued his words. and so dysceyued went
their ways. and hynge the body of the knight upon the galowes where it hynge
long time and his sone would neither take his body down from the galowes. ne
yet bury his head ye Empress said understand ye what I have said. The Emperor
said ye right well.

The declaratyon of the example.
Tho spoke thempresse. thus my lord I fere me it shall be of you and of your
sone. This knight for love of his sone was made poor. and first he committed
theft and brake the toure. secondary did himself too be heded. that his
children should have no shame. After yt sone cast his head in a dyke. and
buried it nether in church nor in chyrcheyerde. his body he suffered to hang
still upon the galowes. if that he could not have taken it down in the day he
might well have done in ye night. In the same manner ye labor night and day
that ye may promote your sone to honor and riches But without doubt he
daily labors for your confusyon and destructyon that he may regne after you
in your empire. Therefore I advise you yt ye do hy^ to be hanged before or he
you destroy. The Emperor said ye have showed me a good example. The knights so
ne when he had smyten of his faders head would not bury it. Without doubt my
fader shall not do so by me but he communded anon his officers that they
should led him to the galowes. and they obeyed his commandment hastily. and
as they lad him through the streets ye people made great noise and lamentacyon.
alas alas the only sone of the emperor is lad again to wards ye galowes / and
as they thus ladde him. the third master named Craton came rydy^g upon an
horse / and as ye child saw him he bowed down his head to him as though he
had said. have mind upon me. The people cried sayng. O good master have you
and save your dyscyple. He smote his horse with spores and hasted him to ye
palace. And when he came before themperoure he honorably salued him. which
said. thy coming hither shall never auayll the / nor it that you come for The
master said. I hoped in my coming to have be welcome and have had a better
reward and not too have be rebuked. The emperor said / as ye have deserved so
shall it be to you. To whom he said. My lord what have I deserved. The Emperor
said. ye have right well deserved death. For why I delivered to you my sone
well speaking and well manered for to enfourme and teache. and ye have delivered
him again too me dompe and a rybaude. To whom the master said / in that ye say
he is dompe yt I commytte to god / for he makes the dompe to speak and the
defe to here. But in that ye say yt he would have your wife enforced that
would I gladly know if any creature have yt seen. for there is no malice above
ye malice of a woman / and that shall I prove by a good example that wy^men are
full of lesy^ges and decepco^ns. and if ye put to death your sone for the words
of your wife / it shall happen to you as it did to a noble man of his wife and
of his pie. the which he loved merueylously. To whom the emperor said. I you
tell me how that wymmen are full of malice and lesynges / which said I will
not do it / but if ye first call again your sone from the death. and then at
your pleasure I shall show thexample. Than the emperor anon made the child
too be called again and put in prison. Than the master began to say this
example in this form following.

the emperor hears a master's example; through the door, his son is seen
surrounded by guards

THere was in a cite a rich burgeys that had a pie the which he loved so much
yt every day be taught her to speak latin and hebrewe. And when yt she had
learned perfetly. to speak those two langages / all yt she saw and herd. she
showed and told to her master. This good man had a fair young wife as ye
have / the which he loved much. but she contrary loved not him / because he
might not furnysshe her of such pleasures and lusts as she desired to have.
And therefore had she an other fair young man that she loved above her
husbo^de. And always as her husbonde was out of the town about his
marchaundyse and other besynesses to do. and she sent for her best beloved yt
they might together make good chere. The pie as she that saw told it to her
master. at his home coming. in such wise that ye noise ran all over the
cite of her aduoutry. whereof her husbo^de many time brauled and chydde her. She
answered hy^. ye believe your cursed pie. which as long as she lives shall
always make betwix us varyaunce and dyscorde. And he said the pie can not lie.
for that she sees and hereth that she tells me. and therefore I believe her
more than you. It fortuned that these good man went in to far countries to do
his marchau^dyse. and as soon as was gone his wife sent for her friend and love
to solace and make good chere with hy^. but he durst not come by day light. but
abode to ye evening lest that he should be seen and marked of ye people. And
as ye night was comen / he knocked at ye gate: and she was ready and opened it
and said. Go in freely for n^o man shall. see you. and he said I fere me ye the
cursed pie shall accuse us. for by her is comen great sclaundre upon us through
out all the cite. Enter in she said boldly and fere not. And as he should
pass through ye halle where the pie was in her cage. she herd him say these
words. O my most beloved I fere me gretely of ye pie that she shall bewraye
us. And as the wife herd that she said. Be still fool. it is derke she may
not se you. Then^e ye py that herynge said If I se the not I here thy voice.
and thou do wrong to my master. for you slepest with my maystresse. and
whan^e my master comes I shall tell him. The young man herynge that said.
Told I not you yt the pie should dyscouer us. And ye wife said fere no. for
this night we shall be avenged upon the pie. And entered in to ye chamber and
slepte to gyder that night. About mydnyghte the wife arose. and called to her a
maiden and said / fetch me a ladder and set up too ye rofe of ye house yt I
may wreke me on the pie. The maid did so and they both went up and made an
hole through the coueryng of ye house right over the pie / and there through
cast sand clay stones and water upon the pie. so much that the poor pie was
nere deed and on the morn the young man went erly out at a back door. And
when the good man was comen home as his custume was he went and vysyted his pie
and said to her. O pie my well-beloved bird / say me how you haste fared the
whiles that I have been out. She said. master I shall tell you tidings that I
have herd. your wife as soon as ye were gone by the night time she let a man
come i^ and as I that herd I told him yt I would show it to you at your
coming home / that not withstondynge she lad him in to your chamber and slepte
with hy^ al night. ye demanded me also how ye I have dove in your absence.
And I say you of a troth that I was never so nygh my death as I was that same
night with snow hayle and rain ye fill upon my body. so long dury^ge that I
was almost left for deed. The wife wha^ she herd that said too her husbonde.
Sir ye believe your pie now may ye here what she says / she co^playnyth yt in
ye same night there fill so much snow hayle and rain upon her yt she was
almost deed. and yet there was none of the^ all that same night. for ther^ was
not in a year a fayrer ne a clerer night than it was and therefore from
hensforth believe her not. Tho went ye good man to his neighbors and demanded
of them if yt night were any tempest or rain. They auswered yt some of them
had waked all ye night. and in all yt year they had not seen a fayrer night.
Tho went he to his house and said to his wife. I have fou^den you in ye troth
for ye night was fair and clear as I understood of your neighbors. ye may now
know of a troth said she ye py is a liar. with her lesy^ges she has sown and
made discord betwix us. and over that I am diffamed through ye cite by her falls
lesy^ges. than ye burgeys went to ye pie and said wherefore haste you made lies
and falls tales be twix me and my wife. Is this ye thank that I have for yt
mete that I was wont to give you with mine own ho^des every day and haste also
thereby my wife brought in to great dyffamacyou through all the town. The pie
answered. god knows yt I can not lie for that I saw and herd yt have I
showed to you. Than said he. you lie. Haste thou not said unto me that in ye
same night was hayle and snow and rain. that you had nerehonde lost thy
life which is false. And therefore from hens forth you shall make no mo lesynges
ne dyscorde betwix me and my wife / and took ye pie and brake her neck. As the
wife saw that she was right glad and said now have ye done well now may we
all our live days live in rest and peace. And when he had slain ye pie. he
looked up and saw in the top of ye house a laddre and a vessel with water sand
and stones. and as he that beheld. he perceived the falshede of his wife. and
cried with a loud voice. Woo be too me that for my wives words I have my pie
slain and all my solace and joy lost. yt why the in all things said to me
truth. And as he had thus done anon for sorrow left his marchaundyse and
all his house and went to wards the holy land. and never returned again
toward his wife. Than^e the master said to the emperor. Sir have ye under
stand what I have said. he answered right well. the master said. was not yt a
false and cursed wife yt so by her lesynges caused ye pie for to be slain. The
emperor said. In truth she was full of falsenesse. I forthynke greatly the
pie. the which for her true saying lost her life Verily I say to you ye ye
have told, me a fair example therefore these day my sone shall not die. Tho said
the master. Sir if ye do so ye do wisely. and I thank you that ye have spared
your sone. this day for my will. and to god I commend you.

The fourth complaynte of the empress.
When thempresse herd that ye child was not yet deed. she made great noise
and cryenges in such. wise that she was herd through the palace and said. Woo
be to me that ever I was made Empress would god I had dyed when I was brought
in too these parties when the emperor herd ye noise and cry that she made.
he entered in to the chamber. and conforted her as much as he might and
demanded the cause of her lamencacyon / which said. O mine own lord have no
wonder though that I be in this great sorrow and agony for I am your wife. and
in your company by your sone I am shamed. as ye saw me lately all be bled and
scratched. and ye have promised me that he should therefore be hanged / and yet
he lives, wherefore should I not sorrow The Emperor answered be content and
pleased / and I shall do iustyse upon my sone to morrow. But in that I forbear
him yesterday was at the meuyng of one of the masters by an example Than said
she. Have ye forboren to do justice for one word. were it so for all the
world ye should not let to do justice / and ye say for the example of one
master ye have left it. I fere me it shall happen with you and with your
masters as upon a time it fortuned too an Emperor with his seven wise
masters. The empeperoure said. I pray you tell me that example. Shesayd.

To what intent should I labor in vain / for yesterdaye I showed you a good
example and it auayled not. For what someuer I show for your honor and
proufyte that the masters of your sone torn up and down to your destructyon.
as in this present example I shall clearly show you. To whom the emperor said
/ O my best beloved lady tell me that example. that by the same I may the
better beware / for though that I respyted my sons life for one day / I shall
not therefore give him his life / for that is dyfferred it is not therefore
auferred. And she said. gladly I shall show it for your proufyte, and began
to tell it as here after follows.

the empress complains to the emperor; his imprisoned son is seen through the
doorway

Sometime was in the cite of rome seven wise masters by whom all ye empire was
governed and ruled. And the emperor that than was did no no thing or attempt
without the counseyll of them. as they understood that the emperor was to them so
inclyned. yt without them he should ordeyne or do no thing in ye mean time
they made by their art and conny^g yt the emperor should clearly se as long as
he was in his palace. but anon as he was out of his palace. he was made blind
/ and that did they to the intent yt they might the more freely intromytte
themself of all things that apperteyned to the emperor. by ye which they gate
and wanne too them great profit and lucre of goods. and after that they had
made. and wroughte that experymeut. they could never change it ne fordo it.
afterward. but the emperor abode still bly^d many years. Then the vii masters
made and ordained through out thempyre. that if any man had dremed a dreme he
should come unto them with a florene of gold or of silver. and they should
expowne and declare unto them the Interpretacyon of their dremes whereby and by
other unjust means they obtained much more substance and money of ye people
than the emperor did. So upon a time when he sat at the table with the empress
he began to syghe and sorrow in himself. and when she perceived that she
inquired dylygently of him ye cause of his heaviness and doloure The Emperor
said / should not that to me be heavy and sorrowful yt I so long have been
blind and out of my palace / and of yt can have or find no remedy. To whom
spoke thempresse and said. my lord here my counseyll and it shall never repent
you if ye do thereafter In your court ye have vii. wise masters by whom ye
and all ye empire is governed. if ye now behold and mark this in your my^de
/ ye shall find that they are ye cause of your blyndnesse and disease. and if
it be so they are worthy too dye a shameful death. therefore take heed to my
cou^seyl and advise. Send ye for them and show unto them your disease and
infyrmyte. and threte them on pain of their lives. yt they should find a
remedy to make you hole of your fyknesse and blyndnes. This cou^seyl pleased
the emperor well. and anon sent for ye masters And wha^ they were come.
the emperor anon showed unto the^ his infyrmyte and blyndenes. and charge them
upon puyne death / yt they should seek a rememedy and make him hole thereof. Tho
answered they. Ye desire of us a thing that is dyffusyfe and hard. for us to
do thus shortly but give us respyte and days and in ye tenth day we shall give
you answer. The Emperor was therewith well content and pleased. Then ye seven
wise masters went to counseyll. how they might ye best change and alter / and
that in no manner could they find ye mean how they might put away ye
blyndnes from the Emperor. wherefore they were all right sorrowful. and said
among them self. wtoute we find a remedy we are all but deed men. So went
they from thens through out al the^pyre and sought if they could find any
remedy or counsel therefore. It happened them upon a time going through a cite.
and in ye mids thereof they found children playnge. and ater them came a man
with a talente or florene of gold and said to them. Good masters this night I
have dremed a dreme. thenterpretaco^n thereof I would feign know. Wherefore I
pray you show me what it sygnyfyeth and take this gold to you. That herd one
of ye children yt played among ye other and said too hy^. give me ye gold and
not them. and I shall expowne thy dreme. The man said. I dremed this night yt
in the mids of mine orchyerde was a great spring of water. whereof came many
small spry^ges yt all mine orchyerde was full and overflowed with water. The child
said. take a spade and dygge. in ye same place there as ye thought that ye
water out sprange. and there shall ye find an horde of gold so great that ye
and all your chylderne and lynage shall be for ever rich The man did as ye
child had showed him. and found ye tresoure according to his words. Tho went
ye man to ye child and offered him a pound weight of ye gold ye he had found
for ye interpretacyon of his dreme. and he would none receive but committed him
to ye prayers of ye man. The.vii. masters when they herd ye child so wisely
expowne ye dreme. they said to him. good child what is your name he answered
and said I called Merlyne. Then said ye masters. we se clearly great wisdom
in you. we shall show unto you a great matter. and of yt we would gladly yt ye
could find a remedy. The child said. Show me your matter. And they said
the emperor of rome as long as he is in his palace he has his sight clear
without any impedyme^t And as soon as he is gone out of his palace he is so
bly^de yt he may not se. If ye can now determyne ye cause hereof and fy^de a
remedy yt he may be eased and have hes sight again ye shall have great rewards
and honors of the emperor. The child said. I know ye cause as well of his
bly^dhede as of ye remedy. They said to hy^. Come with us to the emperor. and ye
shall be rewarded so largely yt ye shall be pleased. To whom ye child said. I
am ready to go with you. And when they came with ye child before the emperor. they
said to hy^. Lord loo here this child yt we have brought before you yt which
shall fulfill your desire as touchy^ge the cause of your bly^denes as ye
recouery^ge of your syghte. The Emperor said. Good masters woll ye take it upon
you and abide thereby that ye child shall do with me. They all said ye. for we be
expert in his wisdom. The Emperor turned himself toward ye child and
said. will ye undertake to tell me the cause of my blyndnesse and the remedy.
The child answered and said. My lord the emperor led me in to your
bedchamber. and there I shall show you what is to be done And as he was there in
brought he said to ye seruau^tis. take of ye clothes of the bed. and all
thapparayle. and ye shall se wonders And as yt was done they saw a well
smokyng yt had vii spry^ges or floodes. the which when the emperor saw
meruayled greatly. ye child said ye se this well and without it be quenched ye shall
never have your sit. the emperor said. how may yt be. ye child said. but by one
way The Emperor said. Show us than the mean. and if it be possible to me it
shall be done. yt I may recover again my sight as well without as wtin. To whom
the child said. my lord ye.vii. sprynges of this well are these.vii. wise
masters. ye which you and your Empire hythertoo have traitorously governed
and have you made bly^de as ye be wtoute your palace yt they your subgettes by
extorcyon might pluck and pyll. ye not seeing. but now they know not ye
remedy. Here ye now my counseyll. and this well shall be quenched and exty^cte
do stryke of ye first masters head. and anon ye shall ye first spring
quenched. and so by order one after an other. till yt they are all beheded. and
anon all the sprynges with the well shall be vanysshed and gone away / and ye
shall have again your sight as ye had before. And as this was done and fulfilled
/ the well with the.vii. sprynges were vanysshed. And as the emperor had his
syghte again he made the child a great lord and gave hy^ great habundau^ce of
goods. After that spoke them press. my lord have ye this example well
perceived that. I have told you. and he said ye in the best wise. ye have
recyted a good and a ryall example. Than said she. In the same wise your.vii.
wise masters intend too do with you. by their false narracyons. that your
sone may reygne upon you / that god forbede.

The declaratyon of the example.
This well is your sone whereof out flowen seven sprynges. that sygnefye the
seven wise masters the which soon ye may not destroy without the. vii.
masters be made feeble and brought too naught that done this well that is
your sone with all his cauyllacyons and wyles shall not escape / but let him be
hanged first lest that he have help of his masters. and forth after
cosequently ye.vii. masters. And so ye shall govern and guide your empire in
rest and peace. The Emperor anon commanded his servants to lead his so to
the galowes which they were loathe to do. So was there than a great multitude
of people gadred with great noise and bewailing so that the noise came to ye
eres of ye fourth master named Malquydrac. ye which lepte upon his horse / and
hasted him to ye palace So met with him his dyscyple and did reverence to hy^
/ and recommaunded him unto him / and when he came be fore the emperor and had
done his obeysaunce and reverence as apperteyned. The Emperor answered and
said. Little thank have ye old cursed caytyfe for ye techy^ge of my sone for
I delivered you my sone well speky^ge and in all thing right virtuous. And ye
have sent him a fool dompe / and a rybaude / for he would have belayne with force
my wife / and therefore all ye with him together shall be hanged Tho said ye
master. My lord I have not that deserved of you. god knows why your sone
speaks not. in short time ye shall perceive other things. but ye time is not
yet comen. But in ye ye say he would have oppressed your wife. ye is not gospel
ne proved. ne for one sy^guler person ye should not judge to death your sone. if
now for ye words of your wife ye judge your sone to dye. it will be wors to you
than to an old man of his wise. and that I shall prove. Too whom the emperor
said. Think ye to do with me ye old dotarde. as sometime seven wise men did
to an emperor. Thereto said said ye master The offense or trespace of one or
yet of twenty. may not found to the rebuke and blame of all other. for over all the world there be both good and evil. But one thing of a troth I shall
show you. that evil shall come to you if ye this day do your sone to death
for the words of your wife. the which I would show by a notable example.
Than said the emperor woll ye that recyte for our learning. The master
said. yt ye will call again your sone. and keep him till I have made
recytacyon of the example. and than what someuer ye shall think best to done
with him. do it. I shall reherce this example or else not The emperor
commanded that he should be called again / and desired the master to say as
here after ensues or follows.

The example of the fourth master.
the emperor hears a master's example; through the door, his son is seen
surrounded by guards

THere was an old knight and a right wise man that long lived without wife
and child. His friends came to him many times and counseyled and exhorted him
that he should take a wife. The knight thus counseyled and styred by his
friends so oftymes that at the last he agreed too them. And they gave him to
wife the daughter of the provost of rome that rich was and right fair. whom
when he had seen anon he was made blind and taken in her love. and began to
love her meruaylously well and when they had been a certain space together and
had no fruit ne child. Upon a time in a morning it happened that she went to
the church where she met with her mother. and saluted her as it behooved. My dear
daughter said the mother how pleases you your marriage and your husbo^de: She
said right evil. for ye have given to me an old lame man / me in all things
dyspleasynge. I would ye had that same time buried me. for I had lever lie and
ete with a swyne than with him. and therefore I may no longer thus eudure. but I
must love an other Tho said ye mother. god forbede that My dear daughter how
long time I have be with your fader and yet hitherto I never meddled me with
such folysshenes. The daughter said. mother it is no marvel for ye both in
your youth met together. and the one took solace of the other. and I may receive
of him no manner of solace corporal for he is cold / and upon ye bed he lies
as still as a stone. or as a thing immouable: The mother answered. if ye will
jove an other say me what he is. The daughter said a priest I will love. to
whom ye mother said it were better to you and less syn to love a knight or a
squire than a priest. and the daughter said. If I should love a knight or a
gentel squire in short time he would be weary of me. and after yt he would do
me shame and tell it over all. and so it is not of the priest. for he will
hold and keep his own honor and counseyll as well as myn^. And also
spyrytuell men be more true to their loves than the seculer men. The mother
said. Here my counseyll and it shall be good for you. Old folks are wylly and
fell tempte your husbonde first and if ye escape him without doing any harm or
smyty^ge. than love the priest. The dought said I may not so long abide. The
mother said upon my blessing abide till ye have proved him. The daughter said
upon your blessing I will abide so long. till I have attempted hy^ but first
say me how that I shall prove him. The mother said. He has in his orchyerde a
tree which he loves much. do yt to besmyten down whiles he is out at
hontynge. and against his coming make him there a fire. and if he forgive it
you tha^ may surely love the priest. As she had herd the cou^seyl of her
mother she went to her house. To whom her husbonde said. Where have ye ben so
long. She answered I have been in the church where as I met with my mother and with
her a little I have talked and comyned. and so began proprely for to dyssymyle.
After mydday ye knighte rode out for to hu^te. Then she thynky^ge upon ye
counseyll of her mother went to the gardyner and said to hy^. Cut down this
young tree newly planted that I may make a fire thereof to warm my lord withal
at his coming from hunty^ge. For it is a great wynd and a right sharp cold.
The gardyner said. Madame yt will I not do. for my lord loves better that
tree than he does all ye other trees nevertheless I shall well help you to gadre
wood enough for to make withal a good fire but in any wise this I will not hew
down. She herd that. and boldly she took ye axe from ye gardyner and hewed
down the tree her self and made ye gardyner with other to bear it home. At even
when ye lord came from hunting he was sore a cold. The lady let make a
great fire. and went and met with him. and set him ou a stole before the fire to
warm. And as he a little while had sytten he perceived ye odoure of the fire.
and called to him ye gardyner and said. I feel by this odor yt my new plant
brenneth in the fire. The gardener said. Lord it is true. my lady your wife
has felled it down. The knight said to her god forbede that my plant should
be cut down by you. She answered anon and said. Lord I have done it knowing
the weder cold and you also cold. and therefore I have ordained this fire for
your comfort. As the knight yt herd he looked angrely upon her and said. O
cursed woman how werest you so hardy to hew down so gentyl a young tree ye
which you know well yt I loved above al other trees As she that herd she
began to weep and excuse her self and said My lord I have done it for your
good and prouffyte. and ye take it so grievously. and began to cry woe woe be to
me. Anon as ye knight saw ye wepy^ge and teeres of his wife and herd her
cause we was meued with mercy saying to her. Cesse of your wepy^g. and be ware
how ye ye any more anger or trouble me in any thing / that I love. The next
day erly in the morny^ge / she went again to the chyrchewarde. and met with her
mother comy^ge against her. and they salued each other. Than ye daughter said to
her mother. O dear mother I will love the priest. for I have attempted my lord
as ye cou^seyled me / but all for naught. for he anon forgave it when he saw
me a little weep. Tho said ye mother. though old men one time forgive / they
double the pain upon an other time. and therefore I counseyll you yt ye an other
time attempt him. Tho said the daughter I may no longer abide. for I suffer
so much pain for the love of ye priest. that with my tongue I can not tell
therefore ye shall perdone me I will no more follow or do after your counseyll.
than said the mother. for the love that the child should have unto the mother
attempt him yet ones. and for your faders blessyuge / and then if ye goo
quyte without any harm or betinge. love the priest in the name of god. tho
answered ye daughter. it is to me a great pain so long time to abide.
nevertheless for ye blessyng of my fader I shall ons ate^pte him. but say me how
I shall begin. the mother said I understand yt he has a little hou^de yt he
loves well and yt kepith his bed. cast ye hou^d with so great might before his
face that it die and if ye escape without a strype or that he forgive it lyghtely.
in the name of god than love the priest. Than said the daughter. I shall in all
thing do after your counsel. for there is no daughter living to day yt
would more gladly have yt blessing of the fader and the mother than I. And so
she bad her mother fare well / and went to her house again / and that day with
great importunyte and trouble of heart she she brought too the night. and when
the night was comen. she commanded the bed to be covered with pupure and with
clothe of gold the whiles the knight sat by the fire. And when the bed was
thus made ready. the little hounde as he was accustomed lepte on the bed and
she took him by the hinder legs. and with a wood and a malycyous heart she cast
it against the wall yt it lay still deed. When the good old knight that saw /
he was merueylously angry. and said with a loud voice too his wife. O worste and
most cruel of all wicked wymmen now coudest you find in thyn heart that little
gentle hounde to sle. yt I somoche loved. Lord said she have ye not seen how
the hounde with his foul fete has our / bed that is so precyously covered with
rich clothes made foul coming out of the mire: And the knight said with
much anger. Knew ye not yt I loved much better that little hounde than the
bed. when she herd that. anon she began petyously to weep and said woo be to
me that. I was borne For all thing that I do for the best it is all turned
in to the worste. The knight would not suffer the weeping and weymentynge: of
his wife. but for that yt he loved her so much he said to her leave or cesse
your wepy^ge for I forgive you it all together. And I counseyll you that ye
beware how that ye dysplease me from hens forth / and they went toogyder to
bed. Upon ye morrow she rose up erly and went to the church where as she found
her mother / to whom when she had done reverence as it behooved. She said.
Mother now will I love ye priest. For I have now attempted the second time my
husbonde and all things he suffered. The mother said. O my dear daughter there
is no cruelte or falshede above the cruelte of old folks. and therefore I
counsel you ye ye yet ones prove him. To whom the daughter answered. Mother ye
labor in vain. for if ye wist what and how much pain ye I suffer for ye
prestes love ye should rather help me if ye loved me. The mother said. Here me
daughter this one time. and I shall never let you more. Thy^ke how yt ye have
souked milk of my breasts: and the great pain that I suffered for you at your
birth By these pains my dear daughter I de sire of and I charge you yt ye
deny me not this good petycyon. and I promise to god I shall no more let nor
hy^der you of your entente: but rather help you thereto / Tho answered ye
daughter. it is to me a great pain to absteyne me and forbere my self so
long from the love of the priest. nevertheless for ye great charges that ye
have laid too me. and also for yt ye have made a vow no more for to let me.
but to further me. tell me how I shall attempt hy^. and I shall ones yet put it
in adventure. The mother said. I know well that on sunday next coming he
entendeth to have us all to dinner and there shall be your fader and I and all
your friends and al ye best of the cite. And when ye are set in your place and
all the metes are brought and served upon the table / fast one of the keys
preuely yt hangs at your gyrdell in the table clothe and than feign to have
forgoten your knyfe and say these words openly. Se what a short wit that I
am of. I have forgoten my knyf in my chamber / and rise up hastily and go and
yt cloth with all the metes ye shall cast down and overthrow upon the ground.
And if ye escape without pain I make a vow to god yt I shall never let you after.
The daughter say de yt shall I gladly do and so took her leave and departed.
The feste day came yt all as the mother said were bodeu. The servants made
ready and covered ye table. All were set at yt table. and the daughter sat over
ayenste her lord. And when the table was well served. with metes and other
things as thereto belonged / ye lady of the house said with an high voice. Se
how forgeteful I am of mind I have left my knyfe in my chamber ye which I
must fetch / and rose hastily up and drew ye clothe with all the mete that
was upon it with her. and all the gold vessels and saltes lay upon ye ground.
The knight vexed sore angrye in his heart. but for shame he dyssymyled before
his gestes. and commanded on other clean clothe and other metes to be brought
and with Joy and mirth he solyted and meued his gestes to ete and make good
chere. so that by hy^ they were all gladed. The feste or dinner done they gave
all thanky^ges to ye knygh and took their leave and departed every man to wards
his own house. Upon ye next day in the morny^ge ye kny ghte arose erly and
went to the church and herd a mass the which ended. went to a harbor and
said too him. Master are ye expert in blood letynge in what vain yt I will
desire you. He said. sir I am expert in what vain yt ye can name in man's
body. The knight said. I am well content come on with me. and when he was comen
to his house. he entered in to his chamber where his wife lay in bed and said
to her. Rise up shortly. Than said she. what shall I do up thus erly it is not
yet nine the clock. The knight said. ye must rise up. for ye must be letten
blood on both your arms. She said. I was never laten blood / and shall I now
blede. Tho said ye knight. that is troth. and there for ye are a fool. For
thy^ke ye not yt ye hew first down my tree. and an other time ye killed my
little hou^de and yesterday ye shamed me before all our friends and parents.
and the fourth is if I should suffer you thus too go forth ye should me for
ever confou^de and shame. the cause hereof I consider yt ye have evil and wild
blood with in your body. and therefore I will that yt corrupt blood shall be
drawn out that ye from hensforth shall no more put me to shame and anger. and
let to be made a great fire. and she stood and cried and held up her hondes
to wards the heaven and said. My lord forgive me this tespace / and have pity
upon me at this time. and I shall never more offend you. The knight said pray
for no mercy. for by the mercy that god has wroughte without that thou hold
out thyn arm strayte I shall sone have thyn heart blood. And he said also to
the harbor. smite hard and make a deep hole in her arm. or else I shall
give you a great strype. Than smote ye harbor so sore that the blood came
habundau^tly out. and the knight would not suffer him to staunche it unto the
time that she changed color in her vysage. And as this was done the knight
bad to be stopped or stau^che yt vayn^e. and bad yt harbor smite the vain
upon. ye other arm. Then^e cried she with a loud voice. My sweet husbonde have
compassyon upon me for now I deye. The knight answered. my wife ye should have
before thought on these or that ye have done to me these three evil tournes or
despytes. Then^e she held out her left arm. and ye harbor smote therein an
hole yt the blood came out right hudgely. and suffered her to blede unto the
time that the color in her vysage changed and that she swouned / Than said
the knight. now bind that arm and stau^che it. and said to her now goo to
bed. and study and think hensforth how ye may amend your self or else I
shall draw ye blood of your heart. And as this was done he gave the harbor
his reward and he went again unto his own house. and the wife under ye hands
of her maidens nyghe deed was ladde to her bed and bad one of her handmaydens
go to her mother in all haste and say that she come speak with me before I de ye.
The mother when she hard ye she was glad of ye correctyon of her daughter and
hastily came to her / the daughter wha^ she herd her mother said to her O my
most sweet mother I am almost deed. for I have so much blood bled. yt I
believe yt I shall not escape ye death Tho answered ye mother / said I not too you
that old men are right cruel. and fell. will ye now love the priest. Which
said. The devil may the priest confound and shame. I will never love other but
my husbonde Than said the master to the emperor. Lord have ye understand me.
And he answered right well. For among all other yt ever I have herd this was
the best example. Three evil deeds she did unto her husbonde. and I doubt not
but if she had done ye fourth she should have shamed him for ever. Than said ye
master therefore I counseyll you yt ye beware of your wife lest that it happen
worse to you. for why if ye do to death your only sone for her words. ye
shall be deceived in ye end. and for ever ye shall forthynke it. The Emperor
said truly master this day my sone shall not dye. The master said My lord I
thank you yt ye for min example and my sake this day have spared your sone.

The fyfth complaynte of the Empress
The empress hery^g yt the child was not yet deed apparayled and clothed her
in her vesture or clothy^ge. and let to be ordained her waynes and carts / as
though she would have gone to her fader home in her country for to have
co^playned of ye great shame yt was done unto her and could have no remedy
hereof. The servants seeing yt. went and showed it to the emperor yt thempresse
was going in to her country. When he yt perceived he went to her saying.
whither are ye going. I hoped yt ye had loved me so much yt in all ye world
ye should have sought no solace but with me. To yt she said. That is true. and
therefore I go from you. for I had lever here of your death. than to see you dye.
without doubt ye delight so much to here these masters. yt it shall happen upon
you as it did to Octauian. the emperor ye which was so coueytous that ye noble
men of the empire buried him quycke and filled his mouth with molten gold.
The Emperor said. Dear wife do not that an other time ye blame to you or to me
might be laid. Than said the empress. truly ye blame is yours. for have ye
not promised me many times that your sone should dye. and yet he lives. and
therefore from hensforth I will no more believe you. Then said the emperor. It
becomes not a king every cause lightly too dyscusse. with out advise. and
specially upon his sone. upon whom it is not behoueful. lightly to give
Judgment And there fore I say and pray you that ye will tell me somewhat by the
which I may my self govern. for it is utter destrucco^n of a king without
advise and vndescretly to give Judgment. She answered and said. I will gladly
tell you a notable example. so that from hensforth ye shall not be coueytous or
desirous to here ye masters And began to say in this form

The fyfth example of the Empress.
the empress complains to the emperor; his imprisoned son is seen through the
doorway

OCtauianus the emperor reigned in Rome right rich and coueytous. and above
all things he loved gold. The cytezyens yt time of Rome did much harm and
many great out rages to other nacyons In so much that diverse nacyons and
regyons were meued and styred against ye Romans. In that time the re was
master Virgilius. ye which excelled in magique and in other scyences all
other masters. The cytezeynes prayed him that he by his art and conny^ge
would make somewhat by the which they of their enemies might have warny^g and
knowledge before. Where by that they might puruey for themself ye better. He
let do make by his art and conny^ge a toure. and above upon ye toure did
to be set as many images as in all the world were regyons or prouy^ces. and in
the mids of the toure he let to be made and set an image. which held in his
hand an appell or a great round balle of gold. And every image of the toure
held in his hand a little bell. and stood turned lokynge to wards his own
prouynce to him assygned. And as oftentimes as any prouynce would styre or
rebel aye^ste the romans. so often turned him the image of yt lend and range
the bell. That hery^ge the cytezeyns of Rome armed themself and to that
prouynce yede with all their might for that land to keep under. and so was
there no land so great yt could wreke them upon the romans, and therefore
were they bedradde and fered over all the world. After that master Vlrgilius
made for the solace and conforte of the poor people a light that always
brende. and by that light he made two bathes the one of them hot. in the
which the poor people might bathe and wasshe them / and that other cold in
the which they might theymselfe refresshe. and betwyx that light and the
bathes he made an image standing. in whose forhede was written. He yt smyteth me
shall anon have vengeance. This image stood there many years. At the last
there came a clerk and beheld that image and radde this writing / and
thought in himself. what vengeance might he find therefore. I believe better
that if any man should smite the that thou fyllest there with to ye earth. he
should find some tresoure under thy fete. and therefore is thy writing that no
man should have it. and the clerk lift up his hand and gave the image a
great stroke yt it fell to ye ground. and anon ye light was out. and the
bathes vere vanysshed away. and he found no tresoure. The poor folk yt
perceiving were all sorrowful saying. cursyd mote he be for ever more yt for
his synguler couetyse has destroyed this image. and us has robbed of so
great solace and co^forthe Here after assembled three kings the which of ye
Romans had been oppressed and suffered great wrongs. and went to counsel with
them of their counsel. how they might best of ye Romans be avenged. and some
of the^ said. we labor in vain. as long as there standyth ye tour with the
images we may no thing do ayenste them. To yt counseylle arose up four
knights and said to the kings. we have thought a good remedy how we shall
destroy the toure with the images and yt to do and bring about we will our
lives set to pledge. if that ye will do yt cost. Tho said ye kings what
cost shall we do. They said. we must have. iiii tonnes full of gold. Than
said ye kings. take that gold and fulfill your promise. The knights took ye
gold and went toward Rome. and when they were thither come. in the night
without one of yt yates in the dyche with water they drowned one of ye tonnes with
the gold. and an other tonne they drowned by the second yate and the third
tonne by ye third yate. and the fourth ton^ by the fourth yate they drowned.
And when they had thus done erly in the morning they entered in to ye cite at
an hour conuenyent when yt the emperor went over the mart. they did to him
reverence as it behooved. The Emperor seeing them demanded from whens they
were. or what scyences or what service yt they could do. Which answered. we
are of far countries and we be sothsayers so perfyte ye there was never
thing so preuely or secretly hid. but yt we shall fy^de it by our dremes. we
have herd. that ye labor and have pleasure in such things. and therefore
came we to you for to wit if ye had any need of our service / The Emperor said.
I shall prove you and if it be so yt I find you true. ye shall have of me
great rewards and thank. they said we ask no thing but ye haluen dele for
our reward of the gold that by us shall be fou^den. The emperor said. I am
therewith well content And thus had they with the emperor many words At even
when the emperor was going to bed they said too him. My lord if it please
you this night shall the oldest of us set his conning a work and dreme. and
the third day we shall show you his dreme and what it sygnefyeth. The Emperor
said goo in goddis name. And they weut forth with great gladness. and all yt
night they passed over with derysions and mirth upon trust that they should
come to a good purpose. when ye third day was comen they went erly too
the emperor. and the first of them said My lord pleases you to goo with us
without one of ye yates of thy cite and I shall show you where as a tonne full
of gold is hyd The Emperor said. I shall go with you and se if it be true that
ye say. When they were comen to the place they drew out ye tonne that they
there before had put / The emperor when he that saw was glad. and gave to
them their part. Tho said the second dremer. my lord this night I shall
dreme. The Emperor said. god give you a good dreme. ye next night came he and
took out ye other tonne. and gave it to themperoure. and took him his dele. In
like wise did the third. and ye fourth. upon ye which the emperor was out of
all mesure ioyus and glad and said he had not seen before so true and expert
sothsayers or dremers as they were / Than said they al together at ones as it
had been out of one mouth. my lord we have one after another dre ye which as
ye have seen be all true proved. But now if it please you that we may dreme all
together this night. we trust that too us shall be showed where we shall
find a great quantyte or substance of gold and of richesse. the Emperor
said god give to you a good dreme yt to me and to you may be proffytable Unto
ye next morrow they came again unto ye Emperor and said to him with Ioyouse and
glad vysages or cou^tenau^ces. My lord we bring good and proffytable
tidings. for this night in our slepes such and so great a tresour is to us
showed ye. which if ye will suffer it for to be sought. ye shall be so much
enryched that in this world shall be none to you like. The Emperor said. where
should ye find ye hoorde or tresoure. they said. under the fundament of the
tour yt the images standen on. The Emperor answered. God defend that I should
for love of gold destroy that toure with images wherewith yt we of our enemies
be defended and warned. They said too him again. My lord. Have ye found us in
our saynges otherwise than true and ryghtful. The Emperor said nay. O lord
said they. we with our own hondes shall get out ye gold without hurtynge of
the tour or of ye images. And it is expedyent yt secretly in the night by us it
be done. for dread of resort and concours of ye people lest that ye should
ren in the noise and clamor of them. and also that they should not take that
good and gold away from you and us. The Emperor said. Goo in the name of god
and do your best. as ye well can^e. and I shall to morrow erly come too you.
Tho went they with Joy and gladness. and in the night they were laten in too
the toure. and with great haste and dylygence they vndermynded it. and on the
next day erly they mounted upon their horses and rode again toward their own
country with joy and glory. And or that they came without the fight of rome /
the toure fell down. And on the morn ensuynge when it was fallen / and the
Senators it perceived they sorowed gretely and there was a great sorrow and
bewailing thrughout all ye cite and went to the emperor and said. lord how
may it be yt this tour is thus fallen. by the which we have always had
warning before of our enemies. He answered and said. To me came four falls
deceyuers and and feigned themself to be four sothsayers and yt they could
find tresoure hyd in the ground. And they said that under the fundacyon of ye
toure was hid an innumerable so^me of gold. ye which they should well
undermine without hurty^ge of the toure or images / and I gave faith to them and
they have dysceyued me. they answered hy^ / ye have coueyted so much gold.
and for your insacyate couetyse we shall be all destroyed. but first your
couetyse shall full upon your self. and took and ladde him unto ye capytoll.
and laid him on his bac and poured his mouth full of molten gold. sayng to
hy^ ye have desired gold. and therefore ye shall dry^ke gold and after they
buried him quycke. Not long after that came thenmyes against ye Romans. and
overcame and destroyed them al. Than said thempresse unto the emperor have ye my
lord this example well understand and he said right well. Than said she. The
tour with the images is your body with your.v. wits. as long as ye live there
none so hardy to trouble or make werre upon you ne upon your people. That has
your sone right well understand with his.vii. masters and with their false
narracyons or fables find how they may destroy you. for ye are ouermoche
couetyse to here and enclyned to them. and in so much ye they shall undermine
you and cast you under foot. and bry^ge you to naught. The images are your
five wits ye be all lost. For theyse yt ye be all chyldyshe or folyshe they
shall destroy and sle you. and your sone shall opteyne your empire. The Emperor
said. ye have recyte to me a good example. wherefore it shall not to me happen
as it did with ye tour but my sone first this day shall be hanged. To whom
thempresse said. if ye do so ye shall fare well and live long. Upon ye next
day he commanded hy^ to be lad to hangy^ge.. and as he was to wards ye
galowes lad. came riding against him upon an horse his fyfth master to wards
ye palace. and came before the emperor and saluted him with all reverence / and he
despised his salutacyon. and put him in fere of his life. and ye master said
My lord I have not deserved to dye. and ye my salutacyon despise it is not
your honor. for your sone has not with us be of such condycyo^s as ye
repute hy^ for. as ye in short time shall find. and that he speaks not is of
his his great wisdom. and know ye yt he shall well speak as ye time comyth.
though ye he now speak not. as ye in short time shall here. But ye say yt he
your wife would have shamed. yt believe not. for so wise a man as he is never
should atte^te so shamful a deed. And ye put him to death for your wives
words. ye should not escape without shame and vengeance / In like wise as
ypocras escaped not without vengeance for ye death of Galienus his cosyne. The
emperor said that would I feign here and understand. The master said. what
should avail ye narracyon to tell unto you for your prouffyte if in the mean
seasone your sone should be hanged. and thersore if ye will call again your
sone. and thereafter do as ye think best it shall be at your pleasure.
The Emperor let call again his sone and set him in prison. And tho began ye
master too tell under this manner as follows.

The example of the fyfthe master.
the emperor hears a master's example; through the door, his son is seen
surrounded by guards

Sometime there was a famous physycyan named Ypocras right conning. ye which
exceded all other in conning and scye^ce he had with him his neuewe or kynnesman
yt was called Galienus. ye which he loved much. This Galienus was of an
excellent wit and applied all his wit and mind to learn of hes uncle the
science of physyke. When ypocras apperceyued that in as much as he could hyde
from him his conynge ferynge that he should excelle him in yt craft. for ye
great wit that he was of. As Galienus this saw. he studied and excersysed.
in so much yt in short time he had perfyte conning physyke. for the which
ypocras enuyed him much. It happened upon a time thereafter. yt the king of
Ungary sent his messengers unto ypocras that he should come unto him his sone
for to cure or make hole. Ypocras excused hy^self and would no goo. but sent
his cosyne Galienus with his writing in the company of ye messengers for to
excuse him. And when Galienus was comen before ye king he was right
worshypfully received. but he merueyled why that ypocras would not come, he
excused him saying that he had many great things too do that he might not
come. but he has sent me in his stead. and with the help of god I shall make
hole that child. That pleased well ye king. Galienus went to the child. and
when he had seen his vryne. and tasted his pounces. he said tho the queen. O
excellent princes I pray you here and suffer my words. and tell me who is ye
fader of this child. She said. who should be his fader but my lord the king.
Galienus said. I am sure yt he is not the fader. She answered if ye will say yt
for a troth I shall do your head to be smytn of. he answered I say yet ones
again yt this king is not the fader and I am not therefore comen hither to lose
my head. for I have no such reward deserved. and he was going his way. The
queen yt seeing fpake. O good master if ye will keep it secret. and not
dyscouer me. I shall show and open unto you mine heart. The master said God
defend that from me. that I to no person should show it. and therefore o
noble queen show it boldly to me for it shall never pass my mouth after.
and I shall your sone ease and make him hole. She said if ye do that. ye
shall have of me a good reward. and therefore here what I shall say. Of
fortune came hither unto my lord. the king of Burgondyen. and he was so long
with me conuersaunt that this child by him I bare. Tho said ye master. Fere ye
not. I knew well that it was so before. and anon he gave the ch^de to ete
beef or of an ox to dry^ke. and the child was eased of his infyrmyte. And
when as the king herd that the child was quite of his malady he gave unto ye
master a good reward. but of the queen he secretly received and had a greter
gift and a specyal thank and went his way And when that he was comen home.
ypocras his master demanded of him. have ye ye child heled. and he said ye.
Than asked he hy^ what he gave to him. and he said. I gave hy^ flesh of or
beef to ete. and water to dry^ke. Tho said ypocras. Than is the mother of that
child not true too her husbonde. yt is troth said Galienus. Ipocras anon was
meued with envy. and thought in himself if here be not found a remedy. my
science shall no more be set by. and he shall be named and praised above me. And
from that day forthwarde he thought and devised how he might slay him. Upon a
day Ipocras called and said come go we to seek and gadre herbs in the gardyne.
To whom he said master I am ready. And when they were comen in to ye gardyne.
Ipocras said. I feel that this herb is right virtuous. stoop down and gadre
me of it. Galienus did so. and as they went about the gardyne. said ypocras
now know I well by ye odoure of this herb that it is better and precyoser
than gold. and therefore stoop down to the ground and draw him out with the
rotes for he is right much. Galienus bowed himself down to pluck up the
herb. ypocras drew out his knyfe and killed him. After that ypocras fill
seek to the death that ye strengthes of his body failed him and did as much
as he could to help himself but it would not be and as his scolers and
dyscyples herd of it they went hastily to hy^. and all that they might or
could do for the prouffyte of his health they did / but it auayled him
nothing.. When ypocras that perceived. he said unto his scolers. Goo and
fetch me a great tonne an fill it full unto the brynkes with water. And when
they had so done. he said too them make now therein an hundred hooles. and
when that was done. there went none of the water out. Tho said ypocras.
Behold my most dear dyscyples. how yt ye vengeance of god is fallen upon me.
as ye openly may see. For in this tonne are an hundred holes. and yet gooth
there out not one drop. right so there comes no virtue out of ye herbs to
help me. and therefore what ye do to me it helps not. For I must dye But my
dear children if my neuewe Galienus were now on live. he should hele me. whom I
have slain / yt me sore forthynketh. and therefore ye vengeance of god comes
over me. And this said he turned hy^ to ye wall and gave up the ghost. Tho said
ye master to the emperor. My lord understand ye well what I have said. He
answered ye right well. what hurt had it be^ to him and Galienus had lived.
The master answered it had been right good. for Ipocras at that time had not
dyed. and therefore by ye ryghtwyse Judgment of god his medycynes auayled hy^
not. and therefore I show to you yt it shall happen worse to you. if yt ye put
to death your sone for ye words of your wife. which in time of necessyte shall
assyste and socoure you. A consider ye not. yt ye have after your first wife.
ye have wedded this wife yt ye now have. and so ye may yt third and yt
fourth. and never shall ye have of any of them such a sone ye shall keep and
save you from peril. The Emperor said truly he shall not dye. Tho said ye
master than do ye wisely. and I commend you to god. and thank you. yt ye
have this day for me spared your sone. The Emperor said I mark this well yt
wy^me^ are crafty. and subtyl. herfore I will not for you but for my self save
hy^.

The syxte complaynte of the Empress.
When that thempresse had knowledge. she showed her self as a wode or an
Impacyent body yt all that saw her or herd her wondered and said to themperoor
your wife she pyneth her self as though she should deye The Emperor that heryng
went to her and said wherefore be ye so heavy. and so impacyent. O lord how
should I hold it in. when I am the only daughter of a king and your wife. and
in your company I have had a great despyte and shame. and contynually ye have
promised me to punysshe it. but ye perform it not. The emperor said. I wot
not what I shall do. ye labor from day to day. to have my sone slain. And the
masters labor to save his life. and among al these I know well that he is
my sone. but whether the troth is that know I not. Than said she. that is it
yt I complain that ye believe the masters more than ye do me. Therefore it
shall happen to you as did to a king with his steward. Than said. the
Emperor. tell that example happily it should meue me the sooner to put my sone
to death. She said. gladly. but I pray you give attendaunce what I shall say.
and began to tell as hereafter ensues.

The syxte example of the Empress.
the empress complains to the emperor; his imprisoned son is seen through the
doorway

THere was a king right proud and merueylously dysformed in his vysage in
such wise that wy^men him hated and abhorred. This king thought Rome to
destroy and the romans to slay. and ye bodies of Peter and Poule to take and
carry a way. which while he was in this my^de he called to hy^ his steward
that was right secret with him of his pryue counseyll and said to him. Seek me a
fair woman yt this night may sleep with me. The steward answered. My lord ye
know well your infyrmyte and dysese. and yt no woman will do it without a great
sum of money. The king said. think ye yt for money I will want one have I
not gold and silver enough though it were a thousand florenys I should it
gladle give. The steward herynge yt was anon smyten with couetyse. went too his
own wife which was right fair chaste. and of a good kynrede. and said to her.
O my good wife. my lord desires and coueyteth sore to sleep with a fair and
beauteuouse woman. and will not forbere it. though yt she would ask of him a
thousand florenys. and has commanded me too puruey him of one. And therefore
I counseyll you that ye to us get that money. The wife said. were it not so
that the king so proud and foul of vysage were. yet would I not to that evil
consent because of the sin against god. The steward answered. and I consent
that ye shall do it. and thereto I cou^seyl and command you. and promise you
wtoute that ye co^sente to me herin. ye shall never have good day with me. She
heryng that trembled. in so much that for dread she consented to him. The
steward yt herynge went to the king and said Sir I have found a fair woman
and she is comen of a good house. which will not less have than a thousand
florenes and in the euin she shall come. and erly in ye morny^g she must away
that she be not seen of the people. The king answered and said. I am well
content. when the night was comen the steward lad his wife to ye kings bed
and made fast the door and yede his way. Erly in the morny^ge the steward
arose and went unto ye king and said. My lord it shall be day wtin a while.
it is good that ye perform your promise and let the woman go. The king said
this woman pleseth me so well yt so sone she shall not depart from me. when
the stewerde that herd he departed thens al sorry. uneath he tarried any while
but came to the king and said. My lord the morning is comen. therefore let
the woman goo. lest yt she be ashamed. as I have promised her. The king said
yet shall she not. go from me. and therefore goo out and shet the door again. The
steward right sorrowful departed and went up and down with an heavy and an
angry herre. till that the fair and the clear day appeared. and than entered
again in to the chamber and said. My lord it is clear day. suffer that woman
to depart that she be not therewith ashamed. The king answered / I say to you
for a troth she shall not yet depart for her company is to me right pleasant
and acceptable. The steward yt hery^ge could no longer forbere ne hold his
own counsel. but said unto ye king. O my good and gracyous lord I beseech
you suffer her to depart. for it is mine own wife. The king herynge that said
to him. Open ye wyndowe. and when it was open. the fair and the bright day
appeared. he beheld the woman right fair and goodly. perceived yt it was ye
wife of the steward and said to him. O thou most and worste rybaude or knave.
why haste thou for so little money ashamed and undone thy good and fair wife.
and her unto me vnwetyngly haste delivered. Therefore haste ye and get the out
of my realm and never more herafter come in my syghte. for from hens forth if
ever I may se the thou shall dye ye most shameful and horry blessed death that
ever can be ymagyned. When ye steward herd yt he fled his way and durst
not abide and was never so hardy any more to come in to that real me. And ye
king kept ye wife al his live days in great worship. and gave to her plente
of all things that to her behooved and appertayned. After that the king let
do gadre and assemble a great and a mighty army and puyssau^ce of men of
werre. and went to Rome with great might. and besyeged the cite on all sides.
so long till that the Romans would have delivered him for to have departed and
withdrawn himself from thens the bodies of the holy apostles Petyr and Poule.
Than was there in yt cite seven wise masters as ye now have. by the counsel
of whom all the cite was gyded and governed. And the cytezeyns came too them
and said. What shall we do. it behooves us as that we delyuere unto our dedely
enemies the bodies of the holy apostles or else ye cite Tho answered the
first master. I shall with my wisdom and conning this day ye cite and ye body
of the apostles save. and so one after an other promised to do ye same
eueryche of them for one day. In like wise as ye masters have promised your
sone. with that ye king began to assaute the Cite on all parties. Tho began ye
first master to say. and to allege so wisely for to have pease. yt ye king
that day left his assaute. making and withdrewe him a little. fro the cite.
and so did all the masters one after an other unto the last. To whom came
ye burgeyses and said. O master ye shall understand that. ye king has made
his oath and sworn that to morrow with al his puyssaunce and strength he will
have and win the cite Or else we must all be in Ieoperdye too lose our
lives. Therefore in aquytynge of your promise defend and keep us from danger
like as all your fellows before have done to that answered ye master and said
be of good comfort and fere not. For too morrow I shall by my conning show
such a work and operacyons / that the king with all his puissaunce and might
shall fle and leave the syege. The next day the king made and gave a great
assaute too the cite. Tho went the master and endued or clothed himself with
a meruayvesture or clothing having therein the feathers or ye tails of
pecockes and of other fowls of diverse colors. and took two bright swerdes in
each hand one. and went there with all and stood upon the hygheste toure of
all the cite. and began too meue and torn or show himself about on all
parts toward the oste so that they might all behold and se him. and he held
in his mouth the two bright swerdes yt merueylously shyned. They without of ye
kings host that seyeng said to him. O lord behold upon highest of yonder
toure a wonderful thing or figure. Ye I se it well yt it is merueylous / but
what it is I know not. They said to him It is Ihesus the god of ye christian
folk yt is come out of heaven us al to sle and destroy with his two swerdes if
we here any longer abide. The king herynge that trembled for fere and said
what shall we do there is but one way and that is that we anon go and depart
fro hens lest that their god avenge himself upon us. Tho began ye king with
all his oste to fle. notwithstondy^ge there was no need. but yt they of yt
master were begyled and deceived. And when ye romans yt saw they hastily
moved after al armed in good ordinance. and the king with many of his people
they killed and destroyed. and also in that manner by great subtylte of ye
master was ye mighty king with his folk ouercomen. Then said thempresse to
the emperor. Lord have ye understand what I have said. He said ye. Well in ye
best wise. She said. have ye no herd what. I have said to you at the
beginning of this narracyon. of the steward that the king trusted so much.
which for lucre of good shamed his own wife. and he for that was driven and
banysshed out of the land. In like wise your sone for the desire and appetyte
that he has to the empire. entendeth to co^founde and destroy you. But while
ye be in your might and power do with him as ye king did with his steward if ye
will not put him to death. banyssne him out of your empire. yt ye without fere
may leave in furete of your live. And have ye not also herd how ye king lay
before ye cite of Rome. and how he was by the wise masters dectyued and
scorned yt he with his folk were killed and slain. In the same wise ye seven
masters entende to do with you. and by their false wyles and subtyltees to
desceyue you. and in the end to sle you ye your sone may regne. Thereupon
answered the emperor and said that shall not so be. for my sone too morrow shall
deye. Than commanded his servants that they should led his sone to
hanging. And as the folk herd that there was a great noise and a gaderynge
of them and bewailed the death of ye only sone of the emperor And as ye syxte
master herd that. he hasted him too the Emperor and salued him much
honorably. and he took it vntha^kfully. and thretned him or menaced him to dye
with his sone for that he was with them made dompe. and a rybaude. ye which he had
showed upon his wife. The master said. I have deserved no death. with your sone.
but great and large gifts. for he is not dompe as ye shall here with in three
days if he may live so long. and if ye put him too death for words of your
wife. than shall I merueyll of your wisdom. and with out doubt it shall happen
to you as it sometime happened to a knight that so much allowed the saynges of
his wife that he was bound to an horse tail and drawn through out all the
cite to the galowes. The Emperor said for the love of god show me that example
that I may the better beware of that peril. That will I not do said the
master. without ye do call again your sone. Than the emperor commanded to call his
sone And the master began before all the folk to tell in this manner following.

The example of the syxte master.
the emperor hears a master's example; through the door, his son is seen
surrounded by guards

THere was an Emperor of Rome the which had three knights whom he loved above
al other. And in that same Cite was an au^cyent knight yt had wedded a fair
young wife as ye do thempres which above al other things he loved. This lady
could sing right well. and melodyously and with such swetnes ye many drew to
her house and desired her company / It befell upon a season as she sat in her
house. ye vysage turned in to the street yt she might se them that went by. and
began swetely tu sing. yt all folk delyted for to here her. By chance came
that ways a knight of ye Emperors court and herd that voice. lift up his
eye^ and beheld her Intentyfly, and anon he was taken in her love. and entered
in to her house and fill in communycacyon with her of love. and among al other
he demanded what he should give her too sleep by him one night She answered an
hundred floreyns. The knight said. tell me when I shall come. and I shall give
you an hundred floreyns. She said when I may have a conuenyent time I shall
send for you. The next day she sange again in the same place. and it fortuned
the second knight of the emperor to come by that same way. the which in
likewise was smyten in her love. and also promised her an hundred floreyns. To
whom also she promised to show him a time provided. The third day was the
third knight in like wise caught in her love. the which also promised an
ho^dred floreyns. and she too give him knowelege of the time. These three
knights have so secretly spoken with that lady yt none of them had knowledge
of other. The lady ye was of malice and cautelous replenysshed. came to her
husbonde and said. sir I have secret matters too show you. and follow therein
my counseyll if ye do it: our necessite or pouerte ye may largely releue. The
knight said tell it me I shall hold it secret and fulfill it to my power. She
said three knights of the^perours court have been with me one after an other. in
such wise ye none knows of an other counseyll. and every of them have offered
me an hundred floreyns might we ye three.C. florayns get and no knowledge
thereof be had. should it not be to us a great help and our pouerte well
releued. The knight said. forsooth yes. and therefore what someuer ye cou^seyl me
to do I shall follow it. Tho said she. I shall give you this counseyll. when
they come with the floreyns ye shall stand behind ye yate with your sword
drawn in your hand. and because yt every of them comethe alone. ye shall sle
one after another. and so we shall have the three. c floreyns of them without
knowledge of any other. The knight answered. O my best beloved wif I fere me
that this evil can notte be hid. and we should therefore shamefully suffer
death if that it were known. She said I shall this work begin. and I shall
make thereof a good end. and fere it not. wha^ the knight saw that she was so
hardy. it caused him to be the more bold. and she sent for the first knight
and he came to her anon with out any taryenge to the yate and knocked. and
she asked if he brought ye c. floreyns. and he said ye. I have them here all
ready. Tho let she hy^ in. and anon at ye entering in. her husbonde killed him
and so he did ye second and the third and in to one secret chamber they
drew the bodies of them. when it was thus done ye knight said. to his lady. O
dear wife if these bodies be found with us. we shall dye ye most shameful death
yt can be ymagyned for it is not possible but yt these knights shall be myssed
in themperours court. and great, search and Inquysy on shall be for them made
through all this cite. where they are become. She said. Sir I have this work
begone. and shall make thereof a good end. fere not. as I before said. This lady
had a brother the which had the governance of the watch of ye cite that on
ye nyghtis upon streets watched with his fellows She stood at her gate and called
her brother and said. O my best brother I have a secret matter the which in
co^fessyon I shall show you. and therefore come a little within. and when yt he
was come in. the knight received him friendly and gave him wine to drink. and
said. my well beloved brother. this is ye cause yt I have called you. for of
your counsel I have much need. The brother answered say it boldly to me. and
what someuer yt I may do. to my power. yt shall be at your desire without
letty^ge. Tho said she. yesterdaye came in a knight in good frendshyp / but
afterward he fill in such words and varyaunce with my husbonde. yt he slew
him. and lies in my chainber. and mine own dear brother we have no man that we
may trust but you. and if ye body were found by us we should dye. and she
made mencyon but of one. ye brother said deliver it me in a sack and I shall
bear hy^ to ye see. she herynge yt was full glad thereof. and delivered to hy^
the body of ye first knight he took it and went wtall a good pase and cast it
therein. and as this was done. he came again to his sister and said. give me
now of the best wine for ye are of him quyte. and she thanked hy^ and went in
to her chamber as though she had gone for wine and began to cry with an high
voice. ye knight that was cast in to the sea is come again. As her brother yt
herd he wondered sore. and said give me him. I shall se if he shall arise
again. and took the body of the second knight and wend it had been of the first
knight and went in to the sea. and with a great stone he drowned him therein. yt
done. went again unto his systers house and say de. now fill me a cup with
good wine. for I have drowned him so deep ye he shall never come again she said
thanked be god and went again too her chamber and sayned her to fetch wine. and
cried with a great voice Alas woe be to me he is risen again and come out of ye
see. and as her brother herd that with great meruaylle said. what devil is
this knight that I have thus cast in to ye water and notwithstanding is comen
again. Deliver hy^ me ye third time. and I shall se if he shall come again. Tho
gave she him ye third knxght. which he byleued had been ye first knight. and
yede wtoute ye cite to a great foreste and made a great fire and cast the
knight therein. and when he was almost burnt. ye brother went thens a little
dystau^ce to do his need. Tho came there a knight. yt would tide to ye cite
where on ye morny^ge they should have a tourneye and a Iusty^g. and it was
cold weder and derke. and was not fer fro ye cite. as yt he had a sight of
that fire drew thereto and alyghted from his horse and warmed hy^. The waker
came and said to hy^ what art you. The knight said. I am a gentyl knight. Tho
spoke ye waker and said. you art no knight but a devil for first I cast ye
in to the water. the.ij. time with a great stone I drowned the. and the.iii. time
I have put ye in this fire supposing yt you had be burnt. and yet you
stand here. and tho he took ye knight with his horse and cast them both in to
the fire. and after yt he went aye^ to his sister and told what had happened
hy^. Now bry^ge me of ye best wine. for after ye I had breute him I found him
again by yt fire with his horse. and I have cast them both in the fire. and his
sister perceived well yt he had brent a knight of the tourney which anon
brought hy^ of ye best wine habu^dau^tly. and after he had well dronken. he
went thens. Not long time after that there fill a great debate and co^tenco^n
betwyx the knight and his wife. in such wise yt he smote her. which had
indygnacyon thereof and waxed. angry and said that many might here it. O wretch
will ye kylle me as ye have done the three knights of themperours. men yt
herynge laid hands on them. and brought them be fore ye emperor and ye woman
anon knowledged yt her husbonde had slain the three knights of themperours.
and how he took fro them three hundred floreyns and as it was thus in troth
found. both were drawn at an horse tayll and hanged upon the galowes.
Than said ye master to the emperor. have ye understand what I have said. He
answered right well. I say for certain that wife was ye worste woman that
might be of all wymme^. for she moved and styred hy^ to murdre. and afterward
dyscouered him. The master said. It is without doubt yt it shall to you happen
worse if ye put to death your sone by ye advise of your wife. The Emperor said.
my sone shall not dye. this day The master yt herynge yaue thankynges to
the emperor. and took leave and went his way.

The seventh complaynte of the Empress.
When the empress herd yt the sone of the emperor was yet living. as a mad
woman she ran to them perour weeping and cryenge. O unhappy wife what shall I
do. alas alas for I must needs sle my self yt so am ashamed and no
punysshement there upon done The Emperor answered. God defend you such things
to have in mind. but suffer a while. and ye shall have a good end in your
cause. She answered. Sir ye end shall be evil. for of yt shall follow to you
great co^fusyon and to me. The Emperor said. be still of such things. She said.
Lord it shall come to you and your son^e as it happened to a king and to his
steward. The Emperor said. I pray you tell me that example. She said. I will
gladly tell it. but I fere me that ye will here me no more. for ye next day ye
seventh master shall speak and save your sone from yt death as his fellows have
done. The second day after this. then your sone shall speak of whoos words ye
shall have and take such Joy and delectacyon yt the love berwyxte us shall be
holy forgeten and washed away. The Emperor said that is Impossyble to me. for I
shall never your love forgete, Tho said she, O my best beloved lord. please it
you I shall tell you one example. by ye which ye shall be ware before of many
perils in time coming. and specially of your cursed sone. which entendeth
to destroy me by his masters. The emperor said. tell on your example. and the
Empress began to tell in this wise ensuynge.

The seventh example of the Empress:
the empress complains to the emperor; his imprisoned son is seen through the
doorway

THere was sometime a king. the which loved his wife above all thing. in so
much that he closed her in a strong castle. and bare ye keys of the castle
himself. The lady was therefore right heavy and desolate. Now in far parties
there was a valyaunte knight. ye which in a night had a dreme after this
effect For he thought that he saw one of the fayreste queen's yt might be. ye
which above all things desired to have her love. yt if he might se her
walking he should clearly have knowledge of by whom to him great frendshyp and
worship should come. To yt queen in ye same night by vysyon of the said knight.
it was to her also showed. and yet they had of each other neither knowledge of
name neither of fame. when ye knight had thus dremed and seen in his sleep. he
thought and determined in his mind that his foot should not rest unto ye time
till he had found that lady. yt to him was showed in his vysyon. and lepte
upon his horse / and took with him all that to him was necessary for his
journey. and rode and labored thrughe diverse regyons and lands so long
till at the last he came unto the same land. where that the queen was by her
husbonde closed or kept in a strong castle. And wha^ this said knight was
come in to ye same cite. and by a certain season had theri soiourned. it
happened on a day as this knight walked by the castle. and knew not yt ye
queen was therein she sat in a wy^dowe to behold and see ye people going by.
and among all other she saw the said knight. and knew that he was the same
man. that she had dremed of. And ye knight by chance lift up his eyes and
perceived ye lady syttyng in the wyndowe. and anon his mind showed him yt it
was she yt he the dremes of had. and he began to sing a song of love. And as
she herd yt. she was anon taken with his love. The knight from thensforth
daily went and walked about yt castle beholdynge it over all yt if in any
manner wise he might get to her too show his mind. The lady perceyuy^ge that
she wrote a letter and cast it down to him. And when he had seen over ye
letter. and understood ye will of that lady. he began to haunte Ioustes and
tournamentes and did so many great and merueylous acts or deeds. that ye name
of him came to the king. And as the king herd that he sent after him and
said to him. Sir knight I have herd much honor of you. if it will please you
for to abide and to dwell with us. we shall give you large gifts and rewards.
The knight answered. O right myty prince I am your servant. would god yt I
could do any seruyse to please your magnyfycence. without taking of reward save
one thing before all other I desire. The king said. show it boldly what
thing yt it is. The knight said. my lord sythen yt it has pleased you for to
take me as your servant and one of your counseyll. me seems that it were
expedyent for both our solaces. that I had a place nyghe too the wall of the
castle: that I might at all times be the more ready at your calling when that
ye have need. Then^e the king said I consent it to you make it as ye thy^ke
it best. Tho went the knight and hired werkeme^ and made a fair logynge by
ye walls of ye toure. and wha^ it was all ready. He made a covenant with a
werkeman for to make out of his house a secret way in to ye tour and when it
was made ready after his entente. he killed ye werkeman by cause he sholbe not
dyscouer. and went in to ye queen and did to her reverence accordy^g and they
talked of many things. yt at the end he desired for to sleep by her. which she
oftentimes denied. but never yeles she consented to hy^. After yt ye queen
thought what shall I do. if I should give knowledge hereof unto my husbo^d.
thereof should come two euyls yt one is my shame. and ye by adventure he shode
utterly forsake me and drive me out of his land for ever. and ye knight he
should sle. for fro yt death he could not escape. and therefore it is better yt
I be still and tell not. The knight after yt as of tentymes as it pleased him
he went in to the queen. and and did his will with her. And she gave him a
ring the which ye king had given unto her at their wedding. This knight in
every battle and tourname^t had the vyctory. wherefore he wus and stood in
great favor with the king in somoche that he made hy^ his steward. and
gouernoure of al his Regyon. and land. At happened upon a day that the king
dysposed him self for too goo too chase or hunting. and he commanded his
steward for too make him ready upon the morrow for too goo with him. whertoo
he offered him self all ready. And on the morrow after they entered in to ye
forest. and all that day they chased. and followed ye wild bestes that they
were so weary that ye king by a fontayne sat hy^ down to rest. and ye
knight by ye king. and fill on sleep by him. having ye ry^ge upon his
finger. ye which the king marked and knew. After yt the knight perceived yt
the king had seen the ring. feigned himself seek and said. My lord I feel my
self sore seek yt if I find not hastily remedy therefore by the means physyke
I am but a deed man and therefore I pray you license me to go home. To whom he
said. go my dear friend in gods name. he anon gate on his horse and hasted
hy^ to his house. and went to the queen and gave her again ye ring. and told
her how ye king hud marked it and seen it on his finger and prayed her if he
made any questyons of ye ring yt he should show it to hy^. This done he went
down again to his lodgy^ge. And anon ofter yt the king came to the queen and
she received him right. louy^gly. and after yt a lytyl time was passed. the
king said. My lady show me where ye ryng is that I gave to you. I desire to se
it. O my lord to what entente at this time desire ye to se it. Than said he.
if ye show if not to me Inco^tyne^t it shall repent you. She rose anon up
and went to cheste and brought the ry^ge to ye king. And as he saw ye ring.
he was half ashamed and said unto her. O how like is the knights ring unto
this ring. which I saw upon his finger. and I bileued that it had been my
ring. and therefore it was that I asked it of you so hastily after the ring.
And of this evil suspecyon I yield my self gylty against you my dear lady. in
this behalf. for ye strength of the toure deceived me. For I thy^ke ye no man
might come therein. but I my self alone. She said. My dear lord. wonder not.
for one ring is like an other. for work men make seldom any work. but ye
other make the same. but god forgive it you that ye have had me suspect. when
ye know the strength of ye toure. and the keys ye have always by you. and
believe no man there with. After yt the knight let ordeyn^ a great dinner and said
to the king. My lord it is so that my lady in love is come out of my country
and I have done to be made a feste or a dinner. and gladly I would pray you that
at this time ye will do me honor. and take such mete as is in my house. The
king said I shall gladly do you yt worship and more. The knight was thereof
glad. and by his secret way went to the queen and said to her. My lady this
day ye shall come to my house by my preuy way. and clothe you in rich clothing
after the way of my country. and ye shall sit at the table with the king as my
sovereign lady. and make hy^ good there She said as ye will I shall in all
things fulfill. and when the hour of mete was come. and the king from the
castle was coming to wards the knights house. In the mean time the queen
entered by the secret way in to the knights lodging and apparayled her after
the manner of the knights country. and when the king was entered in to the
house. she salued him reverently and received him. and when the king had
beholden her he demanded of the knight. what woman is this that is so fair.
Then ye knight said my lord it is my sovereign lady that now is come out of
my country after me. I have tarried long in her service. Then the knight set
the king at ye t able as it behooved. and made the queen to sit by him / and
the king thought that it was his queen. and said wtin himself. O how like is
this woman unto my wife. So ye strength of the toure deceived him. that he gave
more faith and credence to ye knights words than he did unto his own eyes.
The queen began^e for to speak and talk unto the king and to styre him for to
ete and drink and to make good chere. And wha^ as the king herd her voice
and speech than he said to himself. O blessed lady. like is this woman unto my
queen. in her behauyng / in speech / in vysage / and in all other things and
condycyons. and always ye streng the of the toure failed him. In the end of
ye mete. ye knight prayed his love to sing a song before ye king the which
began for to sing a song of love. when as he herd that and knew her voice.
he thought is not this my wife. How may it be she. have not I ye keys of the
toure my self in keeping. and so all the mete time he sat and strofe within
himself. Tho at the last he said unto the knight that he should take up the
table for he had some what for too done for why that he sat in such a great
thought. and aduyseme^t The knight answered and said. My lord ye make no
good chere. ye are full of thoughts. And if it please you we shall make to you
more sport and solace. And the woman said please it you sir king here by us
tarry. we shall make you all the sport and solace that we can. like as ye queen
is in her solace and conforte. He said take away the table. for I may no longer
abide Then the knight at the commandment of ye king took up the table. and
thanked them all. And ye king went hastily unto the castle in searching
whether yt the queen were wtin or not. And in the mean while the queen went up
by her preuy way. and put of her uppermost vestures and the king found her in
the same clothing that he left her before. When as the king was entered and so
found her. he embraced and kyssed her and said unto her. This day I have eten
with my knight and with his love that is come out of his country. and sythen I
was borne unto this day mine eyes has not seen two so like creatures in all
thing as she is to you and this mete time I have be so much styred with
diverse things yt I could no longer abide there. but yt I must come and
search whether ye were here or there. Tho said ye queen. Sir how might ye
think yt. for ye know well yt this toure is fast. and strong enough and
that no body can come in nor out without you. for ye alone have always the keye.
How were it then possible for me to be there. Ye find sometime one man like on
other and therefore ye should take none arguments of mysdemyng or of suspycion
as ye late did of the ring. The king said. that is true and therefore I
knowledge my self gylty that. I have mysdemed you. After that came to him ye
knight and said. My lord I have of long time served your good grace. and now
it is time that I return again in to my country and therefore for all the
service yt I have done unto you I desire of you but one thing to do for me. yt
my love ye which I entende to wedde in the face of the church. which has
followed me out of far countrees. and her I shall bring thither again as my
lawefull wife Therefore I beseech and pray your noble grace that ye will do me
this honor. that by your own hand ye will give her before the priest unto me.
the which shallbe unto me greet honor and worship when I come in to my
country. The king answered. yt petycyon and more if ye desire it. that shall
I gladly do and fulfill it. The knight prefyxed the day of marriage. To the
which day this good king came to the church worshypfully. The priest was
ready and stood endued with his vestymentes for to solemnyse the matrymonye. The
knight had the queen all ready apparayled in his own house after his manner and
had ordained two knights for to lead her to the church. they byleuynge that
it had been his paramour: And when they were before in the face of ye church ye
priest said. who shall give this woman unto this knight. then the king said. I
shall give her to mine own knight. and took her by the hand and said unto her.
O good woman ye are much like unto my queen. and therefore I love you the
better. and also for that ye be my knights wife and shall be of my house and
put the queen's hand in to ye knights hand. an ye priest after ye manner of
the church has bound and wedded them together. and when all this was
fynysshed and done the knight said unto ye king Sir my ship yt I entende to go
in toward my country is all ready to make sail wherefore I humbly beseech
hyghly your most noble grace that it will please you for to accompany my wy
thereunto and that ye will aduertyse and enfourme her yt ye will aduertyse an
enfourme her that she love me and have me in favor above all other creatures
living and the rather for your good excytacyon and doctrine. Then the king
with a great multitude of people went with them and accompanied them unto the
ship. of whoos departing many of them were do launte to the ship. the
king began to say unto the queen. my most dear friend. harken now well unto
my counseyll and follow it. for it shall be for your honor and proufyte. My
knight has now here wedded and done to you al ye worship yt in him is.
wherefore look yt ye love and honor him above all erthly creatures and yt has
god commanded and that ye be too him true and obedyent. and as this was said
he delivered her unto ye knight. saying my blessyng go with you both. and our
lord keep and conduyte you in sauete to your country. The^ the knight and the
queen bowed and enclyned down^ her hedes unto yt king. and thanked him of all
things and they committed him to god. and entered in to the ship and the
maryners haled up the sails and say led forth before the wind so that wtin a
short time the king had lost ye sight of the ship. And from the^s he went
hastily to ye castall and myssed the queen. and wha^ he found her not / he was
meued in all the parts of his body. and sought all about ye toure and serched.
till at last he found ye hole or ye secret way ye the knight had made. and
as he saw that than cried he and weped and said. Alas alas this knight in whom
I had so great confydence and trust has taken away my wife was I not a fool
yt I gave more faith in to his words then I did to mine own eyes. Than said
thempresse. My lord have ye understand what I have said. The Emperor said.
right well. in ye best wise. Then said thempresse. remember how yt he trusted
the knight and yet he deceived hy^. In the same manner wise ye have confydence
in the. seven wise masters / and they labor for to destroy me that am your
wife. and ye give more faith unto their words than ye do unto your own eyes.
for ye have well seen how yt your sone rent and scratched me. Whereof yet I
bear and have the tokens and the marks as ye may see. And also ye know well
how that your cursed sone has me ashamed and ye mark not how they defend
him in his folly and falshede. Therefore it is to be dradde yt it shall happen to
you as it did to the king that too you I have spoken of. The Emperor said. I
believe mine eyes better than their words. and therefore I say you yt to morrow I
shall do Justice of him. On ye morrow the Emperor commanded that his sone
should be hanged. Tho began again a great noise in and

the emperor hears a master's example; through the door, his son is seen
surrounded by guards

THere was a knight yt had a fair young wife whom he entyrely loved in so
much that he could not be out of her sight. It happened on a time yt they played
together at the chesse. and ye knight by chance held a knyfe in his hand and
she playng fortuned to smite her hand upon ye knyf. yt a little blood began to
appear. When ye knight saw that his wife bled. he sorowed much and was sore
aferde of his wife yt he fell to the ground in a swoune. his wife cast cold
water upon his vysage. yt he a little came again too him self and said lyghtely
call the curate with the holy sacrament for I must deye for the blood yt I have
seen come out of your fy^ger has smyten the death to my heart. The priest came
and houseled him. and anon after he dyed without any taryeng for whoos death
there was made great sorrow and bewayly^ges and specially of ye wife. And after
that the obsequyes and buryenge was done according. She went and lay upon the
buryel or grave and there she made the gretest sorrow of the world. and said
that she would never depart from thens but as a turtyll douue she would for
the love of her husbonde there abide and dye. Tho went her frenvnto her and
said what avails this for his soul to live and die here it is better yt ye go
to your house and give alms for ye love of god and yt shall more avail his
soul. than in this place to abide. To whom she answered be still ye are evil
cou^selours. Consider not ye how I am fro hy^ separate and departed by his death
for a little blood yt he saw com out of my ho^d or fy^ger. and therefore I
shall never fro hens depart. Her friends hery^ge yt let make a little house
or lodging nygh unto ye grave. and put therein all things yt to her was
necessary and went their ways thy^kynge that within a while she should be
weary to be alone. and so desolate from all company and yt thereby she should
desire again ye company of people. In yt cite was then a laws yt when a
trespassour or offendour against the law were hanged. yt ye shyryf all yt night
should watch and keep the body all armed. and if it happened yt the body of him
hanged were stolen away. ye seryf should lose all his land. and his life at ye
kings pleasure. At happened sone after yt the knight was deed a man too be
hanged for trepasse that be had done. so that ye sheryf after ye law of the
land all the night watched by ye galowes yt was not fer fro ye cite. and yt
church yerde was not far from the walls of ye same. Tho became ye sheryf so
cold yt he wist not but to dye for cold. without the rather yt he might warm
him. it was so fervent a cold and so strong a a froste. and he beheld fro
thens about him and saw yt fire in yt chyrcheyerde. and hasted him and came
thereto. and when he was come he called and knocked at the little house. The
woman spoke who is that yt at this hour is knocking at ye house of this
sorrowful woman. I am ye shyref that so much cold suffers yt without anon ye
late me in I shall frese to death. She said. I fere me if that I let you come
in ye should show me such words yt should cause me for to be more heuyer and
he fayd I promise unto you yt I shall say no words to your dyspleasure. Then
let she him in. and when he a while had sytten by ye fire and was well warmed
he said to her. O fair woman with your license would I feign speak but one word
unto you. She answered to him. sir say what it pleases you. He said. O lady ye
be a fair gentyl woman rich and young. were it not better and more conuenyent
for you to dwell at home in your house and to give alms than to destroy and
consu me your life here with wepynges and cryenges. She said sir knight had I
known this before ye had not come herin for I say to you. as I have said too
other oftentimes. Ye know well yt my husbonde loved me so well that for a
little blood yt he saw me blede on one of my fyngers he is deed. wherefore I
shall here deye for the love of him. As the knight herd this he took leave and
wents to the galowes. and when he was there come. he saw yt the thief that he
left there hanging was stolen and carried a way. and began therefore to wexe
heavy and full of sorrow. and said. woe is me what shall I do for I have lost my
life and all my good. And he going thus full of sorrow and heaviness. and
wyste not which way to torn him or to go. at the last bethought him to go
to yt devout and desolate lady. and she we unto her ye heaviness of his heart.
to wit of yt she could give him any good counseyll. And when he was then^es
come he called. and she axed the cause of his knocking Tho said he. madame I
am the shyref that was here right no we with you. and I would feyne show you ye
secrets of mine heart. Therefore I pray you for ye love of god open the door.
and he went in and said to her. O most virtuous lady I come to have your
counseyll and aduys. for ye know well ye law of ye lands are that when so
ever any man is hanged and stolen a way of the galowes. than the shyref his
life and gods be in ye kings hands. Now it is happened in ye time that I
was here with you and warmed me. ye theefis stolen a way from ye galowes.
therefore I pray you for the love of god give me your aduys what is me best to
do. She answered I have compassyon upon you. for by the law ye have lost life
and goods to ye king Do now after my counsel. and ye shall neither lose
life ne gods. He answered therefore I came to you hoping to have good
comforth. She said will ye than promise to take me to your wife. the knight
answered. would god that ye would do yt. but I fere me lest yt ye would
dysdeyne so much to humble you too me yt am so pore a knight. She said I give
you my will thereto. and he yaue her again his will and consented too be her
knight during his life. Tho said she. ye know well yt such a day my lord
was buried which for ye love of me deyed. take him out of his sepulture. and
go hang him instead of ye thief. The knight answered lady your counsel is
good. Tho went they together and opened the grave and drew him out. The knight
said how shall we now do. by cause or the thief was taken. two of his upper
tethe were smyten out. and I fere me if yt were perceived I should be deed. She
said to him. take a stone and stryke out two of his tethe The knight answered.
madame yt may not do for while he lived he was my well beloved fellow and it
should be to me a great rebuke. if I committed so dysloyall a deed unto his
body being deed. She answered for your love I shall do it. and took a stone
and smote out two of his tethe. and said to the shyref. take hy^ and hang him
upon ye galowes like to ye thief. The knight said I fere me to do it. for ye
thief in taking of hy^ was wounded in ye head. and he wanted both his eres.
and therefore if it were serched and found otherwise. it should be to my utter
undoing. Than said she. take out your sword and make him a great wound on
his head. and cut of his eres. O madame god forbede ye I do yt to the deed body
yt I loved so well in his life. Than said she. give me your sword and I shall
for ye love of you do it. and took ye sword and smote a manly stroke upon ye
deed man's forhede. and cut of both his eres. And when she had thus done.
said. Now take and hang him without company. and than ye knight answered. yet I
fere me to ha^ge hy^. for ye thief wanted both his stones. and if that were
serched and found without. all our labor were in vayn Then said she. I saw
never so feerfull a man seeing yt matter so clear and sure. Take a knyfe and cut
of his slones. And be answered. yt may I not do in no wise and therefore I pray
you spare me. and ye know well what a man is without his stones. She said for ye
love of you I shall do it. And took ye knyf in her hand and cut of husbondes
stones and to him. now take this churl thus dysfygured and hang him up
without dread And went forth together and henge up the body upon ye galowes and
so was the shyref delivered out of the ky^ges danger. Tho said ye lady. now be
ye quyte of all your daungeours and fere and all thy sorrows by my counsel.
And therefore I will yt ye wedde me in ye face of ye church. The knight said I
have made a vow yt I shall never wed other as long as ye live. which I will
hold. but afterward he said. O you most shameful and worst woman of al wy^men
who would take ye to his wife. An honorable and a loving knight was thy
husbo^de. which for a little blood yt he saw of thy fy^ger shed dyed now haste
you smyten out two of his tethe. you haste cut of his eres. and his stones. and
you haste made hy^ a great wound in his head. what devil would wed ye. and by
cause yt you shall never shame more good man. I shall read ye. and drew his
sword and with one stroke he smote of her head. The master. said. My lord have
ye understand what I have said. The emperor said. right well. Among all
wymmen was this ye worste and the knight rewarded her according. so as she
should no more men shame. And the emperor said more over. O my good master
might I ones here my sone speak I should give no charge of my life. Tho said
the master. To morrow ye shall here him speak before you and before al ye lords
of thempyre. and he shall show ye very troth of all ye varyaunce betwyxte us
and thempresse as I hope. and took his leave of the emperor and departed.

How yt Dyoclesyan themperours sone co^playned on thempres. and how yt he
excused him of her co^playnt.
ANd after yt all the masters assembled together and took their counseyll how
and in what manner they should bring out ye child of prison and led to the
palace. and tho they went to ye child there as he lay in prison before the
mydday his will and his cou^seyl to here. To whom ye child said. what yt
shall please you. shall please me. but in no wise besye you not how yt I shall
answer. or what I shall say. for with Joy I shall answer to all things yt
shall be demanded of me. wha^ yt seven masters herd yt they were right glad.
and clothed him in purpure and in clothe of gold. and two masters went before
him. and one on his right hand. an other on his lift hand. and ye other three
followed him after. and before them al went xxiiii men with diverse instruments of
musyke and brought him with great melody and honor to ye palace. And when
the emperor herd all this melody. he demanded what it was. Then it was told
him. Sir emperor it is your sone. yt which comes tofore you and before all
your lords to speak and excuse himself of all things yt are laid to his
charge / The Emperor said. yt is good tydy^ges might I here my sone speak. And
when ye child was come to ye palace he ran unto his fader and said unto hy^.
hayle fader and my most honorable. And when the emperor herd ye voice of his
sone he was so glad yt for Joy he fyl down to ye earth. but ye child took
him lightly up again. and when he was come again to hy^self. Tho began

Then said the sone unto the fader. behold this rybaude that many a night
has with your wife lain in your chamber in auoutrye. and have defouled your
bed. and therefore the Empress loved him so well. the which ye knew not.
when the Emperor saw yt. he was impacyent and wroth. yt he commanded yt she
with ye rybaude should be brent. ye sone said. lord fader make no haste of yt
judgment before that I have reproved her of the crime yt she laid upon me
falsely. and that she untruly and falsely has complained and lied upon me. Tho
said the fader. My dear sone I committee all the judgment in to your hands The
sone answered if she be found false and a liar ye law shall judge her. But my
dear fader when ye sent after me at ye instaunce of her. then I with my
masters beheld the sterres in ye fyrmamente. and there we saw yt if I should
speak any word within seven days I should have deyed a shameful death. and
therefore that was the cause that I spoke not. And where as the Empress said
and put unto me. that I would have oppressed and rauysshed her. in yt she lies
falsely but she did her best to have caused me to do it. And wha^ she in no wise
could bring me thereto. she took me paper pen and ynke. and badde me write the
cause why yt I refused her. And when yt I had written yt I would not do or
commytte so great and abhomynable sin. and also would not my faders orcharde
defoule. Tho began she to tere her clothes and scratche her vysage yt it ran on
blood. and cried with a loud voice. and committed unto me the crime or blame.
And when ye Emperor herd this he beheld her with a fell cou^tenau^ce. and
said to her in this manner. O thou wretched woman was it not suffycyent to
fulfill thy foul and lecherous appetyte I and thy rybaude. but would also have
had my sone Than fell the Empress to themperours foot and she cried him
mercy. Then ye Emperor said. O thou cursyd and most unhappy woman thou ask
forgyuenesse and thou art worthy none to have. for you haste deserved to dye in
three manner wise. The first is yt you haste done auoutrye. The second is that
thou hastee provoked and styred my sone to sin and haste to him committed.
and laid ye crime falsely and untruly. And ye third yt thou haste every day
entyced and provoked. me with thy false tales for to put him to death. and
therefore ye law shall have ye course upon ye. and judge the to the death. Then
said the sone. Fader ye know well. that for ye lesynge that she lied upon me.
I was daily lad to hanging. But god with the help of my masters has
delivered me. O my most honorable fader. it was said unto you by ye Empress
that I would also by ye help of my masters depose you out of your Empire.
and that I labored to dystroye you and for to set me in your place. should
not ye than have sorowed. ye have the Empire to govern. and wherefore should I
not hold you for my fader. God defend that. for of you I have my living. and
I shall hold and repute you for my sovereign lord and fader during the term
of my life. And I will not in any manner depryue you of your honor. but I
shall labor and besye my self about the governance of ye same. and all
your commandments I shall fulfill. in every thy^ ge. But it is in like wise
as the fader cast his sone in to the sea for too drown him. because he said
yt he in time coming should be his lord. and yet ye sone by the help of god
was saved. and was made a gretter lord than he was. and yet was it no
hynderau^ce to the fader but prouffyte. Also ye should see and remember yt my
life and governance shall never hinder you but it shall be to your great
solace and Joy. Than said ye Emperor. blessed be almighty god and the hour
yt I ever begat you. and deserved to have such a sone ye I find so wise and
good in all things. Tell me now an example by ye which I may parfytly thy
wisdom under stand. and that mine heart may the better Joy in the. Then
said the sone first command silence to your people yt I be not let in my
words till ye I have done. And when yt it is ended. give sentence with ye right
wysnesse of the law upon me and upon the Empress Tho commanded the Emperor
silence. and the child began to tell in manner as hereafter follows.

The example of Dyoclesyan the Emperors sone
THere was a knight which had but one sone that he loved right much in
beginning as ye now all only have me. whom he delivered to a master of
far countries to nourysshe and to learn. ye child was of a great wit and
prouffyted much and grew as well in learning as in body. And when he had
dwelled with his master seven year. his fader desired to see him. and sent
letters to him yt he should come again in to his country and vysyte his friends
in like wise as ye have sent for me. The child was obedyent to his fader and
came at his commandment of whose coming he Ioyed much. for yt he was as well
grown in his members as in doctrine. To every man he appeared pleasant and
gentylle. It happened upon a day yt the fader and the mother sitting at ye
table. and the child serving them. A nyghtyngale came fleing before ye
wyndowe where as they satte. and began for to sing so swetely yt they
merueyled. And ye knight said. O how swetely this bird syngeth. well were him
yt could understand his song. and could show the interpretacyon thereof.
Then the sone said. my worshypfull fader the song of the nyghtyngale I could
well declare. but I fere your dysplesure. The fader said. say hardely my sone
ye interpretacyon of ye bird. and than ye shall prove whether I shall be angry
or not. but I shall mark well ye reason of mine anger. and when ye sone herd
yt he said. ye nyghtyngale has said in his song. that I shall become a great
lord. yt I shall be honored and worshypped of all men. and namely of my
fader. the which shall bring the water for to wasshe in mine hands. and my
mother shall hold the towell. The fader said thou shall never see yt day such
service of us to have. nor none such dygnyte shall follow the. and in great
malice and wodenesse he took his sone upon his sholders and ran to the sea
and cast him in it and said. Lie there the interpretatour of ye birds song.
The child could swymme. and swymmed to a land where he was four days with
out mete or drink. The fyft day there came a ship saylynge. and as the child
saw that. he called loud to the shypmen^ and said for the love of god deliver
me from the peril of death. The shypmen saw that it was a fair young man
they had compassyon on hy^ and went with their bote and fette him aborde. and
in to far countrees with them shey led him. and sold him there to a duke.
The child grew goodly and fair. and the duke loved him much. and had him
gretely in his favor. Upon a time the king of yt realm let call and
assemble all the great lords and noble men of his land to a general
counsel. This duke prepared and ordained him to go to ye counsel. and marked
the wisdom and the wit of the child and took the thylde with him. And when
they were all gadred and assembled before the king in his counsel My
well-beloved lords and friends said ye king. will ye wete ye cause wherefore yt
I have called you to this counseylle Then said they all we be all sovereign
lord at your commau^demente. Then ye king said.

It is a secret matter yt I shall show you. if yt any man can open it and
declare what yt it sygnyfyeth. I swear and promytte unto him by my crown yt I
shall give too him mine only daughter in marriage. and he shall be my fellow in my
realm during my life. and after my death he shall have and possede all the
hole kyngedome. and ye mystery of the counseyll is this. Three rauons always
follow me where so ever that I goo. they leave me not. but cry with such horrible
voices. yt it is great pain for me to here them: and to behold their
lokynges. and therefore if there be any man ye which that knows the cause of
their following. and can show what they mean by their cryenge and void them
fro me. without doubt I shall fulfill this promise yt I have made. and as the
king had thus said. there was none found in all the counsel yt wist the
cause or could move or put away the rauons. Then said ye child too the duke.
Mylorde think ye that the king will hold his promise or word if I
accomplysshe his will and desire Than ye duke said I think he will hold yt
he has promised. but will ye yt I give the king knowledge of you what ye can
do. Then ye child said. I will my life set in pledge and I shall perform and
make it good yt I have said. when ye duke herd that he went to the king and
said. My lord the king. here is a young man that is right conning and wise.
the which promyseth for to satysfye and fulfill in all things your desire as
touchy^ge the rauons if ye will fulfill that ye have promised. The king swore
by the crown of his kyngedome what I have promised in all things shall be full
filled Tho brought he ye child before the king. and when the king saw him
he spoke to him. O fair child can ye give answer to my questyon. The child
said My lord ye in the best wise. your questyon if wherefore yt the rauons
follow you and horrybly cry upon you To which I answer. Upon a time it
happened that two rauons a male and a female had brought forth between them the
third rauon. upon the said se was so great famyne and scarsytee of all manner
of things yt men bestes and fowls dyed and perysshed for defaute. The third
rauon yt time being young in the nest the mother left it seeking where she
might best get her living. and came no more to ye neste. The male rauon seeing
that with great penurye and labor fed the young rauon till that he was able to
fly and. wha^ the dear tide was passed and gone then the female rauon came
again too the young rauon and would hold felysshyppe and company with him. And
as the male rauon saw that he would have driven her away. saying thus. that
she in his great myscheyf and necessyte left him and his company. and therefore
now she should want his company and felysshyppe. She alleged and said that
she had in his birth great labor and sorrow. and suffered penurye. And
therefore of his company she should rather Joy than the fader. For this my
sovereign lord they follow you as king the right Judgment which of them both
shall have the young rauon in their company. and this is the cause of their
horrible clamor and noise that they make daily upon you. But my lord had ye
hereupon a ryghtwysse sentence given ye should never more see them or be
troubled with their cryenge. Tho said the king. for the cause that the mother
has let and forsaken the young raven in his most necessyte. it stands
with reason and justice yt she shall want and be without his felyshyp. And
where yt she says and alledgethe yt in the berynge and birth of him she had
great pain and traueyle. that helps her not. for yt pain was turned in to
Joy as soon as she saw the young raven in the world. But for yt the male is
ye cause of produccyon and generacyon in every best. and also yt he the young
rauon in his necessyte sustained and fed in to the recoueryng and
nourysshynge of his body. therefore I give for a judgment and for a sentence
dyffinityue yt the young raven shall abide and hold company with the fader and
not with the mother. And when the rauons herd this sentence. with a great
noise and cry they fl^we up in the air and were no more seen nefou^de in all
that Regyon. when that this was done ye king demanded of the young man wha
this name was. He answered I am called Alexander. Tho said the king. I will
have one thing of you. yt ye from hens forth shall name and take me and none
other for your fader but me. for ye shall marye my daughter. and ye shall be
possessour of all my realm. The young Alexander abode and dwelled stylle with
the king. and every man had too him favor and love. for he began to haunt
and occupy himself in iustes and in tourneys. wherein at all times he had the
pryse above all other yt were in all Egypt. so yt his pere or like was not
found. and there was not so hard nor so obscure a questyon put unto him. but
yt he could assoyle it. At that time was there an Emperor named Tytus. that
excelled in gentylnesse curtesy and curposyte of all other Emperors kings and
princes in ye world. In so much yt such a fame and noise flewe and ran
over all the world of it yt what so ever he was yt would prouffyte in conning
manners or behauynge. that he should go to the Emperors court And when
Alexander herd that he said to the king My most honorable fader and lord ye
wot well that all the world is full of the fame of themperoure so yt it is
delectable to abide and dwell in his court wherefore if it please you my lord
and fader I would gladly go to his court that I might be wyser and prompter in
manners and behauy^ge than I am. Thereupon answered ye king. It pleases me
right well. but I would that ye take with you plente of gold and silver and
other necessaryes. so much yt ye mine honor there with may save. and yt ye may
have also yt is to you requysyte and behouefull. And also me seems it were
expedyent yt ye before your departing should mary my daughter. Tho answered
Alexander will it please you my lord too spare me at this time and at my
coming home again I shall wedde her with all honor as to her apperteyneth. The
king answered. sythen it is your will to go to themperours court I license you
and thereto I consent. Alexander took leave of the king. and took with him
tresoure enough and went to themperours court. And when he was come with a
fair company. he went before the Emperor and fell on his knees. and salued
him and did him reverence. Themperoure rose from his sete imperyall and kyssed
him. and asked of him of whens and what he was. and wherefore he was comen. He
answered and said I am sone and heir to the king of Egypt. and am come to do
service to your most high majesty if it please you to accept me. The Emperor
said yt he was right welcome. and committed him to his steward. and made him
his keruer. The steward ordained him a fair chamber and purueyed him all
things yt were necessary to the same. And Alexander behaved him so well and
wisely yt in short time of all people he was beloved. Not long after that
came ye kings sone of France to do seruyse to themperoure and to learn
nurture. whom the emperor received honorably and demanded his name and of
what kynred he was come. He answered I am sone to the king of France. and I
have to name Lodwyke your seruau^te. Tho said the Emperor I have made
Alexander my karuer. and ye shall be my cup berer. yt al ways ye shall do
seruyse before me at my table. and commanded his steward to assygne him a
lodging whom he assygned with Alexander in his chamber. These were so like in
stature in vysage. and in condycyons yt uneath ye one might be dyscerned fro ye
other. but yt Alexander was more in co^nyng and lyghtlyer in his deeds than
Lodwyke was for Lodwyk was a femynyne man and shamfast. and these two young men
loved well together. This Emperor had a daughter oonly named Florentyne. ye
which was right fair and gracyous. and should be his heir whom he loved
entyerly. which had a court by her self and servants to her assygned To
whom ye Emperor every day was accustomed to send from his table of his
deyntes. in tokenyng of love by ye hand of alexander. whereupon ye daughter
began to have him meruaylouslye in her favor because of his wisdom and his
gracyous demenure. It happened upon a day alexander at the mete time had such a
business yt he served not at ye table nor none other gave attendau^ce for him
in his rowme. Lodwyk perceived yt and served in his stead. And when he had
served the Emperor in his last service upon his knee. ye Emperor
commanded hy^ to bear a dysshe unto his daughter as he was wont to do.
thynkyng him to be Alexander. Tho took Lodwyke ye dysshe and yede to ye palace
of the Emperors daughter and salued her with great reverence and set ye mete
before her. but unto yt time he had not seen her she perceived anon yt it was
not alexander. and said to him in this manner. what is your name. and whose sone
are ye. and he answered to her and said. Madame I am ye kings sone of france.
and my name is Lodwyk. She said I thank you of your labor. and he took his
leave and departed. In ye mean time came Alexander to ye table. and they
fulfilled there service. The dinner done anon Lodwyk went to his bed sore
seek. And Alexander apperceyuynge that went to his chamber and said to him. O
my best beloved friend and fellow Lodwyk how is it with you. and what is ye
cause of your infyrmite. He answered him and said. ye cause of it I know not
but I feel me so seek yt I fere me I can not escape ye death. Alexander said
ye cause of your infyrmyte and disease I know well. For to day when as ye
bare the mete unto the Emperors daughter. ye beheld her vysage and beauty so
fervently. yt your heart is taken and rauysshed with her love. Thereupon he
answered O Alexander all the physysyans in the world could not more truly Judge
my sickness. but I fere it shall be my death. Then said Alexander. Be of good
comforth and I shall help you unto my power. and yede unto the market and
bought with his own money a fair clothe set with precious stones. unknowing
to Lodwyke and presented it on his behalue unto the maiden. and as she saw yt
she asked him where he might that costely and precyouse cloth find to bye. and
he said. Madame it is the sone of ye most christian king yt sends it unto you
for your love. for he but for one sight yt he has had of you is so seek yt
he lies upon his bed unto the death. and therefore if ye suffer him to perysshe
ye shall never recover again your honor. Tho said she. O Alexander would ye
this counsel me ye I should so lose my vyrgynyte. god defend that. and be ye
sure Alexander yt of such messages ye shall never more have ne wyn thank.
therefore go ye out of my sight and speak no more thereof to me. when Alexander
herd that he did his obeysaunce and departed. ye next day Alexander went
again to the cite and bought a chaplet that was two times more in value than ye
cloth. and therewith he yede to ye maidens chamber and yaue it to her on the
behalue of Lodwyke. And when she saw that costely gift she said unto him in
this manner. I marueyle of you yt so oftentimes as ye have seen and spoken
with me. that ye have not done your own erande or spoken for your self. but
for an other. Then he answered. O madame I have not ben so disposed. by cause
that my birth is not to be compared with yours. And also it happened me never
such a case that my heart was so wounded. and he yt has a good felawe is
bound for to do him good and true felysshyp. and therefore most eccellent
pryncesse of your most habundau^te pity have compassyon upon him and make him
hole that ye have se wounded unto ye death that it be not for ever laid unto
your crueltee and impyteouse heart. she answered him. go your ways for at this
time I will give you none answer thereof. And as he herd ye. he took his leave
and departed. And the third day he went unto the market and boughte a
gyrdell yt three times was more in value and costelyer than the chaplet was. and
presented it unto her on the behalue of Lodwyk. And when she saw and beheld
ye so precyouse. she said unto Alexander. Say to Lodwyk yt he come to my
chamber about ye third hour in ye night. and he shall find ye door open. and
Alexander herynge that he was glad. and went to his fellow and said. My best
beloved fellow be ye of good comforth. for I have conquered ye maiden unto you.
and in this night I shall bring you unto her chamber: And when yt was said. he
stert up as though that he had wakened out of his sleep. and was well
reuyued and for great joy he was made all hole. And ye next night following
Alexander took Lodwyke and brought him unto the chamber of ye lady with whom he
was in solace and Joy all the night. and fro ye time forth all her heart was
upon him so yt there was but one love betwyxt them both. And after yt Lodwyke
vsyd her oftentimes to vysyte. so yt it came by process of time to the eres of
ye knights of ye court. how yt the Emperors daughter was known by Lodwyke:
and conspyred among them self how yt they might him there with all find. and
him to take or sle. as Alexander had knowledge thereof. he armed him to
withstand them And when the knights understood yt they ferynge. Alexander
suffered his fellow to go in peace. and Alexander many times put him self in
ieoperdye for him. he not knowing thereof. but ye maid knew it well. In
short time after yt there came letters to Alexander of the death of the king
of Egypt ye he should has tely come and receive his kingdom with honor and
Joy. and that showed he anon too the maiden and to Lodwyk. and also of his
departing. whereof they were sorrowful and heavy. he said also unto ye emperor
My most redoubted lord please it you for to understand that I have received
letters of the death of my fader. wherefore it behooves me to go and receive ye
kingdom. and that ye wylll license me to depart. and for all benefetes to done
I offer my self and all my gods. and rather then I should by my going away
offend or dysplese you my lord I shall forsake all my realm and all yt I
have in ye world. and abide with you still Then said ye Emperor. know ye for
certain yt of your departing I am right heavy for ye were unto me the best
servant that was in all my house. But it becomes not an Emperor to let his
servants from there promocyons. or auau^cementes. but sooner to promote them
unto higher and gretter honor. Therefore go ye unto. our tresourer. and he
shall deliver you as much gold as ye will have. and in ye name of god and
with my blessing go in to your country. and thus Alexander had leave of ye
Emperor and bad fare well. and many of ye court were sorrowful of his
departing. for of all he was beloved. Lodwyk with the maiden brought him on his
way well seven mile. After that Alexander would not suffer them for to go
further. then fell they both to ye ground for great sorrow and Alexander took
and lift them both up again from ye earth. and comforted them with fair and
sweet words and said. O Lodwyke my most beloved felawe. I warn you yt the
secrets being betwyxt you and my lady. ye hyde them and keep them as preuely
as ye may and take good head to all things. For I wot an other shall come and
be in my stead. that shall envy you of the favor and grace yt ye stand in with
the Emperor and day and night shall lie in a wait to take you with a fault.
and to put you to a rebuke. Then answered lodwyk and said. O Alexander I shall
be ware as much as to me is possible. but how shall I now do when I want
your company. therefore one thing I shall desire of you yt ye will take this
ring of me for a remembrance. Then said he I shall for the love of you gladly
receive ye ring. and yet should I never wtoute ye ring forgete you. and
committed them too god. Then they embraced each other about ye neck and
kyssed. and so departed from other. Not long after ye the kings sone of
Spain named Guydo was received of the Emperor in ye rowme and place of
Alexander. to whom the steward assygned Alexanders place and chamber. which
was sore ayenste ye will of Lodwyke. but he could not amend it. Guydo
perceiving yt Lodwyke against his will had him in his felysshyp. anon he took
and had envy against him. so that Lodwyke of a long time for fere of ye said
Guydo kept him out of ye company of ye said maid. Nevertheless afterward
ouercomen with the love of ye maiden. sometime hau^ted and went again to her as
he before time had done. Guydo shortly perceiving awayted so long thereupon. yt
he the truth knew. and was thereof in surete that the maiden was by Lodwyke
known and had accompanied with him. Upon a time it happened ye the
Emperor stood in his halle and praised gretely Alexander of his gentylnes and
wisdom. That herynge Guydo said. My lord he is not so much worthy to be
commended as ye wene for he has been a long while a traitor in your house.
then themperoure said tell me how. Guydo said. ye have but one daughter
oonly. ye which shall be your heir. and ye Lodwyke has defouled and lain by
her by the help of alexander and he gothe to her every night when it pleases
him. and when ye emperor herd yt he was sore meuyd and wexed angry. and it
happened Lodwyke upon ye same time to come through ye hall and when the Emperor
saw him he said. what here I of ye thou evil and untrue body. if it be found
and proved true thou shall deye ye most shameful death yt can be devised
Lodwyke said My lord ye emperor what is ye cause. Guydo answered. I say and
depose here before my lord against the yt thou haste defouled his oonly
daughter. and every night thou ghost to her and do fornycacyou with her. and
yt in battle I shall prove and make good upon thy body with my body Then said
Lodwyke I am innocente. and not defectyue in yt crime. and falsely you put
yt and layest upon me. and thereupon I hold ye battle. for I trust on god thy
falshede shall come upon thyn own head. Then ye Emperor assygned them the
day of battle and fighting. That done Lodwyke went unto ye maiden and showed
to her ye cause and the day of battle by the Emperor assygned. and in what
manner Guydo had him accused. and said to her. Now it behooves me to have
your counsel. or else I must deye for why as ye know it had not aueyled me
to have ayensayd the battle without I would have yielded myself gylty. Guydo is
strong and hardy in arms that his like is none but alexander. and I am weyke
and feeble and therefore if I hold the battle against him I am but a deed man.
and so shall ye abide shamed and rebuked. Then said she. Do my counsel in
that. yt ye mystrust your self. go hastily unto my fader. and say to him
that ye have received letters. whereby that ye are acertayned that ye lord your
fader is sore seek and lies upon his deed bed and desires to se you and
speak with your person. and to dyspose his kingdom and his gods before he
depart out of this world and desire his license for the love of your fader yt
ye may go and vysite him. and yt he will proroge and length the day of
bataylle whiles ye ye may go and come. And when ye have obtained his congye or
license. as hastily as ye may go secretly to the king alexander. and when ye
are come to him take him aparte and show him ye cause of your coming and
require him in this your utter extremyte yt he will us help and aid. and
when yt Lodwyke had herd this counsel. it pleased him well and did hereafter
His leave gotten and longer day or term of battle prefyxed and assygned
departed and took his iourneye to wards ye realm of Egypt. and never let
day nor night till he came unto king alexanders castle. and when ye king
alexander had understanding of his coming. he was much glad and went to
mete him. and received him honorably. and had wonder of his comyn^ge Tho said
Lodwyk. O my dear lord and my best byloued friend. my life and my death is in
your hands. for as ye said to me before yt I should have an other fellow ye
which should lie in awayte to aspye me and too destroy me / without I save ye
more wisely to my self: and as long as I might I absented me till yt I could
no longer. but afterward ye kings sone of Spain making watch so long on
me till that he perceived ye truth. and has accused me unto ye Emperor.
so that from this day unto ye.viii. day hereafter prefyxed it behooves me to
come and fight with him body against body. and as ye know well he is a strong
and an hardy man. and I am weyke and feeble. and therefore has Florentyne
cou^seyled me yt I should not hyde this my charge from you For she knows you
for a faithful friend. and that ye would not leave us in this necessyte. Then
said alexander. is there any body yt knows of your coming unto me for this
matter more than Florentyne. He answered him and said no creature living. for I
took leave of ye Emperor to go and vysite my fader lyenge grievously seek. Then
axed alexander him what counsel has Florentyne given to you how and in
what wise I might help you. He said. O most constau^t and faithful friend.
in this wise she has cou^seylled me. co^syderynge yt we be like. yt ye should
come and do ye battle with him. no man shall know you but she and the battle
done I shall come again to ye court. and ye unto your country. Then he asked
when ye day should be of the battle. and he said this day.viii. days Then
said alexander. if I should this day tarry then can I not come to yt day
prefyxed. Therefore se what I shall do. I have boden all my subgectes that to
morrow they should come and be at my wedding and brydale. and if I should go
than is yt day lost / and if I go not and do the battle than Florentyne and
ye are both undone. what think ye now best for to do when Lodwyke herd yt
he fell to the earth and began to syghe and sorrow out of mesure saying. sorrow
and heaviness come to me on all sides. Then said alexander unto him. be of good
comfort for I shall not forsake you thus though that I should lose my wife and
kingdom but harken what that I have thought in so much as we are both like:
so yt the one of us can not be known from ye other but we be both together
and I am not yet greatly known here. but my barons and other folk shall take
you for me. therefore here shall ye abide and tarry and mary my wife in my stead.
and hold ye feast and brydale. and do in all things as though I were there my
self present. except when as ye come to bed with my wife look yt ye be there
true and faithful: and I shall wtoute taryenge go and take my horse and ride
theder as ye battle shall be. and if god give me the vyctorye yt I may
overcome and vaynquysshe your enemy. I shall come again secretlye. and ye shall
go again to your parties and dwelling place. This done. alexander badde
Lodwyke fare well. and took his Iourneye toward ye Emperors court. for to
fight and to do the battle with Guydo. and Lodwyk abode in Egypt in the stead
of king Alexander. and upon the next morning came Lodwyke as though it had
be king Alexander. and solemply in ye face of the church married and spoused
Alexanders wife. and held ye feast and brydale with great royalte of delycate.
and precious metes. plente of all manner wynes. and diverse melodyes of
instruments of musyke. and he made great Joy and chere to all the noble men.
and to all other people ye there was assembled. And when ye night. was come.
he went to bed with ye queen. and laid betwyxt him and her a naked sword.
whereof she had great wonder. but no thing she said. and also he lay with her
every night as long as Alexander was out The king Alexander at the day yt
was prefixed and set. came unto ye Emperor and said. O most drad sovereign
lord it is so yt I have left my fader right seek. Nevertheless I am come for
to defend mine honor and my forward to perform. The Emperor said ye do
right well and according to a noble man. and fortune shall favor you in your
just and right wysse quarrel. And when the Emperors daughter understood yt
Alexander was comen. anon she sent for him and when as he was come to her she
embraced him. and with joy and gladness she kyste him. and blessed ye time
that she might see him again and demanded him where he that had left her
friend and lover Lodwyke Then he showed and declared unto her all ye process
and how he had left him king in his realm. and took his leave at her. and went
in to Lodwykes chamber. and there was no creature yt thought otherwise but it
was lodwyk. oonly except Florentyne. The next day following before er
Alexander went unto ye battle he said unto ye Emperor in ye presence of
Guydo. My most redoubted sovereign lord this Guydo has falsely and untruly
accused me unto your noble grace. yt I should be of such aqueyntau^ce with your
daughter yt should be unto ye dyshonoure of your most noble person and hyrs.
and unto yt I swear and afferme. by this holy euau^gelyes yt she was never in
any manner by me in such wise known as he has to you alleged and informed.
and that this day with the aid and ye help of god I shall prove and make good
upon his body. Then said Guydo. yet ones I say again and swear by ye holy
euaungelyes and by all yt god has made yt thou haste had knowledge and haste
defouled ye Emperors daughter. and yt I shall make good upon thy head. where
upon they lepte upon their coursers. and fyersly ran together with their speres
yt they both brake and shyuered in pieces. and they drew their swerdes and
faught long together. tylle at ye last Alexander with great might and strength
at one stroke smote of Guydoes head. and sent it unto ye Emperors daughter
whereof she was right glad. and bare it unto her fader and said. Fader behold
the head of him yt you and me has falsely defamed. when yt the Emperor
perceived ye vyctory. anon. he sent for Alexander whom yt he believed had been Lodwyk and said. O Lodwyke this day your honor and my daughters ye have
saved. ye shall stand and be the more in my grace and favor. and what soever
he be that hereafter more defame you he shall for ever stand in my
indygnacyon. Alexander answered. god helpethe and saves them yt trusts in
him. and always wreketh ye blood vndeffectyue or innocent. But now my most
redoubted lord of one thing I require you. at my departing fro my fader I
left him sore seek yt it will like you for to license me to go and se how it
standethe with him. and if yt it be any thing amended I shall incontinent come
again. Then the Emperor said that pleases me well. but ye may in no manner
wise leave me for fro hensforth I can not be without your presence. Alexander
took leave of ye Emperor and bad him fare well. and rode again unto his realm
whom when Lodwyk saw he made great chere. and gladness. and right frendlye
received him and said. O most true friend of all friends. tell me how ye have
done and spedd in your journey and need. and what end ye have brought it to.
Then said he. Goo to ye Emperor and serve him as ye have done tofore. I have
gotten you more grace and favor of him than ever ye have had before time and
I have also smyten of the head of your enmye and aduersarye. Then said lodwyk.
ye have not only at this time saved my life but many a times here before. ye
which as yet I can not deserve. but god reward you. and so departed and went
again unto the Emperor. and there was no man that knew of the absence of
Alexander save oonly Lodwyke. And when as the night was come he went to bed
with the queen. and anon he had with her sweet and friendly words and her
embraced and kyst. Tho said she. ye have made this time all to long. that ye
have not showed any thing of frendshyp or love. how may this be. Then said he
wherefore say ye that. She said. every night as I was in my bed. ye have laid
betwyxe you and me a naked sword and ye have never tasted or turned you
toward me more than now. And when the king herd yt. he thought on ye
truth of his fellow and said unto her. O my most dear lady and queen. it was
not do for none evil will. but for a good probaco^n and for a perpetual love.
But she thought in her self yt love shall ye never more have of me. but yt
dyspyte she thought I shall avenge upon the. Tho was there a Knight yt she
before had a little love and favor unto. and she began for to love him more and
more. so long till at ye last they thought and ymagyned how they might
destroy and sle ye king. and therefore they gate poison and poisoned ye king.
so yt if he had not ben right strong of complexyon he had deyed thereof but it
wrought in him so sore yt it caused him to be ye most foul and horrible lepre
or laser yt ever was seen upon earth. The lords and noble men of his realm
and the queen also seeing this despised him and said. yt it behooved not a lepre
to regne upon us. for he should not procure nor engendre any fair or clean
heirs. And so he was deposed of ye dygnyte royal. and driven out of his
realm. In the mean time deyed the Emperor of Rome. and Lodwyk wedded ye
daughter and after that Lodwykes fader deyed. so that Lodwyke reigned both
Emperor and king of France at ones. when king alexander herd that he
thought in himself. Now my fellow reygneth together upon thempyre and the
realm of France. to whom may I better goo than to him for whom many times
I have adventured my life. and upon a night he rose up and made him ready and
took with him his staff and claper. and yede toward themperours court. and when
he was come nyghe to ye yate. he set him among other lasers abiding ye
gyuynge of ye alms. and on a season as ye Emperor went out of his palace.
all ye pore lasers began to ring their clapers. and ye good king alexander
did like ye other but there was none alms given to them. He tarried so long
unto ye time yt the emperor was set and served at ye table. Tho went king
alexander unto ye yate and knocked thereat. and the porter asked who was there.
alexander answered hy^ I am a pore despised man. but for ye love of god I
require you yt ye torn not your sight fro my vysage. and yt ye will for ye
reward of god do my message unto ye Emperor. he asked what is ye matter.
alexander said go and tell him here is a laser that right horrible is to see.
the which prays him for the love of god and king alexander. that he will
grant hy^ this day to ete his alms before him upon the earth in his hall.
The porter said I wonder that ye dare desire that of my lord. for why all the
hall is full of lords. and noble me^ and if they behold you they should all
abhor and leave their mete. But for so much as ye have required me so
profou^dly for ye love of god I shall go and do your erande what so ever
happen thereof. and so he yede forth before the emperor and did his message. when
ye Emperor herd ye porter name alexander ye king of egypt. he said to ye
porter. go bring him in before me how horrible yt so ever his vysage be. and
ordeyne him a place before me. yt he may ete his mete before me in my presence.
The porter brought him in anon. and ordained him a place and set him to mete
before ye Emperor. and when he was well refresshed he said unto one of the
Emperors servants. My dear friend do me this erande to ye Emperor. Say
unto him yt I pray him for ye love of god and king Alexander yt he will
send me his cup with wine. The servant said for ye love of god I shall do
it. but I believe it will not be. for if ye ones drink of my lords cup. he
will no more drink of ye same. nevertheless he did ye erande Anon as the
Emperor herd him name king Alexander. he commanded his cup to be filled
of the best wine and bear it unto him. The which wine wha^ he had received
it. he put it into his botelle. and took his ring yt Lodwyke had given unto
him. and put it in to the cup. and sent it again unto ye Emperor. and when ye
Emperor saw the ring. anon he knew it yt it was the same yt he had given
unto Alexander in frendeshyp. when yt he departed fro him. and thought in his
heart yt Alexander is deed. or else this man is merueylously come unto ye
ring. and commanded anon that the laser should not depart unto ye time he
had spoken with him. for in no wise he could have knowledge of him nor yet reputed
him for Alexander. after that the dinner was done and ended. the Emperor took
the seek man aparte and asked how he came by ye ring. Alexander demanded if
he knew well ye ring. The Emperor said. I know it right well. Alexander
said. wot ye also to whom ye have given it The Emperor said I wot right well.
How is it than said Alexander yt ye know not me. for I am Alexander to whom
ye have given ye same ring. when the Emperor herd yt. he fell down to the
ground for sorrow and tare and rent his robys and clothes. and with great
syghynges and bewaylynges said. O Alexander ye be the one half of my soul.
whehe is your goodlye and delycate body yt was so fair. yt now so unclean and
wretchedly is enfecte he answered. this is me happened for the great fydelyte
that ye have done to me in my bed. with my wife. when ye laid a naked sword
betwyxt you and her. wherefore she became wroth and hated me. that she and a
knight that before time she ought her love unto have impoysened me as ye may
see. and above yt they have driven me out of my realm. and when the Emperor
herd that he for love took him about ye neck and kyste him and said. O my
most entyerlye beloved brother. I sorrow to see you in this great syknesse and
mysery. would god I might deye for you but my most dear friend. suffer
pacyently a little time till yt we have sent for all ye physycyens and wise
masters in physyke to have their counseylle and advise. if there be any
remedy or hope of recouerynge of your health. and if it be possible for to
help you. we shall neither spare Empire lordshyps nor other good temporal to
make you hole and sou^de. In the mean while he was brought into a fair
chamber rychely appareyl led and appointed of all manner things yt were
requysyte and necessary for his ease and health. and in all haste he sent his
messangers by all parties of ye world. for ye expert and most wise
physycyens yt might be found Of whom within a month were come and assembled
before ye Emperor.xxx. ye which were right expert and subtle in yt
science. To whom the emperor said My well-beloved masters I have a friend yt
greuousely is infecte with a lepry. whom I would right feign were heled and made
sou^de. and no thing thereon to spare neither gold ne silver ne all ye other
goods yt I have in this world. but I would give it to recover his health. The
masters answered and said all yt ever is possible to be done by physyke yt ye
shall sone understand after yt we have seen the person. and forth with as they
had seen him. and perceived ye cause and matter of yt infyrmyte they iuged it a
disease incurable for all ye masters living. and when the Emperor herd yt
he was right sorry in his heart. and remytted it unto yt help of almighty god
calling unto him relygyous men. and poor people. and other devout persons
and desired them to pray to god. yt he would wouchesaufe to make hole his
friend ye sooner for their good deeds and prayers. and he himself with many
other fasted and prayed humbly to almighty god for ye health of his friend.
Upon a day as king alexander was in his prayers. there came unto him a voice
saying If the Emperor will with his own hands slay his two sons. which his
wife has born by him at one burden. and wasshe thy body with the blood of them.
thy body and thy flesh shall be as fair, and as clean as ye flessh of the
little chyldern, when king alexander had herd this he thought in himself.
this vysyon is not expedyente. to beshewed for it is sore ayenste nature yt any
man should slay his own sons for ye recoueryng of the health of a strange
man. The Emperor night and day lay in his prayers with great devotion. and
prayed to god for ye remedy of king alexander. So yt at the last there came
a voice unto him and said. how long shall ye thus cry and call upon me
when it is openly showed and notefyed unto alexander how that he shall be
made hole. The Emperor herynge that went unto alexander and said. Of all
friends ye best and most true. blessed be the most high god the which
never faylethe ye call and trust upon him of whom I have knowledge yt it is
showed unto you how and in what wise that ye may be made hole wherefore I
pray you that ye will it openly show unto me that we may Joy together. and
if ye neve any thing there to that I may do I shall fulfill it unto my powere,
and for your health give all yt I have. alexander said Sir I dare not show to
you how yt I may be cured or heled of my maladye. for it excedethe and it is a
thing ayenste nature for to be done. therefore I will not show it to you. how
be it great trust and confydence is in you. The Emperor said alexander
trust in me. for what so ever is possible sor to be done for the recouerynge
of your health I shall do it and therefore hyde no thing from me. Then said
alexander I have of god knowledge yt if ye will slay your two sons with your
own hands and wasshe me in their blood I should be hole. and therefore I have
not showed it unto you. sor me thinks it is against nature yt the fader should
slew his own chyldern for ye health of a strange man. The Emperor said
say not yt ye be a strange man. for I love you as I do my self. and therefore
if I had ten chyldern I should notte spare one alive to have your health.
after that yt Emperor watched and spyed his time when ye Empress and all
ladies and chambereres were out of ye way and when time was he entered into ye
chamber where as the chyldern slepte. and drew out his knyfe and cut asonder
both their throtes. and gadred ye blood in a vessel. and therein he bathed and
washed alexander and when he was so bathed. his body and flesh was as fair
and as clean as thought it had been of a young child. Then ye emperor had
knowledge of his vyfage. and kyssed him say^g O good alexander now I see you in
yt same form which I have often times dylected in. blessed be god that ever I
had these chyldern. by ye whom ye be helped and made hole. and yet wyste no
man of the death of ye chyldern save oonly ye emperor and alexander. and when
as the emperor saw yt alexander was parfytly heled. he said unto him. I
shall ordeyne to you an honest company and ye shall go from hens ten mile
the next. day send unto me a messager. and yt ye show openly unto me of your
coming. and I shall then with all solempnyte come and mete you. and ye shall
abide with me unto the time that we may otherwise. provide for ye recouerynge
of your realm. This counsel pleased alexander right well. and according to
ye same it was done. For on ye next day came ye messager unto the emperor
showing him yt coming of king alexander and when the empress herd that
she was right glad. and said unto the emperor. O my lord have ye not now
a cause of great joy. that king alexander whom we of a long time have not
seen. and if it please you to go and mete him with your lords and servants.
I shall follow you with my ladies and gentylwymen. and yet wyste she not the
death of her chyldern. Then rode they forth with a great company and met with
the king alexander and when they met together. with great reverence and
honor they received him. and with great gladness and Joy they brought him
in to the palace. and when the time of dinner was come alexander was set at ye
table betwyxt ye emperor and ye empress and all the chere yt she could make
she did to him. and when the Emperor perceived that. he was right well
pleased and said. O mine own Florentyne I Joy above all things yt ye do and
make to king alexander so good chere. Then said she. wherefore should I not.
is not his coming to us both Joy and gladness but more to you my lord. for
this dygnyte yt ye are in by him ye are promoted. and many times he has saved
you fro ye death. The Emperor said than I pray you mine own Florentyne yt ye
will take heed to my words yt I shall say to you. Saw ye not ye foul laser.
which the last day sat before our table. and prayed me for the love of god
and king alexander yt I should give him drink. she said. My lord I saw him
well. a more horrible man I never beheld. then said Themperoure. I demand
now this of you. I put case yt he were king alexander and that he in any wise
could not be made hole but with the blood of your sons. the which ye in one
day krought in to this world. would ye not yt their blood. were shed that he
might bathe him therein to ye entente yt by the same he might have parfyte
health as ye now se him in She said my lord wherefore demand ye me yt
question. I say and let you have knowledge for truth that if I had ten
sons I should gladly slay them with min own hands to prepare and ordeyne for
him a bayne. and should wasshe him therein mine own self. rather than I should
leave him in such peril. for god might well send us mo chyldern. but such a
true friend were as a thing impossyble for us to recover or find. when
the emperor herd this of her. he was well co^tente and pleased in his mind and
said. O wife had ye lever have your chyldern deed than alexander should be in yt
sickness of lepery. therefore shall I open and show to you now ye truth of
ye matter. That foul laser the which ye saw was alexander that syttethe here.
and by yt manner he is made hole with the blood of our sons. and they are deed:
as ye Empress herd yt. she began to sorrow as nature would. all though she
had said before yt she had lever see her chyldern deed than she would suffer
alexander in such pain. The nourysshes of ye chyldern understanding this. with
great cryenge and weeping went to ye nourysshery or chamber of them. and great
sorrow and bewailing was made thrughe themperours court for his sons. and
when the nourysshes came into ye chamber. they found the chyldern playnge and
singing of ye most blessed vyrgyne Mary. aue maria gracia plena dn^s tecum.
and tho went they again in all haste unto ye Emperor and showed him yt his
sons were living and that about their throtes there as they were cut they
have a cercle of threde of gold. and thereof was great Joy and gladness in
all ye conrte. and gave thankynges unto alyghty god and to ye blessed vyrgyne
mary his mother of ye great miracle. after yt themperoure with a great multitude
and company of people gadred and assembled went with alexander in to Egypt and
set him again into his royalte and possessyon of his Realm and the queen with the
knight which lived together in auoutry he did the^ both to be brent in too
poudre. And when this was all do^ne. the Emperor had a sister oonly whom he
gave alexander unto his wife. And when king Alexander had all his Realm
obtained again and was set in good rest and peace ye Emperor went again unto
his Empire. and the king Alexander right wisely and maniy governed himself in
all his feats and acts so yt he overcame all his enmyes and rebels. And
when he was in all his glory. peace and might. he had thought and mind. upon
his fader and mother. by whom he was cast into the sea. which dwelled in
far parties from thens he sent to them a messager and did them to have
knowelege yt the king of Egypt upon such a day would be with them to ete and
to drink and make good chere. and when the messager was come too them. they
received him with great Joy and with gifts largely to him given sent him again.
saying yt their seruyces should be ready at all times to do ye king pleasure.
but yt could they never by powerfully deserve yt he would wouchesauf to show
them ye h^noure. whereto they were not worthy. he for to come to them to ete and
to drink and sport him. The messager went again unto ye king. and showed how
gladlye yt they would receive him. and what reward they had given him. and how
faithfully they were and ready to do him service at his commandment. where with
the king was well co^tente. And when ye day was comen yt was prefyxed. the
king with a fair company rode toward his faders house. ye which as well to
ye knight his fader as to his mother was unknown that he was their sone. when
the king was come nygh unto his faders castle. the knight rode to receive and
mete him. and when he come nyghe unto ye king he descended from his horse and
reverenced him: with his knee on the earth. but the king took him up shortly.
and commanded him to ascend again upon his horse. and rode so together cheke by
cheke unto ye castle. And when they were come theder the mother came them to
mete. and fell upon her knees to ye earth and welcomed him gladly. The king
took her louynly up and kyssed her right friendly. and she said. My most
honorable lord ye do unto us unworthy great honor with the presence of your
person moost-honourable. The which we never more can deserve. After yt all
the mete was all ready. and the time of ye day was come to go to dinner. The
fader came with a basyn. and with an ewyr. and the mother with a towell saying. Sire
all thing is redye. please it you to wasshe. and when ye king saw that he
smyled and said unto himself. Now is ye song of the nyghtyngale true. for my
fader and my mother should gladly fulfill as I said. if yt I my self would
thereto consent and suffer them to do it. But he would not suffer them for to
do too him such service. saying your aege is for to be honored and
worshypped / and therefore I will not of it. and called unto him one of his
servants the which served him thereof. Then said the knight. ye will not
suffer us too do it for our honor. for we are not worthy thereto. The king
said. have not I said that for your aege I forbere you it. when ye king was
set at ye table. he set his mother on ye right hand of him and his fader on his
left side and they as much as they might beheld his vysage and cou^tenau^ce.
The dinner ended ye king entered in to a chamber. and made ye knight with his lady
to come in to him. and commanded all other to avoid and goo out. and when
they were thus alone. ye king said unto them have ye no chyldern. They answered
we have neither sone ne daughter. and ye king said had ye never none. The
knight answered. we have had one sone. but he is long agone deed. The king
asked of what death deyed he. The knight said. a natural death: Tho said ye
king. if I may otherwise know yt he deyed than are ye found with a defawte.
Tho asked the knight: My lord wherefore inquire ye thus after our sone. The
king answered. that do I not without cause. and therefore I will know of what
death he deyed. and if ye will not tell me I shall cause you to deye a
shameful death. when they herd that they fell too ground upon there knees
before him and asked him mercy and forgyuenesse of their lives. The king would
not suffer them to knele. but scortly took them up and said. To that entente
came I not in to your house to ete your bread and to betraye you. but say me
ye truth and ye shall be saved. for it is given me to understand that ye
have put him to death. and if that come in judgment ye must deye a shameful
death. Than said the knight. lord pardone me my life and I shall show you ye
very truth. The king said fere not. for I shall do you no harm. Tho said
he. Sovereign lord we had a sone oonly yt was wise and lettred and right well
understand. And upon a time as he stood before us and served at ye table. There
came a nyghtyngale yt right swetly song. whoos song he began to interpret
and tell us what it mente and said: This bird syngeth that I shall become so
great and mighty a lord yt it shall be to your honor and aduau^seme^t in
such wise yt ye my fader shall be glad to hold ye basyn with water to wasshe
in my hands. and my mother ye towell if yt I would suffer it. And when I herd
yt I was sore meued and took and cast him in to ye see for too drown. Tho
said the king what evil might have come to you if he had been made so great
and mighty. me thinks it should have been your honor and proufyte. The
knight said lord it was no reason but a woodnesse. The king answered: yt was
a great folysshnes of you yt ye would do against ye ordinance and will of god.
But now ye shall know for truth yt I am your sone yt ye cast in to ye
see. and god of his great mercy and goodness has saved me. and by his grace
has brought me too this astate and dygnyte. And ye fader and mother herynge yt
with fere and Joy replenysshed fell flat to ye ground. whom he louy^ly and
friendly took up sayng fere not. but rather be glad and Joyous for ye shall no
thing suffer but my exaltacyon shall be your glory and joy and proufyte. and
kyste both his fader and mother with great Joy and gladness. Tho began ye meder
to weep. Than said ye king weep not but be of good chere for in my realm ye
shall be hononred above me during my life. and took them with him in to his
realm where they dwelled together in honor and Joy. and ended their days with
Joy and myrthe.

Here follows ye applycaco^n of ye example to purpose
Ten said the Emperors sone. lord have ye understand what I have said.
Themperoure said right well. Tho said the sone. My most honorable and
redoubted fader. all though yt god has given and endued me with wisdom and
understanding above many other. ye should not be in appayrynge of your honor
and might. but more for the preseruacyon of the same. So in like wise ye kings
majesty which was no thing to ye hynderaunce of his fader. but rather for his
worship and proufyte. for as long as they lived they were honored in his
realm. Than said themperoure. My dear sone I will all hole resygne to you
thempyre too govern. for I perceive well by your narraco^n yt ye have to me
declared. yt it is best to me and most for mine ease yt I leave this business
and labor and take me to more rest. for I am old and feeble. The sone
answered his fader. My lord fader. so shall it not be. but as long as ye live
ye shall have the auctoryte and might of thempyre to do and command as it
apperteyneth unto an Emperor. but in all besynesses yt are labourouse I will
always be ready to mynystre and to serve you according to my dute. (...) of
execucyon and there to be brent. and we judge also and give sentence ayenste the
rybaude yt he shall be quartred and smyten in pieces and his flesh cast unto
ye hounds. and birds of ye air for to devour him. and this sentence was
approbate and allowed of all people. Hereafter in short time deyed ye
Emperor. and Dyoclesyan his sone governed and ruled thempyre with great
wisdom. and held and kept his masters with him in great honor and glory. By
whoos counsel and wysdom he governed the Empire. yt he excelled all his
predecessors in richesse and in doing justice and right. And his masters
loved him above all other things in the world. So that many times they put
themself in great peril and ieoperdye of there lives for him. And so they
ended their days in great Joy and honor. and commended them to almighty
god.

Thus ends the treatise of the seven sages or wise masters of Rome.
Enprented in Fleet street in ye sign of the sone. by me Wynkyn de word.


