THE DISEASES OF THE TIME, Attended by their Remedies. By FRANCIS ROVS.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for John Parker, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the three Pigeons. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT Worthy and my truly honorable Friend, Sir Benjamin Rudyerd,
Knight.
SIR,
I Doubt not but diverse do direct the Dedications of their Heavenly Labors,
according to earthly respects. But incongruous and untunable Dedications, have
ever been harsh to my Judgment, and it has grieved me much, when I have seen
a heavenly p^arle offered to the hand, but trodden on by the foot of an earthy
and sensual Patron, To avoid this Incongruity, I thought it best ^o dedicate a
Work that concerns the prosperity of the Church of Christ Jesus, to a lover
of the same Jesus, of the same Church, and the same Prosperity For such a one
bears the face and presence of Iehosaphat, which being seen incourageth a
Prophet to speak, and not seen, dot^ make him speechle^se. And surely I do
but testify the Truth, when I say, that by ancient and inward knowledge, I
have been assured of your love unto Sion, and your w^l-wish^^g to the
prosperity of Jerusalem. And even from this Root of Heavenly Love, do I
believe that our particular Friendship has suck^ most part of its nourishment;
which I think the rather, because it has been hitherto durable, whereas
worldly Friendships do usually alter with worldly Changes. Wherefore as to a
lover of Gods House, I present unto you these parcels of Purple and blue Silk,
which I have consecrated toward the reparation of the Tabernacle. And I desire
that when you receive these words from me, I may receive Prayers from you;
that God will daily add to the Beauty of his Church, and that he will prosper
these and the like Works, that endeavor to increase it. Neither shall your
Prayers be altogether unrequited, for I will offer up my hearty des^res, for
your inward and outward Advancement, and that as you grow outwardly in the
World, you may grow inwardly in Christ Jesus. For growth in Christ, is the
growth of a holy happiness that shall flourish for ever.

But growth out of Christ is the growth of Fuel, even of an euer-burning but a
neuerdying Misery.

Yours in the best, that is in Christian affection, Francis Rous.

A Light in the Porch for him that enters.
I Confess the World is very tedious in the Multiplicity of his corruptions,
and it would make a work of the like tediousness, if all the particulars of
the one should become the contents of the other. But I have by diverse
winnowings abated the Heap; desiring to set some shape, if not on the Matter
(for Vice cannot be made handsome) yet on the manner of handling it. Ordinary
Vices, which have ordinary (if just) Cures, I mostly omit, and leave the World
to practice on themselves, that which they know already. Other evils there are,
which for their insolent growth, scorn to be slain by a Pen, but like the
Princes of Midian they call for Gideon himself, even the power of the
Magistrate to fall on them. These being generally referred to their proper
cure, yet if some be touched (for I have heard of a Giant slain by a Sling
and a stone) they are incountred with the kindly Weapons of this Warfare, even
Spiritual and not Carnal. Another sort of Evils like the Plague, by coming
abroad infect farther and become Documents of Vice and not Reproves. And I
wish there were not another sort of Diseases like the same Sickness, which
taking the Air in a Work of reproof, may strike back to the heart of the
same Work, and make it to dye like Ieremies Roll, if it meet with that kind
of humor which uses to cast away all, if any one thing differ from it. In
such a Case, Addition may bring forth Substraction, and a little more in the
writing, may cause a great deal less in the reading. Lastly, there are other
Vices, which heretofore in some Meditations I have discovered, for which the
labor of Repetition may be saved.

But what says the Man of Exception? Are not these the Times of Light and
Purity, and therefore how can there be many faults where there is so much
Light? Surely I willingly and thankfully acknowledge the purity of our
Doctrine, and am assured that in many it has brought forth the purity of Heart
and Life. But I say, even because the Light is so clear, therefore does sin
the more appear, and appearing, is the more to be blamed. For the more light,
the more Direction; and the more Direction, the more shame, and sharper
reproof belongs to the strayer. Again, the more light, the more
manifestation, and the more manifestation, the more sins appear; yea, sins
appear the more sinful. So, in some sense, Light may be said to increase
sins, but that is not in their number, but in the knowledge of the numberer.
Therefore must our Light discover those to be (...), which ancient Ignorance
accounted to be none; and the Manhood of a Christian m^^ the up to that height
of Virtue, which his childhood could not reach unto; yea perchance did think
it impossible or uncomely. Again, where the Devil has lost much, there he
labors much for the recovery of his losses, and the Husbandmen not being still
awake (prosperity often enticing to se^urity) the Enemy finds times to sow his
tares: so that the good days of Josiah had matter of reproof for the Prophet
Zephaniah, and the flourishing Church of Thyatira was taxed for a mixture of
the Servants of Iezabel.

Lastly, it is an observation of secular Policy, That all States, with time
gather rust, and therefore by often reuiews, they are to be reduced to the
first grounds of Virtue and Justice, which settled their Foundations. This is no
less true in the Church, and if any doubt of it, let the Church of Ephesus
resolve him. There was no long time between the planting of that Church, and
the receiving of the Revelation. Of their first Estate Saint Paul a
Master-workman in that Plantation, testifies, that their Faith in Christ and
Love to the Saints made him incessantly to give thanks to God for them. And of
their second Estate at the time of the Revelation, Christ restifieth, that this
Church was fallen from her first Love and her first Works. Therefore the
Church, and every member of the Church out of the experience of humane frailty,
by contiunall turns should suspect and examine themselves, to see what the
Flesh has gotten upon the Spirit, and so with Ephesus, remembering from whence
they are fallen, return and amend, and do the first Works.

Thus it appears that there is matter of reproof, even in the purest
Churches, and if where there is matter, there reproof should be denied, this
were to encourage Diseases, and to forbid Physic. Surely there is at this day
a liberty, yea a necessity of reproouing, and it dyed not wholly when John
Baptist dyed, but the House of God in all Ages has it, and has need of it.
But I confess, there is a wisdom of reproouing, as well as a liberty, and I
wish that they who have this wisdom, did especially, if not only, make use of
this liberty; and I wish, that they who take the liberty, took also the
wisdom with it. The occasion and manner of reproouing oft-times makes the
reproof effectual, and an especial part of the manner is this. That it
proceed from a visible Charity. Splenaticke and eager reproves harden those
affections, which they pretend to soft^n, because these reproofs look like a
quarrel or revenge, and no^ like the incisions of Love, which hurt only, that
they may heal. Surely, the aim and end of all admonitions should be, the good
of the admonished; and those are most commendable which are most effectual to
this end, and not those which fit most with the humor of the Reproouer. Now if
such means of advantage be sought and practiced, a shame and a curse must
needs light on that Man, who being sought by Love to be amended, returns
hatred for the best office of Love. Most commonly to such a one belongs the
speech of the Prophet to Amaziah; I know that the Lord will destroy thee,
because thou refusest my counsel.

As for Babylon, let her not think, because of such reproofs that her deeds are
better then those of Sion. For even because of such reproves, the deeds of
Sion are better then those of Babylon. For Sion grows more beautiful and
glorious, by seeing her spots, by acknowledging them, and by washing them away.
But a special mark and brand it is of the son of perdition, to hide sins
as Adam, yea to bind them fast with the cartropes of Iniquity. And this has
the Church of Rome done; for by Canons and Councels they have bound their
errors fast to them, and by a kind of perpetuity, have intayled Error to them
and their heirs for ever. Now it is a certain Rule, when there is no Remedy
by persuasion, then God uses the Remedy of Destruction. This did God with his
own People, 2. Chro. 36.16. This did he with the first Babylon, Ierem. 51.9.
And this will he do with the last, Revel. 18.5, 7, 8. Secondly, here is not
one corn of our Doctrine pulled up, but only the tares that have been mingled
among it, by humane error and infirmity, or by the malicious diligence of
Satan. Thirdly, among these Tares, shall they find their own Doctrines, so
that part of this business is to show, that the main Body of their Religion,
is a Body of Sores, that upon the knowledge of Babilons vnholsomnesse, Sion may
fly from her infection.

It is now time, that the Reader be admitted into the house, but I think he
will be content to stay till he know what I have done, as at first I told him
what I have not done. I have aimed to the Vices, not usually discovered, not
rightly cured, or not thus cured. Vices I call them, that are found in the
Understanding, as well as the Will; for error and ignorance are faults, ^s well
as outward, visible, and bodily disorders. But when all ^his is done toward the
cu^e ^f Man, there is nothing done, until the same God, who gives the word to
the mouth, speake^ the same word to the heart. Therefore with the Centurian,
let us entreat the Lord, that he will but speak the word, and we his
servants shall be whole.

HIERON, ad Demetriadem de virgin. seruanda. Sermo offendit plurimos, dum
vnusquisque in se intelligens quod dicitur; non quasi monitorem libenter audit,
sed quasi criminatorem sui operis auersatur.
THE CHIEF Heads and Contents of this Book.
CHAP. I. Two d^uers Diseases, of them that love to publish All and Nothing.
CHAP. II. The Folly of Natural Wisdom, preferring the Hand maid before the
Mist is, Philosophy before Divinity. CHAP. III. A h^aling of their Grief,
that are ^ffrighted at Christianity, and run away from it, as from so^e
terrible and ugly thing. CHAP. IIII. That Religion is the true Root of Ualour,
against the waking D^ea^es of the Philosophical Wizard and the angry Russian.
CHAP. V. A C^n^er in the Mouth, from whence issu^th the loths^me Breath of
Rank^ and ^uperflueus Swearing. CHAP. VI. Against their Frenze, that affirm a
b^ind Belief to be the Soul of Christianity, and make Christians to be the
mere Slaves of the Authority of Man. CHAP. VII. Aphorisms of Predestination.
CHAP. VIII. Of the small Health, and great Vnhealthynesse of the Church of
Rome, wherein most conspicuous is a Wenne grown to the likeness of a Head.
CHAP. IX. A cure of that Monastical Melancho^y, that cuts off a Christians
Hands, and turns him all into Eyes. CHAP. X. Against hungry and pinching
Holiness; a foolish Craft of some, Wh^ if they may save much here, care to be
saved but a little hereafter. CHAP. XI. An Error that forbids men though
mortally diseased, to be cured by a sick Physician. CHAP. XII. Spiritual
Wickedness in High Places, and the Remedy. CHAP. XIII. A doub^e fault in
teaching; one that f^etteth the whole Flesh; another that nourishes the proud
Flesh; one thinks to save men by angring and despising them; the other will
not save them, rather then offend them. CHAP. XIIII. The diseases of
Representation, that infect by the Eye, and the Ear. CHAP. XV. Of the
Pharisees Disease, The love of uppermost Seats. CHAP. XVI. Anti-Circ^. A
Potion tha^ turns Beasts into Men, being before turned from Men into Beasts.
CHAP. XVII. Certain falfe Appetites, that dis^aste the Foo^ of Life, though
dressed in it own Kind, if not dressed to their own Mind. CHAP. XVIII. That the
use of the Keys is an excellent Remedy for the Diseases of the Church, if it
self be not diseased, and that it is not to be taken for a Privilege to be
free from Remedies, and not from Diseases. CHAP. XIX. The Discovery of certain
main causes of Wars, and Wounds in the Church, and the means of their cure.
THE DISEASES OF THE TIME, Attended by their Remedies.
CHAP. I. Two diverse Diseases of them that love to publish all and nothing.
CONCERNING the publishing of Works and writings (besides the commonly
exploded Issues of obscoene and frivolous Brains) there is a twofold Error
and Infirmity. One is of those that love to publish as much as they can write;
and a second is, of them that love to publish nothing. The first sort, commonly
passes into their extremity by an ouer-flowing Conceit of their own Ability,
which makes them to love whatsoever is theirs; or perchance for want of
Judgment, which teaches Proportion, and says, that even of things lovely and
good, there must be a stint and measure; and that an excellence in Quality,
may be a fault in Quantity. Now that men may free themselves of this evil,
which is selfe-deceit, out of self conceit, let them choose Witnesses for the
Issues of their Souls, as the custom is for those of their Bodies. Let us
inuit some of our most sincere and severe Friends, to give testimony of the
Ingenuitie and Utility of those spiritual children, and so in the mouth of
two or three Witnesses, let the words of such Writings stand. Surely such have
a great advantage above the Author in censuring his Works, their Judgments
being free from the spectacles of self-love, which make al our own things
seem great in our own eyes. But we ought to know, that these must be men of
Justice and Valor, as well as of Judgment to execute, as well as to know; for
such only will not fear to displease their Friend, that they may profit him,
they will save a public reproof by a private, and by the Chastisement of a
Friend, will prevent the torturing of an Enemy. And Writers in this case must
be more then patient, for they must be thankful unto to Censure, which
squareth and fashioneth their Works unto their true end; the common good. And
now, that both the Author and his Witnesses may have a Rule and Remedy for
the Riot and Excess of writing, even of things of worth; let them harken to an
order already set forth, that new writings should still bring forth some new
Addition to their subject. And indeed if this were observed, it would stop the
mouth of Detraction, even at the widest. For in this case there is nothing left
for Detraction to say, but that it is offended with the increase of those
Works which increase either Knowledge or Virtue. And if here the Reader tell
me, Physician heal thy self, I answer him again, That except the Readers
be all healthy, I am not sick: for he is not sick of writing, that by writing
cures the sick. Besides it must be confessed, that when Divinity is the
subject, this Rule though it may not wholly be broken, yet it does sometimes
receive Dispensations and Inlargements, for in some cases there may be a great
use of repetitions and doublings.

And first, this is very requisite in things chiefly necessary; whereof the
retention is highly profitable, and the neglect and ignorance full of danger.

Secondly, when the thing is full of difficulty, either in regard of
apprehension, or practice, so that it is not easily known or performed. In
these cases the saying of the Apostle is most true, That to write the same
things, is for us a most sure thing; for even here also Detraction it self
shall be forced to confess, that repetition is not unnecessary where the
matters repeated are not sufficiently conceived or received, neither has been
enough taught which has not been well heard. No more then that man has
knocked enough to whom the door was not yet opened.

Therefore if men would find a fault about this kind of repetition, let them
seek it in themselves, and then they cannot miss it; for it is their own
dullness, their neglect, or at least their infirmity that causes it, and
until these faults be amended, they cannot well lay a fault upon repetition;
yet withal we may still remember that even in these Patents of License there is
a measure and reservation; for if the transcendent works and words of our
Savior Christ were in part suppressed, because the World could not bear them,
I think thence does plainly arise this Doctrine, That the Capacity of Mankind
is the most commendable measure of writing. Man may carry away for his use that
which is within his strength of bearing; but a burden greater then his
strength, spoyleth his strength and falls it self to the ground. Therefore
five words remembered, are better then a thousand forgotten; and it is for
loss, and not for profit, when so much is delivered, as the plenty destroys
the memory, or tyreth the endeavors of the Learner. Yet, I confess, that a
little redundance is safer and better, then a little want. For in outward uses,
we desire that a stream should carry more water then we use, rather then to
^arrie till the springs rise. It is easy to let the superfluous water to slide
away, and it is easy for a man to read no farther then he reads for a trial.
But here I cannot but speak to the nicensse and cloyednesse of this time, a
disease of Readers. Plenty of knowledge has been turned into an occasion of
lothing: and knowledge only by plenty is become a light and dry meat, as Manna
to Israel. Surely we are in an extreme faultiness, when in steed of
thankfulness to God for plenty, we return lothsomnesse; and the blessings
which he recheth to us in mercy, we put back to him with neglect and scorn.
When thy friend inuiteth thee to a Feast, and sets before thee plenty of
Dishes, thou take kindly his abundance as a sign of his love, and except
thou art a Glutton, thou art not angry with him nor his meat, because some of
it is left uneaten. Surely God here gives thee the food and delicates of
Heaven in the sundry dishes of the several expressions and labors of his
Servants: And why art thou not as thankful to God as thou art to thy Neighbor?
Though there be more then enough, thou may take but enough, the plenty
forces nothing upon thee, but only gives thee choice; Take therefore but that
which sit^eth thee, and so much as thou may well overcome, and be not
angry, but thankful for that which is left, for that may serve another as
fitly as thy choice serves thee. A miserable disproportion it is, that Gods
plenty of goodness to us, should be made an occasion of diminishing our
goodensse to him, and the more he gives the less thanks he should receive.
Yea, much rather let the abundance of his blessings procure an abundance of
Thanksgiving, for this is verily the right duty of proportion, to increase our
thanks as God increases his blessings. Now for the disease of not publishing
(I mean only of such things as have worth in them) this proceeds commonly of
two causes. The one is an error in Judgment, when men being wisely mad, they
think it an especial piece of reason to sit down in a self contentment, and
to delight themselves, in themselves, by themselves. These men are their own
ends, and indeed are no other then Churles in knowledge; for as wretches keep
their Gold only for sight and not for use, so these hoarders of Knowledge make
their Knowledge but a selfe-recreation, and not a matter of profit to others.
They are Fathers, Nurses, and Murderers of their own Children, having begotten
them, they kiss them, and then bury them. But these high-spirited men in
their own behalf have as they think a generous objection: What (say they)
shall we prostitute our high conceptions, and heavenly raptures, to the common
use and censure of the vulgar? Here the word Common is the most emphaticall
part of the question. And surely in that very word I think lies the best part
of the answer. For as these singulars make commonnesse the reason of their
distaste of publishing; So communicatiue men and lovers of the public have
thought that goodness does grow more good by commonnes. Indeed if knowledge
were a fether, or a hat, or a beard, or in sum, a thing of fashion, it were a
reason very receiueable (though not very reasonable) to say, The fashion is
common, and therefore contemptible and to be suppressed. But knowledge is a
thing of use, and that of the highest nature, it is the food of Spirits, and
food may not be taken away from the hungry, though there be a common plenty of
it; and fullness in many has bred loathing. And indeed if thou have any thing
that may add unto knowledge or virtue, there is a hunger and need of it, and
thou art far from that Nobleness which thou pretendest, if thou do not
commiserate necessity, neither resemblest the chiefest pattern of Majesty and
Honor, who fills the hungry with good things. It is indeed a matter of
Pusillanimitie, not to be able to endure a false and witless aspersion; and
such is that censure which condemns thee for being publikly profitable. And if
there be any spot or grief in this tax of vulgaritie, undergo it patiently
for the good of the public, and so become a Confessor for piety and virtue.
And if yet thou be ashamed to be known for a public well-doer, give us thy
works and keep thy name to thy self.

But if all this cannot draw thee out of thy den of singularity, I wish thou
may be famished out of it, by the return of thine own reason and dealing
upon thee. For it is a rule of Justice, that which men do, they should suffer;
and yet I would have thee suffer it no longer, but till thou do it no more.
Now that which thou do and thy fellows do, is this: ye are a world by
your selves, and the rest are left as a world by themselves; Now as ye are men
of another world, to this world, by the way of retribution should this world be
a diverse world unto you. As your little world keeps his worth to it self, so
should the great world keep his worth to it self. And then I doubt not, but
hunger, and thirst, and labor, would teach you the laws of Traffic, and
force you out of your Cells of separation. Then would nature teach to give,
where there is a receiving, as grace has already taught us. That it is more
blessed to give, then to receive; And indeed where has any man gotten this
high privilege, to be so excellent a part of the whole, that the whole should
only be a servant of that part. That a part is inferior to the whole, even
as a member to the body, the ancient doctrines and examples of Heathens will
teach thee if thou art a Heathen, for they have been prodigal of their lives
to bring their words of this kind into Actions. But if thou art a Christian,
the Word is near thee, even in thy mouth. That the members of Christ must love
and cherish each other, as the members of a body. To this end, excellent is
the exhortation of the great GREGORY, Qui audit dicat veni, etc. Let him that
inwardly hears the voice of grace, outwardly call men by the voice of
exhortation. But especially remarkable is that in his Pastoral Cure; Christ
our elder brother being dead, we are bound to raise up seed unto our elder
brother. And if any that are enriched with gifts, yet dote on the priuatnesse
of contemplation, and neglect the profit of the public, surely in the
strictness of judgment, how much they may profit, so much they are guilty.

Now a second cause of this mystery of silence, is a distemper of the body,
when man are chayned up with Melancholy, and durst not break prison. These
love not the light, but enjoy darkness, and bring up their children, and bury
them in the dungeon with them. To these I wish a bodily cure and outward
physic. Yet with all the physic of grace, by which we are stirred up to
resist and overcome the whole flesh, in the different vices of his several
humors and complexions.

CHAP. II. The Folly of Natural Wisdom, preferring the Handmaid before the
Mistres, Philosophy before Divinity.
D. Char. in his preface of Wisdom.
THere is a certain Wizard whose Morality outstrippeth his Divinity, that
accordingly prefers the practice of Morality before the practice of
Divinity. He says the virtue and honesty of Divines is deiect, sad,
fearful, and vulgar, but that of the Philosophers is pleasant, puissant,
noble, and rare. These words have an unmannerly sound, though some of his
Sectaries will perchance say they have a sound meaning, but if his meaning were
good it had not been amiss in so weighty a matter to have bestowed other or
more words upon us, that among some of them we might have found out the
goodness of his meaning. For my part, I cannot perceive any justifiable sense
in them, but hold them being radically and fundamentally examined full of
danger and untruth. Dangerous they are especially to the unwritten Tables of
young brains; for by the Proclamation of such notable excellence and
transcendence in humane wisdom, the affections of such are lifted up to the
more noble knowledge, and they look down with contempt on a lower and meaner
Learning. But let those who by that Author are brought into danger know, that
they are brought into danger by an untruth, and then perchance the knowledge of
the untruth may prevent the hurt of the danger.

And though to some it may seem, that because there are profitable truths to
be found in this Author, therefore a few errors should be pardoned; I
confess, I am even for this reason the more unwilling to pardon them. For
therefore are the errors more dangerous, because they come in the company of
some notable Truths, it being a ready and common course, that Errors
accompanied with Truths are the more easily swallowed, the excellence of the
Truths speaking for the Errors, and strongly persuading, that the Author of
such Truths can hardly be also the Author of Errors. Besides it were far
safer that he had kept both his Truths and Errors in silence, then that they
should both have an equal acceptance. For he that learneth not those Truths
from him, may learn most of them from others, for others have spoken much of
that which he teaches: and yet if they fail of a great part of them, there
is truth enough besides to be had to make a man temporally and eternally
happy. But he that receives these Errors, though accompanied with his
notable Truths, the Errors will make him miserable, if believed, even in spite
of the Truths. For certainly it is the most fearful misery of all to confine
Mankind, within such a dungeon of wickedness and wretchedness as this world
is, and though these Wizards charm their Disciples with their wittiest
enchantments, yet they shall still be but wretches, the naughtiness of the
world, and the crasie infirmities of their own bodies shall torment them, and
the blacknes of darkness, even the shadow of death shall terrify them. For
that darkness is naturally fearful to Man, and the fearfulness of Morality
may assuage or put off by fittes, but it will still return upon them. Again,
it brings a man to an amazement, and makes him to quarrel with his Creator,
and to ask this question of that highest Wisdom, Have thou made al men for
naught? or in other words, Have thou been wise in making Man to no purpose?
For Man considered only in this life is merely vanity, and his life after
death being cast up amounts to nothing. Besides, such subtle and cunning
Doctors pick not away the lower sort of wits, but the higher; in whom natural
understanding being high, claspeth strongly with the chiefest natural reasons.
For Nature without grace, the wiser it is, the more mad it grows upon natural
reason. And now that I may rightly perform the cure of this Evil, I will take
his own titles from Philosophy, and give them to Divinity, and I doubt not
but to make the very same good on Divinity which he speaks of Philosophy;
even that Divinity is more noble, pleasant, puissant, and rare then
Philosophy. And first for Nobility. That Nobility which this Man especially
condemns in Philosophy, I think to be the freedom and vndependance
thereof, even a mere practice of virtue for virtues sake, without the respect
of an higher Rule, Judge, or End. But this which he terms Nobility I believe
to be baseness, and doubt not to prove it. For Divinity though it goes with
Philosophy a little, yet it leaves it behind in the latter and higher degrees
of Virtue. For Divinity commends goodness because it is good, but then it
goes farther and judges it to be good, because it is conformable to the
highest Rule of goodness; and so it teaches the practiser to make God the
Rule and Square of Virtue. It rests not in this that goodness is supposed to
be goodness, but it fetches the practice of goodness from God, and having
fetched it from God it returns it to God; It borrowed it of God and therefore
pays it to him from whom it was borrowed; It knowing it to be good because it
is agreeable to the Highest goodness, for the same reason it does it, even
because it is agreeable to him. So the Divine in his highest degree is far
above the Philosopher, for he practices goodness for the same reason by
which it came to be goodness, even because by a conformity it proves it self
to be descended from the Highest goodness. And surely let them deceive
themselves as much as they list. It is the happiest and rightest estate of a
Creature to be conformed unto his Creator, to fetch deriuatiue goodness from
the primative, and to examine it thereby, and finally to return the deriuatiue
to the use of the primative. And here I might encounter another Gentilisme of
this Author, which is an opinion, that all virtues are not branches of piety,
but piety is a branch of a virtue. True it is indeed in a Heathen, that virtue
is not a branch of piety, both because he has no true piety, and because his
virtue and his piety issue both jointly and not subordinately, from distinct
considerations of his natural reason. And even therefore his piety is not
piety, nor his virtue, virtue. For true piety alone is the mother of true
virtue, neither is there any true virtue that is not the true child of piety.
For the Creator is the pattern and rule of virtue to his Creature, and the end
of it. It is fetched from him, it is referred to him. By God we prove and
iustifi^ our virtue, of God we have strength to perform it, and what by God
we know to be good, and knowing were enabled to perform, that we justly
return to God. So true virtue looks in all her actions toward God; it learnes
of him what pleases him, that which pleases him it knows to be virtue, and
then it does it, because it pleases him. The true pious man acknowledges God
to be the beginning and Author both of his being and of virtue, and therefore
he referres his being and his actions of virtue to the Author and Owner of
both. So he does virtue because it is Gods and because he is Gods. He is Gods
and therefore justly endeavors to please God whose he is, and virtue is Gods,
and therefore he wisely endeavors to please God by that which is his. Gods
wisdom and Dispensation, gave to Man both the seeds and laws of virtue, and
therefore the pious man does them with an eye to the Author, Rule, and End of
them. And whosoever does any virtue, without an eye to God as the Author and
Rule of virtue, (both to enable and to approve it) or to the same God as the
Owner and End of both, this man is a traitor to his Maker, and guilty of
impiety, because he robs God of his Creatures, and the Creature of their true
End. For he does not his actions by whom nor for whom he should do them. But
to true Christians it shall be a steadfast Rule of their actions, That by God
and for God are all things, and therefore their virtues; And if all their
virtues be fetched from God and done for God, then are all their virtues
fruits of piety, even of the worship and service of their Maker. But now
having found out these premises, let us by their light discover and examine who
is baser, the Philosopher or the Divine.

And first I say that the Divine is more noble in his Rule of virtue then the
Philosopher. For the Philosopher has got a Soul he knows not how, with some
measure of reason in it (but I must tell him terribly ruined and degenerate)
and having got it he hugges it, looks on it, and sets his rest, and
contentment in the sight and operation of it, and compares it only with
itself. But the soul having a deriuatiue goodness, the true tryer and
touchstone thereof must be the primative goodness. Therefore they do
foolishly that examine their souls by their souls, and their Reasons by their
Reasons, especially in this state of corruption, for if the soul be crooked it
cannot serve for a Rule to rectify it self. But the primative Rule and
goodness ought to be the Rule of the deriuatiue, and to it must it have
recourse to know whether it have swarued or no.

Therefore the Philosopher while he dwells in himself, fayles in Judgment as
well as in honesty. But the Divine (I mean the practiser of Divinity)
escapes these faults; and ennobles himself far above the Philosopher, by a
continual recourse to his original. For perceiving that from God he has his
knowledge and goodness, he looks up unto God as unto the highest Rule of all
created goodness. Therefore he reasons not foolishly with the Philosopher, It
is true, or it is good because I who am frail and imperfect think it to be
so, but because the highest perfection, truth and goodness has declared it to
be so. For (as before) goodness is goodness, even because it is uniform
unto God.

Secondly, the Divine is more noble then the Philosopher in the means of
acting virtue; for knowing that from God proceeds all strength, he seeks
strength for the action on of Virtue from the Author of strength: whereas the
Philosopher makes use of an old decayed strength, which is the remaynder of
the gift of God, without either petition or thanks to God. The Divine indeed
commends Virtue for the spark that it has of the first Image of the Maker,
but yet acknowledges great defects in it, and therefore desires to perfect it
by the renewing of the same Maker, and then having renewed it by him, he
referres it to him. So the virtue of a Christian, doubly acknowledges God the
Author of it, and with double strength returns unto him; both as it came first
from God by Creation, and after the Creation being defaced, as it was renewed by
Regeneration.

Thirdly, the Divine is more noble then Philosopher, in giving the Creator his
right in his Creature; for knowing that his whole person came from God, he
voluntarily, freely, and joyfully returns himself wholly to God, he gives
the Creatue to the Creator, and makes him his end who is his true Owner by
being his beginning. But the Philosopher cuts off the Creature from the
Creator, either by denying the Creation (and yet he sees no man now adays
spring out of the Earth) or otherwise by denying all traffic between the
Creator and his Creature. As if God had cast out caresly from his hand, so
admirable a Creation, and willingly lost it, and so became a Creator to no
purpose, or else regards it only as a Spectator of Gladiators and Fighters
with beasts, even as one that delights to behold the miseries that Mankind
wreaketh on it self, which is a blasphemy against the Fountain of Goodness.
But far be it from us to account our selves our own, but his, even his
Creatures, Children and Servants. Indeed, if our selves and our Virtues were
originally ours, then might we rest in our selves, and love both our own selves
and our own virtues by themselves and for themselves. But God has a property
in us and our virtues, and therefore as to a father we ought to offer the
service of Children. For a just and upright soul cannot but take delight in
pleasing him who is to her the Author of being.

Wherefore, I desire hereafter that the Philosopher will not despise the Son
for a cheerful pleasing his Father; nor the Servant for a comfortable practice
of Virtue, because it is acceptable to his Lord the true Owner both of him and
his Virtues. For although himself be a fugitive Servant, and has turned his
Liuerie into a Suit of Apparel, and swaggers it up and down in his runaway
freedom, yet the Masters property lies as a heavy burden and accusation
upon him, and shall one day bring him to the Bar of the highest Justice, and in
the mean time he stands here below indicted for a Vagabond, and so is far
worse in his stolen Gallantry, then a Servant is in a just and voluntary
obedience. The service of a Christian is a service of love, and therefore it is
a noble service. A Christian loves God, and therefore pleases him by doing
that which God loves. Now this service of love is noble because it is
voluntary, pleasant, and cheerful.

Love casts out fear, and takes delight in pleasing him whom it loves; and
therefore it cheerfully obeyes him, and indeed, such cheerful obeyers does God
only love; Therefore such should only be called Divines, and their virtue the
only virtue of Divines. Which if it be granted, then is the slander of the
deiection, sadness, and baseness, of the Divines wholly overthrown.

Lastly, the Divine is more noble then the Philosopher in his Mark or End. For
the fruition of God is proposed by the Divines in their practice of virtue, but
that by these is turned to an objection while themselves have no other end but
some transitory use of virtue. True it is, that Christians beholding the
beauty of virtue, they love the look of it, and highly esteem it. But yet
more Reasons of estimation do bind more, and the adding of strength does not
weaken but strengthen; else a threefold cord were easier to be broken, then a
single one.

Therefore, God knowing the corruption of man's nature, and that few men in this
state of deprauation have either understanding or worth to value goodness
sufficiently, and accordingly to practice it, he hedgeth in the frailty of man
with the double enclosure of punishment and reward, and all little enough (and
too little as Experience shows) to keep him in his way.

Though virtue be lonely to a clarified understanding, yet man's understanding
being in the most pudled by the fall, and in every one sometimes dimmed by
passions the fruits of the fall, the beauty of virtue then shines not to an
vnseeing eye, but the will by fear or benefit is then most to be wrought on.
If therefore to aid so great a weakness, there be a supplement of strength
by the proposition of danger and profit, the nature of man is hereby the more
succored, and we are to blame, if we blame our helps. But they will say, they
are most noble, that have no need of them; and that tread the path of virtue,
neither for fear nor covetousness. I answer, that Goodness and Happiness
being naturally linked together, and wickedness and misery, the understanding
and will, more readily employ and bend themselves to the good, and from the
evil by reason of that Union. And surely, Happiness being tied to Goodness
by the Chain of Providence, we cannot but mend our pace to goodness, by the
sight of annexed Happiness: and it were folly not to look on that which may
both delight and encourage us.

Our will desires good naturally, and therefore good being tied to goodness,
gives more appetite to the will. And surely herein was the same kind of
Action in the Heathen, though by mistaking. For these did seek a sovereign
good in virtue; and even for that sought it the more fervently. Now the ods is
this, that we have a sovereign good with virtue, though not in virtue,
conjoined but not confounded. So virtue is lovely to us, but God the Fountain
of virtue is far more lovely, and to him we walk in the path of virtue. Now
there is no baseness in loving virtue well for it self, neither in loving the
Author of virtue better then it, neither in loving virtue the more for leading
us to the Author of virtue. So we may not be blamed but rather should be
commended (virtue being the way to the Author of virtue) if we make this use of
this little stream of goodness, by the guiding thereof to come to the
infinite ocean of Goodness.

Surely, we then love virtue best, when not contented with the drops of it, we
labor earnestly to come to the fountain and sulnesse of it; and by practizing
a little virtue to come to the perfection of it. If one poor spark of virtue
be to be loved for it self, much more is that infinite Rock of Orient and
most shining virtue to be loved in God, and it is a most reasonable purpose and
resolution to love the Higher Excellence more then the lower, and to love the
lower the better if it lead to the Higher.

When we find gold Oar in the top of the Earth, we value it highly, but we
value it the more, because it leads us to the Gold Mine it self. Therefore
the Philosophers were children in this, that having found a Myne-stone, they
played with it, and sought no farther, but the Christians are truly wise, who
having found it, follow the Vein until they come to enjoy the very Root and
Treasury thereof. Another spot which is cast on Divinity, by the odious
comparison or preferment of Philosophy, is this, That the virtue of Divines is
more vulgar, and that of Philosophy more rare. Here I cannot but stand still
and wonder, how this man came to use speeches so flatly contrary to the
speeches of Christ, and having spoken them, to propose them to Christians.
Either he thinks himself herein wiser then Christ, or that we are no
Christians, and therefore apt to believe him before Christ the Author and
Finisher of our Faith: But it is an ancient truth, The narurall man is blind
in the things of God, Christ has said, The way to Heaven is narrow, and few
there be that find it, and I take it, that is rare which but a few do find.
Israel was but a drop to the Ocean of Mankind, and Israel only had for a long
time the Statutes and Judgments of God.

Again, at this time when Religion is let out into the World, how is it
beyonded by Turcisme, Atheism, Gentilisme, Heresies, and Epicurisme? Surely, a
true Christian is a rare thing, and if it were not so, this man could not well
have hoped to be generally believed that they are common. And if he means by
vulgar (besides the commonnesse) to intimate that Christianity is incident to
meandness, and so is fit for the common people, as well in that they are base,
as in that they are many, I utterly gainsay him; For if Divinity be truly
examined, it requires the highest understandings to search it, the mightiest
and noblest endeavors to perform it, for in Divinity they are Mysteries
which are taught, and excellent things which are commanded. Therefore Christ
tells things hidden and unsearchable to the very wise of the world, and
enioyneth virtues excelling the ambitious holiness of the very Scribes and
Pharisees. Yea, he wyteth his hearers that contented themselves with ordinary
virtues, saying, What great or excellent thing do ye? yet the truth is, that
to sundry of the mean ones, God imparteth the light and grace of
Christianity, but not because meannesse is fitter to apprehend it, but because
by meannesse God best expresses his own excellence, and shows his power
chiefly in infirmity, and his light in darkness. Therefore for his own
glory he chooses them and not for their ability toward Religion, but rather
for their not-abilitie in some respect. For whereas by their natural unableness,
they were altogether incapable of Divine Mysteries, God is sure to get glory
to his Spirit, which entering into men so full of darkness and meannesse, makes
them lightsome, wise, able, and truly noble, For from henceforth being
regenerate, They understand secrets, perform difficult virtues, aspire unto
eternity, and despise te^porall, though glorious vanity. Thus mean men receiu
grace not by their meannesse, but for their meannes, and receiving it are no
longer mean, but are made excellent and noble. This is it which David says:
Psalm 19. That God by his Word gives understanding to the simple. And Psalm.
119. That by the fear of God he became wiser then his Teachers: And if we
look for examples to omit those ancient Fishermen (a profession commonly most
ignorant) whose words and writings cannot be matched by the world in
spiritual, that is in the best wisdom: I will speak of our times, that in
them I have seen Men admirable in Simplicity for worldly things, but
miraculous in Divine knowledge, so that their speeches in the one kind have bin
contemptible, and in the other have sounded like Oracles. So that a great
knowledge being found in a great simplicity, it may not be thought, That
simplicity is the cause of Knowledge, but we must look a higher cause, even
that the Creator is the cause of a new Creation. And the fountain of Wisdom
is the cause of these drops of new and supernatural wisdom, powered into
natural simplicity. And this hits right with Christ's speech unto Peter, Flesh
and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father in Heaven. And that
Divinity is not a shallow knowledge fit to be waded through by dwarfish
ignorance, the experience of the Fathers may confirm. For the chiefest of them
were men of admirable wisdom, great learning, and unwearied study, and yet
they found in Divinity Wisdom beyond their Understanding, Learning above
their Learning, and Work beyond their Time. Therefore it shall remain a
certain Truth, That Religion ordinarily requires Wisdom, and therefore
though it often lights on them that lack it, yet then it brings Wisdom with
it. And indeed Religion brings with it the best Wisdom. For that is the best
Wisdom which teaches us the most perfect virtues, and leads us to the most
perfect, absolute, and eternal Happiness. Lastly, though God do show most
often his strength in weakness, yet that Grace of God is no common work,
neither, among the common people. But surely I think this man deceived
himself thus; He saw in the blind Religion of his Country, the common people
led with Ignorance and Superstition, and out of that superstitious Ignorance,
to do many seeming works of Charity and Piety, and on these he bestowth the
title of the virtue of Divines. But it is a great error to make Superstition
the Root and Mother of Theological virtue; for Superstition is a Bastard
begotten by an informed and ignorant fear of the Deity. Such people are as
far from true Divinity, as he is from the true commendation of it. And
himself in his chapter of Piety, has truly showed piety to be of so high a
Nature, uniting Man to his Root the Godhead, that I wonder he could here make
the superstitious dotage of the ignorant vulgar, to be the high and
transcendent virtue of the Divines. For let him confess ingeniously, how many
of the vulgar has he known truly to return to their original, and to knit
themselves unto it.

Surely, it seems he forgate at last what he had written at first, or knew not
at first what he would write at last. But say what he list, Theological
virtue is of no base stamp, it contains in it an union with God, and from
hence issues an Image of God, and from this Image the Love of God, Charity to
our Neighbor, and Sobriety in our selves. And in this path of virtue, it
leads us to Felicity. And when he has magnified his Philosophy to the
highest, Divinity chalengeth all the Goodness it has as her servant, and
adds more unto it. Now for the other two Epithites wherewith he decketh
Philosophy, and whereof he robs Divinity, Pleasantness and Power; I have
fitted several discourses for them, yet withal respecting other faults. But
the Reader may set such pieces of them together, as being inlayd in his memory
jointly with this, may serve for an entire Confutation of these errors. And
that his memory may not travail far for the doing of it, I here immediately
adioyne them.

CHAP. III. A healing of their Grief that are affrighted at Christianity, and
run away from it, as from some terrible and ugly thing.
THere are some that think on Religion, as upon some fearful Apparition, and
accordingly receive the Image thereof into their Minds; in the likeness of a
sour, grim, and austere visage. And surely some Pharisees have given a
Confirmation hereunto. But this is an especial deceit and fraud of the Devil,
to rob us of the greatest joy by a false fear of the greatest sadness. Is
there any more comfortable thing, then the union of Man with his Sovereign
Good? Is there any thing more pleasant then light, and true Christians have in
them the beams of the uppermost Light? Is there any thing more rauishing then
Beauty, and these are delighted with the highest Beauty of the Creator, and
with the lower Beauties of just and holy men, resembling the higher? What
delights Man more then to love and to be beloved, and behold a Christian is
the best lover, and loved of the best? Virtue was glorious in the eyes of the
Heathen, so that in regard of her they despised all labors and sufferings,
yea, life it self. Yet their Virtue was but of a bounded Nature, and as a
standing Poole, whose waters are by measure. But the Virtues of Christianity
are continual streams flowing from the eternal Fountain of the Deity; and
have an unlimited power of daily increasing. I cannot, I would not say all that
the joy of Christians can afford me, I have Art of Happ^nesse.
elsewhere saved this labor. Neither let men think but that these are matters
of Fact, and not of mere Speculation, for the hearts of true Christians are at
this day living Witnesses, and the Sayings of the Dead cry aloud to confirm
it. Read DAVID rejoicing in his Psalms, and you will think him a man
ravished, so does every word swell with joy, praise, and exultation. See him
dancing before the Arc, and if you be no wiser then a very woman, you will
think him out of his wits, but if you be so wise as a good woman, you will
say, his soul did magnify the Lord, and his Spirit rejoiced in God his
Savior.

Again, read the Song of David, describing the ecstasies of love and delight,
wherein the Church almost loses her self, as unable to contain them, and you
cannot but say, that there is a joy entered into the heart of man which cannot
get it self wholly into it by comprehension; nor get out of it by expression.
All the Instruments of Music, all the Creatures both sensible and insensible,
are summoned together to help forth the utterance of an unutterable joy. And
how can you blame him, for his soul is in the Courts of Heaven, Where to be a
doore-keeper for one day, is better then to be a thousand years in the Courts
of Princes, and yet most men think that Courtiers have great joy of their
places.

Again, Gods Words are sweeter to him then the honey, and you know, Sweetness
is the God of the Epicure. Yea, it is more precious then fine Gold, and Gold is
the God of the Worldling. Thus a Christians joy surmounteth the joys of the
Naturallist, even Honor, Pleasure, and Profit. But if this be true, you will
say, how comes it that so few seek heavenly, and almost all seek earthly
joys? and perchance thou which read it art also of the same mind. Hereunto
I answer, That the fault is in the Taste, not in the Meat; in the folly of
the Judgment, not in the Pearl; when a grain of Corn is preferred before
it. To taste spiritual joys a man must be spiritual, for the spirit
rellisheth only the things of the spirit, and like loves his like. Between a
spiritual man and spiritual joys, there is as mighty an appetite and
enjoying, as between fleshly meat and a carnal stomach. Therefore the want
of this taste and apprehension condemns the World to be carnal, but
magnifies the joys spiritual, as being above a gross and carnal
apprehension.

Surely, the face of this world at the first view, shows us a plain evidence
of its vnacquainta^ce with these joys, it is so willingly soyled with the
sweat of worldly labors, so defiled with wallowing in the mire of
voluptuousness, so wrinkled with the cares of this perishing life. They still
cry out, who will show us any good, but they would have this good showed them
in their Corn, and Wine, and Oil.

But on the otherside, if men did fully taste the sweetness, and rightly value
the preciousnesse of heavenly joys, the World would run so fast from the
World, and press so violently into the Kingdom of God, that we should
extremely need Sermons to persuade to the labors of the six days, whereas
now all Exhortations are too little toward the sanct^fying of the Seventh. And
indeed, the Primitive times gave examples hereof, when there was plain need of
dehortation, to keep men from too much haste toward Persecution, and too much
flying from the World. If thou therefore be as they were thou shall be ready
to do as they did. Do not as Fools do, who because they cannot taste the
joys of a Christian, therefore leave to be Christians. But even because thou
can not taste them, be thou more vehemently desirous to be a Christian, that
thou may taste them. For by being a Christian thou shall taste the joys of
a Christian, whereas else thou losest thy self and them, and sinkest down to
the base degree of a gross and transitory creature, and so of base and
transitory joys: yea, below them again into a bottomless pit of endless
darkness. But rather strive thou by earnest Prayer to the Father of Spirits,
to make thee spiritual, that so spiritual things may be pleasing to thee, and
thou pleasing to him who is the chief of Spirits, for Conformity and Harmony
is the Law of Pleasure and Delight. Therefore, also on the otherside tread
down thy flesh and the taste thereof, whose exaltation is the abatement of
spiritual Life, Taste, and Feeling, and whose abatement is the exaltation of
spiritual favor and discerning.

Another Objection is framed by the World, that Religion cannot be pleasant,
because none speak more against Mirth and good Fellowship, then these forward
Christians, and great Religionaries.

To this I answer, That men truly wise and holy do not preach against Mirth,
but Madness; and not against that Fellowship which is truly good, but against
that which passing under the name of good, is full of all vice and wickedness.
There is an honest and clean Mirth, which Oil to the bones, as the Wiseman
says, and this if the World could find, the Salt of the World would not
correct and chasten. And indeed, this alone deserves the Name of Mirth, for the
sport of sin is a laughter at things lamentable, and a joy in stead of
sorrow, and is so inseperable from sorrow, that if it have not the sorrow of
temporal Repentance, it shall have a far greater sorrow of endless penance.
True it is, that God at first gave his creatures to man to be inioyed, and now
especially to Christians is that right renewed, so that Christianity is so far
from taking them from us, that it only gives them truly to us.

Again, God delights not in the sowrenesse of face, in hanging down the
head like a Bul-rush, in tormenting the body, which though with some they may
be esteemed as good outsides of Religion, and as Paul terms them, shows of
Godliness, yet of themselves they are of no value with God.

There is nothing in us lovely to God, but righteousness, and that which
aduanceth it, and there is nothing odious to God but sin, and that which
serves it. If therefore the Creatures of God be used toward the advancement,
and encouragement of Gods service in us, we please him in their use, yea, we
offend him in their neglect. And the speech of Jonathan concerning Saul's
forbidding of meat, will God himself use against us; these men have troubled
the Land, for if they had eaten, they had done greater service against the
Enemies of God.

And for joy it self we may see that God hates it not, For he himself in
the old Law appointed many feasts, in which there was a plain precept of
Rejoicing. And in the new Law. Paul tells Timothy that God gives us all
things abundantly to enjoy, and in the Acts he testifies that God fills us
with food and gladness. But our Mirth must be wise and reasonable, as
becomes those that are men, and not Apes, even Creatures stamped with the
Image and Character of God. And too true it is that the Mirth of Man, as the
Wrath of Man seldom keeps such a measure that it fulfills the will of God.
Yet this calls for Watchfulness and measure unto Mirth, but sets not
unlawfulness on it, if it be measured and decent.

I deny not but Sadness is sometimes necessary in Religion, but not as it is
Sadness, but as Sadness is a Rod unto Vice, and as by humbling the Flesh it
aduanceth the Spirit. Sadness has no worth by it self, neither is it in
Religion the end of it self, but even Sadness it self tends to Joy.
Religious men by Sadness walk unto Comfort, and indeed Comfort is an assured
fruit of Spiritual Sadness. Sorrow for sin ends in the joy of
forgiveness, and sadness of meditation ends in the joy of Divine
contemplations. So are we made merry by Sadness, and the weed of sorrow
changes it self upon us into the garment of gladness.

And this high privilege of Joy has a Christian above a Carnal man, that
whereas the Man of earth being sad is only sad, and sad unto sadness, the
Christian being sad is sad unto joy. How must not then a Christian be a most
joyful Creature, whose very sadness ends in joy, yea, it is a means of
procuring and making joy. Fleshly mirth ends in sadness, and spiritual
sadness ends in mirth, and so if that be well that ends well, the sadness
of a Christian is better then the mirth of a Heathen.

There is yet a third Objection. That Religion is attended with opposition and
persecution, and these are terrible things to flesh and blood. I answer, that
if this be so, yet is Religion a joyful thing. For these are not in Religion,
but after Religion, and indeed they are qualities of Irreligion. Religion it
self is busied about excellent things, as union with God, conformity to God,
fruition of God; and persecution and opposition comes from Irreligion, Atheism
and Malice.

Religion must needs be the more excellent because it has such Enemies, as
wicked men and wicked spirits, as one commended Christianity because Nero
persecuted it.

If great Armies come to conquer a Land, it is likely to be a Land of pleasure
and fertility, for barrenness and worthlesnesse seldom call for Conquerors.
Envy the Devils torment and pleasure, sees some invaluable joy, which he
would take from us by outward vexations, but certain it is, that as it is a
joy whose fullness is beyond the reach of Man's heart, so the fastening of it is
above the reach of the Devils hand, for nothing can reach high enough to take
it from us. Yea, when he reaches to it by the persecutions of the body, he
increases the joys of our souls, for as tribulations abound, so do
consolations abound also. So in this point is a Christian also a most joyful
Creature, whose afflictions breed consolations, and whose enemies are
instruments of comforting them, even by afflicting them. So in all things are
we more then Conquerors; Joy is our part which nothing may take from us, but
all changes by an unchangeable Law, do work our Joy. Therefore does the
Christian enjoy tribulations and takes them for aduancements; yea, the
disciples of Christ rejoice in their sufferings for Christ's sake, as
testimonies of worth and estimation with their Lord. So a Soldier takes
pleasure in that which to an ordinary man is a terror, yea he inioyeth his
scarres and wounds as marks of valor, and steps unto Honor. And as the sight
of future advancement does cheer up the Heavenly Soldier, so do the present
joys of the Spirit of consolation. As the body is pricked or scourged without
the heart, is bathed within in the celestial oil of joy and gladness. The
comforts within rise according to the sufferings without; yea with them, by
them, and above them. God the Creator is within comforting, and they are but
Creatures that are without afflicting, and how shall we not be full of
Courage, of Comfort, since he that is in us and with us, is so infinitely
greater then he and all they that are without us and against us?

But as the Carnal Man has had leave for his objections against Religion, so
I desire leave of him a little to question the joys of his Carnality. For I am
in great doubt that many sinners have more trouble and work to be damned then
many Christians to be saved. I say it falls out by Divine Mercy on the one,
and Justice on the other, that if some righteous men have the Devil for a hard
Enemy, some sinners have him also for a cruel Master. Generally the peace of
the wicked is fearful, hollow, interrupted, and finally ending in sorrow. If
Affliction come to him (as the first Curse gives some taste of it self unto
all) he receives the Curse with Cursing, he takes his Soul and tears it to
pieces, by raging and repining, and, (contrary to Paul that rejoices) he
raueth in Tribulations. The great pursuer of Virtue, whose love to his Country
was admirable, though the fruits of it scarce justifiable, at his death defies
Virtue it self, and in discontent renounceth her as a Vassal of Fortune. The
end of pleasure is Lothsomnesse, and the apprehension of an End saddeth the
mids of it. Yea, in the main course of his Life he is in bondage by the fea^^
of Death, and that fear of Death bittereth his Life. Accordingly have I heard
one to fall out with his Life, because of Death, speaking in the plain, but
pitiful language of a mere Naturallist, what auayles me any thing that I
do, since whatsoever I do I must dye? And indeed if Death end the whole Man,
by that end the works of Man are to no end; for what can any works avail the
Man that is not?

And now if we consider another way the Carnal man's life, we shall find that
very often he is put to hard services, and has but a bad Master of the
Devil. Take out some one of the chiefest and set him for a Pattern, and you
shall see his Life to be a perpetual Drudgerie, and he is no other then a
Gally-slaue, rowing hard for the execution of his beastly lusts. And if he
sink down into some rest, the Devil spurs him up again with one
Concupiscence or other, that he must needs go being Deuill-driuen. Perchance
he has a piece of whordome in his head, and the house of his flesh is on fire
about his ears, and he can never be quiet before he has quenched it; and
then also he is not quiet, but even by quenching grows more fiery. Before his
beastly satisfaction, he has the labor of watching, sending, giving and
contriuing, he fears the harlots husband, or his own Wife, the parents, the
friends of both, and generally the eyes of Men. Sometimes the Neck it self
must be adventured in cruel Murders for the remoouall of Impediments, and
sometimes for remoouing the Fruits. And if you mark what baseness such people
put on in this sneaking Vice, sometimes equalling themselves with base persons,
sometimes covering their filthiness with base shifts, a noble heart would
scorn it for mere Nobility. But it is an excellent piece of Justice that
filthiness and shame are fast tied together, and he that will have one, must
needs take the other for his labor. And after Satisfaction he is not
satisfied, for one sin satisfies but one lust; and the root of lust as soon
as that one is satisfied, is ready to bud forth a new.

Yea, Lust the more it is obeyed, the more it commands, the more fuel is
brought to it the more it burns, and when upon a call it is used to
satisfaction, it will call the oftener for satisfaction. It is like a Child
(begotten and taught by the same Lust) whom you do not still by giving that it
cries for, but by giving you inuit it to cry for more. Therefore denial is the
best remedy for Lust, and the next way to quietness. For Lust used to
denial, will grow fainter in asking, that which it has often been denied.
But your common granter of Lusts is a Dog in the wheel of Lust, still
fetching down the top of satisfaction, and when that is under his feet, there
is still another top above him to be fetched down again. So is his business
never at an end, until the wheel be rotten, or the Dog old, and notable to
travel any more. But perchance he is no Whoremonger, but he is a covetous
man, and surely that man above the rest, is the Devils Post-horse: his brains,
or his body, or his eyes, or his Letters, are ever trotting abroad for
bargains and sales, and sometimes he is tormented, because he cannot be more
tormented by being in many places at once. He could gladly be scattered
abroad into those diverse places, where are diverse good bargains, or diverse
dangers of loss. One man had need to be wrought out of his Living for
enlarging the Territory, the other must be tentred with a forfeiture, that the
most may be made of him, a third must be vexed in Law for a profitable
composition. And if any of these miss; our Ahab is heart-sick, and cannot be
cured but by a Plaster of Naboths blood, of Iezebels, (of the Devils) own
making. And still his head is full of Bullockes and Sheep, Hedges and Closes,
Towns and Tenements, Markets and Fayres, Silver and Gold, Obligations and
Feoffments. Over and above all this, he serves his God Mammon, in great and
painful Devotions, even in long Watchings, most abstinent Fastings, earnest
Prayers for Profit, and hearty Repentance for a good Bargain lost; I wonder
what greater pains would Grace have asked unto Salvation, then here sin has
voluntarily undertaken unto damnation.

But if Ambition be the disease of the man of flesh, then does he lie
perpetually in a bed of Thorns, and too true it is for him, that Honor and
Misery walk often together in the same path. He is like a short Man still
standing on tip-toe to look over a tall Man's shoulder, and sure he cannot but
be in much pain by his stretching. He hates them above, yet croucheth to
them, and desires to be one of them whom he hates; he loves them below, yet
looks big upon them, and cannot abide to be one of them whom he loves. So
an Ambitious man may well be painted with two Faces or Aspects, the one looking
upward and making many courtesies, the other looking downward, and making many
Frowns and Terrifications. His life is full of labor, for he will never
suffer his work to be done: for he proposes ends, which when he has
attained, he suffers them to be ends no more. This man and the rest of his
fellows I hold to be very miserable, because they buy Misery with Misery, and
with temporal pains purchase eternal torments. And herein is there Misery
more miserable, that they delight in their Misery, and this delight makes them
willing to be still miserable.

These are truly those Egyptian Israelites, that for love of the Fleshpots and
Onyons; can be contented to carry straw, and make brick all the the days of
their lives; yea, they prefer the labors of Egypt, before the freedom and
rest of Canaan; they had rather to be set on work by lust, then to enjoy the
rest and peace, and joy of the Holy Ghost.

But I could wish those men would learn of the West India^s, whom perchance
in scorn they will term Savages and Barbarians, but the worse thou call
them, the worse thou call thy self, if thou be worse then they. It is
recorded of some of these Indians, that they were weary of their gods, and
willing to change them, because they had so much labor to please them. For
their Deuill-gods would not be pleased but with many Sacrifices of men, which
cost them much war and bloodshed. Surely the Devil is the same here, that
he is in the Indies, he sets as heavy taskes on them that will be so kind as
to bear them; for even here also men must sacrifice to him the best endeauours
and affections both of soul and body, in Ambition, Covetousness, and other
toylsome Vices, and at last the very soul and body themselves must be
sacrificed in an eternal fire. But be ye weary of your gods, O ye Heathen
Christans, and serve the true God, who desires no other business but Holiness
and Righteousness, and has joined there with the joys of his heavenly and
most comfortable Spirit, and has annexed thereunto the joys of an eternal
and most glorious Kingdom.

And let no man hereafter be afraid of Religion, because of sadness, for by so
doing he may condemn his sight or taste, that discernes or rellisheth not the
joys thereof, but then whiles Religion is still one and the same, even a most
glorious and comfortable thing.

Therefore let the Nouice or Apprentice of Religion; especially, desire the
grace of that Spirit which is the Author of Religion, to open his closed eyes
to lighten his darkness, that he may see the brightness and beauty of
Religion: and withal let him entreat the strength and supportance of the same
Spirit, to support and stablish him in the beginnings of this new Art and
Science of Joy, both because the beginnings of all new Sciences require labor
and constancy, and because our Enemy the Devil knowing the excellency of
these joys, grudgeth them to Mankind, and therefore mightily strives to tire
men in the very entrance thereof. But be ye assured, that if ye once come
to be freemen in Religion, being made free by the Spirit of Christ Jesus, you
will be ravished with the sweetness of God, and your hearts will pant for his
joys as the Heart does for the streams of waters; you will be enforced to
say, That the strongest is the sweetest, and that his joys alone are pure and
clear, and that the joys of the flesh which you drank so greedily
heretofore, are but puddle and mudde; Though the laughter of folly perchance
were louder, as the fire of Thorns, yet the solid and massy joys of the
Spirit are stronger, and give more true and kindly heat to the heart and soul.

For certain it is in Divinity, as it has been discovered by her servant
Morallity, sound joy is a solemn thing. And conuertibly may we say, Solemn
joy is your only sound joy. Wherefore let solid, wise, and sound Spirits seek
this solid, pure and weighty joy, suffering these light, loose and muddie
joys to be (as most often they are) the companions of folly and brutish
sensuality. And herewith let your sour Pharisees, and Monkish Heraclites,
receive an admonition, that they do not act Religion in the Vizard of ugly
sowrenesse, nor dogged austerity.

Religion is a loving and a lovely thing, and the Picture of it ought to be
like it self. It is made all of light and love, and light and love are
comfortable and amiable things, cheerfully communicating themselves to others,
and alluring the eyes and hearts of others to behold and partake them. If
Religion then be a drawer, be not thou a driuer, neither do thou scarre away
with thy grimnes, those whom Religion would allure with her beauties. There is
a cheerful gravity as well as a light mirth, or a lumpish terriblenesse, and
it were good for the paternes of Religion to look as like it as they may. I
confess, one look fitteth not all occasions, but I aim a general
seemlinesse, leaving particular changes to be framed by their particular
occasions. And though sorrow for sin be a virtue, yet the public show of
it, except it be in a public cause, is not still a virtue, for it is a virtue
many time to cover this Virtue, Christ himself counselling to cover the
humiliation of Fasting, with the anointing of the face. But due exceptions
being allowed, the Christians charge is, Rejoice continually, he is enjoined to
be amiable, and of a winning conversation, that without the word, some may be
won by their Eyes, that are not yet by their Ears.

CHAP. IIII. That Religion is the true Root of Valor and Power, against the
waking Dreams of the Philosophical Wizard, and the angry Ruf^ian.
THere has bin an ancient slander cast upon the Christian Religion, and it is
now either nourished or revived, that Christianity begets cowardice and kills
fortitude. And that it is a slander, I hope it shall plainly appear; but in
the mean time, I desire the carnal gallant to wipe his eyes clouded with the
mist of fleshly Humor, that what does appear may also appear to him, for
except he bring sight, it is to no purpose for me to bring Light. As for the
Philosopher he is so wise already and broad-sighted like the bird of the
Night, that if I should persuade him to look wider and clearer, he would
become blinder by Anger then he was before by Error, and therefore leaving him
as being wise, if his own conceit be true, I begin with the description of
Fortitude.

True Fortitude, is an habitual strength and resolution of the Mind, which
either leads a man constantly to a just and reasonable adventure of danger; or
when he is overtaken by them, sustaynes him constantly in them. Now this true
Resolution does spring from Reason, and by Reason is brought forth into Action.
So is true Valor wise and not blind, for it is the Valor of a Man and not of
a Beast.

Then here are cut off all those rash Braueries, and brutish Valors, that
bestow their owners upon every Swaggerer, when he pleases to call for their
lives, by some wild look or verbal Injury. Surely the reasonable Man is led
into dangers either by Divine providence or precept, when GOD bids him
undertake dangers, or bids dangers overtake him. He acknowledges no owner of
his life but the giver of it, and he will then only adventure it when he may
show the warrant of the giver: for he knows himself to be accountable, and
therefore will so carry himself in dangers, that he may fayrely pass his
account. And surely a strange thing it is, because some wild beast is rude and
unmannerly, therefore some honest and civil Man must hazard his Life, or else
the Country will not be contented: For what has the civil Man done why he
should set his life in a balance with a Russian? If the Ruffian has wronged
him he ought to be punished, and the wronged ought not to hazard himself in
an equal subjection to punishment with the doer of wrong; neither because he
is wronged in his Name, is it Reason he should be farther wronged in his
Limbs or Life; for in these Recreations the blind sword does as often punish
the wronged as the the wronger. The wager is unequal to lay the life of a
Christian against the life of a Ruffian, and far more then an hundred to one;
and therefore he may well leave him upon that odds, and refer him over to
fight with one of his fellows which is as well worth the killing as himself.
If he rail give him an admonition for his railing, and do thou being a Vine
bear grapes, though a Crab-tree close by thy side bear crabs. To see a
religious Man break out into an equality of Fury with a Madman, is just as
I have sometimes seen a dog of the Land run into the Sea, when he has
seen a water-spaniell (the Emblem of a Ruffian) to leap in before him;
Diuersos diuersa decent. But if you ask wherein this excellent Valor of
Christianity does express it self, I will show four glorious, virtuous, and
comendable kinds of fighting, wherein Christians excel all other, and cannot
be matched.

The first is the fight of Confession or Martyrdom, wherein the fire of the
Spirit fights for God and his Truth, against bodily fire, and all other
torments invented by the spirit of darkness. And herein is the very strength
of God in a chief degree expressed, when by the supportation and encouragement
thereof, flesh and blood stands still patiently, yea, joyfully to be tormented,
yea, consumed for his sake who made and redeemed it.

A noble and heavenly courage inspired from God, and aiming to God, who is the
beginning and end of all solid worth and excellence. In this fight man rises
above himself, and being overcome by the animating spirit, he cease in a
manner to be flesh and blood, and is all spirit, and the spirit feels not
torments, neither is the heavenly fire passive to the earthly, but active upon
it.

A second fight, is a fight, of Constancy and Patience in the ordinary Crosses
and losses of this life, or in those extraordinary which (open Persecution
ceasing) cease not to be cast on true Christians by the Law of the first
enacted enmity between them, and the seed of the Serpent. Philosophers had the
applause of their Sectaries, and many times of the People, but a Christian is
sure to have the enmity of the world, to whose fashions his course is a
professed enmity.

He had need of courage not to be ashamed of Religion among Ruffians, and
Mammonists, and Epicures; to whom, not to swear, not to coozen for profit, not
to be drunk is called a Vice, and the Vice is called Puritanisme. But even
herein the Spirit of God hardens and steeleth his Servants, that their faces
are like Flint, and themselves like brazen Walls and defenced Cities, though
otherwise soft in affection, and true professors of meekness.

A third fight, is a fight against Lusts and Passions, wherein the Battle is
terrible and difficult, and the Victory more glorious then a Conquest of the
World. Solomon says, That he which rules his desires, is greater then he
that wins a City. And humane Reason has said, that he that ouercomes
himself, is stronger then he that ouercomes the strongest walls. And a
secret Reason there is that aggrauates the difficulty of this fight, and that
is, because with the Army of Lusts is conjoined an Host of Spiritual
Principalities and Powers, and he had need of a supernatural courage and power,
that must make war with a King of Spirits. Surely the greatest King of
Spirits must be in us to resist and overcome this lesser King. And indeed,
accordingly greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World. And if
the greater be in us, surely then are we greater then they in whom is the
lesser.

Now let the Ruffian or Fencerly Gallant talk of his bold adventures on the
grass and stubble, and let him glory in being rashly or foolishly hazardous,
but in these subjects of wise valor, he is but a Runaway, and your true
Christian is your only man. I will fetch a Boy or a Woman that shall challenge
the field of him, and the place of meeting shall be in a fire, and the
quarrel shall be for the honor of his Maker and Redeemer, but I tell you
before, there is no hope of the Swaggerer, that he will come thither, but if he
came there is great hope he will certainly run away, if he be not bound the
faster. Yet it is well known that many youths and women in this fight, have
right valiantly adventured, and given away their lives unto death.

Again, for crosses and losses, fetch me one among all Philosophers and
Heathens, that can match Job for misery and constancy: the greatness of his
misery, magnifying the greatness of his constancy, because though it was
excessive, yet it was exceeded by it. And if you examine the third kind of
sighting, your Christian has no fellow, for noble and valiant Conquests
obtained against himself, and the infernal host of tempting spirits. The
slaughter of his own lusts is his continual exercise, and he is well skilled
in that difficult Art, wherein no Heathen ever could match him, nor any man of
one only birth, and that is even of expelling Generation by Regeneration; the
art of driving himself out of himself. He sets one foot on the Spirit, and
with the other kickes the flesh out of doors, and by spiritual flames
consumes carnal suggestions.

Again, if the Devil offer him the Kingdoms of the Earth, he despises them;
if he threaten to set open the gates of Hell upon him, he is confident he
shall not prevail against him. But take the Swaggerer at this fight, and he
is most commonly a Beast and a Drudge to that Enemy, against whom (indeed) he
should especially fight. He is led up and down by the Nose like a Swine, or a
Bear by every base Lust and Concupiscence, as a Cup, a Whore, a Play, and a
Pipe, and he durst not but follow them. Y^a, he is so very a slave unto
Lusts, that in s^eed of fighting against them, he fights for them, and the
poor counterfeit valor he has, is at no service readier, then in defense of
one of his Concupiscences. Therefore if you meddle with his Harlot or his Cup,
his Scabbard is instantly pregnant, and your life, (if you please) may be at
his command.

But to leave these Duellists, and to come to Conquerours, which is to come
from the killers of men to the killers of Mankind; surely in leaving them, I
do not leave them; for I find their slavery and baseness, even in Alexander
and Nabuchodonozer. Slaves they are of Drink, of Ambition, of Pride* and
thereby most evidently appears the excellence of Christians, and the baseness
of the sons of nature.

The natural Man conquering the World, is himself conquered of his
affections; and the Christian Conquerors that which conquers the Conquerors of
the World.

But now we talk of Conquests, perchance some martial man will call me into
question, because he finds not here the commendable kind of fighting for
our Country and Nation; or some cunning Arithmetician, that being able to tell
four, finds yet but three of my four promised kinds of valor.

Wherefore to give an Answer to any such Question, I affirm, that no man has
more Reason to be valiant in the defense of his Country, or a lawful cause
then a Christian. The greatest abatement of Valor, commonly arises from a
fearful apprehension of death. But the Christian has least Reason of any to
fear death, for by it he is sure to gain the advantage of an eternal
felicity. And therefore has he most reason to be valiant.

This belief of eternity, even a Heathen Poet commended as a principal root
of valor, and he commended it in the ancient Brittons, for (says he) it is a
foolish thing among them to be sparing of that life which will return again,
and he calls them happy in this error, whereby they are freed from that
greatest fear of death. And by common reason, He that believes nothing to be
beyond life, should fear more to lose life, which is all that he knows, then
another which knows a second life to follow this, which far excels it.

Again, as the Christian has least cause of fear, so he has most cause of
valor, and where is more cause, there is to be expected a greater effect. Now
it does plainly appear, that a Christian has more cause then a Heathen to be
valiant. For besides the love of his Country, and the preservation and
enlargement of Fame, which are reasons common to both, the Christian has for
his advantage, the highest Essence commanding him, confirming him and standing
before him as his reward. God is his warrant for his action, he is his strength
in the action, he is his happiness if he dye in the action. So many advantages
has a Christian of a Heathen, and therefore his valor should by so many
degrees be more excellent then a Heathen.

Therefore if a Christian be not so valiant as a Heathen, it is not because he
is a Christian, but because he is not Christian enough; and no question but he
that is fearful being a Christian, would be much more fearful if he were
a Heathen.

For let the Philosopher rack up his wits to the highest tenters, to see if he
can reach to higher causes of valor then these of a Cristian. I am sure he
can propose no greater reward then eternal felicity, he can conceive no
higher encouragement then the word of the highest, and he can imagine no valor
more full of force and virtue, then that which is infused by the original
Fountain and Root of all might and power, who alone is justly termed the
Almighty, and the Lord of Hoasts, and the God of Battles. Who should be
stronger then he that has the Author of strength on his side? and who can
fear that has a greater with him then against him? Therefore Paul sendes a
challenge to swords and famines, and persecutions, crying out, if God be on our
side who shall be against us? and though all things be against us, yet we be
sure to be more then Conquerours through him that loves us. So we need not
to fear except we will fear to conquer.

And indeed the patent of our salvation runs in those very words; We are
delivered from our Enemies that we may serve God without fear. Accordingly
David professes that, because God is on his side, he does not fear what Man
can do unto him, and he would not be afraid if ten thousand enclosed him. And
the true Root of his inuinciblenesse he discouers in the eighteenth Psalm,
which is this, Because he is backed and supported by the Deity. And since I am
now met with him, I will set him forth to challenge the Ethnickes, to give us
one like him that being a boy slew a Bear, a Lion, and a Giant. Herein I
think they will be far short of David, and it will be well if they come to
his thirties and his threes. And as the Heathen magnanimity comes short of
David, so I think will the Doctors Philosophy.

And indeed the Doctor meant to steal away the question, while under the
name of Divines he intends certain Scholasticall Ravens, that are themselves
grown fearful with Melancholy, and under the title of Priesthood pick out
the eyes of the sheep, committed to them by an implicit Faith, a slavish
Ignorance. They pull out their eyes, and then lead them in the dark, bound up
in the chains of scrupulous Superstition and timorous Devotion. And you know
darkness of it self is fearful, and rayseth up in a man fearful Images and
perpetual doubts.

Surely the doctrine of such Divines is far inferior to that of the
Philosopher. But the Doctor must know (though he profess not to equivocate,
yet) these are but equivocal Divines, and from his equivocal Antecedent, he
shall never deduce an univocal consequent. He might as well go into the
house of a Painter, and beholding there the picture of an eloquent Orator,
return to his scholars, and tell them that he saw such a man of late, and
he has the worst utterance of any man in the City.

But renouncing these scrupulous and painted Divines, I will have David to be a
true pattern of a true Divine, and let the Doctor take his Character from him,
even of that which is written, both of him and by him, and then let him
consider whither there be a more noble, puissant, confident, and free spirit
then that of David. His Valor has before been appr^oued, and his
cheerfulness in virtue and bold confidence, are ready to be manifest. He
danceth before God with all his might, the laws of God are sweeter to him then
honey, and more precious then gold, and he is confident beyond exception, for
he calls God his Rock, his Fortress and his Refuge. His faith and holiness
make him familiar with God, and he is bold to fetch from merciful Omnipotence
whatsoever he wants; Now from this Divine let the Doctor fetch the pattern
of Divinity, and see if he can ground thereon the baseness and deiection of
his Monkish superstition. But the Doctors Epistle had forgotten the Doctors own
Chapter of Piety, for the one confuteth the other, while in the Chapter he
says, tha^ God is not to be imagined as some terrible spectre, whose
imagination frighteth men from him. Again, That Religion setleth a man in
peace and rest, and lodges in a free liberal and generous Soul. Again, That
the office of Religion is to reunite Man to his first cause as to his Root,
wherein so long as he continues firm and settled, he preserves himself in
his own perfection.

Now if this Doctrine be more truly the doctrine of the Divines then his, then
has he vainly condemned it; for this doctrine agrees excellently with
Nobility and Puissance, and rejects baseness and fear.

This therefore I think was not meant to be censured by him, but it remaynes
the^ that the Religion of the Divines which he censured was not his Religion,
but some other, and so they were not both Catholics; or else this difference
arose because he could not knit his diverse common-places into an harmonious
Unity. And indeed either of these may be true. For first where he discourses
of Superstition, he strongly consutes the practical religion of the Church of
Rome, and so seems to differ from them, though he after creep again into
their goodwill, under the covert of commanding an observation of Ceremonies,
Customs and Ordinances. Secondly, I have heard it constantly affirmed in
France by a Gascoigne, Montagnes countryman, and one that was himself an
Author, that his Doctor was a great acquaintance of Montagne, and that his
book was Montagnes pieces brought into a Method. And sure I cannot much blame
the Doctor for not doing an impossibility; for it is a matter near
impossible, handsomely to inlay all the ^agged pieces of Montagne, and to reduce
his infinite wanderings into the order of a steadie path; for he seemed
altogether to run after his own wit, and to take up whatsoever it did let
fall; but the wit ^t self did seldom run after any Mark, nor walk by any
Rule. And so might his Follower by the intricatenesse of the labor, well
forget the different colors of some of the pieces, which he joined into one
Body.

And if we consider but this Chapter of Piety, we may find many contradictions
in it. He makes the Religion of Palestine, (which is the Religion of the
Jews) to teach this belief, that the cutting and punishing of our selves and
the massacring of beasts, is a most precious present unto God, as if God took
pleasure in the torment of his Creatures. And yet after, out of the one and
fiftieth Psalm, he says, That the most acceptable Sacrifice unto God is a
pure, free, and humble heart, And again, out of the fiftieth Psalm, Non
accipiam de domo tua vitulos. Besides he says, the Judicial Religion
retayneth many things of the ^ose^^us in his first book against Apion writes,
that the Egyptians and the Jews, could not agree because of the diversity of
their Religion. And Plessis in his 21. chapt. of Christian Religion, shows
that the Oracles of A^o^o and the ^ibilles pref^rred the Iew^s* as the best
worshippers of God.
Egyptian Gentile, which is a great blasphemy, either in this sense, That the
Jewish Religion had any thing in it not delivered by God himself, or that God
took his copy out of some of that Gentile-Egyptian Religion, thereout to make
up a Religion for the Jews. And herein is also an employed contradiction. For
he that commendes the Christian Religion, and condemns the Jews Religion as
parcel heathen, contradicts himself, for the Jews Religion established by
God and the Christians are all one in substance of Faith, and if they differ in
the manner, I hope that manner was not borrowed of the Heathen, but the Heathen
rather counterfeite the Jews. Again, he speaks of Religion as of some Art
or Confection, saying, That Religion is so fitted, that it may be respected and
had in admiration, yet he says, It is composed of parts, some base, whereat
high Spirits do scorn, and some high and mystical, whereat low Spirits are
offended. So politickely is Religion framed to entrap all men, that it is
fashioned to offend all men.

But yet there remains an objection of the Heathen Martialists, who may tell us
now as heretofore, That Rome being Hethen raised an Empire, and being Christian
lost it. To this I answer that it was not Romes Hethenisme that won it, nor
her Christianity that lost it, but rather it might be said that Christianity
won it, and want of Christianity lost it. There were three Empires before
this, and they being all Heathen arose, and Heathen fell, and why should we
not think that this would also fall if it had still been Heathen.

It has long bin observed, that Kingdoms and Empires have Ier. 27.7.
Ages, and Periods as well as private men. And when an Empire shall rise, there
comes a spirit of Valor on Armies, and of Heroical Virtue on Chieftaynes;
which the Empire being ripe departs away, and then are they like Samson when
his Locks are shaven, and Samson is said then to be like another man. And
that Christianity raised the Empire, it may be justified in diverse senses. The
first is, That God raised this Empire by the universality thereof, to spread
his universal and Catholic Truth. The hedges and partitions of the World were
broken down, that Christian Religion might have a free walk throughout the
whole World.

Again, this huge Kingdom was raised just to meet with Christ's Kingdom, that
by the hugeness of the opposition, the greatness of the victory might be
magnified. The spirit of Antichrist was mounted on this Beast, and fought then
in the Emperors, and now fights in the Popes, against Christ and his Church,
but the Dragon or the Beast, or the false Prophet may not prevail, ^or the
Kingdom is the Lord Christ's, and his is glory, and honor, and dominion for
evermore. This resisting and aduersarious Empire, while it fought against
Christ it served Christ, while it killed his Church it increased his Church,
and while it fought against Religion, it became a means to spread and enlarge
it. And that it was rather Heathenisme then Christianity that lost the Empire,
may appear by the Stories of the Degeneration, both of the Church and of the
Emperors Pride, Covetousness, contempt of Religion, deserving the remouall of
the Candlestick, which long before was threatened to the Church of Ephesus, and
in them to any other like parts of the whole Church. The time and work of the
Empire was expired, it had fought against Christ and was overcome by it, and
now (the sins and corruptions jointly requiring it) he that hindered was to
be taken away, even the Emperor, and the man of Sin was to step in his place,
by whom Antichrists second part was to be acted. And against him also does the
Kingdom of Christ prevail, though fighting against Christ by the old weapons
of the Heathen Empire, even fire and sword. And now small States and Kingdoms
are animated and strengthened by the hand of Omnipotence, so that they stand
the shock of his greatest fury; yea, they gain and grow upon him.

A little bordering Country, that is but a piece of a former state, and the
most despicable piece of it, standing in water, and therefore participating,
left of the actiuity of fire, yet ^ow by the disposition of the Almighty,
partakes of the wisdom and power of a fiery Spirit, and has often consumed
both the adverse policies and forces, preserving mightily; yea, in larging that
Religion, which should have been taken from it by the cruel talents of the
Inquisition. Wherefore be wise, O ye Kings, and be instructed O ye Judges of
the Earth. Kiss the Son and resist him not, lest he be angry, and ye perish
in the midway. Make not your Hoasts and Nauies the vain Bulwarks of
declining Antichrist, neither wrap your selves in the ruins of him that is
appointed to fall. When Christ will overcome an Host, is contemptible before
him, and the greatness of your opposition can only magnify his Victory and
your own ruin. And be ye rather of that joyful side, which shall say with
triumph, It is fallen, It is fallen; Then of that sorrowful company, that
shall cry with sorrow, Alas, Alas; that great City, clothed in fine Linen,
Purple and Scarlet.

CHAP. V. A Canker in the mouth, from whence issues the loathsome breath of
rank and superfluous swearing.
YOur ordinary Swearers, wrongs GOD, wrongs his friends, and wrongs himself.
For the wronging of God, he cares little, because he has sworn so long, and
the patience of God has deferred his punishment, though Medit.
(as elsewhere I have showed) God will right his own wrongs in his own time,
and the length of delay shall be requited with the weight of the punishment.
Yet not guilty of Divinity, he is somewhat touched with humanity, and so out
of the Reason of Manhood, he starts at the accusations of himself and his
Friend.

For first for himself, which self is first in his own eyes, and is indeed
his own God, he has no malice in the World to himself; yea, as he gives
out, he is ready to adventure his life to do himself right; yea, his
swearing is most commonly in his own defense, and thereby to make Ridiculum
acri, Fortius and melius magnas plerumque secat res.
men believe he will fight, and so save himself from fighting; for indeed it
falls out most often, that where solid Magnanimity is wanting in the heart,
there it must be supplied by the valor of the tongue. But yet he harkens
still how it may be, and I doubt not, has already sworn some oaths that it
cannot be. But if it please him to lay his Canons aside, that we may talk of
swearing without swearing, I will plainly prove it to him, and will ground my
proof on the Rules of the most honorable Swearers. And thus I begin. To give
a man the Lie, does him an especial wrong and dishonor, (so that in some
Countries it is punished by death, if the Iron be prompt and nimble.) But the
Swearer gives himself the Lie; yea, makes himself a perpetual Liar.
Therefore the Swearer does himself a great wrong and dishonor.

Now I know he is angry with the lesser Proposition, or that he may understand
it the younger; for he swears that he has no intent in the World to make
himself a Liar when he swears. For a reply, I might stand upon a received
Axiom, That he that will swear will Lie; because that he who has not
conscience enough to forbear swearing, has seldom any more to forbear
lying, and if I would stand upon it, I think he could hardly remove me but by
swearing. But I will leave these collateral proofs, and will draw my Reasons
from the very root of Swearing, that withal if it be possible, I may draw up
swearing by the roots. This then shall be the ground, That swearing is for a
confirmation of things doubtful; Now things are doubtful, either in regard of
themselves or of the speaker. But ordinary swearing is most commonly employed
upon things plain and frivolous, wherein can be no doubt, (as sometimes in a
question what a clock it is, and sometimes in an undoubted Affirmation that
yesterday he drunk such a one under the board, and that he was at such a
Play, and such a Brothell.) Therefore it now only remaynes, that the swearing
must be in regard of the doubtfulnesse of the speaker, or if you will, Swearer.

Now if a man bring himself into doubt and suspicion of a common Liar, by
being a common Swearer, surely he bestows the Lie on himself by swearing;
yea, the habitual Lie, and has wronged his most dear, though most slight
Reputation.

But that we may walk a little aside out of this Logic (and indeed the
Swearer may spare Logic, as the Logician may spare swearing, for the Swearer
proves all by Oath without Reason, and the Logician all by Reason without
Oath) we will go into the larger Field of Questions and Answers, an exercise
which in his University of Recreation, it may be he has heard of.

And first I ask him, why he does strengthen his evident matter with such a
multitude of Oaths? either he must be a brute Beast (which he will by no
means grant, though I cannot altogether deny it) to do things wholly without
Reason, or if there be a Reason, it must be this, That a rotten Tree must have
a leaning Post, and a lying Man must be kept up in credit and belief by
swearing. And then I may well brandish against him this forked Argument: If
thou may be believed, why do thou swear? And if thou can not be
believed (which thy swearing imports) then thou go for a Liar. Therefore I
persuade thee hereafter to leave thy swearing, that thou may be thought to
have left thy lying; and if thou art not an ordinary Liar, believe it, thou
have no need to be an ordinary Swearer. Use but a while to speak the truth
without Oaths, and thou shall find no lack of thy Oaths, for thy word shall
be taken by it self. Otherwise thou art like an ill credited Borrower, thou
ridest up and down the Country with Sureties, because thy own Band will not
be taken. And surely such Bankrupt security, rather disgraceth then helps
thee, Oaths being the common Sureties of the basest people, even the scumme of
highwayes and Alehouses.

Now, for the third point, That the Swearer wrongs his Friend, I confess, my
first proof is much prevented, and returns to me, leaving the business
undone.

For I had thought to have argued thus. It is a great wrong for a man idly to
put his Friend to great pain: but the idle Swearer, idly puts an honest man
to great pain by his idle swearing. But here the mischief of the matter is,
that there is an honest man in the middle Proposition, and the Swearers friend
in the former, which will not become one in the Conclusion; Now, if the
Swearers Friend were an honest Man, it might save the life of the Syllogism,
and perchance his own too. But there being little hope of such a man's honesty,
I doubt me, that a towardly Syllogism is cast away. Wherefore giving him time
to amend his honesty (and I wish he take not to long a day) I retire from him
to reinforce my assault with some new Reasons, which thus marches toward him.
He that often swears to his friend in trifles, gives cause to the World to
believe, that his Friend will not believe him in trifles without an Oath, But
he that gives cause to the World to believe, that his Friend will not believe
him in trifles without an Oath, wrongs his Friend. Therefore he that often
swears to his Friend in trifles, wrongs his Friend.

Now it is certain to all Mankind, that there is no greater scandal to
Friendship, then want of Trust; mutual Confidence being the main sinew and
ligament of Friendship, and yet by swearing this scandal most unhappily lights
on the Swearers sworn Brother. But perchance the Swearer has a malice to the
Vauntgard of my Syllogism, and flies in the face of the first Proposition by a
strong denial, that he swears not because he distrusts his friends belief,
but to procure grace to his words in the ear of his friend. A filthy Grace,
and I doubt a beastly Friend, in whom such a Grace hopes for entertainment.

But first I will answer, That howsoever his Friend may take it, yet the
wifest part of of the World will not be persuaded, that he can have any other
probable cause but Fear and Distrust, and so among Wisemen (which I know he
does not much respect) his Friend is subject to scandal. And secondly, if it
be for a Grace (though indeed it is for want of Grace) in ridding his friend
from the lesser dirt of Distrust, he casts him into the sink of the suspicion
of Folly; and so that he may not be false, he is content to make him a Fool.
And surely as I cannot much excuse him from want of wit, in being a Friend to a
Swearer, yet it is a great wrong for men equally foolish, to call each other
Fools. But he will examine me how he calls his Friend Fool? To this I
cannot but answer with a Question, Is not he a very Fool, in whose opinion
his Friend is graced by Foolishness? And is there more Foolishnes, then for a
man to bumbaste his speeches continually with unnecessary, impertinent,
inconsequent, or to speak English, not-concerning, not-agreeable,
not-sensible, not-reasonable words, and for which it is thought among some of
the simplest sort, a man may chance to be damned? And yet by this madness,
the Swearer thinks to grace himself with his Friend, which he cannot hope
for, except he hold his Friend to be as mad as himself. Wherefore to take my
leave of him, (which I much desire) I wish him in good will to his Friend to
forbear this, and all the rest of his Follies together, or if he will needs
whether I will or no, keep the rest of his (as he thinks) more necessary
Vices, yet to give over this superfluous and very spareable Vice, and to break
out to his Friend in these passionate parts of speech, I. or T. thou have
known me long, many times have we been drunk together, and being drunk,
have drawn our Swords together, we have bin together on the Plains, in the
Dice-house, the Playhouse, and the other house, and I never yet failed thee in
any lawful Action; by these evidences thou know my heart to be true to
thee, and where there are such real poofes, there needs no verbal
confirmation. Wherefore we will set up the Proverb for a Rule, Few words
among Friends: and that the words may be the fewer, we will bate the Oaths,
and so put a difference between our substantial Friendship, and that ^rothy,
and mouthy Conversation of the Country-Swaggerers.

Lastly, If this will not work for a private Reformation, yet in the Name of
Civility, I beseech the Swearer to keep in his Oaths when he lights among
good Company. He can but procure this fruit by his swearing, that he shall
vex them, and they shall hate him. He will confess himself that it is a
great vnciuilitie, when Men are met together for honest Society and Comfort, to
come in and throw stones, cups, or candlestickes, amidst the Company: yet so
does the Swearer, and he strikes not so much the head, as the heart of a
Religious Man. And so he is the spoiler of true Mirth, though he think
himself never so much to be a good fellow. But if all this will not serve to
persuade thee to leave some words, that may well be left without marring the
sense, I must leave thee to be confuted by Fire and Brimstone. The Devil that
now sets thee on work, will hereafter pay thee thy wages; and God whose name
now serves thee but only for swearing, shall then make thee to serve his
Justice, in gnashing and weeping; Howling and cursing, shall be thy chief ease
in Hell, to whom Blasphemy was an especial recreation on Earth.

In the mean time, I would to God there were not only a strict Law against
Blasphemy, but a strict observation of that Law, since if the Scripture be
true, Blasphemy is very Treason to a State. For if the Scripture be true,
Hose. 4.
then has God a controversy with a Land for swearing, and when God and a Land
fall out, the Land must needs have the worst. So the Swearers betray the
Country they live in, and bring it into a quarrel with God, and I wish much
rather that the land would have a quarrel with them, that so by quarrelling
with them we may be at peace with God; for the Almighty has spoken it, and
that in Thunder and Lightning, That he will not hold them guiltless that
takes his name in vain. And though they should escape the penalty of a
temporal Law, yet it were pity they should escape from Ecclesiastical
Censures, which I wish may seize on Swearers as well as Adulterers; swearing
being indeed the spiritual Adultery of the Tongue: for in swearing, either
Gods pure and holy name is polluted, by the fleshly touch of a profane carnal
and sensual Tongue, or if some other thing is set in Gods stead to swear by,
that is Idolatry, and Idolatry is known to be spiritual Adultery: Now
spiritual Adultery is also known to make a divorce between God and Souls,
yea between God and Nations.

CHAP. VI. Against their Frenzy, that affirm a blind belief to be the Soul
of Christianity: and make Christians to be mere slaves of Authority.
THere is gone forth a saying, but it is among the brethren of Error, (and I
take it the foresaid Doctors writings are not clear of it) That the Empire of
Authority is in Religion, and that a blind Credo is a fundamental Law of it.
But that this is a blasphemous untruth, both the experimental and documentall
knowledge of Religion can plainly manifest. Let moral and natural Men brag
of their Arts and Sciences, their demonstrations and reasons, and I will yet
maintain, we hold Religion by a more Reasonable hand, and clearer Wisdom,
then they do their Arts and Sciences.

And first, I give them to know that the true lively and substantial Faith of
a Christian is not an effect of blindness, nor a mere work of the will, that
believes because it will believe; but therein the understanding plainly,
clearly; yea, by the highest kind of sight discerns that which it delivers
over to the Will and Affections to be embraced and depended on. And if
Religion see and know that whereunto it trusts, and trusts to that which it
sees and knows, and if she know by the purest and Diuinest knowledge, what
more reasonable thing can be imagined then this, That a man should trust in
that which by a most excellent Knowledge he knows most worthy to be trusted
in.

Now that a true Faith is grounded in Knowledge, Religion both by word and
experience teaches. The Apostle describing Faith, says plainly of it, That it
is the Evidence of things not seen, that is, by Faith we see Spiritually
things unseen Carnally. Now I hope, where is sight and evidence, there is not
blindness and darkness. Again, when Peter confessed Jesus to be the Christ,
Christ tells him that flesh and blood has not revealed it to him, but his
Father in Heaven, and I trow had not Peter reason to believe in Christ, when
the Father in Heaven had revealed him; and have the Artists any such evidences
of the ground of their Arts. Again, Ioh. 17. This is life eternal to know
thee to be very God, and he whom thou have sent, Christ Jesus* So Christ must
be known before he become our Life eternal. And Ioh. 10. I know my sheep and
I am known of mine. And 1. Cor. 2.10. The reason of this our Knowledge is
showed, God has revealed to us by his Spirit the things that he has prepared
for us. And ver. 12. We have received the Spirit of God by which we know the
things that are freely given us of God. And Verse. 15. A man made Spiritual
discerns all things; and himself is judged of no man that is not Spiritual,
for how can a blind man judge the sight of a seer? And therefore even in this
point which I now defend, we may well scorn to be judged by blind natural
Men, that know not our fight, and therefore know not the things which they
gainsay, but even for that cause deny them to be. Furthermore, Paul, Ephesians. 1.
speaks of the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, by which the eyes of our
understandings may be enlightened, to know the riches of our calling, and the
great Power of God in the resurrection of Christ. And to conclude (excluding
many more) with an evident testimony; let us consider that of the second to the
Cor. 3.18. We all with open Face beholding as in a Glass, the glory of the
Lord, are changed unto the same Image, from glory to glory as by the Spirit of
the Lord: which is presently followed in the next Chapter with these words:
That God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ: which indeed is but a Comentarie of Christ's short words, Ioh.
14.21. He that loves me; I will show my self visibly unto him. Now if God
have so shined visibly in our hearts, that by the beams of his light we have a
knowledge of his glorious work of our Redemption in Christ Jesus; yea, if
Christ has showed himself plainly to us, who can hinder us to believe that
we know, even to believe in an all-sufficient Savior, revealed to us by the
transcendent Light of an omnipotent Creator. Therefore will we triumph in the
reasonableness of our Belief, we will boldly tell the natural Man, Quod
vidimus testamur, and we worship that which we know. We will answer with Peter
(Ioh. 8.) We believe and know that thou art Christ the Son of the living
God. And let the heart of every true Christian speak what it sees, and it
cannot but affirm that it sees an admirable wisdom in the mystery of
Salvation, it beholds Christ a most absolute Redeemer, and Christ shines to
him in an incomparable Beauty as the fairest of Men; And this evidence is not
without a seal, for he feels power accompanying Light. A new Light he has,
which some years before he had not, and a new power he has felt to follow
that Light. The things which now seem glorious to him and are his chiefest
Treasures, were before contemptible, and holiness which before was loathsome,
is now his chiefest delight. And whence can such a change come, that a man
should be clean turned out of himself, but by a hand that turns hearts as
Rivers of waters. Therefore truly may it be said, that the Light of Faith is
sealed by the Spirit of Promise: Ephesians. 1.13. So that we believe the Truth, not
only by a single promise but even with a witness.

But the natural Man will object two things. First, That this Sight of ours is
but an Imagination, and we see only because we think we do see; but we
answer first, That he that denies our sight is himself blind, and therefore
cannot see that we do not see. Solomon says, the Fool walks in darkness,
but a Wise man has his eyes in his head. Now Salomons Fool is a Natural man,
and the Wise man is a man Sanctified, and how can the Fool find by his
darkness that the Wise man finds nothing by his Light? It is no argument that
I do not see, because his blindness cannot perceive my Sight. But he will
have me prove it to him that I see, But I answer, that though I should
prove it, he cannot conceive it. For my self is Spiritual and he is Carnal;
and if I describe to him a Spiritual sight or object, his carnalitie cannot
conceive a Spiritual kind of seeing, but even the sight of the Spiritual man
is folly to the Carnal man. If there were a people of perpetual blindness,
and a seeing man should come among them, and tell them what glory there is in
the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, I wonder by what Argument his sight can
prove it to their blindness, for whatsoever his sight affirms, their
blindness will either doubt or deny. And indeed except a man can communicate
sight, he can hardly communicate an Image of his seeing. And as a blind man on
the one side cannot receive undeniable proofs of Light and sight, but the
belief thereof must be fundamentally grounded upon a trust of the Reporter,
(and this indeed may be the blind belief which he means, which is indeed the
belief of the blind believers, and not of the seeing, and therefore is not
true belief.) So on the other side to prove the brightness and beauty of
Light to one that sees, is as frivolous and vain as the other impossible. If
he should come to a man of sight in a clear and cloudlesse day, and begin
with him thus, Sr, I assure you the Sun shines, and I can prove it by most
evident reasons: the hearer would doubt more of the Speakers discretion then of
his assertion. So it is among the Children of Light. Christ Jesus the Son of
Righteousness, the Object of their Faith shines on their hearts with an open
face, and for one of these to come to another, and to tell him that Christ
Jesus is the Son of God, the head of the Church, and the Savior of his body,
that in him are hid the treasures of true wisdom and happiness, he would
answer as Elisha to the Prophets, speaking of the translation of his Master: I
know it well, hold you your peace.

And this was long agone prophesied, that such Demonstrations should be
needless among the sons of GOD: For it was foretold, that true Believers
should be all taught of God, and his teaching should save the need of humane
Inforcements: Again, this is an excellent proof, that there is one general
Teacher by a Divine Light, illuminating the Church (and it gives great comfort
to the members of it) that in some matters of Religion, one man being many
hundred miles distant, or borne many hundred years after another, receives
some bright evident and glorious Truth, which he sees plainly to be true and
heavenly, but receives it not of man by hearing or reading, but of God alone
by Meditation, and yet he shall meet with another man so far from him, or
with some works of one so far before him, which will tell the same Truths, as
being by that one Teacher also revealed unto them.

Again, there were among the Martyrs and Fathers, men of as great and sound
understanding as any of these Wizards are; yea, they have at first as much
contemned and rejected Christ by their natural knowledge, yet at length they
have changed their minds and have sought him as ardently as before they
contemned him despitefully. Now you cannot imagine that they would have
forsaken the light of their natural Reason, but that they saw a more glorious
Light, neither would they have spared their Candle, but upon the rising of the
Sun. And surely these Seers do as much wonder at the natural man's, not
seeing as the not-seers at the seeing. But the God of this World has blinded
their eyes that the glorious Light of the Gospel should not shine unto them,
and this blindness cannot be taken away by Arguments, and being taken away,
Arguments are needless. And this must be thought the true Reason why in the
Council of Nice, the Reasons of the learned Fathers could not prevail with
the Heathen Philosopher, yet the plain narration of the Faith by a simple
Priest prevailed. The veil of the flesh lay on his heart, and their Reasons
could not take it away, but the Spirit of God took it away, and then the
evidence of a plain proposed truth perwaded him. And indeed God only has the
Key which vnlockes the heart, and that is the spirit; Eloquence and Logical
Demonstration are not those Keys which may open the Soul. That which is
fastened in our generation, must be loosed by Regeneration, and the remedy must
be equivalent; yea, preualent to the Disease. It may not be a naked, bare and
inactive word, that may cure the deed of excecation done to the heart, but it
must be an operative forcible and effectual word that speaks what it does, and
does what it speaks. If such a Word say, let there be light there shall be
light; and then the light of our souls shall see the great Object of our
Souls, the perfect Light Christ Jesus. But before this light and sight be
created in us, let that Infinite Light shine right into the eyes of blindness
and darkness, the darkness will never comprehend it: And even to them that
see they will deny their sight, and swear that they are blind also. But
whither it be fit for us to believe their blindness, or our own sight, let
every man judge. In their own wisdom they will hold, That Sensus non fallitur
circa obiectum, And by that will prove the Sun shines, or the Swan is white,
because the vnhindered fence has apprehended it to be so.

And why should not we enjoy the same privilege, and say much more? That a
soul clarified and illuminated by the purest spirit, is not deceived in
spiritual Objects, but as Solomon says, it sees more and more truly then
seven men on a Watch-towre, and as Paul says, The spiritual man discerns
spiritual things. Surely the spiritual eye as properly and as naturally sees
spiritual things, as the bodily eye does bodily things; yea, it should do it
better and more assuredly, because this spiritual sight came more newly and
immediately from the Maker, but our fight comes from him to us through many
men, and many infirmities of those men much soyled and dimmed.

And here comes in fitly to be answered a second Objection, which is an
Imputation of captivity, undergone by our understandings in the matter of
Faith. To this I answer, That in true Religion it is not a brutish captivity,
by which the understanding yields up her eyes to be put out, and herself to
be blindfold; but the understanding receiving a better sight, yields up the
worse, and so does not loose her light, but change it for a better; yea, it
changes captivity for freedom; for even that blindness that captiuated is,
is led into captivity, but the understanding is more free then before, as an
eye that is freed from blindness. For the Son by his Spirit has freed us
from that natural darkness wherein we were borne, 2. Cor. 3 16, 17. But they
will reinforce this Objection from the usual form of teaching young or new
Christians. Their first instruction they say, is to believe, and they take
Credo for their beginning. But do Christians herein otherwise then other
Teachers of Sciences. It is known for a Maxim, without the bonds of Religion,
Oportet discentem credere, He that learnes an Art must at first believe the
Teacher of the Art, and then after being skillful in his Art, he may look
himself into the truth of his Art. So in Christianity, at first Religion must
be received upon trust, but this is by Learners only, not true and formed
Christians.

The Church must at first teach her Children until they be taught by Christ,
and then indeed they are only true and formed Christians when Christ himself
has taught them. Some of the Samaritans believed the woman at first concerning
Christ, but being taught by Christ, they went beyond that belief, and believed
himself: and they add their Reason, We now know that he is the Christ. So is
Knowledge still the kindly foundation of our Religion, which herein out-strips
other Arts. For the young beginners must at first believe the Artists
themselves, and proceeding farther, must generally upon trust believe
principles (which they hold most from Aristotle, who as the Doctor says in his
Preface, is often contrary to himself, and exceeds in gross absurdities all
them that went before him.) And if some transcendent spirits shake off trust
and authority, and search the Fountains of things, they find that the
Principles themselves are indemonstrable, and what cannot be demonstrated I
hope must be taken upon blind belief. But this favor they will not allow
unto Christians, neither do we much desire it, for we see and know our selves
what we believe, and whereof we affirm, and we see by the highest, purest,
and most undeceivable light, and we want not the Glowworm of demonstration to
tell us, that we see the chiefest Light Christ Jesus by our Faith, and the
light which we see is the same Light by which we see. Herein only is the
trouble, that we cannot communicate our sight unto blindesse, and they will not
allow us to believe by seeing, what for want of seeing they cannot believe.
Therefore when with Stephen, we say, that we see Christ Jesus sitting at the
right hand of God: the blind Wizards are ready to throw stones at us for
confessing what we see, or for seeing that which is hid from them.

But though our Reasons cannot open their eyes, yet God who brought Light out
of Darkness can do it, and therefore we pray unto him with the Prophet for
his Servant, Lord open their eyes, and then with Balaam, that illuminated
Wizard falling into a trance, with their eyes opened they may utter their
Parable; There comes a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter out of Israel, out of
Jacob shall he come that shall have Dominion.

CHAP. VII. Aphorisms of Predestination.
THE root of Predestination is unsearchable, the wit of man is shor^ and
shallow, contentiousnesse is endless, because doubts are manifold, and humors
incompatible; therefore I think it best in a perplexed matter to set down
short and evident Tru^hes, by light to chase away the errors of those that
deceive being deceived, and by brevity to make knowledge portable, and so
either easy or pleasant to the knower.

First, it is fit for man to know, That no man does know the secrets of God,
but by the Revelation of GOD. Therefore, just as they are revealed, so they are
to be conceived and believed. The revelation of Gods secrets must inform and
teach our understandings and judgments what they are, but our understandings
or judgments must not tell themselves what these secrets are; so we must be
passive in a submissiue receiving them not active in an inuentiue contriuing of
them. Therefore, man's reason must lie still, and merely suffer when the highest
Reason and Wisdom speaks vndiscouerable Mysteries, it must hear and believe
as a Learner, and not instruct as a Teacher. For who has known by his own
wit the inward mind of the Lord? for his secrets are only known to his own
Spirit, and to those to whom that Spirit reueales them. Therefore, just as the
Scriptures speak, let us hear; and learn this secret of Predestination,
especially, where it is handled, ex proposito, for in such places good Teachers
set down plainly the state of the Question, and an especial place of that
kind is the 9. and the 11. to the Romans.

Secondly I affirm, or rather the Scripture before me, that though God
discouers to us that he chooses some and leaves others, yet the reason of
Gods will in choosing or leaving is hidden from us. Paul cries out, O depth, and
how unsearchable are his counsels, and his ways past finding out. And again,
he works all according to the pleasure of his own will, which indeed be the
very words of one that hides his reasons of doing, referring us only the
knowledge of his pleasure. Again, Where he will, he hardens; where he will,
he shows mercy. So his will is the Horizon and utmost extent of our revealed
knowledge in this point.

Thirdly, the will of God has ever joined with it Wisdom and Justice: it is
not a rash Will without Knowledge, but whom he knew before those he
predestined, and Pharaoh is hardened not without advice, but that God may get
glory upon him, and Paul thus expresses the wisdom of this business in
general; To show the riches of his mercy on some, and the severity of his
wrath on others. Again, His will is just, for else how should God judge the
World, for how can the Judge of the World but do justly? but I say, some part
of Gods Justice is to man in this life vnsoundable; and is kept for the day of
the declaration of the just Judgment of God, and yet some part of his ways in
this are discernable to have evident Justice.

Fourthly, the Justice of God is thus far evident, That man being made
righteous and freely falling, and in his fall ruining and corrupting his whole
House, Family and Posterity, God, who by man's free falling is free from the
fault of his falling, has power to punish sin in all men, in whom he finds
it. As sin it is contrary to him, and so punishable, as sin contracted by
man's free will without Gods inforcement or cooperation ( quatenus sin) God is
left free to be a Judge, and not to be excepted at as a party.

Fifthly, Man being in this state of misery and corruption without Gods fault or
partaking, and God knowing that it would be so even before the foundations of
the World, before the same foundations of the World, might well and justly
resolve to leave some part of man in this selfe-purchased misery, who cannot
claim any right or merit of restoring, and he might choose another part to
Mercy, God being by man's free act of sinning left free either to Justice or
Mercy, to leaving or choosing. And being free, he chooses or leaves as in his
secret Wisdom he knows most aduantagable to his glory.

Sixthly, true it is that God fore-appointed Christ Jesus to be the Savior of
his Elect, and his Elect to be saved by Christ Jesus, and all these from
eternity. Christ was a Lamb flaine before the beginning of World, and the
Elect were chosen to Salvation before the beginning of the World: though the
Election purposed to execute it self by Adams fall, yet the fall of Adam in it
self was voluntary and not necessary; I say in it self it was not necessary,
for the certainty of Gods Decree did not lay any necessity on the freedom of
Adams will, and yet neither did the freedom of Adams will, in danger the
certainty of the Decree; yea, the freedom of Adams will both cleares God from
necessitating it, and yet certainly and infallibly effects Gods Decree. For in
that Adams will is free, God does not incline it to fall, and so therein is God
cleared from enforcing his sin. And in that Adams will is free, Adam will
certainly fall, and certainly effect the Divine Decree. Adam left to himself,
cannot accuse God for moving him to sin. Sure God is the stability of all his
Creatures, and particularly of man's will, and if God purpose to get himself
glory on man's fall, he need no other means to bring it to effect, but by
giving him free will. For the will left free to it self, as it is ^ree from
God tempting, so it is free from God supporting, and where God does not support
though the will might make man to stand if it would, yet it will not do it
though it might. Therefore when Adam by his free will will certainly fall, we
ought rather to speak of a voluntary and certainty then an inward necessity.
And indeed, Gods Decree has as clear and sure a passage to his mark by a
voluntary certainty, as by a a necessity; yea, by coaction it self. For where
God leaves the will free, this free will will freely but certainly fall, and
where it will certainly fall, by that certainty the certainty of the Decree
passes safely to his assured mark. So likewise to do right to Gods purity,
and that he is not the author of sin, it suffices that we find the fall of
Adam, to be voluntarily certain. As for Necessity there is not a Necessitas
actina, and therefore, if there be any, it must be Necessitas ociosa, and
surely it seems idle to talk of an idle Necessity. For as causa sine qua non
is called stolida causa, so I see not why Necessitas per quam non, may not be
called stolida Necessitas.

Seventhly, God is free to make Adam free; even to leave him in an
aequilibrious estate, with a possibility to be ouer^eighed by temptation is
he listed; He might by his free will have taken the Tree of Life and
Stability, as well as the Tree of Death and Apostasy, and so he was thereby as
near to Happiness as to Misery. But that God should stablish him as he does
the Elect, he was not bound, for he that binds God must give first unto God;
now the Creature cannot give first unto the Creator, for he must be before he
can give, and even that being (which is man's first) he must first receive from
his Creator. So is he first a Debtor in his very being, and a man by one Debt
cannot make title to another.

Eighthly, though God is said to harden, yet he does it not by influence of
corruption, or supply of vice, but God herein is most absolutely clear, for
he does it by not-doing. And if God do not in sin, how can he be accused
of doing sin? if God will that Pharaoh shall be hardened, let him but keep in
his breath, even his blessed Spirit, by which hearts of stone are made hearts
of flesh, and then fle^h will of it self and by the help of Satan, turn into
stone. God is not the cause of sin no more then the Sun is the cause of Ice.
The Sun is properly a destroyer and dissoluer of Ice, and God is a dissoluer
of the sinful works of the Devil. But when the Sun withdrawes his beams by
his nightly and winterly departures, the cold hardens the waters which the
Sun forsakes. So where God hides his face, and contracts his spirit, there
temptation hardens. He does not put the hardness into the heart, but he leaves
the heart and has nothing to do with it, and then where God does nothing to
soften, there will quickly enough be done by sin and Satan to harden.
Therefore when we are hardened, Let us rather complain that God does nothing,
then that he does something in us.

Ninthly, though the Children of Adam be necessarily sinful, yet they may be
justly punished, because necessary sinning came from voluntary sinning. For
this necessity of sinning came not from God, but from their own Father, but
this free will brought upon them this necessity. And surely if they had been
in his place they would likewise have done the same, for Adams Children would
have been no better then their Father, the print no better then the stamp.
When God gave a power of leaving a righteous seed, he may call into Judgment
the seed which he finds unrighteous, and he may be angry with sin wheresoever
he finds it, because he gave a power that there should be no sin at all. We
do the same and allow the same, and yet question what we do and allow; In a
Snake and Toade, we make no question whither they could choose but be venomous,
but without any question we kill them only for being venomous: neither may we
excuse it because we made not their venom, for neither did God make the venom
of sin. And surely sin is like poison in the sight of God, and we may
rather wonder how his mercy can endure it in so many, then how his Justice
should punish it in any. A Traitors children are impouerished by Laws for the
offense of his parents, and when we see an oppressor, murderer, or
extortioner, we exspect it as a necessary piece of Divine Justice, That his
third heir enjoy not his estate. This is the sum. God is pure and righteous,
Man is sinful without Gods partaking, a Righteous God may punish sinful men,
whose sin he has nothing to do with, but he finds it contrary and offensive
to him.

Lastly, in these and the like depthes of God, let no man wade above his
stature. Every Man should understand according to sobriety, that is, according
to the measure which he contains. Let not the Homer tear it self in pieces
by stretching it self to be an Ephah: but let every member (for the members
are different) aspire to his proper fullness, and though they reach not to such
Mysteries, they may converse in points of more absolute necessity to salvation,
and larger edification, as our graffing into Christ Jesus by Faith, and our
growth in him by Love, the stablishing of our hearts in the hope suggested by
the earnest and testimony of the sanctifying Spirit.

These things are maine, general, and absolutely necessary employments, and
concernments in our way to Heaven, and in them especially must we spend our
meditations. And for the rest no doubt to their understanders, they are full of
edification, yet all men cannot ceceiue them. Therefore let every man receive
that which is meet for his measure, according to that which he has, and not
according to that which he has not, nor cannot have. Miserable it is to see
(as I have seen it) a man possessed by pieces of this secret, rather then
possessing them, and so uttering his distractions rather then resolutions, that
one might pity his amazement sooner then conceive his meaning. But I have
showed you a more excellent way.

CHAP. VIII. Of the small health and great vnhealthinesse of the Romish Church,
wherein most conspicuous is a Wenne grown to the likeness of a Head.
Whosoever does consideratly behold the main body of the Romish Church, may
find therein three sorts of Religion. The first may be called Religio
Curialis, the Religion of the Court, which is indeed nothing else but Policy,
paraphrasing Divinity, and an unkindly and froward Alchymie, by which gross
things are drawn out of pure things, the flesh is limbecked out of the Spirit,
and worldly pomp and supremacy is extracted out of a doctrine that preaches
sufferings, patience, and humility. An inconsequent conclusion, and far
vasutable to the premises; and like (though contrary) to the ancient Centones,
wherein out of the Heathen works of Virgill, is gathered the Christian story
of our Saviors incarnation and passion. But these, contrarily, though in the
same way out of the Christian and Spiritual Doctrine of the Gospel, draw a
Heathen, Secular and Carnal Empire, even a perfect story of a Man of sin,
and of one that sits as God in the Temple of God. The Pope has gotten a
Monopoly of of heaven and earth, and none may trade in either without some
tribute to his supremacy. Thus is the Scripture brought to speak the Language
of Babell; by a most cruel rack it is forced to deny it self, Christ is set
on work to set up Antichrist. And whereas it is openly said, Vos autem non
sic, by distinctions, metaphors, and inferences as loudly though not so truly
it shall say, Vos autem sic. You shall not be as the kings of the Nations says
one Text, yet other Texts with their glosses will bring it so about, that the
Kings of the Nations shall be but your Vassals, and shall be metamorphosed into
Brutes, even Aspes and Basiliskes for Popes to tread on. And hither tend the
mayn endeavors of diverse later Popes, even to settle a principality by the
Gospel. Yea, and when the Gospel would not help them (for it will not) they
strive to establish it by wars, by tumults, by treasons, things merely
repugnant and forbidden by the Gospel. So necessary it is that the Pope must
be the Head of the World, that he had rather kill the body then not be the
Head; So is he a true and lively Antichrist, even an opposite to Christ; For
Christ being the true Head of the Church, gave himself to death for the life
of his body. But this Man being (as his own say) but a Ministerial head,
gives the body of Christ to distraction, for the life of this imaginary Head.

On this Theme are spent the huge labors of Baronius. And to this end is the
Popes authority over Princes maintained by Bellarmine and others: and to this
end is the doctrine of Treasons against excommunicated Princes taught, and
printed by many of the Popes Parisites, so that every Protestant Prince may
truly be called a Confessor, for he confesses the Christian Religion with the
danger of his life. Which transcendence both of pride and sin, though the
Court of Rome maintain, yet because some members of the same Church have
confuted and disclaymed it, I may the more truly call it a different kind of
Religion.

Another sort shall be termed Religio Theologorum, the Religion of the
Divines, or that doctrine which is ordinarily taught or acknowledged for the
saving of learned souls: of this also there are three degrees. The first is
Crassa doctrina, the grosser or less refined doctrine, which was both more
common and more gross before Luther, and yet has large entertaynment among
them: such is the doctrine of Merits, of condignity; of Predestination, ex
praeuisis operibus; of worshipping of Images with the worship due to the
sampler, etc. which assertions if any would farther learn, he shall find them
in the confutation of their own ^eater Writers, who among the Heretic^es
confute also their fellows grosser opinions. And those confuters are those
which teach the second degree of Doctrine, which is Doctrina limita, a refined
kind of Doctrine conceived by the genuine interpretation of Scriptures; yea,
enforced by the evident light of the Word, and approaches very near to that of
the Reformed, so that though not out of one, yet out of all, our Doctrine may
be proved and deduced. And this is that which yields the matter of such works
as the Catholic Apology, Papa non Papa, and such other, which by the
Romanists have confuted the Roman Religion. A third degree is Doctrina
Spiritus aut Conscientia, the Doctrine of the Spirit or Conscience, which is,
when Men taught by the Spirit of God, or enforced by the Light of their own
Conscience, confess their own unworthiness, and wholly extol as the surest
Refuge the mercy of God in the merits of Christ. This former is frequently seen
in Barnard, Thomas Campensis and others, that lived in that Church; Men as I
hope sanctified and taught by the Spirit. Others also, by the terror or
conviction of their Conscience, have acknowledged the same as Stephan Gardener
at his end, and Bellarmine when after disputation of merits, he confesses this
affiance in Gods mercy to be the safest rest of the soul. And no doubt when
men are approaching by death to the bar of a supreme Justice; before a perfect
God with pure eyes, if they have any portion of the Spirit, they abhor
themselves with Job, and do so see and fear their own corruption, that they
cannot find rest but in perfect merits, and a perfect satisfaction. So that I
doubt not but of these there is a reserved number, even a number reserved by
Gods election, which is truly Ecclesia Electorum; having washed their robes
white in the blood of the Lamb.

A third and last sort of Religion, may be called Doctrina Idiotarum, even that
Doctrine which is taught to the common people, apprehended and accordingly
practiced by them as sufficient to save their ignorant Souls. This is
generally a Religion very near fitted to brute beasts, for it teaches them to
be saved in ignorance, and by believing as the Church believes. Which is upon
the matter by believing that which they know not, and by not knowing what they
believe. So is the Soul, which should be the principal agent in Religion,
left out in Religion, and lies like the first Chaos, void and full of
darkness, And the body is principally instructed. Accordingly they are taught
by Images and Pictures more then by preaching, as men that have five senses
without, but no sense within. They must confess they must do penance, they
must say Creeds and Aue-Maries in Latin, and those they must mistake for
prayers, they must worship Images, and adore the Sacrament; They must bring
their bodies to the Church; and leave behind their understandings, for in their
Liturgy there is only work for the ear, and none through the ear for the
understanding. And as this teaching of Religion is brutish, so is the practice
Mechanical. They work it out with their limbs, and the poor Soul stands by,
and knows not a jot of the business. The mouth speaks, the knee bows, the
hand mooues on the beads, or knocks upon the breast, the eye looks up, the
ear hears, and yet the soul and spirit which give the only life and being
to the worship, that God a Spirit loves, knows nothing, understands nothing
what the body is doing. And as for the Images, the poor wretches must needs
commit flat Idolatry; for I never heard that any of their Doctors, did
perfectly teach their common people to distinguish between Doulia and Latria,
but as one of their own says, If they worship them with all their heart, they
think they have done it excellently. Surely it cannot be conceived, that the
ignorant Papists who have no Commandment against Images, should in this point
do better then the Jews who had a plain Commandment against them. But the
Jews fell to Idolatry against an evident Commandment, yet these Doctors
think that their people shall be held from Idolatry, only by a distinction:
Surely they little regard the infirmity of miserable Man, fallen into so great
an Ignorance and Corruption, that he is apt to learn Lies of a stock, and to
be inflamed with Images under every green ^ree. Neither do they consider the
strictness of Ielousy, which in the Lord Almighty is as perfect and infinite
as himself. Now perfect Jealousy cannot abide to have a known Adulterer come
near to his spouse, neither can it endure to have any thing come near to the
worshipper, which has been known to have drawn the worship aside from God to
it self. And accordingly God in his Jealousy was very careful that no Image
should be seen in Horeb, lest what had been seen, should have been
represented, and what had been represented, should have been worshipped. But
these Men presuming beyond their Maker, have apprehended and condemned this his
needless Jealousy, and abandoning all fear, in their Horebs, even in the
places where the Law is or should be published, have set up many Images before
their ignorant and untaught people; even ^tumbling blocks before the blind.
And all the remedy or satisfaction we can have from them, is this, that they
teach the people a distinction whereby they need not be Idolaters. But to what
purpose is this, when this distinction is not so universally taught as the
Images are seen: neither (as before) so universally understood; neither if
understood, so generally followed by reason of Man's corruption, which not being
limited heretofore by a Divine Commandment, will less be limited by a humane
Distinction. Therefore should these offenses be wholly taken away from the
places of worship, yea if they were as useful as the brazen Serpent it self,
which was the Image of Christ; yea for their sakes must let them be taken down,
for whom they are most set up; even for the Lay and ignorant people, for to
these are they intended to give most instruction, and to these being least
capable of the distinction, they bring most destruction.

And here as we pass, let us take notice of a great danger in that Mystery of
Iniquity. For the Teachers and Masters of that Art, pretend at first to make
good Christians, but they endeavor at last to make ill subjects; so that except
there be some stop in the Disciples (which can hardly be when the ear is open
to all that which the Church teaches, and the Priests are the mouth of the
Church) it is very hard to stay themselves within the just bonds of Religion
and subjection. For if the Popes temporal power over Princes be both taught
and believed, as it commonly is, the more zealous he is that believes it, the
more dangerous he is to the State where he lives. And lamentable patterns
hereof may be. seen, since ingenuous and good disposition have bin
Instruments in most barbarous Treasons, and particularly in the greatest of all
Treasons.

Thus I have somewhat delineated the portrature of the Romish Church, whereby
it may be known both what a small Church of God is among them, and what a
large Synagogue of Satan, what Temple of God, and what false god sits therein.
So may we distinguish between the good and the evil, not condemning the good
for evil, neither loving the evil for the good. For such is the craf^ of the
Romish Circumcellions and Proselite makers, that they go about to make men
evil by that which is good, and by the best of their Religion bring men to the
worst. Accordingly they do very much fish for men, to the first sort of
Religion by the second, and sometimes by the best degree of the second, though
among the vulgar where the third will serve, they save the labor of the second.
Yea, many good souls seeing such Holiness in some of the Works of that
Church (as before in the second and third of the second) they have of
themselves conveyed themselves into the first, and so while they desired to be
made fellow members of the Saints by union, they have with the same become
subjects of the Popes Monarchy, and so warfared at once to Christ and
Antichrist, which cannot be but by great loss and danger. We therefore to whom
God has showed the deceitfulness of these strong Delusions, though loving the
virtues, truths and persons of those which among them receive a justifying and
sanctifying Religion, yet let us not for love of them cast our selves into a
yoke of Tyranny, Error and Ignorance, neither for Sions sake thrust our selves
into Babylon, but rather fly from it.

It has pleased Christ the true Head of the Church to set us free from the
counterfeit head, and the cruel burdens thereof, both spiritual and
temporal. Let us therefore stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has
freed us, and not return willingly into the yoke of bondage. Whatsoever virtue
and whatsoever Holiness is among them, the same is here open to us, and with
a great advantage of freedom from abundance of Errors, Superstitions and
Deceits. Now who would be so foolish, rather to seek Corn among a heap of
Chafe, then to take it winnowed and cleansed? And who would seek Relgion among
a heap of Errors, when he may have one purged and winnowed by the Fan of
Christ, even the breath and Word of God? And let this be taken for a certain
truth, That if we go but by a general experience, and without an inquiring of
this particular case, we may find that in one thousand and five hundred years,
any Church will gather rust, and moss, and tares. For certain it is, that in
all that time, the Husbandman does sometimes sleep, and as certainly as the
Husbandman sleeps, so certainly does the Enemy sow his Tares. The Church of
the Jews before Christ, (if we give Rome her own asking) was as very a
Church, and as infallible a Church, and as only a Church as the Church of Rome.
In Jury was God only known, to them were only committed the Oracles, and to
them were the promises made; yet we see what dross and Tares grew upon that
Church, even in short returns, and if you will see it, do but mark what
scouring and clensing fell to the lot of the two good Kings, Hezekiah and
Josiah, and at last to our Savior Christ himself, who was feign to sweep the
Temple with a Whip, and to smite the Doctors of the Temple (even the Scribes
and Pharisees) with the rod of his mouth, Mat. 5. yet this while the Church of
Rome is pure and spotless, neither in all these years since Christ is there
any Error in their Doctrine. But the truth is, that she is no other then the
Church of Judea, yea, of Laodicea. She is blind, miserable and naked, but only
she says and will have it said, That she is rich, and has need of nothing.
She is not without faults, but she will be without correction. Having faults,
she will have them to be no faults, that where there be no faults, there may
be no amendment. Surely this is the top of the misery of that Church (as it is
to us a chief Justification of our departure from them) that they have left
themselves no leave, or power of amendment. For they have sealed their errors,
first unto them by a Council, the seal of the Popes infallibility being set
thereto. So are they bound eternally to the love and defense of their Errors;
and must still err, that they may not seem to have erred. But this carnal
policy is likely to be their destruction; for the Church of God seeing her
desperatenes, has nothing left but to cry continually, Come out of her my
people, that ye be not partaker of her plagues; And God himself seeing her
in the same remediless case, that he saw Judah and Israel, 2. Chron. 36.16.
being still the same God, will no doubt use the same Justice, and according to
his own Word, will send down that Angel of Power which shall lighten the
Earth with his Glory, and cry mightily with a loud voice, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen, and become the habitation of Devils; and this is the reason
of her torments, because she faith, I sit as a Queen and am no Widow, and
shall see no sorrow. But if withal some plain particulars be desired by
which men without labor may see that they have erred, who cannot err; and
therefore err again in saying they did not err before; not to refer them
to the large Treatises of these Controversies) let them consider some few
positions which are direct Oppositions to the Word of God. S. John says, 1.
Ioh. 1.7. The blood of Christ purges us from all sin. Bellarmine says, Iudic.
de lib. concord. That good Works deserve remission of sins. Saint Paul
says, 1. Cor. 1.15. That when the people understands not, he cannot say,
Amen, neither is edified, Verse. 16, 17. and withal commands, That all things
should be done to edifying, and to that end, that when a strange tongue is
spoken one should interpret, or otherwise the speaker in an unknown tongue
should hold his peace, Verse 16, 17, 18. But the Council of Trent says, (in
the Decree of the Sacrament, cap. 9) That whosoever holds that Mass should be
said in the vulgar Tongue, let him be accursed. Again, the Commandment says,
That no Image shall be worshipped, but Bellarmine says, they may be
worshipped; and Azorius says, with the worship of the sampler, and so the
Crucifixe with the worship of Christ. Christ says, That the Apostles shall not
be like the Princes of the Earth in Dominion, but the Papists say, That to the
Pope is given all power, and the use of both Swords; yea, they are set above
Princes. And surely to sum up these four points together, Idolatry, magnifying
of their own Merits, staruing of Souls, and intolerable Pride, their
Corruption is abominablyeminent, so that it must be a blind man that sees it
not, and a Whores forehead that confesses it not. And assuredly for four
transgressions and for five, if not fifty, God will certain punish them,
especially for these crying ones, by which God himself has his honor
communicated to Stocks, the Son of God has this honor divided with the
sons of men; Those which are called Gods are subjected to the pride of the
Man of Sin, and the Church of God for whom Christ dyed and shed his blood,
has their blood spilt by ignorance, and not knowing the Council of God, Acts
20.27. So by these short patterns we may know what kind of stuff their
Religion is made of; yea, to what a Religion they have tied themselves, by the
sacred and fearful bands of Canons and Curses. Since then they have bound
themselves to their diseases, what remaynes to us but this? Curauimus
Babylonem, and non est sanata abeamus quisque in terram suam: Come out of her,
come out of her my people, that ye be not prtakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her Plagues.

CHAP. IX. A cure of that Monastical Melancholy, that cuts off a Christians
hands, and turns him all into eyes.
Chrysostom speaking comparatively of an active and contemplative life, De
Sacer. lib. 6.
prefers ^he virtue of the active before the conte^platiue, of the Priest,
before the Monk; as of a King before a private Man. For he says, the
contemplative Man sayleth in the Harbor and passes a good life, but it is in
safety and quietness: But the active Man goes through the World, and yet is
none of the World, he meets with tentations, fights with them, and ouercomes
them, he steereth his course aright, through stormy and tempestuous
Oppositions. Again, he says, that the Minister labors with his mind, the
Monk with his body. On the other side, Gregory Moral. in Job l. 6. c. 18. and
Ezekiel. l. 2. Hom. 3.
prefers the Contemplative before the Active, and to prove it, says, that
the Contemplative Man enjoys his Creator, is already in Heaven, the World is
trodden under him, and he feasteth on Blessedness, so that he is as far above
the Active, as Heaven is above Earth, as bliss is above this miserable and
sinful World.

Now there being but one Truth, how shall we find this one Truth in this
seeming diversity of Opinions? For Truth is only to be found in Unity, and
not in contrariety. Yet by the Candle of Gods Spirit and Word, let us seek
this Groat of Truth, that otherwise may be lost in the dark.

First, true it is which Gregory says, That Contemplation is herein more
excellent then Action, That Contemplation seems to gather the fruit and Action
but to sow it. So as gathering is more excellent then sowing, so Contemplation
seems to exceed Action. And as attayning the Haven, is more comfortable then
tossing in the Sea, so Contemplation is far sweeter then Action. But yet on
the behalf of Action, must we consider two assured Truths; First, that this
World is made for another World, and it is not the place of Rest, but the way
to Rest, and our business in this World is to provide for a happiness to be
enjoyed in another World. Then though enjoying in it self be better then
working, yet upon this consideration of circumstances, it may be better to
work then to enjoy; For if working here increase our enjoying hereafter, and
enjoying here diminish our enjoying hereafter, doubtless, it is better to
work in this place of working, that we may enjoy in the place of enjoying,
then by imperfect enjoying here in a place of working, hereafter to diminish
our joys in the place of perfect enjoying. To gather fruit in an undue time,
abateth of the bigness and sweetness. We must not think to have our Heaven
here, but we must labor in the six days of this life to enjoy an eternal
Sabbath hereafter. We must here be turners of our Talent, that being
faithful in little, we may rule over much, and not think that binding up our
Talent we may be idle here and glorious hereafter: we may not imagine that man
had a body given him to live only in his soul, but the Maker of the body will
also have the service of the body, and that not in works of Piety alone, but
of Charity also; even of mutual help and benefit, as being part not of a
Separation, but of a Communion of Saints.

Therefore though Peter thought it good to be still in the contemplation of
Glory, and would feign have built Tabernacles therein. Yet Christ carries him
down again from the Mountain of Vision, into the World of Action, into the
company of persecuting Jews, seducing and hypocritical Pharisees, yea, into
the winnowing of Satan himself. And indeed, generally the Apostles lives were
lives of Action, and lives of Passion. And if these Apostles be the
foundation, and Christ the Corner stone, then are Active men the chiefest in
Heaven, as being next unto Christ, and no Contemplative men may ever sit above
them: for the foundation will still be nearest to the corner stone, and nothing
may go between them.

Contemplation indeed is absolutely necessary, and in her own turn and time
more necessary then Action, as Mary's hearing in the time of Christ's preaching,
was more necessary then Marthaes serving; but the same Mary's action of
anointing Christ in a due season, is as famous as her hearing of Christ.
Contemplation must not end in it self, but it must proceed, and the due
proceeding of it, is to end in Action. When Contemplation ends in it self, we
may reap some pleasure to our selves, but nothing is reaped to God. But so it
may not be, for the end of our life is the service of God, and the service of
God is Faith, working by Love, and the fruits of Love are good Works;
therefore we must proceed as far as these good Works, or else we are short
of the end and scope of our life appointed by God.

And Gregory himself confesses, that the Contemplative Life is barren like
Rahel, and the Active fruitful like Leah, even fruitful in saving of souls.
Now Rahel pleased not herself in her barrenness, nor should the Church of
God, but it should cry as heartily, though not so impatiently, Give me Children
or else I dye. Neither does Christ the Husband of the Church, love or reward
barrenness, but he desires that we bear much fruit, and the especial
fruit, especially crowned with the glory of Stars, is saving of souls.
Accordingly, Christ when thrice he had questioned Peter of his loving him, and
Peter had thrice affirmed it, Christ does not say to Peter, If thou love me,
be thou still looking on me, sit still and enjoy me, and read and think
only of me, But Peter, If thou love me, feed my Sheep, Feed my Lambs; which
shows that a life of Action and Edification is the most noble Fruit, and
notable Effect which Christ expects from his Lovers. And accordingly shall the
last Sentence be pronounced: Come ye blessed of my Father, not who have
continually carried me in your thoughts, and beheld me with your
Contemplations, but ye who have spiritually and corporally fed me, clothed me,
visited me in my members.

Therefore let us take heed that we take not heaven too soon, neither spend
so much ou^ time, in enjoying the earnest that we abate the inheritance assured
us by that earnest. And indeed (which is the second thing) God deals so with
us in this life, that contemplation cannot be a whole employment to Man.
Therefore as before it appeared to be unlawful, now it also appears to be
impossible: For well does every Saint of God know, that the glory and comfort
of contemplation lasts but some turns, and then comes an ebb of grace, a
night of vision, and perchance a long storm of Satan's buffettings. Either the
Spirit withdrawes his glorious beams from the soul, or the soul it self is
forsaken of the body, as not able to endure a long bent of high Meditations; or
else the flesh has leave to take us down by temptation, that the height of
Contemplation may not hurt us by an equal height of Pride. For the height of
Contemplation, is made most safe and profitable to us by the lowness of
Humility, and Infirmity is a chief preserver of Humility. And even in these
times though we have not the joy and ability of Contemplation, yet are we
outwardly able for Action, and we can profit others when we seem wholly
unprofitable to our selves. Therefore to fall into a true moderation and
indifferency between Contemplation and Action, let this be our Rule, that
Contemplation nourish and feed Action but not devour it; that we contemplate
to know God and to love God, that we know and love him to please him, and serve
him in the Actions of some profitable vocation. We may not quench
Contemplation, for it warmes the soul, cheereth and heateth her to action;
Again, we must not exclude Action, for that is to water the root and to pull
away the buds, and so to prevent the fruit.

The excellency of Contemplation and Action is the Concord of them, therefore
let us be contemplative that we may be active, and in our actiuenesse strive
verily to express our Contemplation. For Contemplation is then most
commendable when it is expressed in deeds, and not when it is merely borne and
buried in thoughts. And it shall be more true glory to a true Christian, amid
the world to despise the world, to resist it, to overcome it, then wholly to
run away from it. Yet briefly for caution, let no man take any more to his
task, then he is duly called to, and his strength can bear: let not the
horse take on him the burden of an Elephant, neither let men endanger
themselves farther in secular employments, then grace gives them good hope to
return with safety.

I will conclude in the saying of Gregor. in Ezekiel. ho^il* ^. and in Job. lib.
10. c. 11.
Gregory. The holy beasts did go and return, and did go and not return: So
the Saints they go from their sins, and return no more to them, but in
another kind of going, they go from Contemplation; to Action, and return
again from Action to Co^templation; for these continual returns nourish and
refresh each other, and it is unprofitable or impossible for a Christian to
continue still in one without returning to the other. Thus doing, we shall be
those laboring Contemplators, who only are the blessed ones that dye in the
Lord, we shall rest from our labors of Action, and our works shall follow
us; and then our good Actions shall be turned into the joys of an eternal
Contemplation.

CHAP. X. Against hungry and pinching Holiness, a foolish craft of some, that
if they may save much here, they care not though they be saved but a little
hereafter.
IT is a lamentable thing to see, not so much how the men of the world, but how
some men of Religion do fit their service for God. For in these men is the
greatest wonder, who profess friendship and familiarity with God, and yet
deal deceitfully with Him. So stedily does Nature work on her work of
Corruption in the Children of Nature, though having undertaken a profession of
Grace; yea, even in the very Children of Grace, though not wholly or finally,
for even Peter in something is to be blamed, and Barnabas is seduced. Gal. 2.
Nature I say continues her old work, even the same which in the days of old
she wrought in the inhabitants of the Land of Israel, who being taught by the
Priest to serve the God of heaven, were also led by Nature to join the worship
of their own Idols to the service of the true God. The same do we too much
at this day, we have given our names to God, we will needs be Citizens of of
the new Jerusalem, and be Pilgrims to the heavenly Canaan, yet we strive to
build houses in Egypt, and spend our main strength for the things of that
world, wherein we profess our selves to be strangers.

So do we join two incompatible ends together, as our mark and scope, East
and West, God and the World; we join together what God has put asunder,
which is as bad as to put asunder what God has joined together. And as those
Inhabitants of Judea, which served God and Idols, did neither serve God nor
Idols, so these men serving God and the world, yet cannot be perfect servants
of both; For true is that of our Savior, No man can serve two Masters. But of
these men which wear a double badge of a two fold service, there are diverse
degrees.

One is the palpable and gross professor, that wears the badge of the world
on the right side, and the badge of God on the left. This man in his heart
writes the world first, and God after; yet as long as they two go one way, he
will walk on among the foremost; He will hear and pray, and say as other
Christians do, (I mean outwardly) as long as Jobs hedge which the Devil
spoke of is safe and sound, or as long as the glory and wealth which the
Devil offered to Christ, do not call him aside. But if the hedge be broken
up, and the wild beasts of crosses or losses rush in upon him, then he falls to
the language of Jobs Wife, Curse God and dye: or to that of the King of Israel,
Why shall I serve God any longer? and the keys of Peter even of Devotion being
cast into the river, the sword of Peter even of a carnal wit cutting and
hewing with shifts and devises, is drawn and brandished forth: or if that
hedge remaining strong, the Devil do but take him up into his Mountain of
wretched preferment, and there show him this man's living, or that man's goods,
which may be had with a little straying from the path of Holiness, he
presently takes leave of his Master, and steps aside to fetch the two Talents
of gold and the two changes of Raiment; and eftsoons comes again, wipes his
mouth like an Harlot, and stands before his Master as afore-time. Miserable
Creature that he is, being contented with the bare show of happiness; but
though it please him to be contented with shows, yet substantially, really,
and without dissimulation to him belong all the woes pronounced on the Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites. Yet this benefit he does the Church, that he can
hardly scandal her to any man of understanding. For his works bewray him that
he is not of us, and his prickles being very sensible make it known that he
is a Thorn, and therefore a Vine, though growing by him cannot well in a
slander, be joined with him. But let such a one be assured, that between his
two Masters he shall be without a Master; for his chief Master the World will
turn him out of service, and then God his pretended Master will not receive
him. Death shall strip him of the Worlds favor and advancement, and God shall
strip him of his show and vizard of Religion, and so being stark naked, poor,
and miserable, he shall be thrust out of the gates of the City, and shall
have his portion with Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

A second sort is, of those that in earnest propose to themselves the service
of God, yea they think not to serve the World, but yet they study and strive
how to serve God most thriftily, and to please him as good cheap as they can.

These men endeavor mightily to find out the utmost Confines of good, and to
see how far honesty may possibly be brought to reach. For they have resolved
not to do evil, though they may get by it, but they are resolved to go for
gain, as near evil as they can possibly, and miss it. So can we outwardly
perceive Gods badge on their sleeue, yet I must needs say, that in the lining
and inwards of the same, there is a secret badge of the World. And surely I
doubt the World is their chief end, and only that they make some reverence to
God as they pass by Him to the World. Toward the discovery hereof, let us lay
the rule or level to this doubtful man: If we look on a face of perfect
proportion, and presently behold another, though but of a little disproportion,
we shall soon find the fault by the comparison.

So let us here behold the beauty of a sanctified Man, of a man crucified to
the World, of a man of Heaven, and then shall we find even the lesser
blemishes of a man of Earth. The man truly renewed has his treasure in Heaven.
There is his Rest, there is his Happiness, there is his Country. This
heavenly Man looks upon his earthly Gods, and casts with himself, how much he
may in good spiritual Husbandry lawfully return for Heaven, how much he may
fitly give unto God, and lay up in the hands of his Savior, and being a good
Steward (though like that unjust one) by all lawful diminutions, he prouides
for the increase of his welcome and welfare in the place of his last and
eternal Residence. Therefore does this Man also seek out the bounds of
goodness, but it is to another end, even to find how far he may righteously
convert his temporal Riches to the glory of God, and advancement of his Soul.
He casts with himself how much he may well spare for holy and charitable
uses, and withal not be worse then an Infidel that prouides not for his
Family.

Now having found out the right purpose of this Man, thereby as by a Rule may
we find the crookedness of the other. Whereas the man of heaven has God for
his main end, and therefore leuells the World unto God, studying to convert the
world to the most glory and pleasure of God; the other mainly studies and
intends the World, desiring to have Gods good will toward the most obtaining
of the World. One strives to return as much as he may, for Heaven, the other
strives to return as little as he may, so he do not wholly lose Heaven; one
endeavors most to please God, the other rather not to offend him then to
please him.

In sum, one strives how much good he may do, by a lawful conversion of
his riches into good works; the other strives how much he may purchase, and
how much riches he may increase by a lawful diminution of his good works.

Now the man strives to that increase in riches rather then good Works, can
hardly be that good Christian whose duty is to bring forth much fruit, John
15.8. Besides Experience shows, that such as stretch their actions to all
possible lawfulness, many times offend in doing things not expedient, and in
leaving undone things commendable and excellent. For things in themselves
lawful, grow to be unlawful by such circumstances as make them inexpedient.
This Saint Paul proves strongly, and examples it in the lawfulness of eating
meat, and in the unlawfulness of eating with scandal. But these hungry
Christians too readily digest the Scandal.

Again, they offend often in the sins of omission, leaving good things
undone, and contenting themselves in the absence of positive evil: yea, many
times they please themselves well, when they have done a less good work, when
they might very well have done a greater. If money be not taken for a
Presentation yet it may be taken for an Aduowson, though the greatness of the
price plainly shows, that it is not all given for the liberty of choice, but
part of it with an eye to the annual value: And yet this annual value is the
very wages of the Labourer, and I hope wages should be bought by nothing but
labor.

Again, when thou sellest thy Aduowson, thou put from thy self an
excellent privilege, by which thou mights do God an especial service, and
thou will give another leave to do God the service, so thou may serve and
please thy Mammon. I wish this traffic of Aduowsons would cease, except when
they be bestowed on Colleges, or some such persons as would amend, not
impair the disposing of them.

Another perchance is no Patron, but a Purchaser, and this man has conscience
enough, not to work his Neighbors out of their Livings. But his Neighbors
poverty has need of money, and his need can coin no money but out of his
Living. Therefore the poor man's Living comes and offers it self for the rich
man's money.

And here first we may observe, that to strengthen the hand of the poor when
it shakes, is thing commanded in the old Law, but perchance by this man scarce
thought to be Moral: Next he sees the living come a begging to him, he has
not wrested it from him, but it walks voluntarily toward him; and therefore he
thinks it not unlawful to take a good Bargain, when it offers it self to
him. So the man that is thriuing, gets by the man that is undoing, and the
poor man's need makes him poorer, and the rich man richer.

As for Alms, though the wants of many do call for them, and the reward of
supplied wants does persuade to them, yet the yearly surplusages shall be
converted into an unnecessary increase of the HEIRS Estate, (which perchance
is to great already) rather then into the satisfaction of necessities; and so
Ambition shall have more service then Charity, though Charity promise a reward
in Heaven.

The Sabbath perchance, is kept by the minute, and the question maynely
disputed when it begins and ends, But the great Sabbath of Sanctification,
which should begin and never end, even a rest from sin, from the works of
the flesh, from laying on yokes and burdens on our Brethren (which are indeed
the mayneayme of the other) is far less respected, and by many minutes, if
not hours profaned. Worldly cares and carnal desires, like the Ox and the
Ass are ever toyling in the minds of many, and with their feet, trouble and
defile the pure waters of Sanctification, which then are especially waters of
purity, when they are waters of rest. But let us hasten from the Disease to
the Remedies.

And first let those that abate Gods service, for the service of the World,
know that the World was made by God to serve man, and man to serve God; So is
the World Gods Servants Servant; but then how crooked and perverse a course do
they take, that will seem to be Gods Servants, and yet take their Servant,
and make him a Co^petitor with their Master? Yea sometimes they will do more
for their Servant then for their Master. But God is a Jealous God, and his
Jealousy burns like fire, when he is not loved in his right place and degree,
his Creature being put into a comparison with him. God will be loved, chiefly,
and wholly, not secondly and niggardly. The cretures may have their due regard
when GOD comes not in place, but when God coms to be served, let the whole
Creation, stoop, yield, and bow unto him. Yea, he is so far displeased with
the dividing of his place unto riches, that he has sealed it with the
indissoluble seal of Impossibility, when he says, ye cannot, or it is not
possible for you to ioyn in one service, God and Riches. Let therefore our
hearts give the mayn ^^oome ^^to God, and let the Creature^ th^^ein way^e upon
the Creat^^^.

Secondly, Let not men content themselves in the forbearing of both good and
evil, for neither can these be knit together in one man. For if thou
forbearest good, thou art guilty of evil, not to water a Plant when it is day,
is to kill it, and the last sentence of condemnation lays hold on men, not for
taking away Christ's clothes and meat, but for not giving them to him when he
needed them.

Thirdly, let not men approach to near to the confines of evil, because it is
both dangerous and odious. Dangerous it is, for it is no other then the walking
on Turrets, on the brinkes of Bridges, and the edges of Praecipices. And it is
a true saying of the Wiseman, He that loves danger shall perish therein. When
a man walks in such extremities of good, the least slip of his foot makes him
fall into Evil, and the falling into Evil, is the way of falling into Hell.

Therefore the wisest of men ( Prou. 14.15.) advises thee, Avoid the way of
the wicked, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. And in the Chapter
following, he advises the Children of Wisdom, to remove their way far from
the Harlot, and not to come nigh the door of her house.

Again, it is odious for this neighborhood with Evil, makes a man a
doubtful Christian, as the borderers between two Countries, are not perfectly
known what Countrymen they be. God cannot abide a Twilight of Righteousness;
he loves not a doubtful Holiness, for he commands a shining Light, an
eminent Goodness, and therefore asks his Servants, What excellent thing do ye?
God will be evidently glorified in his Saints, and he cannot be evidently
glorified but in evident good works. As God loses his glory, when good works
are done for ostentation, so he loses his glory when the goodness of works
cannot well be discerned: So worthless is a work when it is wholly done to be
seen, and when it is done so slightly or scantly, that it can scarce be seen
at all.

Let men therefore do good works not because they should be seen, yet such as
may be seen by their frequence, by their bigness, by their luster and
excellence. This is to walk as patterns and examples, 1. Tim. 4.12. This is
to provide things honest in the sight of all men, Romans 13.17. This is to have
an evident Holiness, Mat. 5.16.

Fourthly, let men know and renounce as an extreme folly, that temporal Thrift
which causes an eternal loss. Surely if that Lord who is Wisdom it self,
commended the Steward for a Wiseman, that abated his temporal Reckonings, to
increase his eternal Rewards, he cannot but disprayse for a Fool, that man
that will increase a little perishing vanity, that he may decrease an exceeding
weight of eternal glory. Whereas a hundred abated here would increase a
thousand hereafter, this man by a most foolish thrift will save fifty here,
that he may lose five hundred hereafter. Ill Husbands they are in the midst of
their good husbandry, and the Husbandmen of this generation shall rise in
judgment against them, for these will not sow sparingly, that they may reap
sparingly, but with a full hand do sow, that with a full hand they may mow. Let
us therefore pray the Lord of the Harvest, he that as he increseth our seed
will also increase our sowing; that as he outwardly ladeth us with the bounty
of his blessings, he will inwardly fill us with the bounty that gives these
blessings, that partaking of his good things, we may also partake of the
goodness that bestows them. Then by the same goodness which gave unto us,
shall we give unto others; the goodness of God supplying us both within and
without; inwardly giving us the power of giving, and outwardly giving us the
matter of giving. And to these men that are filled with this goodness (the
Mother of good Works) is especially recommended that saying of S. Paul, He
that prouides not for his own, is worse then an Infidel. To such I say it
belongs, who are likely to stray too far on the right hand of Bounty, and not
to such who most commonly abuse it for the defense of their left handed
Parsimonie. This place is to limit those that are excessiuely good, not to stop
and bound those that are not yet good enough. Wherefore go on boldly a good
way farther, for there is yet a good distance between this place and thee,
except thou art in doubt of being too good.

There is yet a third sort, which I would only name, and I wish that there
might be no Examples of such hereafter known in Gath, nor spoken of in Ashd^d*
and that is, when they that bear the true mark of God in their foreheads, and
have ripped off the Badge of worldly love from their hearts, yet in some sleep of
their consciences, the enemy sows some Tares of worldly Lust, Covetousness
or Ambition. David sinned in one kind, and no doubt, men of perfect hearts
sin in other kinds, and single Actions of sin, issue from them that have
an habit, or rather a nature of Grace. God has left the Canaanite in us to
exercise us, to humble us, that we may have an Enemy to fight against, before
we wear the Crowns of Glory, and that we may have a pattern of our
corruption to humble us as the Valleys, before we receive his showers of Grace
and Mercy from those hills from whence comes our Salvation. What remaynes but
that we fight like men, for the killing of that old man which fights to kill
us? While we stand, let us stand in humility, taking heed lest we fall; and
this humility which makes us take heed lest we fall, will best keep us from
that falling whereof we are to take heed. And if we do fall (as what man
lineth that sins not) let us rise by giving our hand to Christ in Faith and
Repentance, who by his blood washing us, and by his Spirit quickening us, will
raise us again and set us on our feet, That we may run the way of his
Commandments. Neither let the wicked in the falls of the Godly magnify
themselves, and despise the other, as such Pharisees use to do, for though
these two did the same kind of fact, yet the fact is different. The godly man
falls by infirmity, as by the weight of his body, or slip of his foot, the
wicked falls with the swinge of his will, as if he ran his head against the
Rocks. The godly man hates his own fault and arises from it, the wicked man
never truly hates it, never heartily forsakes it. Yea, the godly man is bettred
by his false, and by falling stands the more strongly, because the more humbly
and warily. And finally, though he pass by some particular frailties, yet
upon the whole he is still better, and grows from strength to strength until
he appears before God in Sion.

CHAP. XI. An Error that forbids men, though mortally diseased, to be cured by
a sick Physician.
THere is an Error, which though it possesses not many, yet some it
possesses strongly; and this is a great mischief belonging to it, that they
think themselves better then others for being deceived, and so they become
angry with those that would cure them, because they seem to endeavor, not to
take away an Error from them, but to deprive them of their Eminence.

Their misbeliefe is this, That none but sanctified Preachers can teach unto
Sanctification and Salvation. And first for a general remedy, I desire these
men to consider, that as in natural, so in spiritual fi^e, there are two
things of especial and inseparable use, the one is Light, the other Heat.

Let the heat of Nature make a man's body never so active and able, yet if the
eyes be shut up so that this heat by the inward light which it makes, cannot
entertayne the outward light, the more active and stirring this man is, the
more he stumbles, and the more he falls. Even so in the things of Grace, if a
man will separate heat from light, he diuorceth those that in the spirit are
joined together, and therefore it is likely that such are Saint Iudes men;
separaters, sensual, not having the spirit. For where the spirit is, there
light is the guide of heat, and such are led by evident Truth, not by blind
violence.

But to meet with their Error more particularly, I will first lay my
foundation, and it is this, An assured discovery of the true cause of man's
Salvation. Not to run into bywayes, the true way to life, is Christ, The Way,
the Truth, and the Life. Christ our life shall appear, says Paul, and again,
Our life is hid with Christ in God. More particularly, Christ entering into man,
does abolish the old man, which is the body of Sin and Death, and gives us
the new man, wherein is included a right of Inheritance unto Life Eternal. The
body of sin, by sin had bound us unto death, and by Dominon had bound us
to sin, but Christ Jesus entering into us by his Spirit, by his Death freeth
us from the Death, to which we were bound, and by his sanctifying Grace, freeth
us from that Dominion by which we were bound unto sin. So from henceforth,
neither sin nor death have dominion over us, but the free and freeing Spirit
of Christ dwells in us, whereby we are sons and heirs of Life Eternal, Romans
8.14. etc. I will sum all up in the words of Saint Peter, 1.1.1. We are elect
by God the Father, through the sanctification of the Spirit, and the sprinkling
of the blood of Jesus Christ. But this, thou will say, thou doubtest not, but
confessest that the Trinity by Christ's humanity saves us, but thou say,
that this Salvation is imparted to us by the Ministry, and the defect of the
Preacher may stop the benefit of the hearer. I confess indeed if his defect be
in preaching, then there is an abatement of the benefit of hearing, but if his
preaching be sound and sufficient, Gods Word soundly uttered by him is able to
save us, without the Preachers Goodness or Sanctification. The Preacher is
Vehiculum verbi, and verbum is vehiculum Christi, and Christus est fons vitae;
The Preacher brings the Word, and the Word brings Christ, and Christ brings
Salvation. If now the heart of man do but open that the King of Glory may
enter in, salvation is come into his house. And surely if the spirit within
open, when the Word without knockes, or Christ in the Word, there is an
entrance of Life eternal:

So is it brought to this narrow point, That when the Spirit meets the Word in
the heart, and opens to it, Christ enters in the Word, and there is but this
left to say, That the Spirit has so tied himself to the goodness of the
Minister, that he will not open the heart of the hearer, except he hear a holy
Teacher. But this is a fearful saying, and worthy of detestation. This is to
tie the free Spirit of God unto Man whose liberty Christ has taught, saying,
The Spirit blows where it lists. This were to make the Spirit to stand in
need of his own graces, and to be beholding to the grace of the speaker, to
give grace to the hearer. This were to bring Christians not to receive their
salvation from the fullness of Christ, but partly from the fullness of the
Minister. Then it might be truly said, that Paul were something, and Apollo
something, whereas St Paul says, they were nothing, but God only that gave
the increase. Then might we be baptized into the name of Paul, for from whom
we receive the grace of Baptism, in his Name may we receive Baptism. This
were to overthrow St Paul's Assertion, and to break his golden chain in
pieces, who says, that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by preaching, for
by this novelty hearing, does not save us except the Preacher be also saved;
so where Paul tyeth Faith to hearing, these have untied Faith from hearing,
except the Preachers goodness tie it up again. But what did our Savior
Christ mean to cause his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses
chair, whom he termed Hypocrites, and on whom he heaped his woes? Either
Christ commanded them to do that which was unprofitable, or these men vainly
condemn that which Christ commanded. And Paul rejoices that Christ was
preched by envious and persecuting Preachers, and I hope persecutors are not
likely to be sanctified. Surely it is the beauty of Christ Jesus, that
rauisheth a soul, touched and warmed by the Spirit. It is not essential to
the moving of Love, that the Painter himself be handsome, so his picture be
evident and lively, and the comeliness of the person represented admirable. If
the Painter be unlike his own picture, the beauty of the picture disgraceth
his ugliness, but remaynes lovely it self. Who is there, that if he were
condemned to death (as we are all naturally to death eternal) but would
gladly receive a pardon from the king by the hands of a condemned man? Surely
the eye of a man touched by the Spirit, does look more stedily on the
happiness of the message, then the misery of the Messenger. For God sends
sometimes a message of happiness, by a Messenger that is miserable, as he
sent blessings to Israel by the mouth of cursed Balaam.

This is true, though it be objected, that unsanctified men are not called,
and not being called, are not sent. For Judas (a worse then Balaam) had the
calling of an Apostle, was ordained to preach, and to cast out devils. Mark.
3.14. and obtained part of the Ministry. Act. 1.17. God gives not his gifts
in vain, but they are for the edification of the Church. So is the gift of
Prophecy. 1. Cor. 14.4. Ephesians. 4.12. yet many that have this gift of edification
shall be commanded to So it seems the promise of shining like the stars for
conversion of souls, Dan. 12.3. has an implicit condition of godliness
which has the promises of this life and that to come. 1. Tim 4.8.
depart for want of Sanctification. Though they loose the private benefit of
the gift of God, yet God will not loose the fruit of his own gift which he
gave for the public.

Wherefore let not the Preacher look into the soul of his Hearer, to find his
salvation in his Hearers conversion, for he shall not find it there, but in
his own Soul, if there he find Sanctification. Neither let the Hearer look
into the soul of the Preacher, in his Sanctification to find his own
Salvation, for he shall not find it there, but in his own Soul, if therein
he can find Faith and Holiness. Surely the days of persecution had not this
wantonness of Hearing, but they rejoiced (as the Spouse in the Canticles) by
any means to hear news of him whom their Soul loved.

But whereto does all this tend? To give encouragement to a wicked Ministry?
God forbid. I wish verily that all the gatherers of Saints were Saints, and
that those who express a scandalous Tit. 1.7. S. Gregor. de past. cura. lib.
1.2. Hooker lib. 5. see. 81.
contrariety to Sanctification were removed, if incorrigible. For no doubt,
though such may quicken some by their doctrine, yet they kill others by their
example, and a man-killer is not fit to be a Minister, whose very Trade is
Salvation. Besides, though a Ministers goodness give not the esse of
Salvation, yet no doubt it gives the melius esse. For a Minister that lives
well, is a double Preacher, he preaches both by words and works; so he
preaches with a witness, and his life is a witnessing or Martyrdom of his
doctrine. But the good Preacher and evil Liver, is but a single Preacher; yea,
he labors by his Life to confute his Doctrine.

Now where the Spirit speaks twice by Illumination and Sanctification, he is
more heard then where he speaks but once. Surely the lives of Saints and
especially of Ministers are the lively books of the Ignorant, and in them
should they read the Characters of Virtue and Holiness.

But my purpose is this; First, that God alone may have the glory of our
Salvation, and that with the Virgin, our spirits may rejoice in God our
Savior. It is the singer of the Spirit, issuing from Christ Jesus that gives
life to the Letter, and brings the advantage of the New Covenant above the Old,
by writing Gods Word in our hearts, which the old Law could not perform.

Secondly, I desire that the Ministers would turn away the eyes of the people
from their goodness as the cause of their Salvation, saying with the Apostles,
Why gaze ye on us, as if we by our own power or virtue had made you whole. The
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, has glorified his Son Christ Jesus, and his
power, not our goodness does give this perfect soundness.

Thirdly, I desire that Hearers would not refuse Christ Jesus, lively offered
and described unto them, though they know not the holiness of the Preacher.
Let not any turn the Church into a Judgment seat, and censure their Ministers
Life, while they should hear his Doctrine. This is to be Judges and not
Hearers. I wonder what such Hearers would do, if they had been in Israel when
Solomon preached after his many scandalous sins, which made his
Sanctification doubtful to many. But let the same Solomon advise thee, Be not
rash with thy mouth, but be more near to hear, then to offer the sacrifice
of fools. Say with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; and not Hear
Lord, for thy servant speaks; and what speaks he? damnation of the
Preacher. Let us rather look on our own miseries and defects, then on the
Ministers, and then we shall have more mind to seek our own cure from the
Word: then to examine whether he be sick that would cure us. Let us not
doubt but if the seed be good, and the ground be good, it will bring forth
much fruit whatsoever become of the Sower.

CHAP. XII. Spiritual Wickedness in high places, and the Remedy of it.
IT has been a great cause of the misery of the Church in general, and of
the members of the same Church in particular, that spiritual exaltations have
begotten carnal gloriations, and that the Flesh has lifted it self up by the
increases of the Spirit, as the Froth mounts by the flowing of the Water. And
how can it choose but draw Misery, when it procures an Almighty Wrath, which
Wrath is attended with an equal Vengeance. And if any would doubt how it
should procure so terrible a Wrath, let him but behold the misshapen ugliness
and absurd inconsequence of this Sin, and it cannot but anger his eyes, and
much more the pure eyes of a most holy God, who cannot abide to sow good seed
and to reap Tares, to plant the noblest Vines and to gather the sowrest
grapes. But first let us consider this sin how it grows, and then how ugly it
is when it is grown. This Sin comes to his growth thus. When God out of the
riches of his Grace, powers on man the gifts of his Spirit, by which he rises
unto a spiritual excellence, and perchance thereby to some outward dignity,
then the Flesh mounts up straight to manage and enjoy the fruits and issues of
the Spirit; So what has been gotten by the Spirit, has been eaten and
digested by the Flesh, and so Grace have been brought to nourish her whom she
should chiefly have slain. This is the infirmity of wretched Mankind. Sin
is so fast wouen into our Flesh, and among sins especially Pride, that the
Flesh most vnsensibly will be proud, when her Foe the Spirit prospers, though
indeed the prosperity of the Spirit by the kindly operation of it, should be
the destruction of the flesh. Occidat modo imperet, says the Flesh, I will
adventure my life, so there may be that excellence by which I may advance my
Pride. And as this is strong in the Root, so it has been general in the
Fruit, it has spread his effects from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hisfop on
the wall, from him that ascends above the clouds and will be like unto the most
High, to the lowly shrub that grows in the humble Vale. For this very Sin
has puffed up the Man of sin unto his monstrous hugeness, that he is grown
to he the king of the children of Pride, and this infirmity endangered the
most humble St Paul, who gloried in distresses, so that he had need of
buffetting. In the one the Horns of the Lamb defend and maintain the mouth
of the Dragon, and in the other the transcendence and abundance of Revelations,
which were above the utterance of Man might have lifted up his conceit to have
thought himself to be more then a man. And as I can hardly think any prouder
then the king of Pride, so I can scarce think any humbler then St Paul, and
therefore I think all men have a degree of this Corruption, and that more or
less as they approach i^ likeness to the pride of the man of sin, or as they
com near to the humility of blessed St Paul. And let not men altogether look
upward or outward, to find this sin either above or without them, but let
them look into themselves, and they may find as much Geometrical Pride in
themselves as they do Arithmeticall Pride in others, as much Pride
proportionably to their Low places and Graces, as others have to their Higher
gifts and Dignities. Yea, it was not true only in the Time of Diogenes, but it
is true now also, That sometimes a greater Pride below, goes about to pull
down a lesser Pride above. Yet I must needs confess that a little Pride above
is in this more offensive, because more conspicuous, and there an example of
Pride does most harm, where a pattern of Humility would have done most good.
But now let us go aside to behold the ugliness of it, and perchance the very
sight of it may serve for a Remedy. What is more monstrous then that which is
most unreasonable, and what is more unreasonable then on Christ to build
Antichrist, on the Spirit to graffe the Flesh, and upon Grace to mount the
corruption of Nature. What agreement has a carnal tumor with Spiritual
excellence, what interest has Corruption in Sanctity, the Old Man in the New?
Wherefore let the house of Israel be the Flesh, and the house of David the
Spirit, and then Israel may truly say, What portion have we in DAVID, and what
inheritance in the Son of ISHAI? Neither let any think that the height of
the Flesh can be any grace or preservative to the eminences and dignities of
the Spirit. For Pride cannot procure safety or prosperity, since it draws the
resistance of God and the hatred of men. But there is a Spiritual vigor and
authority, which agrees both with humility and eminence, and this keeps men
in a true state of mind, free from that Pride which makes a man the enemy of
God, and free from that baseness which makes a man the scorn of men. For we
may not think of an humility which is opposite to the dignity of the Spirit
(ye true Nobility of the Soul) nor to dispensatiue vigor; (for virtues are
not contrary) but on that which is contrary to a carnal Tumor, a needless
swelling, a weed of the Flesh. And surely (that we may farther see the
absurdity of this Pride) we can use no better means for the begetting of
Humility, then the consideration of those excellencies on which the Flesh
usually begets Pride. For do thou enjoy a great measure of Gods chief
Graces? Do but as Jacob did, Take but one of the least of these Graces and set
them in one balance, and thy self in the other, and the voice of Humility
cannot but break out of thy mouth, Lord I am less then the least of thy
blessings. If with David in one sight thou beholdest thy own natural
corruption and misery, and the great works which God has wrought both in thee
and for thee, Humility must speak out of thy mouth as it did out of David's,
Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou
regardest him? And thy Psalm shall begin and end not in thy own excellence,
but in the excellence Psalm. 8.
of God; Lord how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth? Surely if thou take
a true account of what thou have received of God, thou have taken a true
account of what thou owe him; now the more thou have received, the more thou
owe, and the more thou owe, I hope thou will not be the more proud, but
the more humble. Though God allows thee enjoying of his graces, yet thou
owe him the service and glory of them, therefore think as well of the
greatness of thy obligement as of the greatness of thy exaltation by them.
The more graces thou have received, the more service does God exspect, and a
larger account. And though the man that sits down and swells in Spiritual
excellencies, seems to be at his Rest and iourneys End, yet be not thou
emulous of him, for he has taken his reward before his time. The true and
kindly reward of Spiritual graces is a Spiritual happiness, which being put
over to another life (which also is Spiritual) he is altogether short of it,
who in this life endeavors to find it. He that in Spiritual graces aims at
temporal rewards as his chief ends, this man makes the Spirit a drudge to the
Flesh, he makes the Israelite to build Towers for the Egyptian, he has begun
in the Spirit and ends in the flesh, and woe be to him whose end is worse then
his beginning. 2. Pet. 2.20. But let Spiritual honor and advancement, be used
and employed by the same Graces by which they were gotten, and let Grace then
flourish and fortify most, when it is most manured, dressed and encouraged. The
higher Grace is advanced and rewarded, the more power, and the more matter it
has for good works. A man truly Spiritual knows his own dignity and
nobililie, that he is a son of God, a Citizen of Heaven, an inheritour of a
kingdom, and he does not value any worldly honor equal with this. Therefore
for any outward additions, he will not abate his inward excellence, neither
will he give away the greater for the meaner. But he says to outward dignities
as God said to the Prophet; Let them return to thee, but return not thou to
them. He will have outward things by a Spiritual use to become Spiritual, but
he will not suffer himself who is Spiritual, by Carnal things to be made
carnal. If Religion beget wealth, he will not suffer the daughter to eat up
the mother, but the mother commands the daughter and keeps her in obedience to
that which bare her; otherwise it were a most notable sacrilege, to take the
things of the Spirit from the Spirit, and to give them to the flesh, and the
very profaneness of Belshazzar, to drink carnal carowses in the spiritual
Vessels of the Temple.

But let us remember the hand of God was against him on the Wall, and the hand
of God was quickly upon him with a final overthrow. Knowing therefore the
terror of the Lord, let us strive to please him, let us fear to offend him,
and this shall we do if we follow our Saviors counsel, by giving the things
of God unto God. Neither let any man think it an easy thing in outward
aduancements, to continue inwardly spiritual, or to use outward things in a
spiritual manner. For prosperity has bin found a most dangerous temptation,
and it requires great care and a strong spirit rightly to manage it. There is
ancient league between our flesh and the World, the knot where of though it
be cut by the Circumcision of the spirit, yet the smiles and glances which the
World casts on us in outward glory and prosperity, do easily awake the love
that was laid to sleep, and entise the flesh to renew her first Friendship
with the World. Therefore has he need of the faith of Moses, that will refuse
the pleasures of sin, and change them for the coldness and abstinence of
Mortificatio^. But let him* with Moses have an eye to the recompense of the
reward; and that sight will make him resolute. Let him remember the good
Servant, who the more Talents he received of his Master the more he increased
(not to himself) but to his Master, And the more Talents he increased to him,
the more Cities he received of him. Let him, with Saint Paul, not look on the
things that are seen, but on the things that are not seen, because the things
seen are but temporal, but the things not seen eternal; and then if he be
wise he will use things temporal for the advancement of things eternal, and
not lose things eternal by a carnal fruition of things temporal.

To conclude, if the man that has inward Graces, by those Graces have gotten a
spiritual Eminence, that he shines as a greater Star from which the lesser
differ in Glory, let him endeavor to preserve and increase his excellence, as
well as to obtain it. This shall he do if he add one Grace more to the rest
of his Graces, and that is Humility. For Humility is a Grace that is the keeper
of Graces, yea, it is an increaser of them. So a Christians chief way of
aspiring is by Humility, and by lowness to be exalted. On the otherside, if
Grace be followed by Pride, Pride lessens that wherein it seeks to fasten her
roots, so that the more proud a man is of Grace, the less cause of Pride he
is likely to have, for Grace will lessen as Pride increases.

Again, has thy inward excellence received the addition of some outward
Dignity, let the spirit that got it command it, do thou make it spiritual,
and let it not make thee carnal. Do not thou lose that which thou art, for
that which thou have, but be thou still thy self, and let the things of
Nature be the servants of Grace. Be thou still spiritual in thy affections,
in thy actions, for if thou abide in the spirit, thou abidest in thy
excellence, and if thou go from the spirit to the flesh, thou go down
really, though thou mountest imaginarily, for the top of the flesh is too bad
to be the footstool of the spirit. But if thou abide constant in the spirit,
and thereby art possessor of thy own soul, and a commander of things
transitory, thy sowing to the spirit shall make thee to reap of the spirit,
and thy Harvest shall be life everlasting.

Thou shall also stop the mouths of them that speak evil of Dignities, and
for the abuse would take away the use. Thou shall be called a builder of Sion,
and a repayrer of the breaches of Jerusalem. But on the otherside, They that
sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. They that build up a
Babell, shall be stricken with confusion. They that partake with the Harlot in
her sins, shall partake with her in her plagues: and Reu^. 18 7, 8.
one of her chief sins is Pride, and her plagues are Mourning, Famine, Death
and Fire. Their souls shall be banished from the Tree of Life, which is the
extremity of hunger, They shall be sent into weeping and gnashing of teeth,
which is the most bitter mourning, and to the second Death, where the Worm
dies not, and the fire never shall be quenched.

CHAP. XIII. A double fault in teaching, one that fretteth the whole flesh, the
other nourishes the proud flesh; one thinks to save men by angring and
despising them, the other will not save them, rather then offend them.
Our Savior CHRIST says, W^ to you when all men speak well of you: and Saint
Paul says, I seek to please all, that by all means I may win some. In
these two Sayings, there is a show of Contrariety between the Master and the
Servant. Christ accounts them accursed with whom all are pleased; and yet Paul
strives to please all, though those with whom all are pleased be accursed. And
according to the misinterpretation of these two places, have risen two Errors,
the one of them that think their Ministry never well set on work, or
sufficiently confirmed, until it has stirred up the whole World against them:
The other of them, that think it the chief discretion of their Ministry, not
to speak any thing which by a reproof of evident sins may hazard the love of
any of their hearers.

But Verity being ever the Companion of Unity, and Christ and Paul speaking
both infallible Verity, they are certainly at Unity. Now this Verity like a
right Line will plainly show the crookednes of both these Errors: and this
Unity will condemn their contentiousnesse that fall out about the defense of
Errors.

Christ speaks not to this end that the Ministers should labor for hatred, or
strive that men should speak ill of them but he says; That the ill speeches
of men, are ordinary consequents of a faithful Minister, yea, a faithful man.
He does not tell the Ministers that they should follow hatred, but he tells the
Ministers that hatred will follow them He does not set the Minister by the
ears with the World, but he says, the World will take the Minister by the
ears. He is of Saint Paul's mind, that he would have the Minister in all
indifferent things to please all, but yet he denounces that, though such
courses be taken of pleasing, yet the very exercise of the Ministry will
mostly get displeasure. And hereof no better example then Paul himself, with
whom though striving to please all, yet the most of all were much displeased.
So that both these Sayings may be harmoniously contracted into one sentence,
Strive to please all that you profit some, yet striving to please all be ye
sure that some will be displeased; For the Seed of the Serpent will hate Seed
of the Woman and the World that only loves her own, will hate them that are not
of the World. But that we wander not on either hand into these diverse Errors,
let us find out the right paths of truth, even the true Laws of pleasing and
displeasing. In pleasing let this be the first Law, That Ministers are to
propose a good end in their pleasing; they must not please men to their
damnation, nor please them to Gods dishonor, nor for their own vain glory;
but they must please them to save them, and to bring them to serve and glorify
their Creator.

Secondly, they must please them in things lawful; even in things good, or at
least indifferent. They may not please them in evil, that good may come
thereof, neither may they sooth them in their sins, which is to edify the
Kindome of Satan, but if there be at anytime a conniuencie (at no hand may
there be a combination, nor encouragement) it must be for the more profit;
even to watch a better opportunity; And still be it provided, that no perfect
peace by any means be made with sin. Above all, let a Minister strive to
please in holiness of life; for the beauty thereof has often stolen away the
hearts of the gainsayers, and gained their affections even against their wills.
Yea, let his Gesture have an amiable comeliness, befitting one that is a Man
of God. And such is a grave Humility even without Pride or Baseness, not
carnally but spiritually, both confident and humble.

Thirdly, let them please them in the wisdom and discretion of their
Dispensation. Let them give the great Ones their Honors and Respects, let
Festus be called Noble, and let King Agrippa have his commendations of
believing the Prophets, for this is not to give Titles or to call good evil,
but to speak truth and to give honor to whom honor belongs.

A wicked Man may be outwardly honorable, and thou may not rob him without,
because he is already robbed within. Thou may cast him down by spiritual
judgment, but not degrade him of his temporal dignity; thy weapons are
spiritual not carnal, and thy Masters Kingdom is not of this World. If thou
do otherwise, rail on the Pope as much as thou will, thou art surely a limb
of him; for he robs men wholly of temporal honor, for spiritual offenses, and
thou robbest them in part. Eccl. 12.12.
But thou shall prove thy self an ill Fisher for souls, if thou will not
bayte thy doctrine or behavior, with that sweetness or ceremony by which the
fish will byte the better, and be the sooner caught.

In sum, know the estate of thy Flock in particular, and to be to every one
a several Man in thy private conversation, and still one man in the public.
Be that to every Man by which thou may win him most; For thou must be all
for gain, a true Worldling, but of another World.

Thirdly, in indifferent things, as lawful and decent recreations allow them;
yea, sometimes therein join with them. God that fills us with food and
gladness, allows these blessings especially to his blessed ones, the rest
have it by stealth. Let us not make the gate of Heaven narrower then God has
made it, neither let us make Religion a ghastly thing by unnecessary opposing
of Nature, for the business of Religion is not to cross Nature created, but
Nature corrupted; even our Corruption, not our Creation. Yet in Recreation both
Decency and Sobriety must be regarded. Besides, thy presence may restrain or
reform sin; But indeed if there be anvnreformable course of sin, as
blsphemy, etc. I know not well how to allow any patience of wickedness,
neither how the conversation of the Sodomites can be at the same time unto Lot
both a recreation unto his mind, and a vexation to his soul.

Lastly, please them by outward profiting them. If alms, hospitality, a mild
exaction of dues may win them, show with Paul, that thou seek not theirs,
but them. And now as concerning a general displeasing, far be it from us to
make it either a virtue or a touchstone. It is not to be prosecuted as a
business, nor taken for a mark. Christ indeed makes general pleasing an ill
sign, but general displeasing he makes not an infallible good sign, for
even the wicked Jews, as Paul says, are contrary to all men, Yea to all men
they are a reproach. But the true and laudable displeasing must be imposed, not
sought and imposed for duties absolutely necessary, and performed in due
manner. It must be for the profession or practice of that Truth, which to
conceal will be to the loss of Gods glory, or for the reproof of those
sins which the same glory cannot suffer to be unreproved. Yet must these
things be done with a hearty desire, that they may please since it is a true
Rule, That it is a foolish kind of Rhetoric to alien his affections, whose
judgment thou seek to gain; And most That a Christian ought to seek peace
with all men, and to do all things in love. Unavoidable and imposed
persecution is the Crown and rejoicing of a Christian, and he is nearest the
twelve Thrones, that is nearest the Apostles in necessary losses for Christ's
sake. But let us not snatch such glory out of Gods hands, nor with the sons
of Zebedee, intrude our selves into the right and left hands of Christ, for
they only shall have these seats to whom they are appointed of the Father. If
God call us to Confession or Martyrdom, let us run to it, or at least run to
him by Prayer that he will enable us to run, and that so we may obtain. But
if God call not, but we run without his call, let us know, That that running
makes Confessors and Martyrs of the Devil.

CHAP. XIIII. The Diseases of Representation, which infect by the eye and ear.
IT was a clear Truth which the Poet said; That pierces deeper into the heart
which enters by the eye, then that which enters by the ear. Hereupon grows
the excellence of representation, which as it has been useful, so it has
been also in great use, and the usefulness of it has been so eminent, that
men have employed the strength of their wits, to turn Ears into Eyes, even to
fasten on their imaginations, the same character and shape by hearing which
has bin beheld by seeing. So that though the outward gates were diverse, yet by
that diversity, almost the same inward apprehension and knowledge, either of
persons or actions are received into our minds. Hence is it that the Poet,
Orator, or Historian, describes a person or a quality, with such lif, that
though the Ear hear but words, yet the Eye sees the things, at least thinks
it sees them.

And by this lively portrature of wit, the matter is so evidently presented to
the imagination, and so stedily riuitted to the memory, that it is our own,
and pregnantly ready for use upon every occasion. But this use has bin
likewise poisoned with abuse, and that excellent Pensill of the Soul, wit and
conception, which should have paterned and fastened virtue to our affections, in
her truly amiable feature, and have stripped vice before our eyes into her
natural ugliness; contrarily it has given a painting of Pleasure unto Vice,
and made it lovely by the adornment of wit, which of it self is most foul and
abominable. So in steed of being helpful to the mind, by a vigorious
impression of virtue, it has been made a stamp of the Devil, mightily to
print vice into our souls, by representing the Images of Death unto Life.

Another kind of representation of the manual Pensill, has also been useful
for the lively expression of persons, actions and stories. In the Histories of
Martyrs, this has conveyed their sufferings to the minds of men with a mighty
current, that the dead similitude has set life in the affections, and that
which moved not it self, yet moved the beholder both to compassion and
indignation. But this kind also has bin abused and that most grossly unto
spiritual and corporal uncleanness. It has been abused to Idolatry, either
while that which is worshipped is painted, or that which is painted is
worshipped.

To paint the Godhead (which only for it self is to be worshipped) is a
dumb blasphemy, and a silent Lie. It says, God can be represented by
colors, or that he is visible to the Eye, and so makes us believe we see what
indeed cannot be seen. So to speak truth, it shows to us what God is not,
and not what he is, not a likeness but an unlikeness of God; and whereas they
pretend it to be Gods Picture, it is merely a Picture of not God.

A gross fault it is also, to worship that which is painted; For though the
body of Christ himself to be pictured, (and yet I never knew any sound proofs
that he has a true Picture) yet may not the Picture be worshipped with the
honor due to Christ. Though his Humanity may be worshipped, yet that is for
his union with the Deity, even a true real and hipostaticall union; But the
union between the Image and the pattern, is only Imaginary, not real or
hypostaticall, so that while we may well say we worship Christ because he is
God, we cannot say we worship the Image because he is Christ. A far more
real union there is between the Saints and Christ, even the members and the
head, for Christ says, The Father is in him, and he in them; yea, if Christ's
Prayer be heard, we are one with him, yet because it is not a personal and
hypostaticall union with the Godhead, even Peter himself forbids Cornelius to
worship him.

Therefore far be it that a bare likeness should deserve worship, when a
real and participating union does not, This Pensill of the hand has bin also
a Factor for uncleanness, while it presents incendiary spectacles to the
eyes of humane frailty. Surely Concupiscence is a free horse, and wants not
sharp spurs but a strong bitte, it is ready of it self to carry away the
soul and break her neck, by a high fall into a low place, even as low as
Hell. But these men, least damnation should not be swift enough, set wings on
her arms and spurs on her sides, that she may fly away with the soul, by
an extreme and irreuocable celeritie.

Thus are they quite contrary to the Spirit of God, for that sees and pitties
the blind fury of our lusts, it comes into us to quench their heat, and to
abate their rage. It gives us also sober counsels, by restrayning our senses
under discipline and custody, so to put off the dangerous temptations which by
the senses would break in upon us. But these men have a contrary business, they
kindle that which the Spirit quenches, they set fire on the body which is the
house of the soul, they give life unto that which is man's death, and strive to
kill men better that are already too much dead in sins and concupiscences,
Brokers for the Devil that make wares for hell, and the return of their
merchandise is the souls of men. But leave off this needless as well as
wicked Trade, Lust is as good an evil Painter as your selves, it needs no
objects nor representations, for it self chooses objects fast enough, and
makes to it self too many imaginations and pictures. But if you will show the
excellence of skill, do something of rarity, and make such Images that may
fright away Lust, by the apparition of torments and miseries attending it, or
may persuade Temperance by some lively patterns and characters of Sobriety,
and the excellent benefits following it. Another kind of Representation, and
which is done most to the life, is that which is done most by the living, so
that life it self dwells in that Representation. Hence things so represented,
though past, are freshly animated by the spirits of others, and live in them
again, and that so naturally that they seem not to be others but the same,
and not so much to be the second as the first. And surely if this
Representation were of profitable and commendable things, in a profitable and
commendable manner, I do not see how it can be condemned, except a thing may
be condemned for being profitable, or for being a Representation. The first, no
man will affirm, and I think the latter can hardly be defended, for the
personating of others may be patterned, even by Divine examples. One Prophet
takes to him the representation of a foolish Shepherd, another of a man
wounded by him whose prisoner he set free, a third of a man fettered in
chains; and all these to teach more lively, and to move more forcibly. But
such great abuses, have defiled this kind of Representation, that it has not
only left the true and natural profit of it, but it has seemed to many grave
and godly men rather fit to be taken away then hopeful to be cured. On the
other side, I see no hope of the taking away, and therefore I desire it may be
cured, and to that end am willing to show the chief corruptions of it, so that
either the diseases may be healed, or the whole may abstain from being
infected.

A first Abuse of this kind of Representation, is in the person represented,
when such are represented for pleasure, whose representation to wise men is
loathsome, or to weak men is dangerous. I should here begin with the
transfiguring of men into fools, so to make men merry with the deprauation and
abasement of a Creature made to Gods Image, yea of the very Image of God in
that Creature. For this feeds that evil humor and condition of foolish men,
that uses to rejoice in folly, and make it self merry with that which makes a
wise man either angry or sorry. But the world is inexorable in this point, and
they will not have the fool taken from them, but will needs delight in their
like, and therefore I will pass to points of more hope and greater
possibility.

A second Fault in this kind is the Representation of Women by Men, which I
think is a most dangerous* and pestilent Spectacle. I need not go to the old
Law for proof, but only appeal to new and lamentable experience, and desire
the confession of them that know the times, whether the shape of a woman has
not made masculine loves, and whether the maid has not procured love to the
boy. I am loath to speak of that whereof the very speech is loathsome, but it may
not be that sins should have privilege to prosper, because they are
loathsome to be mentioned, but even because they are loathsome they should the
more terribly be reproved. But I will go a middle-way between saying all and
nothing, and wish that there were not so much merchandise of Play-boyes, nor so
much counterfeiting intisement to that traffic. Sure I am in some Countries
at some times, the purchase and attendance of a play-boy, has been a special
ornament: and if there be faults issuing of this fountain, I only say thus
much, That for such, Lands use to spew out their Inhabitants, Heaven raynes
down Hell on Earth, and men of Earth go down alive to Hell.

A third Fault is, when the persons of men either holy by profession or
conversation, are brought forth to the mockes and scorns of profane Herod's.
In such God himself is sacrilegiously derided, while either his functions or
graces are turned into laughing stocks. It is a cursed laughter that laughs at
him by whom we laugh; and he who made laughter does also make weeping, and as
certainly as they now laugh, and his Spirit is grieved, so hereafter will he
laugh and they for grief shall weep, and that weeping shall be eternal, for
it shall be caused by a worm that dies not, and a fire that never shall be
quenched.

A second sort of Abuse is, when evil speeches (that corrupt good manners) are
represented. Of these I will name three sorts.

A first is rotten and filthy language, wherein one defiles his own tongue
that he may defile another man's ears, he takes the fire of his own lust, and
by his tongue flings it in at the windows of the ear, to set young or
youthful souls on fire. And left this poison should do no harm, filthiness
very often is conserved and sugared in wit, that death may be sure to be
swallowed, and that the filthiness may enter and pierce the deeper, being
poynted by the sharpness and pleasantness of wit. Surely such men become
devils unto men, and turn wit into temptation, perverting that excellent
issue of the Soul to be a Factor for the Flesh, yea to carry errands of
beastliness between Flesh and Flesh, the inuenter and the hearer. Yea, the
Soul by this means becomes a destroyer of Souls, for while it foldeth up the
Flesh in sweetness, it kills the Soul that made it, and the Soul that
hears it, if with hearing it be loved, as it will be if wit can do it. But
besides this low debasing of so high and excellent a power of the Soul, Let
me tell them for an advantage, that it is often the sign of an hungry and
needy brain, for as filthiness sometimes borrowes of wit to make it handsome,
so a bad wit often borrowes of filthiness to make it self toothsome; for a
little wit with a great deal of filthiness, has often among vulgar and muddy
ears, more favor then much wit if it be over cleanly. But let the best strive
to please the best, and I know there are wits of that excellency that can give
sufficient delight by clean and clear conceits, even such as flow from pure
wit, and borrow no bastardly generation, of the filth and mudde of the
baseness, shame and corruption of Man. And I know there are also neat and
noble Auditors, that relish wit best by it self, when it is not farded nor
tainted with the mixture of slime and dross. And I do not see but the chaste
wife of one (whose friendship while he lived might have brought me into
suspicion of partiality, but now he is gone, against my will does leave me at
liberty to commend him) has been as fair and amiable, as the Venus of many
decked up with the colors and payntings of lustful and incendiary wit.

A second Fault in representative speaking, is the using of holy words to
profane ends, or in a profane manner. Oaths are sacred, prayers are holy,
and the name of God glorious, yet they must serve the recreation of Man, and
man must be delighted though God be blasphemed. A fearful thing it is, for Man
to delight himself in that wherein God is dishonored; If there were no other
thing but the abuse of Gods name, of sentences of Scripture, and such holy
things, this were enough to make Plays of this nature (and such are most)
abominable to every good Christian. For I tell thee this, That if thou art a
Christian, thou art like unto Lot, and thy righteous Soul will be vexed with
the dishonor of thy God. Now if thou art vexed therewith, how can thou go
to be vexed? Can thou take delight in vexation, and will thou give money for
it? And if thou be not vexed, then art thou no good Christian. Again, if
thou be a Christian, God is thy best friend, and will thou go where thou
think thy best friend shall be abused, and thou must hold thy peace. Take
heed for Gods sake that thou take not delight there where thou should be
vexed; and take heed for thy own sake, that if thou must needs be vexed, that
thou go not to seek vexation.

I might here add for a third Fault, ^he scandalous deprauations and
detractions, which diminish the honor of some, to add to the pleasure of
others, yea beyond this the doctrines rather then reproves of vices, the
prodigal expense of time, the stuff of which life it self consists, but I
wish the former faults were first amended, and the amendment of those would
best give encouragement to a farther cure. Sure I am as the case now stands,
that generally these Theaters are the Churches of Satan, and do by the means
forementioned edify unto damnation. While the Preacher works for Heaven, the
Player plays (for his working is playing) for Hell, and many Souls receive
there those lessons of Darkness, which lead them stedily unto eternal
darkness. And if exhortations may not prevail, I wish Authority would, and
that at least the same course may be taken for the Scene that is for the
Press, that nothing might be acted, but that which first had been examined,
that so if this Representation shall be thought fit to remain, yet at least
the foul spots and corruptions of it may be cleared, that so it may be
restored to all possible beauty, and become (if not profitable) yet infinitely
less hurtful.

CHAP. XV. Of the Pharisees Disease, the Love of uppermost seats.
THE Emphasis lies in the word [Loue] for to love prelation out of a tumor of
the Flesh is a sin, but to receive it humbly being justly given, may be a
work of the Spirit. Our Savior consutes not superiority and inferiority, he
is not the Author of confusion, but of order; but that which he condemns is
the lifting up of the heart in pride, and the proud hearts lifting up of the
body in place. If therefore thou see the Disease, learn also the Remedies,
and if thou art not yet provided, I will help thee a few.

In the First place, That thou may cure thy self by contraries; by true
judgment and humility, grow first into patience, and after into liking with
the lower place. Let thy judgment tell thee that there is no odds in the
place, but in the mind; for the same place does please or displease, as the
mind likes or dislikes it. I have known a man take a pleasure if not a pride
in sitting lowest; if thou do the same thou shall find the place will do
nothing to thee to discontent thee.

Secondly, Know that the true height of a man is eminence in virtue, and an
especial virtue is humility, and humility is very much expressed in a good
digestion of inferiority. So if thou art high in virtue; sitting lowest, thou
sit highest; yea, by sitting low thou do sit high, for humility does
exalt thee. Surely the true excellence of man is virtue guided by knowledge
(and indeed otherwise it is no virtue) for wherein a man is more excellent then
other creatures, therein is one man more excellent then another man. By how
much a man rises above the creatures toward the Creator, by so much is his
excellence increased, and so far every man excels another, as he goes
beyond another in the Image of God. Therefore strive thou for that which makes
thee inwardly higher, though thou be outwardly lower, for if in this thou
excellest thy Neighbor, thou art higher then he in worth though lower in
place. So a pearl is richer then gold, though in a pendent the gold sit above
the pearl. And we say often that a valiant short man, is a taller man then a
long coward; so that he is above him in worth, though below him in stature. And
no less is it thought that a consequent Lady is preferred before an antecedent
Usher.

Thirdly, Know that this present order is but an orderly confusion enforced by
necessity, and sorting with the confused misery of the fall of Man. It was not
the appointment of Gods first Creation that Princes should go on foot, and
Fools ride on horseback, but by Adams fall, rich folly takes place of poor
wisdom. The heart of Man is deceitful, and inward excellence cannot truly be
judged, therefore outward stuff for the present is usually the dull touchstone
of eminence, and where there can be no better, the worst must serve. But here
meets me a case that is vanity it self and vexation of spirit. Two men there
are of equal means, the one lives like a Man and a Christian, and equals his
means by his exspences in hospitality, services of his Country, relief of
the poor: The other he is neither Man nor Christian, does nothing for God nor
his Country, but by sacrilege, oppression, and extortion, robbes God and the
Country; yet by this no goodness, yea by his wickedness he trebleth his
goods, and far surmounteth the other. Now let any man tell me which of these
should be taken for the better Man, whether the worse man or the better?
Surely by the rule of riches, the latter which is stark naught must be the
better man, and if it be so, Love if thou can this admirable excellence and
superiority, which sets thee up higher in place by being worser in wickedness.
Would thou be this better man if thou might, or rather will thou not
rather scorn this so much valued place, which is to be gotten by excelling in
wickedness? Surely a most pitiful eminence, which is bought by the
deprauation of a man's chiefest excellence, the Image of God. A lamentable
dignity where the price of the soul must pay for the preferment of the body,
and thou must inwardly be most ugly, that thou may outwardly be glorious; It
were far better for thee to be the better man that thou may be the worse,
then to be the worse man that thou may be the better. But to give thee
comfort against this confusion, I will tell thee.

Fourthly, That this confused order, shall be righted by an order without
confusion. The day draws near wherein every man shall be seated in his right
place, even according to true, real, and inward excellence. That (as I told
thee) is the Image of God, wherein whosoever now shines above the rest by
grace, shall hereafter shine above the rest in the eminence of Glory.

Therefore lift up thy heart from earthly dignity, unto heavenly honor, and
set thy heart on that which shall be thine by true judgment, by due
administration and in an eternal fruition. Thy worth shall be truly valued,
and accordingly thy glory shall duly be given thee, and this glory shall be
given thee in a Kingdom which has no end. And then shall thou see those
glorious slaves whom vice here preferred, tumbled down into a bottomless
Pit, and as far below thee as hell is below Heaven: Then shall it be no
grief of heart to thee, that here thou were misplaced by mistaking, but thou
shall rather grieve for them, that they were preferred by wickedness unto
eternal misery. It only remaynes, that some of that thought that then shall
fully possess thee, partly be taken up before hand, that so thy future
superiority may make thee fully pleased with thy present lowness, and the
preferment of others by sin may move in thee no other passion but pity.

We see the son of a great Man, can endure to be below in the School,
because he knows he shall be high in the Country, and quietly suffers those
to take place of him, of whom he knows by him place shall be taken. We walk
by faith and not by sight, by the sight of the soul, and not of the body; and
the soul seeing that heavenly exaltation, let not bodily sight depresse us,
but let that glorious eminence which we see by faith erect and cheer us.

And now because by that universal variety of events, all things coming alike
to all, or otherwise by divine favor and immediate blessing, wealth and honor
comes sometimes to grace and goodness; I thought it not unfit to add some
cautions how the great good man should make use of superiority.

First the love of Pride, which has with it a swelling conceit of himself,
and a lesning contempt of others, must be far from being the cause of his
being first, but he must take it for orders sake, which commonly brings two
Companions, Comeliness and Quietness.

Secondly, if there be any doubt of the right of priority, let him rather
incline to the humble side then the proud, and rather seek to go before in
Humility, then in place, which is indeed Saint Paul's To. 10.12
going before in going behind.

Thirdly, let Charity accompany Humility, which sometimes will give prioritie
for love; for some such there are whom you may win by this Rattle, and make
them friends of enemies, as children are pleased with Apples. It is a bad
Neighbor that is not worth more then his place, though indeed he be not very
good that will break friendship for love of the place. But love sometimes
seeks not her own, especially where love must be lost by seeking her own,
for love above all things seeks love.

Fourthly, in the difference of place remember the Community of Nature: yea,
perchance the priority of Grace; so shall thou not be lifted up in thy heart,
as thou art in thy place, above men of thine own dignity by Creation, and
perchance better then thy self by the eminent Graces of Sanctification. And
where greater Graces sit below thee, Let thy love and courtesy acknowledge
their inward dignity, as their inferiority does acknowledge thy outward
eminence.

For as I told thee, their excellence is the chiefest excellence, and it is
far from Justice that he should respect thy outward worth which is the
meaner, and thou should not acknowledge his inward worth which is the
better. But let each have his due, thou the honor of outward eminence; and he
the honor and respect due unto inward excellence.

CHAP. XVI. Anti-Circe. A potion that turns Beasts into Men, being before
turned from Men into aBests.
MAny are the sores that afflict the mind of corrupt and miserable Man. But of
these many, there are diverse that be contented with the hurt of one single
part or faculty of the soul, as a Mote in the Eye, and a Thorn in the Foot.
There is a single error in judgment, a particular straying of the will, and a
measured disordinatenesse of the Affections. In which cases the amending of
that one part where the grief lies is sufficient.

But there is a kind of Men (for such they were once) that will not be
contented with such small sores, but they will needs turn their mind into
one whole sore; Facies dicatur an vlcus? you shall not distinguish the face of
their (once-reasonable) souls, from that of the brutish and still unreasonable
souls of Beasts. They cast so much moisture on the Lamp of their
understanding, so much mudde upon their wills, that the light of their
understanding is put out, and the feathers of a divine and celestial will are
unable to mount; and so the soul in her faculties is slain, and there
remaynes nothing but the husks and shells of Men, for the Men themselves are
turned out of doors.

To such, mending will not serve the turn for they are dead. They must go
beyond mending, and had need to go to new making. For where the principia be
not only laesa, but as it were coesa, an almost indelible Character of
darkness and sensuality, being stamped on the soul, how shall the soul be
new lighted, but by the first inlightner, and how shall she of sensual be
made spiritual, but by a new-begetting of the Father of Spirits? This mass of
moisture is like the first Chaos, void and without form, and darkness is
upon the face of it.

What remedy remaynes, but that now as then the spirit move upon the waters,
even upon this informed lump of Humidity; There needs another fiat, even a
voice from Heaven, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead. But here
is the difficulty, The spirit can new make him, but it is almost impossible to
lead him to the thought of the spirit, much less to the Spirit it self.

If a Prophet would preach of Wine or strong drink, he should have a
plentiful Audience, but the spirit to moist men, is but a dry doctrine. Yet I
will not despair to please them, for I will also promise to bring to them the
best new Wine, a Wine that will comfort and cheer their hearts above all the
Wine in the World. And I doubt not, but if they once truly taste it, they shall
tell the Master of the Feast, even the God of consolations: Thou have kept the
Wine until the last. And that I may assuredly lead them in the right way to
him, who will both new make them, and cherish them being new made, I will set
them in the same path, where I see S. Paul a follower of Christ, leading his
followers; for he long since used the same kind of remedy for the same
disease, leading the Ephesians from the excess of Wine to the fulness of the
quickening and renewing Spirit.

The Apostle Paul in that place sets down a Vice and a Remedy, and he strives
to make the Vice abhorred, and the Remedy loved. To do this he needs no other
art but evidence, even to set forthliuely the true portrature of Vice, and the
true feature of Virtue, for Vice being truly represented, like a fury or
ghast of Hell, frights away her Spectators with her own vglines, and Virtue by
her amiable and glorious aspect, rauisheth and commands hearts and affections.

Let us therefore with patience or impatience, if you will, behold this Monster,
whereof though the sight maybe offensive, yet that offensiuenesse may perchance
prove a cure to the sick; and as for the whole we will recompense them
again, when the Virtue is compared with the Vice, for Contraries are a foil
to each other; And ugliness being more ugly by the side of Virtue, Virtue will
again be the more glorious by the compared ugliness of Vice. This Vice then
is here desciphered to us by three things, Here is the matter of it, here is
the measure or unmeasurableness of it, and here is the house and residence of
it.

The Matter of Drunkenness is Wine, the Measure is Excess, the house where it
dwells, but should not dwell; is ye, even miserable Man. But what will they
say, Does the matter of this Vice any way set forth the ugliness of it? Is not
Wine an excellent Creature? and is it not commended in the Scripture? and to
say truth (reioynes one of the Throat-Gyants) it is for the excellence of it
that we take so much of it; And here if I would give him the hearing, he
would gather a Doctrine out of Salomons Text, yet clean contrary to the intent
of it: That the color is amiable, the motion sprightly, and the effect
comfortable. But when thou have spoken this, thou Sepulcher of Gods Creatures,
I answer thee, that even for these reasons thou and thy beastliness are most
abominable.

For is Wine such an excellent Creature, and has GOD given it such Virtues?
Then art thou a very Swine to abuse so excellent a Creature, to defile that
which is precious, to tread on a Pearl with thy feet; yea, thou art a true
beast for debasing thy self by that which is excellent. Is Wine an excellent
Creature, why do thou bestow it so filthily as thou do? thou know the
issues of it, and I am ashamed to name them, thy deeds are too foul for my
words, I only say thus: If it be so excellent, why do thou throw it about
Chimneyes, floores and corners? Is this the fruit of an excellent gift that
thou should cast the gifts before the giuers face on the ground; yea, by
their excellence lose thy own excellence, and by spoiling them rob thy self
of thy self. The excellence of them should incite thee to an excellent use of
them, the goodness of God in giving so good a gift, should raise up goodness
in thee in the use of his gift, and to say truth, if there were any good nature
in thee, thou would please him that has pleased thee, by using the gift
just according to the will of the giver.

Thou take all other Grants under the Covenants of the Grantor, so should
thou do this even to the same end, and under the same measure by which he
affords it; And if thou ask what that is, Just so much as may make man
better and not worse, as may add to the man, and not take from him, that the
lower and bodily part of man may be so strengthened and comforted, that the
higher part of man remain sound and intyre.

If thou do otherwise, the Wine does accuse thee by his excellence, and makes
thee the more loathsome. For if it could speak as it can take away speech, it
would complain unto thee that it self is excellent, and man is excellent, but
in this beastlines both the excellencies are lost, for the excellent Wine has
spoiled the excellent man, and excellent man has spoiled the excellent Wine.
So does the Swallower prevent the Day of Judgment, for then it is said: That
God shall destroy both the meat and the belly, But this man will not stay so
long, he will before hand destroy both the drink and the belly, for the
occupation of this man is to destroy the Wine, by his belly, and his belly,
soul and body by the Wine.

And as the virtue of this Creature has been one motive to restrain us from
the vice of abusing it, so the unmeasurableness and monstrousness of it in
the word Excess, is a second retractiue, and that a mighty one. There is a
danger in this wine says Paul, even the danger of an excess, and the excess
of Wine has this mischief with it, that by how much the Wine exceeds, the man
diminishes; as much as the Wine is too much, so much the man is too little,
and what loss is greater then when a man loses his own self? Therefore if
any thing will move thee, Let the greatest loss move thee, rather lose thy
Wine then lose thy self: yea, indeed thou sauest thy Wine by saving thy self,
for in excess you are both cast away. This thing excess is worse then the
sting of an Aspe, for by it Wine poysoneth the very Soul and Reason of Man.
Hence it is that Wine is a mocker, and makes a Fool of a man, for the look of
it promises pleasure, the pleasure provoke excess, and excess brings a man
out of his wits, and so he becomes a Laughing Stock to Fools, and a
Lothing-stock to the Godly; And indeed as Idols are most truly called stocks
and stones, so may these men also, for they have eyes and see not, ears and
hear not, neither do they perceive any thing. Now ought not this to be a most
fearful and odious thing unto man, That where man's chiefest excellence and
honor is the Image of God, this Vice flies maynly at the face of this Image,
and seeks to scratch it out of the soul; and so to leave man as base and
dishonorable as the Beasts, whom man despises most. So is this excess a
notable kind of murder, for it kills that which is indeed the man, even Reason
and Understanding. And as it is thus contrary to the Creation by defacing that
Image of God, which the Creation planted in us, so it is also contrary to
Regeneration, and the recovery of that decayed Image. So is it a murder of the
second Adam in us as well as of the first, even a murde^ of life eternal. The
new man says Paul, is created in knowledge and true holiness, but drunkenness
(it is a foul word and an honest ear is troubled with the sound of it)
quenches the shining Lamp of knowledge, and the spiritual fire of holiness,
and leaves the soul of man as den of darkness and uncleanness. It thrusts a
finger into the very eye of the soul, even the understanding, and puts it out;
and it leaves such a dross and muddinesse on the will, that it grows base and
downward, the fiery mountings of the spirit being quenched by the fogs and
clouds of moisture, Namque affigit hums diuinae particulam Aurae;



Such lamentable effects of excess you shall ordinarily see in these thirsty
men, or men-fishes (for their life is only in liquido) they have commonly
rebated and dull understandings, and base, gross and muddy affections. They
love base company, base places, and base courses.

But if it be not yet odious enough, behold the Monster it self as you go in
the streets (for you can hardly miss him) and that will best affright you; A
certain thing it is that perchance was lately a man, but now has nor soul nor
body; That little mouth of his has swallowed down his whole self, he is
intombed in his own bowels, and that which is buried in him is his Sepulcher.
He is now only Belly, Foolishness and Sickness; his panch has buried the
Wine, and in the Wine is his wit buried, his soul, his hands, his feet, and
perchance his last wealth.

Thete can be nothing said of him now, but that he is a mere Caske, the shell
of wine, yet worse then that, a Caske that marres the Wine, and it self is
marred by it. You may strike him if ye will, he feels it not, for he is dead
as well as buried, and whosoever would speak with him, he must stay till he
come home; for the drink has turned him out of doors. But to what end do I
cast away my words? If I speak to such a one, I speak to the dead, and how
can he hear? And if I speak to the living, He is not such, and he has no
need of my speaking? Surely I will here take up the saying of Solomon, of the
other general death, That it is good to see the house of death, because the
living shall lay it to his heart. So though I have small hope of the dead in
excess. A Lazarus of that kind being very seldom raised unto life, yet let
the living behold this house of death, and he may lay it to his heart.

Let those that stand by the fallen take heed least they fall, Let the ugliness
which they see and abhor in others, make them strive not to be that which
they do abhor. Beware of Wine, because it tempts to excess, and therefore
handle it with fear (I speak now chiefly to them that excuse themselves by
being overtaken) because it has a sting in it: But especially beware of
excess, for without this sting the wine will hurt thee. Be an equal Judge
between thy taste and thy whole self, even thy body, thy soul yea Grace the
soul of thy soul. Be not partial to thy base sensuality, but rather ^^ thy
self, and favor those excellent things, Gods Grace, thy own soul and body;
Abate that which would abat^ thee, and lose any thing rather then thy self.

A third dehortatiue is the consideration of persons, for the persons whom he
dehorteth, are men and Christians and such of all other it worst becomes. A
Swine, o^ a Heathen, or (a Heathens fellow) a Swa^geret it becomes somewhat
kindly; But men of understanding, servants and members of Christ Jesus it fits
by no means; yea, it is a miserable incongruity. A man that has some remnant
of Gods Ima^e, yea, which is more, that has Gods Image renewed in him: yea, is
bought and brought to the wearing of this Image by the preciou^ blood of the
Son of God that such a one should defile and deface Gods Image in himself,
this is a great absurdity.

Therefore he coniureth them by their Manhood, and by their Christanity, that
they would not put on this wilful madness, by which both Manhood and
Christianity may be lost. Christ has dyed for thee, do not spoil him with
thy drink for whom Christ dyed. Do not thou defile with thy Wine that which
Christ has washed with his blood, and where Christ endured so great a pain as
accompanied the shedding of his blood, and nayling on the Cross for thy
salvation, do not thou shed thy Wine upon thy self to procure thy own
damnation. Surely thou preferrest Wine before the blood of Christ, and before
the Spirit of Christ. Thou art not a Christian but a Gadaren, or rather the
Hog of the Gadarens, now in carrying by the Devil into the Deep, if thou
prefer a Swinish pleasure before the most precious blood of the Savior of
the World.

Therefore, behold thy dignity and that may suffice thee. Thou art elect
according to the foreknowledge of God, by the sprinkling of the blood of
Christ and the sanctification of the Spirit; and is there a greater excellency
then this, to be a son of God so freely elected, so preciously redeemed, so
divinely sanctified? And now put this filthiness by the side of it (a loathsome
and odious comparison, I confess, but profitable by the lothsomenesse) and can
any man endure to loose the Trinity, that he may gain Sensuality, to leave to
be a Saint, that he may be a Beast, to lose Heaven, that he may gain Hell? Me
thinks a man had need be drunk beforehand, in this case to make a choice
of Drunkenness.

And now Paul passes from the Vice to the Remedy. An admirable fit and
sovereign Remedy, as which helps it three ways. First by a contrariety,
for cures are most commonly by contraries, and as excessive wine has bin
showed to be contrary to the spirit, so is the spirit to it. Secondly, by a
conformity with it, but excelling it, and so the eminence of it calls us
away, from that which is meaner to that which is more precious, as the offer of
gold calls us from silver or brass. Thirdly, by a privilege wherein it
differs from it, as not having the danger of wine, which is excess; for there
is no excess in the spirit, but excess is a virtue in it, and the greater
measure the more comm^ndation. Now that thou may be glad to b^e cured of this
Vice by the contrariety of the Spirit, see wherein the contrariety consists.
The surfeit of wine makes darkness in thy Understanding, and the Spirit light:
It makes brutish sensuality, strong and heavy upon the Will and affections, and
the Spirit exalts and purifies the Will by a clean and celestial grace. Now
if I leave it to thy choice whether thou will come out of Darkness into Light,
from a servile sensuality, a true equality with Beasts, into the glorious
liberty of holy clean and heavenly Minds; I know thou will tell me that there
is no doubt in this choice, but that Light is far better then Darkness, and
a heavenly Mind is far better then a sensual. Then do but believe what thou
say, and do what thou beleeuest, and thou art cured. Prefer in thy works
as well as thy words, the light of the Deity shining on thy Soul, before the
darkness of excess sent up from the gross vapors of Moisture. Be thou far
more glad to have thoughts of Purity, thoughts of Felicity, thoughts of
Eternity, then the beastly imaginations of filthy Lusts, inflamed in thy Soul
by the Lake of Brimstone that lies in thy Bowels. Let neither the color nor
the taste of Wine be thought a fit counterpoyse to those excellencies of the
Spirit, but when Wine would tempt thee by them, call him Mocker, and tell him
that pleasure is but a pretense, but darkness, sensuality, and eternal death
is the drift of it. Tell it thou have a Light in thee more precious then the
light of the Sun (the Father of Wine) yea more excellent then any Creature,
and thou will not change this excellent light into darkness, for so small a
price as a sight and a taste. Say thou have a quickening and purifying flame of
heavenly Fire sent down into thy heart, and thou will not quench it for the
World, by the inundation of a brutifying Moisture. And having chased away this
tempting Ammonite, that will not make peace with thee but by pulling out thy
best eye, retire into the Light and Virtue of the Spirit, inflame it, blow it,
kindle it by Meditation, by Prayer, by Reading, and the increase of this Light
and Virtue, wi^ increase in thee lo^hing of the Darkness and Beastliness of
excess. The Light of the Spirit and the graces thereof, will be so highly
precious in thy sight, that thou will wonder that any man should go down from
that Heaven of the Soul, into the dark and miry Dungeons of a stupi^ied
sightlesse, filthy, sensual and senseless Mind. Thou will admire that a man
should wilfully put out so glorious a Lamp as the Light of the Spirit, and
that a man should quench that fire by which in some measure he is partaker of
the Divine Nature, and all this to get into him the nature, habit and
condition of a Swine, an Ape, a Goat, or a Lion. Wherefore take heed to the new
Creature of God, created in knowledge and holiness, which is far more
glorious then all the old Creatures; Let that by all means be preferred in
its dignity and supremacy, let all Creatures serve it, for so the Creator
allows, but let it self be brought in bondage to nothing. Let it be kept
bright and pure for the service and pleasure of the Creator, who therefore
beautified Man with a likeness to his own Heart, that his heart might take
pleasure in that likeness. And if the chief pleasure which God takes on Earth
be this Beauty of Man, then man himself should take his chiefest pleasure in
pr^^eruing and adorning this Beauty; Otherwise he is an ungrateful Wretch,
not ca^ing to gratify the Creator with the pleasure of his own Gifts, and he
is an ignorant Fool, for not taking a chief pleasure in that wherein the
highest Wisdom is especially delighted. But whosoever is the truly begotten
son of that supreme Wisdom, cannot but love and cherish the Wisdom and
Graces of the inner Man, wherein stands the beautiful Image and likeness of
the most glorious Father. And whosoever loves and cherishes it, cannot but
hate and abhominate that Excess, that casts blackness and filth on so bright
rauishing and celestial a Beauty.

Neither does here the Spirit of God bid us to our loss, but (which is the
second Remedy) even in those things wherein Wine is desirable, the Spirit
offers us advantage. If the Wine be pleasant to the eye, the sights of the
Spirit are far more excellent, for they are such as eye has not seen. The
Spirit of God reueales sights unutterable, and our souls anointed with that
eye-salue, Look into heaven and see him that is invisible. Glorious and
delectable are the Contemplations of the Saints, even such, that they grow rapt
by the sights which they behold, and are loath to come down from that high
Tabor of Vision, into the low and base valley of outward and gross
conversation. The light of the body is the eye, but the eye of Man is the
Soul; The Spiritual sight is man's most excellent Sight, and Spiritual
objects are his most excellent objects. When we see outward things, we see but
that which beasts may see with us, but when we see Spiritual things, we see
that which none but Men and Angels can see wherefore be thou filled with the
Spirit, whereby thou may see the true and kindly objects of Men and Angels,
and dwell not in thy outward eyes wherein Beasts may excel thee. By thy inward
sight thou shall in some measure behold God, thy chief Felicity, the love of
God in Christ Jesus given for our Ransom, the admirable Graces and Virtues of
a holy and sanctifying Spirit. In sum, thou shall see such divine Sights,
that thou will not give thy Contemplations for a Kingdom. For at what price
will a heavenly Soul sell his Meditations? Gregor. in ps. p^ni^. 4.
Sion is by interpretation a Watch-towre, and Sion is a type of the Church. The
Church of God stands on a Watch-towre, and it sees more then seven men on a
Watch-towre; and as her height is exalted on the tower of contemplation, so her
foundation is settled beneath on the Rock of stability. So as she sees far
by her height, she is also stable by her foundation; which amounts to this,
That Sion is a Watch-towre, that cannot be removed from her Contemplation. Now
if this heavenly Sight be the most excellent Sight of Man, dwell no longer in
thy outward eyes, to behold either the color, spright, or motion of Wine, or
of any earthly object; But in the steadfast Watch-towre of divine Contemplation,
behold sights worthy of a Creature endued with a heavenly Soul. Scorn to
dwell in an equality with Beasts, when thou may come into a parity with
Angels, and if thou will needs look on Wine, Look on the new Wine of the
kingdom of Heaven, which Christ now drinks above, and for which he has left
the old, having professed that he will drink no more of it. But of this Wine
more hereafter.

Secondly, If thy taste delight thee, how much is that exceeded by the delights
of the Spirit? The Church confesses, that the kisses of Christ Jesus (who
kisseth his Church by the Spirit) are pleasanter then Wine. Quam dulcia
faucibus meis eloquia tua, says David. He is feign to ask how sweet, because
he cannot tell nor express the sweetness of it; What is sweeter then honey,
says Samson, and yet David says, The Word of God, being tasted by the Spirit
is sweeter then honey. How many Saints have left their meat and drink for the
Wine of the Spirit? How many have beaten down their bodies by abstinence, that
they might the more fully taste the Sweetness of God? Wherefore if thou will
indeed taste sweetness, get thee a Spiritual taste, and receive the Wine of
heaven given by Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God: For he it is that ( Pro. 8.)
calls the sons of men, promising to fill them with delights ( verse. 31.)
And surely those must needs be the chief delights which issue from the taste
of the Deity, which is the uppermost Sweetness. Wherefore desire thou rather to
taste God in himself then in his Creatures, for that is the highest pleasure
of tasting, which flows from the taste of the sweetness of the Highest.

Thirdly, If thou desire Wine for the cheerfulness and joy which it breeds,
know that the Spirit of God is the Fountain of Consolation; and then choose
thou whether thou will drink of the stream or of the fountain. The Spirit of
God has in it the joy and comfort of Wine. Yea, Wine has his joy and comfort
from the Spirit, for the Spirit of God, as once by miracle, so still by course
of Nature turns water into Wine. But there is another, even a new Wine in the
kingdom of God, and this is the best wine. A new Wine it is to us, but not in
it self; new to us, because we were first filled with the old Wine of our
fall, and secondly with this Wine of excess, and after we come to drink this
wine of regeneration and glorification. So it is new to us, but it is old in it
self, as flowing eternally from an eternally from an eternal Deity. This is
the true Wine which recoyceth the heart, not of the body only but of the soul
also, to which the outward Wine connot reach. This is the Wine of blessed
Spirits, the drinking whereof is the cause of those unutterable joys which
dwell in the dwellers, with God. In this the Spirit gives not some gross and
bodily relish, thereby to become comfortable to the bodily part of Man, but in
this the Spirit communicates the sap, taste and relish of its own primitive
sweetness, vigor and cheerfulness, so that we do not so much taste comfort,
as the Comforter himself. In the drinking of this Wine show thy manhood,
Drink deep and true healths, for with this drinking is joined true and
eternal health. The more thou drinkest of this, the wiser, the holyer, the
more sober thou art, for in the same Spirit wherein is cheerfulness, is also
Wisdom and Virtue. The taste of this Wine is a bequeath of dying Christ Jesus
to his beloved Spouse the Church, whom he comfort and supporteth, with the
flagons thereof in his absence before the Day of his great Marriage, where it
shall be given in fullness. And the comforts of it are sufficient to
stre^gthen us against all sorts of grief, yea they make us cheerfully to
scorn and despise the pleasures of sin; they make us to look on death with
disdain, as upon a Snake whose fling and teeth are pulled out, Death where is
thy sting, Grave where is thy victory? They make us to long for heaven, and
stir up the stomach of the soul by these measured tastes of God, to taste
him perfectly in a most blessed, full, and eternal fruition. But perchance
thou will tell me that thou tastest no such sweetness in God; thou have heard
him spoken of in Churches and Pulpits, and thou say thy prayers as others
do, and yet thou perceiuest no such matter as I talk of. Surely I must
confess, This Wine is not for every mouth, neither is every mouth for this
Wine. The holy Wine must be put into holy Vessels, for it is far holyer then
the shewbread, for the receiving whereof Abimelech would that the young men's
Vessels should be clean. The corrupt and lustful Flesh, as it tastes not
this Wine, no more does this Wine endure to be tasted by it: this fruit of the
tree of Life cannot be received, but where the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge
of good and evil is spit out and denied. The lovers of Egyptian Onions, are no
true tasters of celestial Manna: therefore strive to cast out the old Man,
corrupt with deceiuable Lusts, which makes thy taste gross and earthly, and
then thou shall taste the sweetness of God and his consolations. And having
tasted it, thou shall despise the taste of thy former gluttonies and drinkings,
and thou shall say with David, Thou have put more joy into my heart, then
formerly there was when the Oil and Wine were plentiful. This is a privilege
of Saints: be thou a Saint, and enjoy the privilege.

Thirdly (for drunkenness had need to be haled out with a threefold cord)
behold a benefit of this Spiritual wine, which the other wants; yea, behold
the same thing commendable in the one, and damnable in the other, and that is
excess. Thou must drink too much of the outward wine, but can not drink
too much of the inward, and therefore if thou love safety better then danger,
love the wine of the Spirit rather then the fruit of the Vine. If thou know
a Physician that heales all that he meddles with, and another that has killed
as many as he has undertaken, do thou not show thy folly to prefer the
killer before the sauer.

Surely the spirit saues all that it undertakes, and wine has slain many
souls and bodies by excess, O love life, and seek not death by the errors
of this life. Drink the Spirit without fear, but drink wine still in fear;
thou may not fear in the drinking of the spirit except thou will fear
increase of comfort, of light, of holiness. Thou can not drink freely of
wine without fear, except thou do not fear the loss of light, the loss of
reason, of goodness, of thy whole self.

The spirit by how much it grows in thee the wiser, the better, the more
larger thou art; But by how much more thou drinkest the wine of excess, the
foolisher, the wickeder, the lesser thou art. Therefore when thou take the
Cup of Salvation, open thy mouth wide that it may be largely filled, but when
thou take thy cup of wine, know it is a cup of danger, and let in danger as
sparely as thou may. It is the saying of a Wiseman, He that loves danger
shall perish in it, and surely he that loves wine, loves danger, and
therefore he that lowine, is likely to perish by it. While thou fitst at thy
wine, the wine seems to thee to be still the same, because it is still of the
same color, and the same taste, and taken out of the same Vessel; but I tell
thee that the wine at the fourth or fifth draught is not the same that it was
at the first or second. The wine at the first or second draught perchance was
comfortable or physical, but at the fourth or fifth it is furious and
unwholesome. It refreshes thy spirits at first, but it destroys them at last,
and so the same wine which was at first thy comfort, is at last thy poison.
Therefore hold thy hand from wine when it begins to be poison, know the time
when it changes, and take heed thou keep thy self on this side of the Change.

On this side, thou art Master both of it and thy self, and thou may rule
both thy self and it; beyond, the wine will be thy Master, and thou shall do
what it pleases. Then shall thy mouth speak lewd things, and by speaking or
not speaking it shall proclayme thy shame. Wherefore if thou love thy liberty,
if thou love the possession of thy self, stop thy appetite between the wine
that refreshes and the wine that destroys. And that thou may be the more
strong in this power of Abstinence, with a purified soul thirst after the wine
of the Spirit, with which they that thirst shall be filled, and with which they
that are filled, do scorn both the thirst and fullness, and especially the
excess of earthly wine.

Thus have I made a Whip of a twice threefold Cord out of this exhortation of
S. Paul, there withal to whip these deuourers of drink not out of the Temple,
but into the Temple from the Chapels of Satan. I wish they would in this point
be Papists, and whip themselves also, if not withal, yet with some of these
cords, that so by such wholesome wounds, their evil might be purged. I
confess, I have left out one word of this verse, which word seems to be the
occasion of the whole Verse, and it is the word (drunken.) I might say for an
Answer, that I wish it were wholly left out in deeds as it is here in words,
but if that will not serve for an Answer, Let it be this. The matter of the
word is the subject of this Discourse, and the word excess reaches close unto
it.

But for the word it self, as I have for the most part avoided the loathsome
naming of it, So I desire that the lothsomenesse of the name may make the
owners leave it, and entreat them to this end, to preach sometimes to
themselves, and their Sermon shall be only an hours repetition of this word,
Drunken. I doubt not but the beastly sound of it in the ear, the muddie
cadence of it on the tongue will be so fulsome, so odious to them, that in the
ugliness of the word, beholding the lothsomenesse of the deed, they will hate
and anoyde the deed, whereof the word is so abominable.

CHAP. XVII. Certain false Appetites that distaste the Food of life, though
dressed in it own kind, if not dressed to their own mind.
THere are at this day many several tastes that affect several manners of
delivering the Word of God. Some affect roughness, some verbal Rhetoric,
some a short, and sandy Eloquence.

The first pretends for himself, that the profit of the Word consists in
supernatural power, not in humane elocution, and that the intising words of
man's Wisdom rob that divine power of the glory of conversion. But the man of
the man of this opinion must know first, that he finds no precept of
rusticitie, harshnesse or roughness of speech in the Scripture.

Secondly, on the contrary, he shall find in the Preacher, Prophets and
Apostles, yea, in Christ himself, pleasant words, delightful comparisons,
perswasiue exhortations, and often very eloquent and moving expressions.

Thirdly, God speaking by man unto man, though the power of God be the very
effectual cause of conversion, and only baptiseth with fire, yet the outward
powerful expression joining and conspiring with the inward, converting power
may give a degree thought not a being, and may blow the fire which the Spirit
kindles. The Spirit in the speaker or writer, according to his degree, commonly
stirs, inflameth, and exalts the Spirit in the hearer, and that so much
the more strongly, by how much more swift and forcible penetratio^ ithath,
through the outward man into the inward.

Now a clear sound and masculine expression opens wide the door of the
utter man, so that the spiritual meaning contained in the words passes in
fully, strongly and swiftly; And so the active vehemence thereof does as it
were struck hard on the soul, and leaves a print thereon. The Word is the
Lookingglasse bearing the Image of the Spirit that speaks, and therein is the
Spirit speaking discerned by the Spirit hearing. The more this spirit is
discerned, the more beauty, and so the more love, and so the more power. Now
the cleerer the Glass is the more discerning; therefore the spirit made more
excellent in an evident word is more lovely and more powerful. Surely if we
could see spiritual thoughts in their Primitive beauty without the gross
mediation of words, their excellence would ravish us, and their glory would
command and master us. But now thoughts shining to us through the Lantern of
words, the cleerer the Lantern is, the more bright and cheerful is the
Light, and the thicker it is, the less does it direct, and the less does it
comfort.

Fourthly, besides the benefit of evidence, handsome expression helps the
memory; and God speaking to man by man, no doubt, well knows their mould to
whom he speaks, and is willing that all favor, especially by the Ministry
of man, Romans 6.19. should be done unto man, and that words should be fitted to
the best advantage of Nature. A Parable of Christ, a tuned and proportioned
Psalm of David, a Proverb of Solomon, yea, one of the Fathers harmonious
Sentences, sometime take more hold of the memory, then a rough and ragged
exhortation. Yet I speak not this (that I may use Paul's words) to shame them
that have not, to condemn Moses, Exodus 4.10. for want of utterance, but to
exhort others from condemning, and that they do not condemn but desire the
more excellent gifts: for God gave Moses and Aaron, even to divine knowledge,
an eloquent utterance. God has given diverse gifts unto men, and all to
edification; now all together shall edify most, if the higher employ their
Talents, not condemning but encouraging the lower, and if the lower exercise
their gifts, rather imitating the^ envying the higher. But in imitation, let
every Man hold this Rule, That he imitate no further then his strength will
make it good. Otherwise while he seeks to be another, and leaves to be
himself, being short of the other he loses both himself and the other, even
what he would be, and what he might be.

The second is a hunter of mere words, and the outside of speaking with a
neglect of the inside; such a one is a Pharisie in words, as the ancient ones
were in deeds. Against these especially do the Reasons of the first oppose,
for these go about to entice men, and to slack their affections with
Eloquence, not to turn them, not to conquer them with power. These draw men to
themselves rather then to Christ, for their hearers (if they be not of the
wisest, as most are not) commend the Sermon much, and the Preacher more, and
Christ least of all.

And indeed they leave their audience commonly as they found them for profit,
but somewhat better for pleasure. Their mishap is this, that the ear is not
the soul, for if it had been so, then so many souls by them had been
gained, as hearers were pleased. Surely this eare-teaching, or eare-scratching
pierces not home, but it is like an Arrow without an head; It has indeed the
wooden head of the flesh, but it wants the metal and steel of the spirit,
by which it should enter into the heart, and divide between the soul and the
Spirit. Let these men therefore remember that the Kindome of God, though it may
be advanced by words that make power evident, yet it consists not in words
but in power.

The spirit speaking though in course and plain words, may save a soul, but
the top of humane Eloquence, not edged with the spirit, will never enter in
deep enough to save the hearers. The third sort affect a language of ends, and
such a style as is all of inlayings. They are full of short breathes, and if
they persuade you not on a sudden, they have done.

Again, they darken the sense by not allowing it room enough. Surely it has
been a misery of these latter times, to affect both in Latin and English,
such a speech of parcels that hurts the memory, travails the understanding,
and does both nibble and sting the will, not gripe it, not lift it, not weld or
manage it. When the memory would claspe it, it is all one as if you did claspe
a handful of sand, the harder you squeese it, the more it flits. When the
understanding beholds it, either it is payned in opening the fast and hidebound
shells of it, or if it have some ease in that kind, it spies but a short glimpse
of Light, and but a Gloworme of Reason, and be the way never so dark, it must
be content with that flash of Lightning. When the will and affectons meet it,
they rather find in it the taste of an Epigram, then of a doctrine, of sauce,
then of meat. And if there be any strength in it, yet it is so bound in by
breuity, that it gives but a pluck to the will, and draws it not by a
continued might: so if the mind will not be moved with the pange of a sentence,
it may escape well enough from this kind of teaching.

Surely these minutes of style, and littlenesses in discoursing, do not well
express Majesty and Power. And that should they strive to express who are the
mouths and pens of the highest Majesty and the highest Power. Again, in
regard of the hearers or readers, that which should enter with power, should
issue with power, that which should go to the heart, should issue from the
heart, and not be only a flash or fire-worke of the brain.

And now that I may the better free my Reader and my self from mistaking, and
being mistaken, I am ready to tell him what I intend not, and what I intend.

First, I intend not to lessen their deserved estimation, and so their
edification, whose natural gift is a clear and concise expression; I know
there are of this sort that merit good Readers, and have many of them, and I
wish them prosperity in the Name of the Lord. Such men are themselves when
they write and not others, and if they should be forced from this kind, they
should (like Diamonds) be lessened by new fashioning; and I think verily that
wherein a man strength lies, therein should he glorify his Creator, and not by
going out of his strength, seek to serve and glorify God by his disability.
And this do they commonly who leave that Character whereunto they were
fashioned, and reach after another but reach not to it. To such the Apostles
counsel is good Physic; Let every man understand according to sobriety, and
his own measure. But secondly, I intend to show and prove that a continual
Discourse or Treatise made all of parcels, though it may have good things in
it, yet it is not the best kind of Language for edification.

And besides the reasons showed before (that it often darkens the matter, that
it hurts the memory, that it wants the power and majesty, which the Word of God
both requires and deserves) to make up an absolute proof I will add a most
absolute example, and the reason of the example. The example is Saint Paul,
that strong Writer of Epistles, (as the very malice of his Enemies did
confess) who knew the best kind of delivering Divinity, 1. Cor. 2. and both
told it us in writing, that spiritual things must be fitted with spiritual
words, and as there he says in writing practiced that which he told us. If you
will see his practice, search his Epistles, and among them that to the Romans,
which indeed is a Masterpiece.) There you shall see that his manner of
teaching is deep in knowledge, strong in reasoning, pregnant in expression,
powerful in persuasion. He does not trusse up his words too close, neither
does he thin them so much that they can scarce be discerned, but to a full and
substantial matter he gives the fulness of speech and expression. Yea, where
he seems most to excel, he sometimes doubles and makes returns, and gives
two or three sights or countenances of the same matter, that our knowledge and
memory may be assured, and that he may not be thought to grudge us his
matter by grudging us words.

And yet Epistles I think may best plead breuity. Besides in his persuasions
and exhortations, he expresses vehemence of affection and ferour of spirit,
which small ends do smally and weakly perform. And secondly, if we will
search into the reason of this Example: by searching what is spiritual, we
shall find that the Spirit works man's conversion, especially by light and
power, as having to do with a dark and impotent Mankind, and therefore it
expresses it self best, and makes it self most evident by a lightsome and
powerful speech, even words of brightness and fervor. So both by Paul's
example and the reason of that Example, I have fetched the pattern of most
profitable Language. If yet you would have more proof, behold also noble Esaias,
the very primate of the Prophets; and the Ambassador of God, whose tongue was
touched with the fire of Heaven; This great Prophet does not usually skip and
leap in the short steps of broken Sentences; but he walks with Majesty in
the full paces of an expressiue, just and mighty Language. He does what we
should do, even make sweetness to wait upon strength, and not make strength
to melt it self away into sweetness. Let the Bees come unto Samsons Lion, but
let not the Lion spend his strength in running after Bees. Now the use which
hence I would gather, is a double Medicine for a twofold Disease. The one is
for the Readers or hearers disease. For many of these are sick of judgment,
and will not read or hear any but those that are short and sweet, even such
as convey Religion into them by Pills and not by Potions. They are like chicken
that cannot eat bread except it be in crummes. But let such get unto them the
true appetite of a true Christian, and then spiritual matter delivered
spiritually, that is with evidence and force, will be very good (if not the
best) food to their souls. And I would wish them to condemn their own
stomachs, and to seek to amend them, when they condemn or neglect a sound
and Apostlicall delivery of the Word. For certainly that Soul is not very
spiritual in her appetite, that rellisheth not spiritual Doctrine delivered
in it own, that is in a spiritual manner. For true in this it is also, That
Like loves his Like, and on the otherside, where there is no love, there is no
likeness, but that which loves not is unlike to that which is not loved. So
the appetite that loves not a spiritual kind of teaching, is to be suspected,
that it self is not spiritual, and that want of likeness, is the true cause
of the want of love. And if it be so, then let men look into themselves for
the fault, and not out of themselves, and after let them look themthemselues
to the Physician of our souls Christ Jesus, praying him to touch their hearts,
as he did the heart of Lydea with his opening Spirit, and then no doubt, shall
they be attentive hearers of the man that speaks spiritual things in
spiritual words. The other is for the Writers or Speakers disease, and this
very often is affectation. Every man must be of the fashion, and so if this
Language of pieces be the fashion that must be affected; But the affectation
hereof is vicious, both because it affects a vice in speaking, and likewise
because it marres the natural ability, in which the Affectator would have
better excelled, and whereby he would have been more perswasiue. So have I
seen a good Trotter make a bad Ambler, and fall into a Rack which is neither
of them both. Wherefore to draw all to a sum; Let edification be the end of
speaking and hearing, writing and reading, that it may be so, spiritual
things must be fitted with a spiritual Language. The excellence and moving of
divine Music, is then chiefest when the Tune speaks like the Ditty.

So if the light and power of the Spirit utter themselves in words of light and
power, it speaks most mouingly to our souls. Wherefore let spiritual words
have in them spiritual evidence and spiritual feruor, for so do they best
speak to the Understanding, Will, and Affections. And let the whole matter
have a sufficient allowance of words, for so does it best speak to the memory.
Yet this we may know, that with a large and full expression, a sententious,
definitious and comprehensiue Position, is often a very good Companion. The
largeness gives a full appearance of the matter to the understanding, and
works a full impression of it into the memory, and then the breuity becoming
the model and pith of the largenes, makes it more portable and ready for use.
And we may see a string which by the sudden turn of a Key has broken by a
leisurable winding, has risen beyond the degree where it brake. Lastly, if
with the Preacher to the words of Truth, and an upright writing, there arise
pleasant words, let every man make use of his Talent, to the profit of the
lender. Instruction pointed with delight, pierces the more sharply, and sticks
the more steadfastly. And these be the very Nails of Solomon, the fastening of
which he commends in the Teachers. But let every man serve God in his own
place, and not break his rank to do some strange Exployt. For as there is
not an expectation of doing God service, where God has not given ability, so
neither is there an acceptance of that service which is done without an
ability given of God. 1. Pet. 4.11. For such a Work is not the fruit of the
power but of impotence, and it cannot please him because it is done without
him. For as every good thing comes from God, so that which comes not from God
is not good, and that which is not good, can never please God.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Use of the Keys, is an excellent Remedy for the
Diseases of the Church (if it self be not diseased) and that it is not to be
taken for a privilege, to be free from Remedies and not from Diseases.
WHen I read Cyprian. Epis. 10.11.55. and de ^a^^s.
the practice of Penitence in the Times of the first Love, it rejoices me
greatly to see the beauty of the Church, which could not choose but shine in a
notable fairness, when the spots were so duly and carefully taken away, the
faces of the spotted being thoroughly washed by the tears of repentance. Open
Sinners were not admitted into the Communion of Saints, neither was the bread
of the Children given unto dogs, neither by an equal bounty to the godly and
the wicked, was there an equal encouragement to godliness and iniquity. But a
separation was made between the sick and the whole; and this separation had
no other intent but edification, even an edification of the Spirit by the
destruction of the Flesh. So could men find no fault with the dispensers of
this power, having nothing to complain of, but that their lives thereby were
sought to be amended, and their souls to be saved.

I confess the cause was weighty for which the gates of Heaven were to be
locked; great in matter, or great in manner, great in the thing done, or great
in the wilfulness of the doer. And this not without reason, for the doom is
heavy, and fit for the back of a strong and mighty Evil. It was a short
damnation, a temporal Hell, a measured delivery unto Satan, man being shut out
of Heaven upon Earth, even the company of Saints, and shut out of Heaven in
Heaven, even the joys and comforts of the Spirit of Consolation. Neither could
it but be an excellent Remedy, because it was so fitted to the Disease. A
degree of Presumption is incountred with a degree of Despair; the Scorpion is
made a medicine against the Scorpion, and Satan is set on work to take him
down by Terror unto Salvation, whom before he animated and puffed up to
destruction. He that said at first, Sin boldly, for ye shall not die at
all, now he changes his voice and says, Thy sin is greater then can be
forgiven thee. But the Wisdom of dispensation suffered this roaring Lion no
longer to terrify, but until his Terror did mollify. He aimed indeed at
despair, and destruction, but the Church aimed at Humiliation and Conversion,
yea to Consolation and Salvation. For indeed Humiliation for Sin is the way to
Conversion from Sin, and Conversion from Sin is the way to the consolations
of the Spirit, and the comfortable Spirit is both the guide and way to Life
eternal. Therefore when the man is humbled, Satan is cashiered, the Horse-leach
is taken away when he has sufficiently abated the vicious and superfluous
blood. And now the man formerly forsaken by all, is comforted of all, the gates
of Heaven are unlocked to him, and he is restored to both the Heavens, the
Communion of Saints, and the joys of the Spirit. Thus are we healed by
wounding, and by humbling we are exalted. O admirable use and command of
Satan! He is an enemy to God, yet does him service; he is an adversary to Man,
and yet helps him. A strange thing it is, that Satan should help the
incestuous Corinthian, to the destruction of his flesh, and the edification of
his soul. A strange thing that Satan should teach 1. Tim. 1.20.
Himeneus and Alexander not to blaspheme. His Kingdom is seated in the Flesh,
and yet the Flesh he destroys. He is the Author of blasphemies, and yet he
teaches not to blaspheme. But is Satan contrary to himself, and is his
Kingdom divided in it self? No surely. But one that is stronger then he,
both in wisdom and power, manageth both his craft and malice to ends which
himself intends not. The Devil is one and the same still, even purely
malicious. And in this malice he tempts men being in high blood unto a
presumption of sinning. And by the same malice, he tempts the same men being
cast down unto a despair of Mercy. Now as Remedies are by contraries, so a
measure of despair is medicinable to a measure of presumption. And just so
far does God suffer Satan to go on in his temptation, as temptation is
profitable, and no farther. Therefore while Satan is driving the Offender to
despair, God stops his course when the Sinner is come to due humiliation. And
then as it was with Christ in the Wilderness, so it is with the humbled
Sinner, Satan is dismissed, and the Angels come and minister to him. And as God
does publicly administer this Remedy to the members of his Church in public
Evils, so also does he privately exhibit it to his choysest Saints in their
private Necessities. And so a messenger of Satan was sent to buffet Paul, that
by the strokes of him who is the king of pride, God might teach his servant
Humility. But what shall we say to these things? Are men at this day willing to
take this physic, of the Physician of our Souls Christ Jesus? or do not
most men that are of any growth, think themselves too great to be taken by
this Net of Mercy, but are willing to break through, that they may be taken in
the Net of Judgment? I wish we had not far more need of the words of Saint
Ambrose, then he had when he used them. S. Ambros. apologia David, cap. 2.
What great or rich man (says he) shall ye now find, that will take it well
to be reproved of a fault? Yet this man (David) being glorious in Kingly power,
and often approved by Divine Oracles, when he was reproved by a subject,
because he had grievously offended, did not repine in a rage, but confessing
re^ented by Repentance. And a little after: Other men when they are reproved of
the Priests, increase their fault by going about to deny or diminish it, so
that by the same means by which they should have been amended, they increase
their sickness. Had this holy Man a cause to complain, to whose keys the
Emperor Theodosius submitted himself both for binding and loosing, and have
not our days much more, wherein men of a far inferior greatness think it
a special privilege, belonging to their dignity to sin without controlment?
And yet if we look clearly into the matter, a privilege to sin quietly, is
but a privilege quietly to be damned. But I think it much rather a miserable
in conuenience of greatness, and a mere abuse of it, when the terror thereof is
employed, to fright away grace, and so terrify salvation. These are they of
whom it is said, Potentes potenter cruciabu^tar, The mighty by the abuse of
their own might shall be most mightily punished. And if greatness would but
take a proportion of wisdom and patience, and thereby soundly examine why he
is angry, when he is justly reproved, I think he will be so far from
finding a reason for his anger, that he will on the other side find a reason
of thanks and rejoicing. For put the case (as it is too often) that a great
man has offended, to him the Man of God speaks or writes, in due or
respective manner, and discouers his Sin and his danger by sinning. The main
intent of Gods servant, is but to take away the Sin that would slay him, and
instead of Sin and Death, to recommend unto him Grace and Life. Now wherein
has this man offended? whose only business is to take from greatness Sin
and Misery, and to give it Virtue and Happiness? Surely thou have nothing to
dislike, except it be to be less wicked, and less miserable, and to be more
virtuous and more happy. Yet (though without a reason) greatness will in this
case often be angry, though it have most reason to be angry with it self, for
being angry without a reason. But when reasons fail I think this must
represent one, That it is a dishonor for a superior to be reproved of the
inferior, and it is commonly a little great Man that does not think more
honorably of himself then of most of the Priesthood. To this I answer, that
this exception is made all of stomach and nothing of reason. And first I could
confute much of it, by proouing and proposing the dignity of Priesthood from
whose Spiritual power (it being as the Scripture says a power unto
edification) of exhorting, teaching, reproouing; yea, binding and loosing, I
think no true member of Christ's Church should desire to be exempted. Besides,
Saint Paul without any distinction writes to the Thessalonians, to acknowledge
those that labored among them, who (as he affirms) were over them in the
Lord. Whence might be deduced this Doctrine, That the Layitie in general is
the Flock, and the Priests are the Shepherds, and spiritual Shepherds in
the administration of spiritual things, are over their Flocks. But flesh and
blood is loath to hear of any Eminence, though it be but spiritual, and not
of this world. Therefore I must talk with it in a Language more natural to
it, and thereupon I reply, That an Inferior, which in his manner of speaking,
keeps safe and whole the dignity of the Superior to whom he speaks, and in
his matter only strives to take away his sin, this Inferior has in nothing
disgraced the Superior, for in the manner he has given him respect, and in
the matter he offers him Amendment. So upon the whole he has not disgraced,
but graced him in respective words, and in profitable matter.

And surely a man so reproved, may if he please be more honorable after
reproof then he was before, if by the reproof he become better then he was
before. Naaman was an honorable man, but a Leper, and at first he took
exceptions to the Prophet, because he came not out to him, but sent him health
in a manner that distasted him. But if Naaman had continued in his anger, he
had continued a Leper, whereas by harkening unto the Prophets direction, he
returned honorable as he was before, and healthy which he was not before.
Surely every man though never so honorable, has a spiritual Leprosy, and if
a Prophet advise him to wash and be clean, by refusing it, he may continue an
honorable Leper, but by obeying it, he may have spiritual health added to
his temporal honor.

Wherefore let every man do that for the health of his soul, which this
mighty man did for the health of his body, let him wash according to the words
of the Prophet. Christ's business is to wash us in this world, that he may
present us spotless to his Father in another world. As he washes us chiefly
by his own Blood and Spirit, so he washes us ministerially by his Word, by
his Sacraments, by his Keys, for by these the Blood and Spirit which wash us
are more nearly applied, and more fully communicated. Therefore love and
embrace the outward means of thy inward purity, and take willingly not one
but all the helps that may beautify thee.

Some think it too much to be hearers of the Word of Christ, and cry out that
preaching (indeed a foolishness to such, but a foolishness that saues others)
has turned the world vpside down. Act. 17.6. Another can endure preaching,
because he can endure to sit at his ease, while the preacher takes pains in
uttering that for which before he took pains in gathering; but the Sacrament
he will take but once in the year, and not once, except his Charity fall out
right with the time of the year. A third, will endure both Word and Sacrament,
and with Herod will do some things gladly, but if he be threatened with a
binding in Heaven for unlawful Lust, John Baptists head must dance from his
shoulders. But o thou man whosoever thou art that desire to see the face of
God, give leave unto God to sit thee for his presence, by all his means of
washing and clensing. For there is nothing purer then our God of purest eyes,
and there is nothing fouler then a man of natural corruption, therefore think
no washing too much, to bring the most defiled thing on earth to the purest
Essence in Heaven, Believe that Christ knew the glory of God sufficiently, for
he came from it immediately to us, and that he knew sufficiently the filthiness
of Man, for he came to wash it with his blood, and therefore let no man think
that he has prescribed any thing too much, to bring us from so great a
filthiness to so infinite a Glory. Wherefore let no man limite the Highest,
and tell him the Word and Sacraments might have served for his clensing, but
yield to his Wisdom, which has thought chastisement sometimes as necessary
as food. Therefore be thou like David (and be not better then he who was both
a Saint and a King) and then shall thou say with David, That Gods rod and his
staff do comfort thee, as well as that he makes thee to lie down in green
pastures, and leads thee by the still waters. So to sum up all, Let the
dispensers of Christ's ordinances, and his spiritual Stewards, give to all his
servants due meat in due season. Let them take the Towell and the Basin
wherewith once Christ washed and wiped his Disciples feet, and at this day wash
the feet, even the spots of his blessed spouse. He has told you that he did
it to give you an example, if ye follow not his example, you go about to make
his giving of it in vain. Wash them with the Word, for Christ has testified,
Now are ye clean by the Word. Wash them with the Sacraments, for the blood of
Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, the chief means of our Spiritual clensing,
are thereby communicated to us. Wash them with the rod of censure and
chastisement, which purges out the evil by the blunesse of the wound, and by
the destruction of the Flesh saves the Spirit in the Day of the Lord. 1. Cor.
5.5. And let the Flock of Christ strive for the utmost cleanness, and not for
privileges of uncleanness, for as they are purified, they shall be
glorified, the more white we are here in Grace, the more bright we shall be
in Glory. And let every man though outwardly great, seek to make himself as
much within as he is without, and to that end, let him encourage his
spiritual father freely to tell him the sins that bind in Heaven, that he
may be freed from them whiles he is here on Earth. And let every great one
that means to be saved, account it an especial benefit, if he meet with a
messenger of God ( Job 33.23.) which may by wholesome admonition, take from him
those sins which may loose or lessen his salvation. For it is a certain
Truth, that as the more purity the more glory, so the more spots, the less
glory and the greater damnation.

Now unto him that has loved us, Revel. 1.
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God his Father, To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever

CHAP. XIX. The Discovery of some main Causes of Wars and Wounds in the
Church, and the means of their Cure.
THat the Church and Rebecca are alike, and that the Womb of both is
lamentably perverted into a place of wrestling, grief (though unwilling)
cannot but confess it, because Contention is so violent that it will not
suffer it to be hidden. Therefore a question as fitly arises from the Church
as from Rebecca, if it be so why am I thus? Though she desired to be fruitful,
yet she loved not to, be a breeder of quarrels, and therefore preferred a
quiet sterility before a co^tentious fruitfulness. And to this question, of
both there is fitted an Answer for the satisfaction of both.

There are two Nations in thy Womb, and two kind of people come from thy
bowels; one visible Church, one womb, and the same bowels, yet two sorts of
people, and not two only in distinction, but two in contrariety of disposition.
The difference of their inclinations makes a division in their affections, and
this division is inflamed into opposition and contention.

The man of flesh is Esau, a strong Hunter of carnal lusts, or of present
pleasures, or of natural apprehensions. The man of the spirit is Iaacob, a
spiritual discerner, a heavenly Citizen, of a sanctified reason, of a divine
(or godly) will, of affections set on high. But the wretched Antiquity of this
contrariety and contention, reaches beyond Rebecca, even to the beginning of
days, when Time it self was not a week old. For even in Paradise, it was
enacted as a punishment on the sin of Man, even the trouble and vexation of a
perpetual Enmity. Therefore as it was early in Antiquity beginning, in the
beginnings of Time, so it is like to be la^e in continuance, and to endure to
the end of Time.

And no doubt these last Remnants of Time, are likely to have most of it, for
in them love does wax cold, and as love waxes cold, contention grows hot.
Therefore let every Christian take to himself a twofold care. One is, that the
more evil the days are, the more he strives to redeem both his time and
himself from the evil of the days. As the Infection increases, so is it fit
he should increase his Preservatives. A second is, That since in contention of
two parts, there is but one part that has the Right, he must strive to be on
that part which has the Right. The Flesh has no right to hate the Spirit,
much less to persecute it, for therein Darkness persecuteth Light;
Corruption, Cleanness; an earthly and sensual grossness, a Divine and
Spiritual Purity. But good right has the Spirit to hate the Flesh, for no
man can forbid Light to chase away Darkness, Purity, Grosnesse, Cleanness, a
spotted Corruption. Yet so giddie is man grown by his Fall, that the Flesh
iustifies it self in the Opposition of the Spirit, and the Spirit is condemned
for opposing the Flesh. And as this is done by those that are without, against
those that are within, so is it done by those that are within, one against
another, and in that degree of heat, which is proportionable to the degree of
the Flesh, that possesses either their Judgments or Affections. For even
within the visible church the flesh possesses the Judgments of many, and
fasteneth Errors upon them; and the flesh the whiles takes it self for the
Spirit, and therefore will err by Authority. Yea, this counterfeit spirit
fights with the true Spirit, and by Religion would condemn Religion, and
under the show of Truth, strives against Truth it self. And if you will
guess only by heat and vehemence, you will hardly find out which is the
Truth, yea, sometimes you shall have the more heat with the less Truth.

For Error has many times the odds of contentious Egernesse, which shall the
less deceive us, if we carry about us Saint Paul's little note, That the true
Churches of God have no such custom as contention. Yet my business at this
time is to find out such, within the pale of the visible Church (not meddling
with those that are without) and to search for them in that Dragge-Net which
takes up both good and evil. And I wish that by my finding them, they may
learn to find themselves; that so finding themselves carnal, they may strive
to be spiritual; and so by being once found in the flesh, they may ever
hereafter be found in the Spirit.

A first way by which the flesh becomes extremely Religious, and by the
Extremity of Religion, extremely quarrelsome is custom. For too true it is
that many are Christians, and this or that sort of Christians by custom and
anticipation. Christians I call them because they are such in the opinion of
themselves and others; yet must I needs tell them, that true Christianity is
not fastened to the heart by custom and prejudice, but it is knit unto it by
the Spiritual bands of illuminating and sanctifying Grace. True it is, that
man has in him by Nature an Instinct of Religion, even an Inclination to fear
and serve some Higher Power; and this general Inclination is commonly
specificated by Birth and Education, which by Custom knit a Religion to this
Instinct, which knot of Nature is many times mistaken for the knot of Grace.
Now this Religion so taken in by Nature, is commonly violent, peremptory and
dangerous, strongly opiniated of it self, and as strongly hating all Religions
different or opposite. The Reasons of the violence of this Bastard Religion is
diverse.

First, because the Religion it self being natural, the affections and
passions which are moved by it are also natural; now it is truly observed,
that the motions of nature are commonly more vehement, I am sure more
tempestuous and turbulent then those of grace. Quicquid agit Natura valde agit.
Nature marches furiously in the execution of her purposes, and the
satisfaction of her desire. But grace is little, like a grain of Mustard Seed,
or she is by her difference from Nature forsaken of it in her actions and
affections, so that the body often either tarries behind, or comes slowly
toward her for the seconding of her purposes, or she is more orderly peaceable
and temperate, which is indeed the Character of her in S. James 3.17.

A second reason of this violence may be, because custom is a thing strongly
rooted in the heart, and the sinews by which it is fastened are extremely
sensible. Therefore if you would cut away a custom, you cut the heart it
self, and if you will pull it up, you pull out the heart and all with it.
Thence it was that Alexander could not persuade the Indians to bury their
Parents, having still used to incorporate them. Neither could he persuade the
Graecians to swallow down their Parents, being ever used to interre them.

And here by the way an Answer fitly arises to a twofold Objection of ancient
or char.
modern Pagans. One is, That it is a fearful thing to see the strong
diversity of Religions in the World, mayntayned by equal constancy and
assurance; from which either is inferred or deduced by the Master or Scholar,
that where there are so many and every one denied by all the rest, they may be
all false, because all are severally denied. But this follows not; for first I
have showed a reason of the manifold diversity of Religions, and the equal
violence in their Professors. As many Religions as Custom has delivered to
Mankind, so many are usually retained and strongly maintained. But yet the
diversity of Errors cannot annihilate the unity of Truth; but Truth which is
indeed but one, may and shall stand justified by her self and her children,
though the numberless variety of Errors, may be justly confuted and
overthrown. Though the Heathen have as many Gods as Cities, and not one of
them true, yet this hinders not, but that there may be one true God that made
Heaven and Earth, which even by diverse Heathens has been confessed.

A second Objection is this, That Religion has been the Author of many
cruel outrages, Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum,
Que peperit saepe seelerosa asq impia facta.


But henceforth let the Obiector cease from this Language, for here I have
brought him to the Damme of these Monsters. This customary natural, unnatural
Religion is the very Mother of them; For Nature having received a Religion by
custom, this Religion like a Spirit possesses it, and drives it headlong like
the Gadaren Swine into desperate actions. Nature grows mad upon a Religion
knit by custom to her instinct, and in her violence she thinks the Extremity
of Devotion to be the very Mark of Perfection. Therefore she goes furiously
onward, and overthrows all that stands in her way, thinking then she pleases
God best, when she is most furious in his service, and therefore sometimes she
will do Massacres and Murders, that she may be sure to have served him
sufficiently. So mad and brutish is this carnal Devotion, that it thinks to
please the Judge of the World, by those cruelties which a just man does loathe
and detest. And detestable as it is to good men so much more to true Religion,
which is the Doctrine of Goodness, and has been before described to be
peaceable and temperate.

Therefore far be it from any man, to accuse true Religion of that which it
self does accuse. But let this Brat be brought to the true Dam of it, and
that shall be found to be the flesh, but never the Spirit. The Spirit makes
Sheep and not Wolves, (...) has armed many with Patience to suffer Tyranny,
but has taught none to be Tyrants. Quem videris gaudentem sanguine, Lupus
est. Whosoever delights in blood for conscience sake, is a Limb of Antichrist,
the great Wolf of of the Church, the Flock of Christ.

But let us hasten from this diseased Religion, and seek out a Remedy, even a
Remedy for this Devotion of Custom; which Custom is an equal Nurse to all
Religions; A Nurse it is to all Religions, a like Mother of most unlike
Children. The unity of the Mother cannot reconcile the Differences of the
Children, but like the Earth she nourishes all Herbs, even of contrary
qualities. But this while the Contention of these Children is most foolish, for
each strives to be right heir when not one of them is lawfully begotten.

Therefore a first Remedy for these Bastard Religions, is to know the Whoredom
of their Mother, and a second, to know the true Father of true Religion. The
falsehood of the Mother has been already expressed, but it must be known as
well as told, they must take notice of it, as well as hear of it. And let them
take this for an assured sign of a Whorish Mother of Religion, when they find
the same and no other Fountain of Religion, but that which will serve to beget
a Religion contrary to that which is held. If thou hold thy Religion because
thou art accustomed to it, for carnal Reasons, and by a common hand, thou
hold not Religion truly; yea, though thou hold the true Religion. But
because Truth best reproves Falsehood, and Rightnes, Crookedness, I will set
forth the true Father of true Religion, that the Adulterous Mother may the
better be known and avoided. God is a Spirit, and therefore the Religion that
pleases God must be spiritual.

But man is carnal, defiled by a carnal Generation, and therefore can neither
know nor give unto God a spiritual Service. Therefore is it need^ull that the
supreme Spirit, teach this carnal man a spiritual service, which his
Carnality cannot find out. Yea, farther it were (...) give him a spiritual
Understanding, to discern and approve a spiritual Service, being ^aught unto
him which flesh and blood cannot do. So we see there is need of a spiritual
Doctrine, and a spiritual Mind. Man has nothing in him to please God withal:
He is all Darkness and Pollution, therefore God must send from Heaven, tha^
which he will have man to send acceptably unto Heaven. Man that is now most
contrary to God, must be conformed to him* before he can receive from God, and
return to God a Service conformable unto God.

So it remaynes, that true Religion must be a spiritual Doctrine, taught by
God unto Man, and the true means of receiving a spiritual Doctrine, is a
spiritual Mind. This is the right hand of Religion, and Nature is the left, and
these right-handed Men are the only true receivers of true Religion.

For a spiritual Mind, meeting with a spiritual Religion, by Uniformity grow
to an Unity; they kiss, embrace, and claspe one another, and the gates of Hell
cannot pluck them asunder. The Spirit that gave the Word, seasons the Heart,
and the Heart meeting the Word, borne of the same Spirit with it self, ioynes
it self to it in a brotherly Affection and Unity. Now this only true
admittance of true Religion, has notable Privileges annexed to it, which are
both marks of Excellence and Difference, above and from other false means of
receiving Religion. One excellent and necessary Prerogative is this, That the
spiritual Man has God for his Teacher; he learnes the counsels of God, of
that Spirit which only knows Gods Counsel, and only acknowledges it. He
holds divine things by a Divine hand, and receives them from the Deity it
self. Though his outward Man receive Elements and Rudiments of Religion by
Birth or Education, yet his inward man receives them by Heavenly inspiration,
the same Spirit which moved holy men to speak, moving holy men to hear and
believe. For in the Saints the Spirit of God is the last resort, rest and
Pillar of Truth; and how can they but believe when a spiritual Mind plainly
discerns the Truth of spiritual things? It has also a second privilege of
safety, and in that safety, a third of rest and quietness.

For a Religion being once ^ruly discerned, approved and knit to the heart by
the Spirit, the Spirit which leads us into the Truth, does stablish us in the
Truth, by the same Light by which it shows us the Beauty of Verity, it
discouers the deformity of Error; yea, it will join hands with no Religion,
but that which is kin to it. Show the Spirit the whole Millaners shop of
Religions, which Mountebanke Satan has set to sale in the world, and none of
them will fit his hand, though never so much flourished over with the imbrodery
of humane wit and earthly Glory. The Spirit which gave the Word, will
acknowledge no other, but the Word of the Spirit. My Sheep, says Christ,
hear my voice, but a strangers voice they will not hear, John 10. And now
what an admirable privilege of rest and quietness is hereunto annexed? The
carnal man, if he escape the Restinesse gotten by Custom, or imposed by
Authority, he runs like the dispossessed spirit, through all places both
wet and dry, seeking rest for his Religion. And how can he find rest, since
there is no true rest but in the Truth, and that Truth being hidden from flesh
and blood, all other Religions that appear are but Errors, and who can blame a
man to run from an Error as soon as he has found it? This I doubt was the
Disease of Montagne, who professes that he continued in the Romish Religion,
because if he left that he believed he should run through all and never be at
rest. So he kept that Religion it seems for his own sake, and not for the
goodness of the Religion, because he would find rest, not because he had
found the Truth. But much better do they, that by the Spirit embrace true
Religion, because by the Spirit they discern it to be true. Such men seek
Truth rather then rest, for having found Truth, they know rest comes in upon
the Bargain. They follow that truth which is followed with rest, but they by
no means will follow that rest which is divorced from Truth. They seek for
Truth, and Truth gives them rest, but the other seeks for rest, though rest
hold him in Error. So he is resolved to be sure of his rest, though he be not
sure of his Religion. But as this is a Bastard holding of Religion, so is it a
bastard rest, for it is a wrong rest that is grounded on Error, and Truth only
gives a true rest. By the same reason might a Pagan or Mahometane, stablish
himself in Paganism and Mahometisme, because Custom has given each of them
a Restinesse in their Religions.

But let that man who desires by a right hand to rec^^ue the Truth, and from
the Truth to receive rest, and with that rest safety from Error* Let him I say
lift up his eyes on high, Beccause he has his Chair in Heaven, who teaches
the hearts on Earth. Let them vehemently entreat God, that by the Spirit which
only knows his counsels, he will reveal his counsels that by the Spirit
which gave the Word to the Speaker, he will fasten the Word in the Hearers,
and that by a spiritual and heavenly mind, they may discern and hold
Spiritual and Heavenly Truth. And this let them do importunately and
vn^essantly. Importunately, both in regard of the weight of the Petition, for
the very weight of our Salvation lies on this spiritual receiving of Religion;
and in regard of the efficacy of Importunity, to which Christ has promised the
holy Ghost, Luke 11.8, 13. Incessantly, because God may delay thee, yet hopeful
that he will not finally deny thee. He calls some at al hours, and it is to
no purpose to go from him, for he only has the words of eternal life, and
he only can give them to thee, and settle them in thee.

A second reason of difference in Religion, is difference of Complexion; for
many times that is called a War of Religion, which is but a War of
Complexion. And surely pity it is, That the Religion of many, or at least the
zeal of it, is but their Complexion, and yet they think themselves to excel
all others in the zeal of Religion, when they do but exceed them in the heat
of Complexion. And yet under this forged Banner of Religion, they combat
boldly with other Complexions: yea, sometimes with the Spirit it self, the
true and only root of true Religion. For indeed it falls out, that Complexions
being different, by their difference they fall into discord, and not so only
but they are at difference with the Spirit it self, both because the Spirit is
of no Complexion, and because the Spirit upon occasion makes use of any
Complexion; which when it does, it gains the displeasure of that Complexion,
which is contrary to that whereof it makes use. So by several turns, every
Complexion combateth with the Spirit in those whose Religion is Complexion, and
whose Complexions are not commanded by the Spirit, the true Author of Religion.
This in patterns will more evidently appear.

Set before you a man of Choler; his humor is hot, and this heat being
applied to Religion, he calls Zeal. Then he inferres, the more heat, the
more Zeal; and the more Zeal, the more Religion. Hence he blows that fire of
his flesh, until he has kindled in himself some flame of Intemperance, or
perchance, has set the House of God on fire about his Ears.

On the otherside, behold a Phlegmatic; His Complexion preaches to him, that
Religion consists all in Quietness, and living peaceably among his Neighbors.
Therefore he prayseth Moderation so much, that his Religion takes cold, and he
loves an easy Ignorance more then a diligent Knowledge. He is dully patient in
dishonor done to God, he is contented with quiet profaneness and well
settled Superstitions. Whence I guess this man to have been the first father
of this Position, Malum been positum non debet moueri.

But now as we have seen these two asunder^, so bring them together, and you
shall presently see a battle. But the Choleric man is first in the co^ba^e,
and has the Phlegmatic by the collar ^re he be aware. At the first ^low, he
denounces damnation to him for key-coldnesse, ^or doing Gods work
negligently, for his ungodly Patience, for man-pleasing, for temporising, and
at last he calls him Formalist. On the other side, the Phlegmatic (when he is
awaked by the clamor of the Choleric) calls him an angry Gospeller, a
Fyer-flinger, a Schismatic, a Sower of dissension, and perchance a Puritan,
(though that word sometimes be also bestowed on the very grace of the Spirit.)
Besides, if the Phlegmatic be thoroughly spurred by the Choleric, so that
he arise to any height from the cushion of his Flesh, he will then look over
into the life of the Choleric, and tell him his discoueries. He will say,
that all his heat is not zeal, because he is as hot in his own quarrels, as
in the quarrels of God, yea in matters of Earth as much or more then in matters
of Heaven, that he will sooner be reconciled when God is offended, then when
himself is touched; that his heat is not spiritual, because it has Pride
joined with it, and that out of Pride he pretends to pull down Pride, and
that he is angry with dignities because he has them not, and that if he had
them, he would presently be at friendship with them. Thus do we see these two
in a miserable and vehement conflict, where it is pity to leave them long. But
another spectacle calls us aside, from which being returned, I shall desire to
part them by that Spirit of Love, which puts asunder those that come together
in combats, and brings together by Love those that went asunder in Hatred.

The first Man that I take notice of in this new spectacle, is of a Sanguine
Complexion. This man being of a pleasant constitution, will have a pleasurable
Religion. He thinks that the Text, Rejoice continually, is to be taken
literally and strictly, and he will not endure any doctrine that may not
manifestly arise from this Text. He likes well pastimes and recreations on the
Sundays, though Service be the shorter, and he says, That some Ales with a
little spice of Drunkenness, maintain Love. He understands not the word
Mortification, but thinks it is killing of a man's self, and he is never in
earnest with his Soul, much less in sober sadness, but he lives in ^est,
and in sum is of a festival Religion.

But with him, though against him appears a Melancholist, the ruggedness of
whose brows shows the roughness of his Religion. His Complexion is fed by a
sad, sour, and harsh humor, and accordingly his Religion consists all of
terror, censuring, severity, cutting and paring, much binding, with little or
no loosing. He thinks a sour countenance is the very Visage of Religion, and
not to be like any that are many, is the true difference of a Christian. He
hates form and believes Religion must have nothing but substance; he is
himself a soul (almost) without a body, and he would have all the Church to
be like him. He is full of scruples, and therefore both seeks and finds many
faults where are none, and is so jealous of abuses, that he is ready to forbid
all uses for fear of abuses. He is exceeding querulous, and therefore more
apt to complain for supposed Corruptions, then to thank God for real
Reformation, and is more troubled with a little spot on a finger, then he is
cheered with the comeliness of a whole Face. With Superstition he hates
Superstition, yea sometimes he nourishes it by hating it. For his hatred of
Superstition, continues the memory of diverse Superstitions, which if his
opposition did not make known, they had been most quietly confuted by
Forgetfulness. Besides, he is filled with Superstition by a swarm of strange
and extrauagant Imaginations. By them he sometimes sees Visions, receives
Revelations, and approaches to an Anabaptist or a Seraphim; like Bonauenture.
This he does if his Melancholy be lightsome, but if it be wholly dark, then
he is nothing but fear, every Atome is a Mountain, and he falls into
Judicial scruples of touching, tasting, and handling. And now these two being
brought together (though the Melancoly man will hardly be drawn into Company)
you shall be sure to see a combat in these also. The Sanguine man tells the
Melancolicke of faction, separation and pride, and says he is like the
Pharisie, that justified himself and despised others. He tells him, his name
is Stand farther off, which if he says, because he thinks that he is holyer
then others. He accuses him of malice and spitefulness, and says, that Love
is much decayed, since these pure Gospellers came up. He hates him as the Enemy
of Mirth, yea the enemy of Life, for he holds him a walking dead-man, and
doubts he seeks to make others as dead as himself. Therefore he shuns him
as he shuns Death, and is resolved to forsake any Religion or Salvation, that
is of his Complexion. On the other side, the Melancolicke counts the Sanguine
for a Reprobate, and his titles for him are, Good Fellow, and Carnal
Gospellers. He tells him the Love which he talks of is not Charity, but a
brotherhood in Iniquity, and that such Unity is but a conspiracy of the
Wicked, not a Communion of Saints. He taxes him for being merry with Sin, and
for pretending the furtherance of spiritual virtues by fleshly liberties,
wherein God is offended, that he may be pleased. Briefly, he accounts the
Sanguine but a man of this World, and he accounts himself to be none of the
World. Because the Sanguine is of the World, therefore the Melancolicke thinks
it fit to hate him, because he has undertaken not to love the World; and
because himself is not of the World, therefore he thinks it fit to be hated of
the world, and in this word World, he includes the Sanguine.

Thus do these diverse Complexions afflict one another, and each one thinks
that Religion is on his side, and Irreligion on the other, and that with
Religion, he batters and assaults Irreligion, whereas in deed, it is Humor
that fights with Humor, Complexion with Complexion, the Flesh with the Flesh.
And because the one Humor finds faults, and perchance true ones in the other,
therefore he condemns him bodily, and approoues himself securely, because
he is contrary to him. For he thinks that his contrariety to Vice must needs
be a Virtue. But the whiles he sees not that Vices have a great contrariety
between themselves, and therefore a Vice may fall out with a Vice, Prodigality
with Covetousness, Dullness with Impatience, and Dissolutenes with hidebound
Severity. Therefore we ought to look wherewith it is that we resist Vice, as
to be sure that it is Vice which we do resist; For a Vice is an evil
medicine for a Vice, and a beam in thine own eye is a bad help, to take out
the mote of another eye. Yet this is man's Infirmity, the same blindness which
can see nothing in our selves, will perceive much in others, and the same
Humor which preiudiceth us to judge our selves, makes us strong and confident
Judges of others. And this does every Humor in his Turn; for every one will
take on it some work in Religion: but especially Choler and Melancoly are
busiest, the one in practical busi-headednesse, which often tends (in their
opinion) to a holy sedition, and a religious schism; and the other in
speculatiue conceits, scruples, and apprehensions, in the abundance whereof
they seek faults and are willing to find them; and by the prejudice of that
willingness find some, where are none; they call a whole Church to the Bar,
and their private speculations must be the laws of her trial, and if some
word or action be capable of two senses, a good and a bad, they arrest the
Church upon suspicion, that the bad sense is hers, and not the good. And both
these Humors get themselves often much glory among the Vulgar, the Melancoly
man for deadness, being thought guilty of Mortification, and the Choleric
for his vehemence, being accused of Zeal. Yea, these and the rest of their
fellows are often in a mixture, according to the variety whereof, happens an
infinite change of conceits and affections in Religion.

Neither is this to be found in one Church alone, but no doubt it works in all
Churches, all Churches being made of men, and all men having different
Complexions. There are no doubt elsewhere, molles and rigidi, easy and rough
Professors, Phlegmatic and Sanguine, Choleric and Melancolicke. If you will
go aside with Saint John into the Wilderness of Contemplation, and behold the
great Harlot of the World, the Church of Rome, you shall see the diverse
operations of these different Complexions. The Woman her self that sits on the
Beast, even the Heads and Managers of that Tyranny, are of a sanguine and
scarlet Complexion. They have turned Divinity into an Art and Mystery, of
purchasing pleasures, honors, and dignities. And thence she bears this Motto,
I sit as a Queen, and shall see no sorrow. For Choler repair to the Jesuit,
a man of an active and busy heat, full of dissignes and travails, and if the
craft of his Choler do not effect his proiects, the mischieuousnesse of it
shall, and then he sheds the blood of War in the time of Peace. His very
character is Choleric, for it is a Locust, that has the tail of a Scorpion,
and a sting in his tail, etc. Reu. 9. But for Phlegmatickes there are no
patterns like the Monks, whose Life in general is pain by ease, and labor
in eating. And in this pain and labor they express a wonderful patience.
This is the man whom that excellent pensill of the Spirit Saint Paul describes
weeping, whose end is damnation, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is
their shame. And if you will see the face of Melancholy, behold your Anchorite
or Stillite, who often by a fullen humor falls out with the world and falls
into a corner, and at best undertakes voluntary temptations, that he may
escape necessary ones. This man also Saint Paul describes, when he calls his
Religion a show of wisdom, in will worship and humility, and punishing the
body. And these differences have also bred oppositions among them. The Popes
turning Religion to be a Pander for pride, lusts and pleasures is condemned by
diverse, as Barnard, Cassander, Mantuan, etc. The Jesuit is condemned by the
Priest, yea by the founder Romanists, for being too pragmaticall, and the whole
world cries out on the Monckes, and the Poets make songs on them. But the
Melancoly Christian seems most reverent as he does among us, yet they have
been censured by men of Judgment, as Cornelius Agrippa de vanit. sci. cap.
62. and Barnard in Cant. sermo 35. and others, who condemn that life which
lives to it self, profits not others, and runs into Salomons Vaesoli. And
no doubt by the laws of flesh and blood, the Pope in his glory cannot but
laugh at their Penury, and he that rejoices in his gain by Fabula de Christo,
which was the blasphemous speedy of an impious Pope, must needs think them mad
that loose thereby either pleasure or profit. No doubt, as fitly by the Pope
may be given to these men of penance, that saying which was bestowed on the
common people that sought a fatherly benediction. Quando populus hic decipi
vult, decipiatur. Again, the Philosophers had Sects agreeable to different
Complexions, The Epicure fitted either the Sanguine or Phlegmatic, the
Stoicke and Cynicke, the Choleric and Melancolicke. So much in all men that
are merely natural, does the Body work on the Soul, and the Soul by the
same blindness which it suffers from the Body has this defect, that it sees
not that it is blind; and therefore believing that it sees* it calls that an
opinion, which is indeed but a prejudice. Now the Remedy of this Disease, as
of others, is by contraries. Surely as these Complexions of the Flesh in their
extremities fight with the Spirit, so does the Spirit with them, and therefore
the Remedy of the Flesh is the Spirit, and we shall be safe from the
extremities and superfluities of the Flesh, if we keep our selves in the
uprightness, vnpartialnesse, and indifferency of the Spirit. Now this shall
we perform, if we be guided by certain rules, whereof it may be truly said,
that he that keeps these rules, keeps his way, and he that keeps his
way, keeps himself in the Spirit, and he that keeps himself in the
Spirit, keeps his Life. And most true it is, that they that walk by these
rules, peace shall be upon them, for they are the very Israel of God.

The First of these is this, That every man truly judge himself, his
Complexion and Constitution in the outward glass of the eye, and the inward
glass of the soul, so to find out the exuberant, abounding and reigning
Complexion; and that being found, to be far from favoring and defending it
in the things of God, which is the usual manner of flesh and blood. But rather
on the contrary, let him suspect and stop himself in that way to which his
inclination ouer-hurries him, and condemn his error when he goes astray, and
having condemned it, return back to his true way. Surely in this we must
imitate the Nauigators. The Nauigators know the right Line that leads to their
intended Haven, and to that Line by the Compass they set the course of the
Ship. But if contrary winds overrule them, and turn them from this right
proposed Line to any one side, then they reckon how far they have gone on the
one side, and by another return they requite it, and so bring themselves
again into their right intended way. Doubtless our Life is a Voyage, our
Haven is the City of God, the Line of our course is Sanctification, and the
Spirit is our Compass; This Spirit points us our way, and our Souls must
resolve to run in that way. But it so falls out that the tempests of the Flesh
of Complexion, of exorbitant Constitution, carries us aside, what remaynes but
that we find out this Error, and finding it, allow a return as long and as
large as our wandering. But far be from us that foolish and dangerous Custom
of those blind Souls, who being hood wincked by Humor and Complexion, do
make their Humors and Complexions the Guids of their Souls, and not their
Souls guided by the Spirit, the Guide of their Humors. Yea, they think that
Humor is the Spirit, and so they err by authority, and are therefore far
more incurable. This is to make the wind the Guide of the Ship, and not the
Compass, and surely such men shall be sure never to come to their pretended
Haven. For the end of the Flesh is Death, and the fruit of the Spirit only is
Life. Neither is it hard for each man to find out the superfluities of his
flesh, and to correct them if he follow the Second Rule, which is this. Man
must not compare himself with himself, nor measure himself by himself, for
every man is as tall as his own measure, and he cannot thereby find out his
shortness or tallnesse. But Man must seek out for his patterns, both the
words and persons of men truly sanctified, or rather the words and deeds of the
Spirit, speaking and living in them, even such whose impartial uprightness
has wholly given them up from the Flesh to the Spirit. The chiefest is Christ
himself, whose upright temper rectified and guided by an unmeasured Spirit,
setleth him in a perpetual equilibriousnesse, apt upon occasion to the effects
of any Complexion, yet unapt without to be led by any of them.

Next to Christ are his Apostles, And among them most conspicuous and most
known in S. Paul. In him shall ye see the reasonable use of each Complexion,
while he chideth the Galathians and Corinthians, while he rejoices for the
Romans, while he expresses a fervent love to Timothy and many other Saints;
yea, to his own Nation, wishing with his own peril that they might be
saved, while he speaks weeping of those whose end is Damnation, and being
still one and the same man; he is full of anger when Elimas resisted him, and
full of patience when the Jews afflicted him. And even at this day are there
paternes to be found of an upright, even a spiritual conversation, and their
followers should we be that so follow the followers of Christ. Neither must
that backward reasoning be heard among Christians, to argue from their own
apprehensions or virtues, thereby to prove what is Truth and Goodness, which is
to reason from themselves to Christ, but they must reason from Christ to
themselves; they must say, This Christ did, therefore I must do so: and not
this I do, therefore Christ did so. For that were to make thy self Christ, and
Christ a Christian. Yet this many do, and from their own inclinations fashion
the shapes of paternes to themselves, not themselves to them.

And as we must conform our selves to the deeds of the Spirit, so we must to
the words of the Spirit, and to do both, we our selves must be spiritual,
even the freemen of God. Upon which is grounded the third Rule, which is this,
That every Saint and son of God, by the aid of the Spirit inwardly freeing
him, and outwardly teaching him, must strive to have an universal liberty of
soul, free and inclinable to the approouing of all Truths, and to the love
and practice of all goodness. I say this is a great and glorious liberty of
the sons of God, and of them alone, that their souls being li^ted up from
the hinges of the flesh, and new fastened to the spirit, thereby they have a
freedom to move whenever the Spirit moves, and to love whatsoever the
Spirit loves. All Truths are gladly received, all Goodness is highly
esteemed, be it in a Complexion different, yea, contrary. For this Freeman of
God must have the liberty both of his Judgment and Will, he will be bound
Prentise to no Sect, partiality or piece of Truth or Goodness, but will be as
large as Truth and Goodness it self.

And if you will know his Sect, the truth is, he is only of the Sect of Truth
and Goodness; And that is no Sect. For these he approues wheresoever he finds
them, in what Complexion, Religion, or Nation soever, and it seems Saint Peter
himself was of this Sect; yea, God himself favors it, for Saint Peter
says, that of a Truth he perceived, That God in all Nations accepted those
that fear him and work Righteousness. Therefore henceforth, Let no man tie
himself to a part, by some corporeal likeness, or prejudice of birth or
education, and so separate himself from the whole; but let every true Christian
be a true Catholic, even an universal thing entertayning Truth and Goodness
in all persons and Complexions, yea, entertayning all persons and Companies if
there be Truth and Goodness in them.

For let the great and little Sectaries, Romanists and Separatists know, That
the name of Catholic is most properly his, whose judgment is free to the
receite of all Truths, but especially and actually of the Fundamentals of
Salvation, and whose will is free to the embracing of all persons endued with
sanctified Goodness, issuing from the knowledge of Truth. The true Saint is a
lover of all sanctifying Truth, and a lover of all that are sanctified by the
Truth.

This Saint John testifies, when he boldly assumes, That the elect Lady was
loved in the Truth, of all them that love the Truth. Therefore let men boast of
singularity and separation, that is fearful to me which is to them
preeminence. For they that cut off Saints from them, cuts themselves off from
the Communion of Saints. Yea, let not a difference in small Truths make
separation. It may be that Complexion has only made this difference, and has
made him or thee, I know not which, too strait or too large, but take heed
that thou do not for a difference in Complexion separate thy self from thy
own Brother. The great and certain Truth and main Goodness that are in him,
are more strong to bind thee to an union, then the difference in small Truths
and Duties be to make a Division. Yea, that great Goodness that is in him,
except with the Pharisees thou think better of thy self then others, may make
thee to suspect thy self rather then him. And suspect thy self and spare not,
if thou do not find in thy self this universal liberty of soul, which
approues all solid truth and sanctified Goodness in any person; yea, loves the
persons of that Truth and Goodness.

Let not the flesh part what the Spirit has joined together; let not the
difference of bodies put a-sunder what the unity of Grace has conjoined,
neither do thou know men hereafter according to thy own flesh, but according
to Gods Spirit. But if thou will try whether thou do make a true spiritual
discord, see whether thou do equally make it with men of thy own Complexion
and Constitution, if they be void of Truth and Goodness; and whether thou do
love and entertayne any Truth and Goodness, though he be never so much
outwardly different that professes it. But if thou stick at either of these,
thou art not yet a Freeman of the Spirit, but a slave of thy flesh, thy love
and hatred are thy own and not Gods.

And surely so it appears in many of this kind, for a spiritual hatred dwells
in a spiritual heart, and a spiritual heart is a charitable heart, and a
charitable heart even where it hates, there it wishes that it might have cause
to love. Accordingly these spiritual and charitable haters of Vice, rather
then Person, seek the amendment of those that they hate, they strive as much
as is lawful and possible to live in peace with all men, they attend if at any
time they may recover them from the snare of the Devil. But the Complexionary
Zelots, think more of Confusion then Conversion, they seek out Reasons to
maintain a Rent and Difference, and to account men of Infirmity, Enemies
rather then Brethren, and except a man will presently be saved, they will
presently damme him. But wisdom is justified of her Children, and this is the
wisdom of the Spirit, even to unlade our selves of the flesh, to free our
selves from all the prejudice, burden and bondage of it, and to dwell in that
pure, peaceable and universal spirit, which entertayneth gladly all Truth, and
loves willingly all Goodness; yea, where they are not, it wishes they may
be, and expects until they be.

But before I leave this subject, I must both magnify and pity the Man truly
spiritual. He ought to be magnified, because he that is mighty has magnified
him, and has set him in a high degree. The Knife of the Spirit has ripped off
the flesh from his soul, and the flesh does no more command him, but he is a
spiritual Freeman. His soul is free from darkness by a marvelous, even a
Celestial Light, and his will is free from the bands and chains of the flesh
by a seuering, cutting and absoluing Spirit. He is taller then the sons of
men, and as much higher then they, as the Spirit is higher then the flesh, and
by that step of advantage he looks into Heaven, which they see not. He is
inwardly and really more noble, for he has a free, large, and emancipated
soul, which they have not. He is more powerfully valiant, for he fights
the battles of the Lord against spiritual powers, and against the whole
Kingdom of darkness. But with this honor that is to be magnified, is
adjoined a misery to be pittyed.

For as he fights for God against the World, and the Prince of the World: so
the World, with all the Complexions thereof; yea, with the Prince thereof,
fight together against him. His Sword is against every man, and every man
against him, and though he be not evil: but a true Israelite, in whom is no
guile, yet therefore the evil World hates him, because he is not like them.
Surely the quarrel of the World with the sons of God, is not because they
are naught, but because they are unlike, and unlikeness is to them as
sufficient a cause of debate as wickedness. Yea, where there is an
unlikeness, there false wickedness shall be imputed, that which of it self is
faultlesse may seem justly to be condemned, as being guilty of that which is
truly faulty. Because they are unlike, they are hated, and because they are
hated, they must be accused.

To say truth, they are not hated because they are wicked, but they are made
wicked because they are hated. Now this slanderous odiousness arising from
unlikeness, is thus hatched: Either because a man believing fully his own
rightnesse, makes himself a rule unto others, and condemns them when they
swerue from this Rule, or because viewing his own crookedness in a comparison
with a goodmans righteousness, he finds this comparison of righteousness to
be a check and reproof to his crookedness. But whatsoever the cause is, Too
true it is; That unlikeness has made many Quarrels between them, and these
Quarrels of unlikeness too often flow from the opposition of Complexion,
against Sanctification.

The sanctified man being free from all Complexions, yet sundry times upon
sundry occasions serves himself of sundry Complexions, and then commonly he
is censured by the servants of those Complexions, that are contrary to those
that are his Servants.

For indeed the spiritual man is the Lord of Complexions, but the carnal is
their servant. Hence, as they fight among themselves, so most commonly they
fight all with him: For the spiritual being of no faction, nor seueraltie, but
affecting universal Goodness, serves himself of the goodness of each
Complexion, and refuses the vices and extremities of it. So by reason son of
his different temper from all, he has Enemies of all, being Virtus in medio
vitiorum.

Hence the Stiptick, and hide-bound or angry Christian, when he sees the
spiritual man conuersing with Sinners, though perchance with hope of
edification and cure, or some evidence of smoking grace, he cries out against
him, and calls him good fellow, an eater with Publicans and Sinners. If he see
him using some lawful comfort and recreation, he calls him a Glutton, a
Drunkard, a Libertine. If he see him conversant with men of the contrary
Faction, or excusing a Ceremony for the love of Peace, he doubts of his
Salvation, and holds him to be fallen from the Faith, and takes him for little
less then one of the damned. If the sociable, sanguine, and neighbourly
Christian see the spiritual man with a notable difference to affect those that
excel in Virtue, to condemn the Drunken meetings of carnal Feastings, the
lascivious gestures of dancing prouocations, the beastly mirth of Tongues tipped
with filthiness, the prophanations of times consecrated to divine uses, the
contempt of Gods Word, and the careless burying it in fleshly recreations; He
cries out upon his purity, and defies it, and says, too much Religion has
made him mad. If the Lazy Phlegmatic hear the right Christian cry aloud
to the sleeper in security, Away thou that sleep, and stand up from the
dead; if he see him painful in study, abstinent in fasting, not slothful in
service, but zealous to good works, angry with Sinners, and reproving them for
their amendment, he accounts him a busi-body, one that hates his own
quietness, and (he says, as Acts 17.6.) These men that have turned the World
vp-side down, are come hither also.

Lastly, your melancholy man he is angry also with the Communion of Saints,
with the Physicians being among the sick, with the peace of the godly, if
their Coats be not all of one fashion, or if one have a dust on his Coat,
which the other has not. He condemns the spiritual man for being at Feasts
of Love, for drinking a little Wine, though he have an infirmity in his
stomach, and he is angry with any visible glory of the visible Church. If the
true Christian receive any preferment, he holds him a Demas, and one that has
forsaken Paul, and has embraced the World: and if he converse with any that
are less hidebound then himself, though perchance more honest, he takes him
for a Formalist and a Time pleaser. So the spiritual man scapes not his blows
neither, and thus he is beaten of all sides.

But though this to many be a great disheartning, to be as Jeremy, a man
against all men, and all men against him; yet to the Children of Wisdom it is
a Testimonial and encouragement. That is indeed true Wisdom which is contrary
to the corruption of all humors, and by reason of this contrariety is refused
of all, both piping merrily, and mourning dolefully. Carnal mirth hates
spiritual sadness, and carnal sadness hates spiritual mirth, yet the
wisdom of of the Spirit is still true Wisdom, even the Wisdom of God, and
is justified still both by the Father and the Children.

Therefore stand thou strong in the path of the Spirit, and let this opposition
on all sides be unto thee a testimony and approbation, that thou art on no
side, but in the midst. Thy business is to turn neither to the right hand nor
to the left; though terrors assail thee both on the right and on the left,
keep thou the narrow way of Verity, that leads to Eternity. Thou art going
to Canaan, look as well for unkindness of thy Cousin the Edomite, a seeming
professor, as of thy Enemy the profane Amalakite. Thou artfighting a good
fight for the Crown of Righteousness, expect to be in perils, not only by
Robbers, but in perils by false Brethren: the Crown when it comes will pay for
all.

Lastly, I note one Combat of the flesh, yet seeming to be of the Spirit, and
that is the Combat between Zeal and Discretion. A Combat, I confess, which
I grieve to speak of, for it is the falling out of Brethren, or rather of Man
and Wife. I had much rather to contemplate how blessed is the Marriage and
unity of these two, and how fair and beautiful is their issue. Surely the
fruits of this Union are far more glorious then the Apples of Gold with
Pictures of Silver. For it is the absoluteness of each holy Work, when it is
fashioned by the Zeal of Discretion. Such works are excellent both in matter
and form, and so they are both good and reasonable.

But on the other side, how lamentable are the defects in either, when Zeal
wants Discretion, or Discretion wants Zeal. Where Zeal wants, Discretion
can never do a good Work for the matter of it is naught, where Discretion
wants, a good Work is never well done, for the manner of it is naught. And
then again how lamentable are the Wars which proceed from these defects?
Where Discretion abounds, but Zeal is defective, there order is commonly the
chief object; calmness, quietness, and outward prosperity are chiefly
regarded.

But on the other side, true Zeal is sometime condemned of business, of
tartness, of giddiness, and the Prophet is demanded, who has made him a
Counselor? But if Discretion fight against true and sanctified Zeal, let it
know that it fights against the Spirit of God, and then let Gamaliel dissuade
him from being found a fighter against God; yea, let Wisdom bear with smaller
Indiscretions, if accompanied with the true Zeal of Sanctification, for God
gives his Graces many times to the weak, and by weak and contemptible
Instruments we know that God shows his own strength; by their weakness
casting down the strong holds of the flesh, and setting up his glorious
Kingdom. And when we come into the Kingdom of God, and see what great
return of Souls and good Works some weak Saints have made, it shall be no
grief of heart to the men of Wisdom, that they have winked at some lesser
indiscretions and infirmities.

Yet on the other side there grow sometimes intolerable inconveniences, where
Zeal abounds and Discretion is much defective. For by such, holiness is
altogether proposed, but the fitting and shaping of things best to effect that
holiness is not well conceived. Good things are not done with the best
advantage, but lose part of their goodness for want of good handling. Zeal
without discretion is but a wild kind of goodness, and like a mettald horse
without a bridle, it carries the Rider into waves that are out of the way, and
makes him run against all that are in his way. And to take a view of it in
some particulars, I first obseru, that it is unreasonable, and full of
extremity by following reason beyond reason. It is just overmuch, and knows
not the right bounds of Right and Truth, but with Peter when the feet only
should be washed, it will have the head washed also. It strayneth after things
beyond possibility and fitness, and if perchance the things be good in their
matter which it aymeth at, it does it in too violent a manner, and not
proportionably to the value or weight of the things. There are some things
which ought to be done, and other things that should not be left undone, and
as we see some odds between Cummin and Righteousness, so we see ods in
Christ's inioyning them. But inconsiderate Zeal knowing that the paying of
Cummin should not be left undone, with an equal heat sometimes prosecutes
both that and Righteousness; yea with a great heat pursues a small Truth, and
a greater Truth with less heat. Such was the Zeal of the Pharisees, whom
Christ therefore justly taxed as strayners of Gnats and swallowers of Camels.
And I wish there were none now-adayes that are vehemently hot against small
matters of form, and cold even to death in Covetousness, Pride, Extortion and
Oppression. And to go on a little farther after these that go on too far, we
shall find that they follow little Truths at too unreasonable expenses. Mark
we the Law of God in his ten Words, mark we the Gospel of Christ Jesus, the
Epistles of his Apostles, and we shall find Love to be the Soul of the Law,
the new Commandment (by excellence) of the Gospel, the special charge of all
the Epistles. Above all things put on Love; there abide these three, Faith,
Hope, and Love, and the chiefest of these is Love. Love is the bond of
perfectness, it is the most excellent way, it goes into heaven with us, and
there it testifies for us (as John says) that we were the Children of God on
earth.

Now if this be the most excellent thing, if it be to be put on above all
things, and is not to be put off when all things else shall be taken from us,
how is this precious Jewel rashly undervalued, and too often put off by
inconsiderate Zeal? In the difference of small Truth, you shall see Love
thrown aside, like a Cloak by one that goes to wrestling, and (as between
beasts, whom I am ashamed to name in a comparison with Christians) a little
bone causes great and gaping wounds. I deny not but all Truth is valuable, but
all Truth is not equally valuable with Love, but Love is to be maintained,
even with those in whom some Truths are defective, and some such defects of
Truth are to be tolerated, where they cannot be amended but with the breach of
Love. I speak not God knows, but with a desire that Truth were perfectly
embraced, but I give advice in that case where lesser Truths are remedilesly
vnreceiued. And in this case I say, that this most excellent Love is not to be
sold for the buying of such little Trueths, neither may we loose a thing
absolutely necessary to Salvation, for things not so absolutely necessary.
There is a Truth of the foundation, even a fundamental Truth that is
necessary to Salvation; a Truth by the belief whereof we are fastened into
Christ Jesus, and whosoever denies this Truth, is without the compass of that
Love which is due to the sons of God. But whosoever holds this fundamental
Truth, and is thereby become a member of Christ Jesus, Love is due to that
man, even the Love of a son of God, and do not thou dare to hate him whom
Christ loves. Though by infirmity of judgment he deny some lesser Truth,
or by weakness of humane nature fall into some small offenses, cut not thy
self off from him, for if thou do, thou can not cut him off from Christ,
but thou cuttest thy self off from him who is one with Christ. Therefore beware
of this cutting and concision, for where Love wants, it hurts the man most
where it wants, and not the man toward whom it is wanting; for where Love is
absent, there Christ is not present: if Faith work not downward in our hearts
by Love, it works not upward into union with our Head Christ Jesus. Let not
Zeal therefore buy Truth at too dear a rate; but let it be equally earnest
for the maintayning of Love and Truth. What God has put together, let no man
put asunder. We are commanded to follow the Truth in Love, and therefore woe
be to them that divide the following of the Truth from Love, yea follow the
Truth in malice and hatred. The Law was abrogated, yet Paul would not have the
cessation urged with violence and rigor; yea he tells the iudgers and
condemners, What are they that judge, and of the judged he says, He shall
be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. The different decency of
hair is justly recommended by Paul to different sexes, yet if any man will be
contentious herein, he will not join battle with him, but tells him, that
neither he nor the Churches of God have any such Custom as Contention. I wish
we could truly say so too, and that the fight begun about Easter, even Love
lost for a holiday, were not now renewed in the like kind, though on other
occasions. But I desire the saints of God seriously to consider this, That if
the Church of God have no such custom as Contention, how can they that have
such a custom as Contention, be the Church of God? Let the Zealous consider,
that the kindly heat of the fire of the Spirit is Love, and not Contention; but
if this heat grow contentious, it cease to be Spiritual. Wine is no longer
wine, but vinegar, when it has lost his comfortable and sprightly heat, and
has fret it self into sowrenesse and tartness. And surely the heat and Zeal
which is degenerated from edifying and comfortable charity, into opposition,
biting, and judging, is no longer the heat of the Spirit, but a rage of the
Flesh. A Second mark of indiscreet Zeal is, that it is unseasonable, and full
of confusion. It will have perfection to be the fruit of a moment, and it will
not stay for seasons and occasions. The Pharisees would have the old bottles
presently filled with new wine, and the Children of the wedding to fast while
the Bridegroom was with them. If they would have stayed until the bottles had
been renewed, or the Bridegroom had been departed, their Zeal had been
approoueable, whereas now it was unseasonable. In many cases we are advised to
bear evil men patiently, and not to break out into a fury, if at such times
as we would, they cannot break the snares of the Devil; but our patience is
to expect if at any time God will that they may escape. Many there are that are
impatient of evil men, and drive them away by terror and despite, if they be
not presently converted; yet it directly breaks this precept, and shows that
they would be masters and authors of men's salvation, and not waiters upon
God, that only gives the increase. When they have spoken, it must be done,
whereas it shall not be done until God speak. What if God will have him
called at the twelfth hour, will thou damn him if he be not converted at the
ninth hour; wait thou on Gods leisure, for God will not wait on thy
pleasure: he may save him at last, if thou drive him not from hearing, by thy
fierceness; and if thou do so, thou edifiest to Hell, and art not Gods but
Satan's Minister.

Again, others are unseasonable, in not being as wise Fishers for Souls, as
men are for Fishes. They seek not with Paul to catch them by craft, neither
strive so far to please, as pleasing may be an advancement of profiting.
Yea, there is a delight taken sometimes in falling right overthwart an error,
or infirmity, and so a boisterous wind makes the man hold his cloak the faster,
which a warm sunblast would have gently persuaded from his back. It is not
amiss to ground the persuasions of things not believed, on things believed; of
duties unpracticed, on duties practiced; and reproves of faults, on
commendations of virtues. Paul telling King Agrippa he believed the Prophets,
had won him almost to be a Christian; and when he means to chide the
Corinthians, as in some points Carnal and not Spiritual, he begins his
Epistle with the title of Saints, and thanks to God that they were rich in
utterance and knowledge. And since we have fallen into mention of Paul's
behavior to Agrippa, by that and other such examples may we learn the
comeliness of discreet admonition, and the ragged harshnesse of indiscretion.
Agrippa before Paul spoke with him was much less then a Christian, for he was
but almost a Christian when he had done with him. Yet Paul does not call him
Unbeliever, but takes hold on that belief which he gave to the Jewish
Religion, by that to bring him to the Christian. David shed the blood of Vrtas,
but Nathan did not call him Murderer, but first gained his own judgment from
him, and set it against himself. He took David by craft, and Nathan did not
at first condemn him, before he had set David against David, and made him to
pronounce sentence upon himself. Saint Ambrose admonishes Theodosius of his
cruel execution of the Thessalonians, but ue does it with such reverence to
his person, with such expression of Love, and mere seeking of his Salvation,
That a most valiant Emperor could not but receive patiently the Spiritual
bonds wherewith he tied him below, that he might take a course to free
himself above. No doubt but the like occasions may still befall, and Princes
may need Admonition, and why should they not have them if they need them? for
else were they more miserable then common men, and Salomons woe were especially
upon them, because when they fall, there were none to help them up. But it
being granted that they may fall, and that falling they are to be raised by
Admonition: Let the matter of the Admonition be fitted to the Fault (be it
Murder, Adultery, unhallowing of Gods name, etc.) but let the manner be
framed to the best advantage of preuayling, which generally is with a regard to
the dignity of the person, and the remaynder of his Virtues. Let it appear,
that that which speaks is Love, and that for which it speaks is Salvation,
and how can any heart, if it have goodness in any proportion to greatness,
shut it self against Love, bringing with it Salvation? I doubt not but there
are certain fiery Spirits, that like no example but that of the Prophet, See
how this Murderers son has sent to take away my head* but they know not that
one kind of Spirit fits not all persons, times, and occasions; but they ought
to know, That is the best Spirit which fits best with these particulars, and is
most likely to effect that good which it intends. The others do but drive away
the birds with noise, which they pretend to take with nets. This Art of
Admonition is most excellently described by Gregory the Great, in his Morals
upon Job, lib. 12. cap. 3. and upon Ezekiel, libr. 1. homil. 11.

And now let us go down from the top of mankind to the bottom, and there see
how ordinary men may be discreetly dissuaded from ordinary sins. For
example, If you would get Usury from a man, I think it not best to fly
suddenly into his face with the cudgel of Damnation, for that may make him
stand upon his guard, and fall to the defense of his sin, but deal with him
upon confessed grounds, and on those build that which is not confessed. Tell
him at first that which he cannot deny, that men must all live one by
another, and that for one man to fret out all others, and to live by himself,
is in humane. That Charity in one sight regards the benefit of another, with
her own. That in Usury, usually the benefit goes most, if not all, of one
side, yea sometimes the benefit of the one rises out of the loss of the
other. Now where these things are, there such lending is the cause of fretting
and undoing. So it remaynes they must either grant what they first denied, that
men may fret and undo one another, or else they must condemn their lending
which is so fretfull and injurious.

In brief, let us first work upon men's Judgments by informing them, and not
presently at the first sight fly on their wills and affections, to rack and
force them.

Again, where there are great and little faults to be amended, let us not be
more busy for the little then the great, nor equally importune an amendment of
all together. For verily I believe, good occasions of Reformation have been
lost, because too many faults have been brought together to amendment, yea
little and doubtful faults, and such as might be healed with a good
construction, have been brought in equally upon the File with those of greater
moment. And what does this course do, but magnify the tediousness of the
work, and increase the difficulty of it? What does it but bring this answer
to use, That changes are dangerous, and evils well settled, are better then
much vnsetling by much amending? What does it but bring a doubt that nothing
will satisfy, since faults seem more to be sought then found? But I wish that
always there might be an advised and temperate demand in matters of
Reformation, and though it be unadvisedly demanded, yet there may be given a
just and solid answer, and such as might regard to please God by mayntayning
the purity of his Spouse the Church, rather then to satisfy or vnsatisfie the
indiscretions of men. Let Gods cause ever be maintained, whether proposed or
opposed by our own enemies.

A third fault of indiscreet Zeal is, That it is censorious, and passes
easily into condemnation both of things and persons. Not to speak of
indifferent things, too often censured, I say some men, and some matters, are
condemned either not heard or not understood; and yet the Heathen Romans used
not to condemn any before hearing, and much more we that are Christians ought
to know those things whereof we affirm.

There are heights of Dispensation, which mean understandings reach not unto,
and yet for such sometimes they despise dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities; Christ is censured for being among the sick, yet a Physician; for
the waste of a precious Ointment, yet going to burial. So the blame which
belongs to their own incapacity, they cast on that which deserves
commendation; and that which is in it self good, is by them called evil, only
because they are not wise enough to see the goodness of it.

Again, there are many good actions of good men, that by censorious Zeal are
taxed as evil, and yet are only known in some outside of probability, but
the inside (wherein the life of the action lies) is not known. The Jews were
in a rage with Peter for going to the Gentiles, yet when the cause was known,
his fault was found to be a Virtue. The Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe
of Manasseth, were indicted of Apostasy for building an Altar: but that which
was thought to be Apostasy, was indeed a memorial and means of cleaning to
the true God.

Wherefore let us not be hasty to judge according to apparances, but let us
take time to judge righteous Judgments. For if thou judge another rashly and
falsely, GOD shall judge both him and thee truly: He shall judge over the matter
again, and shall acquit him whom thou condemnest, and shall comdemne thee
for condemning him. So thy judgment of another shall return upon thy self.
And surely in this point, Let every good Conscience comfort it self in it
self, and pass little to be judged by another, in that which another knows
not; for thou stand to the Judgment Seat of the Highest Wisdom and Mercy;
and not to the Bar of humane Ignorance or Malice.

Fourthly, indiscreet zeal is often in the flesh when it thinks it is in the
Spirit, yet will not believe it, and so will not be cured.

First, I noted, that by following heat to far, it outgoeth the Spirit, and
runs out into the flesh. And now I observe, that it being gotten into the
flesh, it still believes it self to be spiritual, and so in steed of retyring
it fortifies it self there. Hence it comes, that many fleshly contentions are
mayntayned by Scriptures, yea, Sermons and Scriptures are fitted to passions,
not passions to Scriptures. So flesh and blood fights carnally with spiritual
Weapons; yea, which is fearful, turns spiritual Weapons into carnal.
Malice sometime rayleth in Scripture Phrases and beats his Enemies with
Divinity; and thinks it may speak what it will, so it be in the words of
Scripture; if it have a seeming opposition of vice, it cares not how angry it
be, though indeed Pamphlets of that kind be no other then Libels, and Sermons
then Philippickes. Yet this abuse of Divinity shall be maintained by
Divinity, and so she is miserably forced to justify and continue her own
wrongs. But let Baal plead for himself, let not God be forced to speak for
Baal, nor the Spirit for the flesh; Add not sin unto sin.

It is a sin great enough, to come out of the Spirit into the flesh, and to
turn the business of God into a Quarrel with men: do not add this other
sin of abusing the spiritual Word unto the mayntenance of thy fleshly
contentions; so by the Spirit to fight the battayles of his Enemy the flesh.

But to draw to a Conclusion, Let all true Christians strive, that their Works
be the true Issues of Zeal, ma^ryed with Discretion, for such Works are the
acceptable Salt and sauoury Sacrifices of Wisemen, and not the loath some
Sacrifices of Pooles. Let them know, that the fire of the Spirit, the Mother of
all true Zeal, has light in it as well as heat, and the heat should follow
the light, and not go before it; otherwise if the heat go before the light,
or without it, it may set on fire, where it should but warm, and so may breed
a Confusion, whereas the business of it is edification. Let us by joining the
wisdom of Serpents with the innocence of Doves, become those excellent and
perfect Stewards whom the Lord commends both for being wise and faithful,
whose faithfulness gives meat to the Servants, and whose Wisdom does it in
season; even in fitness of manner, measure, and order. And far be it from
any sound Christian to put a Divorce between that incomparable pair, whose
Marriage was in Heaven; Zeal and Discretion: or to think, that one alone of
them can be a sufficient Parent of good Works. Much less let any man, if he
find these separated by wretched Division, seek to bring them together in a
more wretched Contention. The parting of so lovely a couple is lamentable; but
a malicious meeting of them is far more dolful. For by their own good nature
they incline to love and unity, and therefore cursed is that Malice, that
changes into Enmity the most excellent Unity. He that sets Virtues by the
ears, is as he that sets Brethren by the ears; yea, as one that makes
Quarrels between Men and their Wives. Surely if the Peacemakers be blessed
being the Children of the most High, then such Quarrel-makers be accursed, and
are the Children of the Lowest; even the most infernal spirit.

To conclude, Let us as the newborn sons of the Spirit, lay aside all
Maliciousness, and lust of Contention, which are the vices of the old man, and
express the true Virtues of a godly Nature, received with the new man, even
Charity, Peace and Unity. Let not the difference of Education or Complexion, or
the unkindly opposition of Zeal and Discretion, be powerful to a separation,
where the Unity of one and the same Spirit has made a conjunction. But let the
Spirit be more followed, leading us to love, then the flesh provoking to
hatred. And surely if we be not in love, we are not in the Spirit: for
whosoever is in the Spirit is in love, yea, he is in love with love. And as
love is commended by the Author of it, which is the Spirit, so it is also
praised by the excellent fruit of it, called Edification; for by love the
members of Christ cherish each other, and by that cherishing increase in their
growth. Besides, as Sion inwardly prospers by love, so by the love of Sion,
Babylon decays. For the more Love and Unity in Sion, the more strength, and
the more strength in Sion, the more terror, yea, the more ruin of Babylon. When
the Banners are brought into the Union of an Army, then they are terrible, (
Cant. 6.) And when Israel ioynes together in the Unity of a Shoute, then are
the walls of Jericho most near to their Downfall.

CYPRIAN, de Vnitate Ecclesiae. Pacificos esse oportet Dei filios, cord mites,
sermon simplices, affectione concordes, fideliter sibi vnanimitatis nexibus
coherentes. Et post,

Erant perseuerantes omnes vnanimes in oratione: and ideo efficacibus precibus
orabant, ideo impetrare cum fiducia poterant, quodcumque de Domini misericordia
postularunt.


FINIS.

