FIVE AND TWENTY LECTVRES UPON THE LAST SERMON AND CONFERENCE OF OUR LORD
JESUS CHRIST, With his Disciples immediately before his Passion: Contained in
the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth Chapters of the GOSPEL of Saint JOHN*

As also upon that most excellent PRAYER, contained in the seventeenth Chap. of
the same Gospel.

Preached by that Reverend and faithful Servant of God, M. ROBERT ROLLOK,
Minister of the Kirk ( and Rector of the College) of EDINBVRGH.



EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HEART, Anno 1619*

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Their most loving Friend in the Lord, SIR WILLIAM
SCOT OF ELIE, KNIGHT, etc. Grace in this life, and everlasting Glory in the
Life to come.
ALBEIT, RIGHT HONORABLE, the whole Scripture, and every part thereof, be
of Divine inspiration, and profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to
instruct in Righteousness; Yet it is no absurdity to affi^me, that some
parts thereof, for some respects and causes, are to be preferred, and more
accounted of than others. The Apostle gives us a sufficient proof of this*
while he prefers the Gospel to the Law, 2. Cor verse. 3. And the
Evangelists, in setting down in w^t sundry things, (John 20. verse. 30.)
declare the same to be true in the Gospel, and consequently amongst those
things which are written, the Spirit of God would have us to esteem most of
those things which he has more particularly, painfully, carefully, and at
greatest length put in Register. Amongst the which, there are none to be
preferred unto his last Sermon, which he made to his Apostles and his Prayer
unto his Father immediately before his departure. The excellency whereof, and
how highly the LORD would have us to regard and account of them, (to speak
nothing of the Author, I^^^S CHRIST, because, by his holy Spirit, not only
this, but also the whole Scripture, is dited,) shall more evidently appear,
if we consider a little, first the time of the uttering of them: next, the
manner: and thirdly, the matter therein contained. The time was immediately
before his Passion: for after that by his own example, in washing his
Disciples feet, he had recommended unto them Humility, as a virtue most
singular and beseeming a Christian; he utters these words, partly in the
time of the Supper, and partly after the Supper. And we know, that the
speeches of men, which immediately preceede death, as they proceed of a most
holy and Heavenly disposition, (for then all affections are laid aside,
nature reuiueth, and reason gets place, then most wisely the soul
resolves concerning its own estate and condition, then he testifies most
plainly his will toward his Children, his Servants, his Family, and other
Friends whatsoever,) so are they thought worthy to be most attentively
heard, most carefully received, and most deeply kept in memory. If we
consider the manner, seeing the holy Spirit takes more pains, and is more
plentiful and copious in penning hereof, than of any other Sermon
whatsoever, he would have us to know how precious a Jewel they are, and
how highly we ought to account of them: For if we search all the Records of
the LORDS Sermons in the New Testament, we shall find none so particularly
and fully set down in register, as this is. Lastly, if we consider the
matter, it is full of manifold Heavenly consolations. It is true indeed,
sundry times before, the LORD in his Sermons has comforted his Apostles, and
all penitent sinners: but in no place at so great length, and with such
variety of Heavenly consolations: For here at length he meets and
re-encountereth almost with every grief, scandale, and particular temptation
that exercised and assailed their souls. They were sad and sorrowful, when
they heard that he was to leave the world, and to ascend unto the Father.
He meets this, by bidding them believe in him, and faith in him should
supply his bodily absence: and he tells, that the end wherefore he
ascended, was to prepare a place for them, that where he was, there they might
be also. It was a grief to them, that they should want such a comfortable
Guide, who always directed and conducted them. This he meets, by telling
them, that he would not leave them comfortless, but he would give them his
Holy Spirit. They feared, that they should be deprived of manifold
consolations, which they found in his presence. This he meets, by assuring
them that howbeit in the world they should find trouble, yet in the midst
of trouble he should give and leave them that peace that the world should not
take from them: and if they believe in him, as the Vine-tree furnishes the
Branches, so he should furnishe unto them solid and manifold consolations,
and make them to bring forth fruit abundantly. And to the intent that they
might have the better warrant to look and exspect for those graces in him, as
he charge them by faith to have union with him, so he charge them by love
to have communion amongst themselves. The troubles and crosses that were to
befall them in the world for CHRIST'S sake, after his departure, might have
wonderfully discouraged them, and brangled their faith. This he meets,
partly by fore-warning them before they came to pass, and partly by
exhorting them to patience, and partly by setting down many arguments to
establish them, He tells them, that the world should hate them, persecute
them, excommunicate them, and put them to death. He comfort them, partly
because he has forewarned them, and partly because they had done so to him
who was their Lord and Master, and partly for the goodness of the cause,
because it was for his Names sake. Again, he knew it would be no small
temptation unto them, to see his shameful and ignominious handling, to see
him, who was their Lord, to be so wonderfully humbled, to see him taken, and
bound by wicked and profane men, to see him made a spectacle of derision, first
in the Hall of Annas, and thereafter of Cajaphas, to see all sorts and ranks
of people cry out against him, to see him at last to be condemned and
ignominiouslie crucified: he knew that this temptation would be so strong,
and so vehement to brangle their faith, that at the last all should be
offended in him, and should flee away from him, and leave him. Of this he
fore-warneth them, and furnishes consolation unto them, notwithstanding of
their foul fall.

Now again, if ye look to the Prayer, it is wondrous Heavenly and
comfortable: For after that as a Prophet he has instructed the people, and
the Apostles, now before (as an high Priest) he offer up his own body upon
the Cross, for the sins of the world, he prays most earnestly for
himself, for his Apostles, and for them who should believe through their
Ministry. For himself, That the Father would now glorify the Son, when
he is going out of the world. For his Apostles, That the Father would always
have a car^ of them whom he left in the world behind him. And thirdly, for
all them that through the Ministry of the Apostles should be living to the
end of the world, That the Lord would bless them, and by his providence
guarde them. And so both the matter of the Sermon and Prayer is wondrous
excellent, and in them both we may see, not only Divine knowledge,
foreseeing and foretelling those things that were to come to pass, which, if
he had been only man, he could never have done; but also a love
unspeakable, and more than wonderful, in that when the wrath of God was
persuing him for the sins of the Elect, when the bitter Cup of the Passion
was to be propined unto him, when the terroures of Death were now before his
eyes, when Satan, and all the power of darkness, was now to assail him,
when all ranks of men were to rail upon him, and all his own were to be
offended at him, when Peter should deny him, Herod should mock him, Pontius
Pilate should condemn him, in a manner, he was forgetful of all those
things that should come to himself, and mindful always to offer joye and
consolation unto his own.

Now this matter so excellent, have many learned and godly men comfortablie
and fruitfullie handeled, and amongst the rest, that famous and worthy
Minister of Jesus Christ, in the Kirk of EDINBVRGH, M. ROBERT ROLLOK, of
happy memory, for his painful and comfortable travels therein, and for his
manifold other graces, deserves to be praised with the first: For he was a
man whom God beautified with many rare gifts and graces, and whom the Lord
made many ways to be steadable to his Kirk: his untimely death, when the
Lord first called him, did many lament, and when their tears were spent, they
entertained dolor and grief in their hearts: Yea, even now the faithful,
seriously considering these days of decay, (wherein that Antichristian
rabble set themselves to smoare the Truth, and to bring in darkness again:
and wherein by some, Religion is mocked, and disdained, and some are content
with a bare show and outward profession, without power and vigor thereof, and
a life answering thereunto) are compelled to sigh for the great wound and loss
that the Kirk suffered, as in the death of many others, so namely in the
death of that most faithful man of GOD. Through his death this City lost a
good Citizen, the Flock a good Pastor, the College a good Rector, his
Brethren a faithful Fellow Laborer, wandering sinners a wise guide, and in a
word, what sort of people found not some loss, and had not their interesse
in his death? Who was more careful than he to have GOD glorified? Who walked
more carefully with GOD? Who was more crucified to the world? Who was more
severed from all entangling worldly pleasures, and commodities? Who more had
their conversation in Heaven? Who more careful to gain souls to the Kingdom
of GOD, publicly and privately, by voice and by pen, by word and by writ,
at home and abroad, alive and dead? And his conversation was so answ^rable to
his profession and calling, that the very malicious Adversaries, and enemies
themselves, could not, nor durst not, charge him with any imputation. But we
need not, Sir, to praise him unto you, who knew him so well, and who was so
familiarlie conversant with him; and his words do speak sufficiently to
others who knew him not.

Now, Sir, th^se his LECTVRES we grant are not so absolute as many would
require, and we our selves would wish: for neither delivered he them of
purpose that they should see the light, neither saw he them ever after he
had delivered them* neither did his Scholars receive them from his mouth on
the purpose, but only for the helping of their own memories: And yet we
trust, that such as regard more matter in edification, than delicate language,
and plau^ible words, shall find no small comfort in perusing of them: For,
not only for the duty we ought to the Author, our loving Master, but also
for your cause and earnest request, to whom we are so much obliged, have we
taken some, yea, no small pains, herein, (as they who are accustomed with
such cases, may easily consider,) that his own matter might be set down
in his own phrase and style so near as possibly we could, that with the
greater liking and approbation they might be perused by such as seek ^o be
edified.

And so much the more careful were we herein, because we found that his
other LECTVRES, published by us before, as on the COLOSSIANS, THESSELONIANS,
and other several Textes of Scripture, and nar^lie the Lectures last
published, upon the Passion and Resurrection, ever received with great liking
and contentment of many, who acknowledge themeselues to be greatly edified
thereby.

Now, Sir, these last LECTVRES, and our labors therein, we present unto
you, to be published abroad under your protection, because most justly in
all respects they belong unto you: For first, few are ignorant how loving
and always beneficial you were to the Author himself, from the first time
ye knew him, even to the hour of his death, and thereafter to his Wife, and
now you continue the same kindness to his posthume Daughter. Next, as while
he lived he acknowledged and professed himself to be m^re obliged to you
than to any, so at the hour of his death, in his latter Will, he ordained,
that whatsouer of his works thereafter should see the light, should come out
in your Name, that where his works were read, your deseruinges might be
known, and that they who got fruit of them, might also esteem of you, and
give you thanks therefore. Thirdly, for the great Pains, Exspences, and
Trauelles that ye have bestowed in making them to come to the light. For by
you they were gathered in from the hands of SCHOLARS, that wrote them: and by
your exspenses they were written over and over again: without you they had
never been reuised and corrected: without you they had not been made meet for
the PRESS. Fourthly, because as the Lord has blessed you with many worldly
comforts, with an honorable esta^e, and good account in the world, so has he
endued you with graces of his Spirit inwardly, with true Piety and Religion
in the soul, and outwardly with an answerable profession and practice thereof
uttered in the true love which ye carry to all Gods Children, and namely to
those who carry the Message of reconciliation, in helping and furthering them
both privately and publikelie, according to your power. And finally, we
dedicate our labors herein to you, as a testimony, that we acknowledge our
selves to be many ways debtbound to you, for your undeserved kindness
uttered so many ways toward us, and continuing so long without alteration.

Now, the Lord, who is infinite in mercy, whose love is constant, without
alteration, and endless, who has hitherto given you plentifully and
abundantly manifold tokens of his love, both for the use of the body and
this transitory life, and also for the weal and comfort of your soul in this
your pilgrimage, and who has honored you with many good turns, and namely,
with love and kindness toward Gods Children for his cause, make you more and
more find the love of God shed abroad in your soul, so that you never weary
in well-doing, but that ye may daily go on forward in the course of
sanctification: that ye seeking, fearing, loving, and always serving him, and
being comfortable to his Saints on Earth, ye may be assured, when this
short life is ended, the Lord shall crown you with, eternal Glory in Heaven,
with all his Saints in JESUS.

AMEN.
Yours in the Lord, H. C. W. A.

THE FIRST LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 1.2. LEt not your heart be troubled: ye believe in
God, believe also in me.

2 Jn my Fathers house are many dwelling places: if it were not so, J would
have told you: I go to prepare a place for you.


IN the CHAPTER immediately going before (Brethren) the LORD forewarned his
Disciples of his departure, and taking away of his bodily presence out of the
world: that moved his Disciples exceedingly; for they had no will he should
go from them: Therefore the Lord in this, and in the next two CHAPT.
continues in speaking to his Disciples, to comfort and confirm them after his
departure, and taking away of his bodily presence from them. And in the
beginning of this CHAPTER he lays down the proposition of this comfort: Let
not your heart be troubled: Thereafter he subjoyneth sure arguments to
comfort, strengthen, an I confirm them when he should go away: He says,
Let not your hearts be troubled: knowing well, that when he should depart,
they should be like as many Lambs among Wolves in the midst of this wicked
world; and so they would be troubled in mind when he should go away: therefore
the LORD warns them before his departure, that their hearts should not be
troubled. The Disciples fail in this, that they thought that if the LORD had
taken away his body, and should absent himself out of their eyes, they should
have no more comfort nor grace of him. Ye see the Lesson arises here of their
example: As the presence of the LORD JESUS* ministers joye, peace, and
tranquillity to the heart of the sinner, even so when he draws away his
presence from a sinner, from a miserable creature, then there is no joye, no
comfort, no peace, no rest to the heart. It may be indeed, and it comes often
to pass, that men and women will be lullud up in a carnal security, deliting
themselves in the vain pleasures and comforts of this world, in eating and
drinking, etc. It may be, some be occupied, they will have a quite life, they
will lie down, and sleep quietly, they will rise, and be wanton: but in very
truth, they have no true peace, if they find not the Lord Jesus present in
their heart when they lie down, and when they rise: howbeit they had all the
world, they have no peace: ( No peace to the wicked, says the Lord, Esaias.
57.21.) Howbeit they seem to have peace, they have none: As for the godly,
that have once found his presence, and have once tasted of that joye which is
in his face, of that light which comes from his face, and once he be taken
from them, give them all this world, and all the pleasures of this world, they
shall have no pleasure, they will never be blythe, till they get a sight of
their Lord, their soul dies without his face: and when he comes again, it
quickens, and lives. This is the true joye: think never ye have true rest
without the countenance of the Lord, without the which all the pleasures and
comforts of the world are but vain: for all shall leave you, and ye with them
shall perish. No question the Disciples, when they began to feel that joye
which they found in his presence, rather than they had wanted his company,
they would have wanted all the world.

Now when he has set down this proposition of comfort, he leaves them not
so: but knowing well, how hard a thing it was to a comfortless heart, to
receive comfort, he subjoyneth sundry arguments and reasons, to hold them in a
good courage and comfort: And first he says, Ye believe in God, believe also
in me. There is an argument wherefore they should not be troubled: The first
comfort he ministers to their comfortless hearts, is Faith in Christ: The
meaning is, Howbeit when I go away, ye shall not see me, yet settle your
hearts upon me, follow me with the eye of your soul, and look afar off to
the Heaven, and look that ye rest and repose upon me by a true and lively
faith. Well then, ye see the first remedy against the taking away of the
Lord Jesus, and withdrawing ^f his bodily presence, is faith in him: howbeit
he were never so far away, let thy soul go through the clouds and take hold
on the Lord Jesus, where he sits at the right hand of God his Father:
stick till him, be sure of him, gripe him by the hand of faith, and then in
the midst of all the confusions of this world, which ye see now fall out in
these latter days, thou shall get comfort and ease to thy soul, and it shall
be holden up among all troubles of this world: For why, this is the nature of
faith in Christ, it will make things absent to be present: As the Apostle says
to the Heb. 11.1. It makes things hoped for, to be present with us: it will
let thee see that felicity, that life, that glory, which is laid up in the
Heavens for thee, which we cannot see with the eyes of our mortal bodies, so
long as we are here: Then so long as thou art absent from him, believe in him,
that thou maye^t find ever comfort, till thy faith be turned in sight: and
then thou shall find, that both sight of the soul, and the sight of the body,
into the Heavens, shall be perfected: then we shall see that clearly, which we
saw before obscurely: and we shall see him no sooner, but our joy shall be
full, and we shall be into his glory with him: and as his face shines, so
shall ours shine also. So ye see, the chief thing that holds us up in all
troubles of this world, is the blinke we have of Christ by faith.

Now he proponeth not this argument barely, but by way of comparison: for he
says, as Ye believe in God, so believe in me: for as he said, I and the Father
am one: howbeit the Father and the Son be sundry persons, yet they are but
one blessed Majesty, one God, in one nature, and one substance: faith in one of
them, prejudgeth not another: as thou belieuest in the Father, so believe in
the Son, so believe in the holy Ghost, because they are one in nature and
substance: they are coessentiall, coequall, and coeternall: if the Father and
the Son were different in substance, so that the Father were one God, and the
Son another, then in very deed faith in the one, would prejudge the other:
for why, faith in the heart cannot lean on two things, or upon two Gods, or
three. So that we note here, that faith must be on one thing only: if thou will put thy trust in any thing in this world, on riches, or honor, etc. it
shall pass thy power to believe in God: if thou make many Gods, it shall pass
thy power to put thy trust in them all: and it were no more but this, that
faith must be grounded on one only, it is a sufficient argument to bear thee
witness, that there is but one God in substance, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost: So it is no prejudice to the Father, that we believe in the Son: yea,
I say more, there is no faith in the Father, but through the Son: And if thy
faith reach not through the Son, and through the nature of man in him, it shall
pass thy power to believe in the Father; for God dwells in a light without
access: no creature can come there: no, not the Angels, without the Son:
there is no sight of that Majesty, but in the Son, the LORD JESUS. Men
trowes, the Jews trowes, to get a sight of that Father, and to pierce the
clouds without the Son: No, there is no sight of him without Christ Jesus,
and him crucified: for in him only shines the glory, justice, mercy, and
power of his Father; because he is the Image of the Father and the in-grauen
form of his person. So, would thou believe in God, thou must pass through
the Son to the Father. This is the truth: search and see, if it can be
possible to thee to get any grip of God, or if thou can get any joy, without
Jesus: No, thou can not: but when thou apprehendest Jesus Christ, thou
piercest in to that light, and tastest of that joye. This is the way to believe
in God.

The next argument he uses to comfort them when he should depart, is this, Jn
my Fathers House are many dwelling places: if it were not so, I would have
told you: I would not lie to you: and now, says he, I go to prepare a place
for you: As though the Lord would say, Be not troubled at my departure; for
why, my departure is for your weal: my departure is to prepare a place in
Heaven for you: and if I go not before you, ye can have no place there intill.
There was never yet since the beginning of the world, and since the fall of
Adam, man, or woman, that ever entered into Heaven, or shall enter there, and
get a place there, but by the virtue of the Ascension of Jesus Christ: The
Fathers, Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob, never one of them entered into
Heaven, but by virtue of his Ascension: and never one shall enter at that great
day, but by virtue of his Ascension. Look how we should believe that Article
of our Creed, the Ascension of the Lord Jesus. Before the Lord Jesus came into
the world, in the nature of man, all the Fathers, that lived before him, from
the beginning of the world, after they departed this life, came to Heaven
only by virtue of the Ascension of Christ. It is true, their souls went to
Heaven immediately: the souls of Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob, went to Heaven
immediately: But how? By the virtue of Jesus Christ, that was to come in the
flesh, and by the virtue of his Ascension that was to come. What ever the good
they got, they got it all through him that was to come: their souls went up to
the Heaven by faith in him that was to come: As for us, who live now in this
world, after his manifestation, never one of us goes to Heaven, or sees him,
or gets any place in Heaven, but by virtue of his glorious Ascension, past
already; as the Fathers got entry into Heaven, by virtue of his Ascension to
come: What ever grace has been, and what ever shall come into the world, all
has been through Jesus Christ. There is a difference here to be understood,
betwixt the measure of grace the Fathers got before the Ascension, and the
grace we get now since the manifestation of Jesus Christ: We have a great
vantage of these Fathers; all the grace they got, was by virtue of Christ to
come: but we get grace by virtue of Christ already come: The virtue of him
before his coming, was not so great as it was at his coming, and after he
passed up to Heaven. Why should we have such a benefit, and not know it?
Albeit the souls of mea went up to Heaven before his coming, yet not so many
as now go since he came, and since he has taken place in Heaven himself:
before there were but few got entry into Heaven: there was but a little door
of Heaven open, the great multitude got not entry there: Therefore the Apostle
( Hebr. 9.8.) says, So long as that old Tabernacle stood, the way to the
Sanctuary was not open: But now, what grace, what mercy is shown to us, that
are borne since the coming of Christ, if we get a sight of him? But woe to
us, if we believe not! The virtue of his coming into the world, has a
thousand times greater force to open Heaven, than of before: Now all the yates
of Heaven, since he ascended, stand wide open: and so the Lord says, Violence
is come to the Heaven, and it is violently reaft up, Matthew. 11.12. As he would
say, Whereas few entered into the Heaven before, now they rush in, since the
Lord Jesus is come, and the yates shall stand up aye and till the multitude of
souls and bodies shall enter in. Seeing we have this grace, therefore,
miserable is the man who would not enter in, when the yates are open, and
patent to let him in: and well is that soul, that will enter there. But ye
will say, Why is there not entry into Heaven, but by the virtue of Jesus
Christ? I think ye would know the reason of this: There is none that can enter
into Heaven, but with an offering of blood: Heaven is won by blood: It is
impossible for a sinner to enter into Heaven, but by a Sacrifice. So there is
no remission of sin, but by shedding of blood, Hebr. 9.22. The hight Priest
of old, who was a Type of Christ, durst not enter into the earthly Sanctuary,
which was a figure of Heaven, where the glorious Arc was, but with a
Sacrifice, with an offering and blood; otherwise he would have been stricken to
death. This meaned, there is none entry to the Heaven, to that Sanctuary which
is not made with men's hands, but by the Son of God himself, and by his
blood and sacrifice. And why? Because the wrath of God is against sinners; and
that wrath cannot be satisfied, but by blood: his mercy cannot prejudge his
justice. This ground being laid, The Lord Jesus enters into Heaven by blood:
he enters not there without a Sacrifice: he takes the most precious
sacrifice that ever was in the world: he entered not with the blood of beasts,
but with his own precious blood: he carried there his own bloody wounds: and
that blood slokned that burning wrath: So that so soon as that justice finds
that blood, the justice is satisfied, and then there is place to mercy. So it
follows, there is no entry to Heaven, but by the Lord Jesus, and his blood:
and as he entered into Heaven by his own blood, so there is never one of us,
man or woman, shall enter into Heaven, except we carry with us that blood: if
thou will go into Heaven, be sprinkled with that blood, or else the wrath of
God shall burn thee up. But how shall thou get this? By faith in him, that
has gone before thee with his blood, that shall prepare for thee a rowm, and
thou shall follow thy Head. So ye see, how needful it is to believe in
Christ, if we would get entry into Heaven: it was not for his own cause he
entered into Heaven, but for us: he passed with his blood before us, to get us
an entry. Before he lay down the argument, he lays down the ground ther^f, In
my Fathers house are many dwelling places, and I go to prepare them. Brethren,
Heaven is a very fair place, and there ^re many dwelling places into it, there
is great honor into it. What is Heaven, but the glory of God? Whereto go we to
Heaven, but that we may be partakers of that glory? who now without Christ are
deprived of the glory of God. Who is able to measure his glory? for he is
infinite, he dwells into a light, whereto there is no access: And as the glory
of God is infinite, so there are infinite dwelling places in Heaven: Before the
Ascension of Christ, there were rowms enough, but they were al unprepared, and
closed up til he entered. By virtue of his Ascension, all the yates were dong up.
Then what good does the Ascension of Christ? It opens all the doors of Heaven
to us: there are dwelling places in Heaven for a thousand worlds, for infinite
worlds, mo worlds than tongue can tell: There is no scarcity in Heaven, but as
the glory of God is there, and is infinite, and can never be contained, so there
are infinite places: I say more, the Ascension of Jesus Christ up to Heaven, is
of such force, that it is able to prepare a place for a thousand worlds, and
for every reprobat. What is then the cause, that every one goes not to Heaven,
seeing the Heavens are able to contain so many? There are many called (says
the Lord) but few elect. What is the cause of this? What is it, but this, No
want of Mansions, there is no want in Jesus Christ: but the cause is in men and
women, who want faith in Jesus Christ. Who ever has faith, they go in: and
who wants it, albeit there be many Ma^sions there, yet there is none for them:
When thou hear there are so many dwelling places in Heaven, say with thy
self, Lord, prepare me for grace, as grace is prepared for me: and, Lord,
give me faith into this blood, that I, by virtue thereof, may have a place in
Heaven. Strive therefore rather to throng in, and to have a part of that life,
than to have all the commodities of the world: for if thou have not this, all
the commodities of the world shall go away, and thou shall be shot in Hell: No,
strive rather to get a part of that inheritance, and it were the least Mansion,
than the whole earth: for there is more joye there, than in all the world. He
says, And it were otherwise, J would have told you. As he would say, I am
not boune to beguile you, and feed you with fair words: and there were not
many dwelling places in my Fathers house, I would have told you: the promise of
the Lord Jesus, is not like the promise of the world: for men will promise
mountains of gold: All men, of all estates, yea Princes, are liars: but the
Lord Jesus will promise nothing, but that which he will perform. There was
never such promise made, as the Lord Jesus made: Look how he speaket^ of the
joy of Heaven, and of that immortal inheritance: think^st thou he beguileth
thee? No, no, think not so: for and it were n^^ ^o, the Lord would never have
spoken so of it to thee: thou shall find it so* thou shall see it with thine
eyes: there is none that belieueth, but they shall find in experience the truth
of that promise: There was never a faithful soul yet, who departed, as
Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob, etc. but they now find that joy which was promised
them in this world: Yea, more, ye shall find more than ever was spoken of.
All the words of the world, cannot express the greatness of that joy in
Heaven: yea, all the words in the world, cannot express the thousand part of
that joy. As the Queen of Saba, when she heard the words of Solomon, and saw
his pomp, she began to commend them, and said, It was a true word that I heard
in mine own land of thy sayings, and of thy wisdom: but lo, the one half was
not told me, for thou have more than I heard by report: Even so, believe all
these reports, and thou shall find greater things in Heaven, than any thou
heardest tell of in the world: thou shall wonder at them. It is true that the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.9. The eye of man has not seen, nor the ear of man
h^ard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, touching the things which
the Lord has laid up for them who love him. Hope for greater things, and
believe greater things, than thou can feel: Hope for infinite glory, (thou
can not hope enough,) and thou shall find in that great day greater joye
than ever thou hopedst for, and that, through Jesus Christ: To whom, with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, for evermore.
Amen.

THE SECOND LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 3.4.5.6. 3 And if I go to prepare a place for you, I
will come again, and receive* you unto my self; that where J am, there may
ye be also.

4 And whither I go, ye know: and the way ye know.

5 Thomas said unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go: how can we
then know the way?

6 Jesus said unto him, J am that Way, and that Truth, and that Life. No man
comes to the Father, but by me.


HAving heard already (well-beloved Brethren) two arguments, whereby the Lord
comfort his Disciples, who were heavily casten down for his departing, and
taking away of his bodily presence from them: The first is, Faith in Christ:
Howbeit when I go away, ye shall not see me, yet settle your hearts upon me,
follow me with the eyes of your soul, rest upon me with a true faith, and
then in the midst of all troubles, ye shall get comfort and ease to your soul.
The second argument is taken from their own weal: My departure is to prepare
a place for you in Heaven: if I go not before you, ye can get no place there:
(for never man either got, gets, or shall get place there, but only by the
virtue of the Ascension of Christ) It was not for his own cause he entered
into Heaven, but for us: he passed with blood before us, to get us an entry by
his blood: He by his Ascension opened up to us all the yates of Heaven, that we
might go in there. His Ascension to Heaven, is of such force, that it is able
to prepare a dwelling place, and it were for a thousand worlds, if men could
have faith in him. Now I come to the third argument, whereby he comfortes them*
which is taken from the second coming to Christ to glorify them fully: And
this of all other arguments brings greatest comfort to the soul. The former
arguments are indeed very comfortable: faith works a great joy in the heart
of a sinner: because faith makes Jesus to be present to the soul, even then
when it is absent from the Lord, and walking yet in this pilgrimage here on the
earth: Again, it is a greater comfort to the soul, when we hear that Christ
has prepared a place for us in Heaven, wherein faith shall be changed in
sight, and we shall see him face to face* and glorify him without any stay or
intermission: yet none of these will furnish us perfect joy, if there be no
more: for the conscience of our own weakness, and the sight and feeling of
sin within us, makes us oftentimes to doubt, brangleth our faith, and
stays our full consolation. And albeit we hear, that Christ has prepared a
place for us, and opened the Heaven to us, yet our own weakness and infirmity
tells us, we cannot be able to come there, and to enter into the possession
of the inheritance prepared for us: But here is matter of perfect joy, and full
consolation, when we hear that Christ will come again in his own person, and
take us to the Heavens to the place he has prepared for us: whereunto
otherwise, in respect of our weakness, we could never come: Jf, says Christ, I
go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self, that where J am, there may ye be also: As if he had said, I depart not
from you to remain absent from you for ever. I purpose not so to do, but I will
come again to you, to take you up to the place that I have prepared, that ye
may remain with me in the Heavens, and be partakers of my glory for ever. No
question, this was a great matter of comfort and joy to the Disciplis, when
they heard, that Christ would come again to them, and take them with himself to
glory: and doubtless this made them after Christ's Ascension, to have their eyes,
hearts, and affections lift up to Heaven, waiting for his blessed appearance.
Brethren, it is the common custom of all the Saints, when they hear and
believe that Christ is to come again out of the Heavens, to take them to that
place of joy, which he has prepared for them, te re^oyce, under the hope of
that glory, with a joy vnspakeable and glo^ious, and to set their hearts above,
and to have their conversation in Heaven, from whence they look for our
Savior to come, to change our vile bodies, that they may be like his glorious
body, etc. Indeed it is true, our hope and waiting for Christ, is ay co^joyned
with sighing and sobbing, because we have not as yet gotten the full fruitio^ of
our inheritance. And therefore Paul says, We who have gotten the first fruits
of the Spirit, even we, sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the
redemption of our body, Romans 8.23. There ye see, with waiting he conjoyns
sighing: and indeed the sorrow and sighing of the godly, is exceeding great,
while as they are absent from their Lord: But it is also true, that with this
sighing and sadness, they find a joy unspeakable and glorious: yea, such a joy,
as all the joys and outward comforts in the world cannot be able to furnish
unto men. The natural man, who seeks to have joy in outward things, never
wist what true joy meaned: thou that seeks joy in thy riches, thou never knew
true joy: thou who seeks joy in honor or preserment, thou finds but a shadow
of joy: thou who seeks joy in the pleasurs of the flesh, thou finds nothing in
the end, but displeasure, in stead of joy: But the godly, in waiting for the
coming of their Savior, find such a joy, that the heart of no natural man is
able to conceive: and if thou found but one spark of this joy into thy heart,
thou would count nothing of all world^ie joys, in respect of it: yea, thou
would be content to renounce all worldly pleasures, that thou might bruik it.
Now, Brethren, if our joy be so great, even now while we are absent from the
Lord, and are only waiting for his blessed appearance, O how great shall our
joy be, when our faith shall be turned in sight, and when we shall see him face
to face, and when he shall put us in the full possession of that inheritance,
which now we are hoping and longing for! But leaving this, I go forward to
the fourth argument of their consolation, which he takes from the knowledge
they had both of the place where he was going to, and likewise of the way which
led them to that place: For, says he, whither I go, ye know, and the way ye
know. As if he had said, In the mean time, while I am come again to you, let
this comfort you, that both ye know the place whereunto now I am going first,
and whereunto next ye shall follow me: and also, that ye know the way wherein
ye shall walk, that ye may come to that place: ye know both the one, and the
other: And if there were none other thing, but this knowledge, it may serve to
comfort you, the time of mine absence from you, while I come again, and take
you to that place with my self. Mark the Lesson, Brethren, It is a great
comfort, to a man who is absent from the Lord, and would feign be present
with him, to know the place where the Lord is, and likewise to know the way
how he may come to that place where he may find the Lord, and enjoy his
blessed presence: Ye know this by experience, that if a Pilgrim be wandering
in his journey, and in the mean time know no place, where at length he may
come to rest in, it will be a sore grief to him: and again, ye know,
howbeit he knew a place where to find rest, and yet knew not the way how to
come to that place, he will be very based, and exceedingly casten down. But by
the contrary, if the Pilgrim in his iourneying, know both the place wherein to
rest, and likewise the way how to come to it, he is greatly rejoiced, because
he has a sure hope to come to his resting place: Even so fares it with us,
who are Gods Children: while in this Pilgrimage we are wandering, absent from
the Lord* if we neither know the place where the Lord is, and where we may
find rest for our souls with him, neither know the way, how to come to it, we
cannot but be wonderfully discouraged: but i^ on the other part, we know both
the place of our resting, (that permanent City that has a foundation) and also
the way how to come to it, it cannot be possible, but our souls must rest in
hope to come there. So ye see, the knowledge of the place whither we should
go to seek the Lord, and of the way that leads to that place, furnishes
great comfort and joy to the soul: Whereas by the contrary, the ignorance and
mi^kenning of the place and way* is ever accompanied with great dolor and
sadness.

Now to go forward: The Disciples, when they hear these words that Christ
utters, of the way and the place, they mistake him, and understand him not:
and therefore Thomas, one of their number, opponeth himself to the Lords
words: and whereas the Lord had said unto them, they knew both the place
whither he was going, and the way, Thomas opponeth himself to both:
affirming, That they neither knew the place, nor the way: For, says
Thomas, We know not whither thou goe^^^ how can we then know the Way? As
if Thomas had said^* LORD, thou say we know vvhither thou (...)s and we
know also the way* but we know not whither thou go, and therefore we cannot
know the way: both the place and the way are unknown unto us. These words at
the first face would seem to have a direct contradiction to the Lords words:
but if we weigh and consider the matter deeply, as it becomes, we will
find that in effect there is no contradiction, but both may stand very well
together: for the Lord spoke of a begun and a general knowledge, which the
Lord communicates to every one that is a true member of his body: And this
knowledge, how small soever it be, the Lord accepts of it: for it was
prophesied of him, that he should not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking flax, Esaias. 42.3. But rather where he finds any knowledge begun, he
cherishes it, and makes the soul to grow from knowledge to knowledge, till
it come to perfection. But Thomas mistaketh the Lord, for he thinks that the
Lord speaks of a distinct and perfect knowledge and this makes Thomas to
oppone against the Lord, and to affirm, that they neither knew whither he
went, nor yet the way. And these two speakinges may very well stand together,
that they had a begun and confused knowledge both of the place whither the Lord
went, and of the way to that place: of the which knowledge the Lord spoke: and
nevertheless, that they knew not distinctly and perfectly, neither the place
nor the way, of the which knowledge Thomas means. The like of this is to be
understood when we speak of the knowledge the Prophets had of the calling of
the Gentiles: for with good reason we may say, that the Prophets knew the
calling of the Gentiles, because they had it foretold them in their
prophesies. Yet Paul says, that the calling of the Gentiles was a mystery
which in other ages was not opened up unto the sons of men. These two sayings
stand very well together: neither is there any contradiction in them: for the
one is to be understood of a begun and imperfect knowledge: the other of a
distinct and perfect knowledge. Again, we may say, Christ spoke of the
knowledge which the Disciples should have had, and might have had, if they had
taken good enough heed to Christ's doctrine and instructions: for how often had
the Lord preached to them, of the kingdom of Heaven, which was the place,
whither he was first to go, and they next to follow him? How often spoke he
unto them, of the Father, who sent him for the Redemption of the World? How
often spoke he unto them, of the right way that led to Heaven? Yea, he
pointed it out with his finger; as when he said, I am the light of the world,
IOH. 8. etc. Therefore, seeing the Lord spoke of these things so many times,
and so clearly, and was so careful to instruct them, the Disciples might well
enough have known both the place and the way: and their negligence cannot be
excused, who were so rude and ignorant, and profited so little in these things.
And so Thomas by this his answering to the Lord, lets us see how little
knowledge he had attained unto; notwithstanding of all the travel the Lord had
taken to instruct them: Always out of these words of Thomas, we may take up
a profitable Lesson, concerning the order of our knowledge of heavenly things:
Thomas says first, We know not the place where thou go: and upon this he
gathers, We cannot know the way: Then the Lesson is, We must first have a
knowledge of the place where we should go to, before we can have a knowledge
of the way that leads unto the place: We must first have a knowledge of
Heaven, and that there is life, glory, and happiness laid up for the
Saints there: We must know what manner of glory we have to look for; and
then it is time for us to inquire what way we may come to Heaven: what way we
may attain to that glory and happiness: For there is no man that will take on
a journey, till he know where he would be, and what should be the end of his
labor: He that runs, he will set up a mark before him, that he would be
at: Paul says of himself, 1. Cor. 9.26. I so run, not as uncertainly: so
fight I, not as one that bears the air: that is, I run not, nor I fight
not, for naught: but I run, to get the crown: I fight, that I may get the
victory: He ra^ne with all his might toward the mark, for the prize of the
high calling of God in Jesus Christ, Philip. 3.14. So, we must first have the
prize and the mark of the high calling set before our eyes; and thereafter we
must enter into the way that leads to that mark. There are none of the
Saints, but they have ever Heaven set before their eyes: they desire, they
sigh and sobbe to be there, because they know, that there, in the presence of
the Lord, there is fullness of joy; and that at his right hand, there are
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. And therefore Paul says of them, that
they have their conversation in Heaven, from whence they look for their
Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change their vile bodies, that
they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, etc. Philip. 3.20. And in
the viii. Chapter to the Romans verse. 23. he says, that they who have gotten
the first fruits of the Spirit, they sigh in themselves, waiting for the
adoption, even the redemption of their bodies: And ( Tit. 2.13*) he says, We
look for that blessed hope, and appearing of that glory of that mighty God,
our Savior Jesus Christ: And therefore, seeing their eyes are always set upon
Heaven, and upon that glory that is there, the Scripture especially insisteth
in the way, whereby we may come there: and our Preaching, for the most part, is
all of that way: to wit, of Jesus Christ, and of that grace that we have of
him: And so the Lord Jesus, hee^e in his answer that he makes to Thomas,
speaks nothing of the place, neither of the Father, to whom he was to go:
but presupponing that they had some knowledge thereof, he passes by them for
the present, albeit hereafter he will speak of them. And in his answer to
Thomas, he insisteth upon the way, and he says, J am that Way: And then he
tells more plainly, how he is the Way, when he says in the words following,
that he is that Truth, and that Life: So that if we would come to the
Father, we must come by him: for, No man, says he, comes unto the Father,
but by me. And therefore, we shall see first how Christ is called the Truth,
and the Life, that we may see the better how he is the Way. He is called the
Truth in sundry respects: as first, he is called Truth, because he is true:
as John speaks of him in his first Epistle, Chap. 5. verse. 20. We know that
that Son of God is come, and has given unto us* a mind to know him, which is
true: and we are in him that is true: that is, in that his Son Jesus Christ.
Next, he is called the Truth, because he is full of truth: yea, of his own
essence and nature, he is Truth it self. John said before of him, We saw him
full of grace and truth, John, 1.14. And Paul says, that the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him bodily, Coloss. 2.9. Thirdly, he is called Truth,
because from him, as the Author and Fountain, all truth does flow and
proceed: And therefore John said, Chap. 1. verse. 17. The law is given by
Moses, but grace and truth, by Jesus Christ. Fourthly, he is called the
^^ueth, because he is the matter and subject of all truth, and all truth is
grounded upon him: And in this respect John says, Every spirit which
confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: and every
spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God, but is the spirit of the Antichrist, John, 4.2. And Paul says, Another
foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 1.
Cor. 3.11. Fifthly, he is called the Truth, because all truth is in him^ that
is, ratified, confirmed, and established in him: for as the Apostle Paul
says, in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 1. verse. 20. All the
promises of God are Yea and Amen in him: that is, all have their foundation,
and ground, and all have their accomplishment in him: For and if thou be not
in Christ, thou can have no right to any of the promises of Grace: Thou shall
never find the power and virtue of them to be communicated to thy soul: No,
the blood of Jesus must be first shed, and next thy conscience must be
sprinkled therewith, before that ever thou find the force and power of any of
these promises conuoyed to thy soul: So all are grounded upon his blood. Then
ye see, it is not without good cause, that Christ claims this Style as proper
to himself, That he is the Truth: because he is true, because he is full of
truth, because from him is all truth because of him, as the proper subject,
is all truth: and last, because in him all the promises of God have their
truth and accomplishment.

Now let us see how he is called Life: and this Style the Lord takes to
himself for sundry respects: And first, because he lives, and lives
eternally: yea, he is Life it self. Secondly, because he lives by himself:
he lives not by another, as creatures do: for he says of himself, As the
Father has life in himself, so has he likewise given to the Son, to have
life in himself, John. 5.26. Thirdly, because through him, and by him, all
things that have life, live: Yea, this same natural life, that we live here
on the earth, we live it by him: For John, speaking of him, says, ( John,
Chap. 1. verse. 4.) In it (that is, the Word JESUS CHRIST,) was Life: and that
Life was the light of men: That is, he gave life to men, even in the very
first creation: and not only live we this natural life by him; but also, by
him we live a supernatural life: I am crucified with Christ, (says the
Apostle Paul to the Galatians, Chap. 2. verse. 20.) but I live: yet not I any
more: but Christ lives in me: and that that I now live in the flesh, I live
by Faith in the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me.
There ye see clearly, that the Apostle Paul affirms, that the Spiritual
Life, is only the benefit of CHRIST. And John testifies the same, in the
first Chapter of his Euangel, and the fifth verse where he says* That Light
shines in darkness: That is ^^ter that through our Fall, and defection from
GOD, ^ wonderful and horrible great Darkness had entered in, and ouer-gone
the soul of man, so that there was nothing to be looked for of man, but utter
darkness, and eternal death; then he illuminated the soul of man with
spiritual light, that he might be restored again to eternal life:
Therefore, seeing Christ lives, seeing he lives by himself, seeing all
things live by him, good reason has he to call himself that life. Now
hitherto we have let you see in what respects Christ is called the Truth and
the Life; whereby we may easily perceive how Christ is called the Way: Christ
is called the way to the Father in two respects: First, he is the Way, as he
is the Truth: Next, he is the Way, as he is the Life: for we must first go
to the Father by Christ, as he is the Truth: and thereafter we must go to the
Father by him, as he is the Life: for this way to the Father has two parts:
The first part is Truth: the second Life: and therefore if we would come to
the Father, we must begin at the Truth: we must enter into the way to him by
Truth. Now, how enter we into this way to the Father, by the Truth? How is
the Truth, the beginning of the way? I will tell you: Whilst we address our
selves to God, to the Father, we must first of all persuade ourselves and have
full assurance, that Christ is the Truth: that all his words are true: that
all the promises of God are true, and are accomplished in him. After we have
entered into this way to the Father, by Christ, as he is the Truth, we must
next enter into the way to the Father, by Christ, as he is Life: But how enter
we into this way, by him, as he is Life? How brings Christ us to the Father,
as he is Life? I answer, Whilst we are going to the Father, we must
steadfastly believe, and be fully assured, that Christ is Life, and that all
life is from him, as from the Fountain; and that whatsoever life we have, we
have it through him. Then ye see, Christ is the way to the Father: first,
because he is the Truth: next, because he is the Life. If thou would come
to Life, begin at the Truth; for the first leads us to the second: For this
word of Truth, even the Gospel of the Lord Jesus, when it is preached, if we
hear it reverently, and steadfastly believe it, and let it settle deeply in
our souls, it will be powerful at the last, to bring forth life in us: Were
thy soul never so dead in sins and trespasses, yet receiving this Word of
Truth, thou shall rise from death, and live. The Lord (in the sixth Chapter of
John, and the 63. verse) lets us see this great force of this Word, when he
says, The words that I speak to you, are Spirit and Life: that is, they are a
most powerful mean, to minister and furnish unto us, that Spirit, and that
Life of God. And in that same Chapter also, when the Lord asks at the
Apostles, If they would leave him? as many of them did, who had followed him
before, Peter answers, in the name of the rest, To whom shall we go? thou
have the words of eternal life: where ye see, Peter out of his own experience,
affirms, that the words which he heard of Christ, were effectual to
work eternal life: which made him, and the rest of the Apostles, with
pleasure to remain with Christ. Thou that by the hearing of the word,
find the life of God to be conuoyed to thy soul, vvilt easily be
persuaded, that he who is the Author of that word, is life himself: for how
were it possible, that there could be such a power in that word, to give
life, except he, whose word it is, were the Fountain and Wellspring of
all life? Then ye see, by what order we come to the Father: We must first
begin at the Truth, then, by the word of Truth, we must be led to Life: and
then, we must go on, piece and piece, in that Life: we must continue and
persevere in it: and so doing, it is not possible, but at last we shall come
into that eternal Life, which is hid up in God, and shall be revealed in
that great day. Then, in a word, would thou have the sum of all that we
have spoken in this matter? This is it, Even that we believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ: The way to the Father, is Christ: when we believe in him,
we are vvalking in this way: when our faith increases piece and piece,
we go on forward, we continue, and persevere in that way.

Now in the end of the verse, he preuenteth, and answers the thing, that
some might have objected against this doctrine, That he was the way: for it
might have been said to Christ, Albeit thou be the way to the Father, yet thou
art not the only way; there are many other ways beside thee. To this the Lord
answers, I am the only way to come to the Father: for (says he) None
comes to the Father, but by me: That is, I am so the way, to the Father,
that there is none other way to come to the Father beside me: And whosoever
seeks to come to the Father by another way beside me: or whosoever seeks to
come to the Father any other way, but by me, he shall be disappointed, he shall
never find the Father: thou that seeks to come to Heaven another way, nor by
Christ, I give thee that doom, thou shall never see Heaven, Men dream to
themselves another way to come to Heaven, nor by Christ: the Papists deceive
themselves, and the whole world; teaching them to seek Heaven, by their own
merits, by their own works, and to come to the Father by the mediation and
intercession of Angels, of the Saints departed, etc. But all this is folly,
for there is one only way to Heaven, and that a very strait and narrow way, by
Jesus Christ: Indeed the way to Hell is a very broad way: that is, there are
many ways that lead to damnation: for there is not a sin that thou
committest against God, but it leads thee to Hell: Whoredom leads a man to
Hell, Murder leads a man to Hell, Drunkenness leads a man to Hell; all the
foul affections of thine heart, lead thee to Hell: But there is one only way
to come to Heaven, Faith in Jesus Christ. Therefore, thou who would come to
Heaven, and dwell with the Father for ever, leave all other ways, for they are
but paths, that lead to damnation: and take thee to that only one way:
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and through him thou shall be assured to get
life and glory. To this Lord Jesus, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be
all praise, and honor, for ever. Amen.

THE THIRD LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 7.8.9.10. 7 Jf ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.

8 Philip said unto him, Lord, show us thy Father, and it suffices us.

9 Jesus said unto him, J have been so long time with you, and have thou not
known me, Philip? He that has seen me, has seen the Father: how then
say thou, Show us thy Father?

10 Belieuest thou not, that J am in the Father, and the Father is in me? The
words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self: but the Father that
dwells in me, he does the works.


YE heard (Well-beloved in the Lord Jesus) among the rest of the comforts that
the Lord furnished to his Disciples, that they should not be troubled, when
he should depart, this was one, and the last, Ye know the place whither I am
to go first, and where ye are to go next in your time: and also ye know
the way: Therefore, would he say, comfort your selves with this knowledge,
while I come again, and take you to that place. Upon this last argument, the
conference falls out betwixt Christ and his Disciples: and first Thomas, one
of his Disciples, speaks, and utters, as it were, a contradiction to the
word of the Lord: We know not the place where thou art to go, says he,
and how then can we know the way? Upon this speech of Thomas* the lord
takes occasion to instruct Thomas, and the rest, in these points whereof they
were ignorant, concerning the place where he was to go, and concerning the
way: and first he points out the way unto them: he points the way to
be Himself: I am the Way, the Verity, and the L^fe: In a word, the way to
Heaven, and the way to the Father is the Lord Jesus, and that because he is
the Truth and Verity, and because he is the Life: Therefore, all who would
have access to Heaven, must enter in by the Lord Jesus first, as he is
Verity: and then as he is Life, they must believe that the Lord Jesus, the
Son of God, is Truth and Life it self, and that all our life spiritual
flows from him, as from a Fountain: and we believe not these two, let us
never look to see Heaven. Then he says, Except they enter in by this way,
they shall never come to the Father: and thou go in by another by-path,
besides the Lord Jesus, thou shall never see Heaven with thine eyes: This is
thy doom. No man, from the King to the Beggar, shall come to the Father, but
by him. Now, when he has pointed out the way, then he begins, and
instructs Thomas, and the rest, concerning the place where he was to go:
and these instructions are given by way of reproof. He finds fault with
Thomas, and the rest, that being so long with him, they knew not the Father:
they might have known the Father, in him: for they who see the Son, may
perceive in him the Father: If, says he, ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also. As he would say, Ye never knew me, because ye know not
the Father. There is a necessity that is laid on every soul that comes
into this world, if ever they would have joy in this world, and if ever they
would dwell in Heaven, that the creature know the glorious Creator. Thou must
know God, if ever thou would dwell with him. Thou must know God, not only
the Creator, but also the Redeemer of the lost world: This necessity and burden
is laid upon our back: we are straited to know God the Father, for herein
stands our felicit^i.

Now, Brethren, it is an hard thing to get a sight of that Majesty: The Lord
dwells in a light that has none access. 1 Timothy 6.16. Never man saw him,
Paul says. He is a God that cannot be seen; the eye of the creature, cannot
be able to look upon that passing glory. So it is an hard thing to see God, and
to know him: therefore, let neither man nor woman, who preasseth to get a sight
of God, strive to pierce immediately through that light. Then, how shall we
see him? The Lord perceiving our infirmity, has prepared a way: we found it
not out, but the Lord has found it out. What is the way to see the Lord, in
his infinite justice, power, wisdom, glory, and chiefly, in his mercy? And
thou see him not in his mercy, all is but in vain; and thou see nothing,
howbeit thou should see all the world.) The Lord has found out the mean:
The Lord Jesus, his own Son, his own Image, represents unto us all the
glory of his Father: and he is the Image of the invisible God, the splendour
of his glory, and the imprinted mark of his person. Col. 1.15. and Heb. 1.3.
The Lord has ordained* that in the Son, even in the nature of man, and humbled
in the flesh, we should see that glory. And this is the end, wherefore the
Lord Jesus came into the world: even that we might see the glory of the Father
in him. This is so true, that he who sees the Son, sees also the Father:
that when in the Gospel thou hear and see Jesus Christ, humbled and
glorified, except in him thou see the Father, his nature, his justice, his
power, his wisdom, and his mercy, thou can not be said to have a
sufficient knowledge of the Son himself: for he himself says here, If
ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. Then he says by way
of correction, No, says he, Thomas, thou know the Father, and so I speak
of the rest and thou have seen him: say what thou will say* there is the
meaning. Upon this speech two things arise: The first, the Apostles and
disciples of Jesus Christ, they knew the Father* The second, they wist not that
they knew him. How can these two stand? They knew him, and saw him: for John
says, We saw him with our eyes: but they wist it not. What is the ground of
this ignorance, that seeing the Son, they knew the Father, and yet they wist
it not? It rises on this, they were ignorant, that the Father and the Son,
were one in substance, essence, glory and Majesty: And howbeit they saw the
Father, and and the glory of God in the Son, yet being ignorant of this
ground, they wist not, that they knew the Father.

Now, Brethren, as concerning this, seeing there is no solid comfort nor rest
in the heart, but in the sight of God, keep this sight night and day, and
sleep on it, for it will be a black vvakening, and we rest not on him: We
may well rest on these pleasures, on these Kingdoms, etc. but yet miserable
shall be thy vvakening: when the soul shall be taken from the body, it shall
tell thee, that there is no rest, but in him: and thou shall curse the time
that ever thou restedst on any thing in the world. There is no joy, but in the
sight of God. Next, except a man or woman know God to be God, when they see
his power and verity to appear in the world, and above all things, his mercy
to sinners: except they take up God in these things, and chiefly in his
mercy: except they know him to be God, they will never have solid comfort.
(A man who has been out of his Fathers sight long, when he sees him, and
knows him not, he will have no comfort.) But then when we see him, and
know him to be our merciful Father, there is our joye. When the sinner sees
God in Jesus Christ, and knows him to be his Father, there is the chief
joye. But how shall we come to the knowledge of this? We must know first of
all, that the Son is the splendour of his Father: (thou vvilt get no access
to the Father, but by the Son:) and therefore, seeing the glory of the Father
shines in the Son, when thou come to hear the Lord Jesus preached, say
thus, In the Lord Jesus, whose Euangel I am to hear, I shall see the glory of
the Father: And when ever ye hear the Euangel, strive to get that sight of
the Father, through the Son: and then thine heart shall get exceeding joy
into it. This must every one of us do, if we would go to Heaven.

When Thomas has spoken, and the Lord has answered him, another of the
Disciples spoke: for they were ignorant, till the Lords resurrection. Philip
speaks next, Lord, says he, once show us the Father: As he would say, Once
let us see him, and we shall be contented. Mark, in this question there is
one thing commendable, and another thing discommendable: not that there is any
good in us: there is aye a piece of imperfection in the best of us all. Then,
that which in Philip is to be commended, is this: that he has a desire to see
God: one of the greatest graces that ever was: for Christ says, ( Matthew.
5.6.) Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness. Woe to that
soul, that neither has seen the Father, neither yet has any desire to see
him. Another thing is commendable: He thought, if once he could get a sight of
God, he would be contented. Indeed, the only contentment that man or woman
has in this world, is into the sight of God: All the things in the world,
will not give a contentation to the soul: but the more thou have of an earthly
thing, as Riches, Honor, and pleasure, the more ever shall thou crave: But and
once thou see the face of God, in the which there is satietie of all joye,
there shall thou find full rest to thy soul, and thou shall have such a joye
and contentation, that thou shall crave no more: for all fullness is in his
face, and he fills the creature with the beams of his glory. And this
Philip speaks: We shall then be contented, getting a sight of that glorious
Majesty.

There are other things discommendable: He utters a great ignorance, even
of this ground, That the Son is the Image of the Father: The Son and the
Father are but one in nature, essence, and Majesty. He misknew this ground,
without the which there is no comfort. There is another thing discommendable in
him: Christ was instructing them in this ground, and he utters a dullness
in the mean time, as if Christ had not spoken one word: These are two
faults: Ignorance is a fault, and the ignorance of God chiefly: And their
dullness and stupidity of heart is another fault, whereby men and women are so
senseless and blockish, that they are neither moved with the thing that they
hear, nor able to conceive the same: as for the first, and thou should
know all the world, and misknowe God, thou have no knowledge. Paul, (
Philipp. 3.) professes, he would misknow all the things in the world, for
the knowledge of that eminence of Christ: He was a great Scholar, and a wise
man: yet in respect of that knowledge of Christ, he counted all but damage:
yea, he counted all but dirt: but he calls it, Eminence, because it
surmounteth all the knowledge in the world: it reaches farther than Heaven:
yea, above the third Heaven. So ignorance is an evil thing: and ignorance of
God, is the worst thing in the world: It is not so great a misery, to be in a
dark pit, as to be wrapped in such darkness, that they cannot see the
Lord Jesus. If an ignorant creature, who knows nothing of the Creator, have
a desire, and an hunger, and thirst, to be fred out of that pit of ignorance,
there is grace: and it must follow of necessity, that that creature, who
feign would know the Lord Jesus, must get knowledge: the Lord shall draw
him out of that darkness, which is the beginning of Hell. Christ says, They
who hunger and thirst for righteousness, shall be filled. Blessed are they
who hunger for God, for of necessity that creature must be filled: And on the
other part, a man, or a woman, who knows not God, and then in the mean time
has no desire to know God: (as, alace, over many there be, who desire not
to know God, as if there were no Heaven nor Hell after this life:) It is a
sure token, they will be casten into utter darkness, a world of all misery.

If there be any of you who is ignorant, and has no desire to be fredde
thereof, I say to you, and ye continue so, and die so, your soul shall go to
that darkness of Hell. If any body be in darkness, and takes a
delectation therein, and if he were a King, Emperor, or Monarch: howbeeit he
had all the knowledge in the world, he is but a miserable catiue: For what is
all the wisdom of this world, without the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST? But
mere folly: And the LORD shall make that wisdom, which the Great men of
this Land count much of, to be a snare to trappe them into: All the things
that they have, and the favor of men, shall not save them from judgment,
because of the ignorance of JESUS CHRIST.

So ye see in Philip what was commendable, and what was discommendable: If we
be in ignorance, let us desire to be fredde from it: And if we be dull and
senseless, let us be careful to understand the word of the LORD: Let us
lay it up in our heart, and meditate on it day and night, with prayer to GOD,
to give us understanding hearts: for to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

Now the LORD answers to Philip: Indeed, considering how he had
instructed them from the beginning, He might have reproved him, and said, I
have instructed you, and as I perceive, ye have profited nothing. But the Lord
yet tyreth not, nor casts them not off: but teaches them with patience, and
with lenity, because he knew what was in man. There is not a Teacher, who
is imperfect in himself, who will teach with such lenity, as the Lord did,
who had no ignorance in him, but the fullness of all knowledge. He leaves his
example to be followed, that all Teachers may teach with lenity after him. So
Paul bids Timothy, being a young man, teach with lenity, 2. Timoth. 4.2.
It was not for nothing, he^ bore with them* but that they should bear with
others afterward, when they should teach others: for they who feel the
hardness and dullness of nature best, they have greatest compassion upon
others. The doctrine he uses, is by way of rebuke: and it is but a gentle
rebuke: for he says, How say thou, Show us the Father? As if he would
say, How is this, Philip, that thou say, Show me the Father? He is not
content with this, but he rebukes and teaches Philip, in the grounds of the
knowledge of God: and he says, He who knows me, and sees me, he sees the
Father: but so it is thou see me; it is a shame to thee, to misken me:
therefore how ask thou at me, Show me the Father? Yet he says, Belieuest
thou not, Philip, that the Father is in me, and J in him? One in essence,
glory, and Majesty, howbeit diverse in persons: Philip, belieuest thou not,
that I am the splendour of his glory? For he is the express form, of him who
cannot be seen. Therefore, would thou see the Father, to thy comfort,
that thou may be transchanged to the like glory? (We may see men, yea,
Kings, in glory, and we will get none of it: but when we see that Majesty,
the beams that strike on us, shall transchange us.) So, I say, would thou
see thy felicity, would thou see God? and as thou would desire to live,
thou must desire to see him: then preasse to get a sight of the Son: look that
thou pass not by him. Will thou do as the Jew does? The Jews got not a sight
of him, because they passed by the Messiah. So let all thy travel be, to get
the Lord Jesus: But ye will say, The Disciples might easily see him, because
he was with them bodily and sensibly: but how can I see him? I answer,
There are two kinds of sights; the one is the Spiritual sight, of the eye of
the soul, which we call Faith, when thou hear the glorious Euangel of
Jesus, and beliuest into it: The other sight is with ^hy bodily eyes: and thou
who see him here with the eye of the soul, by faith, thou shall see him
hereafter, with thy bodily eyes. Then we must not be so gross, as to
think, except we see the Lord Jesus with the eyes of the body* that we
get no sight of him: for the sight we have with the eye of faith, is a
precious sight: and this sight makes his members here to love him exceedingly.
John, 20.29. he says, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou belieuest:
but blessed shall they be, who has not seen me, and yet belieueth. Believe
but a short while, and thou shall see the fairest sight that ever creature
saw: and in the mean time, thou shall get joye in believing, while thy faith
be turned in sight, 1. Pet. 1.8. he says, Though we see him not, yet
believing in him, we rejoice with a joy that is unspeakable and glorious. O
then what shall that joy be, when thou shall see his face! But how is it,
that in Christ we see the Father? There is the ground: The Father and the
Son are one in glory, in power, in wisdom, justice, mercy, etc. Mark well
this ground: When ye come to hear of Christ, bring it with you, and settle
it into your heart: The Father and the Son are one, and the Son is the
Image of his Father: And this ground being settled into your soul, then the
sinner shall rest in hope, and shall have joy, and shall reach in to the
Father: and then the creature finds the self sure and fast: and it were in
the fire, and thou were in the den with the Lions, and in the midst of
death and extremity, thy soul shall get rest: for what shall separate thee
from the love of God? Yea, as Paul says, Romans 8. Thou shall find thy self
more than victorious. And without this security in Christ Jesus, I will not
give a penny for all the security of men, and for all the remission of the
Prince: the Lord shall bruise thee down, for all thy remission. Well, well, the
Lord be merciful to us, and to our Prince, etc.

When he has laid down this last ground, he uses sensible arguments, to
convince them, That they behooved to say, That the Father was in him, and he
in the Father: that is, that the ^od-head dwelt bodily in him. The first
argument is from the ^ordes he spoke: The second, from the works he
wrought: So, would he say, would ye have sure arguments, that the Father
and I am one? take heed to my words, take heed to my works* and in them ye
shall see, that I, who speaks, am the Son of God* The words that the
Lord spoke in the world, and the works he wrought, bare witness to them
that saw him, and heard him, that he was God: He spoke with such a grace,
and with such authority, and such a Majesty, that they who heard, wondered
at his doctrine: In a word, he was such a Man, as never was. Look what the
servants of the Pharisees said, when they had no power to touch him: Never man
spoke as this man, John, 7. verse. 46. The Pharisees themselves understanding
the work that he wrought, in giving sight to the man that was borne blind,
were forced to say, It cannot be, but this man is of God, Chap. 9. verse. 16.

But, Brethren, come to his Disciples: The enemies were astonished, but his
Disciples were not so: but they felt the sweetness that was in him: as Peter
confesses, Where shall we go to? thou have the words of eternal life,
Chap. 6 verse. 68. He said, The words of Jesus had power to life. So the two
Disciples, when they were going to Emmaus, after he had left speaking to them,
and was gone away, they said, Did not our hearts burn within us, while he
talked with us by the way, and when he opened to us the Scriptures? Luke,
24.32. The word of the Lord has power to burn up the dross of the heart.
We also, by the preaching of the Gospel, find by experience, that life is
conuoyed to our soul. What means this? It means, that the Lord, who spoke,
was life, and that the Godhead dwelt in him. Set me up a Philosopher, will
his words give life? No, the words of man can give thee no life: but the
words of the Author of Life, gives life. It is true, we have not the Lord
himself, outwardly speaking unto us: but all that is spoken of him now, it
is spoken by infirm men, and sinners, vveake silly bodies: (and this is the
cause why the world contemns the Gospel:) It pleases the Lord so to
confound the vvisdome of the world. But it is also true, If they who preach
the Gospel, seek the glory of the Lord Jesus, and the salvation of man, they
shall have this vantage; The Lord will accompany the word spoken by them so
powerfullie, by his Spirit, that it shall furnish life to the hearers. Ye see
this in experience, and all the Saints, who have any sight of Jesus Christ,
witness it: And it were but a silly base man, who is speaking the word,
that same word will have power to life: And this is the mean the Lord
uses, while his coming again. And albeit the word of the Cross of Jesus,
to speak of an hanged man, dying a death which was cursed by God himself,
of Jesus nailed on the Cross, be the basest thing, and the most foolish thing
in the world; yet Paul says, The word of the same Cross of JESUS, is the
power of GOD to Life, to them who believe: It is the power of GOD, and the
wisdom of GOD: The greatest wisdom and power that any faithful soul can
feel, is the Cross, which is foolishness to the world: and they think
all the wisdom of men, to be but foolishness, in respect of the meanest
portion of that vvisdome. What means this wisdom, preached by vveake men,
of the Cross, of a crucified man, which conuoyeth life into the soul? It
means this, that the crucified man, is the GOD of glory. Therefore hold
fast this ground, and then thou shall find power coming from him, to quicken
thy dead soul: and through his death, thou shall get life: If he had not
died, thou had never seen Life. So, all our life, and all our joye, is in
his death: And therefore let this be all our glory, and our joye, to rest
upon the Cross of CHRIST: To whom, with the Father, and with the Holy
Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, for evermore. Amen.

THE FOVRTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 11.12.13.14.15. 11 Believe me, that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me: a^ the least, believe me for the very works
sake.

12 Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that belieueth in me, the works
that J do, he shall do also, and greater than these, shall he do: for J
go^ unto my Father.

13 And whatsoever ye ask in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may
be glorified in the Son.

14 If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it.

15 If ye love me, keep my Commandments.


WE have heard in this Chapter, (Beloved Brethren) how Christ comforted his
Disciples, against the time he should have vvithdrawne his bodily presence
out of this world; he began, and said to them, Be not troubled, let not your
hearts be troubled: As he would say, When I go away, ye will find matter of
trouble: be not troubled with all the things ye shall find: And thereafter he
furnishes them arguments of comfort. The first is, Faith in him: Believe in me,
howbeit ye will not have my bodily presence in earth, yet send your faith to
Heaven, and fasten your selves upon me. The second argument, I go away not
for your hurt, but for your weal, to prepare a place for you in my Fathers
house: therefore be not troubled. The third argument, When I have passed away,
I will not abide for ever away; but I shall come again, and take you to my
self, and place you in Heaven, with my self. The fourth argument is, Comfort
your selves with the knowledge, that ye know the place where I go to, and the
way. Pilgrims that wander in a strange Country, are comforted in the mean
time of their Pilgrimage, that they understand the way, and the place where
they shall repose themselves: Even so the Lord would say, Comfort your selves
with this, that ye know the place and the way, while I come, and take you with
me.

After the Lord has comforted his Disciples, Thomas first, and Philip next,
begins to doubt, and utter their ignorance, chiefly concerning the place;
and the way. Thomas begins: and he first utters his ignorance, first of
the way. The Lord answers him, and instructs him, and says, I am the Way,
the Verity, and the Life: no man comes to the Father, but by me. Secondly,
concerning the place, to wit, the Fathers dwelling place. If ye had known me,
says he, ye would have known the Father: and in misknowing the Father, ye
utter an ignorance of me. Philip utters his ignorance, and he says, Let us
see the Father, and that shall suffice us. The Lord answers Philip, as he
answers Thomas, with a reproof: Philip, says he, he that has seen me,
has seen the Father: how then say thou, Show us the Father? Then he
proves this, that he who has seen the Son, it behooved him to see the
Father: I am in the Father, and the Father in me: we are but one in Majesty,
substance, and glory: he therefore who has seen me, has seen also the
Father. So the Lord has brought his Disciples to the first ground of the
knowledge of the Father: the ground is, The Son is one with the Father, and
he is the Image of the Father. When he has reasoned this way with them, and
comforted them, in this Text we have read, he enters into an exhortation:
he leaves nothing off, that may serve for their weal. And in this Text, he
exhorts them to two things: The first is, to faith in him, to believe him,
that God dwells in his manly nature: the Majesty and the glory of God
dwells in him bodily. The second is, in the last verse we have read: and
it is, that they should keep his Commandments, if they loved him.

To come to the first, Believe me, says the Lord, that J am in the Father,
and he in me: As if he would say, Believe this I have been speaking, That
I and the Father are one in nature, in substance, glory, and Majesty: Let not
this base and infirm nature of man, that I am clad with in the world, stay
your faith: Look in the through the veil of my flesh, and see the Majesty of
the great God. The Lesson we have, is this: The Lord is very earnest with
his Disciples, in this pointing out of himself, that under that veil of the
nature of man, his Disciples should see the glorious Majesty of the great God
of Heaven. This earnestness lets us see, it is one of the hardest things
in the world, for man and woman, to take up, and see that Majesty and Godhead
that dwells in JESUS CHRIST: And it is hard for flesh and blood, yea, it
passes the reach of all men, to believe it, except there be another way,
than by the eyes of nature: by the eye of nature, the soul will never
perceive, nor take up, the glorious GOD to dwell in so base a lodging. The LORD
says to Peter, (in the sixteenth Chapter of the Euangel of saint Matthew, and
the seventeenth verse) when he confessed him to be the Son of the living
OOD* Blessed art thou, Simon, the son of Iona, flesh and blood has not
revealed that to thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.

So I say, to see the Majesty of GOD dwelling in earth, it behooves man and
woman to be raised above nature, to the Heavens, to have a Spiritual eye, and
the Spirit of the great GOD, to see that glorious Majesty.

Now another thing follows here on this earnestness to wit, A necessity to
know the Father, that we may get salvation. Had not the LORD known that
it was a needful thing for his Disciples, and for the whole world, that
they might get life, to know that the nature of God dwelt in him, he would not
have been so earnest in this point. It is a thing that the world must know, or
then there is no salvation. The third thing follows: seeing it is so hard a
thing to a natural man, to see the glory of God, in Jesus Christ; and seeing
it is so necessary a thing to salvation, that except we see him to be God, as
well as man, there shall be no life. If ever we would enjoy life everlasting,
and Heaven, we must be lifted up above nature, and in a manner, we must be
supernatural and heavenly. And this change be not made in this life, let never
man look to see Heaven: that is the necessity that is laid upon thee, look
to it as thou will. When he has proponed his exhortation, he brings reasons
to cause them believe this. The first argument he uses, is in the end of the
verse: At the least, believe me for the very works sake. And there were not
another argument to cause you to believe this, that God dwells in me, look
to my works, and see if they pass not the power of any creature. What Angel,
or what man, can work such things? If my works* be not above all works,
believe not in ^ee: but if it be otherwise believe in me. And there were non^
other argum^nt in the world, to move men to believe, that the Lord jesus is
the God of glory, and that in his Manhood the Godhead dwells, the very
effects, the words, the works, the deed: testify, and ^hee is able to convict
all the conscience^ of men and Angels, and make them say, The Lord Jesus is the
God of glory. Yea, Brethren, and there were no more to peswade us, that Jesus
is the God of glory, but the word we have of Jesus, this power of the word of
the Cross, and this grace and Majesty, that shines in the Scriptures, it
testifies plainly, that the Lord, the Author of that word, is the God of
Heaven: for it has such a power in the souls of men and women, that either it
conuicteth them, or else it conuerteth them: and therefore it is called the
power of God. And it were the word of man, that word could never have such
power to convict the world, or to bring the souls of men to salvation. So,
the effects that come from the Lord, testify to the world, that he is God,
and is able to convict the consciences of all the enemies in the world: yea,
even of the Devil himself: But, and there be no more, they will never bring
thee to salvation. Therefore, if thou would have that solid faith in Jesus
Christ, and that taste of his sweetness in thine heart, thou must have another
witness ^ the holy Spirit must concur with the outward word, and the
outward works, drawing, alluring, and persuading thee, by renewing thine
heart: and that brings with it the greatest joye and sweetness in the world:
When the Spirit is inwardly in the heart, and draws it to Christ, as the eye
sees the works, the soul begins to rest, and repose upon the Lord, with a
joy unspeakable. Therefore ever preasse to get the presence of that Spirit, or
otherwise, the works will but convict us, and make us inexcusable in that great
day. Yet he insists, and he brings another argument to allure them to
believe: Verily, verily, says the Lord, believe me, that I am in the
Father: if ye believe this, it shall be for your own weal: it shall not only
be for my glory, but for your weal: Ye think my works great, but believe
in me, and I shall make you work these works, and greater than these. So,
this argument is taken for their own weal. Who gets greatest vantage in
the honoring of God? Who gets greatest vantage in believing? Is it the
Lord* No, he may want thee, and all thy well-doing, and not an hair the more
be impaired of his glory: All the vantage comes to the creature; and the
glory of the creature stands in glorifying the Creator: The felicity of man
and woman in earth, is in believing Christ Jesus. So will thou be blessed,
believe. In a word, and thou believe, the best is thine own, and all the
profit redoundeth to thee. What vantage brings faith with it? There is not a
man, or a woman, that will once believe in the Lord Jesus, but as soon his
heart will be filled with that Spirit, and with all good things, and with power
to work all manner of good works, surmounting all the powers of nature. So, a
poor body believing in Christ Jesus, will have more power to do good, than
all the Kings in the world, that have no more but nature. So it is said of
Steven, that he was full of faith, and of the Spirit, and of power: And what
follows? he was so powerful in reasoning, that the Pharisees could not resist
him: he had a wondrous working with him. And in the Primitive Kirk, after the
Lord had suffered, and when he was glorified, they who did believe in him,
got such a power, that was marvelous to the world. Look the Acts, and the
last Chapter of Mark. So, they who believe in Christ, surpass the world. It
is true, those extraordinary and miraculous works cease now: but yet, the
power that follows on the faith in Christ, abides effectual, if not in such
miraculous works, as were to cast out Devils, to speak with Tongues, etc.
which were in the Primitive Kirk: Yet in such works as the world cannot
work. The words of a sinful man are powerful to regeneration, and to renew
a dead soul: And it is no less wonder, to raise up a dead soul, than to
raise a dead man out of the grave: yea, it is a greater work: And if ye will go
to works, faith makes us meet to work the works of charity: And I say, it is
better to work a charitable work, than such miraculous works; the one is
more excellent and precious than the other. Judas wrought wonders, but he
could not work the works of charity. These works of charity, are as as many
witnesses of our election, and they bring greater joye with them, than all
miraculous works. When the Disciples returned to Christ, rejoicing that they
had wrought great miracles through his Name, the Lord says unto them, Rejoice
rather in this, that your names are written in the Heavens. Luke, 10.17. If
we find the power of faith, in working charitable works, we may think us
well: for we are lifted above this world, and are become Citizens in Heaven,
awaiting for that redemption to come. So, I say, faith is powerful, in word
and deed: and he who wants this faith, he wants power in word and deed:
and so blessed is he who has this faith.

Now there arises a question in the words: Some would think this a marvelous
thing, that the Lord will give power to his Disciples, to work greater works
than himself wrought. I answer, It is true indeed, the Disciples of Jesus
Christ, after his Ascension, wrought greater works, than the Lord did in his
own person: but it was not so much the Disciples, as it was the Lord of
glory, that wrought these works: by the Disciples, he uttered his power, using
them as ministers. Yet should not the Lord have wrought greater works
himself in his own person, than he wrought by his Disciples? Should he not
himself have wrought greater works, when he was in the earth, than he wrought
by his Disciples when he was in Heaven? I answer, No: for the Lord, so long as
he was in the earth, was but humble, and that divine power did keep it self
close, and uttered not it self in the full measure: and so it behooved to be,
that the Godhead should not utter the self in his humiliation. Bu^ when he is
glorified, in the nature of man, in the Heaven, then the power of that Godhead
in him, uttered it self in greater power than in the earth. And if there were
no more, to prove that Christ glorified, wrought greater things by his
Apostles, than he did in his own person, when he was humbled; this one
argument were sufficient, that after his Ascension, by their Ministry the
whole world was converted, which came not to pass, vvhilest he himself
was on the Earth, because the Godhead kept the self close.

But to come to the words following: The Lord lays down the ground of this:
I go to my glory, and I am passing to the Father, and therefore my glory shall
utter it self. The power of Jesus Christ, must appear in the world, at that
time of his Ascension: when he went to his Father to Heaven, then the power
strikes wonderfully upon the Earth, from the Heaven. When we have the Lord
Jesus now glorified in the Heaven, we have a more glorious power of the Lord
Jesus, than the Jews, who had his bodily presence. So, the reason is, Because
he was to pass up to the Father. So ye see, Brethren, this gift the Disciples
should get, that they should work greater works* than he did, is nothing
prejudicial to the glory of our Savior. Howbeit it pleases the Lord, to
work more glorious works by such vveake instruments, than he did in his own
person; it is not prejudicial to his power. If the instruments of themselves
had done these works, it would have prejudged his glory: but seeing they did
them by his power, it hinders nothing his glory. Yea, I say, his glory
seemed the more in the world by their working: because it testified, that he
who was so base in the world, had such a power in him, when he ascended. He
comes to another ground, of working of greater works: What ever ye shall
ask in my Name, ye shall get it: That is, Send up your prayers to me to the
Heaven, when I am glorified, and what ye shall ask in my Name, it shall be
granted. So, this is another ground, wherefore the Apostles wrought greater
works after his Ascension: They prayed to him, and drew down his power out of
Heaven, by prayer* It is a power incomprehensible, that is in the Lord Jesus.
Now if any man or woman would be partaker of that power, he must send up his
prayer to Heaven, by faith in him, to draw down that power to the world. We
see the Apostles ( Act. 4.) pray earnestly, that by their hands he would
work signs and wonders, and they obtained it. It is a pity, that there
should be so great a power in JESUS CHRIST to life, and we, miserable
creatures, having so great need and want of it; should have no part of it: the
fault lies not in CHRIST: for there is power and virtue enough in him to save
a thousand worlds. But this is the fault: Men and women cannot pray, because
they want faith. So all the want that is in us, that we want Heaven, and
life everlasting, all the fault is in our selves, that cannot pray, and say,
Lord, there is a vvonderfull power in thee, and thou can save a thousand
worlds: Therefore, Lord, by thy power save me. It is a foul shame, that
this should inlake on our part, that we cannot open our mouths to seek
grace, seeing such abundance, such an infinite power and treasure is in him.
And if there were a great treasure to be dealt, so that every man might have
his part, he vvoulde condemn himself who went not to get a share. Now
there was never such a treasure, as is life eternal: and he who gets not
a share of it, but lies behind sleeping, having no care to get it, he is
vvorthie a thousand deaths. So, we should seek this grace by prayer, and
chiefelie that we may have the Spirit of prayer: for all men cannot seek
Heaven, It is a sore thing to us to want a share of that rich treasure, for
fault of hearts to seek it.

He repeateth this promise twice, Jf ye ask any thing in my Name, I will
do it. And indeed he did it in effect: for when the Lord had ascended, they
pray that they should work miracles, and so they did: So he is true in all
his promises. And mark it, Brethren: he says, he will do it: and not,
they shall do it: for Christ, by his own power, works miracles: the which
power he communicates not to his instruments, but he reserueth it to
himself: and by the ministry of men, powers forth his gifts upon others.
Then he sets down the end of all the wonders: That the Father may be
glorified. All the power of the Lord, serves to the glory of his Father: All
the power he has gotten, it diminishes not the glory of his Father, but
augmenteth it: and the glory of the Father stands in the power of the Son,
because he is the splendour of his glory: And the Son be not glorified, the
Father wants glory: and he who will not glorify the Son, he will not
glorify the Father. This is not to be omitted, While he is speaking of the
uttering of his power, forgets he the Father? No, he sets down the
Fathers glory, as the end of his power. When the Lord Jesus was in the world,
he spoke never a word, but he had a respect to glorify the Father: And so he
says, when he was to go out of the world, Father, glorify me, for I have
glorified thee. Blessed is he that can with a good conscience protest this,
that he ever had an eye to the glory of God: and can say, Thou wast mine only
But, and whether I ate or I drank, or what ever I did, it was all to thy
glory. We should preasse to do this: howbeit we cannot come to a full
perfection: certainly that man shall be partaker of his glory, that in all his
actions can hold his eye on the glory of God: By the contrary, that man, what
ever he be, and he were a King, or a Prince, who desires not to glorify
God, if he continue so, he shall never see that glory: This shall stand, and
all the world shall not bring it back. Let this be our mark in all our
callinges, that we may have power to glorify God in them. And if we do not
this, and though we should make all the vantage in the world, and heap up
great riches, gold, and treasures, etc. we shall perish miserably. Therefore
the Lord give us grace, since there is no vantage, but in the God of glory,
that we may glorify him, and be glorified with him, through Jesus Christ.

Now we come to the next exhortation, which is contained in these words, Jf
ye love me, keep my Commandments. As he exhorted them before to believe
in him, so now he exhorts them to be obedient to him, or to do his will:
Faith and obedience are chief grounds of Christianity: If one would be a
Christian, first he must believe in the LORD JESUS. Then next, this faith must
not be idle, but it must burst forth in the effects: they must strive to do
his will: to be charitable, that is the LORDS will. In the thirteenth
Chapter, and the thirty four verse, the Lord spoke these words to his
Disciples, A new Commandment give I to you, That every one of you love
another* Being to depart out of this world, this is the special Commandment
he leaves to his Disciples, That in his absence, every one of them should
love one another. So this is the chief Commandment the LORD has left us
till his coming again, That every one of us should love one another, and
every one of us should bear the burden of another: If we do not this in
the absence of the LORD, when he comes again, we shall not be able to
abide a trial of him, or to render an account to him of our doing. But to come
to the Command: The meaning is, as the Lord would say, As ye would protest
before the world, ye love me, make it known in mine absence, by keeping my
Commandments.

Now, Brethren, to insist upon this matter more at large: Ye know this, A
servant, who loves his Master well, he will be about to do all things that
can pleasure his Master: his whole endeavor will be to do the will of his
Master, and chiefly in the absence of his Master, when he has gone far
from home, at that time chiefly he will kythe his love to his Master, in
doing his turns with pleasure. Howbeit love, as the Apostle says, (1.
Thessal. 13.) be painful, yet if a man have a true love in his heart, he
will have a great pleasure also. Love has pain, but with the pain it has
pleasure: It will not take care what pain or what tribulation it have. So this
servant doing the will of his Master in his absence, will testify to the
world, that he loves his Master. To draw this to our purpose, Brethren: The
Lord Jesus, the Lord of the world, is gone out of the world, as it were, to a
far Country, to the Heaven, and has left us all behind him: yea he has
left us here in the Earth, and he is absent from us in the Heaven: He is a
gracious Master: and woe to him, who is not his servant. Then we being his
servants, and we love him, there will be nothing that is his will, but we
will be about to do it: and he that loves him here in the Earth, because
the LORD is absent, according to his body, in the Heaven, he will be the
more earnest to pleasure him in his calling, and to do the turns of the Lord
Jesus in his absence. He who loves him, will employe his whole senses, and
force, and power to pleasure him: as Paul said, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of the
Lord Jesus constrains me, and binds up my soul. I say more: In suffering
all extreamities for the Lord, the Fire, the Sword, and it were a thousand
deaths, he will have a greater joye and pleasure, than any man will have in
doing any turn for a man, whom he loves well. Then, would any man kythe
that love he hears to the Lord Jesus in his absence? (And who amongst us
will not say, We love the Lord Jesus?) Would thou then kythe this love?
Do heartily his will. It is not enough to love in word, but indeed. Love
not in word only, says the Apostle John in his first Epistle, Chap. 3.
Verse. 18. for it is the heart must do the Lord service. So, and thou would
love the Lord Jesus, do his will: and that is, Love thy neighbor. And thou
be a murderer of thy neighbor, and then say, I love the LORD JESUS, I say
thou lie, and the Lord says it also. Will thou oppress the poor members
of the Lord Jesus, and say thou love the Lord Jesus? I say thou art a liar:
Good works kythe the love in the heart. The ground of Murder, hatred, etc. that
is betwixt man and man, is the hatred of the Lord Jesus. So the ground of all
sin, is the hatred of the Lord in the heart. Matthew. 24.40. where the Lord
speaks of good servants, and evil servants, he says, The good servant, who
in the absence of his Master, preassed to do all things to pleasure his
Master, when his Master comes home, at that hour he knew not, (so the Lord
will come when we look not for him) and finds the good servant doing his
will, will bless him, and make him Ruler of all his goods* Blessed is he who
serves the Lord in a small vocation. What does the other servant? He is
striking the rest of the Family: Woe to that servant, says he, he will be
casten out, and his part will be with the hypocrites, who was but an hypocrite
in his Masters house. If we be well occupied, and waiting aye for the
home-comming of the Lord Jesus: if we be well occupied in directing our life to
him and his glory, blessed shall we be, and we shall get a portion with him
in glory. But if we be evil occupied, in oppression, and in wickedness, he
shall cast us out of his Family. To put an end to this matter: In any vocation,
we should al go about to pleasure our Master in the Heaven, and preasse to
kythe it in our works, that in our hearts we have loved the Lord Jesus: Words
will not avail: and thou could tell all the Scriptures, it avails not
without doing. Let us all, therefore, strive to make manifest, that we have
not only an outward show and profession of love, but that it is fixed and
settled in our hearts, as ever we would desire to find comfort and joye in
that great day of the appearance of our Lord Jesus: To whom, with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, now and forever. Amen.

THE FIFTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 16.17.18. 16 And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,

17 Even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him: for he dwells with
you, and shall be in you.

18 I will not leave you comfortless, but I will come to you.


WE have heard (Beloved Brethren) in this Chapter, how the Lord Jesus, being
to leave the world, to ascend to his Father, has set himself partly to
comfort his Disciples, who were sad for his departure, (and sundry arguments
of consolation has he given them) and partly to exhort them. The first
exhortation ye heard, was, That they should believe in him, and that the Father
was in him, and he in the Father: That is, that he and the Father were one in
substance, glory, and Majesty: and that the Godhead dwelt in the nature of man
bodily: And to prove this, he used an argument taken from the works that he
wrought: At least, believe me, says he, for the very works sake which I
work: That is, Supposing there were none other argument to move you to
believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; yet let the very
works, wherein the properties of God are so clearlie manifested, move you to
believe. Another argument he subjoyneth, more perswasiue, If ye believe in
me, says the LORD, ye shall work the works that I work: And I say more,
Ye shall work greater works than ye have seen me working. Thereafter he
laid down the ground of this: For I go, says he, to my Father: and I
shall come again, in my full power, to you, and so work greater works by
you, than I wrought by my self. Then he laid down another ground, of the
great and wondrous works that they should work: The ground is Prayer,
whereby they should draw out of Heaven that wonderful power: and whatsoever
they should a^ke of him, they should get it. Thereafter he came to the
next exhortation, To obey him, and keep his Commandments. Now when he has
craved obedience at the hands of his Disciples, he lets them see in the
words which we have read, that they shall not serve him for naught. No man
serves the Lord for nothing: but he gets a thousand times better than he
gives. What shall I do to you, says the Lord, when ye shall be doing this?
I shall meet you, and I shall pray my Father, and he shall give you a
Comforter, to comfort you, even the Spirit of Truth: and that not for a day,
or a year, but for evermore, to abide with you while I come again. Then he
tells who it is that comfortes them: It is the Spirit of God. Now because
these are great and weighty words, let us consider them: I mark first here,
that these words import this: The Lord Jesus, so long as he abode with his
Disciples, and gave them his bodily presence, comforted his Disciples: they had
consolation in the sight of his bodily presence. Ioh 6.67. when the multitude
had fallen away, the Lord says, Will ye leave me also? Peter said, Lord,
where shall we go to, for thou have the words of eternal life? So it
appears, that all the joye the Disciples had in the world, was the sight of
their Lord, because they saw more than other men in him. John says, chap. 1.
verse. 14. We saw him full of grace and truth: And his words were so sweet,
that they conceived an unspeakable joye, when they heard him speak. So, I
say, he was their comfort so long as he was among them. What did he more?
It appears well, he kept them as they had been Children, from the
assaults of the Devil, and from the malice and affliction of men. This
appears well in the ninth Chapter of Matthew and the fifteenth verse, in the
complaint of the Disciples of John the Baptist: We, say they, fast and mourn
continually, but your Disciples are in joye. The Lord answers, Can it be,
that the Children of the Marriage Chamber, can mourn, so long as they see the
Bridegroom? That is, so long as they have me, they shall not mourn, they
shall have joye, and they shall feel no persecution. Another thing ye may
see here: When the Lord Jesus was taken out of the world, the Disciples
began to be afflicted, and to be tossed to and froe: for the words
importe this, They shall get another Comforter than me. So if they shall get
another Comforter, they shall have need of another Comforter. The time shall
come, says the Lord, when the Bridegroom shall depart, and then they shall
get leave to fast and mourn.

And to draw this to us: Now when the Lord is absent, the Devil, and the
Wicked in the world, makes their vantage of it. The Devil seeing the Lord
Jesus in the Heaven, and his poor members here in the Earth, goes about like
a roaring Lion to devour them: And the Wicked of the world, strive to cut
off the members of the Lord Jesus before his coming. And the Devil was never
more busy, than now he is: and how far he has prevailed in the absence
of the Lord, miserable experience can testify now, in the days of
Antichrist, when darkness has croppen in so, into the Kirk of Jesus Christ.
And this Age tells us, how busily the Devil works by his members, to
suppress the Gospel of Jesus Christ in his absence. But we learn this comfort
out of this place, Howbeit the Lord be absent from us according to his bodily
presence, (yea, he is as far from us, as the Heaven is from the Earth;) yet
the Lord leaves not his own without a Comforter. This is general: There are
none that appertains to him, but if he take one comfort from them, he will
give them another. This is impossible, That the members of the Lord can want
all comfort: if he take away one, he shall give thee another: and if he take
away thy Children, or Wife, or Husband, or Friends, he shall give thee another
comfort, as the Lord comforted his Disciples in his absence: So, I say, howbeit
he be in the Heaven, he will not leave his own without comfort: but he
sends down his Spirit, to work joye in the hearts of men and women: and
the more glorious he is, sitting at the right hand of the Father, the more
powerful will his Spirit be. When the Lord was in the Earth, his glorious
power appeared not: but as soon as the Lord Jesus passed up to Heaven, and
entered into that place of Majesty, then it mightily appeared. So now, the
power that comes out from the Lord Jesus, is more powerful than when he was
in the Earth: And as the force of his holy Spirit becomes greater, it must
follow, that that consolation that comes from him now, must be greater
than the comfort that the Disciples found when he was walking with them bodily.

To open this more deeply: All comfort that comes from Christ, it is all by
his Holy Spirit. This is a sure ground: The comfort that all the Fathers had,
before the Lord came in the nature of man, it was all by the holy Spirit: That
Spirit of Christ, gave that comfort to Abraham, to David, and to the rest. Come
to the time when he came into the world: The comfort the Disciples had, was
by his Spirit and Doctrine: and they in whom the Spirit wrought not, had no
comfort in his sight. The Jews, the Pharisees, had no comfort in him. Come on
yet: After his Ascension we know all this by experience, The comfort we all
have, is by his holy Spirit: and none have joye, but they that have this
Spirit. And to come on yet farther: When we shall come to Heaven, the joy we
shall have, shall be by the working of his holy Spirit. In a word: All the joye
of the creature, shall be by the holy Spirit. It is not so much the presence
of the Lord, as it is the holy Spirit, that works joye in the heart. Then
this must follow: The greater force and effect the Spirit has, the greater
is the joye: This is true. But after the passing up of the Lord Jesus to
Heaven, in full glory, his Spirit had a greater force than before: For before
it was said, The Spirit was not yet given: And after he says, It is good I
depart, for otherwise ye shall not get the Comforter. So I say, the Spirit
has greater force now, than he had then, because the Lord is in his full glory
in the Heaven.

Brethren, all this consolation we have by the holy Spirit now, shall be
nothing in comparison of that, that we shall get, when we shall be drawn
near hand him. Then those beams of grace, those glances of glory, that shall
strike from him, when we shall get a sight of his glorious Majesty: that joy
that shall shine from him, shall surpass a thousand times all the joy we shall
get in this world. Lord, how great a thing it is to be beside Christ, glorified
now in the Heaven! The Lord will transform the creature in that same glory,
as Paul speaks, 2. Cor. 3.18. So this is our joy, to awaite on the fulfilling
of that same joy: and it ministers joy unto us, to wait for that
perfection of glory: and blessed is he that has this exspectation: I vvarne
you to look for his coming: and blessed is he who looks for his coming
in glory.

We have to note in the Text, who it is that shall give this Comforter: He
says, The Father shall give another Comforter. It is said in the next Chap.
verse. 26. The Son gives the Comforter. How is it then said, The Father
shall give him? There is no contradiction: for both these stand well together:
The holy Spirit comes from the Father, and from the Son: but this is the
difference, the holy Spirit comes from the Father, as from the Fountain: for
the Father is the Fountain of the Godhead. Next, the holy Spirit comes from
the Son, as the second person: both the Father and the Son are at the
giui^^ (...) Spirit, but they differ in order: and therefore the Lord himself
says, That he will send his Comforter from his Father. It is to be marked
here, The Lord attributes to the Father the sending of the holy Spirit: Yea,
I say farther, Ye shall see in the whole Gospel, the Lord speaking of the
Redemption of man, to ascribe it to the Father, as to the Fountain. All the
graces that proceed from him, he ascribes them to the Father. That is to
learn the world, All our Redemption, and all our grace, is from the Father.
We must understand, that all grace comes from the Father, as from the
Fountain: that we should give the glory of all to him: for he who is the
beginner of all grace, he must be the ender. The Apostle considering this,
he says, Of him, and through him, and for him, are all things, to him be
glory, and praise and honor, for ever, Romans 11.36. The Lord Jesus goes
before, and gives the glory to the Father: and bids us give the glory of
our Redemption to the Father: but not forgetting the Son, for the Father, and
the Son, and the holy Spirit, have their own glory in all their works: The
Father, as the Fountain: the Son, as the Mediator: the Holy Spirit, as the
Comforter. Now let us see, how the Spirit is given, and how he is gotten:
He is gotten by the means of the Lord Jesus: when he was in the world, he
was ever praying for grace and mercy to the world. And in the seventeenth Chap.
ye shall see his prayer to the Father: and that prayer shall remain to the end
of the world, and it shall never go out of the mind of the Father. This grace
of the Holy Spirit is gotten first by the death of Jesus Christ: and next, by
the earnest prayer and intercession of JESUS. Ere ever man or woman got that
Spirit, it behooued the Lord JESUS to buy him, with his precious blood: And
if God had not died, the world had not gotten the Spirit. What dow a man,
and he were a King, and he get not that Spirit? The LORD meriteth that
Spirit by his death. Ere ever we get that Spirit, he has merited it: yea,
and CHRIST must rise again, and must pass up to Heaven, and be glorified,
and there he must be an Advocate, and there sit at the right hand of the
Father, and make intercession to his Father, to give this Spirit to his own
Chosen, before they can get him. So, ye see how hard a thing it is, to
get the Spirit of GOD: the world thinks it none hard thing to get
that Spirit. The Spirit of GOD will not come upon a man sleeping: No, before
that Spirit enter into the soul, there must be a seeking, morning and
evening, to get him. So says the LORD, Blessed be they who hunger and
thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled. Matthew. 5.6.

Now to go forward: He commands his Spirit to abide with them for ever:
As he would say, He shall be with you not for a day, or a week, or a
year only: but in all your temptations, and in all your afflictions, this
Spirit shall be with you: he shall never leave you. All the things in the
world shall not separate thee from CHRIST, and if thou have this Spirit.
How shall thou find this? None shall take your joye from you. ( John, Chapter
16. Verse. 22.) If thou find joye in thy calamity, that is a token of the
presence of the Spirit. There is no death can separate thee from CHRIST: but
the greater oppression thou lie under, and the greater the pain be, the
more sure shall thou be of the Spirit, the more shall he comfort thee, the
greater shall thy joye be. The Martyrs, who have been burned in the fire,
have felt this. This is a false Doctrine, that the Spirit of Christ can
depart clean away from them who have once gotten him: for, as it is
impossible that the death and intercession of Christ can be of none effect; so
as impossible is it, that the Spirit of God can be taken away from them that
have once received him: And as Jesus Christ, who is that foundation whereupon
all grace is builded, (for in him all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen. 2.
Cor. Chap. 1 verse. 20.) cannot be ouer-throwne; no more can these graces, that
are builded upon him, be taken away. The Spirit, when he is angered, and
grieved in any person, he will hide and with-drawe himself for a while, but
never fully nor finally: for thereafter, by repentance, he will utter himself
again: As we may see in the person of David, Psalm. 51. This then is our
comfort, that the Spirit will never leave us: And therefore let us seek to be
in Jesus, that through him we may have this Comforter to abide with us for
ever.

Now in the next words, the Lord shows to them who is this Conforter whom
they should have in his absence, and he points him out in his proper name,
and he calls him the Spirit of Truth. The Spirit of God is called the
Spirit of Truth, because, as we have hereafter, he instructs men and
women in all truth. And in the 16. Chap. verse. 13. He leads us in the way
of truth and verity: We are all out of the way, till he lead us in the way of
salvation. There is never man nor woman, who is not naturally full of vanity,
and his heart full of lies: no truth, chiefly in the way that leads to life
and salvation: The spirit of error occupies naturally the hearts of men and
women, until this blessed Spirit enter into their hearts. The name is to be
marked: First he is called the Comforter: Secondly, the Spirit of truth: The
one of these is the cause of the other: And the Spirit of GOD is the
Comforter, and ministers comfort to the souls of men and women, because he
is the Spirit of verity: For, Brethren, this knowledge of God is the ground
of all comfort: and without the knowledge of our salvation, there is no
comfort in this life: When the Spirit of God enters into the soul of a man
or woman, he first begins to let the creature see the sinfulness that lies
in nature, the misery, death, and damnation that follows on sin: The first
knowledge we can have, is to know what we are by nature. So the first work
of the Spirit of Verity, is when he lets a man or woman see, that he is
but sinful, and dead under sin. The second point of knowledge that the
Spirit will lead thee until, he will let thee see mercy, in thy
deliverance from sin and death. The best sight that ever a miserable creature
saw, and the ioyfullest: this sight will be accompanied with such a joy, as
the heart of man cannot express: As the sight of sin was heavy, so this
sight of grace and mercy in Jesus Christ, is sweet: yea, the ioyfullest sight
that ever the creature got. The third point of knowledge he will lead thee
unto, is, he will let thee see the way how thou should meet that
merciful God, and what should be thy duty for such a merciful
deliverance. If any man or woman have this Spirit of Verity, he must see these
three things: and if they see not these three, they wist never what was the
Spirit of Verity. Look what follows on these three sights: all the joy in
the world: the heart wist never what joy was, while then. If one had all
the riches in the world, all the pleasures in the world, if they want the
Spirit, they want that true joy, in death, in life: he that wants that
Spirit, can have no joy when death comes to him, and the world leaves him:
how can he rejoice? no, he cannot. So, would thou have joy, and chiefly
in the hour of death, (and that is a sad hour) when the world is leaving
thee, and thou leaving it: (for thou must leave it) Get this blessed sight, and
this Spirit of Verity, and he shall work comfort in thy soul, both in thy
life, and in the hour of death.

Now again the second time he aggreageth this benefit, (for the benefit of
the soul cannot be aggreaged enough) before he aggreageth it, in that it
should abide with them for ever. Now he aggreageth it from the condition of
the world, and he says, He is such a Spirit, that the world cannot
receive. The aggreaging of this benefit to the soul* is by opposition to the
world: The world, says the Lord, received not this Spirit of Verity, whom
ye shall receive. It has a great force, the Spirit of GOD, when he vvoulde
amplify the grace that the Chosen get in the world, uses to set down a
grace opposite to the world, who gets not this grace, but in place of it,
gets misery. So in the threescore Chapter of Esaias, and the twelfth Verse,
he says, The Lord shall rise up, and make the beams of his mercy to shine
upon his own. He sets not down this simply, but to let them see the
greatness of the benefit, he subjoyneth an opposition: And darkness, says
he, shall cover the Earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall
rise up to shine upon thee with the beams of that his mercy, and his glory
shall be seen upon thee. This is done, that the godly should see the
greatness of the mercy of God toward them.

One contrary will make another the better to be known. Brethren, we see this
all: the adversaries use this argument against us, Your Kirk is contracted in
little bounds, and your Profession is but narrow, and few embrace it: where
ye find one who professes as ye profess, ye will find an hundredth who
contemn your Doctrine: So, say they, because the multitude imbraceth it not,
it is not the true Light. But these words condemn them. The Lord says, The
world cannot receive the Spirit of Verity: They say, The world must
receive the Spirit of Verity, or else it is not the Spirit of Verity. So,
to end this: We must be so far from that, to count the less of this
blessed Light, and of these whom the Lord used as instruments, after he had
taken them out of the dark Kingdom of the Antichrist, to make this Light
shine like the Sun: that even by the contrary, we must count the more of it.
And it is an argument, that it is the Truth: because the Lord will not
communicate it with the multitude. And woe is the soul that never saw this
Light. Precious things are but rare: The more pecious a grace be, evermore
since the beginning of the world, it is the rarer. No man gets this Light
communicated to them, but those secret ones, whom the Lord has chosen. And we
one day shall bless this Light, that ever we saw it.

The word is to be marked: The world cannot receive him. This word
imports, that the fault wherefore the world receives not* this Spirit, is
not in the Spirit, but the fault is in the world it self, who wants the
hand, and so neither will nor can receive such a grace. The Lord in his word
offers to all men indifferently this Spirit: and, as it were, by his word
knocks at the hearts of men, and women, to receive such a guest. There is
none of us who hears this glorious Euangel, but the Lord knocks at the
door of his soul, to take in this Holy Spirit, to dwell with him. But look
how he is answered: All receives not this Spirit, and all hearts are not
opened to take him in: yea, very few there be, who take in this Spirit in
their heart, when they hear this Euangel. Take heed, there is no grace nor
welfare, without this Spirit: and how can the heart be glad without him? Yet
they are few who get him. To speak the truth, There is no man nor woman who is
naturally borne to receive this Spirit of God. The natural man, says Paul, is
not capable of the things that are of God, 1. Cor. 2.14. So by nature, all men
and women are alike. Then who makes the difference, says Paul to the
Corinthians? What have thou, that thou have not received? (1. Cor. 4.7.) Then
if there be a difference of men, it is not by nature: for by nature all men
refuse this Spirit. The Lord of Heaven, who offers this Spirit to the
world, in some he will make him to work effectually with joy: in others,
when he offers the Spirit, he makes the heart hard: and when the word
beats at it, it will resist, and fight with both the hands, to hold back
the word. So Steven ( Act. 7. verse. 51.) says of the Jews, Ye resist ever
the holy Spirit. The multitude ever strives to hold out the Spirit out of
their hearts: and the more the Spirit be offered, the harder is their
hearts. Well, it lies in no man's hand to give this Spirit, or to take it:
There is no free will in the heart, but it is of the free will of God. So, when
we hear the word, our whole endeavor should be to look to him from whom
the Spirit comes, and say, Lord, it lies not in my power, of my self, to
receive this Spirit: but, Lord, open thou mine heart, as thou openedst the
heart of Lydia, to receive this Spirit.

Now to go forward: He sets down the cause wherefore the world was not
able to receive this Spirit: He says, The world cannot receive him, because
it sees him not, not knows him not. When we know a thing perfectly, it is
good for us: the knowledge will waken a desire in our hearts to have it, and
to brook it. Again, by the contrary: And it were never so good a thing, and
never so meet for us, and we have no knowledge of it, we will not have a
desire of it: yea, and it were Heaven it self: (for the common saying is true,
Ignoti nulla cupido) The Lord says to the Samaritane woman, John, 4.10. And
thou knew that gift of God that is offered to thee this day: and thou
knew him who asks thee drink; thou would seek of him, the water of
life. The Lord meaned, she asked not the water of life, because she knew it
not: but when she knew the sweetness of that water, and tasted of it; that
Well of Iaakob, which she thought so precious before, she left it behind her,
and ran into the Town, and proclaimed that grace. But to come to the
particular: And a man knew how great a grace the Spirit were, he would give all
the things in the world, for a gripe of him, and for a taste of his
sweetness. But a man who knows not the Spirit of Christ, (for the world
knows not, what grace is in that Spirit of Christ: so the misknowledge of
the Spirit, makes the contempt of the Spirit) that man has no desire of him.
Woe to that soul that cannot say, Lord, indue me with thine holy Spirit: for
it is a sure thing, that those who want this Spirit, they have not Christ: for
Christ is possessed by his Spirit: and when he is out of the heart, there
Christ is away. Ever seek knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, and of the
holy Spirit, as ye would be saved hereafter: And ever when ye hear any
speaking of this blessed Trinity, be busy to understand what is spoken:
Knowledge works a thirst of grace: and, says the Lord, Matthew. 5.6. Blessed
is he who hungereth and thirsts for righteousness, for he shall be filled.
What would a man seek, but his fill? In this life they shall get a taste of
that water of life, and hereafter they shall get a satietie: For as David
says, Psalm. 16.11. In thy face is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. So, strive to get a knowledge, for it works a desire:
and knowledge grow not, desire cannot grow.

When he has laid down the ground, wherefore they were not able to receive
the Spirit of God; the Disciples, who looked to the estate of the world, might
have said, This estate of the world is miserable: What, Lord, is our estate?
Lie we in blindness and ignorance as the world does? The Lord meets this,
and says, Ye know him, and the world knows him not. And he adds the
reason, He bideth with you. And he then makes a promise to them of a farther
acquaintance of the Spirit of God with them: he says, He shall be in you.
And then in the verse following, to confirm us, he repeateth it, and says, J
shall not leave you comfortless: That is, I shall come again to you in my
Spirit. The first thing we have to mark: When the Disciples have heard of the
miserable estate of the world, they are careful to understand their estate,
whether they be like to the world, or not: and as they are careful to
understand, so the Lord is careful to make them understand it: This world is
miserable now, the multitude is hardened, lying without the sheepe-folde of the
Lord: So when we hear of the darkness of the world, as of the Jews, the
Turks, and Pagans, yea, even to amplify and extend this to the kingdom of
Antichrist, and of the Papists also, for they are but miserable: I say, and I
proclaim, in the Name of the great God of Heaven, and in the end they shall
see it: glory in their knowledge as they will, they shall be casten out in
darkness. When we hear of this, I say, should we hear of it securely, as if
it belonged not to us? Or should we set our eyes only upon the world? No, we
should set our eyes upon our selves, and try our own estate, and say, Lord,
what am I? Have I sought grace? Shall I get Heaven? This should be our care, to
see that we be not like the world: And if we be careful, as the Disciples
were, to search our estate, and to try our knowledge of the holy Spirit, the
Lord will be ready to answer, as he answered them: and he will speak to thee
by thy conscience, Thou art not like to the world: Blessed art thou, thou have
the knowledge of the holy Spirit. When we hear of the world, all is but
misery, multitudes lying in blindness and ignorance: when we hear of this,
we should not rejoice of this, but we should be careful of our selves, and
say, Lord, let me not be like the world: but let me have a knowledge of the
Lord. No, we should not rejoice in the misery of the multitude, but lament for
it.

The second thing I mark, is the way, to come to the knowledge of the Spirit
of Christ: We know all this, Brethren, when a man is acquainted with another
man, and haunteth with him, the man will know his familiar, and know his
power: and let them speak, they will know other: So acquaintance will make
knowledge. Well, would thou know the Spirit of Jesus Christ, be acquainted
with him: for there is no knowledge without familiarity: and he must dwell
with thee, night and day, ere thou know him. Barrest thou him out, thou* wilt
never know him. So the way to know him, is only dwelling with thee, he must
dwell in thine heart, and then he will let thee see such a power, the like
whereof thou never saw: even the illumination of the soul. So he dwelling,
and working within thee, thou shall know him. Our Lesson is, Dwell with us who
so will, and let us dwell with whom we will in this world, and if it were
with Kings, and we dwell not with the Spirit of CHRIST, and he dwell not
into us again, we are but miserable in our dwelling. So, let men look what
ever they be doing, that the Spirit of CHRIST be with them: sleep they,
wake they, go they to their bed, look that he be with them. And in one
word, look that he be a companion with thee; for otherwise, and thou had
all the world with thee, thou art but a miserable solitary body.

The words following: I will not leave you Fatherless, but I will come to
you. It is the same thing in effect he spoke of before, to confirm them: I
will not leave you like Fatherless Children. And man wanted Father and Mother,
and all his Kin, and all moyen worldly, (look how precious a thing it is to
have the Spirit of Christ) and he were casten out into the Wilderness, and he
have the Spirit of God, he is not alone, he wants not a good guide in this
world: the Spirit of Jesus is with him, and he shall love him, that in the
greatest dangers in the world, he shall save him: and suppose he lose his
life, he shall get a better life: and suppose he have a battle, he shall
triumph: and suppose he die, and the body be dissolved into dust, the Spirit
shall not leave the dust, till he lift up the body, and place it in the
Heaven. David, Psalm. 146. verse. 5. says, Blessed is he who has the God of
Iaakob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. It follows not,
thou have not a Father, therefore God will be thy Father: or, thou want a
Mother, therefore God will be thy Mother. It will not follow, It will not be
want, that will make GOD to be thy Defender: this must be, that David
says, Ere ever GOD be the GOD of the Fatherless, the Fatherless must hope
in him, and the Widow must lean to him. Would the Stranger and the
Fatherless have God with them, let them lean upon God, and the Heaven shall
fall, ere this leaning stock fall: Our hope must be in God.

Now on the other part, Brethren, this rises on these words, Let a man have
his Father, and his Mother, and all the world, yet want he this companion,
the Spirit of Christ, to accompany him, to go with him, he is ever
Fatherless: And he were a King, and he were riding in the midst of his
troop, and Gunnes and Canons about him, he is but solitary, and Fatherless,
and without a Guarde, and a preye to the Devil, and to his enemies.
Experience teaches us this, in all ages the greatest men have fallen down
miserably, who vvanted this Spirit to be their guarde. In one word, Let all
the world guarde a man, and GOD guarde him not, he has no guarde: All
things are nothing without GOD, and GOD is all things. As ye would be
saved in this life, and in that life to come, never rest, night nor day,
without ye find the company of this Spirit: and say, and it were but this
word when ye rise, LORD, let thy Spirit rise with me, and accompany me
the whole day: and LORD, let me have his blessed society, that I may be
defended from mine enemies. In this broken band should we not take us to him,
who has power to defend us? and should we not be acquainted with him,
who will not leave us? And seeing there is none of us, who finds not in
our selves a thousand wants, and that we are subject to many dangers: and
seeing he has promised the presence of his Spirit, to all who wants and
cries for grace, we ought every one in these troublesome days, to seek the
presence of this Spirit, to supply all our wants. To this Spirit, with the
Father, and the Son, be all honor and glory, for evermore. Amen.

THE SIXTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 19.20. 19 Yet a little while, and the world shall see
me no more, but ye shall see me: because J live, ye shall live also.

20 At that day shall ye know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and J in
you.


WE heard (Beloved in Christ) the Lord being shortly to leave this world,
and to take his bodily presence from it, and from his Disciples, he not only
comfort them against that time, but he exhorts them, to do their duty
in his absence. The first exhortation was to faith, Believe me, says he,
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. The second was, to the keeping
of his Commandments. The argument was first, in keeping his Commandementes,
they should testify before the world, that they loved him in his absence.
None loves the Lord Jesus in his absence, but they who strive to keep his
Commandments till his coming. The next was a moving argument, If they should
keep his Commandments, he should recompense his absence: and whereas when he
was present with them, he was their Comforter, if they should keep his
Commandments in his absence, he should send them another Comforter out of the
Heavens, who should abide with them. He calls him the Spirit of Truth, whom
the world could not receive, because it knew him not, nor saw him not; but
they knew him, because they were familiar with him. Then he makes a farther
promise to them, that the Spirit should be in an higher measure present with
them after his Ascension, than ever he was before his Ascension. Then he
repeateth this same promise in other words, and he says, I shall not leave
you comfortless, but I shall return again to you. Not as he shall come in
the day of judgment, but in his Spirit, and in his power. So, if ye mark
well, ye will see the Lord has promised three times his Spirit to comfort
them, and to abide with them: First he said, That he should pray the Father,
and he should give them another Comforter. Secondly, That that Spirit should
be into them. Thirdly, That that Spirit should not leave them.

In the beginning of the Text we have read* he repeateth the fourth time the
same promise in effect: Yet a little while, and the world shall not see me,
but ye shall see me. That is, in my Spirit, and in that Spirit ye shall see
me more effectually, than ever I was of before, during the time of my bodily
presence. What means this often repetition of the promises of the Spirit? Had
it not been enough once to have promised this Spirit? Brethren, it is an hard
matter for sinners to receive comfort: to miserable creatures to look for grace
or mercy: they will be casten in such perplexity and difficulty, that in a
manner they will see no outgate: all the words in the world will not give them
comfort. But to ripe up the matter more deeply, and to clear how he is said to
come: there appears in this Chap. and in other places, three co^mings of the
Lord Jesus: The first was, when he came into the world, humbled into the nature
of man, (a very base coming into the world) and this was the coming that the
Fathers of old looked for: All the Fathers, from Adam, till Christ, looked ay
for that first coming of the Messiah: and it was a very hard thing to the
Fathers, to look for such a grace to come in the world: All the grace of the
world, is in the coming of the Lord Jesus: his presence brings joye into
the world: And take him away, there is no grace in the world. The thing in
the world that Abraham would fainest have seen, was Christ: and it is
said, he longed to see that day: and he saw him, and he rejoiced: but he
saw him but afar off. Feign vvoulde the Kings, and the Prophets of old,
have seen him.

Now considering this hardness they had, in looking for such a grace, the Lord
had respect to it. In time of old, and from the beginning till his coming,
the promise of his coming was repeated to Adam, Abraham, and Iaakob: to the
people, by the Prophets: it was driven into their ears continually, till the
Lord came, and put an end till all, and fulfilled all the promises.

The second coming, is the coming in his Spirit: After his glorious
Ascension, he came to his Disciples, in the full measure of his Spirit, Act. 2.
Now, as it appears in this place, the Disciples thought it hard enough, to
look for this second coming of the Lord in his Spirit: and therefore this
promise is often repeated to them, J shall pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter: The Spirit shall be in you: I shall not leave you
comfortles: the world shall see me no more, but ye shall see me. What means
this? This frequent repetition means, that it was an hard thing to cause the
Disciples to look for this second coming of the Lord in his Spirit: there are
two co^mings past and done: the coming of the Lord in his body: the coming of
him, in his Spirit, is now come to pass: for all the grace we have, is from
him in his Spirit. Rests his last coming, when he shall come in proper person,
perfectly glorified: not coming like the first: (for then he came in
humility) but he shall come more glorious, than any King, Emperor, or Monarch,
or any creature in heaven, or in earth. Ye see by experience, in so many
miseries, it is a very hard thing to look for so great a grace, and
deliverance, (for he shall bring with him that rich reward, and everlasting
redemption) and a thousand impediments will be casten in, to stay us to look
for that coming, to cause us misbelieue it. There is no man, that ever has
set his mind on that coming, who finds not these impediments. No, there is
none, who will set their eyes on that coming, but they shall find a cloud of
darkness to cover their eyes, to cause them misbelieue that glorious coming.
The Lord has, considering this well, and knowing this hardness, he has
doubled, and tripled, the promises of his coming in the New Testament. And it
is the will of the Lord, that they who preach this Gospel to the world, should
drive in the ears of the people, that the Lord Jesus shall come once in glory.
Let scorners say what they will, one day he shall come again: and when he
comes, he shall bring the full redemption of his own. In a word, all our
preaching should be of the last coming of the Lord Jesus, to cause the
faithful raise up their hearts to heaven, to await for that coming: For in
that second coming, stands the full joye and felicity of the faithful. So,
we should ever keep in our hearts this promise, that the Lord Jesus will
come, and take us to himself, that we may have joy: And he who has not this
joy, in waiting for the coming of the Lord, he wants the true joye: And this
should be the joy of a Christian, and he should sigh and long for it.

Now to come to the Text: Ere he come to the repeating of the promises of the
coming of the Spirit, he sets down what shall be the estate of the
world: The world, says he, shall see me no more: let me once go out of the
world, the Jews, the Pharisees, who contemned me, shall never see me again:
but ye shall see me. This is an accustomable thing to the Spirit of God, to the
end the grace of God should appear the greater, to set it down in opposition
to the world: so that when we see that we get a grace, that the world gets
not, we should make much of it: We shoul^^ make much of this Gospel, for the
world has not gotten it: great Nations want it: it should make us very loath
to want this light, and to be careful that it slip not away. Woe to our
Princes, and to our lords, and woe to all the estates of this Land, and they
let this light go out, seeing the Lord has beautified us with such grace and
light, as he has denied to other Nations, better than we are: we are
unworthy of it.

To come to the words: The world shall see me no more: meaning the Scribes,
Pharisees, and malicious Jews: As he would say. They have seen me once, and
contemned me: Well, for this contempt, when I shall go away, they shall never
see me again. Once contemn any presence of Christ; when that presence shall
be taken out of thy sight, thou shall never get another presence. The Jews
had him amongst them, and might have seen him, (howbeit he was base,) yet
full of grace and verity: if they had looked well to him, they might have seen
him the God of glory: but they would not look to him, but contemned him: fra
once he was taken away, they never got a sight of him again. This is the thing
wherewith he threatens the Pharisees so often, Ye would feign have me away:
Well, I shall go, but where I go, ye shall not come.

Brethren, we have a presence of the Lord Jesus, howbeit not in his body, yet
in Spirit, he shines in his word: we find that power and Majesty to come down
from the Heaven, and work in us by his word: will thou contemn this
presence? dare thou contemn it? Be thou King, Lord, Barron, etc. I shall
give thee this wearde, Thou shall never see his last presence, in his glory,
but to thy shame.

Brethren, the world beguiles themselves: they will contemn the word, and
that base kind of the presence of Christ in the Gospel, and they will not
deinzie the word with their presence: and if they will be present, they
comtemne it, and will drive over their days in security: and if ye ask at
them, if they will go to Heaven? they will say, it is a foolish question, I
will be there as soon as any Minister of them all; howbeit they contemn this
word, and this presence of the Lord. This is like to profane Esau, who sold
his part of Heaven, for the filling of the belly of him: what does he in the
mean time? passes over the time and thinks, he has his Birthright: he
looks for that blessing: but when it comes to the blessing, it is taken
from him, and it is given to Iaakob. So men will not think, that this contempt
of the Spirit will close Heaven from them, until that latter sentence. Esau
mourned and wept, when the blessing was given to Iaakob: but mourn as he
would, he could not get that blessing, but lay still with the curse on him.
So, at that day, sore shall the lamenting be, and we shall hear them, roaring,
howling, and crying, who contemn this word. But let them howl, and they
were kings, they shall never mend themselves, or free themselves from that
eternal fire. So, as we would see Christ coming in that day to our joye, let
us make much of this word, in the which Christ is present: Or else, I give
thee doom, and thou do it not, thou shall never see him, but to thy shame.

When he has set down the estate of them who contemn him, next he lays
down the estate of his Disciples, who contemned him not: But, says he, ye
shall see me: Howbeit that this sight that now ye have, be taken away, yet
shall ye get another sight more comfortable. This sight is the sight of Jesus
in his Spirit, through his word. The Spirit is not without the word. And
there be no word, there is no Spirit. Contemnest thou the word? thou
contemnest the mean that the Lord has appointed to get that Spirit. Then the
word of the Gospel, and the Spirit that follows on the word, lets a man or
woman see Christ. Have thou heard the word preached? and by the word have
found consolation? thou have seen Christ, thou have felt and griped him. The
Spirit of Christ, by the word and Sacraments, enters into the soul of man
and woman, and fills the soul, and brings Christ into the soul, and
fills the whole senses with him. The hands will feel him, the eyes will see
him. Get this Spirit, thou shall get himself: and when thou hear that
word out of the mouth of a weak instrument, thou shall hear his own voice,
and thine heart shall gripe him, even as sensibly, as thine hands will gripe a
sensible body, and thou shall have more joy, sweetness, and peace, than all
the world can give thee. Have ye ever heard him or tasted him, then have ye
felt this joy. Howbeit we see him not, yet as Peter says, we believe, and
rejoice with a joye that is unspeakable. So this faith we speak of, and this
Gospel, is not vain words that pass away, not a superficial thing, but the
most effectual thin^ (...) the world to our consolation. The Christian
Religion is the most solid and most joyful thing of all things in the
world; all other Professions are but vanity, they have no solidity: But to
believe in CHRIST, both in life and death, is most comfortable. And once thou
get that Spirit, thou may feel that Spirit better, than all the things in
the world: And we want this joy, the fault is not in the Spirit, but in us, who
cannot apprehend him. He subjoynes the reason why they should see him: this is
it, There is nothing that can slay this sight, but death: and he proves that
death cannot stay it: If death could stay it, it must be either your death,
or my death, but so it is I live, and ye shall l^ue, ye shall not die,
therefore death shall not stay it: as for me, I have life eternally, I have
the life of God: a^ for you, ye shall live by the life which is in me. The
manner of speaking would be marked: Ye shall live, because I live. He says
not, I shall live: but J live: This is a weighty speech: the meaning is, I live
from all eternity, my life had never a beginning. The form of speaking
imports a life from all eternity, a life by gone, a life present, and a life
to come. And the Lord lives not as the creatures, but he is life it self, and
the Fountain of all life: therefore he lives by himself. In the end of the
eight Chapter he speaks such like, Ere Abraham was, I am: that is, I had my
beginning from all eternity: As in the Revelation, Chap. 1 verse. 4. I am he,
who is, was, and shall be. And there were no more to testify that Christ is
God, and one with the Father, this is an argument to tell us, that our Lord is
God. There is no creature, man nor Angel, can say, I am: it is proper to God.
Exodus 3.14. This phrase imports a being by himself: and by him we live,
move, and are. Act. 17.28. No creature can say, I live: only the Lord can say
it. So this word imports necessarily, that the Lord is God of Heaven. The
thing I note on this argument, is, We may see the ground of sight, is life:
and no man can see, except he be living: What can the eye of a dead body see?
The ground of the natural sight, is natural life: So they who would see
heavenly things, must have life: A dead man will never see Heaven. This life,
what a life must it be? Must it be a natural life? No^ And thou had ten
thousand natural lives, thou will never see Christ, without another life. I
say more: This life natural is so defiled with sin, that it hinders us
from the sight of Heaven: And the more powerful the natural man be in his own
sight, the more are his eyes closed from Heaven: As Paul says, The natural
man is not capable of Spiritual things, for they are foolishness to him. The
natural man will think the Cross of Christ is but scorn: It is an hard
thing for a natural witted man, to receive Christ, because his head is full of
natural wit. So, ere a man get a sight of that life, there must be a
mortification of this corrupt nature, and wisdom of the flesh. And thou
would be heavenly wise, be a fool to the world, that thou may be wise.
1. Cor. 3.18* Thou must learn to make this worldly wit, a servant to this
Heavenly knowledge. So this life, which is the cause of sight, must be the life
of Christ: there shall never one see Christ, but he who has this life into him
in some measure. A man who has gotten a sponke of the life of Christ, he will
see Christ, for he lives not by himself, as Paul says, but he lives by
Christ. Gal. 2.20. As ye would see Jesus Christ, be not content to have a
natural life, occupied in the things of the world: but see thou find that life
of Jesus be in thee. Rest not night nor day, as thou would live, I charge
thee, till thou gettest that life, without the which there is no quietness:
thou may be quiet for a while, but black shall be thy wakening: and say
thou, Lord, live in my soul: for and he live not here in thy soul, thou
shall not get that life to come.

Now, to draw to an end: He lets them see what vantage they shall have of
that sight: It is no small vantage to see Christ: In that day, would the Lord
say, what shall ye see, when ye see me? Ye shall see two things, two
unions, in the sight of which stands the joye of the creature: The first is
the union betwixt me and the Father: J am in the Father: that is, I am God with
the Father: And next, ye shall see yourselues to stand in this society: That
is, That ye are in me, and I in you, to your joye and comfort. One may ask,
How shall thou see him united with the Father? A man or woman shall not so
soon set the eye of the soul upon Jesus Christ, shall not so soon believe in
him; but as soon they shall know and believe the unity of the essence and
glory of the Father, and of the Son: By faith in Christ they shall gripe an
infinite power. Who is he that belieueth in Jesus Christ, who finds not in
his heart an infinite power, and an infinite mercy? And we feel not this,
we feel nothing. And we feel not by faith an unspeakable love, we
feel nothing. In one word, when one belieueth in Christ, they shall see in
him an infinite Majesty: otherways, faith could not rest on him: for faith can
rest on nothing, but on God. I remember, Paul to the Ephesians, Chap. 1. Verse.
18.19. he prays the Lord to illuminate the hearts of the Ephesians, to see
heavenly things: and among the rest, to see that excellent greatness of
power. There is none that belieueth in Christ, but they find an excellent
power. Then if faith find the Majesty of God in him, the man will lay this
conclusion, and say, I see my Savior is God, and is one with the Father: And
there the soul gets a sweet repose to rest upon. So ye see, as soon as the
soul belieueth in Christ, it feels an unspeakable power and Majesty, and so
gathers, he is God, and one with the Father: Except he were God, and one
with the Father, it could not be, that one believing in Christ, could have
such joye and peace in the heart: This is the Truth, and he were not God,
mine heart could not have joye in believing in him. So this power we find
striking from the Lord in believing, tells us, that the Lord is God.

Now to speak of the second union: How is this, that when we look to
Christ by faith, we find us joined with him, in that blessed society? The eye
shall not so soon be set on Christ, and get a blinke of him, but in him it
shall find the satiety of joye. In the face of Christ, is all light and joye:
as Paul says, Turn the heart till him, the veil shall vanish away, and the
mind shall be illuminated, because the Lord is a Spirit, 2. Cor. Chap. 3.
verse, 16.17. When thou belieuest in him, his face shall shine in thy soul:
thou shall see no light, but in him. Is this the effect of faith? What then
should thou gather? Thou would never find joy, except the Spirit had
united thee and him. All this light, power, and joy, which is in our souls,
flows from that union of Christ with us.

Then, Brethren, the sight of Christ will let us see the two ioyfullest
sightes, that ever we saw: First, that union betwixt him, and his Father: and
so thou will see thy Savior to be God, equal with the Father in glory and
Majesty. The next is, Thou shall see thy self to stand in that society with
the Father and the Son. Men would be in honest society: What more gracious,
yea what more blessed society would thou have, than to be in society with
the blessed Trinity, in glory for ever? For this is the felicity of man, to
be joined with that blessed Trinity: even with the Father, with the Son,
and with the holy Spirit: To whom be praise, and honor, forever and ever, Amen.

THE SEVENTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 21.22.23.24.25.26. 21 He that has my Commandments,
and keeps them, is he that loves me: and h^e that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father: and I will love him, and will show mine own self to him.

22 Judas said unto him, (not Iscariot) Lord, what is the cause that thou will
show thy self unto us, and not unto the world?

23 Jesus answered, and said unto him, If any man love me, he will keep my
word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dwell
with him.

24 He that loves me not, keeps not my words, and the word which ye
hear, is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me.

25 These things have I spoken unto you, being present with you.

26 But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my Name, he shall teach you in all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, which I have told you.


WE have heard (well-beloved Brethren) how Christ has insisted much with his
Disciples, to assure them, that after his departure out of this world, he would
give them another Comforter: to wit, the holy Spirit, the Spirit of Truth and
he would give them his presence from the Heaven: He has repeated his promise
often, to assure them of the truth thereof* Now he returns unto that
second exhortation, and exhorts his Disciples of new, to keep his
Commandementes in his absence: He, says the Lord, who has my Commandments,
and keeps them, is he who loves me: As he would say, Would thou know
the man who loves me, when I am in the Heavens, It is he who keeps my
Commandments here on earth. Ye see the Lord is very earnest, to exhort his
Disciples to keep his Co^mandeme^ts: as they would testify to the world,
that they love him: The Lord knew well enough the hypocrisy of this world;
and in this latter age chiefly, that men and women would have a pretense of
love and faith, and have none indeed in their heart: and therefore he insisteth
with his Disciples, that men should kythe it indeed: The babbler and the
speaker only, is not the lover, but the doer. John in his first Epistle, Chap.
3. verse. 18. says, My little Children, let us not love in word, neither in
tongue, but in deed and truth. They who believe, are not those who speak
most, but those who do most. James, Chap. 2, verse. 18. says, Let me see thy
faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. Christ is not a
voice, or a sound, sounding in men's ears, but the Lord Jesus is in deed and
effect: and there are none who have Christ, but they will be fectfull: There
is not a man or a woman, who deliteth in evil, that has Christ dwelling
within them.

When the Lord has pointed out the man who loves him, the Disciples might
have thought, What vantage shall men then have to love thee? for we will do
nothing without vantage: thy love appears to be a burden till us, because
thou chargest us to keep thy Commandments. The Lord meets this, and he
says, He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father: he shall not love me
for nothing, my Father shall meet him with love: Whosoever loves the Lord
Jesus, the Father loves him: whosoever hates the Lord Jesus, the Father
hates him: There is nothing but hatred in God against the Jews and Pagans:
who loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema. It would seem by these
words, Brethren, that our love preceedeth and passes before the love of God,
and because we love him first, therefore he loves us: But this is not the
beginning of love that is meant here: God begins the love, and then we love
him: Thereafter he meets us with love: God loves us ay first: when we were
his enemies he loved us: he loved us ere ever we were, or had any being: and
because he loved us, he chose us. In this stands love, faith John, 1. Epist.
Chap. 4. verse. 10. not that we loved him first, but that he loved us first:
to kythe this, he sent his only begotten Son, to be a propitiation for our
sins. So God begins first to love us, ere ever we begin to love him. Paul
says, Romans 5. The love of God must be shed abroad in our hearts, and the holy
Spirit must testify unto us of that favor that God has till us: and he must
water our dry hearts with a sense of that love: and then when the Lord
lets us see that he loves us, and has assured us of the remission of our
sins, by the death of Christ: then we begin to meet him with love. So, the
love we have to God, is nothing, but like a little spring of water, flowing
from that great Fountain of his love. Now when the Lord sees us begin to
love him in some measure; we begin not to love him so soon, but as he began
to love us; he comes about, and compasses our love. He is ever the first
lover, and the last. There is none heart able to comprehend the love of the
Lord: The love of the Lord to his own, is endless. Paul says to the
Ephesians, Chap. 3. verse. 18. Ye being rooted and grounded upon the love of
God, (there is our root, and our foundation we stand upon) ye may be able to
comprehend with all the Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height of that love. The love of God is infinite. The heart will feel the
love of God: But the heart of the sinner cannot comprehend it in full measure.
But to speak of our love, it is very sober, it is nothing to speak of: and
except God meet this sponke of love continually with that passing love, that
sponke, would soon be quenched: except he continued his grace upon us, our
love would soon vanish away. We may find this all by experience: For when
God has heaped his benefits upon us, we meet him not aye with love: but
our love is like to die and euanish out of our hearts. When God has given a
benefit, who is it that at the recept of it has his heart drawn to God?
When thou have eaten, and drunken, and slept, have thou thine heart drawn to
God? The world forgets God, when it has gotten the benefits of God. In
a word: Our love is so small and weak, that albeit he preasse to intertaine
it, it is like to die, and dwine away. It should not be so: For it will not
be well with them, and they were Kings, Lords, or Earls, when they get
the benefits of GOD, who will not acknowledge him for them. And think once
of the love of GOD, thou shall not love him so soon, but thou shall find that
love of GOD in thine heart. Preasse to love the LORD, and he shall strive to
love thee, and shall not rest to love thee, till he glorify thee in the
Heavens.

He adds to, and he says, Not only shall the Father love him, but the
Son shall love him also. The love of the Father and of the Son is inseperable:
whom the Father loves, the Son loves: and on the contrary, whom the Father
hates, the Son hates also. So, and thou would have the love of the
Father, have the love of the Son. Howbeit these two loves be set down as
sundry loves, as though the Father had one love, and the Son another love, as
we see amongst men, it is not so with the Father of Heaven, and with the Son
of God. As there is but one essence of the Father, and of the Son, and one
Majesty: and as there is but one power, and justice, and wisdom; so there is
but one and that self same love of the Father, and of the Son: and that same
love which is the Sons, is also the Fathers: the nature of God is love: if
there be but one nature of the Father, and of the Son, it must therefore
follow, there is but one love of the Father, and of the Son. How then get
we the sense and feeling of this love of God? Experience tells us, that all
the sense of love that is in the Father, is all through the Son. Never man yet
got a sight or sense of the love of the Father, but by the Son. He who never
saw the Lord Jesus, saw never the love of God, because he is the splendour of
his glory, and the image of the invisible God. The Jews may strive to see the
Father, but never shall they see him, till they turn them to the Son. What
man is he that ever felt the love of God without Christ? And what dow a sinner
without a sense of love and mercy? Look if it will not pass thy power to have
any sense of the love of God, without Jesus Christ: but when the heart is
drawn to look to him by faith in Christ, then thou shall get such a
sweetness, rest, and joy, as cannot be uttered. What means this? It means,
that the mercy that is laid up for sinners, it is laid up in Christ. So, let
us address our selves to Christ, and through him we shall have access to the
deepnesse of that grace in God. That then is the vantage they shall get who
loves him, to wit, they shall be met with a twofold love.

Now lest they should think this love but fectlesse, as is the love of the
creature, he tells them what fruit shall come to them there through: If the
Father shall love you, and I, then I shall show mine own self to you: I shall
give you mine own presence. So there is the profit that redoundeth of the love
of the Father, and of the Son: Whateuer they be, that the Lord Jesus loves,
they shall see him by his holy Spirit, howbeit he be in the Heavens. Men will
think this a matter of no great importance, but it is the happiest thing in
the world, though senseless sinners think nothing of it, and count it of
none importance. It is true, they who know not what sin means, they who
have a sleeping conscience, will make a little account of it, and give them the
sight of the world, they shall never desire to see Jesus Christ: but the
joyfullest sight that ever a ladened and wearied sinner got, who seeks him in
any measure, is the sight of Jesus Christ: I shall make a supposition to you:
If there were a man condemned to die, what would he desire so earnestly, as to
get a merciful sight of the Prince? Nothing: for he would have hope of life.
Now, what is the estate of us all by nature? Paul tells us it in a word: We
are but dead, and we are all concluded under sin and damnation. And what is
it to die that death eternal? Paul tells us, Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is
manifest against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, from the
Heaven. The sinner thinks he is free, when he says, and does mischief:
but he is captive to death and damnation: and our only deliverance there from,
stands in that merciful presence of the Lord Jesus, by faith in our souls.
Thou shall die that death everlastingly in Hell, and thou get not a sight of
Jesus Christ. Therefore let us all strive to see out own filthiness: the
fairest of us all, is filthy: we are all but rotten stocks* meet for
nothing, but to be casten into Hell. The first degree till happiness, to a
sinner, is to feel the sense of his own misery: A sick body, who feels not
the sickness, is in most danger: A sinner, that lies under sin, and feels
it not, is most miserable: but a sinner, that feels sin, and groneth under
the burden of it, gets a gracious sight: A sad sinner, gets the sight of
the Lord Jesus his deliverer. David was glorious, yet he counted nothing of
all, if he wanted the sight of the face of God. Lift up the light (says he,
Psalm. 4. verse. 6.7.) of thy countenance upon me, and give me a sight of thy
face, and I shall be more joyful in heart, than they will be, when their
Wheat and their Wine did abound. Therefore preasse to feel sin, that thou
may seek the presence of Jesus.

When the Lord spoke this, one of his Disciples entered in conference with him,
named Judas, not the traitor, but a kinsman of the Lord Jesus, who wrote that
Epistle of Jude which is now extant: he asks a question, Wherefore is it,
that thou will make thy self manifest to us, and not to the world? As he
would say, Is there not grace enough? is there not mercy sufficient in thee to
the whole world? Why art thou then so sparing of it, that so many die without
faith? Is there not grace enough in Jesus Christ, to suffice a thousand worlds?
Why will then God make a choice? See the maruelling of the world: Men
considering there is so great grace and mercy in Jesus Christ, as may save a
thousand worlds, they say, Why is it that so few are saved in the world?
The Lord is not careful to answer the question, because it was more curious
than profitable. The world wondereth at the same this day: but there is none
occasion of wonder. It was no wonder that God in his Justice should cast all
men into Hell: but the wonder is, that God is so merciful to miserable
mankind, that he should send his only Son to die for any: And the Angels
marvel at this, and desire to look in into that mystery, 1. Pet. 1.12. And
this is the wondering of the godly, that ever they should get mercy. And this
was the wondering of Paul. Wonder and thou get Christ: thou have cause to
wonder, that ever he should have saved thee. Paul, Romans chap. 9. verse. 19.
where he speaks of the eternal election, and the eternal reprobation, he
says, I hated Esau, and I loved Iaakob, before the foundation of the world.
The reason of man comes in, and says, Then God is unjust: what was in
Iaakob, more than in Esau? There is our reason we make. No, hold thy tongue,
says the Apostle, It was the will of God: he gives not another cause: on
whom he will, he shows mercy, and whom he will he casts off.

Our Lesson is, Whether in time, after men be come into the world, it
pleases God to give his presence to some, and to deny his presence to some
other: We should not be curious in this, but glorify God in his mercy, to us,
who have found the presence of the Lord Jesus, and in his justice toward the
wicked. Or, whether thou go higher, and consider his election and
reprobation, from all eternity. Be not curious to inquire, or to reason, but
knowing that it was the will of God, say, Blessed be thy will, O Lord, thou
made the creature, glorify thy self in the creature. Reason not with him, but
count all that he does just: and thou who can count reverently of God,
thou shall reign with him. The reprobate commonly chideth with God, and is
curious in these things: But as for the regenerate man, he reuerenceth the
will of God, and gives him all honor, and glory, in all his works,
whether from all eternity, or in time, albeit he perceive not evident causes
thereof. Therefore speak thou reverently of thy God, and think reverently of
hi^, that thou with him may reign in glory.

Now to go forward. In the words following he answers Judas: and mark well,
he will not give a direct answer to the question: but leaving to answer to
that curiosity, he follows forth his exhortation, and says, He who will
love me, will keep my Commandments. Least that should seem a fectlesse
thing to keep his Commandments, he says, J shall love him: and least this
should seem fectlesse, he says, The Father shall love him, and I, and the
Father, will come, and dwell with him. This all was exponed in effect already.
The Lord he gives not an answer to this curious question. Hereby he learneth
us, that we have nothing ado to be curious in questions, in searching out the
secret will of God. It is over presumptuous a thing to us to inquire that which
is not communicated to the Angels: they will not get leave to sit on his
secret counsel. Do as he commands thee to do: ask not, why he bids
thee.

To come to the purpose we have in hand: We should not be so curious to
ask, why will not the Lord save the world? as to enter into the way of
salvation our selves, and to see that we keep his Commandments, and love
him, that he may love us: and loving us, he may come, and abide with us: and
that not for a short space, but for ever. We should enter into the way to get
his presence. Christian Religion stands not so much in curiosity, or in
speeches, as in the sense of the heart, and in a practicing of that love of the
heart, in the life and conversation. The Apostle Paul, in the fourth Chap. to
the Ephesians. verse. 22.24. tells us, what it is to learn Christ, even to put
off the old man, and to put on the new man. This for the answer. Yet he
insisteth in that, that they should keep his Commandment: No, it cannot be
preached enough to keep the Commandment of Christ, because our nature is so
backward. And as before he pointed out the man who loved him, so now he
points out the man who loves him not: and that is he who keeps not his
Command and blessed word, that he has given for our weal. Who is it then who
loves him not? he who keeps not his Commandes. Mark, when ye see a man
taking pleasure to displease God, and leading a life directly contrary to the
will of God; point out that man, and say, This is a man who hates God in his
heart. Judge not of a man by his tongue and speeches: for oftentimes he who
does vvorst, speaks best. Ask at an hypocrite, if he be a Christian or
not? he will be angry with you, because he not seeing himself, thinks
himself as good as any other: (It is an easy thing to the tongue to cloak
the filth of the heart of the hypocrite.) And what will his hand be doing
then? It will be uttering it self in a filthy life. So take not up the
disposition of the heart of man or woman by the tongue, but by the hand: for
the hand will say to the tongue, Tongue, thou lie. John, 1. Epist. Chap. 2.
Verse. 4. If any say, I know God, and keep not his Command, he is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. And again, Chap. 4. Verse. 20. If any man say, I love
God, and hates his brother, he is but a liar. Who is it that controlleth the
tongue? and testifies before the world, that the heart is but false? It is the
hand, and the work: the tongue is but a cloak of falsenesse. Mark a
faithful man by his h^nde, and not by his tongue. Our Lord says, in the
seventh Chap. of Matthew. and the eighteenth verse. It is impossible that an evil
Tree can bring forth good fruit.

Yet he insisteth in this matter, for he is very earnest to recommende this
obedience to his Disciples, and to us all: and he furnishes the last argument
whereby they should be moved to keep his Commandment: and he leads them unto
that Fountain of all his words, which was that glorious Majesty of his
Father: The word, says he, which ye hear, is not mine, but the Fathers
which sent me. Would ye have the ground and fountain of all faith? of all
obedience? of all well-doing? and of all security in this life? The ground of
all, is the only mouth of the Father. So that when a man understands that
word that he should believe into, it is not the word of man, but that Verity
that flows from the mouth of the Majesty of God: then the heart gripeth unto
it, and belieueth: then the hand executes it: then there follows obedience:
But when the heart is not persuaded, that the word flows from that mouth of
God, but from man, then the heart will draw abacke, it cannot believe, and the
life will not follow it.

Then Christ learneth us here, If we would have the people believing, and
obeying his word to draw their ears to hear the Lord speaking, and then the
hearts of the faithful will receive it with joye, and practice it. Away with
all the words of men, of all creatures, of all Angels: they cannot be a
solid ground to our faith: neither can the authoritv of the Kirk be a
ground to our faith, albeit the foolish Papists affirm, that the cause
wherefore we believe the Scripture, is, because the Kirk says, it is the
word of God: for except the Scripture bare witness of the self, that it were
of God, and the word of God, truly the authority of the Kirk could never
make us believe, nor persuade us the same: For the ground of our faith must be
the voice and testimony of God himself speaking to us. Only this word of the
Old and New Testament, wherein God himself speaks, is able to establish
our faith.

The Lord when he has exhorted them, perceiving that his word took not
that effect in the hearts of his Disciples that it should have done,
notwithstanding all his gracious speaking (for he knew their hearts) he meets
this, and he says, J have spoken these things being present with you: And
howbeit they be not so effectual in you for the present, be not discouraged:
for when I shall pass to the Heaven, the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my Name, shall teach you all things, and he
shall call these words to your remembrance, which J have told you. We may
learn here first the word has none effect in the heart, without the Spirit
accompany it. Let it be the word of God, and flow out of the mouth of God,
yet and he concur not with the word by his Spirit, the word shall work none
effect in the heart.

There are two Doctors who teach us: one Doctor outward to the ear, and
another inward, that is, the Spirit, who mollifieth the heart: Let the
outward Doctor sound never so long in the ear, if the inward concur not,
the word shall do no good: And except that Spirit open the eye of the soul
to see, and open the heart, as he opened the heart of Lydia, ( Act. Chap. 16.
verse. 14.) to receive that seed of the word, the heart shall be as a closed
Book, and harder than it was of before. Mark another thing: The Spirit of the
Lord Jesus will not accompany the word at all times, no, not in the hearts of
the faithful themselves: The Apostles were a proof of this: How much spoke
the Lord to them when he was in the world? and how little effect took it in
them, till he went to the Heavens? In the 29. chap. of Esaias. verse. 11. ye
read, the word of the Lord is like a closed book to the unfaithful. Now this
is true likewise, the word of God to the godly sometimes is like a closed
book: and they will have such a hardness at times, that they will have no
sense of it; not to endure them, but to humble them. And if ever there was
ma^ter of humiliation, here it is, that when God speaks, thou will stand
up, and not regard him, and receive no fruit nor consolation of it.

Upon this rises the Lesson to us all, that the Lord Jesus gave unto his
Disciples, Howbeit at sometimes we will find an evil disposition of the
soul, a deafness, a blindness, and senselessness, Take this consolation, Be
not discouraged altogether: Let not the Minister leave off to preach, and let
not the people leave off to hear: but let ever the s^ede be sown, and let
ever the heart receive the seed, and hold ever up the ear: and in despite of
thine heart, when thine heart would loathe it, ever hear, and strive to hold
up thine ears, and abide in patience, till the Lord send better. Peter, in his
first Epist. chap. 1. verse. 23. he calls the seed of the word an immortal
seed. It will never die: it may be choked, and holden down: It can no more
die, says Peter, than God can die. So of necessity, in the end, when it shall
please God to waken that word, by his holy Spirit in the heart, then it shall
afford solid joy and consolation till us: these sentences shall be called to our
remembrance, which we heard before without fruit and edification. We have
found this in experience, when man or woman has most ado in affliction, this
same very Comforter will come to the heart, and renew the remembrance, and will
cause them to have a joy in that word which they heard before with deaf ears.
And this is true, that at the last he shall comfort his own with that word
which they heard with deaf ears: for the word cannot pass away without
some effect. He says, The holy Spirit shall teach them all things. We know,
he who teaches, is called a Teacher: yet when he says, The holy Spirit shall
teach, he calls him not a Teacher, but a Comforter, because al his doctrine
tends to consolation. There is no comfortable doctrine, but that doctrine of
the holy Spirit inwardly working in the soul. We will say, Men will teach
comfortable doctrine: but all the comfortable doctrine we hear, proceeds of
this, that the holy Spirit accompanies their doctrine, and works comfort
inwardly. If thou have any consolation inwardly by teaching, thou may
rejoice, and be assured, that thou have a glorious Doctor, even the third
person of the Trinity, in thine heart, There is no consolation in the outward
Teacher, without him, whom the Father shall send in my Name. The Father
sends the holy Spirit in the Name of the Son, and sends that Spirit by
his Son, as Mediator. The Spirit and all his graces, flows till us from
the Father, but mediatelie through the Son, as a mediate person. There
comes not a grace till us, but through the Son. All power is given to him,
and through him immediately all joye is conuoyed to the creature. The Jews and
Paganes pass over this, and think to climb up to God the Father without the
Messiah: but they shall never see him: for the God of Heaven has placed in
him, as in a storehouse, all grace, which he shall bestow upon the world: as
Justice, Mercy, Sanctification, Joy, Peace, and tranquillity of Conscience: and
he has bought them by no less price, than by his Blood: they are all bought
by the blood of the immaculate Lamb of God. Thou who have gotten a sponke of
that grace* thou have gotten a greater grace, than if thou had gotten all the
Kingdoms of the world.

But what shall he teach you? All things: Not all the fantasies of men, not the
inventions of the Pope, but all things J have told you. The Lord be merciful
to this world, which wandereth after the inventions of men: And blessed art
thou who restest upon that word which the Spirit has told. Mark: has the
word preached none effect, but by the Spirit conuoying it? Not: Even so on
the other part, the Spirit will teach nothing, but that which has come out of
the mouth of Jesus Christ. Be not deceived: What call I the word of Christ?
That is the word of Christ, that ^he Prophets spoke of old, as Peter
testifies: for the Prophets spoke by the Spirit of Christ. Next, I call the
word of Christ, that which he spoke himself in the world. Thirdly, that which
the Apostles spoke. Last, I call the word of God, the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, which the Lord has registrated in his mercy: And take it
away, miserable darkness shall come upon the world: Let it stand, give it
the own power, it shall shine like light unto the world. They will say, it
has not all that Christ spoke, and that the Apostles spoke. I answer, The
Lord Jesus spoke nothing, nor his Apostles spoke nothing, but all in effect is
contained in this written word. There is not a word that the Spirit of Jesus
shall speak unto thy soul, but only that which is registrated in the Old
and New Testament. That Truth shall stand inspite of the world. This place
therefore confuteth all them that are enemies to the Scriptures. Mahomet began,
and said, the Scripture was imperfect: The Pope brought in men's Traditions, to
supply the wants of the Scriptures. Others, as the Anabaptists, awaite on that
revelation of the Spirit, besides that revelation of Jesus Christ in his word:
But inspite of them, they shall get none other revelation: nor the Spirit shall
accompany no word but that which Jesus has spoken, and left in register. Now,
Lord if we, with whom he has let his light remain, should praise him! The
Lord accompany his word with the presence of his Spirit, that Comforter, in
our souls inwardly, till his coming in the Clouds, and we see him face to
face: To whom be praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

THE EIGHT LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xiiii. VERSE. 27.28.29.30.31. 27 Peace J leave with you: my peace I
give unto you: not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let not your heart be
troubled, nor fear.

28 Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and will come unto you.
Jf ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because J said, I go unto the
Father: for the Father is greater than I.

29 And now I have spoken unto you, before it come; that when it is come to
pass, ye might believe.

30 Hereafter will J not speak many things unto you: for the prince of this
world comes, and has naught in me.

31 But it is, that the world may know, that I love my Father: and as the
Father has commanded me, so I do. Arise, let us go hence.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, Brethren, Christ began to comfort his
Disciples against the time he was to with-drawe his bodily presence from them:
and he continued a while in comforting them: and then after he begins to
exhort them, First, to believe in him: and next, to obedience to keep his
Commandments: and he insisted chiefly in this, That they should keep the
word he spoke unto them in his absence. Now in the beginning of these words
we have read, the Lord returns again to that consolation that he began
with: to wit, That they should not be troubled in his absence. The argu^ent is
taken from that peace he leaves with them: Seeing I leave peace with you,
what need ye to be troubled? Weigh the words, for they are weighty, Peace I
leave you, says the Lord: No question he alludeth to that common fashion of
salutation that was used amongst the Iewest in their meetinges and departinges,
wherein they wished peace one to another: by the which word they understood all
kind of prosperity, in things earthly and heavenly. So the Lord would say, I
am now to depart from you, but I leave something behind me to you, to wit, my
blessing and prosperity for ever. Now least it should have been thought, that
he left peace unto them no other ways, than the men of this world use to do,
he subjoyneth, My peace I give you. There is an emphasis in these words, My
peace, and I give you it: As the Lord would say, Men may well wish peace to
men: but it lies in no man's hands to give peace: there is no Angel in Heaven
able to give peace: but I, says the Lord, shall give you it: I am not only,
says the Lord, a wisher, but a giver: There is no man able to give his own
peace, because no man has peace to give: Men may wish peace from God, as to
the Philipp. 4.7. It is called the peace of God. None of the Apostles will say,
My peace: but the peace of God: and therefore he is called the God of peace,
Romans 16.20. The Lord Jesus has peace to give, as the Father has peace: Yea,
more, he would signify by this peace, not a common sort of peace, but an
inward peace of conscience, the rest to the soul of a sinner, that peace that
passes all understanding, Philipp. Chap. 4. Verse. 7. The rest of the soul, as
ye may read in Matthewes Gospel, Chap. 11. Verse. 29. where Christ says. Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you, and ye shall
find rest to your souls. Take this peace away, there is no rest to the soul.
This peace is called Christ's peace, because it flows from him immediately
till us, that we may have a good conscience, that we may have assurance of the
remission of our sins: for herein stands chiefelv a good conscience, when
it says, thy sins are freely forgiven thee. We know this good conscience
stands in faith through the blood of CHRIST. Take away the blood of CHRIST,
there is no conscience that is good. Heb. 9.14. The blood of Christ purges our
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God: that is, it purges us
from our sins. So ye see this, that all the joy of the soul flows from the
blood of Christ Jesus: and therefore worthily he calls it his peace, because
it comes through his blood: without the which peace, there is no rest,
howbeit ye had all the peace of all the Princes of the world: Let the
Traitors have the Kings peace, and let them want this peace; let them pass
as they will, they have no peace.

Yet he insisteth the third time, and subjoyneth, Not as the worl^e gives,
give I it. He marketh the manner of the giving, and makes an exposition of the
giving of it. Worldly men will take upon them to give peace, but the worlds
peace is but for a fashion: the mouth will wish peace, and the heart will
curse: this is the peace of the world: That peace of the world is so fectlesse,
that scarcely will a man wish that peace from his heart. As the Lord would
say, I speak not only with my mouth, but from mine heart I wish it, and I
shall effectuate it indeed. A man may wish well, but it wants effect. Ye
see now this three-folde repetition. Will ye weigh the words, ye shall find
a wonderful intier love, and unspeakable heartinesse, uttered by the Lord in
his Farewell. These words let us see, that he not only leaves peace and love
behind him, but his very heart. Besides all the grace we have of Jesus
Christ, they who love Christ, they have his heart. Look how tenderly he loves
faithful men: howbeit he be in the Heaven, yet he leaves them his very
heart, and inward affection: there is an unspeakable love.

Now when he has taken his goodnight, he concludes, Seeing I have left you
peace, and I give you it, what then needs you to be troubled? Mark then
this conclusion: Where the peace of the Lord is not, there the soul of man
has no rest, there is nothing but trouble and grief there. It is true, great
sinners, who will have no part of Jesus Christ, will have some kind of rest,
and who will be so merry as they? (Bloody murderers, wicked blasphemers, and
vile adulterers, will by appearance have peace.) But, Brethren, this is but a
false peace* and assuredly it is better a thousand times, to have an unquiet
and restless soul, than to have a secure life: for a senseless carnal
security, is a sure token of a sudden judgment to come* Paul, in his first
Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chap. 5. Verse. 3. says, When they say, there is
peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the travel
upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. The loune will bid cloze
the yates, and bid watch: let him bid as he will, the judgment of God shall
not pass by him, and his yates shall not hold out the wrath of God, but it
shall come on him, as the pain comes on a woman in the time of her birth.
So, in one word, they who want this peace, they have no peace: No peace to
the wicked, Isai. 57. By the contrary, when the Lord Jesus gives peace to the
heart of a sinful man or woman, whose heart is troubled, then the heart of a
sinner has peace. I put the case, that a man were in great danger, even at
deaths door, yea, and he were in the fire; and the Lord Jesus give him his
peace, and say, I give thee my peace, then the soul shall be in exceeding
joye. Tyrants have marueiled, that the Martyrs who suffered for Jesus, should
have had such a joye as they had. So, if the Lord Jesus will once say, My peace
I give you, then the soul will rest on him with such a joye as is
unspeakable. So the Apostles felt this indeed. In one word, the peace of
Jesus Christ guardeth the soul, and makes it sure: as Paul says to the
Philipp. Cha. 4. Verse. 7. Thus far now has the Lord comforted his Disciples.

Now in the next Verse he begins to speak more sharply, and he, as it
were, finds fault with them, that they loved him not well enough: and they
uttered it, in that they were so grieved and displeased at his departure. This
form that the Lord uses, teaches us this, that in comforting of heavy
hearted sinners, (Who should be comforted, but the heavy hearted?) thou use
gentle reproves: for the heart that is heavy and sad, will hardly take
consolation, but will delight in sadness. Look how ye shall comfort them:
not to hold up the heart aye with comfort: but reprove it with some piece of
sharpness, as it were. So David in the 42. Psalm. verse. 11. when he finds
himself carried away with a vehement affection of sorrow, and over far
casten down in his exile, he says, Why art thou casten down, my soul? and
why art thou disquieted within me? vvait on God, for I will yet give him
thanks, etc. So we should press down the affection with a reproof, as the
Lord does here. He lays down the ground of his reproof, I told you, J
would go away, and I told you, I would come again in my Spirit: and now I am
to depart to my Father. Now, he says, ye love me not, because ye rejoice not
that I am to go to glory with my Father: for my Father is greater than I:
that is, I go to be partaker of that glory which the Father has* and when as
ye are sad at my departure, ye utter that ye envy my glory. Mark the words:
Heretics who a^leadged that Christ was a God, but created in time, and not
equal with the Father. Though they got a great vantage out of this place, The
Father is greater than J: The Fathers of old exponed this place well, That it
was to be understood of the humane nature, and not of the divine. Yet there is
another exposition of this, that is, That this place is not so much to be
understood of the nature of Christ, as of his office: The Godhead of the Lord
Jesus, the Son, being equal with the Father, takes an office upon him, by
the which he becomes inferior to the Father: to wit, he becomes Mediator:
The office stands in this, He takes upon him the flesh of a servant. Next,
he becomes obedient, yea, even to the death of the Cross, in that nature: so
in respect of this office, he makes himself inferior to the Father. By this
we must not gather, that he was inferior to the Father in person, Majesty, or
essence; howbeit in office he was unequal and inferior to the Father: For as
that reverent Father Cyrillus says, Missio and obedientia non tollunt
aequalitatem potentiae, and essentiae. Therefore ye see, the Heretics, as
namely, Arrius, out of this place have no ground for that blasphemous heresy.
But consider yet more narrowly what the Lord says, And ye loved me, ye would
have rejoiced, in that I said, J would depart. As he would say, The very words
that ye turn to your discomfort and sorrow, should have been matter of joy and
comfort. There is never a word that the Lord speaks to his own, no, never
one, but in them all is matter of joye: howbeit the words will seem sharp,
yet all the words of the Lord that he speaks to his, tend to their joye and
consolation: and all they that love the Lord Jesus, should construct all the
deeds and words of the Lord to their comfort: let him take away worldly riches,
honor, health, friends, life it self, etc. all should work comfort to them.
But, brethren, we are so corrupt and blind by nature, that we see not the Lords
purpose, and what he is doing to us: and we make the words of the Lord, wherein
we should take pleasure and joy, to be matter of displeasure, I speak not this,
to take away sense of the sharpness of the Lord, and to commend Sto^ke
senslesnes: but herin we fail, that sadness is without joy and co^solatio^. Now
the Lord craves this, that with bitterness we should taste sweetness: indeed
heaviness is the comliest thing that can be in a Christian, and sadness becomes
a sinner well: but in the mean time there should be joy in the soul. 1. These.
5.16. Rejoice evermore. He finds no fault with them, that they were sad, but
because they would receive no comfort. He says, Jf ye loved me, ye would
rejoice, because I said, I go to the Father* One who loves another truly, will
rejoice in the weal of the other. Love bringes a rejoicing: he or she that
loves Christ, that gets greatest joy in the heart, as envy eats up the heart of
man or woman, in whom it is: one who loves another, will rejoice at the good
estate of the other, at his prosperity, riches and honor: one who loves the
Lord Jesus well, rejoices to see him glorified: and that should be our joy to
see the Lord Jesus glorified, and his kingdom advanced: and cursed be thou who
laughs at the down-throwing of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus: no, they who
loves God, will curse all their kin: and as he says here himself, they who
love the Lord Jesus, their delight shall be to see him glorified. The Apostles
not taking such joy as they oght, to see him glorified, their love was
preposterous: no doubt they loved him intierly, Peter loved him, John loved
him; and the rest loved him; yet the Lord shows that their love was with a
great ignorance, and the flesh was mixed with it, it was not sincere. So let us
tak heed to our love: not only to that love we bear to Christ, but even to
men, man to wife, parents to children, we should take heed that it be a true
love, and not a preposterous love: I call it not a true love, that has nothing
but sadness with it for the death of another: when a Christian goes to joy, and
when we are sad for them, then we utter an envy in our hearts of their glory.
Indeed we should not want natural affection: and we may have displeasure
for the want of our brother: but look that displeasure be not for thy
brothers joye, and that he is participant of that glory with Christ, and the
hope of that Resurrection. The remembrance of the assembling of the Saints of
God, to meet their Head in the Clouds, should cause thee rejoice. The Lord
lift up our hearts to the Heaven from this earth, whereon we are so fixed: and
make us to wait continually for that blessed assembly of the Saints; that
when he comes in the clouds, we may be carried to remain with him in joy
for ever.

Now in the words following the Lord sets down the end of his speaking to
his Disciples, and chiefly of this, that he forewarneth them that he was to
depart. Here is the chief end, That they should belieu^ in him, that he was
that promised Messiah, the Son of God: and when they should see the
accomplishment of all his sayings, that they should believe. The whole word of
God leads us to this, that men should believe in Jesus Christ, there is not a
word spoken in the Scripture, but it leads us to Christ, whether the Lord speak
of things to come, as in the Prophets, or of things done, as in the Evangels,
all tends to this, to lead us to Jesus Christ, to believe in him: They who
get not this end in the word, they get no fruit of the word. He says not,
These things I told you before the hand, that ye should believe: But he
adds, I have told you them before the hand, that when they come to pass* ye
should believe. The perfection of faith stands not in foretelling, but in
accomplishment. It is true, the fore-speaking of the things of Christ to come,
has force to work faith in the hearts of men and women: All the godly men
and women before Christ, had nothing but foretelling of Christ, that he was
to come into the world: and upon these fore-tellings they believed. So the
predictions of Christ in all time wrought faith in the hearts of the Fathers
of old: But faith then is confirmed and made stronger, when the event
answers to the prediction: And therefore we who now live, have greater
matter of faith and consolation, than they had who lived under the Law: they
had but the predictions of Christ, but we now under the Gospel, have not only
the predictions, but also the accomplishment of all that was spokon and
foretold by the Prophets: And therefore Christ comparing us to the people of
old, ( Luke, 10.23.) says, Blessed are the eyes that see these things which
ye see: I say to you, Many Kings and Prophets desired to see these things that
ye see, and yet saw them not. And again, Abraham longed to see my days, John,
8.16. In very deed, we have a great blessing, who are come into the world
since Christ came: But here is the fault, We cannot apprehend that joye and
happiness. The Apostle considering this, he says, Rejoice continually, 1.
Thessal. 5.16. We never consider the gra^e which we have under the Gospel.

When he has set down this end, the Lord appearingly concludes this
conference with his Disciples: Hereafter I will not speak may things to you:
And he gives the reason: for why? The Prince of this world comes: My
speech is cut off, because the Devil is come against me, with all his force:
and he is come like a Burrio, to execute that which the Father ordained to be
done from all eternity. Mark: as the hour drew near, when the Lord should
have laid down his life for the world; so the Devils drew near, who were
appointed to execute that turn: and they began to assault him very busily: and
assault him not only by the wicked instruments, as Judas, Pilate, and the
Jews, but the Devil, and all the whole force of Hell, in their own persons,
rushed out upon Christ, and especially when the Lord Jesus hung upon the
Cross: at that time chiefelie he had his combat with the Devils Be not
deceived, He suffered not only that pain in body, and wrath of his Father;
but at that instant he had a battle with all the Devils in Hell, for they
thought to have wracked him then, and to have triumphed over him, and by his
wrack, to have wracked all men, and to have disgraced the glory of God: for in
Jesus Christ, is all the glory of God, and all salvation of man. Paul in the
second to the Coloss. Verse. 15. says, That Christ upon the Cross triumphed
over the powers of Hell, and made an open show of them: and this imports,
that they rushed on him on the Cross, that they might overcome him. Christ
fights with all the powers of Hell on the Cross, and takes all the power
from them, and openly in the sight of the world he leads them captive,
after the manner of a victorious Conqueror. Yet ere we leave this, we see
another thing: As the hour drew near, as the Devils drew near, with the
hour of Jesus Christ, What does he? Goes he to eschew them? Goes he out
of Jerusalem, as he did of before? Goes he to hide himself? No, no: But as
the hour drew near, and as the Devils drew near, so the Lord Jesus meets
death, and the Devil, and draws near to them, and willingly puts
himself into their hands, knowing it was the will of his Father, He is as
ready to die, and offer himself, and put himself into their hands, as they
were bent to seek him. This is our lesson: When the Lord gives us tokens,
that Death is at hand, as Age, sickness or afflictions: for they are summondes
to warn us: What should we do? Should we abhor from it? No, go
forward, and be ready to embrace death: go to him, and meet him, and take
a gripe of him: as he imbra^eth thee, so embrace thou him: for death is
nothing else, but a passage to joye: when thou abhorrest death, thou abhorrest
that port to glory, and eternal life.

Now I go forward: It might have been said by his Disciples, What? Has the
Devil such a power over thee? Art thou so vanquished by him, that thou must
break of speech? The Lord meets this, and says, He has naught in me: That
is, For all his coming against me, he ha^h no power or jurisdiction over me:
think not, that the prince of this world has ought over me: the prince of
this world, or rather the tyrant with his tyranny comes in by sin: Sin
enters not so soon, but as soon he began to reign: and where sin is,
there is his power: But would the Lord say, in me he shall find no matter of
his kingdom, therefore he has no power over me. Another general: It is not
seemly that the inferior should have power over the Superio^: But so it is, the
Lord Jesus is God, and the Devil is his inferior; therefore he has no power
over me. He assaileth him, because he had our burden upon him. Now mark one
thing: The holy Spirit in the Scripture, New and Old, where he speaks of the
suffering of Christ, he is very careful to note these circumstances, that
Christ suffered nothing but that which God decreed. In the Acts, 24. Chap. What
could they do to him, but that which thy counsel had decreed? Another: when
it comes to the execution of the decree, the Spirit makes God to be the
Agent, who decreed it. Look the eight Chapter to the Romans, He spared not
his own Son, but he gave him to the death. What was the Devil, but an
instrument in the hand of God? The holy Spirit tells us this also, that the
Lord Jesus suffered willingly: as willing was the Lord Jesus to suffer, as was
the Father to give him. John, 10. verse. 18. No man takes my life from me: I
have power to lay down my life, and to take up my life again. Gal. 1.2. Heb.
9. He offered himself. Wherefore is it that the suffering of Christ is set
down with these particular circumstances? The first reason is, The Spirit of
God will let us see, that in the suffering of Christ there is no disgracing of
the glory of God: indeed if he had suffered against Gods will, and his decree,
then God had been disgraced: but when we know it was not against Gods will,
there is no disgracing of the glory of God. Another is, If the Cross of Christ
had been against Christ's own will, it had been a great discomfort to men and
women, and had been a great offense to the world. Last, the willingness of
the Son to suffer, lets us see that the suffering of Jesus Christ, was
obedience to the Father. When a man does a thing willingly, because it is the
will of God, offers up his life willingly, and dies willingly, there is
obedience: But let him die ten thousand deaths, if he do it not willingly, it
is none obedience: I suppone that the Son of God had not suffered willingly,
we would have had no salvation: the obedience stands not only in suffering,
but in that he died so gladly, suffered so willingly, with such a love, to
power out his life for the world: as ye may read in the 53. Chap. of Esaias,
He was like a Lamb before the Shearers. So when we look to the death of
Christ, let us not look to his death so much, as to his patience and
willingness.

In the last verse the Lord sets down the end of his suffering, wherefore
he puts himself into the hands of the executers: I do this, that the
world may know, that I love the Father. This is the end: We see first in this
end, the ground of the obedience and suffering of Jesus Christ. What needed him
to be so obedient, and to deject himself so far? Ye may take it up in one
word: All this obedience proceeded of an unspeakable love he bare to the
Father: It is true, the love of the salvation of man moved the Lord to this
obedience also, no doubt: and this unspeakable love moved him to give his life
for them. But mark yet, this place lets us see, the chief ground of his
obedience was not the love of the world, but the love of the Father. Paul, 2.
Philipp. 5.6.7.8. speaking of the obedience of Jesus Christ, lets us see,
and points out that humiliation of Christ as proceeding of that love he bare
to the Father: Let that affection, says he, be in you, that was in Christ
Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God: but he manited himself, and made himself of no reputation, in taking
upon him the shape of a servant, and in that shape he became obedient to the
Father to the death of the Cross. That obedience then flowed from the love he
bare to the Father. Ye would think it a great matter to two kings, the one
of them as great as the other, if one would serve the other in a worldly
service, ye would think it a great love the one bare to the other: The Lord
Jesus being equal with the Father in glory, humbled himself to the Father.
What followed on this obedience? As he dejecteth himself through love to obey
the Father, so the Father loves him unspeakably. Paul (2. Philipp. verse.
9.10.11.) lets us see the effect of this love: he exalts him to a
wonderful sublimitie, and he gives him a Name above all the names of the
world, That at the Name of JESUS, all things in Heaven, and in Earth, and
under the Earth, should bow their knee: or else, if they will not bow, they
should be broken.

Now, Brethren, to draw this example to our selves, we have this lesson to
learn: What is the ground of true humility? (I speak not of fained
humility, but of true lowliness, which is the best virtue in a Christian man:
Learn of me, says Christ, that I am humble and lowly in heart, Matthew.
11.29.) not only of obedience to Superiors: for Christ bids thee be
obedient and serviceable, not only to Superiors and equals, but to inferiors,
and each one to another. What is the ground of this humility? Even the love of
the heart: and a man have true love in the heart, he will not care how lowly
he be in the world. So when ye see a sober Christian, point him out, and say,
There is a loving hearted Christian. Would ye know what follows on
humility* and lowliness? Obedience. What follows upon obedience? They who
in love humble themselves, to exalt others, and obey them, shall find that God
will meet them with love, and exalt them. Wherein stands the band of love?
When every one prefers another to himself. Herein stands humility:
humility begins with love, and ends with love. By the contrary: What is
the ground of pride? A foolish self-love, when a man takes pleasure in his
own corruptions, and has a conceit of himself, and an hatred and disdaining
of others. Wherewith is it met? With a mutual hatred and disdain: That man
who is proud, stinketh both in Gods nose and man's: and as humility
intertaineth peace amongst men, so pride breaks the amity and love, and
rents the body of Christ: so that pride is the most unseemly thing in any man,
and it is a note of them who perteine not to Christ. Strive ever to be like
Christ, in being humble: and have love in thine heart. But what is the chief
end of the suffering of Christ Jesus, and of his humiliation? The Lord sets it
down in these words, That the world may know that the Son loves the Father.
Indeed this is one end, yea, the chiefest which we should all consider. Another
is, that we may know, that Jesus Christ has loved us. Look in, through the
body of Christ into the heart: look not to the nails, and to the wounds of
his side, but to that heart of his: and chiefly to that infinite love that the
Son has borne to the Father. Thou may say, What advantage is it to me to
know that obedience of the Son to the Father, and that love? When thou see
that Son of God equal with the Father, how he humbled himself so lowly, that
no creature in Heaven, or in earth, Angel or man, ever humbled himself so as
the Son; It serves thee to this end, to learn thee who is a creature, and
who is but a servant, to humble thy self before God, and to glorify thy God:
And indeed, albeit there be many things to move us to humility, yet and a
man get not the sight of that humiliation of Jesus Christ, he shall never be
truly humbled. Paul, in his second Chap. to the Philipp. to stir us up to
humility, he brings in the example of the humility of the Son to the
Father. Ye will ask, Have we any profit of this, that we be humbled to the
Father? Have thou no profit in glorifying God? Never one served such a Master,
and never one got such a glory, as they shall get, who glorify God. Was Christ
exalted highly? Thou shall be also exalted. I ask then, Wherein stands thy
misery? and wherein stands thine happiness? There is the only joy that the
creature has: when it has humbled it self to the Father, it obeys him, it
glorifieth the great God the Creator: And herein stands the happiness of
man, even to have his heart loosed to glorify the Lord: The godly find this
in experience. And by the contrary, when the faithful soul is locked up, and
has no pleasure to glorify God for his graces, albeit it had never so great
abundance of all things in the world, yet it counts the self to be in great
misery. Paul ( Romans 7.) feeling this rebellion in him through the remains of
sin, cries out, Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death? Indeed if thou make rebellion to God, if thou had all the pleasures
in the world, thou art miserable. Felicity is, when the heart is loosed to
serve God: for the end of gifts, spiritual and temporal, is to glorify him:
and misery is, when the heart is locked up in hardness and rebellion to God. God
give us grace to see this, that we may be instant with God, to get o^r hearts
loosed* to glorify him; and so have that felicity which is only true felicity,
through Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, and the Spirit of grace, be all
praise, honor, and glory, for ever. Amen.

THE NINTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. XV. VERSE. 1.2.3.4.5.6. I Am that true Vine, and my Father is that
Husbandman.

2 Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away: and every one
that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

3 Now ye are clean, through the word which J have spoken unto you.

4 Abide in me, and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

5 I am that Vine: ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit: for without me can ye do nothing.

6 If a man abide not in me, he is casten forth as a branch, and withers:
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they burn.


WE heard already (Brethren) in the fourteenth Chapter of this Gospel, the
Lord, a little before his departure out of the world, his conference only with
his Disciples: and partly comfort them, partly exhorts them. Now in this
Chapter, and the next, he insisteth in that same purpose: partly exhorting,
partly comforting them ^^rst in this Chapter he exhorts his Disciples to
that union with him: Secondly, to that brotherly love: last, he returns to
that consolation begun in this Chapter, comforting them against the hatred and
persecution of the world. Before he come to the exhortation to that union
with him, he premitteth in the beginning of the Chapter a general doctrine,
wherein he denounces an heavy judgment, The cutting away of such members who
bring forth no fruit: and he promises an increase of grace to them who
would bring forth fruit: and so he prepares them to that union whereunto he
exhorts them. He sets down these grounds, as common both to the
denuntiation, and to the promises: First, that he himself is the true Vine
tree: Secondly, that the Father is an Husbandman. On this ground he deduceth a
judgment to those who will not bring forth fruit: and mercy to them who will
bring forth fruit. The Lord, when he was in the world, was wont to stand up
in the midst of the people, and with an high voice to point out the fullness
of grace that was in himself, and that served to life: and that by similitudes
and comparisons, taken from things earthly, serving to the comfort of this
life. Sometimes he says, I am that Bread of Life, as in the sixth Chap. of
this Gospel, Verse. 48. Sometimes he says, I am the Light of the world, as
in the eight Chap. verse. 12. Sometimes he says, J am the Way, the Truth, and
the Life, as in the 14. chap. verse. 6. The Lord then is the Bread, and the true
Bread, that feeds the soul to life everlasting: the Lord is the only Light,
that illuminateth the dead soul: the Lord is only that Way, that leads to
Life: the Lord is that Vine tree, which furnishes all sap, juice, and
sustentation, to all them who as branches are ingraffed in him: and take him
away, all men are dry, like a stick: and no man without him can bring forth
fruit, no more than a withered stick can bud out in flowers. In comparison of
other things, he is said to be the true Bread, the true Light, the true
Vine, etc. because he substantially and essentially is so: the creatures are
only so accidentally, and by way of participation. The second ground: My
Father is an Husbandman. The comparison betwixt the Father of our Lord Jesus,
and the husbandman, stands not in all points: the husbandman gives not the
sap and nourishment, or life to the Vine tree: the Vine tree of the own nature
has the sap within it: only the husbandman intertaineth the sap and life which
is in the tree: But this Husbandman, the Father, communicates with his Son,
the whole sap of life, which is himself. As the Father has life in himself,
so has he given to the Son to have life in himself. Ioh. 5.26. The Father
in that eternal generation communicates his life with his Son: but the
comparison stands in this, As the husbandman, in time of year, cutteth down
the unfruitful vine tree, and cherishes that which is fruitful; so the Father
of our Lord Jesus, dresseth his vine trees, cutteth away rotten members, and
purges the fruitful, that they may be more fruitful. Take up this ground
shortly: The Father of our Lord Jesus is such an husbandman, as never one was:
first he gives sap to his Son, and then through him all sap comes to all men
and women: all sap flows out of the Lord Jesus, which is the Vine tree, to
all his own children. Now we come to the denuntiation, Every branch that
brings not forth fruit in me, the Father will cut away: The promise is,
Every one who is ingraffed in me, and bears fruit, the Father will purge
them, so that they may be able to bring forth more fruit. We have to mark
what are these branches, and what is this fruit. By these branches I vndersand
the whole visible Kirkes in the world, whether they be ingraffed truly or not
in the Lord Jesus, whether they be corn or chaff, sheep or goats, true
Christians or hypocrites, they are called branches. By the fruit is understood
good works: It is as needful to them, who are ingraffed in the Lord Jesus, to
bring forth good works, as to the vine tree to bring forth wine berries, being
filled with sap. But for the farther clearing of this matter, we shall speak
something of this comparison: as the husbandman, who has a vineyard, will have
all his care set upon the vineyard, because it is both his pleasure, and his
profit: so the whole care of the Father is upon Jesus Christ his Son, for he is
his vine tree: the whole joy and glory of the Father is in the Son: all the
care the Father has, is in the Son, in him he acquisces, and is well pleased.
Next, if there be a vine tree in the vineyard that the husbandman loves well,
he will have all the branches numbered of that tree: he will not let them go out of
his eye. So there is not in all this world a servant of the Lord Jesus, but the
Father has them all numbered: they are all in his eyes. Ye remember in the
parable of the Marriage banquet ( Mat. 22.11.) it is said, when they were all
come in, the King comes in also, to view the banqu^t: what means this, but
the care of the Father, that he has of his branches, who are ingraffed in
Christ? The King is the Father of Heaven: he who is married, is the Son: and
they who are called, are the branches. The eye of the Father is upon all the
members, good and bad: yea, that hypocrit who wanted the wedding garment, was
soon seen by him. Let him be an hypocrit who will, king or beggar, the Lord
will point him out in his own time. Now last, the husbandman in the own time
will dress the vine tree: he takes away the unfruitful, and purges the
fruitful: Even so the Father of our Lord Jesus, goes to his vine tree, and
vieweth the branches, and in his own time will come with his snedding knife, and
will cut off the hypocrit: and he will purge the fruitful, and the next year
it will bring forth more fruit. The Father cutteth off hypocrites: and this we
have seen: And then again in the faithful he augments regeneration and
grace. Mark this Text well, and ye shall see the pleasandest vine tree that
ever was in the world, with the root, the body of the tree, the branches, and
the fruits budding forth in every branch: the root of this vine tree is the
Father, who is the Fountain of all life: the body of the vine tree is the Son,
the branches are men and women ingraffed by faith in the body: the fruit of the
tree is good works: the sap of life is in the Father, he is the ground of al
grace, and sendes this his sap to the body of the tree, the Son: and the Son
has all the grace that is in the root: and then the body of the tree sendes
sap to the branches: and then the branches being filled with sap, bring forth
fruit as necessarily, as a vine tree can bring forth fruit. So if ye would
take up the nature of these works, ye shall understand, that good works spring
not from flesh and blood, they come not from the power of men and women, and
from nature and free will. So foolish Papists will say, that men will do good
works of nature, and of free will: No, no, these works proceed not of nature:
no, there is not a good work, but it flows from that life which is in the
Father, and is communicated to the Son: there is not so much as a charitable,
or a good thought, but it flows from the life of God. So all the good we do,
is as fruits flowing from that root. And thou were not imped in Christ, and so
as a wild Olive, partaker of the sap of that true Olive, it would pass thy
power to think a good thought, and thou would do no more good, than a
withered stock can. Now mark this: When as it pleases the Lord to transport
us from that rotten root of Adam, and to set us in Jesus Christ, the second
Adam, then whereas before we brought forth but stinking fruit and dead
works, as the Apostle calls them: (all is but filth and stink, without the
life of God in Christ, let be all these works which are forbidden in the Law:
and it were a good work, he polluteth it, because he medleth with it, and
there be nothing but nature) being once ingraffed in Jesus Christ, then the
creature begins to draw out so fruitful sap, and so delicate, that all
the sap of the Vine tree is nothing in comparison thereof: And when we have
gotten of that sap, then the fruit comes out, and flows with a sweet
smelling savor: fra once the heart begin to suck of that life, the very
smelling of the life of Jesus Christ, will appear in the works, and in the
words. It is true indeed, and we may find it al, there is ever in all our
fruits, in all our deeds, and words that proceed out of our mouth, some
bitterness and sournesse in the best of us all: the cause is, howbeit we be
ingraffed in Christ, yet that old life abides intill us all: and so the fruit
we bring out as it has a savor of Christ, so it stinketh of the old man: the
best work that we bring out, is partly sweet, and partly sour, and the
word sauoureth of bitterness: but and we be highly displeased for the
bitterness, then we have this comfort, We may be assured, the Father is
purging us: and this hope, That when we shall be with Christ, our fruits shall
all savor of that life of God in Christ: and this should augment our joye.

Next, we see wha^ need we have even to be purged, and to make a perpetual
progress in regeneration: if the Father should leave off to cleanse the lively
branches that are in the Lord Jesus, as soon the liueliest should turn in
rottenness, and then the natural corruption should ouer-goe us, except he
were ever snedding us: and of lively members, we should become dead: All our
standing and perseverance is of him. Another thing: as impossible as it is that
the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ should leave off to purge the members of
Christ; even as impossible is it, that that member can fall away: if it were
possible that the Father should leave off his office, then it might be possible
that men should fall away. No, the Father can never leave off his office: and
they who are once ingraffed in Jesus Christ, shall never be cut off. It is a
false doctrine of the Papists, who say, that a man once sanctified, may become
unsanctified: it is an horrible blasphemy, and a lie against the holy Ghost.
The last thing I mark: Look how needful is it that the Father play the part
of an husbandman in purging; as needful it is that every branch grow in
holiness and sanctification: the Father cannot purge the branches in vain; but
as he purges the branches from their own nature, so the branches must bring
out berries: So if they who profess themselves to be Christians, make no
grouth, and never mend in holiness, it is a toke^, that the Father of our Lord
Jesus purges them not: and then they are not branches. So take heed. Men will
hunt greedily after honor, riches, and pleasure: but this is the thing thou
should chiefly strive to, That thou make much grouth in Jesus, and that
thou find thy soul in better disposition this year, than it was the last: that
thou may be a true member of Jesus Christ. This for the denunciation of the
sentence against the branches that bring forth no fruit, and the promise to
them that bring forth fruit.

These words might have moved his Disciples to be feared, and to have heavy
hearts: therefore the Lord, who saw all their cogitations, meets them, to
comfort them, (Howbeit he speak not to us, he comfort us by his holy
Spirit) and he lets them know that that denunciation perteined not to them,
because they were lively members: they were clean through the word which he
had spoken to them. Our lesson is, When thou hear a denunciation of
judgeme^t or promise of mercy, make ever application to thy self, and say,
Lord, pertains this judgment to me? and, O Lord, pertains this mercy to
me? Without this application, there is no general doctrine can do good, or
edify thee. So when we hear of this, that some are living branches, and some
dead, we should enter in trial with our selves whether we are to abide with
Christ, or to be cut off, and casten into the fire. It is true, we have not
Christ to speak with us, and to resolve us of such doubts: yet the Lord has
never left any faithful man or woman so destitute, but he gets a certification
and assurance, that he is a lively member. The Lord, if he be in any man or
woman, he shall make that person know, that he lives in them. The most
sensible thing in the world, is the life of Christ: as sensibly w^l the
creature feel the life of Christ in their hearts, as they will feel this natural
life. Besides this, if the sap of Christ be in a ma, the fruit will burst out:
and if thou would know a man, look to his life and good works: let his life
testify whether he be a lively member or not: if their life testify otherways,
I testify to thee, in the Name of God, they are no lively members. Certainly
Christ cannot dwell within one, but he must utter himself in the hand and tongue.
Now hereafter he subjoynes the reason wherefore they are clean, and how they are
made clean, By the words, says he, that J have spoken, ye are made clean:
wherefore spoke I so much to you, but to make lively members of you, who were
dry branches? The way to make a man a lively branch, is the word of Jesus: it
cleanses the soul which is foul: My word is Spirit and Life, John, 6. verse.
63. It is the force of the Spirit to purge the soul. The word, says Peter,
is that immortal seed of regeneration, 1. Epist. Chap. 1. verse. 23. Our seed
is mortal, and so if we have not another seed of God, we are but dead. It
is no marvel, that the word of God purges, because it is Life and Spirit:
Look but to that experience that godly men have in hearing the word of Jesus
Christ and that joye that rises in the heart. What means this? Will the
words of any man work this joye in the heart? No: but when men hear these
promises of life, and of grace, and consolation, O what consolation, what
peace, what rest, what joye will the sinner get! And this testifies, that the
word is powerful to work in the soul that life of God. The hour shall
come, says the Lord, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that shall hear, shall live, John, 5. verse. 25. 1 Pet. 1. verse. 22.
Our souls are purged by the hearing of the word. If this be the mean the
Lord has ordained to get life, let us take pleasure to hear the word: And I
say, that man that has not a pleasure in some m^asure to hear the word, but
co^temneth it, is no member of Christ, and has never been truly ingraffed in
Christ, nor got never of that sap which is in Christ, and never wist what
Jesus Christ was. As thou therefore would live, and as thou would be
sanctified in this life, and glorified with the Lord in the Heavens, take
pleasure to hear this word: and if thou would taste any sweetness of Christ,
grow in holiness: and chiefly, seeing thou must leave this world, begin to
live this life, which never shall have an end.

Now in the next words, after he has laid down the grounds, he comes to the
first exhortation: Abide in me, and I in you. The meaning of the exhortation
is this, Ye have begun to be joined with me in Spirit, and in faith: as ye
have begun, so continue in that union to the end. He says not, Abide still
with me, and I with you: but abide in me. These words have a greater
signification than the other: they signify a straiter union with Christ: for
Brethren, ye must mark, the members of Jesus Christ, not only abide with
him here, and dwell with him: but every one of them abides in him, and
dwells in him: as ye s^e the branches of the tree, they are not said so
much to abide with the tree, as to abide in the tree: so are we in him. And on
the other part, the Lord Jesus is not said only to abide with his Kirk on the
earth: but howbeit he be in the Heavens, to dwell in his Kirk, and in every
member, who belieueth in him: yea, in all their hearts: even as ye see the
tree abides in her branches, so the Lord Jesus, the Vine tree, abides in his
branches.

This place requires that we speak somewhat of this union the members have
with Christ, and he with them: This conjunction betwixt Christ and his
members, who are faithful, ye must not imaginate to be a bodily and natural
conjunction, as ye see is betwixt creatures, as the head with the body, it is
not so gross a conjunction: there is no conjunction bodily, so near, and so
strait, as that conjunction of Jesus Christ, now in the Heavens with his
members: the head is not so surely joined with the body by nearnes, as the
Lord Jesus, our Head, is joined with every member, who belieueth in him upon
this earth: The body and the head may be severed, but the members of Jesus
Christ, once truly ingraffed in him by his Spirit, and by faith, shall never
be cut off: all the powers of Heaven and Hell, shall not separate them. What
shall separate us from the love of Jesus Christ? shall hunger and sword, etc.
yea, in these we are more than victorious, Romans 1.35.37. So ye see this
conjunction, is not to be imagined to be a gross conjunction, as the
Papists imagine: (but I leave them:) But this conjunction is spiritual, and
mystical: I call that a spiritual union and conjunction that we have with
him, because it is wrought after an heavenly and spiritual manner, and is made
not with bodily bands, as ligamentes and sinews, but with spiritual and
heavenly bands: the one of them is called the Spirit of Jesus Christ, the
other is called Faith. To make that conjunction betwixt us and him, he sends
out of the Heavens his holy Spirit, into our hearts: and we getting that
Spirit, send up to the Heavens again to him, our faith. Then ye see two
bands, to make this conjunction: this conjunction must be mutual; so that as
he sends down his Spirit to us, so we must send up our faith to him. The
order of the working of these two bands would be considered: We never begin
first: no man begins first to gripe Christ, but he must gripe us first: all
things begin at him, and his affection is to us first: ere we love him, he
loves us: and because he imbraceth us so friendly with his love, therefore we
love him: and the sense of the love of God in Jesus Christ were not in us first
wrought, we would never love him: Even so is it in that conjunction, and if he
never conjoined himself with us first, we would never gripe him. Paul, to the
Philippians, Chap. 3. Verse 12. he strives to get a gripe of him, by whom he
was first griped: And this should be our strife, To strive ever to gripe
Christ and if this be not thy strife, miserable shall be thine end: as it is
in that conjunction, so it is in the perseverance: No man can persevere in that
love, and in that faith, except it please the Lord to abide with us by his
Spirit. In one word: all grace begins at Christ: and if we have any grace,
all flows from him.

Our Lesson is, When we hear the Lord exhorting us after this manner, Abide in
me, and I in you; answer, Abide in me, Lord, and I shall abide in thee:
Lord, except thou abide in me, I will fall. and such like, when the Lord
says, Believe in me: say, Lord, take a gripe of me by thy Spirit, first. So
when it is said, Love me; answer, Lord, love thou me first; for the love I
have to thee flows from the love thou have to me.

Now we come to the reasons the Lord uses to move his Disciples, to abide in
that union with him: The first argument he uses, is from good works, and a
sanctified life: and this is the argument, Except ye abide in that union with
me, there cannot be such a thing that any of you can bring forth fruit:
Therefore as thou would live an holy life, abide in me, and stick fast by
me. He declares this b^ a comparison, Except the branch abide in the Vine
tree, it can bring forth no fruit: So except ye be ingraffed in me, and abide
in me, the true Vine tree, no more can ye produce good works. Mark it, this
reason craves a consideration of an higher ground: the ground is this, There
is a necessity laid upon every man and woman in the world, to live an holy
life, as ever they would see the face of God. Now this necessity being laid,
come to the reason: But so it is, No man can live an holy life, except he
abide in Christ: Therefore as ever any man would taste of life, let him strive to
be in Christ, and never let Christ depart from him not a foot bread. Ye see
in this reason, the way to strait any man to believe in Jesus Christ: first
thou who would believe in Christ, have a necessity laid on thee, that thou
lead an holy life, thou must be changed, thou must have a new life:
otherwise, take thee thy doom, thou shall never see the face of God: and I
pronounce in the Name of the great God, that if thou live not an holy life in
some measure, thou shall never see the face of God. The Lord says to
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of
God. The next ground: Without Christ Jesus there is no power to do good:
without him thou can not think a good thought: without him thou art but a
dry stick, without any sap. Then I ask, how can the Papists, who
affirm, that we have free will naturally to do good: how can they, I say,
persuade a man to believe in Christ? They deceive the world. Can this be a
good doctrine? No, I pronounce, in the Name of the great God of Heaven, Except
a man denude himself of nature, except he stand up naked, and say, Lord,
there is no power in me to any good whatsoever, he shall never get Christ:
Except we be persuaded, that without Christ we can do nothing, and that we
are but dry sticks, the soul shall never cleave till him: But when the soul
shall hear and know this, then it shall run with griedinesse to gripe him.
This for the first argument.

The next argument, taken from good works, is in these words in the next
verse, I am the Vine tree, and ye are the branches: And if ye abide in me,
ye will bring out much fruit. They might ask, Is it not possible to bring
forth fruit without thee? He answers, Without me ye can do nothing. The
argument* If ye abide in me, ye shall bring out much fruit: Not only
fruit, but much fruit. The longer a man be in Christ, the holier he is. Take
up another ground of faith, and an alluring argument, to draw the heart to
Jesus Christ: this is the ground, That if a man would believe in him, they
should not only be holy, and lead an holy life, but grow in holiness.
This ground differs from the other: the former straiteth the soul: as for
this, it is not a binding argument, but a secret alluring argument, If thou
shall believe in Christ, thou shall abound in holiness. Whom moves this? Only
those who see themselves withered, and feign would have that sap of life in
Jesus Christ. Tell the soul, who sees the own misery, that and if it be in
Christ, it shall live, and will get the sap of life, it will rejoice: it will
not move them who delight in a filthy and polluted life. Mark our nature, for
the Lord knows it well, and according to it he sets down arguments in
order: there is not one, but ere they come to Christ, they must be straited,
and necessity laid upon their back; otherwise we will never seek to Christ,
because we are stubborn by nature. That necessity that was laid upon
Nicodemus, must be told to us all: there is never one of us, but we are
straited with the same strait: and when we are straited this way, except we
be obstinate, we will run to Christ. Next, it is not enough to boast a man:
if there be but boasting only, there will be no belief. The Lord knew
this well, and therefore he subjoyneth to this a fair alluring argument. We
must not begin with fair words, but we must strait men, as they would live to
believe in Christ: and then come on with sweet promises: If the Lord move us
not with fair promises, we will be obstinate for ever. Surely when a man
sees he must do such a thing, and if he do it, he will get such a
reward, that he shall be filled with sap, to bring forth an holy life;
well, will he say, I see not only a necesitie to believe; but I see also,
that if I do it, I shall b^ made a fruitful branch, whereas I was but a
rotten stick, to be casten into the fire: and then he will say to his soul, My
soul, believe in Christ, and stick upon him, and thou shall see a blessed end.

Now another thing I gather: I see here he counts much of good works, which
he calls fruits: and he moves them to believe from this argument of good
works. The end of faith, is a sanctified life: and the end of that union with
Christ, is good works: As the grace of God in Christ, is to make a regenerate
man, and of a dead stick, to make a lively branch, and Christ came into the
world, to repare that lost image of God in man; the end of election is to
live an holy life, Ephesians. Chap. 14. The end of our vocation, of our
justification, is to live an holy life. To Titus, Chap. 2. verse. 11.12. The
grace of GOD, that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, and teaches
us, that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberlie, righteouslie, and godlily, in this present world. There
is the whole end of the grace of God, and of the Gospel. So if a man have not
good works in some measure, he felt never the grace of Christ: the grace of God
may shine in their faces, but not in their hearts.

Now follows the third argument, Except a man abide in me first, he shall
be taken, and casten out, out of the Vineyarde: and next, as it were an
vnfrui^full branch, he shall wither: then when it is withered, wherefore
serves it? Shall it be imped again? No, but it shall be casten into the
fire. The fire of Hell is for them who will not come to Christ: A man goes not
to Hell at once, but by degrees: He who has not ado with Christ, he is
casten out of the Kirk: that is, the society of the Lords Elect: that is, the
true and invisible Kirk: howbeit for a season they remain in the visible
Kirk outwardly. Another degree, Being out of that society, he withers: and
the last degree, he is casten into the fire. If fair offers will not move a
man to believe in Christ Jesus, then let the fire of Hell move him. If thou will not believe for fair promises, thou shall see nothing but horrible
judgment: and as the Apostle speaks to the Hebrews, an unquenchable fire.
Tell a man now of belief in Christ, and of a sanctified life, if they will
believe in him; it will not move them, because their delight is in murder,
filthiness, and adultery. Then I tell thee, in the Name of the great God,
thou who art not moved with these promises, the fire of Hell abides thee: tell
them this. Indeed it is true, the godliest man that lives, has ever need to
be holden in Christ, by a flame of fire, we are so inclined to infidelity:
Knowing, (says the Apostle of himself, 2. Corinthians. Chap. 5.) the
terriblenesse of the Lord, we bring men to Christ: that is to say, We do our
duty in our calling: And if he had need to be holden in awe, much more had
we. The godly, who have a wakened conscience, will find this: as soon as
they begin to fall away, a flame of fire strikes upon them: for without
Christ, there is nothing but fire, and the wrath of God seaseth upon the neck
of the sinner, and never leaves him, till it bring him to destruction, and
shoot him into the fire of Hell. Indeed men and women will be out of Christ,
(where there is one who belieueth, there are ten who believe not: and it is a
rare thing, truly to believe in Christ: Some there be who deny Christ
altogether, and some who are profane hypocrites,) and yet the very infidels
will find rest into this world: and who will be so wanton as they? the
greatest infidels, the wantonnest: But think not, howbeit they be at rest,
that the wrath of God leaves them: No, the wrath of God is most upon them,
when they are least sensible of it, and perceive it least: for the wrath of God
strikes first the heart with a deafnes and stupidity: and next follows the
bitterest and dririest wakening that ever was. When the wicked cries peace,
then that judgment comes on suddenly, as the pains on a woman traveling in
birth; and then driery and sorrowful shall that wakening be. Now to end: take
up here the way to Hell, and that, step by step: The first step of all misery,
is infidelity, when a man is without Christ, and has no part with him: So when
one departs from Christ, either to the one hand, or to the other, he is in a
step to Hell: The second, fra he fall away from Christ, he is taken and flung
over the Dike, as having no society with the members of Christ. (I understand
the number of his secret ones, if the Lord in the Heaven excommunicate him.)
The third degree: Once casten over the Dike, then they begin to wither, and
dry up, and all grace goes away. There is no grace, no mercy, no life, but to
them who are in that blessed society. Last, wherefore serve they, when they are
rotten and dry? In that great day they are gathered together, and casten into
the fire of Hell. If any man would eschew the last degree to Hell, (think not
Hell a Bogill, for it is the sorest burning in the world,) beware of the first
degree: beware thou never swerue from Jesus Christ, in any step, but strive to
bind thy self in that union: When thou risest in the morning, look that he
be with thee, and thou with him: and so when thou lie down at even, look
ever thou be in Christ: and if thou find the heart sweruing from him, and
coldness to grow in it, and thee to grow slack, strive ever to claim till
him again: and say, Lord, hold mine heart still, that I decline not an ihtch
from thee. Therefore, strive ever to hold thee with Christ, and let not thy
heart be blyth, except thou feel him again in thy soul: and ever grow in
holiness: be exercising thee this way, and thou shall find in stead of fear,
an infinite joy in Christ: And I promise to you, if ye will believe in Christ,
the joyfullest end that ever was: Only believe: and seeing it stands in no
man's hands to believe, say to the Lord in your hearts, Lord, work thou that
faith in us, for Christ's sake: To whom with the Father, and the Spirit of
Truth, be all praise, honor, and glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE TENTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. XV. VERSE. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14. 7 If ye abide in me, and my
words abide in you, ask what ye will, and it shall be done to you.

8 Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and be made my
Disciples.

9 As the Father has loved me, so have J loved you: continue in that my love.

10 If ye shall keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love; as I
have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love.

11 These things have J spoken unto you, that my joye might remain in you,
and that your joye might be full.

12 This is my Commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.

13 Greater love than this has no man, when any man bestows his life for
his friends.

14 Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever J command you.


YE heard the last day (Beloved in the Lord Jesus) the first exhortation of
the Chapter, was, That his Disciples should abide in that union with him, and
he with them. We have sundry arguments of this purpose: The first, Except ye
abide in me, and in that union with me, ye can bring forth no fruit, nor do
no good in this world: The second is, That if ye abide in me, and I in you, ye
shall be full of good works: The third, If a man abide not in me, and I in
him, he shall be casten out of the Kirk: and once being casten out, he shall
wither, (for out of Christ there is no sap of life) and then (being dried up)
he shall be gathered up, like a dry stick, and casten into the fire, to
burn. So the argument in this, He who cannot abide in Christ, he shall be
casten into the fire of Hell: these arguments we have heard. Now in this Text,
the Lord goes forward in the arguments, and first he gives the fourth
reason, wherefore they should abide in him: then he passes to other
exhortations: Then the fourth and last argument is this, If ye abide in me and
my words in you, then what ever ye ask, or seek, ye shall have it: Note the
words, If ye abide in me, and my words in you: Before he said, If I abide in
you: But all is alike: the Lord Jesus abides in the heart by the word, and by
faith: so all is alike. But to come to the argument: What ever shall be your
desire, ask, and ye shall have it: that is, If ye abide in me, all your
petitions shall be granted. This argument is very alluring, to tell a man what
ever he desires, he shall have. Before he threatened, now he allureth. Ye see
how the Lord tempereth his arguments. But, Brethren, mark this: in respect of
whom is this argument alluring? and whom moves it? Not every one: tell this to
a man or woman who has no sense of their need, they will answer when they
hear this, We have no need to ask: tell this to a senseless sinner, he will
answer, he has no need: what need has the whole of the Physician? but tell
it to them who have felt the weight of sin, and who have felt their want, and
know they are deprived of the glory of God, and strangers from the life of
God, as the Apostle says, it shall be the joyfullest and sweetest hearing that
ever they heard: he will be moved when he hears this sweet promise. Then
when we come to hear of the promises of grace in Christ, let us prepare our
selves this way, and say, I am void of al grace; therefore I will go hear
these fair promises of grace. Now the thing I mark here, Ye see how a sinner
gets grace, and ye see by what degrees he comes to grace: The first and
immediate mean to get grace and mercy, is to seek: ask* and thou shall have:
Heaven is little worth, and if it be not worth the asking: beg Heaven, and
thou shall have it: But who is it can do this? Can all men do it? Look what
must go before asking: ere a man can ask grace, there must be a thirst and a
desire: look that the heart be hungry: Blessed are they who hunger and thirst
for righteousness, for they shall be filled. The world is full of want, yet
they have not a sense of want, or an heart to seek. How rises the desire in
the heart? The desire rises of a feeling in the heart, of a wonderful inlacke
and misery, when a sinner feels he is void of all grace, with this sense,
together with a sadness, and godly sorrow, for it has ever sadness: (for who
wants these earthly things, but they will be sad?) So the want of these
Heavenly things has a sadness with it. Paul says, 2. Corinthians. 5. verse. 4.
We being burdened with sin, we sigh for sadness. Whoso^uer feels this
burden of sin, and mortality, will sigh and sob. But from whence comes the
feeling and dolor? The sinner cannot have it of himself: for flesh and blood,
that is, the corrupt nature, will not feel this sense: but it comes of the
Siprit of God. Paul, Romans 8. ^ers. 26. says, The Spirit of God intercedeth for
us, with sighs unspeakable. And again, We who have gotten the first fruits of
the Spirit, sigh. So it is the Spirit who raises up these sighs in the heart:
and without the Spirit thou can not once give a sigh: Thou may sigh like a
man, but not like a Spiritual man. And how get we the Spirit? Believe in
Jesus Christ: faith in Christ furnishes us the Spirit. Ephesians. 1. verse. 13.
After ye have believed, ye are sealed up with the holy Spirit of promise: for
faith draws out of Christ, into the heart, that Spirit: The grace of all
grace, is to believe in Jesus Christ: and having him, thou shall get the
Spirit. I grant, the Spirit must go before, and work faith, but it is true
also, that by faith we get a fuller measure of the Spirit* So faith in the
blood of Jesus, is the fountain of all grace: for all grace flows from that
blood, and the merit thereof: and by the power of the Spirit, which accompanies
that blood, grace is applied till us.

Then ye see, that faith is the beginning of grace: the holy Spirit follows
faith: after the holy Spirit follows a sense of our misery and want: upon
this sense follows an earnest desire: upon the desire follows asking: by
asking grace is obtained. So, look thou stand in Christ, if thou would have
grace. Out of this place ye may ask this question, Will a man get all that
he seeks of Christ? He answers here, If ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you, ask conform to this word, and thou shall obtain it: if thou
ask any Spiritual grace, thou shall get it: Undoubtedly, Heaven and Earth
shall perish ere thou want it. As for earthly things, he will not aye give
them according to thy desire, but as he thinks meet, for his own glory, and
thy weal: And how can they want, who gets the Kingdom of Heaven? The Lord
shall give them so much as shall content them. The Lord shall give thee so much
as is necessary to a Pilgrim.

Now we go to the secon^e exhortation, which is to good works: The first
was to stand in that union with Christ: The second is, to bring out good
works: Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; and in this ye
shall be known to be my Disciples. There are the two things: he says not,
Bring out fruit: but, Bring out much fruit, that is, do much. A man should
strive not to bring out fruit, but much fruit: and indeed, if we continue
in that union with Christ, we shall grow in that regeneration, and so we
grow in good works. The first argument he uses, is taken from the glory of
the Father, In this is my Father glorified, that ye bring out much fruit.
Surely a moving argument: at least it should move all souls to do well,
seeing God is glorified in my well doing, for I am set in the world to
glorify God. Take up the ground: Whom will this argument move? Not every
man: Tell to a man, who has no zeal to God, nor no sight of the glory of
God, Do well, and glorify God: he will not care for it. But to tell a man,
who loves God, (alace, whom can he love, and if he love not God?) tell him,
if he will do many good works, he will glorify God: he will do all that
lies in his power, yea, he will suffer, that he may glorify God: as Moses
and Paul wished to renounce Heaven to get their God glorified: And if Paul
could get God glorified, he cared neither for life nor death. Then when we
come to the hearing of the word, where such exhortations are given us, we should
bring hearts filled with zeal to the glory of God: and if thou bring such an
heart, when thou hear such an argument, it will be very sweet to thee.
Ye see here in these words a fair effect following on good works: when a
man does well, the fairest effect that ever was follows: to wit, the glory
of God thy Creator. The Papists think, there can follow no goo^ of good works,
except a man merit, and get life by his works: as though the Prophet had said,
The just shall live by his good works: No, he said not so: but, The just shall
live by faith. Habac. 2.4. May not this serve them, that God is glorified in
well doing? Ye see the words that are here, are borrowed from the Vine tree:
Then let us take up the comparison, to make the matter more clear: We see by
experience, that the branches of the Vine tree do not live upon the fruit,
nor take no sap from the Berries: the Berries do not furnishe life to the
branches: Therefore can they conclude hereof, that the Berries avail nothing,
because they give no sap nor food to the vine tree? Has not the berrie none
other use? Yes, it has a better use, for it serves chiefly to refresh and
make cheerful the heart of man. It is even so with our good works, the good
works are not causes of our justification, or life: they are but the fruits
of justification: A man does not good works to be justified; but is
^ustified to bring out good works: they have their own use: they are not
only comfortable to them who work them, to confirm their election, calling,
justification, and life: but also those who stand by, and look to them, the
Apostle says, they are edified by their on-looking, as ye may read in the
first Epistle of Peter, and the first Chapted: Yea, more edified by one work,
than by a thousand words: And not only are men edified, but thereby God is
glorified. Christ says, Matthew. Chap. 5. verse. 16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and may glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. So by good works the God of Heaven is glorified, and men
are helped.

The second argument: Ye shall be my Disciples: As he would say, God shall
not only be glorified, but ye shall get good your selves: ye shall be my
Disciples. It is the same in effect with that which he said, Chap. 13. verse.
35. By this a man or woman is known to be the Disciple of Christ, by mutual
love. Then let us see what doctrine is taught in the School of Christ: there
is the sum of the doctrine, Do well, bring out much good fruit, bring out
many good works. All the doctrine that is taught of faith, is to the end that
a man may do well. The Apostle to Titus, chap. 2. verse. 11. tells us what is
the end of the Gospel, to wit, that the grace of Jesus Christ has shined in
the world, that we may live soberlie, temperatelie and godlilie in this
present world. So the end of the Gospel is, that men and women should live an
holy and sanctified life: and he who lives an holy life, he is indeed a
disciple of Christ: not he who knows most, but he who does most, is the best
scholar: and he who does evil, and deliteth in mischief, has no more to do
with Christ, than the Devil has. Ephesians. 4.20. After that he has set down
the life of the Gentiles, that they gave themselves to wantonness, and to commit
wickedness, with all kind of griedinesse; he turns to the Ephesians, and he
says, Ye have not learned Christ so: whosoever leads an evil life under the
name of a Christian, they have never heard Christ speaking to them by his
Spirit in their soul: Thou have not learned at Christ to be a murderer, an
adulterer, and drunkard. Then if thou would show to the world, that thou
have learned at Christ, strive to do much, and not to speak much: In one
word: As thou would show thy self to be a Scholar in the School of
Christ, do ever many good works. Then when he has exhorted to good works,
he comes to the grounds of good works: the grounds are two, the love of God,
and the love of thy neighbor: the whole Commandments are grounded on these
two. Then he exhorts his Disciples to love: It is not enough to begin to
love Christ, but to continue. He gives the arguments, J have loved you,
wherefore then should ye not love me? The best thing we can do, is to meet
him with love in some measure, who has loved us so well, so dearly, and
tenderly: I have loved you, therefore love ye me. And that they should not
think this a common love, he says, As the Father has loved me, so love I
you: I love you not as men love men, but as the Father loves me. Then we see
here, that Jesus Christ is not only aye the first lover: (for if we love him,
it is because he loves us first: love aye begins on the part of Christ:
ere we begin to think to love him, he loves us:) but also we learn more
here, What kind of love Christ bears to us. 1. John, Chap. 3. verse. 1. What
a love has the Father borne to us, that has called us his sons? So the love
of Christ to us, is a tender love, such as the love of the Father is to him:
what tongue can express the love of the Father to the Son? So all the
tenderness of the world, is nothing to that love that Christ has to us: it
is passing in tenderness, and passing in measure. Indeed the Apostle speaks
of a great sense of this love to men, Romans 5. where he says, This love of God
is powered out from the Heavens, and powered out in the hearts of men and women.
Who does it? The holy Spirit sheddeth it abroad in our hearts: and indeed a
man will feel the love of God in Christ, more than the tongue can tell. Look
Ephesians. 3. verse. 18.19. No, Paul nor all the Apostles, could not tell the love
that Christ bears to men and women that are sinners: and in this life we
cannot be capable of it, nor yet in the life to come, when we shall have a
thousand times a greater sense: for it is infinite: then we shall be astonished,
and wonder at it: but we shall be filled with it there, where God shall be
all in all. Abide and walk in faith, till thou meet with him, and thou shall
find this to be true.

Now I shall end: Lest they should have thought that the love they should
bear to Christ should be fectlesse, and should be closed in, and smoared in
the heart, and not shine into world, the Lord says, If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my love. Think not that the love of Christ
can be in the heart of a man or woman, and then be idle: and if we love a
person, we must do him good: So if a man or woman love Christ, they will go
about, night and day, to please him, and to obey his blessed will, and his
Commandments: And if a man have no will to obey God, it is sure, there is
no love in the heart. Well, I say, thou who live not an holy life, in that
great day, that will testify against thee, that thou never louedst Jesus
Christ. So, take heed our hand be answerable to our profession of love, that
good deeds may follow it: for if thou be idle, thou have no love. One thing
I mark here: Upon what ground does our obedience to Christ arise? The first
ground, the love that a man bears to Christ brings out obedience: Yet there
is an higher ground, J have loved you, says Christ, therefore abide in my
love. The love that Jesus Christ bears to a sinner, brings out that mutual
love we bear to him: When ye see a man set to keep the Commandments of
God, (and blessed is that soul that so does:) I say, surely ye may, by all
appearance, conclude, that that soul loves Christ: And farther, surely it
appears of this obedience, that God loves this person well: and that is a
better love, and a stronger ground, than is all his love to God: and
certainly, the Lord will love that man exceeding well, whom he will employ
in his service. Blessed is that creature whom the Lord will employ in his
service in this life, whatsoever calling it be into: and of all blessings in
this life, there is the first, when we know the Lord has chosen us to such a
turn, and give him thanks therefore. 1. Timoth. Chap. 1. verse. 12. Paul being
employed in that Ministry, says, I thank my God, that he has counted me
faithful, to employ me in that Ministry. So blessed is the servant, who can
serve Jesus Christ: yea, he is more happy, that can serve Jesus Christ, than
he were a King of the world: whosoever serves him, whomsoever he imployeth in
his service, he shall give him a rich reward: Let this therefore be the
strife and endeavor of every one of us, to serve him.

Now in the latter part of the tenth verse, to the end that they should show
that love they bare to him, by keeping his Commandementes, he lays out his
own example: As I, says he, have kept the Commandments of my Father, and
abide in his love: that is, Love me, as I have loved my Father: the love that
I bear to my Father, is obedience to him: so be ye obedient to me, if ye
love me. So ye see, Brethren, he lays out his example of love and obedience
to his Father, to be followed by his Disciples. Mark this: The Lord Jesus is
the liueliest example of love and obedience that ever was, or shall be in the
world. There was never such a love as the Son bare to his Father: never one
so obedient as he was^ he obeyed his equal. Philip. 2. verse. 6.7.8. He being
in the form of God, he thought it no robbery to be equal with God: Yet he
thought it no shame to humble himself, to become humble to the death of the
Cross: Yea, he not only submitted himself to his equal, but also to his
inferiors. He washed his Disciples feet, John, 13. He humbled himself to
the world, to serve the world. Romans Chap. 15. verse. 3. As the Lord is the true
pattern of love and obedience; so is it needful that his example be aye
laid out before our eyes: for except we see it, there is not such a thing
that any man can be truly humbled, to obey God: for it is the obedience of
Jesus Christ, and faith in him, that reformeth the heart of a sinner, and
makes of a proud heart an humbled heart: and if thou take not a gripe of that
Cross by faith, thine heart shall abide unreformed, till it be put into Hell.
The tongue of man is not able to tell what grace we have in the obedience of
Christ: We have not only salvation, and justification, through his obedience;
but we have also his obedience, to learn us what obedience we should give to
him, and what we should give to God. Learn at me to be humble, says the Lord,
Matthew. 11. verse. 29. Mark another thing concerning this matter: Whilst he is
exhorting to love, and to the keeping of his Commandment, he gives himself
an example most lively of that thing whereunto he exhorts them. This is a
lesson for all others, who teach into the Kirk of Christ: whatsoever doctrine
they teach, let them not only be speakers, but doers of that which they
teach: otherwise they will destroy more with their life, than they are able to
build up with their doctrine.

In the next verse, he concludes all this, and sets down the end of his
exhortation: These things have I spoken to you, they my joye might abide in
you, and that your joye might be full: All is for your weal, that ye may be
replenished with joy: all mine exhortations tend to your joy. The end of Christ
is joy: indeed he begins with a sadness and heaviness: Learn how ye
shall come to him: the first step by the which the sinner comes to Christ, is
by repentance, by the sight of sin, and that brings sadness with it: but
frae once the sinner has gotten that sight of Christ, then the heart is full
of joy, and departs with joy: and all the speech the Lord speaks to a
sinner, is to put joye into the heart of the sinner: whatsoever displeasure the
sinner has in the mean time, yet all is for this, that in the end he should
rejoice: And the end of the speeches he speaks to his Disciples, exhorting
them to that union, and good works, and love, and obedience, and society, and
communion with Christ, is joye: Good works bring joye in the end: The love of
Christ fills the heart with joye: there was never the like of it, essay it
and see: love the Lord, and thou shall find such a joye, as the world knows
not: love Christ, and thou shall have a good conscience: and a good conscience
brings with it joye, rest, and peace. So the end of all is joye to the heart
of a sinner: the union with Christ brings with it an unspeakable joy. Read
1. John, 1. verse. 4. After he has been speaking of the communion with the
Father, and the Son, he subjoyneth, These things write I unto you, that your
joy might be full. And if we be not in society with that blessed Trinity,
we have no matter of joy: and therefore we should ever strive to get a
communion with that blessed Trinity, for therein stands the happiness of
man.

Now to mark the words more narrowly, he terms it first, His joye: then
he terms it, Their joye: so it is both the joy of Christ, and also of his
Disciples, but in diverse respects: It is the joy of Christ, because he is
the giver of it: all joy proceeds of Jesus Christ: It is our joy, because
it belongs to us, and is given us. So then, what is the joy of a Christian
man? Learn it here, It is nothing but the participation of that heavenly joy
that is in God: God is full of joy, and his whole nature is joy: the joy
that one has, who belieueth in Christ, is a part of that divine nature, 2.
Epist. of Peter, Chap. 1. verse. 4. of that joy that passes all understanding:
there is the felicity of man, to get apart of that infinite joy.

The Philosophers disputed much about the felicity of man: some of them placed
it in pleasure: the general is not evil, but here they failed, that they
placed it in a beastly pleasure: Indeed it stands in the participation of
that joy of God, begun in this life, and perfected in the Heaven, when we
shall see Christ Jesus face to face. The joy we have here is mingled with
sorrow, and for one joyful hour, we have aye ten sad: but then all tears
shall be wiped away from our eyes, when God shall be all in all, and shall be
filling the souls of his own with joy.

In the next verse, he comes to the other ground of good works: The love to
man, the first was the love of God: think not: that thou can do a good
thing, and if thou love not thy neighbor. The words are, This is my
Commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. Love will not
stand on one side only, but it must be mutual, otherwise thou can not
stand in that society either with God, or with man. Ye heard before this, of
the Lord, If ye abide in my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love. So the
love of Jesus Christ, is to keep his Commandments. This Commandment is not so
much the Commandment of the first Table, as the Commandment of the second
Table. The true touchstone whereby is tried whether thou love God or not, in
thine heart, as is commanded in the first Table, is the love to thy neighbor,
which is commanded in the second Table: so that if thou will stand up, and say,
I love God, God will answer, Love thou thy neighbor? and if ^e find an
hatred in thine heart to thy neighbor, he will answer, Thou love me not.
He who hates his neighbor, hates God. Well, let men continue on in murder,
and wrongful dealing, and stand up, and say, We love God, they lie. Mark
another thing: there appears here a wonderful love the Lord bears to his
members on earth: no tongue can express it: That love the creature would utter
to him, he will have it turned over on his members in the earth: I mean not as
though the Lord would have none of our love to himself, or regarded it not,
and so bade us love one another: No, for he deliteth exceedingly to be loved
by us: But that love we bear to him, he bids us kythe it on his members,
and do good to them. And what is the cause that the Lord bids us love his
members? The Lord himself is perfect: Our Head is full of all felicity: but
as for the members, they have great need of things spiritual and temporal: So
the Head is not to be benefited by us: but the best member, though he were a
King, has need to be helped, and the beggar may help him: And so, seeing He
has no need, he turns the benefit of our love, over to us his members, who
have need thereof. David professes this, Psalm. 16. verse. 2.3. Help me Lord, he
says. And lest the Lord should answer, What good can thou do me? he
meets this, I cannot do thee good: my well-doing extends not to thee: thou
art all sufficient: but, Lord, keep me to thy Saints on the earth: howbeit
my good cannot help thee, yet, Lord, keep me to thy Saints. Farther, ye see
he requires mutual love: for except love be mutual, men cannot be united:
the members of that body are conjoined with love: albeit thou be loved, yet if
thou love not again, thou art not of the body.

When he has exhorted them to love one another, he sets down his own
example, As I have loved you, every one of you love another. Seeing he loved
them so well, why should not they love one another? As before when he exhorted
them to love him, that is, to love God, he laid down before them his own
example; so now he exhorts them to love their neighbor by his example. We
learn by this, the Lord Jesus is the lively example of all true love, either
to God, or to man: and the example of the love of Christ is needful to move
us to love man in this world: so that except we sensibly find that love of his
in our hearts, there shall be no spunke of true love to man in the heart: for
why? all this love we bear to God, and to man, arises upon the feeling of
that love of Christ, shed abroad in our hearts: he must warm our hearts by
his love; and then shall arise the love of God, and of man: Except a man feel
that God love him, he cannot love: for our love is but a repercution of that
love wherewith he strikes on our hearts.

Then in the next verse, he lays out the love he bare to them in the own
greatness, and that by comparison: No man can have a greater love than this,
that he lay down his life for his friend: but I have laid down my life for
you: there ye see what a love I bear to you. The greatest token of love in
the world, is, when a man is content to lay down his life for another.
Indeed it is a great token of love, when a tender friend will lay down his
life for his friend. Romans 5. verse. 7. Scarcely will a man lay down his life
for the just: but when a man will be content to give his life for his enemy,
that is a greater token of love: there is not such a token of love in the
world, as this.

Now to come to Jesus Christ: The Lord Jesus died not for his friends: he had
never a friend in the world, till he died; and by his death he purchased
friends: No man ever loved the Lord Jesus, but by virtue of his death. Look
the fifth Chap. to the Romans verse. 8. This commends his love, that he died for
us, sinners, and enemies to him. There was never such a love, as the love of
Christ to man, who suffered so shameful a death in the body, and so great
anguish in conscience. Indeed all men will say in word, that that love was
wonderful: but all the difficulty is to feel in the heart the greatness of
the love of Christ, and to apprehende it. Except there be some sense in the
heart, the heart is but sick, and evil disposed: And therefore this was a
point of Paul's prayer for the Ephesians, Chap. 3. verse. 18.19. He prays for
them on his knees to God, that the Ephesians, being rooted and grounded in
love* might be able to comprehend, with all the Saints, what the hope is of
his calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the
Saints, and what is the breadth, what is the length, what is the infiniteness
of the love of Christ, that ye may know the love of Christ, which passes all
understanding. There is no salvation without that sense: no peace, no rest, no
joy: for of all things under the Heaven, we should seek to feel it the most,
and say, Lord, as thou have loved me, so let me feel it. If thou would,
feel this love, get an assurance that the Lord has died for thee, when thou
wast a sinner; for thereupon shall rise such a sense in thy heart, as thou
never felt before: First feel that thou wast condemned to die under sin and
the law: then get an assurance that he died for thee, and shed his blood that
thou might be free. That sinful woman, who washed the Lords feet with her
tears, and dried them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and
anointed them with ointment, was filled with the sense of the love of Jesus
Christ: Except the love of Jesus Christ had loosed the heart of her, she had
not had one tear: She was a great sinner: and he says, Because much is
forgiven her, she loves me the better, Luke, 7. verse. 47. The more sins that
are forgiven a sinner, when be gets this sense, that Christ died for him, he
will love him the better. Romans 5. verse. 5. Paul says, The love of God in
Christ is shed out into the heart: ere ever that love be shed out, the blood of
Christ must be shed out, and the heart must gripe to his death, and be washen
with his blood, and bathed in it: and when the sinner feels that, then
flows that sweetness of his love; and there is a mutual love betwixt the
heart of the sinner, and Jesus Christ; and the sinner will feel such an
exceeding love, that he will defy all the world, as Paul says, Romans 8. verse.
35. The Disciples might have said, We see thou do for thy friends, and
show a great love to thy friends: are we thy friends? The Lord meets this,
Ye are my friends; but under this condition, If ye love me, and do my will,
ye are my friends. Surely when we hear such conditions as these, That the
Lord has laid down his soul for his friends, we should search to know, if
we be of that number, and should say to our hearts, I see the Lord has died
for his friends, am I one of the friends of Jesus Christ? There is no life
without his death: and he died for none, but for his friends: and every one of
you who hears me this day, should try your selves, if ye be the friends
of the Lord: Ye shall know it by this, if ye be his friends, ye shall not
be fectlesse. What serves a fectlesse profession for in the mouth, when the
heart is contrarious? What serves sucha a friend for, as is a friend in the
mouth, and a foe in the heart? Look if thou have an heart bent to do his will:
take heed to thy tongue, and to the motions of thine heart, that they be
sanctified: and if thy tongue be soul, and thine hand be bathed with murder, if
thou see this, thine heart will testify to thee, that thou have nothing to
do with Christ; the love of Christ has nothing ado with thee; but that
carcage of thine, and that soul of thine, shall be dragged to Hell, if thou
abide in that estate: But if thou find in some measure a delight to pleasure
him, who has pleasured thee, and died for thee: (Fie on him* who will not
strive to pleasure him!) If thou find in some measure good actions fall out of
thine hand, then thou may have a good conscience, and the heart will get a
piece of that rest and peace which passes all understanding: When a creature
sees, that he has been doing nothing all day but evil, sleep as thou will, and wake as thou will, thou have the curse of God upon thee.

Blessed is the man who has good works, for they are tokens unto him, that
he is sealed up in the blood of Christ. We must not gather out of this place,
that because we were friends to Jesus, therefore he died for us: for by the
contrary, because he died for us, therefore he made us his friends. He had
never a friend, till by his death he acquired them. And if thou find the
force of his death in thee, thou must be his friend, and must preasse to
pleasure him: To whom, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all praise,
honor, and glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. XV. VERSE. 15.16.17.18. 15 Henceforth call J you not servants:
for the servant knows not what his Master does: but J have called you
friends: for all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known to
you.

16 Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye
go, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain; that whatsoever ye
shall ask of the Father in my Name, he may give it you.

17 These things command J you, that ye love one another.

18 If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before you.


HItherto in this Chapter (Beloved in the Lord Jesus) we have heard of sundry
exhortations which the Lord, being to depart out of this world, gives to his
Disciples, who are to abide in this world behind him: First he exhorts them
to abide in that union with him: Then he exhorts them to good works:
Therefore he comes to the grounds* of all good works: There are two
grounds, The first is the love of God: the next, the love of man. Therefore
he exhorts them first to the love of God: next, to the love of man. He
sets down his own example to them, to move them to love. The greatness
of his love to them he sets down in comparison, I laid down my life for
you: then there cannot be a greater love, than that I bear to you. And lest
they should doubt of his friendship, Ye are my friends, says he, and
therefore my death appertains unto you. And lest that friendship should
seem to stand in word only, he subjoyneth a condition, Keep my
Commandment, if ye would be my friends. In this Text we have read, in the
beginning thereof, it might have been said by the Disciples, they were rather
to be called servants than friends. The Lord meets this, and says,
Henceforth call I you not servantes: for why? this is the condition of a
servant: he knows not the will of his Master: the Master will not call him to
his counsel: but I, whatsoever thing I have heard of my Father, being in the
bosom of the Father, I have revealed it to you, and therefore I call you
friends. The meaning of the Text is easy: I observe this, It is true indeed,
the Disciples of Jesus Christ, they were servants, and will be servants to
him forever. If ye will seek the ground of it, it is not only the creation,
(for the creature is a servant: all the Angels of Heaven are creatures,
therefore servants:) but the chief ground why they were servants, was by
virtue of that redemption. When they were sold to sin, and to the Devil,
the Lord paid for them a precious ransom. Romans 14. verse. 9. The Lord died for
us, and revived, and all to this end, that he should have dominion over the
quick and the dead, and be Lord over them whom he has redeemed. 2. Corin.
5. verse. 15. Paul says, Considering the Lord has died for me, and risen,
from henceforth I will not live to my self, but to Christ. So thus the
Apostles were servants to Christ: another way also, they were his servants by
their calling: were they not Ambassadors of Christ? Now an Ambassador is aye
a servant to him who sends him. The Apostles of Christ were servants, by
creation, by redemption, and by vocation: But by this manner and kind of
service, that they are servants by redemption, and vocation, they are not
servants only, but friends. Whosoever they be, that are redeemed by the blood
of Jesus Christ, they are not only servants, but friends: they sit in
counsel with the Lord, whom the Lord has redeemed: they get leave to come in
to the Chamber of the Bridegroom: And as John the Baptist says, Chap. 3. verse.
29. As friends to the Bridegroom, they stand in the Bridegromes Chamber, and
hear him, and rejoice: they hear him sweetly: Yea, he counts us more than
friends, the Lord makes us his Brethren: They are Sons of adoption, and as
they are Sons, they get the Spirit of adoption, testifying to them, that they
are Brethren. Romans 8. verse. 15. They cry, Abba Father. But ye will ask,
Wherefore is it then, that the Lord will not call them servants, but friends?
I answer, The Lord has respect of the common sort of servants, or rather of
slaves. In those days the Masters communicated not their counsel to them, but
commanded them, under such a pain, to do their will. He respects this, and
he denies such servitude to his Disciples. It is true, in this world there
are not only servants that are brethren to the Lord: but the Lord has many
slaves, men and women 2. Timoth. Chap. 2. verse. 20. In a great house, there are
not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood, and of leame, some to
honor, some to dishonor. All this world is the House of the Lord, and in this
world, he has some servants in an honorable rank, and many slaves, yea,
more than servants who are free: the world is full of slaves. Now these slaves,
they are bound to service by virtue of creation, and so is the Devil. As for
the redemdtion these slaves have no part of it: and so it follows, that
having no part of that redemption, they have no friendship with him: and being
no friends, they are no brethren: they get not that blessed Spirit: but
that Spirit which in the eight Chapter to the Romans is called the Spirit of
bondage and slavery, which makes them to fear for vengeance: They serve
Christ, but all that service is evil, they are murdering men, they commit
adultery, their mouths are full of blasphemy, all their service is to evil:
and it is but the breaking of the Lords Commandment, yet it is his service.
In the second Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the thirteenth verse,
and Chap. 4. verse. 28. The Devil, and all his instruments, can do nothing,
but that thy hand has ordained. The Lord has decreed all to be done: and they
shall get their reward for doing. The Disciples were free servants of the
Lord: as for slaves, they were not. Seeing all must be his servants, we
ought carefully to consider, what sort of vessels, and in what rank of
servants we are. The Apostle Paul, when he has told of this difference,
whereof we show in the great house, in the second Epistle of Timothy, Chap.
2. verse. 30. he subjoyneth a token, whereby a man shall know whether he be a
vessel of honor, or dishonor: Men shall well know whether they be ordained
to slavery or not: Look if they be cleansed from the filth of this world:
look if they be sanctified vessels, to work good in the house of the Lord: and
if thou be a foul vessel, who can do no good, say with thy self, I have
no warrant that I have to do with the Lord Jesus: and say, that thou art a
vessel to destruction. And blessed is that soul that feels some piece of
desire with joye to do well: for they have a warrande, that they are vessels
of honor, and that they shall be in Heaven with the LORD: So sanctification
is the most infallible token of our election and justification. Whereas he
says, All things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known to you,
I mark this, That Christ, who came out of the bosom of his Father, revealed
to his Disciples the whole counsel of God concerning the salvation of the
world, which the Apostles preached thereafter fully to the world: for the
holy Spirit called all things to their remembrance, which they had heard of
the Lord, John, 14. verse. 26. And Paul, Act. 20. verse. 27. professes, that he
had kept nothing back, but he had showed them all the counsel of God. It may
be asked, whether all things that Christ himself preached, and that the
Apostles thereafter preached, be fully set down in writ? I answer, All
things according to the matter and substance, albeit not in as many words, are
left in register: and we affirm, That if Christ himself were here present,
he would say no more, write no more, change nor alter nothing, according to
the substance.

In the next verse he begins to give an ordinance to preach after his
departure, as ye read in the 28. Chapter of Matthew, verse. 19. Before he lay
down the ordinance, he premitteth some words to prepare the hearts of his
Disciples to accept of it: J have chosen you, and ye have not chosen me:
therefore I have ordained ye should go out, and bring out fruit. As the Lord
would say, I have chosen you to be Apostles to me, before ye thought such a
thing: I sought you first, and ye sought not me: I prevented you, and so this
office is of my grace: there is no cause in you, but the whole is ascribed to
me. Was Peter seeking Christ, when he was fishing? Was Matthew seeking
Christ, when he was sitting at the Table with the Publicanes? Matthew. 9. verse.
9. Had Paul any mind of Christ, when he was going to Damascus, to persecute
the poor Saints of God? It is a good thing to know how much Paul
acknowledged this grace. Look the first Chapter to the Gal. verse. 15. When it
had pleased the Lord to separate me from my mothers womb, he called me by his
grace, to reveal his Son to me, that I might preach him amongst the
Gentiles. See in how pitthie words he sets it down. The ground of Paul's
calling, was the good will of God: and higher, the eternal separation of him
from his mothers womb: and last, he comes to the grace of God. But this is
the thing I mark: We see the Lord he groundeth his ordinance to his Disciples
upon his own free grace: In election the Lord will have all our calling to
depend upon his mercy only: he will have his grace to prevent us. I am found
of them who sought me not. Who dare say, I sought the Lord, before he sought
me? He will be the first caller of us, to the end, that he should have a right
to command us what he pleases. Another end, that he commanding us to do
it, with our whole hearts we should give obedience, and say, Lord, I will
answer thee. Be not deceived, the Papists are full of vanity, they labor to
set up men with pride to disobey God: that doctrine they teach makes men
proud: for when they speak of works of preparation, before their calling,
and of a free will, when they are called, whereto tends this doctrine, but to
bereave God of that power he has over us? Let this enter into our hearts
once, We have not all our grace of God; the Devil seeks no better: they
think not, that they are altogether debt-bound to God: and if they do him any
service, they think he is in their common. The way to keep our hearts in
humility, and to dispose them in lowliness, is to think nothing of our
selves: they that think that they have nothing in nature, but rebellion, and
hatred of all grace, they ascribe all to God, and praise him, and they will
say, Lord, seeing I have no grace except thou give me it, and if thou bid me
suffer, I will suffer ten thousand deaths. But weigh the words: In these words,
that they should go, and bring out fruit, he alludeth to the Vine tree: what
is that, to bring out fruit? that is, they shall vantage, and win souls to
God: and of all fruits, it is the best, to win lost souls to Jesus Christ, to
dwell with him in Heaven: to draw them out of that damnation, he ordains
that they should not begin only, but that their fruit should abide: that is,
they should continue all the time of their life to win souls to Jesus Christ,
and should continue unto the end. Now know this, It is not enough in any
calling once co begin to do well, to fructify; but there must be perseverance
to the end: the end of all our well doing must be with our last end: Let our
labors in this life, and our life go together: At all seasons, a tree will
not bring out fruit: but it is required in a Christian, that he bring
evermore out fruit at all times: they have no season by another. And as this is
requisite in all men, so chi^fely is it requisite in them who are called to the
Ministry, that they be winning souls, and aye doing good, one way or other:
no rest for a Minister, but of all men, it is most requisite that he do good.
Paul s^^th, 2 Timot. 4. verse. 2. Preach the word, in season and out of season:
that is, no rest for thee, Timothy. And truly the Apostle Paul himself above
all others preassed and endeavored in hi^ calling in the Ministry, to be
faithful: and he thirsted so earnestly for that high price of Gods calling,
that he never looked behind him, but aye ran, till he came to the end of the
race: and when he came to the end, he says, I have ended my course.

Now, that man is happy, in this life that lays this ground, There is no
resting for me here: I must not sit down: I am in a course going to Heaven:
and so with an holy courage goes forward, running on in his pilgrimage: for
in the end, he shall get that Sabbath day of rest, and he shall eat sweetly
the fruits of his travels. But if thou restest in this life, and wilt not
labor in thy calling in this life, and seek thy rest in sin, (for let him
sit idle, he shall rest in sin and wickedness,) thou shall not get rest
afterward. There is no soul that will sit down in the race, that shall rest
with God in the Heavens. Alace, we set not that crown of glory before our
eyes, and that is the cause we run not: but blessed is that soul that will
take pain.

In the end of the verse, to move them to do well in their calling, he gives
them another argument, Whatsoever they should ask in his Name, they should get
it. The world wants grace, for fault of asking. So the Lord would say, Go
forward, and what ye shall ask in my Name, at my Father, (for without faith
in him, we will not be heard,) he will give it you. The Lord obscurely would
meet a doubt. It is hard for us to do well in this world: how many
impedimentes are in man? and how many without him? And so, ere thou do any
good, these must be removed: So they might have said, It is hard for us,
being so few, to go out into the world: it is hard for us to begin, and far
harder to persevere. To this he answers, Ask at my Father, in my Name, and
whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, ye shall get it. Well doing is gotten by
begging: and he or she that will begin to do any good turn, must beg it at
the hands of him who has grace to give. So well doing begins at prayer:
and continuance in well doing, depends upon continuance in prayer. Thou who
would continue in well doing, be aye praying, and aye asking. Paul, Ephesians.
6. verse. 18. exhorts the Christian man of every rank, to stand continually
in Armor, so long as he lives. Amongst all the Armor, he says, Ever pray,
with all manner of prayer. There cannot be a standing, without there be a
continuance in prayer, night and day. There is nothing more requisite, if thou
would do well, than to continue in prayer: for why? all grace is in Heaven:
except we get grace drawn out of Heaven, from God, we cannot do any good
turn: and the only way to draw grace from Christ, (for he is full of grace,)
is, first to believe in him, and to be grounded on him: then next, with open
mouth and heart to pray in his Name to the Father; and centainly, Heaven and
earth shall go together, ere thou want grace: ere God deny thee thy prayer, al
shall be turned vpside down: and thou shall get that grace he thinks meet for
thee in this life, and Heaven at length. In the next verse, as before he has
enarmed his Disciples, whom he was to send out to the world with a piece of
armor, to wit, prayer; so here he enarms them with another, I command you to
love every one another. How needful it is that every man and woman, who would
do well, should have love, Paul, 1. Cor. 13. shows. Let a man do all the things
in the world, yea, give his body to be burnt, if there be no love in the heart,
alauailes not: But chiefly to come to a Minister, of all men it is most
requisite that a Minister have love in his heart: otherways all is nothing, all
his language and preaching auailes naught, if the heart have not a love of the
salvation of man and woman. So the thing he regards, is that love be in their
heart. Ye know what a love Paul had: he had so great a love to the safety of
his kinsmen, that he would have wished to be Anathema for them: look what a
love he utters, 2. Cor. 6. verse. 11. he says, O Corinthians! our mouth is
open to you, our heart is made large: ye are not kept strait in us, but ye
are kept strait in your own bowels. So there are many graces required in a
Minister, but chiefelie love: and if he have no love, he will not care by,
how many perish. Yet farther: they should not only have love to their
people; but also Pastors should have mutual love amongst themselves: they
should have unity of heart, go where they will. There is nothing that
serves more for making up of that body of CHRIST, than the sweet agreeing of
the Laborers: when they agree, the work of the Lord goes forward: as
workmen, when they work together in one union, the work goes forward. And
a man who carries envy in his heart, he shall never preach Christ truly,
but hypocriticallie. Paul, in the first Chapter to the Philippians, verse. 15.
he speaks of two sorts of Preachers: Some, says he, preach to increase
mine affliction, some of love. Then he says, What then? yet CHRIST is
preached, all manner of ways, whether it be under a pretense, or sincerely, and
I therein joy, yea, and will joy. He speaks this in his bands. So whosoever
has contention against his fellow laborer, preach as they will preach, they
make the Gospel a cloak to cover their malice and hypocrisy. Upon the other
part, they only who have intiere love to their fellow laborers, teach Christ
sincerely. We see the Apostles, when they make mention of their
fellow laborers, how honorably they style them, what great affection they
utter unto them: as Paul, when he speaks of Timothy, Titu^, and others.

Now I go forward: If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before
you. This is the third part of the Chapter, wherein he comfort them against
the hatred and persecution of the world: and so he warns them to go out
after his departure: I know well enough, the world will hate you. Then he
comfort them with his example, Have they not hated me before you? There is
the ground, The servant is not greater than his Master. The Lord Jesus is worth
all the Apostles and Ministers that ever were. Shall the servant start, and
run, when he is hated, seeing the great hatred and malice the Lord suffered?
No man in the world suffered so great persecution as the Lord, and so
patiently: And had it not been that the Lord Jesus took on that evil, thou
should have suffered more than the hatred of the world: that is, the very
wrath of God. So to move them to patience, he lays down his own example,
as before he proponed his example to love God, to keep his Commandments, and
love their neighbor: So he commends never a thing to them without his own
example. There is nothing that the Lord will bid thee do, but he will let
thee see that same first done by him: He sets himself before us as a
pattern. And as concerning this patience in suffering, it is needful that
this example of Jesus Christ be ever before the eyes of any that would
suffer: for it is against our nature, to suffer any way: Yea, it is so
needful, that there was never a man or woman who suffered, if they had not
had that suffering of Jesus before them, that could suffer patiently. The
example of all the patience in the world, will not cause one to suffer
patiently, except thou get a sense of that suffering: for faith in Christ
Jesus, is the ground of all well doing: Jesus Christ must be in thine heart,
ere there be any good virtue in thine heart: for it is faith in Christ Jesus,
that reformeth the heart: Except we have him in the heart, there is no good in
it. Therefore Paul, when he recommendeth any virtue unto us, he uses to set
before us the example of Christ, as a most forcible argument: as when he
exhorts us to modesty, he says, Let the same mind be in you, which was
in Jesus Christ, Philip. Chap. 2. verse. 5. And when he commends patience,
in bearing the infirmities of weak brethren, he brings his example: For
Christ also, says he, would not please himself, Romans Chap. 15. verse. 3.

Then, if thou would have love, or meekness, or any virtue into thine
heart, have the Lord into thine heart, and cast thine eye upon him. In one
word, believe in Jesus Christ: and getting a sight of him, thou shall find a
sweet change of thy nature: then thou shall be an holy liver, and a patient
sufferer, and thou shall grow in all good virtue, and that through Christ
Jesus: To whom, with the Father, and the Spirit of Truth, be all praise,
honor, and glory, foreuermore. AMEN.

THE TWELFTH LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xv. VERSE. 19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27. 19 Jf ye were of the world,
the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

20 Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than
his Master: if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also: if they
have kept my word, they will also keep yours.

21 But all these things will they do unto you for my Names sake, because
they have not known him that sent me.

22 If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin:
but now have they no cloak for their sin.

23 He that hates me, hates my Father also.

24 Jf J had not done works among them, which none other man did, they had not
had sin: but now: have they both seen, and have hated both me, and my
Father.

25 But* it is that the word might be fulfilled, that is written in their
Law, They hated me without a cause.

26 But when that Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from my
Father* even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father, he shall
testify of me.

27 And ye shall witness also, because ye have been with me from the
beginning.


AFter the Lord Jesus (beloved in him) has given sundry exhortations to his
Disciples, at last, in the 16. verse. he gives a direction to them, that after
his ascension to Heaven, they should pass out into the world, and teach all
Nations, and baptize them. The words here, are that they should go, and bring
out f^uit: that is, win souls to the kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, he sets
down the ground of his ordinance: he sets down what right he has to give it:
I have chosen you, and ye have not chosen me, says he: I prevented you, when
there was no such thing in your mind: and therefore I have just right to give
you this ordinance. After he has given this ordinance, he begins to furnish
them, and inarme the^ against the time they should pass out: the first piece of
armor was prayer: they should pray to the Father. But how? In his Name. Look
they heart in prayer be grounded by faith in Jesus Christ. The next piece of
their armor, is love, and chiefly that love which every one should bear to
another: they ought not only love him, whom they teach: but the fellow
laborers should love mutually: when the fellow laborers agree among
themselves, then the work of the Lord goes forward pleasantly. The third piece
of armor, is patience, that they should suffer patiently all the hatred of the
world. Now he insisteth upon this place, and uses sundry arguments: The first
he had, was from his own example: he says, Have they not hated me before
you? then why should ye take it heavily, that the world hate you? for the
servant is not greater than his Master. I go forward. In the beginning of this
Text, we have the second argument, whereby the Lord moves his Disciples to
bear patiently the hatred of the world: If ye were of the world, the world
would love his own, says he, but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. The meaning is
this in effect, If the world hate you, it is a good token, that I have chosen
you out of the world, and relieved you from that damnation which ye were
subject to. Ye see in this argument, when the world loves any man, certainly
it is a token that there is little good in that man: for the wicked world,
ordained for damnation, will love no man without a cause, except it find a
conformity with it: And as Paul says, Romans 12. verse. 2. except it find a
likeness in humor and affection, it will not love a man. It is true, wicked
men will love a good man, but never for any good, never for Gods cause, but for
some particular respect, as kindred, alliance, blood, or some policy: But for a
good cause, wicked men will never love a good man. By the contrary, when the
world hates a man, it is a token there is some good in that man. Ere ever the
world begin to hate a man, God loves him: Ere ever the world begin to
shoot that man out of the world, the Lord has exempted him out of the
world. It is true indeed, the world will hate a wicked man, as a man who
does great and horrible murders, commits adultery, and incest, etc. but
the world will never hate wickedness for wickedness cause, because it is an
offense to God, but for some private hurt and damage; as because he is noisome
to the Commonwealth, and troublesome to the peace of the Country, and such
like. This same which I speak of men, may be well drawn to Religion: That
Religion which the multitude of the world runs after, is not most to be
approved: No, the Lord save me from it. Neither that Religion which the world
detesteth, is to be rejected: No, the hatred of the Devil, and of the world,
is a good to ken. When the world hates godly men, there is matter of patience,
and of joye: and it is a sure token, the hatred of the world shall not so
soon touch the heart, but as soon the Lord shall meet it with his love: and
the greater the hatred be, the greater shall the love of God be. Romans 5. verse.
3. Faith works patience, patience experience, to wit, of the favor and love
of God: which he says afterward, is shed abroad, by his holy Spirit, into our
hearts.

I go forward: The third argument, Remember, says the Lord, the word that I
said to you, The servant is not greater than his Master: Look what they did
to me, they will do the same to you. As he would say, It may suffice you to
be in that estate that I was in before you: for why? ye are but servants, and
I am the Lord: and therefore it may suffice you well, to be in that estate
that I have been in before you. He calls them to remembrance of that word
which he spoke before in the 13. Chap. and 16. verse. when he exhorted them to
humility. Would any man or woman after the example of Christ, be humbled,
lowly, and obedient, and patient; let them ever hold their eyes upon Jesus
Christ and upon that highness and Lordship, wherein he sits at the right
hand of the Father: and then when thou see how high he is, look down to
thy self, and thou shall see, the fardest that thou can claim to, is this,
To be but his servant, though thou werest a King: (and woe be to thee, if thou
be not a servant of Christ's) Then looking up to Christ, and down to thy self,
reason thus, Has my Lord, who is above me, suffered many things patiently,
shall not I, who am a servant, suffer something patiently? And then the soul
shall say, Suffer patiently for him, and I shall count it honor to be partaker
of his suffering: for of all the honors of the world, it is the greatest, to
suffer for Christ. Were not the Apostles blythe while they suffered for Christ?
Read Act. 5. verse. 41. there it is said, They departed from the Council
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his Name. Paul,
Phillip. 1. verse. 29. says, To you is given for Christ, not only to believe
in him, but also to suffer for his sake. They who suffer for Christ, may think
they have gotten a great gift.

Farther of this argument, I mark this, The hatred and love of men is common to
Jesus Christ, with his members: so that they who love Jesus Christ, they love
also his servants: and they who are foes to Christ, they are foes also to his
servants. But it is well to be marked, that this hatred and favor of men
begins ever at Christ: ere ever one love the servant, he must love the
Master: and he that hates the servant, he hates the Master first: Hate
thou him who bears the Message of Christ? thou hate Christ, who sent him,
say what thou will: and thou who love Christ, thou will love the silliest
member of Christ.

Now I come to the fourth argument, and it is from the cause which they had in
hand: Whatsoever the world should do unto them, it should be for a good
cause, it should be for my Names sake, and for my Fathers sake. He lets
the Disciples see farther than the world saw in their hatred to the Disciples:
for Christ in all his speaking, chiefelie with the Scribes and Pharisees, he
lets them see with whom they had to do: they had to do first with the
Father of Heaven: all their persecution was a misknowledging of the Father. The
malicious persecution of men, strikes first upon the GOD of Heaven: first ere
it be on the Son, it must strike on the Father. As the Jews then, that
would boast that they loved God, and hated his Disciples, had in their hearts
first the hatred of the Father: so now men will say in the midst of the
hatred of the servants of Jesus Christ, that they love Jesus Christ: but the
Spirit of Jesus Christ says, They lie: and the ground of their hatred, is
the hatred of Christ. Be not deceived: I will lay down this as a sure
ground: It is impossible for one to love Christ, or his Father, and to rail
upon the servants of Christ. This for the fourth argument, wherein we may see
the first thing required in a Christian, is patience. Among all the arguments,
to move a man to patience, this suffering for a good cause, is principal: for
it brings with it great joy. When a man suffers as an evil doer, as a
thief, an adulterer, or murderer, he will not suffer patiently and joyfully.
The Lord will not let joy come of sin: but if they have joy, that comes upon
the assurance their sins are forgiven them, which caused them to hold down
their head. Blessed is the man who suffers for a good cause! and the best
cause, is to suffer for Jesus Christ: and if ever one found joy in suffering,
they found the greatest joy: for as it is said 1. Pet. 4.14. of those who
suffer for Christ, the Spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon them: the
Spirit of Christ sits down in the soul, and rests and holds up the soul
with joy. No words can teach this so well as experience: the Martyrs were
witnesses hereof, who in most exquisit torments were patient, and rejoiced
wonderfully: and what was the cause thereof? Even because that the Spirit of
Christ filled their souls with joy: and that joy overcame and ate up all the
pain. Therefore, if thou would suffer, look that it be for a good cause: let
it be for the cause of Jesus Christ, that our suffering may be joyful, and in
laying down of this life, we may be assured, that we shall be transported to
that blessed life: Blessed, says Christ, Matthew. 5.10, are those who suffer for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. Now lest the ignorance
of the Father should have been thought to have been a simple ignorance, he
says, Jf I had not come, and spoken unto them, (he means of the Scribes and
Pharisees) they should have had no sin: that is, If I had not revealed the
whole secret of the Father, their ignorance had been tolerable: but now they
have no pretense to cloak their ignorance, but their mouth shall be closed up.

Now ye see in these words, how he brings this persecution of his
Discilples to the head ground: First, There is the hatred of the Disciples:
Secondly, there is the hatred of the Son: And thirdly, there is the
misse-knowledge of the Father. The ground of this is the bitterness of the
heart. So it is called, Act. 8. verse. 23. when Peter speaks to Simon Magus.
The ground then of ignorance, was the root of bitterness in the heart,
resisting the holy Spirit. From this maliciousness sloweth the ignorance of
God, the hatred of the Son, and the hatred of the Disciples. All persecution
comes of malice first, and then of ignorance. All the persecuters that ever
were in the world, were like as many blind men. Indeed I grant, that all
persecution will not proceed in alike measure, from malice, and the gall of
bitterness; albeit there is none ignorance, but it is joined with some malice
of the heart: but the malice is not alike great: for in some hearts there is
nothing but venom, and a bag of gall: and some there are who have less: and
that persecution proceeds of a blind zeal, more than of bitterness. Look
what Paul speaks of himself, 1. Timoth. 1. verse. 13. he had such a blind
zeal, that he persecuted the Kirk: and when he was going to Damascus, he had
a kind of zeal: but afterward, when he saw Christ, he called that zeal a
madness, and woodnesse. So there is some persecution that comes of a blind
zeal: and some there is, that comes of maliciousness altogether: And as
these two differ in grounds, so they differ in mercy also. Paul, 1. Timoth. 1.
says, Before, I was a blasphemer, a persecuter, and an oppressor: but God had
mercy on me, for I did it ignorantly, through unbelief: and therefore the Lord
laid it not to my charge. But as touching the other persecution, that comes
of maliciousness against the holy Spirit, woe to that persecuter: for surely
it is a rare thing for such a man to get grace: And he who is obdured in
maliciousness, (for it is the ground of sin against the holy Ghost,) very
hardly obtains salvation, because with great difficulty is it rooted out of
the soul.

Take heed, there is none of us, but there is a piece of venom in us, and we
spoute out venom. So we knowing that God despiteth that venom, we should
travel to get it away by prayer to God, as we feel it: for there is no
power in Heaven, nor in earth, that can purge us, but that holy Spirit: and he
who has this Spirit of Christ, when he feels this bitterness in the
heart, will loathe at it, and then he will have his refuge to Christ.

Take up, in this last verse, that Christ and his Gospel serves to make the
world inexcusable: for their ignorance is wilful. There is never a soul that
is condemned, or goes to Hell, that can pretend ignorance, because their
ignorance is voluntary. It is true, that ere ever a man go to Hell, he is
blinded, and the eyes of him are taken away by his own corruption: But it is
also true, that ere ever a man die, his mouth shall be closed, and he shall
not have a word to speak in the day of judgment: No damned soul shall have
a word to speak in that day: when that voice is pronounced against them, they
shall pass away, with the greatest shout that ever* was, because they dare
not pretend ignorance: for his ignorance shall be inexcusable. Any man would
think, that if any were excused for ignorance, that the Gentiles would be
excused: yet the Apostle says, Romans 1. verse. 21. There is not a Gentile that
died, but their conscience shall make them inexcusable: because of the light of
nature that they had into them: Look then to the sharpness of the judgment
of God: And if thou had no more but the light of nature, all these creatures
shall stand up against thee, and condemn thee, though there were no more to
condemn thee. If that light of nature make men inexcusable in that great day,
let us take heed how we hear the Scriptures: for if the Gentiles were
inexcusable, what shall be the estate of the people, who have not only the
light of nature, but that spiritual light from Heaven, revealed by the mouth
of Jesus Christ? Shall that soul speak a word in that day? Therefore I
beseech you, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to receive knowledge, or else it
were better for us, that we had never heard of Christ: and better shall it be
with the Gentiles, and with Sodom and Gomorrha, than with us: the greater
light, the greater condemnation: Therefore, as we would see Heaven, let this
light shine in our hearts, that we may be transformed from the course of the
world, and shine before Christ in newness of life.

Now in the next words, he gives the second argument of that hatred, and
aggreageth it more: They who hate me, hate the Father also. And he is speaking
of the obstinate Jews, who pretended a love to God. We heard heretofore, that
the hatred of the world against the Disciples of Christ, was against Christ
himself: the hatred that extended to the one part, extended also to the other.
Now we hear that the hatred of the world against Christ, extends to the
Father also: and that he who hates Christ, hates God also: And even as the
Jews hated the Disciples, because they saw some grace of Christ in them, and
because they were endued with his Spirit: (for the world will never hate one
that is his own:) so for that same cause, hates the world Christ's members:
yea, the hatred of the world against Christ himself, was for none other cause,
but because they saw God dwelling in him bodily: they saw that glorious Godhead
dwelling in the nature of man: howbeit they cast up his kindred to him, yet they
hated him not because of the flesh, but because God dwelt in him. The thing
that the men of this world hate most, is the God of Heaven: and if they hate
any creature of God, it is for Gods cause. It is a wonderful thing, that such
a thought can be in the heart of the creature against the Creator. Let us then
see the cause! God is light, says John, 1. epist. 1. verse. 5. And whatsoever
man in the world does wickedly, he hates the light deadly, yea, if it were but
the day light, and the light of the Sun, he hates it, because it craves a
decent behavior. Romans 13. verse. 13. And the wicked soul craves aye
filthiness: and much more they hate the light of the word of God, because it
pierces into the consciences of men, it stingeth them: and then most of all
they hate God himself, who is the light: when he begins to shine upon
their consciences, they find such an horror and dread our, that they would
wish him out of the world, so vehemently they hate him: they can abide to
see the Devil, or any creature; but they cannot abide the sight of God. Now
look our nature: darkness and light sight not so much, heat and cold fight not
so much together, as God and our nature: and this battle shall never have an
end; no, not when the miserable catiue is in Hell. Whereon rises Hell, but
upon the dissension betwixt the Creator, and the creature? So this battle
shall never take an end, except it please God of his grace, who made light to
shine out of darkness, to inlighten, and to reform the soul, and to scatter
this palpable darkness* wherein we are wrapped.

I go forward to the third argument, If I had not wrought such works among
them, which none other man in this world did, they would not have had sin. The
argument then is taken from his works: They saw Jesus Christ to be such a
man, as there was never the like of him. They saw that divinity in him: and
this sight aggreageth their hatred. By the works, I understand all the proves
the Lord gave of his Divinity to the world; whether they were the miraculous
works, in restoring the blind to sight, the lame to limbs, the deaf to
ears; or it was his holy life in the world. Never man lived so holily, and
heavenly, as he: for he says, John, 5. verse. 36. My works testify of ^e* that
I am not a man only. And indeed, not only those who were his friends, and his
Disciples, and servants, took this up: (John says, We saw him full of grace
and verity, and we saw his glory* like the glory of the only begotten
Son of God, John, 1. verse. 14.) but also his very enemies saw it: when as the
soldiers came to take him, they said, Never one spoke, as he speaks, John,
7. verse. 46. His words bound the men's hands: and the Pharisees, who were his
enemies, were compelled to say, If he had been a sinner, he could not have
healed the blind, John, 9. verse. 16. And so we who now live, howbeit we see him
not bodily, working wonders in the world, thereby to persuade, or to convince
us; yet by this word of the Cross preached, which to his own is the power
and wisdom of God, we are persuaded that Christ is the only Son of God,
there is such a Majesty in it: And so, if there were no more to testify unto
us, but this word of the Gospel, it conuinceth the consciences of all men, that
the Lord, of whom it is spoken, is not man only, but God also.

Then he says, They have both seen, and have hated both me, and my Father.
There is a marvel, that they knowing God, they hated God: it would seem
tolerable, if they knew not God, to hate him: but to know him, and hate him,
it is a thing not to be comporteth with. It was said of before, that the
world, who hated him, knew not the Father. How can these two stand? They
stand both well: for first of all, there is a certain knowledge of God, by the
which the most wicked in the world knows God: but then the canker of the
heart expels this knowledge: and on this comes ignorance, and on ignorance
comes hatred. Mark by what degrees sin rises up: and every one of us may
find this in some measure: there is no sinner, who does a great sin, but
first they have a knowledge of God, of good and of evil. Paul, Romans 1. verse.
21. speaking of the Gentiles, says, they knew God. There is such a
bitterness and maliciousness in the heart, that that maliciousness blotteth
out the knowledge in the heart. A wicked man will stop both his fingers in
his eyes, that he should not see. The Apostle afterward says, They not taking
pleasure to intertain the knowledge of God, they put out knowledge: knowledge
departed, black ignorance comes in, by the judgment of God; and then
farewell conscience: then they lose all feeling: and being blind, and past
sense, they run headlonges to all mischief: And that is it the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 4.19. So ye see, that all this mischief that men commits
in the world, falls out immediately of blindness: ere ever one go to do
wickedness, ignorance comes in first: and then comes in a want of
conscience. Durst a man go out so boldly before God, to do wickedness, if
he had a conscience? And think ye that wicked men in this Country, who take
pastime in murder, in filthiness, etc. and above all, those men who have
committed such heinous things against God, against Religion, against their own
native Countreye, and the Crown; think ye they would have such a boldness,
if they stopped not their fingers in their eyes, and blunted the conscience? I
pronounce, in the Name of God, they are bound in the chains of darnesse,
(loose them who will,) if they repent not.

The last thing I mark: what is the thing that makes all sin inexcusable?
Knowledge closes the mouth of the sinner: knowledge takes away all excuses:
it takes away ignorance, and ignorance shall excuse no man in the day of the
Lord: and the greater the knowledge be, the less excuse is there for sin. I
say more: Knowledge not only makes sin inexcusable, but knowledge doubleth
sin: Murder is sin, but murder with knowledge is double sin: and the
greater the knowledge is, the greater the sin shall be, in the day of
Judgment. And if thou had but the knowledge of the elements, thou shall be
inexcusable: And if the Lord speak out of Heaven to thee, thy sin shall be
tripled: and well were it with thee, who now sinnest under the light of the
Gospel, without repentance, that thou had been one of Sodom, in that great
day: and thou thy self shall wish in that day, that so it had been. There is
no tongue can tell the judgment that shall fall upon that man, who hears
this word, and abides in sin. Yet the world will not be wakened: Cry on
them, they are not the better. Thus much for the second argument.

In the verse following, lest it should be thought or objected, that the
obstinate Jews should have done this in despite of God, the Lord meets this,
and says, All this is done that the word might be fulfilled that is written in
their Law, They hated me without a cause. The place is in the 35. Psalm,
verse. 19. It is called the Law, because all Prophecy is a pendicle to Moses
Law; and all the Prophets were under the Law. This is a complaint of David, of
his enemies, who hated him without a cause. There was a great cause of love in
Christ, and not of hatred. Then this ye will see commonly, that when the
Spirit in the Scripture makes mention of crosses* troubles, and persecution of
Christ, which are evil things, he speaks so warily of them, that nothing be
derogate to Gods glory, he says, The Lord ordained them from all eternity.
And there is not a thing, yea, not the most unworthy thing, that is done to
the faithful of Christ this day, but it comes by that eternal Decree: it
was preordained: and if it had not been so, the godly had cause to sorrow,
and the God of Heaven would be disgraced. And mark this, that the ordinance
of God shall not excuse thee, who is the instrument, when thou do any thing
against his revealed will. The Murderer may say, What have I done, but the
will of God? O murderer! say I, thou art not to be excused: thou have not done
the will of God revealed: and so say I to the Adulterer, and to all others,
that commit sins, which God has forbidden. After that he has aggreaged this
hatred of the Jews, against his Disciples, he leaves it, and returns to his
Disciples, to comfort them. The last thing he comfort them with, He shall
send them that Comforter from the Father: for he comes first from the
Father: and the Father sends him by the Son: he calls him the Spirit of
truth: and, He shall testify into your heart of me. As if he would say,
The testimony these Jews got, it was but outwardly: but to you I shall send
my Spirit, an inward witness. The Lesson is: We see here two sorts of
witnesses: the one outward, the other inward: to wit, the Spirit. The first
is his word, his miracles: and it is good to hear the word: but and if the
Spirit be not present, it were better for thee never to have heard the word.
And supposing we had CHRIST with us, even in the midst of us, as he was
amongst the Jews, if it pleased him not to send his Spirit into our hearts,
it would do us no good. And therefore, think it not enough to say, And if
we had CHRIST, as the Jews had him, we would believe, and we would be
well. No, no, If thou had not the Spirit, all would not avail thee. Be
not content to be hearers only, for all that will serve but to damnation,
except thou feel that Comforter to work in thine heart, to reform thine
heart, and to work faith into thee. And therefore let this be thy prayer, in
hearing that word, LORD, let thy Spirit work into mine heart. And if he be
into thine heart, he will let thee feel such a comfort, and such a peace, and
such a rest into thine heart, that the world cannot tell what it means.

This is to be considered, that he says, he will send the Comforter to them
from the Father: for it imports, That the Spirit flows first from the
Father, and then from himself. So he said in the Chapter preceding, tha^ the
Father should send the Spirit in his Name: for the Father sends the Spirit
by the Son, ere the Son send him from the Father. Seeing then, he
proceeds from them both, he must bear witness both of the Father, and of
the Son: but of the Father, by the Son, in whom the Father manifests
himself visibly.

Thereafter he comfort them another way, for he says, Ye shall also
witness of me. So he honors them, to make them witnesse-bearers to him.
The greatest honor in the world, when a man is sent to bear witness to
Christ: howbeit thou should die into the message, thou have gotten an honor
above all honors. It is true, this cause wherefore they bare witness of him,
was because they saw him, and heard him, and handled him with their hands: and
this was a great help. But take up here the chief ground, in bearing
witness of Christ, when he sends into the heart, the Spirit of comfort: And
I say, suppose never a man saw Christ, (as we this day see him not bodily,) or
never handled him, yet if it please the Lord, to send that Spirit into the
heart, he will demonstrate Christ unto him, as evidently, as though he had
been in Heaven to see that grace. Not only Ministers must do this, but all
men must confess Christ: and so let us preasse to get that Spirit: for as
Paul said, No man is able to name the Lord, without that Spirit. 1. Corinthians.
Chap. 12. verse. 3. At the Name of JESUS all knees should be bowed, and the
tongue should be loosed, with such a grace of the heart, that the hearts of
men who hear, should be edified at the hearing of the word: And we should
aye be edified more and more, till in the end we grow to perfection in
Christ: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise,
honor, glory, power, and dominion, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XIII. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvi. VERSE. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12. THese things have J said
unto you, that ye should not be offended.

2 They shall excommunicate you: yea, the time shall come, that whosoever
kills you, will th^^ke that he does God service.

3 And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, nor me.

4 But these things have J told you, that when the hour shall come, ye might
remember, that I told you them. And these things said I not unto you from
the beginning, because J was with you.

5 But now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you asks me,
Whither go thou?

6 But because I have said these things unto you, your hearts are full of
sorrow.

7 Yet J tell you the truth, It is expedient for you that J go away: for if I
go not away, that Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, J will
send him unto you.

8 And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment.

9 Of sin, because they believe not in me:

10 Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye shall see me no
more.

11 Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

12 I have ye many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.


THe Lord being shortly to depart out of this world (Beloved in the Lord Jesus)
continues his speech with his Disciples from the beginning of the fourteenth
Chapter, to the seventeenth; exhorting them, comforting them, and instructing
them in all things they should do after he was departed. Now in the sixteenth
Chapter he continues in the same purpose. In the beginning of the Chapter he
concludes that doctrine which he had in the latter part of the former Chapter,
that exhortation he gave his Disciples to patience, These things have J spoken
unto you* that ye should not be offended: that is, I have spoken to you of the
hatred of the world, and of the persecution of the world for my cause, that
ye should not be offended at me, and at my Cross. The Lesson is, Brethren,
Christ Jesus, and the Cross, are things inseperable. Affliction follows upon
the Euangel: 1. Timoth. Chap. 1. verse. 8. they are called the afflictions of
the Euangel: Be not ashamed of the afflictions of the Euangel. Now the thing
in the world that nature abhors, and can abide worst, is the Cross: So if
we will look to nature, there is no access to Christ: It is impossible for
us, by nature to attain to Christ, except by an heavenly power we be
sustained, that we may pass through the sire of the Cross, wherewith he is
compassed. The Lord Jesus is in a fire, and without: we pass through this fire,
we cannot be partakers of Christ: and ere we go through the fire, we must be
raised up by an heavenly grace: for as faith to believe in Christ, is of grace;
so affliction and suffering for Christ, is of grace. Philipp. Chap. 1. verse.
29. Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him,
but also to suffer for his sake. Except a man be holden up, he is not able to
abide the afflictions of the Euangel.

Well then, in the time of calmnesse, and while the Lord, giu^th us time to
draw our breath, this should be the chief thing we should study, to prepare
ourselves for affliction: knowing, that affliction follows on the Gospel.
Yea, every one, who professes the Lord, and his Gospel, should be ready, when
it pleases the Lord to lay on the burden. And chiefly this appertains to
Preachers, ay to fore-warne, that affliction is to come: that at that day of
affliction, men and women may be ready to suffer what the Lord will lay on
them: for as it is said, He who is forewarned, is half armed: And thou
should say every day, Lord, as I profess thy Gospel, so I am ready to
suffer for it: knowing, that the end of affliction is joy.

When he has concluded the speech he has had with them generally, he comes
in particularly, and fore-telleth of some afflictions which they should suffer:
The first is, They shall excommunicate you; The second, The time shall come,
when they shall slay you: and they shall think they serve God. He lays
down the ground, Because they know not the Father, nor me. The Text is easy:
It is not one or two sorts of afflictions only, that is joined with Christ, and
his Gospel: but all kind of affliction, and at last it will come to death it
self: and what reck of a common death? but death with exquisite torments.
Read the Books of the Martyrs: the Apostles had experience of this, they
passed forward, after Christ went away, from affliction to affliction; till at
last they lost their lives: they were scourged, and shot out of the Synagogue,
and at last slain: the afflictions that follow on the Gospel, are all kind of
afflictions. So if any man would suffer, let him prepare himself to suffer,
though it were all the torments of the world. Look what the Lord spoke to
Peter, Ioh. 21.18. When thou wast a young man, thou girdedst thy self, and
walkedst whither thou would: but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch
forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and lead thee whither thou
would not: That is, thy suffering shall be in the will of thine enemies.
Brethren, the most exquisite torments, as racking, burning, and such others,
will not excuse thee, if thou deny Christ for the pain: and therefore we should
make us for the most exquisit torments: and this is one comfort, the Lord will
not lay more upon thee than thou may bear: and he will give thee power to
bear it out: and he, who sends the tentation, will give thee a fair and
joyful out gate: So Paul says, The momentaniall and light afflictions of this
present life, works out an everlasting weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17. Look,
1. Pet. 1.7. Now follows the cause of persecution, They who will persecute
you, they shall th^nke they serve GOD. The forest persecution, is under the
cloak of Religion, and service of God. The fairest cloak to do a wicked
turn, is the cloak of Religion: and so the forest cruelty, is under the
cloak of Religion. There was never such a cruelty as the Papists use, under
the pretense of Religion: Inquire about that holy house of Spain, and that
Massacre of Paris, which shall never be forgotten before God: that blood of
the Saints is crying for vengeance from the Heavens: all the pretenses they
can make, shall not save them from it. Now, mark the ground of their
persecution: These things they shall do to you, because they knew not the
Father, nor me. The ground of all well-doing is light, when the eye of the
soul is illuminate to see GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, and the Father in the face of
the Lord Jesus: when the mind is illuminat, then the judgment is upright: and
when the judgment is upright, the heart and the affections are well inclined:
when the heart is well inclined, then the hand, and the outward instruments,
are well occupied. Matthew. 6. verse. 22. Jf the eye see, the whole body is
lightened: that is, if the eye of the soul be lightened, then the soul is well
disposed: So when the mind is set upon Jesus Christ, and lightened by that
light, it is a joyful thing: but if the mind, which is the eye of the soul,
be blinded, and see not the face of Jesus Christ, then all the powers of the
soul are blinded: the judgment is blind, and the heart is evil disposed, the
affections perverse, and then the hand is doing evil: a blind body is ay doing
evil: if the eye be blind, the whole body is blind: if the light be put out,
then there is great darkness: if the eye of the soul be put out, then a man
is but a lump of darkness, and nothing abides that creature, but that
outward darkness. Wherefore serves darkness, but to be casten into darkness?
Therefore, as thou would have an upright judgment, strive to have an
illuminate soul: and as thou would do well, keep aye a clear eye in thy
soul. Never let the face of Jesus depart from thine eye: for it is only that
face that holds the eye in a clearness, and gives light to the soul: He is
the light of the world, and take him away, there is nothing but darkness in
the world. When he has forewarned them of the afflictions, he sets down the
end, wherefore he fore-warneth them, to wit, that they should remember the Lord
had forewarned them of afflictions, and therefore, that they should prepare
themselves for trouble. But whereas they might have said, Wherefore forewarned
thou us no sooner? he answers to this, I forewarned you not of this from the
beginning, because I was with you: but now I am to depart, and therefore I
forewarn you. One of the best preparations we can have, is to hear much, (for
this preaching will not abide ay) therefore let us hear well so long as we
have occasion of hearing of the word which we preach to you: for why? in the
day of affliction, that holy Spirit shall call to thy rememberance that which
thou have heard, and so comfort thee: And in the day of affliction* the holy
Spirit will be more effectual to call to thy rememberance that which thou have
heard, better than when thou first heardest it: For why? the word of God, and
the Spirit of God, has not the special effect ever when the word is heard,
but when the body is in most necessity: and of all times in the world, in the
time of affliction, or in the hour of death, the word will be most sweet.
Therefore hear in time, if it were in the hour of death: that at least, in
the hour of death, thou may have joy in thine hearr. Another thing here:
behold how the Lord loved his Disciples in this world: certainly so long as
he was with them, he loved them wondrous tenderly: and let be that he would
not let them suffer, he would not once let them hear of the cross. And this is
the thing, that the Disciples of John the Baptist come to Christ, and complain
of, Mat. 9. verse. 14. saying, Why do we, and the Pharisees ^ast often, and thy
Disciples fast not? The Lord answers, Can the Children of the Marriage
Chamber mourn, so long as the Bridegroom is with them? But the days will
come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then they shall fast.
And now, when the Lord is with them, he fore-warneth them of their
afflictions, and of death it self: and so indeed they felt it when he
departed. The ground of this is, because the Disciples of Christ had a time of
grouth granted to them into the world: and so long as the Lord abode into the
world, they were not ripe, and their strength was more outward than inward:
But now, when he goes away, they grow ripe: he sent his Spirit upon them, as
ye see, Act. Chap. 2. they had a greater consolation by that Spirit in Christ's
absence, than they had during all the time that Christ was with them. So we
have our own time in growing: and the Lord, when he sees we are not able to
suffer, he will not lay the Cross upon us, but he will spa^e us. Then we
have a time when we come to ripeness: that is, when we get that Spirit, and
then the Lord will lay on the burden. Now as for us, we have had a long time
to ripen, and it is a wonder that the Lord has given us so long a time, and
spared us so long. But, Brethren, the time is coming, wherein we shall
suffer, and afflictions abide us for the Gospel: And I pray the Lord, that he
may find some ripeness and maturity, and chiefly in us the Ministers of the
Gospel, that we may seal up the Gospel with our blood, if need require. He
falls out in the verse. following, in a gentle reproof of his Apostles, I am
to depart, and none of you asks, where I am to go: but, says he, your
hearts are full of sorrow. The Disciples of Christ, when he was among them,
so acquiesced upon his bodily presence, and thought they had such an ease with
him, that they thought not of any other felicity: and therefore they were woe
at such speeches: for they were more carnal, than spiritual; and took more
heed to that carnal, than spiritual joy. So this is our nature, that if we
can get in the world such abundance of riches, pleasure, honor, and such
company as we would, we would never desire to go out of this world, but ay to
remain. And when we hear tell that we must slit out of this world, the
rememberance of death will sting us to the heart: the Disciples were sad,
because the Lord was to go from them: It is the hardest thing in the world,
to get the soul disseuered from the world, and to get the eye set upon
Heaven, and to get an hope of that Life: Woe to that soul that gets not
hope to reach above this world: that soul is in an evil estate: And the Lord
knowing this, he will take away from us, that company that will draw us
from him, and piece and piece he will take us unto himself: for no man
gets the desire of Heaven in a moment: but a man piece and piece steals
out of the world, and goes to Heaven. Think not thou, therefore, them
happy, who have the world at their will: No, no, it is well for that
creature, whom the Lord draws out of the world, by taking from them the
things of the world: For miserable are we, if ou^ hope be not extended
beyond all earthly, yea, spiritual comfortes, that even can befall us in
this life: as Paul says, Of all men we are most miserable, if in this life
only we have hope in Christ. 1. Cor. 1. verse. 19.

I go forward: As before he gently reproved them, so in the next verse. he
comfort them: It is expedient for you, that J go away: for it J go not
away, the Comforter shall not come to you: but if J go away, I will send him
to you. Hereby we see, that the holy Spirit comes by the Resurrection and
Glorification of JESUS CHRIST: and therefore it is said, The holy Spirit was
not given, because Jesus was not as yet glorified, Chap. 7. verse. 39. And
whatsoever grace was of the holy Spirit into the world, was by virtue of
that Resurrection of Christ to come: and all this consolation we have, flows
out of his Resurrection, and Glorification: for out of his fullness, we receive
a part: he is full of glory, and his soul is repleat, and passes all the
Angels in glory: and so out of his fullness, all grace flows unto us: and
every one of the members of Christ, has a measure of that Spirit, as he
thinks meet: and therefore Paul says, He ascended on high, and gave
gifts to men, Ephesians. 4. verse. ^. And so, would thou have joy, cast up thine
eye to heaven, and fasten thy faith on Jesus Christ, and thou shall find a
portion of that Spirit. We see two sorts of the presence of Christ: One
bodily, as the Disciples saw: another spiritual: Howbeit he be distant from
us in the Heaven, yet he sends down his holy Spirit: and by that Spirit he
works a feeling in the hearts of his own: and they will hear his voice, and
will see him with the eyes of their soul: And they will have this sense, with
such a joye, that the tongue of him who finds that joye, is not able to
express the thousand part of it. Both these presences are very good: and they
who saw him, had a great benefit. Many Kings longed to see him, but they saw
him not: as David, and Abraham. The men who saw him when he was an Infant,
thought they got a greater grace, than if all the world had been given
them. But for all this, the other presence is better: for he says, It is
good that I go away from you. It had been good for the Jews, that they had
never had his bodily presence, because they had not the spiritual presence of
the Lord in their hearts. But as for that spiritual presence, in all respects
it is to be preferred to his bodily presence, in the days of his humiliation:
because by virtue of that presence, (albeit so far distant from us,) we
receive the holy Spirit, and all his graces. Look to Heaven, and see him
glorified: that presence is the chief presence: and as soon as we see that
glory, in that day, the beams of his glory shall transform us, and catch us
up in the clouds. So great is the glory of the Lord, that it will not remain
within the Heavens with our Head: but of necessity it must flow to his members
upon earth. Now when thou find grace, and joye, and pleasure into thine
heart, (And think not thou have joy enough, howbeit thou had all the
pleasures in the world, except thou have that joye of Christ.) then assure thy
self, that Jesus Christ thine Head is glorified in the Heavens. And if we
find such a pleasure, that we will be ravished above the world, being now
so far distant from Christ; what shall be that joy and pleasure we shall
conceive in our heart, when we shall see him face to face? The tongue cannot
tell it: but the heart that has felt it, can best testify it. The Lord grant,
that while as we are in the earth, we may walk as Citizens in the Heavens,
ever waiting that these vile bodies may be transformed, and made conformable
to that glorious body of Jesus Christ.

Now to go forward: After he has forewarned his Disciples of the afflictions
which after his departure they should suffer, That they should be
excommunicate, and also slain: And after he has set down the end wherefore
he forewarned them, to wit, that they should not be offended, but confirmed:
And after he has reproved them gently, that they rejoiced not when he told
them that he was to depart: And after he has begun to comfort them, by letting
the^ see that is was for their weal that he was to depart from them: For
through his blessed Ascension, they should be partakers of the holy Spirit, and
his graces: which, if he did not ascend to his Father, they would not get: In
the words following he falls out upon another head of doctrine, and
instructs them concerning the office of the Spirit, which he was to
discharge in the world, during the time of his absence: and this office is in
respect of the world, and chiefly of the obstinate Jews, who would not
believe in Christ when he was present with them: When he shall come, that is,
when that Spirit of truth shall come, after that I am gone away, he shall
rebuke the world: that is, the faythlesse and obstinate in the world, he
shall convict them. But ye may say, No man hears the voice of the Spirit,
speaking with his own mouth: how shall the Spirit then rebuke the world?
The meaning is, The Disciples, whom that Spirit shall comfort, shall by their
Ministry rebuke the world. We have then two effects of the Spirit here:
The first is, in respect of the godly, and those who believe in Jesus Christ,
the Spirit enters into their hearts, and works the greatest joye and
consolation that ever was. There was never a soul that knew what true joye
meaned, but those that felt the Spirit. The other effect, is in respect of
those who abide rebellious against Christ. In respect of them, the holy Spirit
is aye rebuking and threatening them to their damnation: and that, by the
Ministry of poor men: for he will set them up, and make them stand up, and
rebuke all the obstinate: yea, even the Kings of the earth, if they will not
believe. All these reproves that come out of the mouths of the servants of
JESUS CHRIST, how simple soever they be, they proceed not so much from the
mouths of men, as from the holy Spirit: and they contemn the holy Spirit,
who contemn those men, his Ministers: and the Lord of Heaven will be avenged
on them in that great Day.

But to come to the particulars: He shall rebuke the world, and convict it of
three things: The first is, He shall convict the world of sin: Next, Of
righteousness: And thirdly, Of judgment. The first of these three concerns
the faythlesse world: and the other two concern the Lord Jesus: He shall
convict the world, that the Lord Jesus is not only holy and righteous, but also
the great and glorious Judge of the world. First he says, The holy Spirit,
when he shall come, he shall convict the world of sin. Then he shows the
ground, Because the world belieueth not in me. The sin is infidelity* in
that they believe not in Jesus Christ, the heauiest sin that can fall upon
any man, for it brings on the greatest guiltiness and condemnation that ever
was: He who belieueth not in me, says Christ, he is condemned already. John,
3. verse. 18. Look how soon thou sinnest, if thou refuse to turn thine heart
to the Lord Jesus; as soon thou art condemned: the Lord delayeth not the
sentence to the last day: but when thou have sinned, the Lord immediately
ascends as a Judge, to his Tribunal, and gives out the sentence of wrath
against thee, because thou belieuest not in the only begotten Son of God. So
there is no greater sin, than infidelity, for where it is, all sins are
imputed: as by the contrary, the greatest righteousness that any man in this
world can have, is to believe in Christ: it is such a righteousness that takes
away all the sin whatsoever: where it is, no sin is imputed. Art thou a
Murderer, a Blasphemer, an Adulderer? etc. believe in Christ, that he died for
thee, and thy sins shall not be laid to thy charge: for the righteousness of
Christ cloatheth a guilty man with righteousness. And this moved a notable
servant of God to say, There is no sin without infidelity: and no righteousness
without faith: Meaning, that of all the sins in the world the sin of infidelity
is the greatest: for if thou believe not, the least evil thought that thou
can think, shall abide before God continually: so long as infidelity abides,
all sin abides: and take it away, all thy sins shallbe taken away. This is
then the meaning: and would ye have proof of this, how the holy Spirit shall
reprove the world of sin, look Paul, 1. Cor. 14.24. there ye will find the
experience hereof, for he says, Jf a man prophecy conform to the word, if
an idiote comes in at the door, o^ an unlearned man that belieueth not, he
is rebuked of all, and is judged of all: and so are the secrets of his heart
made manifest: (to wit, that infidelity that lay in his heart, is made
manifest,) and then he falls down on his face, and worshippeth GOD: and
says plainly,, GOD is in you indeed. We have the experience of this in our
own selves: when Jesus Christ is preached, there are none that hear, and are
guilty, but their hearts are convicted: there is none of you but ye find
this: for if thou be an harlot, when thou hear harlotry preached, thou art
convicted, except thou be converted by the holy Spirit, and can come to God,
and say, Lord, for Christ's sake, have mercy on me: for that person that does
so, is not only vnconuicted, but also is comforted by the Spirit: And happy
is that soul which finds this wrought into it. Now, What is the next thing
when the Spirit shall come, whereof he shall convict the world, and
unbelieving Jews? He shall convict the world, says the Lord, of justice:
that is, He shall convict the world, and the unbelieving Jews, That the Lord
Jesus was that holy One: for the Jews counted him the most unjust man that was
in the world: they put him in the rank of thieues: they preferred Barabbas to
him. But the Spirit of God, when he shall come, he shall convince the world,
That he was the holiest man in the world, as he is called, Act. 7. verse. 52.
The ground of the conviction is this, He passed up to the Father. It appeared
that he was the justest man in the world, seeing he passed up to Heaven,
after his glorious resurrection: For if he had been a sinner, he had never
ent^ed into that Heavenly Sanctuary. No unholy thing can enter into Heaven: if
a man have but so much as one spot of sin, he cannot come there. So then,
there was never soul that got entry into Heaven, that got access to the
Majesty of God, but the Lord Jesus first: And then, so many as shall be washen
from their sins, by faith in his blood: so many only shall enter into that
Sanctuary, as shall be clad with the righteousness of Christ. If thou
would go to Heaven, strive to be clad with that garment: that is, Have
faith, or else thou shall never have entresse into Heaven.

The proof of this, That the Lord was the holiest man in the world, appeared
soon after Christ ascended: An example ye have in the second Chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles, verse. 23. where Peter, or rather the Spirit of God, by
the mouth of Peter, immediately after Christ's ascension, objecteth to the
Jews, that him whom they had slain with wicked hands, the Lord had raised
him from the dead, and glorified him in the Heavens: Whereby the holy Spirit
so convicted, and pricked their hearts; that they said to Peter, and the
rest, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? That is, How shall we be cleansed
from that innocent blood? So now it appears, that Christ was the justest man
that ever lived in the world, through the working of the Spirit, that
conuicteth them thereof.

The third point, whereof the holy Spirit shall reprove the world, is, of
judgment. So, as the Lord is just, so is he the glorious Judge of the world.
On what ground shall this pass? Because the prince of this world is judged.
The LORD JESUS is the Judge of the world, in that he has condemned the
Devil: he has not judged the silliest, and the weakest in the world: but him
who had the greatest power in the world: And so in judging him, the holy Spirit
conuicteth the world, That he was the Judge of the world. Colloss. 2. verse.
15. it is said, When he hung upon the Cross, he sat most gloriously in a
Chariot. There was never an Emperor, who was carried in such a glorious
Chariot as the Lord, howbeit he was abject in the sight of the world: In that
Chariot he takes the Devils, and takes all their power, and leads them in
triumph, and makes an open show of them. So there is his victory, which he
got over the Devil, the prince of this world. Indeed I grant, that the
Devil as yet has a great power in this world. Ephesians. Chap. 2. verse. 2. And
he runs about like a roaring Lion: yet he is overcome, and chained in
darkness. Iud. 6. That is, He is in chains of terrible horror and anguish:
howbeit he will deceive men women, and make them to think, that he is free to
do what he will: be lies, he is in a great horror. Now the godly, who find the
mortification of that sinful nature, find that the Devil is overcome: for
except the Devil were overcome, sin would reign in the world, for the
kingdom, and tyranny of the Devil; and the kingdom of sin and death, are
ever conjoined. So the godly, who find that the old man is crucified, find
that the Devil is overcome. The ungodly also, in whom the Devil, the prince
of this world, reigns, ( 2. Corint. 4. verse. 4.) they are convicted in their
consciences, That the Lord has overcome the Devil. The Murderers,
Blasphemers, Adulterers, etc. are convict by the light of the Gospel, That
Satan, whom they serve, as as many slaves, is but a slave himself, vanquished
by Christ Jesus, and bound with chains of darkness: albeit through induration,
and malice of their hearts, they prefer his bondage to the liberty of the
Kingdom of Christ. And I denounce, In the Name of the Great GOD of Heaven, If
they continue, their portion shall be with the Devil: the Lord Jesus shall be
avenged on them: For albeit the Lord Jesus be in Heaven, sitting at the right
hand of that glorious Majesty; yet he leaves not his poor members destitute
of comfort. As before he said, I will not leave you comfortless; as soon as
he went to Heaven, he sent down his Spirit, by whom he reigns in the
world. Now that Spirit is either converting the souls of men, to Christ; or
else he is conuicting and condemming the obstinate: And be thou assured, that
if the holy Spirit convert not thy soul by this word, he shall convict thee,
and stop thy mouth, and keep thee in chains, to that great Judge the Lord
Jesus: and thou shall be so convict in this world, that thou shall not have a
word to say in that great Day, Paul speaks of this, 2. Cor. 10. verse. 5.
Those who will not be converted, but remain disobedient, I shall cause
vengeance light upon them, and I shall be the savor of death unto death to
them. So either shall thou be converted by the word, or else be convicted,
and condemned. Now when he has dipped into this doctrine, he cutteth off the
speech, and says, J have many more things to speak to you, but ye cannot
bear them now: That is, ye are not capable of them now. There were other
causes, no doubt, that here urged him to cut short his language: as namely,
because the hour of his death was at hand, as Chap. 14. verse. 30. Another was,
because, as he says, Chap. 15. verse. 15. All things that I have heard of my
Father, have J made known unto you: and therefore now he would not insist to
repeat or expound the^ here, but he remitteth farther revelation to the
Spirit. Foolish therefore are the Papists, who ground on this place their
Traditions: for all grace and power to understand any thing of Jesus Christ,
and of the salvation of man, is of the Spirit. The Lord knew well, what power
he has given to every one to understand the way of salvation, and according
thereunto he measures his instruction: he submits himself to their
rudeness and capacity. If thou be an Infant, he will not give thee solid
and strong food, but Milk: So he wills a Minister to measure the doctrine,
conform to the grouth and power of the hearers: The Ministers in every
Congregation, should know who are Infants, and who are not, and accordingly
use discretion.

This word is to be marked, I have many things to tell you, and yet I will
not tell you them now. The Minister should instruct the soberest in meanest
things, and yet he should subjoyne this, There is an higher mystery, if thou
werest capable thereof; that they may desire to grow in knowledge. Some
foolish men will say, If I had the Creed, and Pater noster, and the
Commandementes, I care not for more knowledge: that will not serve thee: no,
no, as thou gettest a sight of Christ, so should thou have a great desire to
receive farther grouth and in-sight, and strive to get a perfection: for albeit
we appear to our selves sometimes to have cunning and knowledge enough; yet
it is but little which the best of us has, in respect of that which we should
have: for here we see but in a part, we know but in a part. Read 1. Corinthians. 13. verse. 9. We should therefore never be content of the knowledge we
have: but should aye strive to get more, and with all these Preachinges, strive
to get Jesus Christ, and to see his face more and more, as it were in a glass,
till once our faith be turned into sight, and then we shall get sacietie of
knowledge. How dangerous a thing it is, to a man who has gotten but little
knowledge, there to bide, the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 6. verse. 4.
declares, for there he denounces an heavy judgment against those, who have
gotten a piece af knowledge, and stand there, yea, and fall away from it, he
says, there is no place of repentance for them. And indeed it is not
possible, but if a man get once a solid taste and sight of those heavenly
things, but he will strive most earnestly to have a farther knowledge, sight,
and fore-tasting of them night and day, even till he get full sacietie of
joye and glory. 1. Petr. 2 verse. 2. Therefore, I beseech you never to rest,
till ye get a sight of Christ by and above all knowledge, that in him ye may
have all perfection: To whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all
praise, honor and glory, world without end.

So be it.

THE XIV. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvi. VERSE. 13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22. 13 Howbeit, when he is
come which is the Spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth: for
he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, shall he
speak, and he will show you the things to come.

14 He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you.

15 All things that the Father has, are mine: therefore said I, that he
shall take of mine, and show it unto you.

16 A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and
ye shall see: for I go to the Father.

17 Then said some of his Disciples among themselves, What is that he says
unto us, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while,
and ye shall see me: and, For J go to my Father?

18 They said therefore, What is this that he says, A little while? we
know not what he says.

19 Now Jesus knew that they would ask him, and said unto them, Do ye
inquire among your selves, of that I said, A little while, and ye shall not
see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?

20 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, and the
world shall rejoice: and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy.

21 A woman, when she trauelleth, has sorrow, because her hour is come: but
as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world.

22 And ye now therefore are in sorrow: but J will see you again, and your
hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.


WE heard the last day (Beloved Brethren) how the Lord, in that long
discourse and speech which he continues with his Disciples, a little before
his departure out of this world: after he had forewarned them of their
afflictions, and had gently reproved them, and comforted them, by telling
them, that it was good for them, that he did ascend, for then he should send
them the holy Spirit, he entered into a profound doctrine, concerning the holy
Spirit, whom he was to send to his Disciples after his departure to Heaven.
He showed them what the Spirit should do, chiefly in respect of the
obstinate world, and the Jews, who would not believe: when he shall come,
he shall convict them of three things: The first is, of that sin, the
greatest sin in the world, the sin of Infidelity: The next is, that Jesus
Christ, whom they esteemed to be an unjust man, the holy Spirit shall convict
them, that that Christ is the holiest in the world: The third thing, that he is
not only just and holy, but he is the glorious Judge of the world: And that
shall appear in this chiefly, that he has condemned the Devils. When he has
dipped into this doctrine, he cutteth it off, saying, I have many things to
speak to you, whereof ye are not capable.

Then, lest the Disciples should have been offended with him, that he would
not go forward in teaching them: in the first words of this Text the Lord
meets this, and he comfort them with a promise, That when that Spirit
shall come, which is the Spirit of truth, he should lead them in all kind of
truth, and instruct them in all those things which the Lord spoke not to
them. In this Text the Lord continues his speech of the holy Spirit, and of
those things he should do in the world. This appears of the first words
we have read, that the Lord would have his Disciples to understand, that the
holy Spirit should be a more profitable Teacher to them, than Christ himself
was by his own voice before his Passion: and therefore he remitteth farther
doctrine to the Spirit. It is better to have the Spirit of Christ, without
Christ's bodily presence, than to have the presence of Christ, not teaching
thee inwardly by the Spirit: Yea, I say more, It is better to have the voice
of a poor simple man, speaking to thee, in the Name of Jesus Christ, together
with the holy Spirit, than to have the presence of Jesus Christ himself, and
his outward voice, if thou have not the Spirit. What auailed it to the
obstinate Jews, who believed not into him, that they saw him, and heard him?
It had been better, that they had never known him. It is not the voice that
does the turn, but the powerful working of the holy Spirit: the holy
Spirit reformeth the minds. If the voice of CHRIST were sounding among you
this day, (as sweet as it is) it would do you no good without the Spirit:
Therefore take not so much heed to the man who teaches outwardly, as to the
Spirit: and as ye would be safe, as ye hear that outward teaching, strive
to feel the Spirit of Christ instructing, illuminating, and mollifying your
hearts: other ways it were far better for you, never to hear a word.

Yet to mark the words more narrowly: he says, That Spirit, which is the
Spirit of truth, shall lead you in all truth: that is, Concerning your
salvation. In stiling the Spirit, he gives an argument, wherefore he shall
teach them the truth, Because he is the Spirit of truth: the true Spirit
can teach nothing but the truth. If a man or woman, therefore, would be
instructed by that Spirit of Truth, and would be led into all Truth,
then let this be settled into their hearts, That that Spirit which speaks,
is true: Ye know that no man will credit another in weighty matters,
without he know he be true: Even so, if this opinion be not settled into
thine heart, that he is true, thou will never believe the Scriptures of God.

To go to an higher ground: If one would be instructed in the truth by the
Spirit, he must have a love to the verity, and desire to know the verity:
where there is no love of the truth, there must be an hatred of the truth:
He who is not with me, is against me. And where the Devil finds such an
heart, he is effectual in it in all vanities: because, (as Paul says, 2.
Thessal. 2. verse. 9.) where men have not a love of the truth, God gives them
over to believe lies, that they might be condemned, and carried into
perdition. So as thou would live, hunger for the truth; as a man hungereth
for temporal food: then when this appetite is wakened, settle this persuasion
in thine heart, that that holy Spirit who speaks, is true: then the heart of
man and woman will drink in the doctrine of the truth, with greater
sweetness and joye, than ever any hungry man has had in eating Meat.

Yet the words would be better marked: He says not simply, he shall lead them
in the truth, but in all truth: there shall be no point of truth, but he
shall instruct you therein. It will not be a piece of the truth that will
fill the heart: but the sinner that would be safe, would understand the whole
way to salvation: he can never be satisfied to drink in the truth: and the
more he drinks in, he desires aye to drink more. This is the disposition
of a sinner, who has tasted how sweet that Milk of the word is, as Peter
says, 1. Epist. Chap. 2. verse. 1.2. This place lets us see, that it was not
only a part of the truth, that was committed to the Ministry: they received
not an imperfect doctrine, but the whole Mystery of salvation was revealed and
laid before them: and that which they received, they delivered again
faithfully. Paul says, Act. 20. verse. 27. I have not hid any thing from you,
but I have shown you the whole counsel of God: And whatsoever things the
Apostles preached in the world with their mouth, all in effect and substance
they wrote with their hands, to the weal of the Kirk: and there is not one
point, which either concerns Gods glory, or man's salvation, but in effect we
have it registrated in the Old and New Testament. Away with the unwritten
verities: whatsoever was preached, all is registrated to the weal of the
people: And If all the Apostles were this day preaching, they would not
preach one word in effect, but that which we have already registrated. I will
affirm that before God, the holy Spirit will not teach any thing to the
heart, but that which is written in the Old and New Testament: Yea, more, true
faith will drink in none other thing, but that which is within this compass
of the word: and if thou drinkest in any other thing than this, I affirm
before God, thou never had true faith: Let no Spirit be pretended to this:
let no faith be pretended to this. Away with those Papists, who commend so
highly the vain traditions of men, and unwritten verities: they have no true
faith: It is only the Spirit who leads us in all verity. Then he gives them
the reason, Because that Spirit shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever
he shall hear, that shall he speak. As if he had said, Ye will credit
me: and I assure you, that Spirit will speak nothing, but that which he has
received of me. Whatsoever the Spirit of God teaches the world, while as he
is in the Heaven, he receives it out of the mouth of Jesus Christ. And
farther: whatsoever thing the Lord spoke during the time he was in the world,
he received it out of the mouth of the Father. Look this harmony of teaching
among the glorious persons of the Trinity: He says not one thing, and he
another, as men do: The Father begins, and he speaks: then the Son
speaks the same: and the holy Spirit speaks nothing, but that which the
Father and the Son have spoken. Look the word and decree of our salvation:
It is a conclusion given out by all the three persons of the Godhead. If it be
so, certainly the word of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, it must be a thing of
great authority: For that decree which is laid in the Kings Counsel, has a
great authority among the Subjects: and the word of the Counsel, is greater
than the word of the King only. If this be among Kings in the earth, of what
authority should this be, that comes from the decree of the glorious Counsel
of that blessed Trinity, in respect whereof, all the Kings of the earth are
but dross? Now would to God the hearts of men could see this great authority
of this word! So this word must crave a great faith. The King would be angry
if his decree were not credited: then what judgment shall abide us, worms, if
we believe not the decree of the glorious Trinity? I say this before God,
The contempt of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, brings on with it, the heauiest
judgment in the world. And if such a contempt of the word in this Land
continue, an heavy judgment no question, shall light upon them, who have not
credited such a decree. John, 12. verse. 44. Therefore seeing the word of the
Gospel is of such authority, let all men who would see Heaven, strive to
believe it in their hearts: or else, if they believe not, an heavy judgment
shall ouer-take them: let them beware.

In the end of the verse. he brings in more particularly what the Spirit
shall teach: He says, He shall show you the things to come: that is, The
things which shall follow after my departure, mine ascension, and
glorification: the things which were acquired by his death, and applied by his
resurrection, as remission of sins, justification, and life eternal, he
shall teach you them inwardly, and he shall seal them up into your hearts:
For after the Lord had suffered in the earth, then grace came down, then
remission of sins came down, that free righteousness of Christ came down,
and life everlasting came down, as also extraordinary gifts came down, as
the gift of Prophecy, the gift of healing, of working of miracles, of speaking
sundry languages, etc. for why? when the Lord Jesus was filled with glory, of
that fullness the members here in the earth received their part: and grace for
grace came down, as it was prophesied, He went up on high, and led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. And all these things gave he by the holy
Spirit, illuminating the mind, and working powerful in the heart: for other
ways what avails it to have remission of sins, life, glory, and happiness
for ever, effected? Except the Spirit of Jesus Christ accompany the word,
illuminate and mollify the heart, all shall be of none avail. Therefore,
again I bid you, as ye would live, strive to feel that Spirit working into
you.

Now in the next verse. he takes up summarily the effect of all that the
Spirit shall teach them: He shall glorify me. What is it the Spirit is doing?
and what is it we are doing? and whereto is all this preaching? All is to
glorify Christ: If thou be not an instrument to glorify Christ Jesus, thou
shall have no part of glory with him. He gives the reason wherefore the
Spirit shall glorify him, Because the thing he shall show you, he shall have
it in commission from me. If the speeches of an Ambassador be not to the
honor of his Prince, he is but a Traitor. The Son was sent as an
Ambassador from the Father: therefore he glorified the Father, as he
speaks, Chap. 17. verse. 7. So the holy Spirit is sent from the Son:
therefore he speaks all to the glory of the Son. But this would be well
understood, how the Spirit of Christ glorifieth Christ upon the earth: Who
gives the Spirit? who sees him? or who hears his voice? How then
glorifieth the Spirit the Lord? The Spirit glorifieth the Lord Jesus, by the
Ministry of the Gospel, and by the mouths of simple men, think of them as
ye will: except by the mouths of men, ye shall never find the Spirit
glorifying the Son, seek where ye will: If we speak any thing, wherein
God is not glorified, say we are but liars, and the Spirit of Christ is not
into us. If we begin to speak of Purgatory, and of the merits of men, of
intercession of Saints, say we are but liars: If we draw you from that
only merit of Christ, say that the Spirit of God speaks not by us, but
the spirit of Antichrist: for hereby are the spirits discerned; he that
teaches Christ only, speaks by the Spirit of Christ: but he who teaches
any thing besides Christ, has the spirit of the Antichrist, 1. Ioh. 4. verse.
2.3. And this is the spirit that teaches the Pope, and his Clergy, and
therefore go away from them, or else ye will be deceived: and one day ye
shall see this justified, and this day ye should hear with your ears the
Lord crying, Away out of Babylon, as thou would be safe, and see Heaven: I
have cried this oftentimes.

It might have been said, Shall not the Spirit reveal that doctrine he has
received of the Father? He meets that now, and says, Whatsoever things the
Father has, are mine. Mark this: It appears very well out of this place,
that the holy Spirit is sent immediately of the Son, and that he has his
direction of the Son our Savior: this may comfort us: indeed the Father
sends him, but by the Son, and therefore it is said, He shall send him
in my Name: and again, Whom I shall send from the Father. Now that which I
speak of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, I understand it of the Apostles, and of
all the faithful Ministers in the Kirk. We have all our commission
immediately from our Lord Jesus Christ: so the silliest Minister that is
faithful, has not his calling from the Father immediately, but from the
Son. Ephesians. Chap. 4. verse. 11. He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers. And
Paul, speaking of himself, calls himself the Apostle of Jesus Christ: and
he adds to, by the will of the Father: whereby he tells us, that he was
sent immediately from the Son, and mediatelie from the Father. What is the
ground of this? The Father has given his Son all power in Heaven and in
Earth: he has kept nothing from him: All thine is mine, as it is said in the
next Chap. verse. 10. And upon this it comes to pass, that the holy Spirit
comes immediately from the Son, and all the Apostles and Ministers in the
Kirk are immediately from him: and even now he sits like a King, at the
right hand of the Father. I speak not this, as if I affirmed, that the Father
had put off all power from himself, we must not think so: no, no, for
afterward he says, All mine is thine: so this hurts not the Father: And
therefore these things which are given to the Son, remain in the Fathers
hands: But the Son is the Storehouse of all grace: and when the Father
would give grace, he takes it out of the treasure of the Son, and gives it
to us by the hand of the Son. The Father has his glory, the Son has his
glory, and the holy Ghost has his glory: but we glorify the Father, as
the Fountain of all benefits, the Son as Mediator, and the holy Spirit
as our Sanctifier: and we give them all one equal glory amongst themselves,
because they are equal in Glory and Majesty. Therefore, let us glorify the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, in this blessed Trinity, who lives
and reigns world without end.

Now to go forward: After he has forewarned his Disciples of his
departure, and has comforted them against that time; promising, that after his
departure they should receive the Comforter, to wit, the holy Spirit: and
therefore he has spoken much of the holy Spirit that should come unto
them: Now in these words he continues on in the same purpose, and he
fore-warneth them of his departure, and he says, A little while, and ye
shall not see me: meaning, that he was to depart out of this world. Then he
comfort them in the next words, Again, a little while, and ye shall see
me: meaning, that after his departure, he should come again in his Spirit,
and by his Spirit he should give them his presence: and he gives the reason
of this his presence: for, says he, J go to my Father: that is, I am to
pass up to the Heaven, and am to be glorified, and the Heaven shall not
contain my glory, but it shall come down to the Earth: my Spirit, wherewith
I shall be filled, shall come down to you. For albeit that Christ merited, by
his death, all benefits to us, yet they come not to us but by virtue of his
Resurrection, Ascension, and Glorification: for he merited all things to us,
as a Priest, humbled on the earth: but he communicates to us the benefits
which he merited, as a glorious King.

Now, Brethren, ye may see this of these words, That the LORD he never
takes his presence from his own altogether: if he will take away his
bodily presence, (as indeed presently we have not his bodily presence,)
he will recompense it with his spiritual presence: for this is a sure thing,
The Godly here on the Earth, cannot want some sight of CHRIST; they cannot
live without some presence of JESUS CHRIST: No, there cannot be a Kirk
without some presence of him: For first, How is the Kirk made here upon the
Earth? Who makes the separation? Who but JESUS CHRIST? He lets such a
number have his presence, and sanctifies them by his holy Spirit, and so
makes a Kirk: And if there were not a continuance of his presence, the Kirk
could not stand. There is not a member of the Kirk, that could stand in
holiness, if it pleased the LORD to withdraw his presence. We have
holiness, not of our selves, but of the Spirit of the LORD JESUS CHRIST: and
if he withdraw his Spirit from us, we would become as profane as the most
wicked of this world. So all our grace, and all our standing, comes of the
Spirit of Jesus. Then mark this: By what virtue receive we the Spirit of
Jesus, and that presence of Christ by his Spirit? We receive it in a word, by
virtue of his glorious Resurrection, Ascension, and Glorification in the
Heavens: for now being in the Heavens, he is full of glory: All the Angels
in Heaven are nothing comparable to him in glory: the Heavens are not able to
contain his glory. Now the head being full of glory, a portion comes down
from him, and in some measure, glorifieth the members: And as John says, Of
his fullness we all receive a part, Chap. 1. verse. 16. And to the Ephesians,
Chap. 4. verse. 8. He passed up to the Heavens, and filled us all with his
grace: and so by the passing up of Christ to the Heaven, we receive the holy
Spirit. Therefore, when thou considerest the Resurrection and Ascension of
Jesus Christ, it should move thee to take a trial, whether thou have gotten
the fruit of his Resurrection and glorification, to see if thou have gotten his
holy Spirit in some measure, or the graces of his holy Spirit: for the
Apostles, by his Resurrection and Ascension, had hope that they should receive
the holy Spirit, and his graces; and so they did in effect. And if thou find
that thou have not gotten the Spirit in no measure, no illumination, no
reformation of thy corrupt nature, sore may thine heart be: for in respect of
thee, in vain is he risen, and glorified. Therefore, as thou would be
partaker of his glory, strive to get his holy Spirit, ere thou go out of
this world, or else thou shall never get light nor life in the world to come.
Farther, hence we may see the Lord leaves never altogether his own Kirk: for
if he give not his bodily presence, yet he will give his spiritual
presence: for without his presence, his Kirk, his Saints on earth cannot
^aue a being: for by reason of his presence, the Kirk has her beginning: for
what, I pray you, is the Kirk else, but a society of men and women severed
from the rest of the world, by the presence of that holy Spirit, whereby they
are sealed? Thus far has he partly forewarned them of his departure, and
partly comforted them. It follows in the Text Then sa^d some of his Disciples
amongst themselves, What is this that he says unto us, A little while, and
ye shall not see me, etc. They are moved at these words: and some of them
begin to whisper amongst themselves at the words which the Lord spoke. Ye see
here a marvelous ignorance of the Disciples of Christ: he has been speaking
to them so long, and yet they utter a great ignorance. It is a wonderful thing
to see how blinded and how hardened a man will be, before he have received the
holy Spirit, at the preaching of the Gospel, even at such voices as would
pierce stocks and stones: Yet a man hearing with reason and sense, will
conceive no more of things heavenly, than the stocks and stones. I tell you
this, that no words, no preaching, if there be no more but words and
preaching, can make any man to conceive heavenly things: yea, no admonition,
no threatening, no judgment if there be no more, shall make the hardened heart
to be the better. The blindest thing in the world, is the heart of man. So
except the inward Teacher come out of the Heavens, and illuminate and mollify
the heart, all the preaching of the world shall do the heart no good, but rather
evil: so that thou may see this to be true, that the natural man is not
capable of the things that are of the Spirit of God: but when it pleases the
Lord to accompany his word with his Spirit, the^ two words shall do more good,
than a whole preaching before: and the Apostles of Christ, after they got this
Spirit, profited more in one day, than all their days before. So albeit thou
hear many preachings, except thou have that inward Doctor into thine heart,
all auails not. Therefore carry that inward teacher into thine heart, and change
him never: so if thou want him, run to this preacher, or that, if thou wast
hardened before, thou shall be so still. A sound in the ear will do no more good
than a blast of wind, without the Spirit. It follows, Now Jesus knew. etc. He
perceiues them well enough, and of what thing they were debating: He answers
them gently, I know, would he say, what ye are thinking and inquiring: and
then he teaches them more gently. Might not the Lord have been angry with
them, who understood him not at the end of the Preaching? But the Lord, as it
was prophesied of him, Isay. 42. he quenched never the smoking Flax, nor
brake the bruised Reed: he was ever about to intertaine grace, and not to put
it out. All Teachers may take their Lesson here: they ought not to cast off
people, howbeit they get no fruit of Preachinges: let ever that word be
driven into their ears, and let aye that seed be sown: for he has the
Spirit, and he will give him when he pleases: and let both the auditor and
the Preacher pray to God, to give the Spirit. It is true indeed, the seed of
the word of God will lie long lurking into the heart: but at last, the Spirit
will put to his hand to the word, as ye heard, John, 14. verse. 16. and will
make the word to fructify, and to bud out; not only to the illumination of
the soul inwardly, but also to good works outwardly. Be thou ever sowing
that blessed seed, be ever preaching, and then commit the success of all to
God.

When he has made a preface to them, ye see thereafter with what great
lenity he instructs them, both concerning his departing, and concerning his
returning: He instructs them by the effects both of the one and the other,
and they are these: The first is, Ye shall weep and lament: The other is, The
world shall rejoice: These are the effects of his departing. Then he declares
his returning by the effect, But your mourning shall be turned into joy: That
is, I shall come again, and then ye shall have matter of joye. Ye see here a
very effectual kind of teaching: He spoke this of before, but now he
speaks the same thing more effectually. To speak of things barely, and to
propone them simply, it is not so effectual to move the minds of the
hearers, as to declare the same by the effects following: that takes a
greater root and impression in the heart: As for example, When we are
foretelling, that by all appearances, the Lord Jesus is to depart out of this
Land, for we are not worthy of him, albeit this move us; yet this moves us
more, when it is said, It shall come to pass, that thou shall mourn thy
self, thou shall weep: now laugh on as thou will, wo^full shall be thine
end, and shame and confusion shall light upon thee: I denounce this to thee,
in the Name of God. And again, ye think it a light thing to say, The Lord
Jesus shall come: but to say, Thou who mournest, shall rejoice, when he shall
come; that moves more. But now to come to the matter: Ye shall weep and
lament, and the world shall rejoice: Some shall be weeping, and some laughing:
this is the difference. Ye see the departure of Jesus Christ, is a sorrowful
thing to the godly: when Christ is away, the godly are in sorrow: the
pleasure of the godly, is aye in the presence of Jesus Christ: and therefore
when they see that they want his presence, they see nothing but matter of
sorrow: and give them all the pleasures of the world, if they miss the Lord
away, they will have no joye: And by the contrary, place them in all the
sorrows in the world, if they get a sight of Jesus Christ, they get joye
enough: But on the other side, the wicked and the ungodly, who never tasted how
sweet the Lord was, never rejoice, but when they want the Lord Jesus out of
their sight: they have no pleasure in his presence: they have never pleasure to
hear of Christ. What is the cause of this? They never wist what Christ meaned:
they never wist what the Lord was, and never felt of his sweetness, and of the
joye that is in his presence: and therefore they have no pleasure, but when
they want him: And because they cannot get their wicked will, when Christ is
present, they hate him: for where Christ is, (because he is the light of the
world,) he lays open all wickedness, and makes it manifest: All the
happiness in the world, is in the face of Christ: therefore rest never till
thou taste of him, if thou would be happy. And again, miserable is that
man, who has not tasted of that sweetness, and of that grace that is in the
Lord. Therefore, as thou would come to Heaven, I warn thee yet again, rest
never, till thou get that rest in Christ, and that sweetness that is in him.

Let us see the effect that follows on his presence, he says, Your sorrow
shall be turned into joy. He speaks of that presence by his Spirit: for after
that Spirit is once entered into the soul, he works faith, and opens the
eyes of the dark soul to see Christ, as in a mirror: when the face of Christ
is borne up in the word, howbeit, says Pet. 1. Epist. Chap. 1. verse. 8. we
see him not, yet believing, we rejoice with a joy unspeakable and glorious.
So that dark sight of him, works into the soul an exceeding joye when we
believe. I grant indeed, that as there is no joye in this life, but it has
sorrow with it; so our joye in Christ has heaviness with it: it is imperfect
here: but it is better for thee to have a mean portion of that joye, than all
the joys in the world: yea, the very displeasure of the faithful, is so
far from that to hinder the joye, that by the contrary it wakeneth up the
joye in the soul: Look the 2. Epist. to the Cor. Chap. 5. when the soul is
heauiest for sin, then it finds such joye, as they would not give for all
the joys in the world: and when this joye is wakened, it swalloweth up all
sorrows: as in the 8. Chap. to the Romans And in the end of the 15. Chap. of the
1. Epist. to the Cor. says the Apostle, After this life, mortality shall be
swallowed up of immortality, and death shall be swallowed up in victory: and
all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes, Revel. 7. verse. 17. And then
they who have sorrow with joye here, shall have joye without sorrow for
ever. Look about you, look within you, or without you, ye shall see nothing
but matter of joye. So ye see the effects of the departure of the Lord, and of
his returning again.

Now hereafter he makes this doctrine, of the sorrow and joye of the
godly, more sensible, by a familiare similitude, and it is taken from a woman
traveling: A woman when she trauelleth, says he, is in dolor, because her
hour is come: but when she is delivered of the Child, she remembereth no
more her dolor, for joy that a man is borne into the world. Then in the last
verse. he applies it: Now ye are in heaviness, and ye are traveling, and
that is, because I am to depart from you. The Disciples took heavily with the
away-going of CHRIST: But I shall see you again, and ye shall see me, and
get my presence by my Spirit, and ye shall rejoice, and it shall be such a
joy, that all the world shall not be able to take it away. The world may
take thy life from thee, but never shall they take that joye from thee: Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ?

Two things are here to be marked the nature of the dolor of the godly
into this world, wandering from their Lord, as Pilgrims, and the nature of
their joy: The nature of their displeasure, is like the dolor which a woman
has in traveling: So the Apostle, Romans Chap. 8. verse. 21. he compares the
languor of the dumb creatures and elements, after the coming of the Lord
Jesus, to a woman traveling. The dolor of a woman traveling is very
painful: but yet it is profitable. Why? Because that pain brings out a
birth: So a woman in travel has hope, not only to be saved from that
pain, but also to have a Child. So, hope in pain, will have joye mixed with
it. To apply this: It is even so with the displeasure of the godly, into this
their Pilgrimage, awaiting for their life, which CHRIST will bring down to
them at his coming. 2. Corinthians. Chap. 5. Look what dolor Paul utters: he
sighed under a burden, he desired to slit away, and to go to dwell with the
Lord: Albeit it be but a pain, yet it tends to a pleasure in the end, to a
birth: and in the midst of dolor, they have an hope; and with the hope, they
have joye. So a godly man in sorrow, will have the greatest joye in the
world: albeit the joye of the godly be with heaviness, yet that joye is
unspeakable. The displeasure of the ungodly is not so: indeed the Scripture
(as in the first Epistle to the Thessal. Chap. 5.) compares it unto a woman
traveling: but this is an hopeless pain: What recke if that soul had hope,
that that pain should cease: but they shall never look for a birth: well were
it to that soul, that that body could be turned to nothing, after so many
thousand years. The sorrow of the godly is with hope and joye; but the sorrow
of the wicked, is without hope. Jest not with Hell: it is an horrible thing to
fall into the hands of a consuming fire. He says, When she has borne her
birth, she remembereth not her travel, because she has borne her birth;
Even so, when we address our selves to Heaven, thronging through this world,
we must prepare our selves to go through thorns and brieres, through
temptations outward and inward: (a man who would go to Heaven, he shall not
put down his foot without a thorn, or some offense:) But when we are come
to the Heavens, then we shall get such a birth of joye, that we shall
remember no more the temptations of the world: and then we shall find that
saying of Paul to be true, 2. Corinthians. 4. verse. 17. The momentaniall light
afflictions shall work an infinite weight of glory: the soul shall be so
occupied with joye into the Heavens, that we shall count nothing of all
afflictions bypast. This is true, howbeit we cannot feel it now sensibly,
but once we shall find it in a full measure, if we appertain to Christ. The
Lord therefore in the mean time, grant us a fore-tasting of it, that we may
overcome all temptations and difficulties, till we obtain the full possession
thereof, in Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be
all honor, praise, and glory, for evermore: AMEN.

THE XV. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvi. VERSE. 22.23.24.25.26.27. 22 And ye now therefore are in
sorrow: but J will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your
joy shall no man take from you.

23 And in that day shall ye ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you.

24 Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name: ask, and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full.

25 These things have I spoken unto you in parables: but the time will come,
when J shall no more speak to you in parables; but I shall show you plainly
of the Father.

26 At that day shall ye ask in my Name, and I say not unto you, that I will
pray unto the Father for you:

27 For the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have
believed that J came out from God.


FRom the thirteenth Chapter of this Gospel, (Brethren) to the seventeenth, the
Lord holds purpose only with his Disciples and Apostles: for he had now
ended all his speaking and doing with the people of the Jews. He has
hitherto given sundry exhortations unto them: and he has given them
Cammandements, and instructed them, and given them sundry arguments of
consolation, because they were heavy for his departure; and so prepared them
against the time he was to go his way, and to leave them. Now his conference
and speech draws to an end, for it ends with this present Chapter. In the
end of his speech and conference, he recounteth to them particularly, part by
part, that felicity and blessing that they shall have after he is gone away
from them to his Father, to be glorified in the Heavens, by his coming again
to them, not in the body, but in his Spirit: He has said immediately in the
verse. going before, When ye shall see me again, that is, when I shall come
again to you in my Spirit, after my glorious ascension to the Heaven, then
your heart shall rejoice, and no man shall take your joy from you: all the
world shall not be able to twinne you and that joye, which my Spirit shall
furnish you. So then, Brethren, there is the joy which they shall have, when
the Lord shall come again, they shall have joy, and joy everlastingly; and
spiritual joy, and that for evermore.

This is the first part of their blessedness: the words are easy, and I
spoke of them before, only this for the present: We must not think that this
joy which Christ promised to his Disciples by his Spirit, went away, and
died with the Apostles, when they departed out of this world: but it abides
in the Kirk of Jesus Christ to the end of the world: Even as that holy
Spirit whom the Lord sent down to the world, abides in his Kirk, till
Christ come again, and supplieth as it were, the bodily presence of Jesus
Christ: (for the Spirit of Christ, is the Vicare of Christ in the earth, and
not the Pope, as the Papists say:) Even so, I say, by that Spirit abides here
in the Kirk of God, solid joy to the end of the world: for wheresoever the
Spirit is, there is joy and inward consolation: and that soul in whom the
Spirit of God dwells, feels as sensibly as one feels with their hands,
the joy and peace of the holy Spirit: for that Spirit, is the Spirit of joy and
peace: and they who feel not the sense of this joy, alace, they want this
Spirit. They who feel not spiritual joy at any time, has matter of sorrow
and mourning, for they have not the Spirit of Jesus Christ: and they who want
his Spirit, have not ado with Christ. Romans 8. verse. 9. and consequently never
shall taste of joy: but thou who have felt this joy, have cause to rejoice,
yea, as Paul says, to rejoice evermore, 1. These. 5. verse. 16. Paul
recommendeth joy unto us, not for an hour, or a day, or a month, or a year,
but perpetually: meaning, that there is great matter of continual joy offered
by that Spirit, who graciously lighteneth our souls, and assures us of
salvation. What should move thee to joy? Should not good tidings move thee to
rejoice? Yet we rejoice not: and this want of joy declares that we make
resistance to the holy Spirit: we will not suffer the Spirit to come in; and
when he comes in, we give him sober intertainment, but by our evil life, we
cause him to depart with sadness.

Now to go to that second part of that blessedness which they shall have when
the Lord shall return to them by his holy Spirit: Jn that day ye shall ask
me nothing: that is, Ye shall not aye doubt: for ye heard before, when he
said, Yet a little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, ye shall see
me: there they doubted what he meaned. Now, would he say, ye shall not doubt
then, but the holy Spirit shall teach you, he shall inlighten the darkness of
your souls, and make you to believe. To apply this to our selves: Eue^ as I
said before, of the first part of the blessedness promised to the Apostles, so I
say of the second part of their blessedness, (for what recks us what light, or
what knowledge the Apostles got, if we get not a part of it?) which stands in
the inward teaching of the holy Spirit, by taking away the veil from them, and
opening up of their blind eyes, to see salvation. This Spirit went not away out
of the world with the Apostles, but he abides still in the world, till Christ
come again: Even as the Spirit abides, so the inward teaching of the soul by
the Spirit abides in the Kirk: for as the Spirit is the Spirit of joy, so he
is the Spirit of knowledge: he opens the eye of the soul, which is dark; and
mollifies the heart, and that with such a sweetness to receive grace, as the tongue
neither of man, nor Angel, can express. And the godly, no doubt, at the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ, will feel that inward operation of the
Spirit in their soul. Study ay to feel this by experience (for what auails
Christ to us, if we feel him not?) they will feel a light shining in their
souls, as the shining of the Sun: and they will feel their heart, that was
hardened before, with a sweet consolation to be mollified: as it is said of
Lydia the Purple seller, that by the preaching of the Gospel, her heart was
opened, Act. 16. And on the contrary, let the man or woman who wants this
sense, who sees no light, nor finds no opening of the soul, blame themselves,
and not the light: for Christ offers himself to all alike: the inlacke
thereof proceeds of the contempt of the word, and of that light that shines
so brightlie without thy soul, and goes not in. And surely, it is a
fearful thing to contemn this Light: for if thou contemn this light, I tell
thee, long shall thou sit hearing, and shall not be the better, but shall
grow aye the harder, till thou be so hardened and obdured, that thou can
feel nothing at all.

Brethren, ye may think it a wonderful thing, that a body, who sits
hearing continually, and who has so clear a light glancing aye before him,
should get no light at all, but should go out of the Kirk more blind than when
he came in: and yet indeed it is so; for many come in to hear, but because
they come in with cold and evil disposed hearts, having no delight to hear
the word of God, they go away more profane, and worse than when they came
in: And therefore, for lack of this, the miserable world perishes, the
multitude goes wholly to destruction. Therefore, for Christ's sake, Brethren,
learn to have a pleasure and joy in hearing, and take in that Spirit into
your souls. We have heard of the second part of the blessedness which
Christ promises to his Disciples, after his glorious Ascension to the Heaven:
to wit, the light and knowledge of the holy Spirit.

Now to come to the third benefit, or the third part of their happiness,
wherein all grace is promised to them who ask: He begins very gravely,
Verily, verily, Amen, Amen, J say to you: that is, It is a true saying, and
ye shall find it true indeed, essay it when ye will: Whatsoever thing ye
shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. In one word, this is
the third part of their blessedness, All grace and mercy is to be had for the
asking: not by buying, for all grace is bought by the price of the blood of the
Lamb only: seeing that is so precious a ransom, no man has need to buy any
thing at the hands of God: we have no need to buy any grace of God by our
merits: for by that only merit and blood of Christ, all grace is bought. We
have need of asking: and if we ask not in his Name, we shall never get
grace, for there is not another Name under Heaven (says the Apostle) by whom
there is salvation, but only by the Name of Jesus Christ, Act. 4. verse. 12. So
there is the third part of their blessedness that is promised them: Even all
grace shall be given them for the asking. To draw this to our selves, (And
the Lord give us grace to do it,) As by the Spirit all joye, all knowledge,
and light abides in his Kirk on earth, till the Lord JESUS come again; Even
so, all grace, all mercy, abides in this Kirk militant, till the Lord come
again: for if that Spirit of grace abide in this Kirk, of necessity all grace
must abide with that Spirit. The faithful in the Kirk, who are Christians in
heart, and not in word, only they will find in experience, that when they
ask any grace, as righteousness, and sanctification, life everlasting, and
glorification, they* will not so soon open their mouth to ask it, but they
will get it: And when they say, Lord, renew mine affections, the word will not
so soon be spoken, but as soon they will find the soul opened with joy:
and when they say, Lord, give me that life for Christ's sake, with the word,
the life of Jesus will be felt in the soul sensibly. Therefore, preasse aye
to find by experience, that the presence of Christ is no empty wind. By the
contrary, if a man or woman find in no measure, no grace, or no sense of
grace, in their souls, let them blame themselves: for they want grace, for
plain fault of asking. Alace, that we should lose such grace for fault of
seeking! Is he not a foolish man, that will lose life for a word? But it is
not so light a thing to ask as so, for every man, and every woman, has not
the gift of prayer: Except thou be the son of GOD, thou shall have no power
to open thy mouth to call GOD Father: If thou be a slave, thou shall have no
power to pray to GOD: for prayer is the proper note of the Child of GOD: and
except the Spirit of Adoption testify unto thee, that thou art the son of
GOD, thou shall have no power to pray, but thy mouth shall be closed: But
when the Spirit will testify to thee, that thou art the son of GOD, then
the heart will open, and the tongue will say sweetly, O Father! Therefore, the
ground of all grace is the grace to ask: get once grace to pray, and then
thou have all grace: And therefore, when the Lord says, Knock, and it shall
be opened: ask, and thou shall have, etc. say, Lord, give me grace to ask.
Take aye heed to the gift of prayer, for we lose all for fault of prayer, and
for fault of begging. So I beseech you all, Brethren to pray, as ever ye would
see Heaven, or be partakers of life. In the words following, when he has set
down the third part of their felicity, That they should pray unto the
Father for grace, knowing the great necessity they had to pray, and their
great sluggishnesse on the other part, he begins to allure them to pray,
and to stir them up to ask at the hands of the Father. And lest they should
have objected, We have asked, but we have not been answered; he answers to
this, Hitherto ye have sought nothing at the Father in my Name: but in times
coming, ask boldly, and look for an answeee, and ye shall get grace heaped
upon grace, till your grace be perfect: and the greater grace thou ask, the
greater thou gettest: and the more thou gettest, the greater is thy joy that
thou have, when thou perceiuest that grace: and thou who have gotten it,
would not give it for all the world. This is the meaning of the words.
Take up here what necessity we have to pray: for if we had no need, the
Lord would not have stirred up his Disciples to pray: No, no, we have so
great need to pray, that except we pray, we get nothing. A Beggar, who
has nothing but that which he beggeth, if he leave off his begging, he shall
die at dike side. If thou leave off thy spiritual begging, yea, though thou
were a King, and had all the world, thou shall die for ever: For what is a
King in this life, but a Beggar? And woe be to him, if he be not a Beggar at
the hands of Jesus Christ.

Then mark the sluggishnesse in every man and woman, and how unable we are to
beg. A Beggar who has naught, ere he die, he will cry and shout: but a
poor sinner, who is the poorest man, and the silliest creature in the world,
who wants all grace, has not a mouth to ask, though he should die. Now to
stir us up to pray, the Lord says, Ask at the Father, and essay if ye get
a denial. We know all this, yet we lie sleeping in sin, and seek no grace
to be fred of it, howbeit grace be so freely offered to us by Jesus Christ. It
is a sore thing, to be a poor body, and to lie still, and seek nothing: We
are poor bodies, sleeping in a dead sleep: and except we be wakened, we will
not rise out of it, or once open our mothes, to say, God help me: And then,
when we have opened our mouths to speak a word, it will be coldly and
wearshlie said: this is our nature.

Then mark last, what merciful care the Lord has over us: we would for ever
lie still, and die in poverty, if the Lord said not, Waken, waken. The Lord
Jesus not only wakened his Disciples, but, to the end of the world, he is ever
wakening his own, sometimes by fair words, and sometimes by boasting, and
sometimes by afflictions, to move them to pray in his Name. Sometimes outwardly
the Lord will come and strike thee: (what reckes of all the strokes in the
world, though thou should be buffetted and beaten, yea, and pulled in
pieces, and if it be to free thee from Hell?) Sometimes inwardly he will
prick thee, and stir up thy conscience to accuse thee, and he will open the
eyes of thy soul, to see thine own misery, and want. And when the Lord has
wakened thee, that thou beginnest once to sigh for grace, he will be at thy
right hand, and stir thee up to pray: and then the sigh for grace shall not
so soon come out, but it shall ascend to God: for that same sigh, though it
were never so small, being raised from the heart by his own holy Spirit, he
cannot mis know it, but he must send thee an answer: and then thine heart is
kindled up with a sweet sense of thy God: But should thou then leave off to
pray? No, no, but then thou should pray fastest: for a poor body, who
has gotten a penny, will be very well content, and will give many thanks:
And thou who have gotten a part of Spiritual grace, will thou not give thanks?
Yea, thank and thank again, for there is no time to leave off prayer, but
aye to pray and give thanks. There are two things, thou have either a sense
of thine own misery, or else a sense of the grace of God bestowed upon thee: and
then should thou not pray? There is not an hour but we should pray: for
Paul, Ephesians. 6. verse. 18. recommendeth prayer unto them in this manner, Praying
with all kind of supplication, and at all times. We must be aye fighting
with our inward enemies, and those spiritual powers of darkness: there
should be no rest, no, not a moment: and as the battle has no rest, so we
should never leave off to pray: for and if thou leave off to pray, thou shall
not stand, but yield, and give thy self over to thine enemies. In one word,
there is no time granted unto us, to be void of an heavenly disposition, and
if thine heart be well disposed to pray: and think not that this will hinder
thee of any worldly exercises: be aye communing with God, in whatsoever thing
thou do: for it shall be so far from hindering thee, that it shall
further thee: and when thou go to do any work, say, Lord, bless this
work: and when thou enterprizest any thing, seek aye the blessing of God: let
thine heart be ever spiritually disposed.

This is the cause why the world is so profane, and has so little mind of
God, and has so foul hearts, that will speak so foul blasphemies, and
filthy purposes: the Adulterer will work his vile adultery, and the foul
Murderer his murders, etc. because they want prayer, and then the Lord leaves
them, and lets them wallow in their mischief, till at the last he gives
them over to the hands of the Devil.

Now when he has wakened them, he comes to the fourth part of the
blessedness they shall have, when he shall return, Hitherto, says he, I
have spoken in parables: that is, in obscure and dark sentences: But when J
shall come again, I shall speak nothing in parables, but mith a great
evidence, that ye shall not need to doubt of one word. Brethren, understand
this; for when the Lord was into the world amongst the Jews, for the most
part he spoke in parables, and his speeches and preachings were obscure: so it
was hard to take up his speeches: and therefore ye may read, in the
thirteenth Chap. of Matthew. that commonly he spoke in parables: that is, all
which he spoke was not evident: and not only were his speeches obscure to the
multitude, but to his Disciples also: as this, A little while, and ye shall
not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me. Yet he
expounded the parables to his Disciples, as ye read in that same Chap. of
Matthew. And till he came again out of the Heavens to them by his Spirit, it was
hard to understand him. What was the cause of this, that he would speak so
obscurelie, not only to the multitude, but also to his own Disciples? When
Christ was in the world, the work of the redemption of man was not wrought;
Christ had not suffered, nor risen again, nor passed up to the Heaven, he was
not glorified: and therefore the speeches of the redemption of man, being a
thing to come, could not be so plain: but now all is past, and there are no
more parables, but all are clear speeches of the redemption: the speeches of
the things to come, cannot be so clear as the speeches of a thing done and
ended. The Lord spoke more clearly by the mouth of his Apostles, of the work
of our redemption, than he did himself with his own mouth.

To draw this to our selves: As the Lord has given to us, to have that joy,
and that knowledge, which was promised to the Disciples, and all grace and
mercy for the asking; Even so, we have in the Kirk of Jesus Christ this day,
the same plainness in speaking of the Cross: and, as the Apostle says, The
Lord Jesus is crucified before our eyes. Speak not the Apostles clearly unto
us in these Writs which are left? Have we not the four Euangels? the best
Book that ever was, (make of it as ye will,) and those Epistles of Paul, and
the rest of the Apostles, written in such euidencie and plainness, even the
same thing in effect which they preached? And in a manner we have the Apostles
speaking unto us, in that euidencie wherein they spoke when they lived. And if
a man would take those Writs in his hands, and espy them well, he would
perceive the Spirit of God in them. And now also, the Lord raises up men to
speak with lively words, and to build on that foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles: Not Hay nor Stubbles* but the Lord raises up men to build on the
foundation, (as the Apostle says,) Silver, and Gold, and precious stones:
and as Paul says of himself, and the rest of the Apostles. 2. Corinthians. 4.
verse. 3. He who works light out of darkness, the same God causes the light
of his presence to shine in our hearts through Jesus Christ, to give the light
of knowledge of the world. Now by them there is no doubt, but the LORD shines
into the hearts of some men, that they may give light unto others: light
abundantly shines into the world, so that none have cause to be darkened
for fault of light: but as the Apostle Paul says, in the second Epistle to
the Corinthians, the fourth Chapter, and third verse. If the Gospel be hid, it
is hid to them that perish: So say I, if thou be not lightened, thou shall
die: and if thou gettest not illumination by these same men, (count of them as
thou will, and lightly them as thou please,) die shall thou everlastingly:
and say with thy self, And if I get not illumination, I will die without
remedy. And I denounce against thee, that if thou gettest not illumination by
this same Ministry, count of it as thou will, thou shall die for ever.

The last part of that felicity is this, A readiness and easiness of GOD, to
hear their prayers night and day, Ye shall ask in my Name, says the LORD,
and J say not, that I shall pray the Father for you. Indeed, would he say,
I pray continually. And no doubt the LORD JESUS in the day of his
humiliation prayed: and never one prayed as he prayed, with such a faith, such
a zeal, and such a sense: No, let him have the degree above all that ever
prayed from the beginning of the world: He felt best the misery of man, and
pitied it: And when he went through the Streets of HIERVSALEM, or
wheresoever he went, he beheld the miserable bodies, and he prayed for them
unto his Father. And thou likewise, therefore, when thou go through the
streets of EDINBVRGH, look about thee unto the miserable multitude, and see
if thou have not cause to pray to GOD for them, that he would be merciful
to them. This should be thine exercise: and no doubt CHRIST was so exercised
here on earth: but now, when CHRIST is exalted to his glory, to say that
he will kneel down on his knees, and pray to the Father, as the Papists
say, it is but a dream: for all that was a part of his humiliation: The LORD
JESUS is an everlasting Mediator, and there is none end thereof: And that
Cross is as lively before the Father, as that same night wherein he was
crucified, and so are his prayers: for he is an Advocate, (not like our
Advocates,) he is a crucified Advocate: Look to him, for there is no life but
in the sight of him. And as for his praying and humbling himself, think not
that all is vanished: no, all abides everlastingly: for that Prayer which ye
shall hear in the CHAPTER following, and all his Prayers which he made to his
Father, abides yet, and shall abide everlastingly.

Then, says he, think not that I shall pray then for you, as I was wont to
do, but ye shall be heard, Because the Father loves you. Ye see, a man
who loves another, he will hear him willingly. And wherefore loves he
you? Because, says he, ye love me. GOD will requite love with love: yea,
GOD will prevent thy love, with his infinite love: and then thine heart is
drawn to him: And look how often thou will love him, he will as often
compass thy love, with his love: and what is thy love, but a sorry thing, in
respect of that infinite love of his?

Then he says, Ye have believed, that I am come out from GOD. Ye see the
ground of this readiness, is faith in JESUS CHRIST. I will end in one word,
and would to GOD this love could enter into our hearts: Will thou love the
Son of GOD from thine heart, and not in word only? (For love stands not
in a word,) and will thou believe him, that he has died for thy sins, and
risen for thy glory? Then every day and hour his ear shall be ready to
hear thy prayer. A man will think it no small matter, to have the ear of a
King patent and ready when he calls: The LORD shall bow his ear to thee
night and day, if thou believe in JESUS CHRIST. Is this any small thing, that
the LORD of Heaven shall hear thee when thou shall call upon him? So his ear
through love, by faith in JESUS CHRIST, is ever patent to hear his own. Yet
there is an higher ground of this: to wit, that wonderful love which the
Father bears to the Son: If thou love him, he will love thee: and if
thou be an enemy to him, he will be an open enemy to thee: If there be
any man who loves not the LORD JESUS, let him be Anathema, and Anathema
Maranatha, 1. Corinthians. Chap. 16. Verse. 12. That is, Cursed for ever. He who
loves the LORD JESUS, is blessed for ever: and he who hates the LORD JESUS,
is cursed for ever. Now would to GOD we had an heart to say with Paul, The
man who loves not CHRIST, let him be Anathema! From whence rose this? From a
wonderful love which the Apostle bare to the LORD JESUS. And from whence rose
this love to CHRIST? Look what the Apostle says, in the second Epistle to
the Corinthians, in the fifth Chapter, and the fourteenth Verse. The love of
CHRIST constrains me. Now, would to GOD that we had the half of this
love! and if it were so, we would have little patience, to see things as
they are, and to see the enemies of CHRIST JESUS set up the Altar of the
Devil, against the Altar of CHRIST: we would not only make imprecations
against the^, but we would by all means hinder them: And this carelessness
which we have, testifies, that we love not CHRIST: and if we love him not,
an heavy judgment shall light upon us. Now therefore, seeing all grace is
from the love of CHRIST, the LORD fill our hearts with that love; that we may
be partakers of grace here, and hereafter be glorified with CHRIST: To
whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, and
glory, for evermore. AMEN.

THE XVI. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvi. VERSE. 28.29.30.31.32.33. 28 I am come out from the Father,
and came into the world: again, J leave the world, and go to the Father.

29 His Disciples said unto him, Lo, now speak thou plainly; and thou
speak no parable.

30 Now know we that thou know all things, and need not that any man
should ask thee. By this we believe, that thou art come out from God.

31 Jesus answered them, Do you believe now?

32 Behold, the hour comes, and is already come, that ye shall be
scattered every man into his own, and shall leave me alone: But I am not
alone: for the Father is with me.

33 These things have J spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace: in
the world ye shall have affliction; but be of good comfort, J have overcome
the world.


BEfore, in this Chapter, Brethren, the Lord forewarned his Disciples, that
he was to depart: but he spoke to them in a parable, and obscurely, Yet a
little while, and ye shall ^o^ see me: and again, ye shall see me: they
understood him not, nor wist not what he spoke. Now the Lord warns them of
his departure in plain speaking, and he says in plain words, I am come
out from the Father, and came into the world: again, J leave the world, and go
to the Father. Now, Brethren, take heed, and ye shall mark a difference
betwixt this fore-warning of the Disciples, which is plain and evident to
their understanding, and the former forewarning, which was obscure, and not
plain to their understanding. Before he proponed the matter in plain talk,
he proponeth sundry consolations, to prepare them against his departure, that
they might hear of his departure the more gladly: for it was an heavy thing
for them to hear of his departure, with whom they were so well, and had such
joye, and such intertainment in this earth. The Lord is very loath, Brethren,
to make the hearts of the Godly sad: He is not only loath to make their
hearts sad, and grieve them by death, by afflictions, and by crosses: but
he is loath to speak the word that would grieve them: though it were but a
word to make them heavy, he is loath to utter it unto them: and therefore,
ere ever he do to them any thing grievous, sad, or heavy, the Lord uses
to prepare their hearts to bear with it patiently, and to furnishe their
hearts with comfort against crosses and tribulations; that when persecution,
and affliction, and sad and heavy words should come, they should bear all
things the more patiently and gladly. This is the Lords custom: So all men
should beware to grieve the heart of any man, and chiefelie of the Godly: I
warn thee, be loath to make the Godly sad: rather we should incline to
make the heart of the miserable creature joyful, than sad. I see ever through
Paul, in his writs, this illumination: he ever inclines to stir up the
Godly to rejoice. Read him, and ye shall see this: Ye have a notable example
of him in the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 1. verse. 23. they accuse him
very sharply, that he came not to them. He answers them with a great
attestation, Now the LORD bear witness against my soul, that I would not
come to you, to spare you. And in the next CHAPTER he says, That J should
not make you sad, (for there was great matter of sadness amongst the
Corinthians, by reason of their evil behavior,) for if I should make you sad,
who is there to make me to rejoice? So, in a word, we should incline to make
the heart of a sinner joyful: and if we should be enforced to speak sad
words, as oftentimes we are, in this Country, by reason of the manifold and
gross sins reigning in it, yet they should be thrown out of us: Let them
all be in lenity, that in the matter of sadness, they who hear them, may
find love in them. Paul, in the Epistles to the Corinthians, and to the
Galatians, seems to be sharp against them at the beginning, and progress;
but in the end of the Epistles, he utters a marvelous love to them, to raise
up their hearts to rejoicing.

Now to mark the form how he proponeth this sad news of his departure: He
says not barely, I will go my way: but first, I come down from the Father,
being equal with him in glory: And now I go to him again, to take up my
glory, which I had with him before all beginning: and it shall be for your
good, that I go my way to Heaven, to my Father, for I shall send you that
Comforter. In telling them this, he gives them withal to understand, that
they shall be so far from damage and sadness, when the Lord shall go his
way, that they shall rejoice: for he shall go to Heaven, to the Father, and
be more busy to do them good, than when he was with them in the earth. So we
learn here, a form of proponing sad news unto the godly: we should propone
them with such a conuoy, that even in sad words we should present to the
hearers some matter of joye: and in reproof, love and lenity should appear.
I will use a familiare example: now certainly we have this day an occasion to
tell heavy tidings: and as Christ told to his Disciples, that he was to depart
shortly; so we may tell, for ought we see, the glorious tidinges of the
Euangel is to depart: The Gospel is to depart: there is sad tidings: but how
shall I tell them in this form that I have said, for the comfort of the
godly? The glorious Gospel of Christ shall shortly depart, for the ingratitude
of this Land: there is sad news. But well is them who loves Christ, and is
sad, and mourns for his departure, for they shall rejoice. And so on the
contrary, woe is them who is not sad at the departure of Jesus Christ: and woe
to them who loves not this glorious Euangel: and woe to them who puts it
away, and are the authors thereof: Woe to the Noble men, and lords of this
Land: howbeit they be leaping, through senseless security, in their pride,
yet their judgment was never so near them: for pride goes before
destruction. Now thus much for the words of the Lord. In the words following we
have the answer of the Disciples unto the Lord: He has spoken plainly to
them, that he will go his way. Now, say they, thou speak plainly, and thou
speak no parable: thou speak plainly, that thou will go thy way, that
any man may understand. This is the first part of the answer. They understand
now when he speaks plainly: but they wist not what he spoke before, when
he spoke in parables. Well, Brethren, it is good to speak of Christ, and of
the way to salvation plainly, that the poorest that hears may understand. It
is not enough that thou take heed to deliver sound and true doctrine, but
plain doctrine, and that this doctrine, which is sound and true, be spoken in
such words as becomes. Thou ought not only to look that the matter be
sound, but also to take heed to the words, as Paul, 1. Cor. 2. We speak those
things that God has gratified in Jesus Christ, and we speak them not in humane
words, but in powerful words of the Spirit. The Spirit has ay his own matter:
and as the matter is heavenly, so the words must savor of Heaven, and of the
Spirit: for as the Spirit has his own matter, so has he his own words. The
words must be evident and plain, that the unlearned may be capable of them. We
have many places of Paul agreeing to this: In that Chap. verse. 4. going before,
What was my language when I came to you? says he, it was not in humane
eloquence, but in spiritual power: that is, I spoke so, that I made an oculare
demonstration. And 2. Cor. 3. verse. 12. Having such confidence, we speak
plainly. And Chap. 4. verse. 3. If this Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
perish. So say I this day, if this Gospel be hid, it is hid to them who go to
perdition: and thy perdition is sealed up, if thou see not this light into
thy soul, and understand it not. Into the 3. Chap. to the Galatians, he
says, he preached so plainly, that in a manner he crucified Christ before
their eyes: that is, he made such an oculare demonstration of the crucified
man Christ, that they might have perceived him, even as he was crucified on the
Cross. So say I, Brethren, as we should strive to sincerity of doctrine in
the light, so we should strive to deliver it so evidently, and to tell it in
such plainness, that it may be plain to the most unlearned: for it is no
small joye, that comes to the heart of them who would feign understand and
see that light, when they hear the word and doctrine delivered plainly. And on
the contrary, when the doctrine is not plain, it intangleth them who have will
to understand, and they get no joy thereof, but they are left in heaviness and
sadness. Paul says, 1. Cor. 14. verse. 19. J had rather speak five words
with mine understanding, than ten thousand in a strange tongue, to none
edification.

But I go forward. In the next part of their answer, they profess a
wonderful knowledge to be in the Lord, and that he was the searcher of
hearts: Now, say they, we know that thou know all things, and need
not that any man should ask thee. This they said, because that in that
parable which he spoke of before, Verse. 16. A little while, and ye shall not
see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me; they wi^t not what
he spoke, but doubted amongst themselves: and they thought to ask at him,
what was the meaning of it: Yet he prevented them, and told them that which
they would have asked at him: Thou not only answerest, say they, when thou art
asked at; but also thou answerest when none asks at thee. What gather they of
this? That he is the searcher of the hearts of men and women: We believe
therefore, say they, that thou art come out from the Father: because, say they,
we see thou art more than a man, thou know our minds, and what is in our
hearts, and that no man knows, and therefore of necessity, thou must come
from the Father.

We have to try a little, this faith of the Disciples: it would seem at the
first face, to be a good faith, and a good confession they give: but surely,
will ye look the answer of Christ, subjoyned in the next Verse. ye shall
find it not to have been a firm and solid faith. They got little thank for
that faith. And if ye mark the ground of this faith, ye shall find it of
little avail. Indeed if they had said thus, Because thou tellest us thou came
from the Father, we will believe thee; it had been better: but we believe thee.
Why? Because thou have told us, what was in our minds and thoughts. So this
faith is grounded more upon a wonder, than on the words of Christ. This matter
offers us large occasion of speaking, but I will be short for the present.
Wonders and miracles may well prepare thee to believe, and may confirm faith
when it is gotten: but all the wonders in the world, cannot work faith. All
the works of God, both ordinary, and extraordinary, of his infinite wisdom,
power, and justice, would never make thine heart to settle on him, and believe
in him truly, and if thou gettest no more. The Gentiles in the world, before
CHRIST came, they saw GOD, his power, wisdom, justice, providence, etc. by
the works of his creation; yet they cast him off, and believed not. Paul
says, 1. Cor. Chap. 1. verse. 21. Like as it pleases not the world to know
God, in the wisdom of God: that is to say, in the creation, (a wonderful
and infinite wisdom,) it pleased God to save them that believe, by the
foolishness of preaching: for what is this word, and this preaching of the
Cross of Jesus Christ to the world, and to them that perish, but a foolish
and idle speech? But what is it, that works faith in the heart of man and
woman? None outward thing: no such power as is uttered in miracles: but it is
the word of the Cross of Christ, that works faith, which illuminateth and
opens our hearts. He that was borne blind, Chap. 9. verse. 1. through the
miracle of getting his sight, began indeed to think well and reverently of
Christ, but yet he believed not, till Christ instructed him by his word,
saying, Belieuest thou in the Son of God?

Now we come to Christ's answer: he refuteth this their faith, whereof they
bragged so greatly: Do ye believe now? As he would say, Ye think now,
that ye have faith enough, but ye deceive your selves; for the time shall
come, that ye shall all leave me: how then can your faith be sure? Then mark
here: it is an unstable and vanishing faith that is grounded and leans on
miracles: for such a faith cannot abide the persecution. Yea, I say farther,
oftentimes it turns to persecution. We have an example of this, Chap. 2.
verse. 23. where it is said, Many believed in his Name, when they saw the
wonders that he wrought: but what follows? Did Christ trust to them? No, it
is said, he would not commit himself to them, because he knew them well
enough: he knew what was within them: they were not to trust to. A question
may be here moved, whether if the faith of the Apostles was grounded on
miracles only, or not? To this I answer: Their faith was not grounded only on
miracles, but also on the word: their faith was not euanishing and temporal,
but a true and justifying faith: for when Christ said to his Disciples, Whom
say ye that I am? Peter, in the name of the rest, answered, Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God, Matth^ 16. verse. 16. But it is also true,
that their faith was mixed with corruption, and earthly conceits: they trusted
in him for some carnal respects: for so long as he was with them, they lived
in ease, they were subject to no crosses, nor they saw no cause of sorrow or
mourning: for when the Disciples of John the Baptist came to him, and asked
him, why his Disciples fasted not, as they and the Pharisees did? The Lord
answered them, How can it be, that the Children of the Bridegroom should
mourn, so long as they are in the Bridegroom^ Chamber? And besides this, they
looked that he should be a wor^^lie King, and have great honors into this
world. So I (...) word, that their faith and confidence, for a great part
(...) worldly respect, That he should be a King in Jerusalem, and wh^ so great
Courteours as they? Though there were no more to t^stifie, that their faith,
for the most part, was fleshly, but this, that they had a peartnesse, and
boasting of faith, it were sufficient. In the 26. Chap. of Matthew. verse. 33.34.
when the Lord says, Verily, verily, ye shall all be offended in me this
night: what says Peter* in the name of the rest? Shall we leave thee? We
shall die with thee. So he, and the rest, boasts of their faith. Well,
says the Lord, Peter, thou boastest now, remember that, ere the Cock crow,
thou shall deny me thrice. So, though there were no more but this boasting of
faith, it testifies, that their faith was more fleshly, than spiritual: for
worldly and fleshly confidence, is ay proud: so all this confidence is with
pride: but that spiritual faith and confidence, is aye with lowliness. And, O
how lowly a faithful man will be! he will aye fear, and feel his own
weakness. He that has the greatest faith in Christ Jesus, has the greatest
lowliness and fear: for the greater the faith be, he will have the greater
sense of his own weakness. Ye see how Paul, in the 11. Chap. to the Romans
verse. 20. speaking to the Gentiles, says, Be not proud, thou stands by
faith, stand with fear: where fear is not, there is no faith in Jesus Christ:
the man who has a sense of his own weakness, gripeth fastest to Christ. So
ye read of the man in the Euangel, when as the Lord said unto him, Belieuest
thou? He says, J believe, Lord, help mine unbelief. So he or she that
belieueth in Christ, will have a sense of weakness: for the power of God is
aye with a fear and dread: dread, I say, of their weakness, lest in this
battle which we have against nature, nature prevail over the Spirit. This is
the nature of him or her who has true faith in Jesus Christ.

Mark the words, he says, Behold, the hour comes, and is already come,
that ye shall be scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone.
Ye would marvel, he was even now comforting them, and now he drives them
down, and says to them, Ye shall leave me: that is, every one of them
should depart from him, and seek their own shelter. This is great matter of
dejectour. Brethren, look how needful it is to raise up an heart, which is
casten down, and to give comfort to a comfortless soul; as needful is it to
cast down the heart, which is puffed up with vain conceit: and if the proud
heart be casten down in mercy, it is for the weal of the creature: There is
nothing more meet in this world, to prepare us against the day of trial,
than the dejection of the soul: for here the Lord is preparing his Disciples
against the day of affliction, that their faith should be grounded, not on the
works, but on the words of Jesus Christ. There is nothing more needful, than
to try thy faith well: and ay look down to thine heart, and look well to this,
that thy confidence rise not on flesh and blood. There are many, whose
confidence leans on flesh and blood, and on nature; thinking that they are
strong and stout. Take heed that thy confidence be not on flesh and blood,
but on the Spirit of Jesus Christ: and there is nothing better against the
day of persecution, than to put a difference betwixt the motions of the
flesh, and the motions of the Spirit; and the strength of the flesh, and the
strength of the Spirit: For what was Peter's bragging, but the strength of the
flesh? For the strength of the flesh will beguile a good man. So, prepare thy
self this way in trying thy self: for and if thou do not this, thou shall
never willingly suffer: Yea, when thou shall be brought before the fire, then
thou shall start abacke. Therefore, strive aye to have a sense of the weakness
of thy nature. I will glory in my weakness, says Paul. There is none
strong in God, but they who are weak in themselves. And if thou be strong in
thy self, in flesh and blood, thou have no strength of GOD: and doubtless
at one time or other, thou shall fall. But when thou feel thy weakness, and
sighest and gronest under the burden thereof, thou art strong. Ye hear, that
after Paul, seeking to be fred of his weakness which he felt, had gotten this
answer, My shrength, says Christ, is perfected infirmity. Then, says he,
I will glory in mine infirmity, 2. Corinthians. 12. verse. 9.

Now in the next words, left it should have seemed grievous to them, that
they should leave him alone, he subjoyneth, by way of correction, But I am
not alone: for the Father is with me. The thing which rises of this, is
plain, and I propone it in as many words: The LORD JESUS was never left
himself alone, even when he was in greatest extreamitie, and when the
horrors of death were upon him, upon the Cross, and when he said, My GOD,
my GOD, why have thou forsaken me? His GOD had not left him. Indeed it is
true, GOD kept himself close, for a time, and let the nature of man, in soul
and body, suffer all extreamitie: yet he ceased not in the mean time, to
hold up that nature of man, under the infinite weight of dolor and wrath: or
else, he could not have stood, and borne out that burden to the end. Yet
the LORD JESUS was left comfortless on the Cross: and a very Martyr, who
suffers for the truth, will have greater joye in suffering, than CHRIST had
when he was on the Cross. This is true, look to Paul, in the second Epistle
to Timothy, Chap. 4. verse. 16. and 17. Howbeit he was in great trouble, yet
the LORD gave him comfort: In my defense, says he, no man was with me, but
all against me: GOD grant it be not laid to their charge: yet GOD was with
me, and strengthened me, and delivered me, and shall keep me till his
Kingdom. So Paul had a wonderful comfort, when he was brought before the
Tyrant Nero. The cause of this difference, is, The LORD JESUS was punished for
our sin, which he took upon him: The Lord Jesus was left comfortless,
because the Lord punished him for our sins: When the Lord punishes, there is
no consolation. Will the Lord send on thee sickness, crosses, afflictions,
etc. to punish thee, and take vengeance on thee for sin, thou shall have no
joye: but if he be chastening thee, thou shall have joy. So the Lord Jesus,
because he suffered for thy sin, had no consolation, for he had the pains of
Hell on him; and there is no joye in Hell, essay it when thou will. As for the
Martyrs, that which they suffer, is no punishment for sin: they suffer for
the testimony of the truth, and they have a good conscience: and the good
conscience will bring joye with it: for the Martyrs will have a greater joye,
in extreme affliction, and exquisite torments, than without affliction.

Now in the last Verse. he concludes this communing with his Disciples, and
these are his words, These things have J spoken unto you, that in me ye
might have peace. All tends to this end, that ye may enjoye that peace and
rest, that gladness and joye through the holy Spirit. This joye brings
with it, a very great ease and quietness. Well, there are many eases in the
world: but never one wist what ease was in the soul, but he who finds this
ease that is through a good conscience in CHRIST, and that peace which comes
of the forgiveness of sins.

Would ye have the true estate of a Christian man, or woman? There it is in
one word, That they are peaceable hearted, and they are joyful hearted: The
true Christian man, has the wonderfullest peace and joye in the soul, that
can be. And this was the end of all the speaking of the Lord Jesus to his
Disciples: and this is the end of the Gospel, and of all our preaching, to
have a good conscience, and that peace and rest in the soul. Now they never
knew what rest and peace was, but they who know what it is to have a sore
heart for sin; And, O how sore the conscience will be tossed, when it has
the taste of the judgment of God ^ that body would give a thousand worlds for
a word of that peace: for what is the peace in Jesus Christ? It is the
beginning of Heaven: if thou beginnest not that peace here, thou shall never
see peace hereafter. And this is the end of all our sanctification, and
justification, to get this peace in Christ. And what is Heaven? It is peace and
rest with God, that is our Heaven. So that if thou have no peace and rest in
the soul, and never find that true peace in Jesus Christ, and that Spirit
of joye, all this preaching is vain to thee: all is vain to thee, if thou
gettest not that peace. Take heed to it, as ye would see this life in Christ:
and when thou hear of this word of peace, look thou preasse to go home
with a peaceable soul: and if thou can not get this peace, be sad, and
mourn for it, and thou shall get it another time: Be this ways exercised,
that thou may feel the fruits of this word.

Now lest they should think, that this peace which he promised them, should
want sorrow, and that they should never be troubled, he puts this out of
their mind, and says, In the world ye shall have affliction: your peace
shall be without peace: The rest of a Christian, is no rest: your joye shall
be with sadness, and your comfort with heaviness: inwardly ye shall have
joye, but outwardly ye shall have heaviness. This heaviness which the godly
have, is so far from that, that it takes away their pleasure, that their
joye rises of tribulation: and then they have greatest joye, when they are
sorest vexed, and in greatest tribulations. Take heed to it, came not the same
to pass in the Disciples? they had never such a joye, as they had then, when
as soon after Christ departed, and was glorified in the Heavens, they were
brought in before the Council, and scourged for the Name of Jesus Christ, and
commanded straightly, that they should never speak in the Name of Jesus: then
they went out with joye, that they were counted worthy to suffer for that
Name: They had not such joy all the time that they were with Christ in the
world.

Yet he gives them a comfort against these tribulations, Yet b^^ of good
comfort, all these affl^ctions shall have an end, they shall end with victory
to you: J have overcome the world. If we looked not for an end of these
troubles, howbeit we had aye this peace with troubles, yet it would be heavy
to us: therefore the Lord comfort them with this, that in the end they shall
have a solid joy, and all tears shall be wiped away, and they shall get the
victory: not in themselves, but in him that has gotten the victory. The Lord
Jesus is the only Conqueror, and he it is, that is only victorious, and has
overcome the world and the Devil. But as for us his members, ( 1. Epist. John,
Chap. 5. verse. 4.) this is the victory that has overcome this world, even our
faith. Fasten thee on him who has gotten the victory, and then the Battle is
perfected. To speak it properly, we have not a battle with the Devil, to get
the victory; but to keep Christ by faith: for the Devil, and all our enemies,
are overcome, and the battle is stricken, and the field is won. Christ
sitting on the Cross, vanquished the Devil, and took him, and led him
captive in a triumph: all the Devils are reserved in chains to that great day:
So we have not a battle, for the victory is won already: but all our
victory is to keep faith in him, who has overcome our enemies, and purchased
the victory to us: and all the battles of the Devil, are to twin us and
Christ: and all the battles we have with him, are about faith: for if the
Devil be able to twin us and this faith, we have done with Christ: and
therefore all the exhortations of the Apostles, are to stand in faith. Look the
6. Chap. to the Ephesians. What then should I exhort you to? or what should
be our exhortations to them who are fighting? (And woe to them who are not
fighting against these deadly enemies: we should all be sweating in the
battle.) Let every one cry to another* Stick fast to Christ, hold the gripe,
and let it not go, and hold on the way, and strive on a little while, and thou
shall brook Jesus Christ, and all his graces: and thou shall leave over, and
repose, and rest upon him sweetly, until that day that he come, and deliver
thee from all trouble: then thou shall be crowned with that Crown of glory,
which he has purchased with his blood. To him therefore, with the Father, and
the holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XVII. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvii. VERSE. 1. THese things spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to
Heaven, and said, Father, that hour is come: glorify thy Son, that thy
Son also may glorify thee.


WE heard (Well-beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ) the large Sermon which the
Lord has to his Disciples, from the beginning of the fourteenth Chapter of
this Gospel, to this present Chap. which is the seventeenth. Now in the
seventeenth Chap. he ends his Sermon, with an earnest Prayer to the Father.
For the better understanding of this Prayer, we have to know thus far, The
Lord Jesus, when he was in this world, manifested in the flesh, abiding
amongst the Jews, and conversant with his Disciples; he abode amongst them as
an high Priest: that eternal high Priest, of whom all the high Priests
amongst the Jews, before his coming, were only but types and figures: and
when he came, he put an end to all the types, being the very body it self.
Now as it became the high Priest to make intercession for the people; so he
being high Priest, made intercession for his own people. The intercession which
the Lord made for his own, consists in two points; to wit, in prayer, and in
offering up of a sacrifice. Then, as for the first part of this intercession,
when the Lord was in the world, he prayed continually for the people; he never
ceased night nor day from prayer. As for the other part of his intercession,
when he had been in the world awhile, at the last he offers up that sweet
Sacrifice of his own body to the Father; and so he puts an end to all
those sacrifices, which were but types of him the true Sacrifice. As for the
Prayers whereby the Lord interceded betwixt God and man, they were many, and
made at sundry times: But amongst all the rest, it may be easily seen, that
this prayer in this Chapter was one of the most excellent and so it has
pleased the holy Spirit to register this Prayer especially, and to recommend
it to the posterity, to the end of the world. First, this Prayer is no able,
in respect of the time in the which he made it: it was even about that time,
when he offered himself up to the Father. Next, in respect of the use, it is
notable, because by this prayer he did consecrate and dedicate that blessed
Sacrifice to the Father: for sacrifices were dedicated to Go^ by prayer.
Thirdly, in respect of the subject and matter of it: for as ye may see in the
Chapter it self, first the Lord prays for himself, and for that eternal
glory which he had with the Father from all eternity: the fairest thing, and
the greatest matter that ever was, was that which he prayed for: and this he
does in the first five Verses. Then he comes on, and prays for his
Disciples, which he should leave behind him in the world, that the Lord would
take the custody of them, after his Ascension unto the Heavens, and would
preserve them from all peril: and this he does from the fifth Verse, to the
twenty: And last, he prays for the whole Kirk, for life everlasting, and
justification: and this he does to the end of this Chapter: So ye s;ee, it
is a notable subject. Last of all, will ye look to the force of this Prayer,
ye shall see the excellency of it: The force was not for the present, or for
a time; but the force of it abides continually, to the end of the world. And
this same Prayer is a mean, whereby all men and women, who are safe, and shall
be safe, to the end of the world, obtain salvation: And so this Prayer may
be well called, A ground, whereupon the Kirk stands. And as our salvation
stands on the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, so it stands on that Prayer that
was offered to his Father.

But to come to the Text, When Jesus (says John the writer of the Gospel) had
spoken these things, he lifted up his eyes to the Heaven, and he said as
follows. This is the entry to the Prayer, wherein John first concludes the
Sermon which the Lord made to his Disciples: When Jesus had spoken these
things to his Disciples. Then he proponeth the Prayer that follows, He
lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and said. There is the proposition of the Prayer.
In the proposition he notes narrowly the behavior of Christ in his Prayer:
He lifted up his eyes to Heaven. So in the eleventh Chapter of this Gospel, he
notes this behavior in praying, when he thanketh his Father, that he heard
him: before he raise ^ Lazarus from the dead, he lifted up his eyes to Heaven.

Now, Brethren, to speak of gesture in Prayer, it needs not much: will ye
read the Scriptures, ye shall read these gestures to be in prayer: First,
Godly men have humbled themselves before that Majesty: (It becomes the best
of us all to bow us before God:) They signified by the bowing of their knees,
the humbling of the heart. Offer not, if ye have a proud heart, to come before
that Throne. Then they were wont to have their hands, and their eyes, lift up
to the Heavens; that signified the lifting up of the eye of the soul to God,
to look to him* and to see him through all these clouds, and these visible
heavens, to come to that light that has none access: and this agrees with
the other. There are many who shall see Heaven, but with an humbled heart: when
the heart is humbled, and brought low, then it is conuoyed through these
heavens, even to that light of God. It becomes all Christians to be humbled
on their knees, and to lift up their eyes to Heaven: but all stands in the
heart. What recks of the outward disposition, if the soul be not heavenly
disposed? If it have a sense of Heaven, then the outward gesture will follow,
then we will bow our knees, and humble us before that Majesty. An humbled
heart will fall down, but a proud sinner, who is not touched with a sense of
his sins, will hardly bow his knee.

Now we come to the Prayer: first he makes his petition for himself: and
why not? the most precious thing in the world is the glory of Jesus Christ:
He says, Father, glorify thy Son. There is his petition. Mark the style:
it is a very warm and hearty style that he gives him, speaking familiarly to
God: the heart of him warmeth sweetly with him, and as a Son, he calls him
Father. The style which he gives him, utters, that he had a sense of that
fatherly love and affection toward him. While as he names him Father, he
utters that Sonly affection and love that he bare to him: A Sonly love,
craves a Fatherly love, and conciliateth a Fatherly affection from Heaven. Why
should we not strive to be like the Lord Jesus, and in Prayer chiefly? Would
any man or woman find the Fatherly affection of God? Would they have that love
that Fathers bear to their Children? Let them utter in Prayer that affection
that a Son or a Daughter should have to their Father. If thou would have
the Fatherly love of God, (the sweetest thing in the world,) look that the
Names which thou gluest him, testify, that thou love him, as a dear Child
loves his Parents: and look aye we pray with that Spirit, which is the
Spirit of Adoption, that testifies to our souls, that we are adopted to be
the Sons and Daughters of God: for it is that Spirit, that gives liberty
to the heart, and opens the mouth, and causes thee (as the Apostle says,)
to cry, Abba, Father. And if thou have not this holy Spirit of Adoption, and
if that Spirit open not thine heart, and lowse thy tongue, call him Father as
thou will, he is nothing else to thee, but a terrible Judge, to take vengeance
on thee, and thou art nothing else but a slave to him, and not a Son. Look
aye therefore, that thou have that Spirit, that shall testify to thee, that
thou art not the child of wrath, but that thou art bought with the blood of
Jesus Christ: and when thou feel that Spirit within thee, thou shall find
most sweet and comfortable motions, yea, motion upon motion rising in thine
heart.

As he calls him Father, so he calls himself his Son: he says not,
Father, glorify me: but, Father, glorify thy Son. Even as the first style
conciliateth the love of the Father to the Son, so this style reconciliateth
the love of the Son to the Father. So, Brethren, let all the styles we use
in prayer to God, savor of the love we have to God: whether we name God, or
call him Father, let that style smell of that sonly love we bear to God: or
whether we style our selves to God, let that style show the love we bear to
God: and then, when these two affections meet, our affection going up to him
to the Heavens, and his sweet affection coming down to us, there is the
tenderest and sweetest meeting that ever was: and be assured, and if it were
but a little affection that thou bear toward him, he will meet it with
an infinite love: yea, he will send down, out of the Heavens, by his holy
Spirit, such love to thy soul, as the tongue of no creature can express.
Have ye not experience of this, that the love that the LORD bears to us, in
JESUS CHRJST, is the sweetest thing that ever was? The LORD has given us leave
to be homely with him through CHRIST: and they who want CHRJST, dare not be
homely. The Pagans and the Jews, who deny the LORD JESUS, have not this
familiarity with GOD. Through JESUS CHRIST we have this wonderful liberty
to come to GOD, and call him Father.

But to come to the matter: Father, says he, glorify thy Son. Th^n, what
is it that he seeks of the Father? He seeks glory: He has been humbled
exceedingly, and laid down: the tongue of man nor Angel cannot tell how
low the Lord was laid, so being humbled at the pleasure of the Father: now
when he has near finished the work which he should have done, he seeks
again his own glory, and good reason were: he says, Glorify me, Father,
with that glory which I had with thee from all eternity. The Son with the
Father ha^ equal glory. Paul, in the Epistle to the Philippians, Chap. 2.
verse 6.7.8.9. has a notable place to this purpose, and he points out three
things of Christ in that place: First, he lets us see the glory which he
ha^ before he came into the world: Secondly, he lets us see how he humbled
himself to the Father: And thirdly, he lets us see how he recovered
again that glory which he ha^ from all eternity: as comfortable a place of
Jesus Christ, as is in all the Scripture. This then was his glory, when as he
was in the form of God, he thought it no robbery so to be equal with God,
for he was equal with his Father in glory in all respects. Then he tells us
of his humiliation, But he himself, of his free will, made himself of no
reputation. At the will of the Father, the Son of God comes down from the
Heaven, and lays down that glory, and takes upon him the vile habit of a
servant: the habit of man, that is the next degree: and being in the habit of
man, he is made obedient to the death, the vildest death that could be, an
accursed death, the death of the Cross: and this was all done at the pleasure
of the Father. Last, he comes to the recovery of this glory, God exalted him
in a wonderful sublimenes and highness, and he gave him a name above all names,
that at the Name of JESUS all knees should be bowed, of all things in Heaven,
and in earth, and under the earth, and that all tongues should confess that
JESUS was the Lord, to the glory of the Father. In the first to the Ephesians. also
he speaks of this his glory, saying, He raised him up from the dead, he
placed him at his right hand in the Heavens, far above all empire,
principality, and power, and he subjected all things under his feet, and he
made him head over all, even over the Kirk it self. Whose heart is able to
tell the glory that the Lord Jesus, who was so far humbled, got after his
humiliation? I recommend often these places to you: for if we love our Savior,
it should be our joy to read of the glory and exaltation of him, which he has
in our flesh: for his glory, is our glory: and as he was exalted, so shall we
be. What glory is this which he seeks? The Lord Jesus is very God and very
man. Now whether seeks he the glory of the Godhead, which dwelt in him bodily,
as Paul says, Col. 2. verse. 9. or the glory of the humane nature, or the
glory of them both? The answer is easy: The Lord Jesus is that eternal high
Priest, and Mediator betwixt God and man: And as he is Mediator, being both
God and man, no doubt, he seeks at the Father, the glorifying of both the
natures: The glorifying of the Son of God, as he was equal with the Father,
to be restored to him again: and the glorifying of the humane nature, to be
given him of new, which he had not before: but principally the glory of the
Godhead, Glorify me with that glory, says he, which J had with thee from
all eternity. So chiefly he seeks the glory of the Son of God, that
glory he had from all eternity: for why? As ye heard, Philipp. 2.6. the Son
of God had passed far, and laid down that glory which he had with the
Father: therefore Jesus sought the glory of the Godhead. As for the glory of
the manhood, it is but the consequence of the other. What is the glory of the
manhood, unto the glory of the great God? The glory of the nature of man in
Christ, is nothing but the beams of that glory which comes from the Godhead.
The glory of the nature of man in Jesus Christ, howbeit it passes all the
glory of Angels and man, is nothing in respect of that glory of God, which
dwells in Jesus Christ. To tell this more plainly, we see how the glory of
God uttered it self in Christ, when that blessed body was in the grave, and
when he was lying earthed closed in a Tomb, then that glorious God begins
to utter himself: for God left him never, but kept him still in the grave,
that he corrupted not: and the first thing he does, he raises up the dead
body out of the grave: and when he raised that body, he carries it up to
the Heavens, and sets it at the right hand of the Father, and that glorious
Godhead shall utter it self in conuoying that body, at the terrible day of
judgment, and shall set down that man Christ in the air, as a Judge, to judge
both the quick and the dead. As in the first to the Romans, he declared that
he was the Son of God mightily, in that he rose from the dead. So that
Godhead declared it self, that it left him not after this life was exspired,
but raised him from corruption.

Then he comes to his arguments to move his Father: the first is, Father,
the hour is come, therefore, Father, glorify thy Son, the hour of death
appointed from all eternity, that I should offer up the Sacrifice for the
redemption of man* seeing this death approaches near, let glory follow that
ignominious death: my death will be very offensive, both to the multitude,
and to my Disciples: as he said, This night ye will all be offended at me:
and, as he would say, O my Father, leave me not in that ignominious death:
but out of death, raise me to glory. Christ Jesus, all the time that he was
in the world, the only thing which he sought, was the glory of Heaven: for
our life stands in that Resurrection: And if CHRIST had not been raised,
says Paul, all our preaching should be in vain, and ye should lie still in
your sins. So, during all the time that he was in this world, this was aye
his prayer to his Father: and chiefelie, when he saw the hour of death, he
was instant and earnest in seeking that glory, We may learn here a lesson:
The nearer and the nearer we are to death, (deceive not our selves, with a
false life,) the more earnest we should be with GOD, that he would give us
life: and men and women, as they grow in age and draw nearer death, they
should be the more instant to seek life: and when they grow to graye hairs,
(it is a great shame to see an old body profane,) they should prepare
themselves for the hour of death: for death is a dangerous thing, death is not
to be jested with. All men will say, I will die: but if thou die once, woe
is to thee, if thou gettest not life: for why? death is a port, whereby we
either pass to that everlasting death, or then to everlasting life: Look for
no Purgatory: when as the soul is loosed from the body, it sees an horrible
darkness, if in this present life it had not a fore-tasting of a better life.
Therefore during the time of grace, when ^^ we have space in our life, let us
seek that life of Heaven* not on^^ie in our old age, but even in our
youthhood, we should cast us to seek life: and happy is that young body, that
enters into that race to life, and aye goes forwards, with the Apostle
Paul, never sitting down, but aye striving to apprehende that Butte and Mark,
which is the Crown of glory in JESUS CHRIST. Whether thou be man or woman,
happy art thou who look for that life, and say, before the death draw
near, I must flitte. So, during this life here, we should aye groan to
feel that life, and fasten heart and hand to find that life: but then
chiefly, when we are drawing near the door of death: and daily we get
many warnings to flitte, and remove out of this life: And the Lord says by
these sicknesses and calamities, Flitte, flit: but then greedily we should
gripe to Jesus Christ, and fasten to him, who is life: and if we get a gripe
of him, that death, which is terrible otherwise, it will be turned to a sweet
sleep. Paul says, Those who sleep in him, he shall raise them up: there
death is but a sweet sleep. Woe to them that have no gripe of Christ! for at
the last hour death shall be terrible unto them. Even as I began, so I
end: Think not lightly of death: and if thou bestowest thy life, look that
thou bestow it well, and for a good cause: and if thou flittest, and if thou
changest this house of claye, be sure that thou get a better: and if this
tabernacle of the body be dissolved, be thou assured in thy soul, that thou
shall be clothed with the glory of Jesus Christ. Paul, in the second Epist.
to the Corinthians, and the fifth Chapter, was sure of this, after the
dissolution of his body from the soul: when as he says, I know
perfectly, if once the earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, I
shall get a lodging, not made with the hands of men, but eternal in the
Heavens. Before ye flitte out of an house here, ye will be sure of another
to dwell in. O fool! art thou so wise in the things of this world, and art
not sure to be clothed with that building of the Heavens? Therefore, before
thou losest this life, see how thou bestowest it, and see that thou die in a
good cause, and look that thou have a gripe of Jesus Christ: and if thou
would die, give this life to him, who is able to give thee a better life.
And seeing the time of trial draws near, for ought we see, and the time
will declare, who will die with Jesus Christ, and offer their lives up to him,
the Lord give every one of us grace to die for Jesus Christ: and say in thy
self, Lord, if it shall please thee to bring on that trial, prepare me to
give thee this life, which thou have given me; for I know assuredly, that I
shall receive a better of thee. Well is the soul which is this ways prepared!
And well is them who die for the cause of Jesus Christ, for this glorious
Gospel! And woe is them who die in the contrary part!

The second argument is, That thy Son may glorify thee also. This is the
reason: If thou glorify me, Father, I shall glorify thee: for the knowledge
of thee stands in the knowledge of me: if the world see not me, they
cannot glorify thee. If the creature see not the glory of the Son, he will
never see the Father. Ye see a sweet meeting here, betwixt the Father and
the Son: how every one of them joyneth together in glory: the Father, who
is the Fountain of all glory, begins, and communicates his glory, with
the Son and the holy Spirit: the Father has not his glory of them, but he
begins, and communicates his glory with the Son and the holy Spirit:
and the glory of the Son and the holy Spirit, redoundeth back again to
the Father. And that glorious Trinity deliteth in glorifying one another: for
the glory comes from the Father, upon the Son, and from the Son, to the
holy Spirit: and back again, from the holy Ghost to the Son, and from the
Son to the Father: even as the Sun makes reflexe from a mirror toward
himself again. No words are able to express this, for it is a thing
incomprehensible to see that glory betwixt the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. The consideration of this would confound all the creatures, both
men and Angels; how the Father puts on the beams of his glory upon the
Son, and from the Son to the holy Spirit: and then it comes about from
the holy Spirit, and strikes on the Son, and on the Father. Of this we are
not capable, nor no Angel can sufficiently consider the deepnes of this
glory: yet we may know, that all glory comes of the Father, and passes
on the Son, and on the holy Spirit: and, as it were, in a circle, the beams
of that glory comes back again, glancing on the Father: and the glory of
the Father is not diminished, but ever he remains infinitely glorious: and
the Son, and the holy Spirit, are nothing inferior in power, majesty, or
glory, unto the Father: for they differ nothing, except in order: The Father
is first, and the Son is the second person of the glorious Trinity,
begotten of the Father: and the blessed holy Spirit, the third person,
proceeds of the Father, and the Son, all alike glorious. Now I will leave
this: There is even such a meeting betwixt God and man, in a manner: for all
the glory which we have, comes of the Father: for what is the glory of a
King, but a little small beam of that infinite glory? So the glory of the
creature redoundeth to God. Look to the Heaven, and to the Earth; there is
great glory in them: yet the glory of them shall all come to him again: and
Heaven and Earth shall perish, ere he want a jote of his glory. Romans 11. By
him, through him, and to him, are all things. So that to him redoundeth all
glory: in end all comes home again till him, as in a circle.

And mark this: he says not this, That thou may be glorified in the Son:
but, That the Son may glorify the Father. If any man has gotten a spark
of that glory, let him not think, that that glory shall only come back
again to God, but let him be the conuoyer of it: and let him say, yea, if he
be a King, who has gotten a Crown, Lord, I will take this Crown, and with as
good will as thou have given it to me, will I give it to thee again: for we
have nothing but that which comes from this God: And so, if thou had
nothing but this life, say, Now, Lord, with as good will as I got it, with as
good will, will I render it to thee: otherwise he will be glorified in thee
whatsoever thou do, do what thou can; but thy life shall be turned into
death, and thine honor into shame and ignominy. Therefore, whenever it
pleases him to seek our lives, even with heart and good will we should render
them unto him: for if he take them from us, he will give us life everlasting:
and if he take a Crown from a King, he will give him the Crown of life
everlasting. And if he take this worldly riches from thee, he will give thee
that rich treasure of glory in Jesus Christ: and so with all other worldly
things: but if we give them not with good will, he will take them from us, and
will give them to others, and we shall get shame and ignominy. So, in despite
of thine heart, God shall be glorified, in whatsoever thing he bestows on
thee. Therefore let every one of us, whatsoever we receive of God, be so
disposed, that if it please God to have our life, riches, or whatsoever
commodities of this world, we render all unto God willingly: as Job says, The
Lord gives, the Lord takes, blessed be the Name of the Lord. As he would
say, I have gotten all from thee, and I will give all to thee again. What got
Job for rendering all to the Lord? He gave him the double. Even so, thou shall
get the double. Now the Lord prepare us to offer up this life willingly unto
him, and to spend it thankfully for his glory and service, being assured, that
we shall get a better life laid up in the Heavens for us, through JESUS
CHRIST: To whom, with the FATHER, and the holy SPIRIT, be all Praise, Honor,
and Glory, world without end.

AMEN.
THE XVIII. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvii. VERSE, 2.3. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that
he should give eternal life to all them that thou have given him.

And this is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God,
and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.


WE showed you the last day, (Well-beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ) that this
Prayer which the Lord made to his Disciples before his death, stands in three
parts: First he prays for himself, and his own glory: Secondly, he prays
for his Apostles, and for their preservation: Last, he prays for the whole
Faithful, the whole Kirk that should be on the face of the earth, to the
end of the world. The last day we entered into the first part. His petition
in the first part, was Father, glorify thy Son. The first argument of his
petition, was The hour is at hand: that is to say, The hour of my death is
at hand, therefore it is time that I should be glorified: Let me not lie for
ever, would he he say, in that terrible, and ignominious, and offensive death;
but after the death, after that shame and ignominy, that I shall suffer,
immediately glorify me.

Then the next argument was, Glorify thy Son, Father, that thy Son may
glorify thee. I shall glorify thee again, would he say, and in mine
exaltation, and glorifying me, thou shall be glorified, and so the whole glory
shall redounde to thee: therefore, Father, glorify me. In this Text which we
have now read, follows the third reason of his petition, why he desires
that the Father should glorify him: The third reason is, That I may give life
everlasting to them that thou have given to me. As he would say, Father,
glorify me, and I shall give life everlasting to thy Chosen: it shall not be
for nothing, but as my glory shall redounde to thy glory, so it shall redounde
to the salvation of thy Chosen, to the end of the world. Ere he come to the
argument, he lays down the ground of it, which is, the authority that the
Father had given to him: Thou have given me authority over all flesh, says
the Lord. This ground of the gift of life everlasting* is a power and
authority, which the Father has given to the Son. Whosoever gives life, he
must have a great authority, and a greater than all this earth has. All the
Kings in the world have not authority to give life to a gnat. Indeed the
authority of a King may take away the life: but they have no power, no if it
were but to give this life natural, let be life everlasting: And so that
power must be great, to give life everlasting. So this Princely and Kingly
authority, the Lord Jesus has received of his Father: Ye know his offices, his
Kingly office, his Priestly and Prophetical office: Life everlasting, and the
gift of it, is grounded on that Kingly authority which the Lord has gotten
from his Father. But how far extends it? Thou have given me authority
over all flesh. Never man, nor woman, is exempted from the Kingly power of
Jesus Christ, whether they be chosen or reprobate. Look the fifth Chapter of
this Gospel, The Father has given the Son all authority and judgment, and
by him does adjudge to life the chosen, and to death the reprobate: So there
is never a soul exempted from his judgment. The Lord himself in the 28.
Chapter of Matthew. verse. 18. he extends his authority larger: The Father,
says he, has given me all authority in Heaven and in Earth. So that Jesus
Christ has not only authority over man and woman, but over the Angels in
Heaven: he has power over them all, and over the Devils, and at the Name of
JESUS, all knees must bow, of things Heavenly and Earthly; if they bow not,
they shall be broken. I shall tell you more, which is very comfortable: This
authority which the Lord has gotten in Heaven, and in Earth, is not as he is
God only: (bowbeit principally it be as he is God:) but this power that he
has gotten over the Angels, is even as he is man: howbeit they be glorious,
and far more glorious that men, yet they are not so glorious, as the man the
Lord Jesus. So, I say, even as he is man, he is head and King of the Angels.
Look the 5. Chapter of John, verse. 27. The Father has given the Son all
authority and judgment, as he is the Son of man: not only has he this
power as he is God, but even that nature of ours wherewith he is clad, has
this power. It is a worthy thing to be marked, what the Lord gathers of
this authority. In the 28. Chap. of Matthew. verse. 18. The Father has given me
all authority in Heaven and Earth: The^fore go out, says he, and preach, and
baptize all Nations, in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. So ye see, on that princely authority which the Son has, he sends
out his Disciples to preach: And all that the Apostles did in the world, in
preaching and baptizing, they did it on the authority of Christ Jesus their
Lord. There was never an Ambassador, that went with such a power, as the
Apostles of Jesus Christ had in the world. And, Brethren, to come to our
selves, I say, even this day, all this preaching of the Gospel, and all this
ministering of the Sacraments, and Discipline, all proceeds of this princely
and kingly authority of the Lord Jesus. Mark it: The closing up of Heaven, and
the opening up of Heaven to penitent sinners, whether it be by word or
discipline, all is grounded on an higher authority, than all the authority of
the world. There was never a King or Prince that had so great authority as
this, whereon the Discipline, according to the word of GOD, and exercise of
Religion, is grounded. And they who contemn this preaching of the Gospel, and
ministering of the sacraments, and Discipline, they contemn not the ordinance
of man, (it were better for them to contemn all the authority of Kings,) but
they contemn the authority of the great GOD: for in the Kirk, there is none
authority, but Christ's authority; and all that is done, is founded on this
au^hority. We say not on the authority of Kings, or of the Pope. The Lord has
not translated this authority to any creature: and therefore the Pope has but
an usurped authority. As for the Minister, he has no authority in his own
person, but only in the Lord Jesus. And this is the difference, betwixt the
Kirk and the Policy, The Lord Jesus has given a part of his authority, to
the King, or to the Magistrate: but the Lord Jesus has not given any part of
his authority, to any of the Kirk. In the Policy, there are Kings; but in
the Kirk, there is none, but the Lord Jesus. And all that tyranny, in the
kingdom of the Antichrist, is but usurped: there is not a minute of the word
of GOD, that can be a ground to it.

When he has laid down the ground of life, he tells who will get this
life. Will every one get this life? No, no, never one gets this life from
him, but the soul that the Father has pulled out of this world, and put into
his hand, The Lord will know well, to whom he will give this life everlasting.
It may be, he will throw a Kingdom to a man, and give him these earthly things
in great abundance: but he will not give to every one the Kingdom of Heaven.
If ye will weigh the words, ye shall see distinctlie, the part of the Father,
and of the Son, in the work of salvation: The Father gives men to the
Son, that is the part of the Father: J will give them life everlasting, that
is the part of the son. First the Father of the Lord Jesus, choosed out so
many, as he would have safe, in his Son Christ Jesus: and then in time, he
calls on them, whom he has chosen: he knows them well enough: he
calls them by his word, and draws the souls of them unto him: for if they
be not drawn, they will not come: as he says in the sixth Chapter of this
Gospel, verse. 44. No man comes to me, but them whom the Father draws. He
draws them by his holy Spirit, to the Son: and then he, and the Son,
keeps them to the day of their full redemption, and gives them life
everlasting. So ye may see in this place, and in the Epistle of Jude, at the
beginning, that all, who are safe in Jesus Christ, are first called by the
Father: To them, says Jude, who are called and sanctified by GOD, and are
saved by JESUS CHRIST. I mark on this, what is the ground of this authority,
where he says, These a home thou have given me, J will give them life
everlasting: He ascribes this authority to the Father, and he says, he
will save none, but these whom the Father has given him. All the Brethren,
read of JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD, in this Euangel, and through out the
whole Gospel, ye shall never read of him, where he speaks of any thing
that he is doing, has done, or shall do; but he gives the whole glory of
it to the Father. What means this? This is the ground of it, He had his
commission from the Father. He came from the Heaven to the Earth, out of the
bosom of the Father: and he was an Ambassador, sent from his Father. Now it
is good reason, that an Ambassador, sent in an Ambassadrie, not only in deed,
but also in word, honor his Prince: otherwise he is but a traitor. The LORD
JESUS was an Ambassador sent from the Father: therefore in all his actions,
and in all his words, he honors his Father. There is not one of us all,
but we have a commission from GOD, and is placed in a calling: and there is
not one of us, high nor low, but we are borne to do some thing. Then, if the
Son of God, equal with God, having a calling of his Father, sought to
glorify God, so let us also, in word and deed, grorifie God: fie on that
flesh that will not glorify God, but will ascribe any thing to himself; and
will stand up, and say, I did this or that: fie on thee, that wilt say so, and
wilt not honor him, who has honored thee. Beware to speak any thing, that
may derogate to the glory of God: and not only in deed, but also in word
glorify him: that they who hear you speak, may glorify God through your
speech, and by your example.

Now, having spoken of the ground, we come to the benefit of life everlasting
it self: As before we heard, the glorifying of Jesus Christ served to the
glory of the Father; so we have now, that the glory of Jesus serves also to
our glory: So ye may see, of what importance is the glory of Jesus Christ: the
fairest fruits that ever were, follow on that glory: through his glory, glory
comes to the Father, and life to the world. The chief two things in the
world, are, The glory of God, and the salvation of the Kirk: which both
proceed from the glory of Jesus Christ. Life everlasting, mark it well, it
comes, and it flows, of the glorious life of Jesus Christ, when he rose
from the dead: all our life is by the rising of Jesus Christ, from death to
life. What is this life everlasting, or the Spiritual life which we have? It
is but a little sponke, that flows from that fullness of that glorious life
which Jesus Christ lives in the Heavens, at the right hand of the Father: And
this quickening Spirit, which every one of us receives in sober measure, is
nothing but a portion of that Spirit of life, which is in Jesus Christ, hat is
in him in all superaboundance, and above all measure. We in the Kirk, his
members, have the Spirit of life flowing from him in some measure. Paul, in the
6. Chapter to the Romans, verse. 5. has a notable sentence concerning this
matter, If we be planted with him, in the likeness of his death, we shall
be planted with him, in the likeness of his life: meaning, that this
mortification of the old man, comes by the virtue of the death and Cross*
of Jesus Christ: and this new life comes by the virtue of his Resurrection
and life. And in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 15. verse. 17. J^
Christ had not risen from the dead, we had yet lain still in our sins. So
then, would thou have one of the chief arguments, to know whether Christ
has died for thee, or not? (if thou know not this, thou know nothing:)
descend down into thine heart, and see if thou find in any measure that
foul and cankered nature slain into thee, that thou be dead to sin: if
thou find it, thou have cause to be blythe, for thou have a sure warrande,
that the Lord Jesus has died for thee: for if he had not died for thee, thou
had not had any mortification of sin. Then, would thou know, if the
Lord Jesus has risen from the death, (as Paul speaks,) for thy
justification? Look if thou have any part or that spiritual life. Woe is to
that soul, that feels no life, no spirit, no quickening, etc. for that
soul has no warrande, that ever Christ rose, to justify or save it.
Therefore, as ye would know, if Christ has died or risen for you, look
your warrande: and if ye find any mortification, or any sense of the
Spirit, then be sure ye have a warrande: But and if thou find it not, say
not that Christ died for thee; thou have no warrande of the death and
resurrection of Christ for thee. What is this we are doing? We are seeking
busily Charters and Euidentes for Lands, and Liuinges, and earthly
possessions: but seek a warrande for Lands, and all the world, as thou will,
shame shall come upon thee, if thou want the warrande of life everlasting.

Now in the next verse. This is life everlasting, to know thee to be the only
true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. In this verse. (mark it) he
lets us see the necessity there is in glorifying of him, if ever such a
thing should be, that one who is chosen should be glorified: for he reasons
after this manner, Father, thou know what, is life, it is a knowledge of
thee, and of me, whom thou have sent: but except I be glorified, the world
cannot know thee, nor me: therefore, Father, except I be glorified, there is
no life for the world. So, there is the necessity of the glorifying of
Christ, to get life everlasting; because there cannot be knowledge of God
without Christ, and except he be glorified. But to consider these words more
norrowlie, he says, This is life, to know thee to be the only true God:
not only to know thee to be God, but to know thee to be the only God:
that is, to put a difference betwixt thee, and the Idol gods of the Gentiles.
This excludes not the Son, and the holy Spirit, but he respects the
time: for before the coming of CHRIST, the Gentiles were not called, but the
world was full of Idols, and men were blinded with error and ignorance.

Now see what is life: there are many that will speak of life everlasting,
and yet they know not what it means. Life everlasting stands in a sight
and in a knowledge: if thou be ignorant, thou shall never get life: It
stands in the light of the mind: thou art full of darkness, and that
darkness must be out, and light must come in, ere thou gettest life: But it
stands not in the knowledge of every thing: many one seeks knowledge: but
run where thou will to seek knowledge, if thou see not him who is the
Fountain of life, from whom all life flows, thou know nothing. I mean
not of a bare knowledge, for if thou have no more, it shall not avail thee:
but with the knowledge, thou must have faith in thine heart, to draw out life
out of the Fountain of life. Who is the Fountain of life? It is the Father of
Jesus Christ, who is the Fountain of all life: the life which the Son
himself has, comes out of that Fountain, as Christ himself confesses in
the fifth Chapter of this Gospel, The Father has given to the Son to have
life in himself. Then all the life of the Angels, and all the life of the
creatures, and all our life, spiritual or natural, flows out of that
Fountain. So, except a man or woman get a sight of the Father, and of the Lord
Jesus, they cannot get life. Lord! if it be not a great thing to get a
sight of him! For, as the Apostle says to Timothy, He dwells in a light
that has none access. That deepnesse of light which he dwells in, is
wonderful, yea, incomprehensible: and there is no knowledge of the Father,
without the Son: if thou see not the Son, thou shall never see the
Father, and so thou shall never see life. Away with that dream of the Jews,
and Turks, etc. that will say, they will get a sight of the Father, without
the Son: no, no man shall see him without the Son: For why? never man saw
the Father at any time: it is the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of
the Father, who has revealed him. John, 1. verse. 18. Except we get a sight
of the Son, who is the splendour of the Father, and the engraven form of his
person, we shall never see that glory. Hebr. 1. verse. 3. So except we see
the Son of God, the second person of the glorious Trinity, there shall be
no life for man nor woman in this world. And there is no sight of that glorious
person of the Son, who dwells in that light inaccessable: (as he is God,
he is as incomprehensible as his Father:) he is not seen, I say, but under
a cloud: we must see him through this nature of ours: There is no Angel in
Heaven, that dare abide to look on the Son, but through a veil, and this is
the veil of our flesh: if thou take away that veil, the sight of that
Majesty shall devour thee: No, if thou gottest a sight of the Son of God,
without the sight of his manly nature, wherein he died for our sins, and
rose for our justification, thou would be destroyed, and confounded
thereby. But by the contrary, that is the pleasandest sight that ever thou
saw, when thou see that tabernacle of thy nature, that glorious person
clothed with the nature of man. The knowledge of Christ, must be first as he
is sent: next, as he is Jesus: and last, as he is Christ. His sending is, as
he is manifested in the flesh. And he is Jesus, and Christ, as he is God and
man. So we must look through that veil of man, and through that tabernacle
of our nature, ere we see that glorious Majesty: And this is joye and life,
and our heaven into this earth.

Ye shall mark a notable lesson of this which I have spoken: See how
knowledge goes up through to the Father, and see by what degrees life comes
down from the Father. There are the degrees, and order of our knowledge, and
how it passes up through: First, our eye strikes on the veil of our nature,
wherein that glorious Majesty sits. Then, through the veil, the soul
pierces in to that glorious Son of God: and then when the soul has gotten
that sight of the Son, it passes forward to the glorious sight of the
Father, and then our knowledge rests there, for it is the Fountain of life:
Faith never rests, till it come to the Father, and then it rests on him,
and there is the joye of it. Now, look how we get life: As soon as our
soul comes to that Fountain, the Father, that Fountain breaks out in
living waters. Look the power of Faith: Faith breaks up that Fountain, and
then spirit and life begins to flow. Life comes first from the Father, to
the Son of GOD; and then it comes from the Son, to our nature; and
through our nature, that Spirit, and that life, flows into our souls. There
is the difference, knowledge begins at the nature of man in Christ, but life
begins at the Father. Again, knowledge passes up, and life comes down
from the Father. Well then, if life everlasting stand in knowledge of GOD in
Jesus Christ; then it must follow, first, as a man or a woman grows in
knowledge, and in faith, so they grow in life everlasting: and as they grow
in life, so they grow in faith: and in what measure thy knowledge is, in that
measure thy life is: and in what measure thy life is, in that measure thy faith
is. And when that day shall come, when we shall see the Lord Jesus face to
face, as our knowledge shall be perfected, so shall our life and joye: and, in
one word, our Heaven shall be perfected. The perfection of life everlasting*
and knowledge, stands in the sight of the face of Jesus Christ. And if our
life everlasting stand in knowledge, then death everlasting stands in
ignorance: and where there is ignorance of God in Jesus Christ, there death
takes place, and their Hell is begun here: and that darkness which is in
thy soul, shall be turned into utter darkness: and the more ignorant thou
be of God in Jesus Christ, the greater shall thy damnation be. Paul to the
Ephesians. Chap. 4. verse. 18. joyneth these two together, speaking of the Gentiles,
and their estate, before Christ came into the world, says he, they had
their minds darkened, with a cloud of ignorance, and they were aliantes from
the life of God: Meaning, that when as ignorance reigned amongst the Gentiles,
they were all casten out from the light of Heaven. Where there is nothing but
darkness, there is not a sponke of the life of Christ there. Though thou
werest a King, and have but a natural life, I count thee worse than a Dog:
howbeit thou can pass the time, and hunt and haulke, and eat thy meat,
etc. thou art deader than a Carrion.

Seeing then life stands in the sight of God, through Jesus Christ, and
seeing death stands in the ignorance of the soul, this should be our care
night and day, to warble through that cloud of darkness, which hides us
from that Son of God, and ^o get away this foul veil: for if it be not put
away, it grows aye till it come to an hard scroofe. There is no standing for
thee, but thou shall either grow in light, or in darkness. This should be our
care, to put away darkness, and get light. We should aye labor to cast off
this veil, under the which we lie, till the Lord deliver us fully from that
blindness of the mind, which is a black and cloudy covering. The way to be
fredde of this, is to hold up thine eye, to get a sight of the face of Jesus
Christ: In the face of Jesus thou see the glory of the Father: Know thou
how thou shall get it in this life? Seek it in the word: All the sight that
we have here, is but in a mirror, and by an aenigma, (as The Apostle says) or
by a parable, in respect of the sight which we shall have in the life to come:
And this mirror is the glorious Gospel. To end in a word: As thou would
see Jesus, and be quite of darkness: as thou would have life, and be quite
of death, set thine heart to hear the Gospel of Jesus Christ; that is the only
way for thee to get a sight of him in this life. Strive to hear this word
preached: Ye shall have Christ crucified in the Gospel, and Christ glorified in
the Gospel: And begin once to take pleasure in hearing, and I shall promise
thee, in the Name of God, Heaven and Earth, and all shall go together, ere
thou gettest not light, and consequently Heaven in this life: otherwise, I
give thee over.

Now, seeing Christ is our light, and our life, the Lord give us grace to take
heed to him in the mirror of his word, and to take a delight in it, that we may
get this black darkness of the soul put away, and get a sight of God,
through Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, and praise, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XIX. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvi. VERSE. 4.5. 4 J have glorified thee on the earth: J have
finished the work which thou gave me to do.

5 And now glorify me, thou Father, with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was.


We have heard (Well-beloved in the Lord Jesus) sundry arguments that the Lord
Jesus uses in his Prayer to his Father, to move him to glorify him. (For that
is the petition, Glorify thy Son.) The first argument was from the time of
his death, that was at hand: The time is come, says the Lord, therefore
glorify thy Son. The second argument was from the glory that should redound
to the Father, if he should glorify the Son: Glorify thy Son, Father,
that thy Son may glorify thee. The third argument was from that life
everlasting, that he should give to them whom the Father had once given to
him, if he were once glorified: Glorify me, says he, that J may give life
everlasting to them whom thou have given me. Then he lets us see, that it
cannot be possible that he can give life to any man, except he first be
glorified. Life everlasting stands first in the knowledge of the Father, that
only true God: Then it stands in the knowledge of the Son, that he is
sent of the Father, that he is Jesus the Savior, that he is Christ anointed,
and the Mediator betwixt God and man. Now, would he say to the Father, Except
thou glorify me, neither thou, nor I, shall be known: and therefore, that
life everlasting may be given to man, it is needful that I be glorified.
Thus far hitherto.

Now in the beginning of this Text which we have read, we have the fourth
argument from that glory he had given to the Father already: Father, says
he, J have glorified thee on the earth, J have ended the work that thou gave
me to do: what rests, but that thou glorify me? There must be a meeting
here. The Son must glorify the Father, and the Father must glorify the
Son. So ye see very weighty arguments of this petition, from the
beginning: both the time craves that the Father should glorify the Son, and
then the great fruit that was to proceed thereof: for the Father should want
glory, and the world should want life, if the Son were not glorified. And
last, ye see that very obedience that the Son gave to the Father in the
Earth, requires, that the Father should glorify him. The Son had glorified
the Father in the world, and therefore the Father should have glorified the
Son in the Heavens.

But to come to the last argument: J have glorified thee, says the Son:
This argument leans to a promise, which the Father made to the Son, ere
ever he was manifested in the flesh. As he would reason thus, Father, thou
have promised, that if I should glorify thee, thou should glorify me: but
so it is, Father, that I have glorified thee, therefore glorify me. This
promise is often found in the old Testament, in many places thereof. Look
the hundredth and tenth PSALM, there it is said, The Lord said to my Lord,
that is, the Father said to the Son, (for both are the Lords of this
world,) sit thou at my right hand, until the time that I make thine enemies
thy foote-stoole. There is that promised glory, That he should make him King
over the world, and humble his enemies, spiritual and temporal, under his
feet. So this is the glory that the Son craves.

Now, Brethren, in very deed, the Son of God might have claimed justly
that promise that the Father made to him, under the condition of obedience,
because the obedience of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, was perfect: which
obedience being the ground of the promise, justly he might claim that
glory, by reason that the promise was perfectly fulfilled. But to come to us:
There was no man since the fall of Adam, that dare be bold, except they be
utterly impudent, to claim any life or grace of God, by virtue of this
condition of obedience, and to say, Lord, I have done this, therefore Lord,
give me life. There is no flesh, no, not the best renewed man that ever was,
that has that freedom, that can say this, By virtue of my merit give me
life. Look what Paul, a renewed man, says of himself, Philipp. 3. verse. 9.
I ^steeme all to be but dongue, that I may gain Christ. For why? Brethren,
there is no flesh, except that man Jesus Christ, that ever has had, or will
have, that perfect obedience, which meriteth any grace at Gods hands. This
shall stand, though all the world would rise against it, with the Pope, and
that whole rabble: Therefore it comes to pass, that none, either who is,
was, or shall be, shall be made righteous in the presence of God, or get
life everlasting, but they who pass from the condition of works, (that is
called the Legal covenant,) and take them only to that promise made in the
blood of Jesus Christ; and seek not life by virtue of their works, but only
by virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ. I denounce, in the Name of Jesus
Christ, if thou seek not life only by that blood, thou shall never see nor
taste of life. If thou begin to seek grace by thy merits, thou shall never
get it, because thou treadest down under thy feet, the blood of Christ, and
renouncest it, and take thee to thy peltrie.

But yet let us mark the words better: I have glorified thee, Father: that is,
I have put an end to that work thou gave me, the fair work of the
redemption of man, the fairest work that ever was: yea, fairer than the
creation of the world. Now how is this he says, I have ended it, seeing
he had not satisfied, and was not crucified, and the end of this work was
founded on the Cross of Jesus Christ, and that bitter suffering? The answer
is easy: He speaks of the work to come, as though it were past already,
for the certainty of it: for it was most sure, he behooved to suffer, and also
for the nearness of it: for his death and latter passion was at hand. Another
question: How is it that he says, J have glorified thee already, in time
past, when as he said before, Father, glorify thy Son, that he may
glorify thee, in the time to come? They stand very well together: for the
Son, the Lord Jesus, he both glorified his Father, before he was glorified
by his Father; and also when he was glorified by his Father, both the times, he
glorified his Father: But see the difference: The Lord Jesus glorified the
Father, before he was glorified of the Father, in that most humble obedience
he gave to his Father: there was never a man humbled under the Father as he. In
that obedience he gave to the Father, the mercy and love of the Father shined
in the world in his humility. The worl^e wondered that ever there should have
been such a mercy and such a love of God to man. And they who will look to this
humble man, the Lord Jesus, they will wonder, that ever there should have been
such a mercy to man. If thou look well to the obedience and humbleness of the
Son, thou shall wonder at the love of the Father toward us; who humbled his
own Son, not only as a servant, but to the vile death, the accursed death of
the Cross, for our cause, as Christ himself says, John, 3. verse. 16. The
Father has so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son
for it, that all, that believe in him, should he saved, and none perish. What
man will give his only begotten son to save another? Now this commends
the love of God, says Paul, Romans 5. verse. 8. that when we were enemies,
Christ died for us. Who is he that will die for his enemy? or what father
will give his son for him? So, neither man nor Angel is able to comprehend
the thousand part of the love which the Father bare to the world, in
humbling his only begotten Son. So the Son glorified the Father in his
humiliation. Then again, when the Son was glorified of the Father, after he
was raised from the dead, and ascended to the Heavens, and set at the right
hand of his Father, in that glory incomprehensible, the Son glorified the
Father in that exaltation: as he glorified him before in his humiliation, so
does he in his exaltation: and he glorified the Father in his exaltation, by
reason that there appeared such a wonderful power in God, in exalting Christ
in our nature, that was so humbled in the grave. And when the world saw, that
the body of the man Jesus Christ, was raised up so gloriously, they wondered,
that ever there should have been such a power in GOD: All the Angels in Heaven
got never such a Revelation of the power of GOD, as then when the LORD JESUS
was raised up from the death to life. Not only raised he a dead man up from
death, but he raised him up in such a wonderful highness, that he made him
King over all kings* and above all Angels, and gave him such a Name, that at
the Name of Jesus all knees should bow, of men and Angels, of all things under
the earth, and above it: and that all tongues should confess, that Jesus
Christ is the Lord of Lords, and God of all glory. Paul to the Ephesians, Chap.
1. verse. 20. when he speaks of this power, he will not simply call it a
power, but he says this, According to the effectualnesse of his strong power,
which he uttered in Christ, when he raised him from the dead: that is the
first degree: and placed him at his right hand, that is the second degree.
There appears the power of God, in exalting him in our nature, to so high a
glory. It appeared not so great at the creation, as then when he exalted the
Man Jesus Christ. Would thou know the power of God? Look to that
exaltation, and thou shall see it shine in a greater measure, than in any thing
that ever was wrought. Men by nature would see things to ravish them to
admiration: but I tell thee, if thou would wonder at any thing, wonder at
these things, at the humiliation of Jesus Christ, and at the exaltation of
Jesus Christ: the wonderfullest doctrine that ever sounded in the world. So
when thou hear of the death of Christ, and of his exalting, wonder; for such
a wondering shall work salvation. Let us see all the wonders of the world,
never one of them shall work life or salvation, but that wonder. The answer
may be otherwise. The Lord when he was in the world, he glorified the Father
in his prophecy and Priesthood: he is that anointed Prophet, Priest, and
King: So he being Prophet, Priest, and King, he glorified the Father in the
Earth, chiefly in his prophecy, he teached aye in the world: he glorified
also the Father in his Priesthood: he aye suffered: never a day, passed by,
from his birth, until his latter breath, without some suffering. But in his
Kingly office, he glorified the Father when he was exalted, and raised up to
the Heaven, and set down at the right hand of that Majesty: and that is the
office in this hour, in the which the Son of God glorifieth his Father, in
sitting there as a King of Heaven and Earth, reigning in the midst of his
enemies, with a great iron rod, battering them in pieces, like a potte-shard:
and that same rod of iron, shall never leave them, till it bruise them down.
There was never a King so glorious, as he is at the right hand of the Father:
and when we shall see him in that Princely Throne, we shall say, we never
saw glory in this world to that glory. And when the conquesse which the Lord
Jesus is making in Heaven, and in Earth, (for the enemies are not yet
altogether subdued: no, the day passes not, but he makes some conquesse,)
when it shall be ended, I say, he shall render up that Kingdom into the
hands of the Father. 1. Cor. 15. verse. 24. When death is overcome, and the
Devil, (for death is not yet overcome,) he shall render all into the hands of
the Father, and there shall not be an enemy, but all shall be casten down, and
all the Chosen shall tread down the necks of Emperors. We mark one thing,
ere we go to the next verse. for our use, to draw this to our selves. This is
the protestation which the Lord makes a little before his death: He
protests, that above all things in Heaven or in Earth, he sought the glory
of his Father, even to his own death. Now well is that man, who when the hour
of death is drawn near, is able to say in any measure, Lord, I have glorified
thee: and howbeit it be with great infirmity, Lord, I have honored thee in my
life. Ye see, old men will reckon of things past: if they have been notable
instruments in any thing, they will talk and say, I have done this and that.
But alas! if thou had won kingdoms, al auails not, if thou can not say,
Lord, I have sought to glorify thee. Away with all the world, and with all the
felicity of it, and all thou have suffered and done in it, if thou can not
say, when thou art going out of this world, I strove, at the least, to glorify
thee. And at the least, if thou, who have been a notable sinner, can not say,
Lord, forgive me, I have been a sinner, and have not repented in time, now I
repent, and crave thee mercy: if thou can not say this, woe is thee, if thou
had conquessed as much as Alexander the great Monarch, if thou had
conquessed all the world. I tell thee the truth, if thou go out of the world
without one of these two, woe shall be to thee that ever thou came in the world,
thou shall never see life. But there is a great difference betwixt the
protestation of the Lord Jesus, and all the protestations that we can make: J
have glorified thee, says the Son, therefore glorify thou me. The Son might
have soght glory, because of the excellency of his person: but as for us, we
may not crave glorification for our obedience to God, because it is imperfect:
away away, with that stinking merit of the Papists: away with the creature,
that will attribute such a stinking merit to it self. Therefore thou must
say, Lord, I crave nothing for my merit, but only for grace: for when thou
have done all that thou can do, thou art but an unprofitable servant: and
say, I will creep under the wings of thy mercy. But if thou come to claim
any thing with a conceit of thy merit, suppose thou had done works to
glorify thy God, builded Kirkes, and made Bridges, etc. if thou acclaime any
thing for it, and wilt stand up, and say, I have done this, thou shall go
away without grace. The Pharisie may stand for an example of this. There was
never such a pride, as to a stinking creature to stand up before that
Tribunal, with a conceit of his merit: If thou stand up so, I pronounce,
the effect of that merit of thine shall be condemnation.

When he has used so many arguments to the Father, to glorify him, then he
concludes his petition in these words, Therefore, Father, glorify me with thy
self: that is to say, Not in the Earth: I have glorified thee in the Earth,
but the glory that I seek, is not in the earth, but in the Heavens, wherein I
would reign: not in the Earth, as an earthly Prince, but in the Heavens, at
thy right hand. The place makes much. It is impossible that there can be so
much glory in the Earth, as in the Heavens. The glory of all the Kings in the
world, is nothing to that which we shall have with Jesus Christ in the Heavens.
The glory which Adam had, in that glorious and earthly Paradise, was nothing in
respect of that glory which we shall have, when we shall be lifted up in the
Heavens. Look how far distance is betwixt Heaven and Earth, as far shall
our glory shine above that glory: no compare of the darkest Star, with the
Sun. So compare that glory of Adams, with the glory we shall have with Jesus
Christ: and look how far the Sun passes in glory above a Star, as far we
shall pass that glory, and surmount above it.

What a glory is this he seeks? Glorify me with that glory, Father, which I
had from all eternity: that is, Glorify me with that glory of the Son of
God, the glory of the second person of the Trinity: glorify me with thine
own glory, which is promised me: and glorify me with all thy glory. The
Son may claim all the glory of the Father, and the Father he communicates
not with the Son a part of his glory, but the whole glory of GOD.

Now, Brethren, ye shall mark some things shortly: Certainly (...) no man
nor no Angel, that can be capable of this matter, that concerns the
incomprehensible glory of the Father, and of the Son: and therefore we
mark this shortly: First, we see this, what a glory this is that the Son
seeks of the Father: this I told you in the beginning: It is not so much the
glory of the nature of man, as it is that glory that the Lord had with the
Father from all eternity. Then ye see another thing: ye see the Son of God,
the Lord Jesus, ere ever he came down into this Earth, he was in the form of
God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God. He is the Son of God,
equal in power and Majesty with the Father. Let the Heretics hang
themselves, who would deprive the Lord Jesus of his Godhead: our faith should
not be grounded on him, if he would be no warrant to our faith, and if he were
not God blessed for ever.

Then ye see, how the Lord Jesus, the Son of God, passed from that glory
which he had with the Father, for a time, and made himself (as the Apostle
says) of no reputation. We would not be content of this, none of us all, to
deject our selves altogether: yea, even the filliest of us: yet the Son of
God made himself of no reputation nor estimation. Mark this: think not that
the Son of God, the Lord Jesus, ever renounced that glory which he had with
the Father: no, not then, when he was sorest humbled: no, not then, when he
was hanging on the Cross, he renounced not his glory, as Cyrillus says,
Missio, and obedientia, non tollunt aequalitatem potentiae and essentiae: that
is, The sending and obedience, takes not away the equality of glory and
essence. Mark it well, and be not deceived: How then passed he from this
glory? This is an higher matter than we can consider, yet we shall express it
in some measure: The Son of God, equal with the Father, suffered for a time
that glory to be obscured with the habit of a servant, the habit of man: the
glory of the Son of God was made of no reputation, through the taking on of a
slough. How agree these two, the mortal and corrupt flesh, and the glory of
God? Will not that slough of our nature obscure the glory of God? Then again,
the glory of God, in the Son of God, is obscured with the most vile death,
the death of the Cross: and this was the highest degree of his obedience: Yet
he never quiteth himself of this glory. I will use a similitude: Ye see the
Sun shines fair and bright: and if a thick black cloud should pass in
betwixt us and the Sun, the Sun abides in his own nature, and the cloud
takes nothing away of the brightness of the Sun; only it obscureth the
Sun to our sight, that we cannot perceive the splendour of it: It is even so
with the Son of God, that glorious Sun of righteousness; when he takes
first upon him the cloud of our nature, and secondly the cloud of death, the
glory of the Son of God is no more impared by this, than the Sun is impared
in his light by the cloud. When the Son of God took upon him the cloud of
our nature, for the salvation of mankind, he kept himself close, and he
uttered not himself in that nature of God: for if he had uttered himself in
that force and glory proper unto him, he had been glorified at his first
incarnation, and then the redemption of man had not been done. All the Jews
and Pharisees could never have touched him, if he had not humbled himself in
the nature of man. Look to this, and in the mean time gather how much we
are beholden unto him. What King would have humbled himself so? No, there is
no King who would have put on a Beggars weed for a slaves cause; let be to
humble himself so far. Now look how we are indebted to him: yea, if it were a
thousand lives, it is too little to give for him who has so humbled himself
for us.

Now last, ye see in what sense and meaning the Son of God seeks this
glory: He seeks not a glory which he had not the time that he sought it;
for he had i^ ^^wayes, from all eternity. He sought not also to be quite of
the nature of man; for then he should not have been our Savior. He seeks
not to be quite of the first cloud, but of the second. He seeks to be quite
of death, and he seeks that that Godhead should glorify the Son of man,
that the beams of that Godhead should strike out, and glorify the nature of
man. And indeed, how soon that Godhead that dwelt in him, began to utter it
self, when his head was lying low in the grave, then the man gets up, and
life comes into our nature. And next, when the Godhead uttered it self in
that nature, then that man is lifted up to the Heavens. And last, when the
Godhead uttered it self, the man Christ is placed at the right hand of the
Father, and that nature of man shines in such sort, that it passes all the
glory of the Angels. This is very comfortable: Thou will say, What recks me of
all this glory? and what is that to me? Howbeit that that man be glorified,
yet I abide here in the earth, a vile body: what recks me if the world were
glorified, if I got not a share of it? Now, will thou take but once hold of
that nature of man, and once fix thine eye upon it? that is, Will thou believe
in Jesus Christ, God and man? set thine heart on him, that he first died for
thee, and secondly that he rose for thee: believe that all this was once done
for thee; then certainly, as sure as the nature of man in Jesus died, and was
glorified, as sure thou shall be glorified: and as soon as thou touchest him,
the glory shall strike out, and ouershaddow thee in this life: when thou
look into the mirror of his Gospel, (for we see him here but in a
mirror,) it shall ouer-shaddow thee, I say: but when faith shall be changed
into sight, and we see him face to face, and sit fore-anent him, and look to
his glorious face, those glaunces which shall proceed from him, (as it is
said to the Philippians, CHAP. 3. VERSE. 21.) shall transform thy vile body,
and shall conform it to his glorious body. There is such an effectualnesse in
his power, whereby he subdued all things, that if thou shall get a sight of
him, he shall change thy body in a moment, and he shall make it to shine
more brighter than the Sun. Only believe, so long as thou art here. A man
who has faith in him, shall see this glory. If thou gettest not a sight of
Christ by faith in this world, thou shall never see him hereafter to life and
glory. So let us believe, and stir up every one of us another, with
exhortations, that as ever we would see glory, we believe in Jesus Christ:
To whom (...) the Father, and holy Spirit, be all honor, glory, and pray
(...) world without end.

AMEN.
THE XX. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvii. VERSE. 6.7.8. 6 I have declared thy Name unto the men which
thou gave me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me,
and they have kept thy word.

7 Now they know that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee.

8 For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and have
believed that thou have sent me.


HItherto (Well-beloved in the Lord JESUS) in this Prayer the Lord has prayed
for himself, that the Father would glorify him. To this purpose he used
sundry arguments: First, says he, The hour is come, that is, The hour of
my death is at hand, therefore, Father, glorify me. Then he says, Father,
if thou will glorify me, I will glorify thee: therefore glorify me. Yet
farther, If thou will glorify me, J wll give life everlasting to these whom
thou have given me, therefore, Father, glorify me. Yet mark, I have
glorified thee on the Earth, and I have ended that work which thou gave me
to do. What rests then? says he, But that thou, O Father, should
glorify me. Then he concludes, Therefore, Father, glorify me with thy
self, not in the Earth, but in the Heavens, with that glory which I had with
thee before the world was.

Now, in the next part of his Prayer, the Lord prays for his Apostles,
eleven in number: He prays not for Judas, because he was a reprobate. There
are two things which he seeks at the Father for them: The first ^s, That
when he should go his way to the Heaven, the Father should keep them from
all evil in the world. The second is, That the Father should sanctify them
to that work which they were appointed unto. There are sundry arguments and
reasons of this first part of this Petition for his Disciples, That the Father
would keep them, and save them. He heapeth in the beginning many
arguments, as namely, from their calling and vocation, from their election,
from that they were the Fathers, from that they were given to him, from that
that they believed the Word, and from that that he was going to the Father.
He heapeth together these arguments and reasons, in praying for them, that the
Father would keep and save them.

But let us mark the words narrowly, and go through every argument, and
observe such doctrine as shall be to our edification, as God shall give the
grace. He begins, and says first, J have declared thy Name unto the men which
thou gave me out of the world. So the first reason wherewith he moves the
Father to keep them, is, from that he had manifested unto them the Name of
the Father: That is to say, That he had called them by the Preaching of the
glorious Euangel of JESUS CHRIST. So our vocation and calling stands in the
manifestation of GOD, in JESUS CHRIST, by the preaching and hearing of the
Gospel: We are called, when God and his will is manifested to us, by the
preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Well then, if the Lord Jesus uses
this as an argument and reason, to move his Father to keep them, and to save
them, now certainly, when any person finds, that GOD calls on them by the
preaching of the Gospel, (as he is calling on you this day:) Then certainly
they have an argument and token, that that God who calls on them, will keep
and save them, both in this li^e, and in the life to come: for all this
preaching and hearing of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, is not for nothing, and
the Lord never calls man nor woman by the preaching of the Gospel for
nothing: by calling he utters that he will keep them; as this day, if he
call on you inwardly by his Spirit, he utters that he will keep and save
you, both in this life, and in the life to come. So that when one finds that
the Lord calls them, and offers this Gospel unto them, they may conceive an
hope into their heart, that the Lord will save them. Why? Because the Lord is
calling on them by his word: This is a token, say thou, that he will keep me
in this life, and in the life to come. And if, Brethren, any that is called in
this life, man or woman, attain not to salvation, and that the Lord keep them
not, the fault is in themselves, because when the Lord called on them, they
would not answer. No, not one of you, we say, shall perish for fault of
preaching, but because ye made your selves unworthy: when the Lord cried, ye
would not hear him. Ingrate and foolish soul! thou shall perish, because
thou would not obey the Lord, so fairelie and gently calling on thee. But
if, when thou art called to life, by the preaching of the Gospel, wilt say,
Lord, I am here: if the heart will resound, and say, Lord, I am here: if thou will answer: that is, believe the word preached, and be ready to obey the
same; that is as sure an angument, that the Lord will save thee everlastingly,
as ever was in the world.

Now to go forward, to the rest of the arguments. I have, says he, manifested
thy Name to these men whom thou gave me, being chosen out of the world.
There is the second reason, Father, thou have chosen them for thy self, from
all eternity, therefore good reason is it, that thou should keep them. Why
should he not keep his own Elect. Well then, if the Lord use this argument
to the Father, to move him to keep and save his Disciples; now certainly,
that person that sees himself one of the chosen and elect of God, to that
life from all eternity, that person who finds in his heart, that he is one
of that number, has a sure and infallible warrant, that that God who has
chosen him, shall warrant him. Seek aye to know your election; for if ye be
sure of your election, ye have a s^ale of your eternal salvation. It is
impossible, that a man or woman, who is chosen to life, can perish; and that
he whose name is once written up in the decree of God, should be lost. Ye may
ask at me, Seeing it is impossible, that the Chosen from all eternity can
perish, or be lost; wherefore then prays the Son to the Father, that he
should keep his Disciples, chosen to life from all eternity? if of necessity
the Chosen must live, though all the world had sworn it, wherefore is it then,
that the Son prays the Father so earnestly, to keep those who were chosen?
what need had he to pray for them, seeing the Chosen must be saved? The
answer is easy: It is true indeed, that those who are chosen from all
eternity, must be safe, and live of necessity: but it is also true again,
Brethren, he who chooses them to life, and ordaines them to live, of necessity
the same very God, from all eternity, ordained such middles, as prayer, says,
good works, and such other means, that by them we should attain to life: He
who ordains life, he ordains prayer: if thou want the means, thou shall
never enter into life: if thou want faith, and prayer, and good works, say with
thy self, thou wast never ordained to life: deceive not your selves. So,
Brethren, we should take heed to these middles: as necessarily as the Lord
has appointed thee to life, as necessarily thou must believe, as ever thou
would live after this life: for as necessarily the Lord has chosen thee to
do good works from all eternity, as he has chosen thee to life. And then,
when we find these middles, and an heart to pray, (take heed,) he will keep
us, and save us, both in this life, and in the life to come. And when we find
good turns in our hands, and faith in Jesus Christ, then (says Peter) we
confirm our election: all these middles confirm our election: for the Lord
has chosen us to these, as well as to the end it self. If we want these means,
we have no warrant that ever the Lord appointed us to life. I will leave this.
He coms forward, and heapeth arguments together to the Father, that he would
keep and save them: Thine they were: there is the reason: they were thine own
property by virtue of election: whomsoever the Lord chooses from all eternity,
they are the property of the Lord, by virtue of election: So says the Son
to the Father, They were thine by virtue of election: therefore keep and save
thine own. Whom will thou keep, if thou keep not thine own, whom thou
have chosen? Therefore keep them.

Well, Brethren, uses the Son of God these arguments, to move his Father
to keep and save his Disciples? now surely that man, or that woman, who
finds that they belong to God, and that they are chosen from all eternity,
that may say, I am Gods, I am his inheritance, and property, that person has
a sure warrant, that God, to whom they appertain, will keep and save them
everlastingly. Get me this knowledge once, that thou art Gods, and thou shall
know assuredly in thine heart, that God, whom to thou appertainest, shall
never let thee be lost: yea, Heaven and Earth shall go together, ere thou
perish. But ye will say, How shall I know that I am Gods? Mark it,
Brethren: The man, or the woman, that appertains to God, that God whom to
they appertain, ere they slit out of this world, he will give them
advertisement, and will let them know and feel, either one time or other,
early or late, that they are his. Paul, in the eight Chapter to the Romans,
verse. 9. has a notable saying, Those who have not the Spirit of Jesus, they
are not his. On the contrary, the man or woman who feels this Spirit, are
his. Would thou know whether thou be Gods or not? If thou find in thine
heart that blessed Spirit, that works redemption, grace, mortification of
sin, quickening of the new life, and all blessedness; if thou find him,
say, I am Gods: for God will give to none his holy Spirit, but to his own
secret ones, who are chosen from all eternity, and so made the property of God.
Would thou know the Spirit? I shall give thee a token, which the Apostle
sets down, Romans 5. verse. 5. If the Spirit dwell in thee, he will shed
abroad, and power out that sweet love of God into thine heart: he will let
thee feel sensibly in thine heart, that God loves thee: and testify to thee,
that thou art the Son of God by Adoption, and that thou art an Heir of
Heaven, and shall reign with God, as an Heir of God, and as a fellow-Heire
with Jesus Christ. Take heed, the Son of God loves us in his heart, when he
finds that we have his Spirit, and that we are chosen to life. In these
things we should be occupied most, if ever we would get life, we should
be busy to seek our warrant of Heaven. Alace! he that has a bit of Heritage,
or a bit of Land, he will be busy night and day, to seek a warrant for it:
and yet we will not bestow any time to seek a warrant for life everlasting.
But now I shall go forward to the fourth argument.

The fourth argument is in these words, Thou have given, me them: therefore,
Father, save and keep thine own gift: Father, thou have given them to me,
not to lose, but to save. Well then, Brethren, as I said before, if this be a
reason that the Lord uses to move his Father, to keep and save his
Disciples; certainly then, every soul, who finds that the Father has given
them over into the hands of the Son, that God has put them in the hands of
the Mediator, the Lord Jesus, has a sure argument, that the Father will keep
them everlastingly. If thou be given once to the Mediator, it is a thing
impossible, that thou can be lost. The gift of the Father, is not like the
gift of men: When they have given the gift, they care not for it, what to do
have they with it? it is not theirs. But when the Father gives the Chosen once
to the Son, his eye will be ever upon that gift: and he will see that that
gift of the Son be kept and saved. Ye must understand this, that when the
Father resigneth us over to the Son, he has a care of us, and we are still
the Fathers, as well as the Sons: and this is evident by Christ's words is
this same Chapter, All mine is thine, and thine is mine, says Christ: he
resigneth us not wholly, as though he had no care of us, for we are his gift,
and his property, and he quiteth him never of us, but even when he has given
us to the Son, we remain the Sons gift, and the Fathers property: and
that gift never impareth that love which the Father bears toward us, nor his
careful providence over us: Yea, by the contrary, this is a mean to save us.
Wherefore puts he thee in the hands of the Son? Even to the end that he
should redeem thee, and save thee with his blood. So this is the mean, yea
the only mean to save thee everlastingly.

But mark this, Brethren: See how mutually the Father and the Son recommende
the Chosen one to another: the heart of man is not able to comprehend this
care which the Father and the Son have over the Chosen: First the Father
gives them to the Son, that he should redeem them: and then, when the
Son has gotten them, he makes intercession to the Father, that the Father
would keep them, and save them: And whom the Father has given, he has a
care of them. See thou not the grounds of thy salvation, which is, the
mutual recommending of thee, from the Father to the Son, and from the Son
to the Father? The Father gives us to the Son: the Son again makes
intercession for us to the Father. How can it be possible, that those can
perish, whom both the Father and the Son have such a care of? If thou be
chosen, how can it be possible, that thou can perish? Seeing our salvation
is so wonderfully grounded, that all the power of Heaven and Earth is not able
to shake off the grounds of it. But alace, Brethren, here is all the fault:
There is such a blindness and doubtfulnesse in our hearts, that we cannot see
nor feel the established grounds whereon our salvation stands: and
therefore we have not yet solid joye and consolation: for all the joye of this
life, is the confidence of these grounds of our salvation: for except a man or
a woman gripe into that salvation, they have no joye. Now would to God we could
learn to see and feel our salvation! we should feel and see wonderful things,
and we should find such a solidnes, that we would defy all the devils of hell. Now
hitherto we have heard four very strong reasons, whereby the Father should be
moved to save the Disciples, both in this life, and in the life to come. Now,
Brethren, mark these reasons which we have heard: they are all without us: the
manner of our vocation is without us: our election is without us: that, that
we belong to God, is without us: that we are given to Jesus Christ, by the
Father, is without us: Yet all these outward graces of God, will never avail
thee to life and salvation, if thou gettest not the inward feeling of them in
thine heart, before thou be taken out of this life: if thou gettest not the
inward grace in thine heart, to apprehende thy vocation, and thine election:
if thou gripe not in thine heart, first, that thou art Gods property: and
secondly, that thou art Jesus Christ's, all the grace that thou shall get in
this life, shall serve thee for nothing. Now, Brethren, this feeling of grace
in the heart, is nothing but faith. What is this faith, that every man has in
his mouth, but that feeling of the grace of God? The feeling of our vocation,
of our election, and of that mercy which God gives us in Jesus Christ, is
nothing but an inward sight and apprehension of them all: therefore the Lord
leaves all outward graces, and comes to the inward apprehension: that is,
to faith, and says, O Father, they believe all that J spoke unto them: and
therefore, O Father, keep them. Ye see, Brethren, amongst many arguments which
we have, there is the most special: when God stampeth in our hearts a feeling
of grace: getting once that stamp, that we are called, by faith in God, and
in Jesus Christ, then the Charter of our election is sealed, (for our election
is but a Charter,) then we have our warrande in our bosom, that we shall
never perish, but have life everlasting. It is impossible that any man or
woman who finds this, can perish, for they have the earnest-pennie of their
salvation, who have once gotten faith.

But, Brethren, if we would mark the words which the Lord Jesus uses in
setting down this faith, they are many and weighty, and great consolation in
them: faith must have a knowledge: for if thou have no knowledge, and say
then, that thou have faith, thou lie: if thou be an ignorant body, and
know not Jesus Christ, and wilt stand up, and say, I have faith, thou
lie: faith must have an eye, a sight, and a knowledge. The first thing in
faith, is sight: thou must see God, and that in that glorious face of his Son
Jesus Christ, howbeit afar off, as in a mirror. And seeing there is a sight
and a knowledge required in faith, the Lord passes not over this, but he
says, They have known, that all things which thou have given me, are of
thee. There is the first, the knowledge. And, that I came from thee: there is
the sight. Now, go forward, and ye shall see faith painted out: It is not
enough to know, and to see, if thou have no more: if thou have but a
knowledge, and a sight of Jesus Christ only, thou art not the nearer: but the
heart of man and woman, must draw in into it that thing which thou know and
see. Thou see and know Christ to be the Redeemer: the very heart must
get out the arm, and pull him in: And therefore he passes not by this: The
words which thou gave me, J have given them unto them. Have they known
them only? No, but they have also received them. Is it enough to receive
them? No, that is not enough. Then what must thou do? Thou must not have
Christ to night, and bid him farewell to morrow: but as thou have known him,
and received him, so thou must keep Christ ever in thine heart, and thou must
keep all his graces: thou must never lose him: keep him still, dislodge him
not, dislodge rather all the world, than thou dislodge him: keep him, and let
him not go: the happiest guest that ever came, is when the Lord Jesus is in
the heart: he is full of all joye: he is full of all peace and consolation:
the last that thou must keep in thine heart, is Jesus Christ. So make up faith
of all these parts: there are the parts of it, To know God in Jesus Christ,
to understand him in his word, and that which thou know, to take it within
thine heart. We should not be content of this only: we should not be
content to get CHRIST into our hearts, by a piece of knowledge, but
sensibly to feel him. And last, to keep him, who is the Treasure of all
treasures, and who has given the treasure of all knowledge, the most precious
treasure in the world. Ye will keep up Treasures and Hoordes in your Kistes:
now keep rather CHRIST into your hearts, than all the Hoordes in the world.

Mark again in the argument, the diversity of the things which we believe,
which are the objectes of faith. If ye mark the words well, ye shall see
this: First, we must believe in JESUS CHRIST; and ere we believe in him, we
must have a sight and a knowledge of him: and then we must receive JESUS
CHRIST himself: and this he declares, when as he says, Therefore have
they known that I came from thee. And again, That I am sent from thee. We
must believe the Mediator, the LORD JESUS, to have come from his Father. And
again, what is the next? They have known these things which thou have given
me. The next thing that they believe, is, That all store of grace is in JESUS
CHRIST. The next thing that thy faith should reach unto, is, That thou gripe
into thine heart, that store of grace and glory that is in JESUS CHRIST. The
last thing that they believe, is the word of GOD concerning CHRIST. The
Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, Epist. 2. Chap. 5. verse. 7. says, We live
now by faith, and not by sight. So long as we live Pilgrims in this Earth,
and dwell in this tabernacle, we will not see the LORD JESUS face to face: but
when we are once flitted out of this earthly body, we shall see him face to
face. All the sight that we have of JESUS CHRIST in this life, is but as in a
mirror, even as one would see a man's face in a mirror. And what is the
mirror wherein we see JESUS CHRIST? It is nothing but this word of the Gospel,
and this glorious Euangel of the blessed GOD, the fairest mirror that ever man
or woman looked in: There they shall see the fairest sight that ever was.
Therefore, the LORD he passes not by this mirror, when he sets out faith
to his Disciples, They have received those words, says he, which thou
gave to me, and they have kept thy words. The whole thing that is to be
believed, is, First, JESUS CHRIST: and next, That all joye is in him, and that
all store of grace is in him: Last, the word of Jesus Christ, in the which his
glorious face is seen, and shines. Contemn not this mirror, contemn not
this Gospel preached: for if thou contemn it, it shall pass thy power to
get grace: contemnest thou it, thou shall never taste of life in this life,
nor in the life to come. Woe to the contemners of the Gospel! they shall never
see Christ, in whom is all life, all joye, and all comfort, etc.

Mark well, Brethren, when he sets out the faith of the Disciples, to the
Father, he speaks thereof in such sort, that he directs all to the glory
of the Father. Lord! so dear the glory of the Father was to the Son! When
he speaks of the Father, he attributes all the glory to the Father: They
have known well, (says he,) that I am come from thee, O Father. Then
again, They have known, that whatsoever thing thou have given me, it is from
thee. There is the true knowledge of the grace of Jesus Christ, when thou
attributest all glory to the Father: when thou belieuest in Christ, believe
that the Father sent him, and that the Father gave him, to redeem thee from
death, and that he is risen, and ascended to the Father: believe that the
Father raised him. The whole praise of faith in Christ, redoundeth to the
Father. Whatsoever we believe in Christ, as when we believe his death, or his
resurrection, his glory in all fullness, is the glory of the Father. We know
this by experience, the faith that strikes on Christ, passes immediately
through that man, the Lord Jesus, through that glorious person, and never
rests, till it lean on that Fountain of all mercy and grace, the Father of
our Lord Jesus. The Fountain is the Father of our Lord. To speak it in one
word, All this faith in Jesus Christ that we have, redoundeth to the glory of
the Father: And therefore, the last exhortation is, That our faith be in Jesus
Christ: for when we believe in the Mediator, and lean us over on him, then the
heart passes into that light, whereunto there is none access, where that
glorious person does dwell, the Father of Jesus Christ. Let not thy faith rest,
till it get that sweet apprehension of that glorious person, the Father, and
he will save thee, and give thee to his Son: To whom be al^ honor, and
glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XXI. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvii. VERSE. 9.10.11. 9 I pray for them: I pray not for the
world, but for them which thou have given me: for they are thine.

10 And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them.

11 And now am I no more in the world, but these are in the world, and J
come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy Name, even them whom thou have
given me, that they may be one, as we are.


Well-beloved in the Lord Jesus, in the second part of this Prayer the Lord
prays for his Disciples, whom he was to leave in the world behind him, when
he should pass up to the Heavens. He uses many arguments of his request and
petition which he makes to his Father: first, from their calling out of the
world by the Gospel, from their election and choosing them from al eternity,
from this that they were the Fathers, from this that they were given to him,
from this that they believed in the Father, and in him. Now in the words which
we have read, first after many arguments, yea, a cloud of arguments all
gathered together, the Lord concludes his petition and prayer, and says, O
Father, I pray for them: As he would say, Seeing so many things concur in
them, their vocation, their election, and the rest, therefore I have good cause
to pray for them: I pray for them, O Father, that thou would keep them:
it cannot be, but thou must keep them upon whom thou have shown so many
graces. Now happy are they, on whom God begins to show any grace: for on
whom he begins to show grace once, there is none end of grace, but continually
grace upon grace: mercy follows mercy, till at the last, they be glorified in
the Heavens for evermore. But to go forward.

When he has said, I pray for them, he defines them in special, who they
are for whom he prays: J pray nor for the world, says he; not for the
world, that is, not for the Reprobate, and the wicked of the world, but for
them that thou have given me: these are they for whom he prays: he
excludes the reprobates from his prayers, he includes only the Elect, whom
the Father has given him: for as the decreete of the election of God from all
eternity, was limited and bounded, al were not chosen, all men and women were
not written up in that Book of Life; and even as the gift that the Father gave
to the Son, was limited and bounded, he gave not all to the Son, he gave not
every man and woman in this world, but so many as he had chosen to life
everlasting, them he gave to the Son, and no more. So I say, as the decree
of election is bounded, and as the gift of the Father to the Son is bounded;
even so the intercession of the Son to the Father is bounded: The Son
intercedeth not with the Father for every man and woman in this world: and
whether ye look to the intercession by prayer, as ye see now he prays for the
Chosen, and for his Disciples in special: whether ye look to that
intercession that was by his death, and by that sacrifice, the Lord he prays
not for all, that is a sure thing. And when he died, he died not for all, but
only for so many as the Father had chosen out from all eternity: and having
chosen them out, he gave them to his Son the mediator. Only the Lord in the
world made intercession for these Chosen that are given him. So, Brethren,
what shall we say? blessed is that man or woman that is of that chosen number!
and blessed is that person, whom the Father has put into the hands of the
Son! For, for him the Son makes intercession: And woe is that soul that
is not chosen, and is not put into the hands of the Son to be kept and
redeemed by him! no intercession for that soul: the prayer of the Lord Jesus
appertains nothing to that soul: nothing abides that soul, but anguishe
and damnation everlastingly.

So ye see how needful a thing it is, to have assurance of our election, and
to be assured and persuaded in our hearts, that we are of that chosen number,
given to Jesus Christ. This is the persuasion we should seek in this life, if
ever we would have comfort either in life or death: and we should a^e have
that respect of the life to come and set our hearts on another life, than this
life. Therefore the thing that we should seek most, is to be of the number of
the Chosen, and to be one of the number of them who are in the keeping of Jesus
Christ: But alas! we are so beastly and senseless, that we think there is
no life, no joye, no glory, etc. but in this life, such is the blindness and
beastliness of the nature of man.

Now, Brethren, and if ye mark again the words well, ye shall see a great
difference betwixt the Prayer that Christ made, and betwixt the Prayer of the
faithful in the world: When we pray for others, our prayer is confused: we
cannot separate the Reprobate from the Elect: we will pray for altogether,
good and evil, because we know not who is chosen, and how is reprobate and
casten away. Then, when we pray for the Elect, and for the Kirk, our prayer
is but confused, and general: we cannot pray for every particulare man, or
for every chosen one, because we know them not: but generally we
recommende unto God the whole Kirk: this is the manner of our prayer. But it
is far otherwise in this prayer which the Lord makes for his Disciples,
and for the Chosen. The Lord prays for his Elect, but he prays not for
the Reprobate: and particularly hereafter he excludes Judas; because the
Lord knew who was elect, and who was reprobate. Then again, when he prays
for the Elect, he prays not confusedly, as we do: but in his prayer his
eye is set upon every one of the Chosen particularly. There was never one of
the Chosen, that was that time that Christ was in the world, or was since the
beginning of the world, or shall be to the end of the world, but the LORD
prayed for every one of them particularly: he prayed for me, and he prayed
for thee, and he saw every one of us before the beginning of the world, and
now he recommendeth us to the Father. Think not, that the Lord Jesus prays
confusedly, and generally for all men: no, he prays particularly for the
Chosen: there is not one Chosen, but the eye of the Lord is upon them all. Why?
The Lord knew who was chosen: No, there was not one little one, yea, the
poorest upon the face of the earth, of the chosen number, but in that time he
had his eye upon them, that the holy Spirit might flow to them out of his
death. When the Lord died, ye must not think, that he died for all: he died
but for some: he died not for any reprobate: he separateth the Elect from the
Reprobate, by virtue of his death. When he offered himself to the death, his
eye was set upon every one of the Elect that was in the world: and when he
was going to death, he said in his heart, I will die for this sinner, and
this sinner, etc. His eye was upon every one of them. Paul to the Galathians,
Chap. 2. verse. 20. knew* this well: The life I live now in the flesh (says
the Apostle,) I live by faith in the Son of God, who has loved me, and
given himself, not for the Chosen in general, but particularly for me. Well
then, says Paul this ways that he died for him particularly? And the Lord
said before his death, I have a particulare eye to Paul. And howbeit he was
an enemy to Christ, at that time, persecuting him in his members, yet he
says, I will die for Paul. Then every one of us should say, as Paul said,
Not generally the Lord loved the world, that Lord gave himself for the
Elect: but particularly, the Lord loved me, and the Lord loved thee; and, the
Lord died for thee, and died for me; and the Lord had an eye to me in his
death, and a respect to me in his prayer, etc. This particulare respect which
the Lord had to me, furnishes great comfort, when I consider it: for if the
Prince had a respect to any particulare person, he would be greatly
comforted: and should not this particulare respect of the LORD JESUS, King of
all kings, comfort us? No, there is not one Chosen in this life, but the Son
of God, in his death, had a particulare respect unto them, not generally, but
particularly: His eye was on every one of us: he bestowed not confusedly a
common benefit upon us, without regard who got it: No, he knew well, to
whom the least spark, or drop, of that blood should appertain.

Now to go forward: But J pray, says the Lord, for them that thou have
given me: For all mine, are thine; and thine are mine: and I am glorified in
them. It might have been said, If thou have gotten them, what have I to do
with them? The LORD meets this: No, they are thine: not only were they
thine, but, Lord, they are thine yet, and shall remain thine everlastingly:
Whomsoever thou have given me, I take them not out of thine hand, but ever
they continue thine. So, Brethren, he reasons generally, All mine are
thine, and thine are mine: whatsoever thing I have, is thine; and whatsoever
thing thou have, is mine: therefore I take them not out of thine hand, for
they are thine, as well as mine. The words are plain: we use to say
commonly, All things are common amongst friends. And PAVL alleges in his
EPISTLE to PHILEMON, That friendship amongst men, will make the goods which
they have to be common amongst them: Ye see by experience, Matrimony makes
common gear, betwixt the man and the woman: but there is an higher and
straiter conjunction betwixt the Father and the Son, that makes all things
betwixt them more common, than any conjunction in this world. That conjunction
is in one nature, and in one essence: The Father and the Son is but one God,
blessed for evermore, Amen. There is an higher conjunction, than any that can
be found amongst the creatures. And as this conjunction is of one nature, and
of one essence, so is it also of one glory, power, and majesty. It is true,
they differ in persons: the Father is the first person of that glorious
Trinity, and the Son is the second person of that glorious Trinity: yet
they are both one God, in essence, and in substance. Now, through this
conjunction it comes to pass, that that which is the Fathers, is the Sons;
and that which is the Sons, is the Fathers: so all is common betwixt them:
the whole world is as it were common good betwixt them: the Elect are common,
and as it were, common good betwixt them. But here is the difference: mark it,
Brethren, the first right is the Fathers, I mean, the first right, by order,
all appertains first to the Father, because he is the first person, in order
of that glorious Trinity. Then the next right of all things, is the Sons,
and it is equal with the Fathers right, but a second right: because the right
that the Son has, it is by conjunction: the Father has all of himself, he
has it not from the Son, because he is the fountain of the Trinity. All
that which the Son has, is of the Father, even that glorious essence it
self, let be the things of the world. Look whatsoever the Son has
gotten, he has gotten it by gift of the Father: Yet the Father has not so
resigned all quite over to the Son, that he has denuded himself of all,
howbeit all be common betwixt them, but the thing which is the Fathers he
keeps it still, yet by gift, he makes it the Sons: So that donation
takes nothing away of the right of the Father, because that donation is not
so much a donation, as a communication. Not only gives he all things readily
to the Son, but he communicates all things with the Son: so this is
rather communication, than donation: for whatsoever thing the Father gives to
the Son, the Father keeps still the same everlastingly. As for us,
Brethren, what shall we say more but this? Now blessed is that man or woman,
that is of this community, and of this common good betwixt the Father and the
Son! For he or she that is of that common good, betwixt the Father and the
Son, let them be assured, that the common care of the Father and of the
Son, shall watch over them everlastingly: the Father shall keep them, and
the Son shall keep them everlastingly: as I spoke before, it is a
wonderful thing to consider the grounds of our salvation, and what care and
providence the Father and the Son have of the chosen ones, and how fast our
salvation stands: so if we had a sure persuasion, and a lively faith of the
grounds of our salvation, we would not be so tossed with doubting as we are
concerning our salvation, but pleasantly and sweetly we would repose upon the
care which the Father and the Son have over us: But alace! there is such a
slough of sin upon our souls, and we are so senseless, that we cannot see
the grounds whereupon our salvation stands.

But to go forward: Yet he continues in arguments and reasons, to move his
Father to keep his Disciples: we have heard five: now he begins the
sixth, I am glorified in them, that is, in my Disciples: therefore, Father,
keep them: as thou respectest my glory, O Father, so keep them, because I am
glorified in them: they have glorified me by faith in me, by confession of me,
and in their life and conversation. These are the ways wherein the Son is
glorified, by faith in him, by confession of his Name, and by an holy life and
conuersa^ion before the world: without the which, all thy profession is but
counterfaite: and al is vanity, if thy life answer not to thy profession. So
if this be an argument, that the Son uses to his Father, to move him to
keep his Disciples, certainly it follows, that whosoever finds in their
hearts, that they have glorified the Son, in believing in him, in confessing
of him, and in their life and conversation, that man, or that woman, may be
assured in their heart, and say, The Father keeps me, and I am in his
custody; and I am assured, that the Father has a special care over me,
because I find my delight and pleasure to be set on Christ: No, no, if the
Father had not me in his custody, I should not have such a pleasure and
delight to glorify him. The heart that finds no delight nor pleasure to
glorify Christ Jesus in this life, has no warrant that it is in the keeping
and custody of the Father: if thou find no faith at no time: and if thy
life in some measure answer not to thy profession, say, The care of the
Father is not over me, I am desolate, I am not in Gods hands: that is the most
desolate creature in the world, whom the Father has not in his custody,
yea, though all the world should compass him and guard him round about. And
by the contrary, whom the Father has a care of, they are better guarded than
if all the Kings of the Earth were about them: for, Brethren, ye may well
know, that the Father loves that person well, that loves his well-beloved: for
he who loves the Son, the Lord Jesus, he loves the Father also, and the
Father loves him: and he who honors the Son, the Father shall honor
him. And by the contrary, he who dishonors the Son, the Father shall
dishonor him, and shame him, in despite of all the world; albeit all the
world should honor him, he will have him shamed, he shall set him up to be an
open shame to man and Angel: he shall be Anathema, yea, and Anathema Maranatha,
that is, cursed for ever, who loves not the Lord Jesus. There is such a strait
and narrow conjunction betwixt the Father and the Son, that the honor of the
Father, is the honor of the Son; and the honor of the Son, is the honor
of the Father: and that the dishonor of the Son, is the dishonor of the
Father: and the hatred of the Son, is the hatred of the Father also. Ye heard
what Christ said, He who honors me, he honors him who sent me. A Prince
will think that his Ambassador should be as well reverenced as himself:
for all the honor that the Ambassador receives, comes to the Prince, who
sent him. Now the Son of God, is more than an Ambassador sent by the Father;
for he is not a simple Ambassador, but also the Son of God, equal with the
Father, who is more than all the Ambassadors in the world. Will not then the
Father think, that the honor done to the Son, whom he has sent, is done
to himself? Yes certainly.

But to leave this: Yet he continues on, and brings other arguments, and
heapeth argument upon argument, to show that great desire which he had, that
the Father should keep and save his Disciples, who were in the world, J am no
more in the world, I go away, and concerning my bodily presence, I am no more
with them, they will abide still in the world, therefore, O Father, keep them,
in respect that I leave them to thee, and I am to go out of the world, and
that shortly, therefore take thou the care of them. Even as a man dying,
leaves them whom he loves well, to tender friends: Even so the Lord Jesus,
leaves his Disciples to his Father, that he should take them in his custody.
When I was with them, says he, I kept them, but now I am going out of the
world, and I leave them unto thee, therefore, Father, keep them.

Brethren, this absence of Christ in his body, and our absence from him, it is
so far from that, to be an argument, that God has left us, that by the
contrary, this absence of Jesus Christ, in his bodily presence, and the
leaving of us behind him now in the Earth, it is an argument to every one of
us, that God is with us, and that the Father of Iesust Christ, has a special
care of us: for look, the farther that Jesus Christ be from us in his bodily
presence, the nearer is the Father unto us, by his holy Spirit, that
Comforter: So that ye would think it a wonderful thing, to consider the
care that the Father has of us, in the absence of Jesus Christ from us. It is
good for us, that Jesus Christ, our Lord, went to the Heavens in glory: And
Christ says himself, If I go not away, that Comforter, the Holy Spirit,
shall not come. And this is sure, the more desolate that any be in this
Earth, as the Fatherless, Widows, and Strangers, etc. if they be Christ's,
the greater is the care of God over them. So, ye will find in the SCRIPTVRES,
he will take into his hand, and have a special care of the Widows, and
Fatherless, so that they be Jesus Christ's, and once given to him. If thou
be desolate, look that thou be Jesus Christ's: and if thou would not want
the society of Jesus Christ, above all, beware of Infidelity, which is
nothing, but the beginning of that everlasting desolation. Would we have joye
or consolation in any desolate estate in the world? Would we have that
presence of God, and that consolation of the Holy Spirit? No more but this,
See that thou be Christ's: for Heaven and Earth shall go together, and all
shall turn to nothing, ere the Lord be not with thee, to keep thee, and to
guarde thy soul: as the Apostle says to the PHILIPPIANS, with that peace
with passes all understanding: He will set that peace into thine heart, when
thou art in trouble, and he will set thine heart at rest, and give thee a
greater peace, than all the peace in the world.

Now, when he has repeated these arguments, he concludes shortly, Holy
Father, keep them in thy NAME, them whom thou have given me, that they may
be one with us, as we are one. Mark, Brethren, these words which the LORD
utters, have a great weight, and also this petition which he makes to the
Father, it is full of affection, and love: And it is full of affection, first
to the Father, and then to the Disciples, for whom he prays: It is full of
affection to him whom to he prays, and to them for whose cause he prays.
Look when thou prayest, that thy affection be to thy God, and to them also for
whom thou prayest. He says, Holy Father, keep them. Will ye consider
every word, and first these words, Holy Father, ye shall perceive a great
affection in the Son, to the Father. These words rise on two motives; the
one is love, that is an affection which the Son bare to the Father. When he
calls him Father, he vttreth that wonderful love which he bare to the
Father. And then the other rises on a great reverence, that Jesus Christ our
Lord bare to his Father, when he calls him Holy: for as he loved him, so
he reverenced him: Holiness craves reverence. And that holy God, what
reverence ought he to have? He should not be named, nor thought on, but with
reverence of the heart.

Then he says, And keep them in thy Name: that is, by thy divine power.
This word rises on a confidence of a wonderful power in the Father, that he
was able to defend and keep them, in none other Name, but in his own. Now
look the disposition of the heart of Jesus Christ: In praying the heart is
disposed with a wonderful reverence, and love to his Father. And, Brethren, I
count this argument of all the arguments that ye have heard, (howbeit they
were very many, mighty, and strong*) this same disposition of the heart, I
say, to be one of the most forciblest to move the Father. The inward
disposition of the heart of the Lord Jesus, in love and reverence, is most
forcible to move the Father to keep his Disciples. Look in prayer, to the
disposition of thine heart: for when we pray to God, what do we all
arguments? Wherefore avails it to heap on arguments to move God, if thou
have no good disposition in thine heart in prayer? Wherefore use thou words,
when thou have an unbelieving heart? and when thou have no love nor reverence,
nor no confidence in God? And then again, when the heart of man, or woman, is
well disposed in praying, with an holy affection to God in Jesus Christ, with
a reverence, and with a confidence in him, then few words and few arguments
will serve. It is better to have few words in praying, with love and faith,
and with an holy disposition, than to pray all the day without the inward
disposition. James says, Chap. 5. verse. 16. The prayer of a faithful man
avails much, if it be seruent. He says not, If he use many reasons or
words: but if he have a zeal to the glory of God in prayer, then it is
acceptable. This is known by experience: they who know the disposition of the
heart, they will account more of it, than of all the world. So ye see, this
disposition in the heart of Jesus Christ, is the chief argument to move the
Father: he had no sin in him, his heart was clean, and his love was
perfect, without any mixture of hatred, or any other sinful infirmity. All
our affection, our love, and our confidence, is full of sin, and all is
troubled in our hearts: and if we get any liberty, it is but small.
Alace! this is the foulness of our soul: but well is that soul that gets
any love, or any confidence, or any reverence, etc.

Now to come to the affection to them for whom the Lord prays: J pray even
for them whom thou have given me. No question, when he says, Whom thou
have given me, he takes them into his heart, he imbraceth them into the
affection of the heart: the affection gripeth to them, when as he calls them
his. No, if the Lord Jesus call thee his, he will take thee into his heart,
and his affection will gripe thee. Now certainly, as the affection to his
Father was a great argument in the sight of the Father, so when we pray to
God for others, the affection toward others is a great argument to move God.
And as we respect the one, having a zeal and an affection to God, so we
should respect the other, having true love toward others. Look that thine
heart hate not the person of him for whom thou prayest: otherwise, thou
scornest God in thy prayer: and when thou prayest for any, look that thou
love that person: for the love of God, and the love of the person for whom
thou prayest, is aye joined together. If thou love not the person for whom
thou prayest, it is sure, thou love not God.

Farther, it is to be considered here, that since the beginning of this
prayer, this argument is often repeated, Them whom thou have given me. This is
the third time that it is repeated. The first is in these words, J have
declared thy Name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world. And
then, I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou have given me. And
again, Holy Father, keep them in thy Name, even them whom thou have given
me, etc. He has not so often repeated any other argument as this, They are
thy Chosen, they are called by the preaching of the Gospel: but he has
doubled and tripled this argument: there is some ground of this: this must be
the most special thing that moved the LORD to pray for his Disciples,
because they were given to him, and the Father had concredited them unto him,
and put them into his hands: And therefore he lets it never go out of his
heart, that the Father had given them unto him: Father, (says he,) thou have
given them unto me, therefore, Father, keep them. There is not a faithful
man or woman, but if GOD will concredite any to their care and protection, the
most special thing that will move them to have a care of them, is, That GOD
has concredited them unto them: Therefore they will pray unto GOD for them.
And even by the contrary, they who have not a respect to them who are
concredited unto them, for this cause, that GOD has put such persons into
their hands, to provide for them; that person, says the Apostle Paul, is
worse than an Infidel: That person who has gotten a Family to care for, and
neglects it, is worse than an Infidel. So this should move us to care for
others, because the LORD has concredited them unto us: And in the day of
Judgment, it shall be asked at thee, Where is the care that thou had of
them, whom I concredited unto thy charge? And then terrible shall it be for
them, who have neglected those whom the LORD has given unto them.

As he uses this argument to move the Father, so the Father must have a care
on that which he has given to CHRIST: And that person that will take care of
their Family, or of the Kirk, or Commonwealth, the LORD shall meet him, and
have a care over him. So that whosoever has gotten the charge of souls, or of
Families, or of Commonwealths, they should have a care over them: for let
be that it is ungodly, not to be careful; it is an unnatural thing. Woe to
the men, that will run out, and drink, and leave their Family, and run,
and rash, and fill themselves, and have no care of them whom GOD has put
under their hands! Woe to them that run, and leave their Kirk! Woe to that
man that has no care over them that GOD has concredited unto his charge.

He says, That they may be one, as we are one. Keep them, that they may
be like us. No, all our blessedness, is, to be like the Father, the Son,
and that Holy Spirit. Wherein stands it? It stands in an unity, to wit,
That as the Father and the Son are one, not only in that mutual love, but
in that very Godhead, substance, and essence, that is that unity, one GOD,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, so we also are one. Now, it is
not required, that we be one in essence, but one in hearts and souls: that
is to say, Let every one of us love another, let peace be amongst us, and in
this point we must represent GOD: and this is that unity, that our hearts
be joined with others in love: No man is knitte to CHRIST, or yet to the
Father, but in love: and when we are knitte unto them, our hearts are knitte
every one to another. So in one word, when we see love amongst men, and
especially amongst Christians, when we see their hearts joined in love, we
may say, The Father keeps these, because they are in unity one with
another, and he has a care over them, or else they could never have this
unity of minds in love: And where there is nothing but dissension, and every
one biting and backe-byting another, they are not in the custody of GOD: for
if they were in his keeping, they would be one, as the Father and the Son
are one. So, in one word, the LORDS care is not over those. Therefore, as
ever ye would be sure, that the LORD has a care over you, look that ye
have an unity amongst your selves: And this is it that the Apostle Paul most
recommendeth unto us, an unity of mind. So, as we would testify us to be
the members of JESUS CHRIST, let us be in unity with our neighbor: for by
this we testify to the world, that we are GODS, and given to JESUS CHRIST:
and where there is no love, no amity, there the members are not joined with
the Head, and we have no part with CHRIST: for where faith is, there is love:
and where faith is, there the members will concur together in unity of mind.

The LORD give us faith in JESUS CHRIST, in whom stands all our happiness,
and felicity: and to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all
honor, praise, power, and dominion, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XXII. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvii. VERSE. 12.13.14.15. 12 While J was with them in the world, I
kept them in my Name: those that thou give me, have I kept, and none of them
is lost, but the child of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.

13 And now come J to thee, and these things speak I in the world, that
they might have my joye fulfilled in themselves.

14 I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because they
are not of the world, as I am not of the world.

15 I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
keep them from evil.


IN the second part of this Prayer (Well-beloved in the Lord Jesus) the Lord
being to depart out of this life, and to rise again, and to ascend up to the
Heavens, he recommendeth his Disciples, whom he was to leave behind him, to
the keeping and preservation of the Father. To this purpose he has sundry
arguments and reasons: First, says he, I have manifested thy Name to them,
therefore, Father, keep them. Then, Thou have chosen them out of the world
from all eternity, therefore, Father, keep them. Then, They were thine,
therefore, Father, keep thine own. And again, Thou have given them to me,
therefore keep them. And again, They have kept thy word, and believed in
me, that thou have sent me, therefore keep them. And again, I am glorified
in them, therefore keep them. And last of all, I am to leave them behind me
in the world, therefore keep them. These arguments and reasons we have
heard. Now he goes forward, and adds to the eight reason, beginning at
the Text which we have read. The eight reason is from his own keeping of his
Disciples, while he abode with them in the world: While J was with them in the
world, I kept them in thy Name, and saved them: And those whom thou gave to
me, I have kept; so that there is not one of them lost, save one, the son of
perdition: meaning Judas, that the Scripture might me fulfilled: even that
Scripture, which fore-tolde of his destruction: therefore I kept them so long
as I was with them: Now, Father, I recommende them unto thee, and I put them
into thine hand.

Yet the words would be better weighed: This keeping of his Disciples he
amplifieth by sundry circumstances: The first circumstance, is, A carfulness,
diligence, and earnestness in keeping them. This carfulness appears in
doubling of the words: he is not content to say once, J have kept them: but he
says it over again. The Son of God, the Lord Jesus, whom he keeps, he
keeps them faithfully, and carefully: not slackly, but diligently: night and
day his eye is upon them: and as he himself says, O Jerusalem! as the Hen
gathers her Birds under her wings, so would I have done to thee. And no
doubt, the Lord gathers his own, under the wings of his grace, and keeps
them after a most tender and intiere fashion of keeping. So we may learn at
his example, those whom God has concredited unto us, to be kept in this world
by us, whether they be in our Family, whether they be in the Kirk of God, or
whether they be in the Policy, or Commonwealth, wheresoever they be, one or
more, how many or how few they be, who are concredited unto us, and given out of
the hand of God to be kept and defended in this world by us. We learn here
by the example of Christ, to keep them so carefully and faithfully, that
they lose not in our hand. The Prophet says, Woe to them that does the work
of the Lord negligentlie and slacklie. Ierem. 48. verse. 10. There he means,
Who slays not, and wracketh not, as the Lord commands to slay and wrack:
Therefore, much more, shall woe and curse appertain unto them, who keeps not
them faithfully, whom the Lord has concredited unto them, and commands them
to keep. If woe was denounced against them who slew not, and wracked not, at
the commandment of the Lord, a double woe shall appertain unto them, who
neglects them whom the Lord has concredited to their charge.

Now I come to the second circumstance, J have kept them in they Name: that
is to say, By thy virtue and power. All the power that the Son has, he has
it given him of the Father: and all the power that the Son has, is the power
of the Father: and therefore he acknowledges the keeping of these Disciples,
to be by the power of the Father: and so he glorifieth his Father in Heaven.
The Son in any thing that he does, he ever glorifieth the Father. Who is he
in this world, who is able to keep a soul by his own power? Who has power
in his own hand, to keep a body, or a Child, or the meanest thing whatsoever?
There is no flesh that has power to keep the least in their Family: No, a
King has no power to keep a poor body in his Commonwealth, except the LORD
look down from Heaven, and wait upon that body, which he has concredited to
his keeping. And therefore, seeing none of us has power to keep one, except we
have power of God from Heaven, then let every man take heed to his speaking:
Let Kings take heed to their speaking: let those that have Families take heed
to their speaking: let them who are set over the Kirk, take heed to their
speaking: let none say, I have done this: let no flesh stand up, and say, I
have brought such and such good works to perfection by my foresight, wisdom,
and power: The LORD shall take all power from thee, and turn it into shame, if
thou glorifiest not him who has given thee power, and say not, I have kept
them by the power of GOD. PAVL says, I have labored more than they all: But,
not I, but the grace of GOD in me. So, beware of your speaking: blaspheme not
the LORD in speaking: when ye have done it, say, GOD has done it, what was I,
but a poor Instrument, raised up by the power of GOD?

I go forward to the third circumstance, whereby he amplifieth this keeping: It
is from the cause moving him: These whom thou gave me, J kept. The cause
was, The Father had put them into his hands: that was the chiefest respect that
he had in keeping his Disciples. Well, Brethren, there are many causes wherefore
we should keep them whom GOD has concredited unto us: but surely this should
be the chiefest, that should move us to wait on them, and night and day to
care for them, because GOD has put them into our hands, and delivered them to
us, to be kept by us. We should ay remember on this, The Lord has put them in
my hand, and I must make answer for them, at the Great day of the Lord. Yea if
the least one of them perish through thy default, the blood shall be required
at thy hand. Look the Acts of The Apostles, Chap. 20. verse. 28. where Paul, when
he had called the Kirk together, he comes to the Elders of Ephesus, and
says, Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy
Ghost has made you ouer-seers, to feed the Kirk of God, etc. This is his
exhortation. The first band that he binds them with, is this, The holy Ghost
has made you ouer-seers for them: and ye must make answer for every one of
them: Night and day, therefore, take heed to them. Another band which he binds
them with, is, He has shed his blood for them. So, if we would be careful to
keep them, whom GOD has given us, this must be the first, GOD has
concredited these, and these, to me: therefore as I shall answer at that Great
day, I must keep them. No, thou dare not stand up before that terrible
Tribunal seat, if thou keep them not faithfully, whom the LORD has
concredited unto thee. It is no small matter for a King to keep a
Commonwealth: or for a Magistrate to keep them who are concredited unto him:
Yea, will the King make his pastime of it, that he has gotten such a care?
Will a Minister take his pastime, who has gotten the care of a Kirk? Or a
man, or a woman, who has gotten a Family, shall they take their pastime,
without regard? Is this the end wherefore God has concredited those to them?
No, heavy shall thy judgment be, if one perish through thy default: the blood
of that one shall be required at thy hands.

Now we come to the fourth circumstance: The fourth circumstance is the effect
that followed this careful keeping of his Disciples. The effect was this,
Never one was lost, who was given to him, of his Disciples, who were twelve,
except one, Judas, the son of perdition* that is, a man addicted to
destruction, and wrack; to the end that the Scripture might be fulfilled. There
is an higher cause than this: that is, To the end that that decree which God
made concerning Judas, and his perdition, should stand. The Scripture was but a
revelation of that Decree: for as GOD is immutable, so his Decree should stand,
that Judas should be condemned.

Well, Brethren, ye see a fair effect that follows a careful keeping: None
are lost, because the Son keeps them: he glorifieth the Father in his
keeping, because the Father had concredited them unto him: and therefore it
follows well, that seeing he kept them, none was lost, but Judas. Where a man
is faithful in keeping, and careful night and day to preserve them who are
concredited unto him, because God has given them unto him, first he glorifies
God in keeping them: next, by his faithful keeping he procures the eye of God
to be ay watching over them: and last of all, certainly that man will see a
fair effect of his care and keeping: None shall be lost, except those who are
separate to be sons of perdition, as Judas was: that is, who are ordained to
destruction from all eternity: For, Brethren, those who are ordained to
destruction, made vessels of wrath and perdition, who are appointed to hell
everlastingly, all the keeping in the world will not keep them: all the careful
attenda^ce in the world will not save them. All the keeping of Christ, who was
more careful than any man in the world, could not keep Judas from destruction.
So, who are ordained to destruction, no keeping shall serve them, but they
shall perish everlastingly. It may be, that the sons of perdition may be kept
in an outward Discipline; but at last they shall be manifested to be but
hypocrites: they seem to be the Children of Light: and who will put a
difference betwixt them, and those who are ordained to salvation? Who will put
a difference betwixt Judas, and the rest of the Disciples for a time? Judas
seemed an Apostle for the time, as well as Matthew, James, and John, and the
rest. So for a time, they who are ordained for death, will seem to be kept,
and they will hear the Preaching, and who will be so earnest to take heed as
they? But howbeit they give a fair show outwardly in their behavior, in the
end, behold, there shall a shameful destruction befall them: and let them show
to the world what they will, they shall show themselves to be Apostates from
Jesus Christ.

Therefore, Brethren, ^e never content of an outward profession, till that ye
find your selves on a sure ground: and rest not, till that by faith and
regeneration, ye get an assurance of your election: and till that ye be sure,
that God has made a decree, that ye shall have life everlasting. And when ye
see men and women, who seem to stand, fall away, and make a foul defection,
it is an evil token. This for the four circumstances: He kept them carefully,
and in the Name of his Father: because the Father had given them him, he was
the more careful of them: and therefore it follows, that none was lost, but
Judas.

Now let us come to the conclusion: Therefore, Father, I speak these things:
that is, I recommende them unto thee, that thou should keep them: I come to
thee: I leave them now here. It would seem, that Christ, when he went out of
this world, he left his own so in the world, that he had no more the
keeping and custody of them, and that, as it were, that he denudeth his hands
of them: this would move any man. Now, Brethren, the Lord Jesus never denuded
his hands of his Disciples: he never gave quite over them whom he once kept:
but this is the meaning of his words, when he died he ceased to keep them
in that manner that he kept them before when he was in the world: for when
he was with them in the world, he kept them by his bodily presence, and went
before them, and they followed after him. This keeping ceased when Christ went
out of the world: but as for that keeping which is the spiritual keeping, it
never cease to the end of the world: And the Lord now in the Heaven, he
keeps more surely his own by his Spirit, than he kept his Disciples when he
was in the world with them. And all this keeping that he requires at the
Fathers hand, is, That he should keep them by him. No keeping of the Father,
but by the Son, who is glorified in the Heaven, at the right hand of the
Father.

Well, Brethren, we see of this argument thus far, They whom the Lord Jesus died
for, and they whom he kept in this world, the Father of Jesus Christ keeps
them in the absence of Jesus Christ, till the Lord come again in his body.
Look whom to the Lord had an eye, when he was in the earth humbled,
whosoever they were to whom he had an eye, the Father, from his vp-going to
the Heaven, till his coming again, has an eye to them, and watches over
them. It is true, we who live this day, (I mean the Elect,) we were not then
with Jesus Christ, as his Disciples were, and he kept not us after the manner
that he kept his Disciples, because we were not: Yet there is not so much as
one of the Elect that now are, or yet shall be hereafter, to the end of the
world, but Jesus Christ, even humbled, had his eye upon them: and before they
came into the world, many years, he loved them: and therefore it follows, if
thy conscience will testify to thee, that Jesus Christ our Lord, when he was
humbled in the earth, when he prayed for sinners, and when he died in the
earth; if, I say, thy conscience will testify unto thee, and say, My Lord had
an eye to me, as well as to Peter, in his death, and as he had to John,
James, Matthew, etc. certainly thou may be assured, that the eye of the
Father of Jesus Christ watches over thee, till Jesus Christ come again. Paul
was not conversant with Christ, as the rest were into the earth: for Paul was
called after the Ascension of Christ, when he was glorified: yet Paul says,
The Son of God, in whom he believed, loved him, and gave himself for him.
Galat. Chap. 2. verse. 20. Meaning, that Christ, when he died, he had a respect
to him. The respect which Christ had in his death to Paul, the same he had to
every chosen man, and woman, to the end of the world: And therefore say thou,
that when Christ died, he died for me, and he loved me, and his eye was upon
me. If thou can say this, thou art in the custody and keeping of the Father,
till Jesus Christ come again. There is another thing to be marked here: What
makes the Son so bold, to stand up before the Father, and desire him to
keep his Disciples, whom he should leave behind him, when he was going up to
Heaven? Look the argument: I have kept them faithfully, therefore, Father, in
mine absence, keep thou them. Who dare be so bold to face God, once to bid him
keep them, whom he has concredited unto them? What King in the world, dare be
so bold, to pray for his Subjects, (the King is bound as well to pray for his
Subjects, as the Subjects are for the King, or as a Minister is for his Flock)
and say, O Lord, keep these Subjects? And what Minister dare be bold to say,
Lord, keep my Flock, or Family? None but he who has a conscience that he did
his duty, and was diligent night and day in keeping them. No man dare
reco^mend any to God, who has not a care to keep them whom God has
co^credited unto him: And therefore, these careless bodies, who rule Kirks,
Kingdoms, or Families, cannot pray: And if they pray, they scorn God in
praying: they are nothing but hypocrites, with fained voices. What moved Christ
to pray for his Disciples? A solicitude he had night and day of their weal.
No, ere any of them had died through his default, he had rather died himself.
This made David to watch so carefully over the people. And Paul, 2. Cor. chap.
12. when he has recounted th'afflictions he suffered, All is but outward,
says he, but there is one inward, which presses me like an army: and that
was, a solicitude and carefulnes he had for the Kirk of God, planted in his
time: Who is afflicted, says he, but J am afflicted? that is, No man is
afflicted, but I am also afflicted: Who is offended, but I am also burnt? The
offense of the Kirk, is a skauding and burning to me. Of this care proceeds
prayer for the Kirk of God. But as for us in this Land, we are like to lose
the Kirk: The King has no care: the Nobility are gone back, and have no
care: the people and the whole estate are careless. If this way we lie still in
security, and be careless of the weal of the Kirk, what can we look for at
length, but that the Kirk shall be wracked, and come to confusion? But to what
end is it that he would have the Father to keep them? Look the words: he says,
That my joy may be full in them. Before he spoke of another end, to wit, That
they might be one, as the Father and the Son are one. Then, whomsoever the
Father takes into his custody, he keeps them to the end, that both they may
have peace with others, and also in their own souls and consciences: for this
peace of conscience is that joye whereof now he speaks. But wherefore is it
that he calls this their joy his joy? In what respect is it called the joy of
Jesus? Because this joy and peace of conscience that passes all understanding,
could never come into the souls of the Apostles, or of any of GODS children
since then; but through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, the Mediator
betwixt God and man. So there is no solid joy nor peace of conscience, until
the time that the conscience be first sprinkled with the blood of Jesus: and
then the conscience being once thus sprinkled, the soul will find such joy as
no tongue can express. Thus much for the eight argument.

The ninth argument is from that hatred wherewith the world persued his
Disciples, and hated them, The world hates them, therefore, Father, keep thou
them: they chase them here and there: now, Father, be thou their refuge. Alace!
it is a great misery to be chased and hunted here and there, and to be persued
in the world, and in the mean time to get no rest in God: when thou gettest no
rest with God, and no rest in the world, miserable is thy estate: but when thou
gettest rest in the bosom of God, thou have joy and quietness in thy heart: this
is it he reco^me^deth to the Father, Father, the world hates them, therefore
let them get rest in thee: because they are not of the world, it hates them:
the world loves none, but godles ill men: now I have given thy word to them,
and it is thy word that has sanctified them, and separated them from the
world: for it is this word that will take thee out of the world: if the word of
Christ separate thee not from the pollution of the world, thou shall perish in
the pollutio^ and stink of the world. Then he compares them with himself,
They are like unto me, and thou should love them the better: for the world
loves them the worse, that they love me: the word of Jesus, as it makes us
unlike the world, so it makes us like Jesus Christ: if the word of Jesus make
thee not holy, nothing shall make thee holy, and the^ nothing shall ever make thee
like Jesus Christ: but this holy word of Christ, as it makes us unlike the
world, so it makes us like our head. Now he means, that this likeness with him
was the ground of persecution: the world persecuted them because they were like
him, whom the world loved not: for, Brethren, this is the ground of
persecution, to wit, the hatred of God, the hatred of the Light, and the hatred
of that Majesty of self. Well then, ye see the hatred, and the persecution
of this world, is wrong understood: men think that when any man is
persecuted, or hated of the world, that God hates them also: this is the
judgment of the world: when they see any man troubled for the cause of Jesus
Christ, they will say, God hates this man. Now this is so false a judgment,
that by the contrary, the hatred of this world is the surest token that can be,
that God loves thee: If there were no more to tell thee, but the sense and
experience that godly men have of Gods presence, in the midst of the hatred
of this world, it will tell thee, that God loves them. A man who is
persecuted for Jesus Christ, will feel such a presence in his heart of God,
that the tongue of man nor Angel cannot tell: And when he is chased, till he
pant, and be breathless, he will feel such a presence, that he will count
nothing of all the trouble of the world: as Paul says, Romans 8. verse. 31. Jf
God be with us, who can be against us? And again, Who can separate us from
the love of God in Jesus Christ? He who feels this, he will stand up, and
spit in the face of all the Tyrants in the world: he will defy the world: the
man who is farthest out of the world, Jesus Christ is nearest him: Go out of
the world, go out of Jerusalem, bearing the reproach of Jesus: and so thou
shall have a sense of that joye: the more thou conformest thee to the world,
the nearer man or woman is joined with this cursed generation, (the most
cursed generation that ever was on the face of the earth,) thou shall find
that thy God shall be the farther from thee: when thou live as they live,
and speak as they speak, I appeal thy conscience, if thou find then the
comfort and joye which thou foundest, being from that society? And if thou
say, thou have it, thou lie. If it were no more, but that sense, it may
tell thee, that this doctrine is true. Now I shall end the conclusion.

When he has used this argument, he subjoyneth, I pray not that thou should
take them out of the world: but that thou should keep them from the evil
of the world: for I have a work to do with them: that is, to send them out
to this cursed generation: therefore, Father, keep them: this is the thing
that I pray, when I shall send them out to the world, that thou leave them
not, but in the midst of persecution keep them, till my work be ended. He
craves not, that they should be free of persecution: for of before ye heard,
he says, In the world ye shall have oppression, but be of good comfort, in
me ye shall have peace: therefore he craves not that they should be free of
all persecution: but that in the midst of persecution, the Father should be
with them, and make them victorious: and more than victorious, even to triumph.
Ye may mark in these words, two remedies against the persecution of the
world: The godly have two remedies against the persecution of the world: the
first is When the Lord takes his own out of this miserable world, to dwell
with himself in joy and felicity. The other remedy against persecution, is,
when the Lord lets his own still fight on in a battle, and in the mean
time keeps them wonderfully in the midst of persecution: so that the world
will be compelled, to wonder, that a man, or a woman, who feels the Lords
presence, will so triumph in affliction. All this world has no power to take
their life, so long as the Lord has his work in their hands. All the Tyrants
under the Heaven have no power to harm them: and namely, a Preacher, till he
end his work for the which the Lord set him in the world, all the Tyrants in
the Earth cannot take his life from him: no, they cannot touch the least hair
of his head, for they are numbered: yea, rather ere he get any harm, the Lord
will send his Angel out of Heaven, as he sent him to Peter, and pull him out of
the throat of death.

Now, Brethren, look to the order which the Lord uses in these remedies: he
will not incontinent take his own out of the world, howbeit the world be
unworthy of them: this world is not worthy of a good man: he will let them
tarry till his work be ended: There is not one of us, when the Lord has put a
piece of work into our hands, in our own calling, that he will take out of this
world, till we end it, to the glory of his holy Name. As I told you of before,
it is a wonderful thing* how the Lord will keep his own: and he will not at an
instant take them out of this world. Howbeit a man will mourn, and groan,
under the burden, as Paul did, when he says, J choose rather to flitte out of
this body, and to go dwell with the Lord: yet the Lord will have him abiding
a while. Yea, howbeit a man will have an heavy heart in this his Pilgrimage,
yet the Lord will have him to remain a while here: and in the mean time he
will abundantly comfort him, and will hold up his head, as he did to Paul,
when he delivered him out of the Lions mouth: that is, from the bloody Tyrant
Nero: J am assured, says he, and I have a confidence, that the Lord shall
deliver me, and keep me to his heavenly Kingdom. There is the remedy: he will
let thee bide still in the world, yet an hair of thine head shall not fall
without his will, but he will keep thee to that heavenly Kingdom: and when he
has ended his work with thee, he shall make thee to rest in peace, and shall
bring thee to himself in his Kingdom. Let no man think, that so long as the
Lord has any work ado with any of his own, that he will let them be taken
out of the world. It is a vain speaking, when any man is taken out of the
Commonwealth, or taken away by death, If this man had been living, this had
not been done, and this evil had not come to pass. Understand this, when the
Lord takes him, the Lord has done his work with him: the Lord knows there
is no more ado with him, and therefore he takes him. The enemies of the
truth think that they get a great victory, when a good man is taken out of
the world. O Fools! is not this the last deliverance of the godly, who
glorified God in their mortal bodies? For he shall glorify them in despite of
the world: they shall triumph over the world: No, the sword, the fire, etc.
cannot hinder this their triumph: Let wicked men come on their way, let them
essay and prove on their way, they shall find in end, that the godly shall
triumph, and in that Great day, they shall see them glorified: and then they
shall say, Thought we not once that these men were utterly wracked, whom now we
see so glorious? So not only shame and confusion shall light on them for their
wickedness, but also this shall wonderfully aggreadge their condemnation, when
they shall see them glorified, whom they persecuted in the world.

Let us rest in this hope, and let us labor in this world, howbeit with hatred
and with contempt, and we shall get the last remedy: the Lord shall take us to
himself, and we shall cease from all labor, and shall be glorified with him
in the Heavens, through Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, and the holy
Spirit, be all honor, praise, and glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XXIII. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvii. VERSE. 16.17.18.19.20.21. 16 They are not of the world, as I
am not of the world.

17 Sanctify them with thy truth: thy word is truth.

18 As thou did send me into the world, so have I sent them into the
world.

19 And for their sakes sanctify J my self, that they also may be sanctified
through the truth.

20 I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me,
through their word:

21 That they all may be one, as thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee:
even that they may be also one in us: that the world may believe, that thou
have sent me.


THE LORD used sundry arguments (well-beloved in the Lord Jesus) to move his
Father to keep and preserve his Disciples, and Apostles, whom he was to leave
in the world behind him. Hitherto we have nine of them, which we recounted the
last day. Now in the beginning of this Text we have the tenth and last
argument, which he uses in his petition which he makes, That the Father would
keep and preserve his Disciples. Shortly to come to the words: They are not of
the world. Then would he conclude: Therefore, Father, keep them. What is
this, Not to be of the world? Not to be of the world, is, To be borne again:
to be regenerate and separate from the pollution and wickedness of this world.
By what means this is done unto us, we heard the last day: to wit, by the word
of God: For, as Peter says, the word of God is that immortal seed of the
eternal God, who lives everlastingly, wherewith he begets us of new again,
and separates us from the world, from the ignominy, filthiness, and
wickedness, wherein the world lies naturally, for the world is drowned in
filthiness and wickedness.

Then he recommendeth to the Father the estate of them who were separated from
the world, by a comparison with himself, As I am not of the world, so are
they not of the world. Look this matter in the seventh Chapter to the
Hebrews, verse. 26. Our high Priest is undefiled: that is, The Lord Jesus is
undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the Heaven. Indeed it
is true, it is impossible for us, so long as we live in this mortal body, to
be altogether separated from sin, and uncleanness: but he was out of measure
holy, and equal with the Father in glory. Yet we are in some measure like unto
him. Always ye see in this, that this recommendeth our estate, that we are
like the Son of God: and this commends our separation from the world, in
that* that in this separation from the world, and the pollution thereof, we are
like the Son of God.

Brethren, whatsoever our estate be, so that in it we resemble him, howbeit for
his sake it be shameful and ignominious in the sight of the world, it is
glorious: if we be like to him in ignominy, we shall be like to him in glory:
Our shame is never so great in the sight of the world, if it be for his sake,
but it is better than all the honor and glory in the world. But* to leave
this: The thing which I understand, is this shortly: The farther that we be
from the world, the Lord has the greater care over us, and keeps us the
better: And the nearer that we are to it, the less is the care of our God over
us, and we are the worse kept. What is the keeping of God else, but the drawing
of us out of this world, and the seuering of us from the company of it? And
when he has drawn us out of the world, the keeping of us out of it again,
that we meddle not with it, and that we may be quite of it, and delivered from
it? This is not my meaning, that any man should draw himself to live as an
Heremite, and in the Wilderness, separated from the society of men, as the
Monks do. This is nothing but the craft of the Devil, that men should draw
to Cloisters, living in Harlotry, and in a Den of wickedness; living in a
vain speculation, feeding their bellies, and doing no good to the world. But
this is it that I mean, That men even living in the society of this world,
yet they should not live as the world does; they should separate their life
from the society of the world. Paul to the Philippians, Chap. 2. verse. 16.
desires them to live like as many Lights. Where? Not in a backside, but in the
midst of this naughty and wicked generation, bearing before them the word of
life. Thus should we live, as he says, Philipp. Chap. 3. verse. 20. that while
we be living, we be Citizens in Heaven: and howbeit our bodies be here, that
yet in the mean time our conversation be in the Heaven, and that we live an
Heavenly life, as if we were not living in the Earth, but in the Heaven, with
the Angels, and with our Mediator.

Now to go forward shortly: Having used this argument from their separation
from the world, in the next Verse. he insisteth in it, and of it he takes the
occasion of a new petition. He has prayed the Father to keep his Disciples:
now he prays the Father to sanctify them: that is, that as once the Father
had begun to separate them from the world, so he would continually separate
them from the world, till he took them out of the world. It is not enough
to begin to be sanctified: that is, to be separated out of the world: it is
not enough once to begin to be holy, but continually, night and day, we must
warble out of the pollution and filthiness of this world, and grow in
holiness of life and sanctification. But wherewith shall they be sanctified?
With the truth: It is the truth of God, in Jesus Christ, that makes man or
woman holy. Not every truth makes man or woman holy, but the truth of
God, in Jesus Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. This truth is
the word of God, which separateth thee from the world.

Well then, it is the word that sanctifies, and makes men and women holy:
for as the word is the immortal seed, whereby we are borne again, so it is
that sweet and sincere Milk, (as Peter says,) whereby we grow in him. It
is the word that begets us in him, and makes us to grow on, till we see
our Savior. Would thou begin to be holy? hear the word: thou shall never
be sanctified, till thou hear the word. Would thou grow on here still?
that is the only mean that God has appointed in this world. Hear aye, and
grow on, and at last thy glory shall be perfected in Jesus Christ. Brethren,
to mark somewhat here: He prays, that they may be sanctified: that is, that
more and more they may be severed from the world. Then we must aye grow on in
holiness: as ye read in the Revelation of John, Chap. 22. verse. 11. He who
is just, let him be just still: and he who is holy, let him be holy still,
etc. Well, it is a good thing to begin to be holy: for he who begins
truly to be holy, he grows on still.

Now the mean whereby we grow in holiness, is Prayer: Ye see here, the Lord
he prays, that his Disciples, who were begun to be holy, should grow on in
holiness, and should be separated from the world. So the special mean is
Prayer: Pray continually. It is our sluggishnesse in prayer, that causes us
to want an holy heart, and growth of that sanctification. Would thou be aye
holy? Pray ever. If thou prayest not, but loathest prayer, thine holiness
shall fail. Would thou grow in holiness? Continue in prayer. Now the
instrument that makes thee holy, and that God has ordained to take away the
filth of thy nature, and that the holy Spirit takes in his hand, as it were,
to wash away the pollution of thy nature, is the word of Truth. As he uses
the mean of Prayer, so he uses the word of Truth. When the word of God is
preached, lay to thine ear to hear: and pray still, and hear on still. How
shall thou hear? In hearing pray: that is, when thou hear the word of
Truth, pray him, that by the word of truth he would sanctify thee: that is,
that by his holy Spirit that word may be effectual in thy soul: Say this
ways, Now, Lord, as this is the only instrument, appointed to sanctify may
soul, and scour away the corruption of my dead nature: so let thine holy
Spirit take it in his hand, and conuoy it into my soul, to sanctify my soul.
Pray ay, and hear ever, and crave that the word may take effect to make thee
holy.

When he has made his petition to his Father, to sanctify and to separate his
Disciples from the world, and from the pollution of the world, to this purpose
he uses one or two arguments in the words following: The first is in these
words, As thou have sent me into the world, so have I sent them. Father, I
have sent them into the world, therefore, Father, sanctify them. He declares
this by a comparison from himself, As thou have sent me, so have I sent them.
Ye heard he made them like to himself in holiness, so now he makes them like
to himself in vocation. It is a blessed thing, to be like to Christ in many
things. And so by this likeness with himself, he recommendeth them to the
Father. The Disciples of Christ, whom ye call the Apostles, they were like
Christ in calling and vocation. The Lord Jesus was the great Apostle of our
profession. Hebr. 13. verse. 11. and they were also sent by the will of the
Father: So they were, in a manner, like unto him, in calling and vocation: but
here is the difference, The Lord Jesus was an Apostle immediately sent by the
Father: the Father sent him to the world immediately: but the Apostles were not
sent immediately by the Father, but they were sent immediately by the Son.
The Lord Jesus, as he was sent of the Father immediately, so he sent his
Apostles immediately, yet at the will of the Father. Look the Epistles of
Paul: he calls himself the Apostle, that is, the Ambassador of Jesus
Christ. But how? By the will of the Father. So it fares with the Pastors and
Teachers in the Kirk of God: No commission they have from Jesus Christ, but at
the will of the Father As this is true, that the Pastor, or Teacher in the
Kirk, is immediately sent by the Son; So it is true, in all grace that
comes from Heaven to the Kirk, all comes immediately from the Son, and
not from the Father. Whatsoever grace it be, as vocation, justification,
sanctification, and life everlasting, or whatsoever gift it be, all comes
immediately from the Son: as in the fourth Chap. to the Ephesians. verse. 10.11.
where he cites the testimony of David, He passed up on high, (meaning of
Christ,) that is, to the Heavens, he led captivity captive, and he gave
gifts to men: that is, the Lord Jesus, who was humbled, being exalted to
glory, sends down grace on his Kirk: he gave some to be his Apostles, some
to be Evangelists, some to be Pastors, and some to be Doctors. The ground of
all is this, The Father has given all power in Heaven, and in Earth, to the
Son. Thou should understand this well. What is the Son of God? He is the
Treasure-house of all the grace and mercy of the Father. Whosoever would have
grace and mercy from the Father, let him address himself unto him; for in him
is the fullness of all grace, and passing knowledge, and wisdom: in him is
the deepnesse and fullness of the Godhead bodily, as Paul says to the Coloss.
Chap. 2. verse. 9. and all grace immediately is powered out from him on the
Kirk. Let him that would have any grace, address himself to the Son, and
desire him, that the Father would give some portion of grace, out of that
Treasure-house, Jesus Christ. If thou passest by him, thou shall never taste of
grace. Seek grace, where there is fullness of all grace in the world.

The thing which I mark of this argument, is this shortly: To move his Father
to sanctify his Disciples, he uses this argument, Father, I send them out to
the world. Now ye see the Lesson that rises, Whosoever comes to the world,
to draw this world out of that pollution and filthiness wherein it lies, to
sanctify the world, and to make this world holy, of an unclean world, to make
it clean, of necessity he must be sanctified. Alace! Brethren, an
unfaithful, and unholy man, let him be a Minister, (as for Apostles we have
none,) not separated from the world, but in all things like the world, is
unmeet to preach, and to be an Instrument, or Minister of God, to sanctify the
wicked world, or to win souls to Heaven. An unholy man, and in no measure
separated from the world, but in life and conversation like the world, in all
vanity, let him not open his mouth to speak of Christ. There is not one that
the Lord Jesus sends, but in some measure he will make them holy: and
therefore, that man that lives like this world, and has his conversation in
all points like the world, I say, and I assure thee, the Lord never sent that
man. So, if a Minister would have a good conscience in his calling, and would
go out to the world, to draw men to Heaven, let him try himself, if he be
separated from the world, or no: And if he find that he is separated from
the world, then with the better conscience he may speak of Jesus Christ: and
then he may put out his hand to miserable men, and draw them piece and piece
out of this sinful world: otherwise he can have no boldness.

Now let us come to the second argument: The second argument which he
uses, is from the end of his sanctification: For their sakes I have sanctify
my self. To what end? That they may be sanctified through thy truth. I have
sanctified my self, that is, I have consecrated my self to the death, to be a
Sacrifice, that by my death, and through it, they should be made holy, and that
by the ministry of the Cross. The ground of all our sanctification, is the
Cross and death of Jesus Christ. It is that blood, and that Sacrifice, that
makes us holy, and which is that meritorious cause that has procured
holiness to every one of us. Well, Brethren, as little as men will count of
holiness, our holiness is dear bought: there is not one that has a sponke
of holiness, little or much, but it is bought by the precious blood of the
immaculate Lamb: it is the dearest Merchandise that ever was bought in the
world. So the ground of holiness, is the blood of God: But I say again,
except that the Cross of Christ, and his blood, and his death and Sacrifice,
be made thine, and applied to thee, and apprehended to thee, and except (so to
speak it) the Cross of Jesus Christ be in thine heart, and thy conscience
sprinkled with his blood, the Cross of Jesus shall never do thee good, to
make thee holy.

Now, ye see the mean, and instrument, whereby the death of Christ is made
ours: It is the word of Christ, even the word of the Cross: This same Gospel
of Jesus Christ, wherein the Lord, in a manner, is crucified, and painted out
to thine eye, that is the mean, which applies to thy soul that death, that
it may be effectual in thee, to sanctification and holiness of life: It will
not be Christ, and his Cross, without thee, that will sanctify thee, except
thou believe in him, and by faith draw Christ, and his blood, into thine
heart, thou may well be worse, and the Cross of Christ may condemn thee,
but thou shall never be the better of him: But if thou belieuest this word of
the Cross, and so make Jesus Christ, and his Cross, thine by faith, then the
blood of Jesus Christ shall gushe out, to thy sanctification: It cannot be
idle, but it must sanctify, and separate thee from the world, and make thee
an Heir of Life.

Look how ye should have a sight of the Cross of Christ: think it not
enough, that Christ suffered and died for sinners, except when thou hear
this word of the Cross, thine heart griedilie gripe, and draw Christ in to
thy self: and this aye should be our exercise in the hearing of the word of
the Cross of Jesus Christ, to get such a solid apprehension of the Cross,
that thou may say, The Lord Jesus died for me, the greatest sinner in the
world. Look that thou find the effect and fruit to flow of that Cross, to the
sanctification of thy soul, and mortification and slaughter of thy sinful
nature, day and night. So hear not with the ears only, but with the
apprehension of the heart, or else that Cross shall never be effectual to save
thee, but for all this benefit of the word of the Cross of Jesus Christ,
everlasting death and damnation shall be thine end. Be not secure in hearing,
but draw in to thy self Jesus Christ, and there shall follow such a joye and
consolation, that all the tongues of men nor Angels, cannot express: there is
no pleasure comparable to that pleasure, which the heart of a faithful man
will find.

Now hitherto he has prayed for himself first, That the Father would
glorify him: and next, for his Disciples, eleven in number, for Judas has no
part of that Prayer. Now last, he extends his Prayer farther out, beyond all
the Apostles, to the whole faithful, that shall believe in him, to the end of
the world. And this is the third part of this Prayer: a Prayer for the whole
faithful, that should believe in him, to the end of the world. But to come
to the words: Not for them only, that is, Not for my Disciples alone, do I
pray, But J pray also for all them that shall believe in me through their
Word. And what prays he for them? That they may be made up in one body,
joined with that band of perfection, of charity and love. And how? As thou
and I am one: Thou art in me, and I am in thee, so they may be one in us:
that is, Through their faith in us: and that, to this end, that the world may
believe in me, that thou have sent me. Ye see how this Prayer of Christ
extends it self: it begins narrowly, and then piece and piece it
grows. It begins first at himself only, and he prays, That the
Father would glorify him. And then farther he makes his petition for his
Disciples, That he would first keep them, and then sanctify them. Then he
extends it farther out, to the whole belieuers, that shall believe in him to
the end of the world. So, Brethren, it is not contained within that Age in
the which Christ was in the Earth, (this is a great consolation,) it pertains
not only to those Jews and Gentiles that were at that time: but the Prayer
of Jesus Christ, even this same Prayer, wherewith he did consecrate himself
to the death of the Cross, it reaches out to us in this Age: And look how
many of us has faith in Jesus Christ, we may be assured that that Prayer
which Christ made, was made for us, and every one that belieueth. And when we
read this Prayer, and these words, I pray not for them only, but for them
that shall believe, there is not one, who finds a sponke of faith, but he
may say, Christ made this Prayer for me, as assuredly as he prayed for Peter
and James, and the rest of the Apostles: For when the Lord prayed, his eye was
upon every soul that should believe in him to the end of the world: he
recommended every soul to his Father in this Prayer. Not generally: but the
Lord Jesus being God and man, he had every soul before his eye, that ever
was chosen, and called, or shall be called to the end of the world: and he
prayed particularly for every soul. So, if thou find faith in thine
heart, thou may say, The Lord made intercession for me, as well as he did
for Peter and Paul, or the rest. But, Brethren, this is well to be marked, for
whom it is that he prayed: not for every man and woman, but for them who have
faith, for those that believe in him: Never soul got part of that Prayer, or
of his death, or of his blessed resurrection, or of that glory, that belieueth
not. Therefore, let us believe, as ever we would have any grace: for no grace
shall ever appertain to any soul, but to that soul that belieueth. It is not
for scant of grace, that the world perishes: The Prayer of Jesus Christ might
extend it self to a thousand worlds. How falls it out then, if he might
save a thousand worlds, that the world perishes? It is not for scant of
virtue, in the Prayer, or in the death of Christ, that the world perished; but
for want of faith: we are not capable of the virtue of his death: no soul is
capable of that death, but that soul that is faithful: that man that is
faithful, is made partaker of all the Prayers of Jesus Christ, and the virtue
of that death shall strike out to his salvation. Only believe, and thou shall
find the effect of that Prayer: but if thou belieuest not, that Prayer shall
not serve to thy salvation.

But this is to be marked: How is this faith gotten? Those, says he, who
shall believe in me, through their word. Faith in Jesus Christ is *****not
gotten by every word, and every dream, and every unwritten verity, and
fantasy of man. (The enemies have filled the world with dreams, and give out
fantasies and dreams to be believed.) The inventions of the Pope and
Cardinals, will not breed faith in thine heart. Look the words, They who
believe in me through their word. No word will breed faith, but the word
of the Apostles: Christ will so honor them, that he will never work faith in
the heart of man, but by their word only: And so to the end of the world,
no word is to be believed, but the word of the Apostles and Prophets: For
this excludes not the word of the Prophets, but the traditions of me. If thou
set thine heart to seek faith by the word of the Antichrist, thou shall
never get faith in thine heart. If thou will have faith, hear this word of
the Apostles: and if thou turnest thine ear from it, all the words in the
world shall not work faith in thine heart. The thing which he requires
would be marked: What requires he? He requires, That they all may be one.
So, the thing which he asks for us all, to the end of the world, it is,
That we be joined together in that conjunction of love, and made up in one
body, and one new man, whereof the Head is the LORD JESUS, and knitte up with
that band of perfection, which is love. Without JESUS CHRIST there is no body,
there is no conjunction with the members: no, the sibbest conjunction in the
world, is not worth a penny without JESUS CHRIST: No, the conjunction of man
and woman, which is a near conjunction, and the conjunction betwixt brother
and sister: and in a word, all conjunction, is nothing but a dispersion, which
is without Jesus Christ; it is nothing but a variance. This natural life is
nothing without Jesus Christ. I might draw this matter from the ground: After
Adam had fallen, and was severed from God, Adam and Eve had no true
conjunction, nor none of their posterie after them. Then, Brethren, how get
we our conjunction again? Even by Jesus Christ, and by that virtue in him*
for except in him, nature, and all these bands be sanctified, by them men
cannot be joined together amongst themselves: For in him there is made a
gathering together, of all things, both which are in Heaven, and which are in
Earth, Ephesians. 1. verse. 10. Coloss. 1. verse. 20.

He insisteth upon that union, and he recommendeth it unto us, and amplifieth
it from* the similitude between the Father and the Son: The Father is in the
Son, and the Son is in the Father: that is, they are one, by a wonderful
and unspeakable conjunction, in a divine nature and essence. The thing in the
world, wherein we resemble most that glorious Trinity, the Father, the Son,
and the holy Spirit, is this union: Would thou be like the Father, and
like the Son, and like the holy Ghost, then be united in heart and love,
with the members of Jesus Christ. There is no likeness with the Father,
without this union. A man full of malice in the heart, is no more like to Jesus
Christ, and to the Father, than the Devil is: and that is the thing which the
Devil seeks most of all, to make men unlike to God: For as union with God
brings life everlasting, so unlikeness with God, and disseuering from him,
brings death everlasting. None shall be safe in that Great day, but so
many as are united with a band of love: if thou be not united by that band,
with the members, look for nothing but death.

Then he sets down the ground of our conjunction, Even that they may be
also one in us. What is the ground of the conjunction of the members amongst
themselves, but the conjunction of the members in the Head? If thou be not
joined with the Head, the Lord Jesus, by faith, thou can not dwell with thy
neighbor in love and charity. He who is joined with the Kirk, he must
first be joined with Christ. He comes to the arguments of this
conjunction, and the first is, from the end, which is this, That the world
may know, that I am sent from thee: that is, that the world seeing that union
of the faithful amongst themselves, and that binding up of their minds and
hearts, by that band of love, may know me, from whom that conjunction
proceeds, and they may take me up, not (as they do) to be a wicked man, but
to have come down from the Father, and to be the Son of God. Then, Brethren,
there is not a thing in the world, no, not an effect in the world, where in
that virtue of Jesus Christ appears more, than in this conjunction of the
members of the Kirk in the Earth. So, would thou show before the world,
that Jesus is God, equal with the Father? be at one with thy neighbor.
Would thou glorify Jesus Christ, and profess him before the world, and
honor him? live in peace, unity, and concord. Would thou dishonor him,
and shame him before the world? be at variance, have no peace, and no love. If
thou would set thy self to make the world think, that Jesus Christ is not
one with the Father, have no peace with thy neighbor. This conjunction, and
making up of one body, is no small effect of the virtue of Jesus Christ: there
is no power in Heaven nor in Earth, but this power of God, that will make up
that band: all the Kings in the Earth will not make thee love thy neighbor
truly: no power can make thee love thy Wife truly: no, not thy Children, but
only that power that flows from Jesus Christ, the infinite power of that
Godhead, which flows from him to thy soul, is able to turn thine hatred
into love, and to sanctify thee. So, would thou glorify Christ in this
world, and live in this world to the glory of him, and profess that he is God,
and that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily? strive, so far
as lies in thee, to keep peace with all men, and be knitte up in love with
thy neighbor, as thou would glorify him in this life, and have part of
that everlasting glory, purchased by the blood of Christ: To whom, with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XXIV. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xvii. VERSE. 22.23.24. 22 And the glory that thou gave me, J
have given them, that they may be one, as we are one,

23 I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that
the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have
loved me.

24 Father, J will, that they which thou have given me, be with me, even
where I am, that they may behold that my glory, which thou have given me:
for thou louedst me before the foundation of the world.


IN the last part of this PRAYER (Well beloved in the Lord Jesus) the Lord,
after that he has prayed for himself, that the Father would glorify him;
and after that he had prayed for his Disciples, to wit, the eleven, (for he
prays not for Judas, because he was the son of perdition,) at last he
conceiueth a Prayer for the whole faithful to the end of the world: I pray
not, says the Lord, for them only, that is, for my Disciples, but I pray
for all them that will believe in me, through their word. The thing which he
prays for the whole faithful, is this, That they may be one in this world,
joined in one heart and mind, to make up in this Earth that glorious body of
Jesus Christ: that is the thing he prays for. The first argument ye heard
the last day, which was from the end of that union of men and women, in the
Kirk of God, and of the making up of the body of Jesus Christ: Then the world
shall know, that Christ is sent of the Father: In that conjunction and union,
they shall see that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, sent of the Father, to the
world, for the redemption of the world: that is the first argument.

Now we go forward in this present Text, to the second argument of his
petition, for the whole faithful to the end of the world. The second argument
is taken from the end of that glory which the Father has given to the Son,
and that the Son has given to the faithful: the end of all this, is, That
there should be an union and conjunction amongst the members of one body of
Jesus Christ in the Earth. The glory that the Father gave to the Son, and the
glory that the Son gave to us, tends to this end, that we be joined
together in the Earth, to make up the body of Jesus Christ: Seeing that all
the glory that thou have given me, and I have given them, serves to this,
that they may be one, as we are one* this is the thing I pray for, That they
may be united in one body. The glory, says the Lord, that thou have given
me, I have given it unto them: That is, to the whole faithful: not to his
Disciples only, but to the whole faithful to the end of the world. What is
the glory that the Father has given to the Son? The next word expounds
it, and makes it clear: The glory that the Father gives to the Son,
stands in this, that the Father is in the Son: I in them, and thou in me.
The Father is in the Son: the Father has given himself to the Son. This
is high, but I shall make it plain to you: In the eternal generation, wherein
the Father begot the Son from all eternity, without beginning, the Father
communicated with the Son that whole glorious substance and nature: and as
soon as he communicated with the Son his whole glorious nature and
substance, so soon the Father and the Son became one in nature and
substance: And therefore, considering this communication of the nature and
substance of the Father and the Son, it is said, that the Father is in the
Son, to wit, in nature and substance, and that the Father has given to the
Son his glory: For, Brethren, what is the glory of God? Nothing but the
glorious essence and nature of God: and this is the glory that he gives to
the Son. What is meant again by this glory that the Son gives to the
Father? The words in the next Verse. makes it plain, I in them: The glory
that the Son has given us, is nothing but himself: it stands in this,
That the Son is in every one of the faithful. To make it more plain: In
our Regeneration and new birth, the Son of God, Jesus Christ, communicates
to every one of the faithful, borne anewe again, his holy Spirit: and so,
as Peter speaks, 2. Epist. Chap. 1. verse. 4. he makes us partakers of that
diuine-nature: There is not one of us, that has gotten that holy Spirit of
Jesus Christ, but, in a manner, we are made partakers of that divine nature:
Yea, in our Regeneration, the Son of God gives unto us himself. This is a
great prerogative to thy soul, to get God to dwell in thee: for where the holy
Spirit is, there is faith: for the Spirit breeds faith in the heart: and
where faith is, there is Jesus Christ. Have thou faith? thou have Christ. The
saying of the Apostle PAVL to the Ephesians must be true, Christ dwells in
the heart by faith. Have thou faith in Jesus Christ? thou have Jesus Christ,
the Son of God: and if thou have faith, thou have the holy Spirit in thine
heart: and if thou have the Son, thou have the Father: and if thou have the
Father, thou have the glorious Trinity in thee, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Spirit. Well then, Brethren, consider this giving of Christ, wherein he
gives himself unto us: by this Regeneration the Lord is in every faithful
man and woman: that is the meaning. As the Father communicates himself to the
Son, so the Son communicates himself to every one of us: and, as it
were, he communicates that divine nature unto us in this life, and much more
in the life everlasting.

But to come to the end of the glory that the Father gives to the Son, and
that the Son gives to the faithful, that is, That they may be one, as we
are one. The Father being in the Son, the Father and the Son becomes one,
in that glorious substance and nature: and then the Son, the Lord Jesus
Christ, being in us, there rises not only a conjunction of us and him
together, a conjunction of the body and the head, but there rises also
another, to wit, a conjunction with the rest of the members of his body in the
Earth: For, Brethren, where the Spirit of Jesus is, where Faith is, where
Christ is in the heart of any man or woman, there, of need force, love must
be: faith and charity are inseperable: Where that band of perfection is, as
the Apostle PAVL calls it, in the third Chapter to the Colossians, Verse. 14.
Where faith in Christ is in thine heart, thou must be joined with the Kirk of
God, and with thy neighbor. And this is our perfection, that every one of us
is joined with another in this band of love. There is no perfection of a
member in this world, when it is sundered from the rest of the members: Cut
off a member from the body, it does no good, but perishes: Cut off the hand
from the body, whereto serves it? Or, cut off the foot, what perfection
shall it have? Take the eye out of the head, whereto serves it? So the
perfection of every one of us, stands in the conjunction of us together, in
the body of Jesus Christ. Would thou be perfect? Be thou an hand, or a
foot, or some member, (yea, if it were but a little To^,) of the body of
Jesus Christ, that is* of the Kirk, or els^ thou art but a rotten member. If
he were a King, if he be separated from the Kirk of God, he is but a
stinking vilde member, and serves for no use, and in end shall be casten
into the fire.

The doctrine which we see here, Brethren, is, That virtue which comes from
Jesus Christ: For all grace and life flows from him, and comes to us, by
virtue of that conjunction betwixt him and us: the virtue is not to make a man
perfect in himself, and absolute with all sort of graces: that is not the
virtue of JESUS CHRIST, to make any man so absolutely perfect, that he shall
not have need to beg any thing at his neighbor: But this is the virtue
that comes from Jesus CHRIST our Head, to make all, one man; and not to make
one member, the whole body: but to make one, an eye in the body, and another
an hand, and another a foot, etc. And not to set up any one man, no, not the
Emperor, nor the King, to make him the whole body.

Then, Brethren, this grace of JESUS CHRIST, is to make a conjunction amongst
the members, and not to give unto him, or her, all grace: Yea, though it were
the Emperor, or the King, the LORD will give him but part of grace: And he
will give that grace to the soberest Subject in the Land, which he will not
give unto the King: And again, he will give unto the King, that which he
will not give unto the Subject. For, he will give to one, to do the office of
a Foot, and to another to do the office of an Eye, and to some other, to do
the office of the Hand, etc. Now the Foot cannot be the Hand, nor the
Hand the Foot: So it is with the members of JESUS CHRIST: And we see by
experience, ye shall never see that one man has gotten all graces: but he
who has gotten one grace, he wants another, and his neighbor has gotten
that which he wants. This the Lord does, that there may be a conjunction of
the members, and to make thee join with thy neighbor, because he has the
grace that thou want: for if every man had all graces, every man would
misknow another. The man that will stand up in a proud conceit of himself,
and will mount above the Kirk, and contemn any member of that body, howbeit
it were the silliest member of Jesus Christ, he is nothing, and he shall have
no portion of grace. If thou joynest not thy self with thy neighbors, and
with the members of Jesus Christ, thou have no grace.

Yet he insisteth in the commendation of this conjunction: for it is a blessed
conjunction, to be joined with the Kirk of Jesus Christ in this world: of all
blessings it is the greatest, if thou be a true member in the Kirk, if it
were but the foot, thou have gotten a greater blessing than thou had gotten
all the Kingdoms of the world. As therefore thou would be partaker of
that life to come, look that thou be a member of the body of Jesus Christ: if
thou be not the eye, think it a great thing to be the foot, or to be a Toe
of that glorious body. He commends it from two ends: the first is. The
world shall know, that J am sent from thee, as he said Verse. 21. Would
thou know that Jesus Christ is the Messiah? be conjoined in that body of
Jesus Christ. Another is, The world shall know, that thou have loved the
faithful, as thou have loved me. Would thou know, that God loves the
faithful, and that he shows mercy? join thee to the body. There are the
two ends of the conjunction and joining together of the members: The first is,
the glory of the Son: the second is, the glory of the Father: for by this
conjunction, it is known, how dearly the Father has loved the Son: and
by this, it is known, that the Father has loved the world: not with a common
love: he has not loved the world only as a workman loves his
worke-man-ship; but as the Father has loved the Son: that is, with a
Fatherly love: that is another sort of love than a common love. What avails
it to thee to know, that God loves thee as his creature, if thou be not
assured that he loves thee with that entire love, wherewith he loved his
Son: and that he loves thee with that Fatherly love, and with the bowels
of pity? And if he love thee as his Son, he shows it in this, That he gave
his Son for thee: for except the Father had loved thee as his Son, with
that Fatherly love, he had never sent Jesus Christ to redeem thee. The
sending of Jesus Christ testifies, that he loved thee with a Fatherly love.

We see here, wherefore God has a Kirk in this world. Wherefore is there a
communion and conjunction of souls here in this Earth? Think not that a
Kirk is gathered for none end. Wherefore is it then, that there is a Kirk? In
a word, It is, that the glory of the Father should shine, in that society
and conjunction of the Saints in the Earth. Jesus Christ is glorified in his
Kirk, and the Father of Jesus Christ is also glorified in it: They who divide
and disseuer the Kirk of Jesus Christ in the Earth, they do nothing else, but
to deface the glory of Jesus Christ, and the glory of the Father. Will thou
slay and persecute the Kirk of Christ? What do thou? Nothing but defacest,
and scornest the glory of Jesus Christ. What are these men doing, that
persecute the Kirk that the Lord has gathered in this Land? Nothing but
smoaring the glory of the Father, and the Son: and the Lord shall turn
their glory to shame and confusion: I give them their doom, The Father of
Heaven shall turn them, and all that shall conioyne with them, to shame and
confusion.

Mark the order, how the glory of the Father, and of the Son, is known:
First, we know, that the Son is sent from the Father, for us and our
redemption. Next, by the sending of the Son for us, we know tne
unspeakable love of the Father toward us. Now I go forward: When he has
prayed for this conjunction and unity of the faithful on the Earth, that they
may be joined in one body; he is not content with this, but he seeks
more: Father, says he, where I am, I will that they be there: that they may
see that glory that thou have given me. The Lord seeks not only glory to
the faithful in this life, but glory in the life to come. He intercedeth not
only for thee, that thou may have glory in this life, but also that thou
be glorified in the Heavens after this life. For, Brethren, the Lord Jesus
considered very well, that our felicity is not bounded within the compass of
this Earth. That is a miserable happiness, that is bounded within this life:
thou art but a catiue, if thou lockest for none other happiness: as PAVI*
says, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 15. Verse. 19. Jf our
faith be only in this world, of all men in the world, we are the most
miserable. So if thou have this grace only in this life, thou art miserable:
for all the graces that thou gettest, if thy felicity reach not beyond this
world, and beyond all eternity, thou art miserable. Felicity has none end:
the blessedness of the faithful man, or woman, has none end: it is not
drawn within the compass of this Earth, but it passes above the Heavens, and
extends it to all eternity.

Now our happiness stands in this conjunction and union, partly with our
Head, and our God, and with our Neighbor, to make one body to Jesus Christ.
In these two parts standenth our felicity. Thou beginnest this conjunction in
this life, but it shall never be ended: the perfection shall be in Heaven:
when we shall come to Heaven, and meet with him there, then our conjunction
with Christ, and with the members of his body, men and Angels shall be perfect.
The thing that works this conjunction, and brings out charity, and joins
thee with thy neighbor, is faith in Christ: for we live by faith, and not by
sight: when thou castest thine eye afar off to Christ, (for he is as far
from thee as the Earth is from the Heaven) howbeit thou be in heaviness and
languor, thou shall once get peace and joy, when thou look to Heaven. It is
but a far sight, to look through the clouds, to see thy Redeemeer at the
right hand of the Father: but this is not the perfection: the accomplishment
is by a full and clear sight, when we shall pierce the Heavens, and shall see
him, not in a mirror, but face to face: then the members shall be perfected,
when we shall see him, and the glory that the Father has given unto him.
This is common: But, O that thou could feel it sensibly in thine heart, to
thy joy and consolation! J will, that they be where I am, that they may see the
glory that thou have given me, before the foundation of the world. Ere ever
we get the presence of JESUS CHRIST, ere we see him face to face, we must
change our dwelling place: we will not get the sight of Christ here in
this Earth: Look not to get the sight of that glory here in the Earth:
thou must flitte out of the Earth, to the Heaven: Whatsoever soul would see
his glory, that soul must flitte: and before ever we change our dwelling
place, we must first be changed: we must have a change of our selves: There
is never any man, nor woman, that shall get entry into that Sanctuary
where the LORD JESUS sits in glory, but he who is changed in himself: It
is impossible for a man or a woman to enter into Heaven, with this mortality,
or with this death, or with this corruption. What are we but dead, and
mortal creatures? Then, thou must change corruption, into corruption; and
thou must change thy mortal body, into a glorious body. Now, this change
of man and woman cannot be but by death: What strikes more terror to thine
heart than death? Yet there is no change, but by death or else that which
shall stand us in stead of death: as when Christ shall come the clouds in
the latter day, we must be changed in the twinkling of an eye. This doctrine
tends to this, that we abhor not death altogether, and the leaving of this
life, that deat be not so heavy to us: for howbeit nature abhor it, yet of
a mortal body, it makes an immortal, and it tends to take thee out of
this Earth, and to transport thee to that Heavenly Paradise, where Jesus
Christ sits in glory: Yea, and this I affirm, There is no man, nor woman,
that has a desire to be with Christ, but he groaneth under the burden of
mortality, and would willingly embrace death, to be with Christ: yea, the
rememberance of his departure out of this life, is joyful to him. Fie upon
that man, who has his heart and affections knitee and glewed to the world,
ever seeking worldie honors, or pleasures, etc. Thou souldest have that
disposition which Paul had: look what he he says, J desire to be
dissolved: I have confidence, that J shall yet remain with you, but I choose
rather to flitte out of this body, and to go and dwell with my Lord. Let us
not be like Ethnickes, who have no blessedness, but beastly blessedness,
and look for no blessedness after his life. If thou have not an eye to
Heaven, and to that heavenly blessednsse, there is no blessedness for thee.

This is to be marked: Who is it that will make this flitting from the Earth,
to Heaven? Not every body, but only so many as the Father has chosen from
all eternity. Never one shall get entry to that Light, and to that holy
Sanctuary, but that soul whom the Father has given to the Son. If thou
be once given to the Son, and once put into his hands, howbeit thou be a
Pilgrim for while, (for thine inheritance is not here:) howbeit thy body be
walking in sadness and heaviness, howbeit thou be wandering far from
Christ on the Earth, yet of necessity thou shall once dwell where Christ is.
This doctrine is very common, yet comfortable: That body that is separated
from his Lord, and gets not that fruition of his presence, once he shall
go, where he shall get that presence, howbeit not incontinent, once he shall
be lifted up above the Earth, and shall dwell in glory with Jesus Christ. The
thing in the world that should be most persuaded of, is, That we are given to
Jesus Christ. There is no consolation for thee, and thou need not look ever
to dwell in Heaven with Jesus Christ, if thou find not this persuasion, that
Jesus Christ is become thy Lord, and has conquessed thee out of the hands of
sin and death. There is none other consolation in life, (although thou
should live ten thousand years,) and much more in death, without this,
thou shall find no consolation: but even in death, if thou find this
persuasion, that thou lie sleeping in the arms of Jesus Christ, then thou
shall find consolation: and when the soul is departing out of the body, it
shall find in experience that joye.

Now yet the end would be marked: There is the end, That they may see my
glory that thou have given me. It is true indeed, in this life the faithful
get a sight of the glory of Jesus Christ: for if there were not a sight of
that glory, wherefore would all the pleasure of the world serve? Thou wist
never what joye meaned, if thou gettest not a sight of that glory: But yet, I
say, all the sight of Jesus Christ, which we have in this life, is, as it
were, but in a mirror, and in a looking-glass: it is but a dark sight that
thou have of him: This is by the Preaching of the Gospel, wherein ye have
Christ, first crucified, and then glorified. What is our Preaching, but that
Christ has been first crucified, and now glorified, at the right hand of
the Father, for the justification and sanctification of the world? This is
that dark sight which we have here: but one day we shall be there where
he is, and we shall see him face to face, and we shall see such a glorious
Majesty, as we would never have looked for: thou can not look for enough:
hope for as much as thou will, when thou shall be with him, it never entered
into the heart of man, that which once with the eyes of the body, thou shall
see. And therefore he says, That they may see that glory, as though they
saw it never. Wherefore shall it serve thee to see the glory of Jesus Christ?
When once thou shall see that Glory face to face, then perpetually, tide and
time, thou shall glorify him. What is the cause that we cannot glorify
Christ in the Earth, as we shall do in the Heavens? Because we have not such
a bright sight of his glory, in the Earth, in this mortality, as we shall
have in the Heavens. And if ye see a man, ye will know him better than to
hear speaking of him: The greater sight thou have of Christ, the more thou
shall glorify him. A man that has the smaller sight of him, shall glorify
him the less: but that man that has no sight, woe is him; for he will get
no glory. These dissolute men and women, who have no delight to glorify him,
and have gotten no sight of him, shall get no glory: Therefore, when we
shall get the full sight, even that shining sight, our delight shall be to
look to our King: and we shall marvel, that ever creature could see such a
glory: and we shall delight to glorify him that sits upon the Throne: and
when we shall see him, then day and night our Song shall be as it is written,
in the Revelation, Chap. 4. Verse. 8. Holy, holy, holy, is the Great GOD
Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come. What is the cause of that?
Because of the brightness of the glory, which shall strike out from him, upon
us: the cry shall never go out of our mouth. Well is that soul that will
strive to glorify him! And that soul that can once study to glorify him,
that soul shall say for ever, Holy is the Lord. But shall we not be the
better of it? When thou look to a King in his glory, thou art never an
hair the better: But it shall be far otherwise with thee, when thou shall
see him. So soon as we shall see that glory, we shall be as soon
transformed: that bright face of the Sun of Righteousness, shall strike out
the beams of his glory upon thee, and the beams shall go to thine heart, and
shall illuminate thy soul, and shall shoot out that darkness, and shall make
thy body shine more brightlie that the Sun. So we shall not so soon see
him face to face, after that glorious Resurrection, but as soon thou shall be
transformed to glory, and thou shall shine like an Angel of Light. Look to
the end of the third Chapter of Paul in the 2. Epist. to the Corinthians: We,
with uncovered faces, behold, as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord; and it
transformeth us into that same image, from glory to glory. The more that a
man hears of the Gospel, the soul is the more illuminate: and the body that
will take heed, will find the glorifying of the soul in some measure: and
then, when we shall see him out of the body, when we shall blinke on that
glorious countenance, then both body and soul shall be glorified.

He draws the glory which the Father has given him from the ground, Because
thou have loved me before the foundation of the world was laid. The glory the
Father gives to the Son, is of an infinite love, and unspeakable. Would ye
measure the glory of the Son, and the greatness of it, and when it began?
Look to the love the Father bare to the Son: in greatness it is infinite:
thine heart is not capable of the thousand part of that love: It is infinite.
Who can tell it? How can my finite heart tell it? If the love be infinite, then
the glory is infinite. He said, his Father loved him from all eternity: that
love had never a beginning, therefore the glory had never a beginning, as he
says himself before in the 5. verse. of this Chap. Would thou know the end?
It has none end. It is not like the love of man: the love of the Father to
the Son, it is everlasting: and therefore, the glory of Jesus Christ it shall
never have an end, howbeit it was obscured for a time. Farther, ye may perceive,
when he speaks of his glory, he draws in the love of the Father, to
himself. This is an argument, that in speaking of that glory, he has a sense
of that infinite love. So the joye, and the glory, of the Son of God, wherein
stands it? His joy, and glory, stands, in that he has gotten it, not with
reafe or robbery, but with the love of the Father. Would thou possess any
benefit of God with pleasure? and would thou have joy with it? What if thou
had all the world, and had no pleasure nor joy in it? All gifts are from
the Father of Heaven, the Father of Jesus Christ. Would thou then have
pleasure in the gift? Look that the giver love thee, strive to feel that he
gives thee it in love: and then, though the gift be never so small, yea, if
it were but a Dinner, or a fill of Meat, thou shall have more joy in the
participation of it, if thou take it because he loves thee, than if he would
cast unto thee a Kingdom, if thou feel not his love. He will throw a
Kingdom to a Loune, to a wicked man, etc. as who would throw a bone to a
Dog. But as for thee, whe^thou gettest any thing, look thou get it not in
anger, or else it shall never do thee good: if thou would have it to be
unto thee an ernest-pennie of heavenly things, look that thou find the love
of the giver: otherwise esteem naught of it: thou may well have it, but it
shall be for thy destruction: but if thou gettest it of love, he will warn
thee, he will make the holy Spirit to power into thine heart, a greater
sweetness of his love, than thou can find in the participation of the
benefit it self. Therefore, in all benefits thou receiuest, ever cast thee to
feel that God loves thee in Jesus Christ, who has died and risen for thee:
And if thou have a sense of that love, that Spirit shall work in thy soul an
unspeakable joy, which shall be the earnest-pennie of that eternal joy
which thou shall get in the Heavens, through Jesus Christ: To whom, with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honor and praise, for evermore. AMEN.

THE XXV. LECTVRE, OF CHRIST'S PRAYER BEFORE HIS PASSION.
JOHN, CHAP. xxvii. VERSE. 25.26. 25 O righteous Father, the world also has not
known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known, that thou have sent
me.

26 And J have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it, that the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and J in them.


WE have heard (Well-beloved in the LORD JESUS CHRIST) that the LORD in the last
part of his Prayer, which he makes to his Father, prays not only for his
Disciples, but generally for the whole faithful* to the end of the world.
Now in this TEXT which we have read, he returns again to his Disciples,
and he makes a Prayer especially for them, because they had most ado in the
world, and were to be sent out into the world, to win others to the Kingdom
of Heaven: Therefore the Lord most of all remembereth them in his Prayer, and
most earnestly recommendeth them to the Father: for those whom the Lord has
ordained to win others, of all men in the world they have most need of
Prayer; because if they be not vpholden, not only are they lost themselves,
but also in them stands the loss of the whole world, and of the whole
Congregation of Jesus Christ, to whom they are sent. Therefore the Lord in all
his Prayers, and especially in this his last Prayer, is most earnest in
recommending of them to the Father.

Now in the last words, which were immediately before these words which we
have read, the Lord speaks of that love which the Father bare to him, ere
ever the ground-stone, or foundation of the world was laid. And now in this
petition that he makes for his Disciples, he beseeches his Father to
communicate with them that love which he bare unto him: For all graces, and of
all ben^fites in the world, the love of God is the greatest: and he or she,
that has gotten the love of God in their heart, and feel^th that God loves
them, have the most precious Jewel that ever was: Therefore, the Lord
beseeches the Father, in the end of this Prayer, that the lou^ that he bare
to him, he would communicate it to his Disciples, whom he was to leave
behind him in the world. The argument that he uses, is taken from that end
both of the knowledge that the Son has of his Father, and of that whole
obedience that the Son gave to the Father, as also of the knowledge that the
Disciples had of him: the end of all this, is, That the Father should love
them: And therefore, seeing the end of all, was, That the love of the Father
should be in them; the Lord beseeches the Father to love them, in these
words, O righteous Father. There is the style which he gives him, O righteous
Father, the world has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have
known, that thou have sent me, and I have manifested thy Name unto them, and
shall manifest it farther: and all to this end, That thy love may be in them,
and I in them. There is the whole TEXT: He styles him Father, a warm word,
and a loving style: He styles him, Righteous Father, respecting the petition
which he had in hand: It is a very righteous and just thing, which he
seeks of the Father: Therefore he calls him Righteous Father: Thou will
grant that thing which is righteous and good: but it is a righteous thing to
the Father, to love them who know him, and believe in Jesus Christ: that the
Father should meet faith in Christ with love, it is a just thing. So,
considering this, he styles him, Righteous, and Just Father.

Mark it, Brethren: Look what thing thou would have GOD doing unto thee,
and what work thou would have him working, acknowledge him to be such in
nature, quality, and condition, as is the thing that thou ask of him by thy
prayer. Would thou have him doing any work of power? Then in asking, style
him according thereunto, and call him, GOD Omnipotent. Would thou have him
working a work of wisdom? Then when thou ask that of him, style him
according thereunto, and call him, Only wise GOD: as DANIEL, seeking a
Revelation, and seeking out the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, says, To thee
appertains Power, O GOD, and Wisdom. If thou would have a work of
mercy done, apprehende him in his mercy, and call him, Merciful GOD, and
say, O most merciful GOD, give me mercy. And would thou have him doing
a work of Justice? Then look that thou know him to be a most just GOD, and
give him a style conform thereunto, and say, O most just GOD, and so forth:
For Brethren, except the heart of man in prayer, when he seeks any work of
GOD, as a work of power, or a work of mercy, or a work of wisdom, or of
justice, etc. except, I say, the heart of him that prays, take the
apprehension of the nature of GOD, that he is merciful, that he is
Almighty, and that he is just, and wise, and so forth: except this
apprehension of his nature be in thine heart, thy prayer can have none effect.
How can thou seek him to work a work of mercy, or of wisdom, and have
none assurance, that he is merciful or wise?

So, the first thing in prayer, that we should strive to, is, ever to have a
knowledge and confidence of thy GOD, and of his essential properties:
otherwise, the heart shall not be assured, (thou may well pray for the
fashion,) except first of all thine heart and mind conceive him, in his
nature, to be a merciful, just, and powerful GOD. And therefore, the thing
in the world, that is most requisite, is to know GOD, so far as this
little heart and mind can conceive and gripe that infinite Majesty: It is
needful for thee to know that glorious Majesty, in those essential
properties, in his Mercy, Justice, and so forth: and to know him in all
those things in Jesus Christ: for all the knowledge of GODS nature, and of his
properties, without Jesus Christ, shall never avail. So the thing which we
should seek, is to know our GOD in Jesus Christ. This for the style.

Now to go forward: he comes to the setting out, first* of his knowledge of
the Father, and then of the knowledge of the Disciples, that they had of the
Father, and of the Son. But before he speaks any thing of these
knowledges, he sets down that misknowledge, and that wilful and obstinate
ignorance of the world: The world has not known thee. Alace, that there
should be such a multitude in the world, in such dark ignorance of so bright
and glorious a Majesty, that shines in the world, in that glorious word!
and yet they have no sight of him. Would thou eschew this ignorance? and
get a sight of thy sin? For the miserable world, howbeit the Sun of
Righteousness be shining into it, it sees him not, neither can it get any
apprehension of him. Strive to get thine eyes opened, to see that glory,
wherein stands thy salvation: No salvation to thee without that sight of
Jesus Christ: if thine eyes abide close, and see him not, they shall never be
opened, but shall remain close everlastingly: and never a sight shall do thee
good, to thy joy, but that sight.

Now he sets down this wilful ignorance of the world, and sets it
before the Father, to the end the Father should account the more of them that
knew him, considering that so many misknewe him: for ye know the Proverb,
Quod rarum, charum, That thing which is rare, is dear. That thing that few
has, it is precious: the rarer faith is in the world, the more precious: the
fewer they be that are faithful, the more precious, and the dearer are they
in the sight of God. I tell it again, The fewer that the number be, which
truly belieueth in Jesus Christ, the more precious are they, and the dearer in
the sight of God. The dearest thing in the sight of God is a faithful man or
woman in the world: and therefore, Brethren, this is a false conclusion of the
Adversaries: The multitude with the Pope and his Clergy; the Kings and the
Princes of the world embrace not your Religion; embrace not the verity of the
Gospel, which ye profess; therefore your Religion is not to be counted of. By
the contrary, it follows, The world imbraceth it not, therefore the Lord
accounts the more of it. And if I were to make a Prayer for the professors
of the Gospel, to the Lord, I would use this argument of the Lords, and I would
say, Lord, the world sees not this light, and few are they that see it;
therefore I recommend them unto thee, for the few number are dear to thee. Let
the Papists hold this still as a true note of their Kirk, Kings, and
Princes, and the great multitude, imbraceth their Religion: let them hold
still that Note, it shall deceive them, it has blind-folded them to
everlasting destruction.

Then he comes first to his own knowledge, and he says, I have known
thee: As he would say, I am in thy bosom: for the Son is in the bosom of
the Father: and I am one with thee, in essence, and in nature, and I sit with
thee in that eternal Counsel, and I see thy mind, and thine heart: all that
is in the Father, the Son knows it. Now with this knowledge is understood
that obedience and humble subjection the Son gave to the Father: all tends
to this, that the Father should love his Disciples, and the faithful: All the
obedience and knowledge of the Son to the Father, tends to this, That the
Father should love us. Well then, he that prays for the Disciples, he is a
good man, and knows God most perfectly. And no question, this knowledge
which he alleges, it is a great argument of this petition. The person of him
that prays, and makes intercession to the Lord for another, is much to be
regarded: he draws a great weight with him, if he be a man that fears
God, a good man, and one that knows God, and belieueth in Jesus Christ: in a
word, if he be such a one as the Lord accepts of, and favors,
certainly the Prayer of that man, either for himself, or for any other, is
powerful: as JAMES says, The prayer of a just man avails much, if it be
fervent. James, Chapter 5.Verse. 16. Is it the Prayer of every man that will
avail? No: It is the Prayer of the just man, who has the Spirit of Prayer.
It is a wonderful thing, to consider, how piercing the Prayer of that man
will be, and how it will pass up, and pierce through the visible clouds,
and all these visible Heavens, and never rest till it come to the ears of the
Lord: It will pass through that light which has none access. That Spirit
that conuoyeth thy Prayer to the Heavens, is not thy spirit, or the spirit of
a man: but it is his own Spirit, and the Lord knows what is the sense of
his own Spirit.

That thing I speak of Prayer, I understand it of all the works, and of all
the turns that proceed of the man that is acceptable to God: if he have that
holy Spirit, whatsoever he does, it is as a sweet smelling Sacrifice in the
eyes of the Lord. All that proceeds of that man, who has the holy Spirit,
and whose person is acceptable in the sight of God, is so sweet to the Lord,
that he accounts much of it. And by the contrary, Brethren, A man, or a
woman, whose person is not acceptable to God, and whom God likes not of, no,
be what he will, although he were a King of the world, the Lord will not
look upon any thing that will proceed from that man, or that woman, though
it had never so fair an outward show. Look to ABEL, and KAIN: When ABEL
offered an Offering to the LORD, the LORD* looked on ABEL, and his Offering: he
accepted first of the man, and therefore of the Offering. Come to KAIN: I
think he had as good an Offering, and largely better; yet the LORD would not
look to the Offering, because he would not look on him that offered it. The
LORD hated KAIN, and therefore because the person was not acceptable, he would
not look upon the Offering.

This is a necessary Lesson: If thou would do any thing in this world,
or speak or pray for thy self, any thing else, look that God have a liking
of thy person: look that thou be acceptable, and in the favor of thy God:
study to be approved of God: study to sanctification, and holiness of
heart, and stick to Jesus Christ: for faith in him makes thee pleasant unto
God: want thou faith, thou stinkest in his sight, and the Lord will not
look upon thee, no more than on a dead carrion, if thou be not clad with that
innocence of his. So, let every one of us take heed to our selves.

Now to go forward: When he has set down his knowledge, he comes to the
knowledge of his Disciples: And they know, that thou have sent me, and I have
revealed thy Name unto them, and will reveal it more, that thy love, wherewith
thou have loved me, may be in them, and J in them. Here is a promise of the
thing to come. If ye will consider the words, the knowledge of his Disciples,
which he sets down before the Father, it is partly present, and partly
to come. The knowledge present, is partly of the Son, That the Father sent
him, and partly of the Father himself. Concerning the Son, They know, that
thou have sent me: That is to say, Father, they have known, that I am thy
Son, and thine only begotten, equal with thee from all eternity, and in
time sent to this miserable world: and, that I am the Fathers Ambassador:
and, that I am the Redeemer of the world. The Lesson is this: He recommendeth
his Disciples to the Father, and that, from the knowledge which the Disciples
had first of the Son, and then of the Father. I said before, that the person
of him who makes prayer, is of great weight in the sight of God: I say the
same of him, for whom one prays: if he be one that has the knowledge of
God, and has faith in Jesus Christ, one whom the Lord regards, and who is
acceptable to God, surely the Lord very readily will hear prayers for him:
for (Brethren) there is some folk in this world, that if all the prayers of
the world were powered forth for them, and if all the world should pray for
them, it shall never avail in the sight of God: as it is said in the
fifteenth Chap. of Jeremy, Though Moses and Samuel should pray for some men,
he would not here: If Noah, Daniel, and Job should intercede: that is, though
all the godly of the world should pray for such men, yet the Lord would not
hear them: because there are some men in this world, whom the Lord has no
liking of: and all the prayers in the world will not avail for them, for the
Lord has casten them off. It is a good thing, once to get one grace of God,
for thou will very readily get another: if it were but the grace of
Election: the body that is chosen, the Lord will very readily hear prayer
for him. He who is justified in the blood of Christ, the Lord will accept of
him: and he who is sanctified by the holy Spirit, the Lord will give him
life everlasting. But that man, that never yet has gotten grace in Jesus
Christ, alace! all the prayers in the world will not avail him, if he be
not once justified, and sanctified. It may well be, that the Lord will cast
unto him a temporal benefit, as a man will cast a bone to a Dog: but as for
Spiritual grace, as Life everlasting, Justification, Sanctification, etc. that
man will not get one of those, as it is said, He that has not, let all be
taken from him: and to him that has, let it be given. Have thou one
Spiritual grace in Jesus Christ, thou shall get more: and thou who have none,
that that thou have, that is, which thou conceitest to have, shall be taken
from thee. Then, as euerthou would have the prayer of the godly, to do
thee good at the hands of God, take heed that thou stand in the favor of
God: take heed that thou stand in grace: for if that thou bid any pray for
thee, and in the mean time thou be graceless, and a contemner of grace, all
the prayers of the world shall not avail thee. Would to God, men would take
heed to this, and chiefelie they who are in high rowmes, as Kings, who would
have the prayers and supplications of others, and for whom the Subjectes of
duty are bound to pray. It is not enough for them to take their pastyme, and
to have the silly people under them, praying to GOD for them. I pray to GOD
that our KING may take good heed to this, that he may be acceptable, and
gracious, in the sight of GOD, or else all our prayers, that we will make for
him, will be of little avail.

Now, BRETHREN, there is another thing here to be marked: What is the
ground of our knowledge? And, how is it builded up? and how goes it
forward? First of all, he begins at the knowledge of the SON, I have
known thee. And then he comes forward, They have known, that thou have
sent me: And then, I have manifested thy Name unto them. What is the ground of
our knowledge in this life? The knowledge of Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
which he has of the Father. What if he had not known the Father? We would
never have gotten a sight of God. For why? All the knowledge that we have, is
by the revelation of the Son of God* he is not borne on the face of the
Earth, that has, or ever shall get, the sight of God, but by the revelation
of the Son. So many as the Son revealed him unto, got the sight of the
Father: But on the contrary, whom to the Son revealed not the Father, he
got never, nor never shall get, a sight of him. First the Son knows,
and then the Son revealed that knowledge unto us, in some measure. What is
the knowledge that the Son has revealed unto us? Reuealeth he unto us the
Father immediately? No, no: The first thing that the Son reuealeth to us, is
his own person: the first sight that thou must see, is the Son: and
therefore, when he speaks of their knowledge, he says, They have known
that thou have sent me. And then he comes to the other knowledge, the
knowledge of the Father, J have made manifest thy Name unto them. The first
thing that the Son of God reuealeth, is the knowledge of himself, That he
is that Ambassador, and that Mediator. And when he has revealed himself,
then he reuealeth the Father. And all the sight that we have of the Father, is
in the person of the Son, for he is the splendour of his glory, and the
express form of his Father: and he, by his holy Spirit, illuminateth the
souls of men and women, to get a sight of that Majesty. So, the ground of
our knowledge, is the knowledge that the Son has of the Father: Therefore,
as ever thou would have the sight of that knowledge, address thy self to
Jesus Christ, and in him thou shall see the Father, and his glorious face, and
thou shall see that glauncing and shining of mercy in him.

Now, he is not content to set down that knowledge which they have already, but
he promises, that they shall have it farther. Ye see then, the Disciples got
not the knowledge of the Father in a moment, and at once: but the Disciples of
Jesus Christ, (even the Apostles,) whom the Lord appointed to be instruments
of grace to us, whose works we have, and who were the light of the world, grew
in knowledge, and faith, piece and piece, and had not all re^ealed at once, but
by his word, and Spirit, piece and piece GOD revealed all to them. The
knowledge of God is not gotten in an instant, in this world: and the Lord
himself, who is the giver of that knowledge, he gives it to no man nor woman
in an instant, but piece and piece, the man, or the woman, grows in
knowledge: so long as we are clogged with this mortality, so long the
knowledge of God shall never be perfect. Therefore, let every man, if he
have a pleasure to seek God, try that grouth that he has in knowledge. That
is a vain soul, and a miserable soul, which will stand up, and say, I have
knowledge enough, I will go no farther. Knowledge must have a grouth in this
world. Woe is that man, that will say, I will set down my staff* as though
he would have no more knowledge: Thou wist never what joye was in the
knowledge of God, who wilt say thus: if thou had a love of it, thine heart
would seek to get the full knowledge of God: for that heart will not be
content of a mean measure of knowledge, but goes forward from knowledge to
knowledge: Seeing it is Life, as the Lord says, This is Life eternal, to
know thee, and whom thou have sent, JESUS CHRIST. If once thou tastedst of
that knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, thou would never say, I will set
down my staff. Let aye a continual strife be, to know more and more, till
this faith be turned into sight: when we shall meet with our Lord Jesus
Christ, then we shall get that sweet and joyful sight, to see him face to
face: therefore let us not rest, till we get that full illumination.

Another thing is to be marked here: Whom once the Lord has begun to
instruct, man or woman, he leaves not off. If Christ begin to teach thee by
his Spirit, he teaches not as men will teach, who will teach this year, and
leave off the next year: But if he take a man or a woman in hand,
continually he teaches them. And if this be true, that continually he
reuealeth, and teaches; that is also true, there is no man, nor woman, who
has begun to get knowledge by his teaching, but that man, or woman, must
grow, and cannot go back. It is a vain thing to say, A man, or a woman,
who has gotten true faith in some measure, (although it were no greater than a
grain of Mustard-seede,) that he can lose the faith which he has once
gotten. As Jesus Christ cannot rest in thy soul, but aye go forward, till
faith be turned into sight: so I say thus, (to refute those, who say, that
they who have gotten true faith, can lose it,) he that has gotten the holy
Spirit, can never lose him.

When he has set down before the Father, first, his knowledge of the
Father: and secondly, the knowledge that the Disciples had of the Father:
partly that which they had presently: and partly that which was to come:
now he comes to the end, and says, All this is to the end, That thy
love may be in them, and I in them. All this knowledge of God, and all this
faith in Jesus Christ, look to the end of it, all tends to this end, That
God may love us, and we may feel in our hearts this love of God. Therefore
(Brethren) mark it well, Count not of knowledge, even of the knowledge of God,
except that thou feel the love of God following upon it: look that all thy
knowledge of God be with a sense and feeling of this love, that God loves
thee. Whereto serves the knowledge of God unto thee, if thou have no sense and
no feeling of the love of God? Some men and women will glory, that they know
this, and that, and thus far of God: and in the mean time, they take no
heed to that sense of the love of God in the heart. I had rather have a little
knowledge, with the sense of that love wherewith he loves me, than all the
knowledge under the Sun, if mine heart be void of that sweet love. Count
never of the knowledge of God, although thou had all the Scripture per^uiere,
if thou find not this love flowing from that knowledge, and a sweetness and
joye in thine heart, arising of this love. And aye the more we know, the
greater should be the sense of the love of God. Therefore, let us strive to
feel the sense chiefelie of that mercy, and that love: and then our knowledge
shall be joyful and pleasant unto us. But here I ask a question, Began
God to love us then only, when we began to know him? Began not God to
love every one of us, before we knew him? Appearinglie in this place, as it
would seem, he makes the love of God to begin and flow of the knowledge
of God. The answer is easy: Look the words: he says, That thy love may
be in them. It is true, from all eternity, ere ever we were in the world,
(I speak of the Chosen,) he loved us, and of love he choosed us: and he
loved us after we came into the world: When we were enemies to him, he
loved us.

But mark again, Brethren, The love of God is never in us, but without us,
till we know him, and have faith in Jesus Christ: That is the meaning, Never
one feels in their heart, that God loves them, but he who knows God. He
loves thee, but thou feel it not, till thou, have gotten knowledge: and
then when thou have gotten knowledge, thou beginnest to feel it, and to have a
sense of that love in thine heart. And this is it that the Apostle says, Romans
5. verse. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, through that holy
Spirit which is given us. Before we get that knowledge, there is no
shedding abroad of that love in the heart: But when thou gettest the knowledge
of God, and faith in Jesus Christ, then thou feel that love, with a
sweetness and joye unspeakable. Experience may tell us this: Thou that have
not gotten faith in Jesus Christ at any time, and know not God, I appeal
thy conscience, if ever thou have felt the love of God? Say thou, that thou
feel Gods love? I dare say, that thou feel it not. And by the contrary,
when men and women know God, and find faith in Jesus Christ, from whom all
grace flows, and distilleth into our souls, they shall find in experience,
with the knowledge, such a sweet sense of love, that the tongue of man nor
Angel cannot express. And therefore, as ever thou would feel the love of
God, (What pleasure can thou have without that sense?) as ever thou would
have joye and comfort in thine heart, in the midst of the miseries of this
world, learn to know God: assuring thy self, that before thou get the sight
and knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, thou shall never get the sense of love.
Strive to see God, and have faith in Jesus Christ: and the farther sight thou
gettest of him, thy delight shall be to pierce in more and more into the
mystery of thy salvation: and I promise thee in his Name, that sense and
feeling shall increase: and the more thou see and know, the more thou
shall feel that love of God. So, would thou have joye and comfort, strive
to see Christ, and think not that thou can see enough. Now, would to God we
had the half of that desire, to look into the face of Jesus Christ, that we
have of worldly things* For all our blessedness and comfort, stands in this, to
look into the face of Jesus Christ, that the beams which strike out from him,
may shine in our souls.

In the last words, he says, And I in them. He commends this presence of the
love of God in their hearts, by the presence of Christ himself, who
accompanies it: as if he had said, So shall it be seen, if thy love be in
them, that I am in them. These two are inseparable Companions, the love of the
Father, and the presence of the Son, in the heart. Is the love of the Father
in thine heart? Then IESES CHRIST is there. And by the contrary: is JESUS
CHRIST into thine heart? then the love of the Father is into thine heart: these
two go inseparable together, and where the one lodges, the other must be
there also. Blessed are they that feel the love of God, for Christ is with
them in their hearts: for one grace draws on another: And if thy God love
thee, the glorious Spirit shall be with thee. A question here may be moved:
There are two Companions here, the love of the Father, and the presence of the
Son: but which of them is first? Whether is the presence of the Son, or the
love of God in thine heart, first? I answer: Howbeit they be in thine heart
together, in one moment of time, yet the one in order, is before the other: And
first, Jesus Christ takes possession in thine heart, ere the love of the
Father be in thine heart: And because Jesus Christ is entered into thine
heart, therefore the love of the Father is into thine heart. Before Christ came
into thine heart, there was never grace in it: all the grace, all the peace,
and all the joy, and all the comfort that is in the heart of a sinner,
follows on Christ: Christ comes first, and then all grace comes in after
him: He is never him alone, but peace, joye, and gladness accompany him: then
follows that joye when he comes. Look Romans 5. verse. 5. he tells us
this order, when he has said, Because, when we were enemies, Christ died for
us: Because Christ died for thee, he loved thee. And think thou, that thou
would feel that love of God, if Christ had not died for thee, and except
thou embrace in thine heart that death, by a lively faith? Go to experience.
What is he, or she, that will feel that love of God, that endless comfort,
or that peace, or joye, who belieueth not in Jesus Christ? It shall pass thy
power, to feel any joye, before thou feel that Christ died for thee.
Therefore, I beseech thee, gripe greedily to Jesus Christ, that he may dwell
in thine heart.

Now ye may ask at me, How is Christ in the heart? Is not Christ bodily
present at the right hand of the Father? How then says he, And I in them?
How can thine heart get him, who is in Heaven? The answer is easy. The
Lord Jesus dwells in the heart of man, and woman, by faith. Belieuest thou in
him? Reaches thine heart through the Heavens, to get a gripe of him? If thou
believe, (as Paul says, Ephesians. 3. verse. 17.) Christ dwells in thee, if
thine heart be set on him, and if thou believe that he died, and is risen for
thee, thou have him dwelling in thee.

And think ye, Brethren, that CHRIST can be in any man or woman, but they
feel him? No, where CHRIST is, he is living in the heart, and that is a
glorious life: If he be in thine heart by faith, there he is living: and as
he is living in thee, so shall he make thee to live another life than this
life: he shall make thee to live an Heavenly and Spiritual life: as the
Apostle PAVL says in the second CHAPTER to the GALATIANS, and the twentieth
VERSE. I live no more, says he, it is not I that lives, I am dead, but JESUS
CHRIST lives in me. And what more? The life that I live in the flesh, and in
this mortal body, I live it by faith in the Son of GOD, who has loved me,
and given his own self for me. Is JESUS CHRIST in thine heart by faith?
look the effects: first, thou art dead, this mortal life is mortified, the
old man is slain. If JESUS CHRIST be in thee, he will slaye this sinful
life: for our life naturally, is but a pudling in sin and wickedness: when
he lives within thee, he bears the rule, and not the old man. And what
more? As he lives within thee, so he gives thee another life, an Heavenly
and a glorious life. He begins within thee that life which thou shall live
with him in the Heavens, where there is no more mortality, nor no corruption.
So, all tends to this, Would thou have life? would thou have grace in
thine heart? would thou feel that unspeakable love in thy vain heart? For
that is a vain heart, which is not reformed, and lies dead in sin, and is
not revived, and quickened with the life of JESUS CHRIST. Would thou have
all this in this life, and in that life everlasting? In a word, Would thou
reign in glory? Strive to get JESUS CHRIST in thine heart; and when thou
have gotten him, keep him well: and if once thou gettest him, thou shall get
one of the most glorious things that ever was; even the love of the Father,
wherein is all sweetness. That love of the Father shall flow down to thee:
and with the same love, wherewith the Father loves the Son, the Father of
IESES CHRIST shall love thee. Well, how comes all grace unto us? Even by
JESUS CHRIST: the Father powers on all grace upon the Son our Head. Now,
he bieng the Head, and we the body, that precious ointment, and fullness of
all grace, which is on him, flows down on us. So that grace is first powered
out on the Son thine Head; and then it flows from the Head, to the members:
so that there is not one member of that body, but it gets a share, though
it were never so sober a member, and if it were but a foot.

Now, blessed is he, or she, that is a member of that body* And blessed is
the soul, that has in it the love of the FATHER, in JESUS CHRIST: To whom,
with the FATHER, and the Holy SPIRIT, be all Honor and Praise, for evermore.

AMEN.
TO THEO DOXA.

printer's or publisher's device A H




