NEVVES FROM ROME, Venice, and Vienna, touching the present proceedinges of the
Turks against the Christians in Austria, Hungary, and Heluetia, otherwise
called Seuenbergh.

Also the true Copy of a Lamentable Petition exhibited in the names of the
afflicted Christians in those parts, to the Christian Kingdoms in the West.

depiction of an armoured knight with feathered helmet, lance, and spurs, on a
horse with plumes

Printed at London by John Danter, for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his
shop adjoining to London Bridge Gate. 1595.

NEVVES FROM ROME, Venice, and Vienna, touching the present proceedinges of the
Turks against the Christians in Austria, Hungary, and Heluetia, otherwise
called Seuenbergh. Also the true Copy of a Lamentable Petition exhibited in
the names of the afflicted Christians in those parts, to the Christian
Kingdoms in the West.
Men's unbelieving hearts hasten too late repentance, and the unwillingness of
Christians either to assist other, gives way for Infidels to insult over all.

Christ's Prophecy is now performde, the days wax worse and worse, and
charity is grown cold: For if mercy had had any government among Christian
men, so many beauteous. Towns, goodly Cities, glorious Kingdoms had not (as
now they are) either been utterly made waste, or suffered the woeful bondage
of Turkish tyranny. The flourishing Churches to which Christ's Apostles writ,
and in which they and the first Fathers of the Church labored, are now the
receptacles of unhallowed multitudes, and only a small corner of the earth
professes Christ. One Christian suffering another to be as easily consumed,
as an idle or envious townesman his neighbor helplesly to be robbed or burned:
Else had not all Asia, some of Affricke, and so much of Europe, suffered so great
and irrecouerable slavish bondage. How many goodly Nations the unbelieving
offspring of Ottoman, have subjected, sufficiently too late experience
expresses, and the purpose of the common enemy to subject the rest, immediate
proof explaineth.

Amurath now Emperor of Turkey, glorying in the usurped seat of the Greekish
Emperre, not long since subjected by Mahomet the son of Amurath his
predecessor, ambitiously by his tyrannous Bassaes incited, has attempted the
affliction of Austria, the unconquered part of Hungary, Poland, Heluetia, and
other Kingdoms neighboring Greece, whose proceedinges since the 25. of
December last, till the middle of January, this small Pamphlet handles.

Rab is a town near Donow in Hungary, which in the end of the last Harvest,
the Turks violently after long siege entered, sparing neither age nor sex, but
making the Infants days equal with the aged Elders, both young and old by
their cruelty at once perished. The winning of which place has not smally
weakened the other Forts of Hungaria, in the Christians power. After they had
tyrannously insulted over Rab, they immediately bent their forces against
Comar, the people of which City assisted by the hand of God, and resolved
rather to die than subject themselves to the slavery of Infidels, valiantly
defended themselves, and violently compelled, the huge multitude of the Turks
to raise their siege and retire to Rab which they had lately taken. From sundry
parts of Christendom since the 25. of December these certain and
unreprovable intelligences have been sent: videlicet, it is certified from
Rome the last of January.

The Emperors Majesty's Legates had audience before the Pope, who desired a
subsidy should be levied on the Clergy, for the cutting off of an Arm of
the River of Donow, that falls in by Comar, thereby not only to defend the said
town and the parts thereabouts, but also to hinder the Turks from intercourse
to Oouen: and besides it would be a mean to spare many Soldiers that must be
employed in these parts. To this the Pope condiscended; with promise to aid
the Emperor with all he might. Iustiniano is appointed the Collector.

The same time also it was certified that the great Master of Malta was
reconciled, being authorized from the Pope to be accountable to no Estate.

It is also concluded, that the Prince of Seuenbergh, otherwise called
Heluetia, upon whose burden the first war between the Turks and Christians
must needs lie, shall have 20000. Crowns monthly to maintain the war, and
if (which God forbid) he be expulsed Heluetia, he shall have some dominion
allotted him in the Emperie and 200000. crowns yearly.

Moreover at Rome the same day arrived this news, that the Archbishop of
Toledo in Spain, being ninety four years of age deceased, and left behind
him a Million of ready money, half a Million in debts, and six hundred
thousand Crowns in Plate, Roabes, costly apparel and other Jewels: Making
five Executors; of which the King of Spain is principal, who has obtained
that his money should be employed to the Churches use, seeing the said
Archbishop had bequeathed nothing to his kindred, whom belike he provided for
in his life time.

Alberto the Cardinal succeeding in the Bishopric and possessing these
goods, has granted half of them to be employed against the Turks.

From Venice the 13. of January.
LEtters came from Syria, certifiying, the Sycalla or Admiral with the Galleys
are come to Constantinople, and that a great Armatho is providing against
Hungary by Sea.

It is likewise certefied to that state of Venice from Halow, by reason of the
great frost and snow, the Cytrons, Lymons, Oringes, and such fruit were all
spoiled, that would be great impeachment to the Turks provision.

Also the eleventh of January there came a Post from Paris to Venice, that
certified them of the French Kings hurt: and the same Post said, that as he
passed on his way by Lions, he heard of some commotion at Marsilles, whence
sundry Noble men are fled.

From Vienna the 11. of January.
AT five of the Clock that day in the morning, came these ill news: that
eight hundred Turks some on foot but most part horse, came from Rab to saint
Georgen, and that the fifth day of this said month the Turks had taken Prug
nere Leyten, and burned the Cities and Country of the Lord Herryth, making
excursions within eight miles of Vienna, murdring the people, or making them
slaves, robbing, spoiling and burning the whole Country, and threatening
within few days to gather head against Vienna.

Likewise the said 11. of January, a Governor of horsemen (being in a Hold
hard by) required to have aid: and the Magistrates of Vienna have taken order
that every Citizen (according to his ability) should keep a proportion of
horse and footmen, till other preparation may be made.

The Grave Hardigh being taken prisoner by the Turks, sought to break
prison, his brother having provided a ladder of roapes for his escape, and
forty horse for his rescue: but it was discovered, and they all slain or
taken.

Three sudden fires have been lately in Vienna, yet by Gods great mercy but
one house at a time burnt: nevertheless the fearful multitude conster it to
be an ominous presage of sad misfortune.

From Prage the 10. of January.
THis day the Emperors Ambassadors returned to Prage, from the King of
Poland, with this answer: That the Polonians would willingly assist the
Emperor, upon condition the Emperor would do as much for him, if the Turk
should move war upon Polonia: of which to be resolved, he requires the
Princes Electors, to send their Ambassadors to his Parliament holden in
Polonia.

Maximilian Archduke of Austria, intends to be General against the Turks.
Charles of Mansfield will come with 3000. horsemen, one thousand of the^ being
bard, and two Regiments of foot of 6000, are promised out of the lower
Germany to be sent into Hungary with all speed.

This tenth of January a Legate came to the Emperor at Prage, with four
demands from Charles the Duke: first for necessaries concerning his marriage,
and relief for three years, till the wars were somewhat quieted in Hungary.
Secondly, that he be taken as a Sessor or Prince in the Emperie, and
incorporated in the Kingdom of Hungary, conditioning, that if he died without
issue male, his lands being Moldau, Walachia, and Bulgaria, shall come to the
succeeding Kings of Hungary. Thirdly, that the Emperor would send him four
thousand horsemen at his proper charge. Fourthly, that the Emperor should not
enter into peace with the Turk, without his knowledge. But what the Emperor
resolves to answer is not yet known.

From Vienna the 6. of January.
THe last night in the evening Syfrid van Colneyt sent his servant to Vienna,
certifiyng the State that the Turks and Tartars in great numbers were come over
the passage at Altenbergh, and fired a town called saint Peter's, and remained
that night at saint John's. But the day before they were at saint Nicholas,
Sturne, Cabastain, Somerain, Zuidenbergh, and other neighboring places
between Altenbergh and Prage, and he feared, they had taken some of those
places, spoiled the people, and hazarded Altenbergh, by reason there was but
two hundred men at Arms therein, the enemy being twenty thousand strong,
and very well furnished with all munition.

Presently the same day came another messenger, certifiyng that the enemy is
come to Prage and Men eshoffen, firing many towns, killing multitudes of
people, and taking diverse prisoners, so that Altenbergh is in great danger to
be taken away, as Rab.

More from Vienna the 8. of January.
THE second of this month came the Ambassadors from Seuenbergh, the chief
man's name being Bapteri Istuan, accompanied with them of Moldau, and were
lodged at the Lord of Westernahers, next day they had audience before
Maximilian the Emperors brother.

About four a clock in the afternoon they came to John de Medices, and the
fourth day iourneyed to Prage to the Emperor.

Two days after came tydinges that fifteen thousand Turks were come to Rab
with intention to take Altenbergh, which they may easily do, by reason the
rivers are so extremely frozen, and the help so small.

Presently after came worse news, that four and twenty thousand Turks were
entered Austria: wherefore that evening every thirtith man was chosen in that
City, beside the quarter of Vienna Wald, who were mustred the seventh of this
month at Brug under Leyther.

By the last Parliament, all things stand as before, but the enemy grows very
strong, our soldiers for want of pay being unwilling to serve: Certain of
the General of Seeneberghs soldiers mutening for want of pay, are gone upward
into the Emperie, and will make us have a very ill name: The money which they
received, they left word should pay for their horses.

One of my Lord the Dukes servant, that was sent to the Lord Haunce Wererne,
General for the Margraue of Bourgan toward Nysadell, brought tidings, that the
Turks and Tartars did great harm thereabout, none resisting them, the people
only determining of flight.

From Presbergh, the last of December.
THe Ambassadors of Seuenbergh yesterday about twelve a clock arrived here,
and immediatelye went toward Fishau.

The Spies bring certain tidings, that the Turks gather in many thousands
about Rab, meaning to spoil the Country about Vienna, for whom they make here
great provision.

The 25. of this month the Turks set forward toward Seinneyt in Hungary, but
the people of the Country so fiercely assailed them, that there remaind above
an hundred dead on the place, beside a number that were drowned in flight. Some
Turkish prisoners that were there taken, confessed, that the Bassaes purpose
immediately after Newyeares day to do some great exployt.

This last of December, one of our Ambassadors came from Seuenbergh, certifying
us the Prince of Seuenbergh greatly endamageth the Turk, taking from him one
Hold after another. And that he has three goodly Camps, one lead by Herbart
Michael beyond the Donow, to hinder the Turks passage to Oouen: the other by
Istuan Ferran in Lucar, near Tamusweer: the third by Cornus Jasper from
Therneyt: to whom are adjoined of the upper Hungarians and Greekish Soldiers,
fifteen hundred men at arms. What their expedition will sort unto, is only
in the hands of God: and of their success we look shortly to hear from
Cassau.

From Cassau, December the 28.
THe Turks and Tartars gather daily in great multitudes about Iula, lead by
the Bassa of Tamusweer, and the Bassa of Selnicke, desirous to do some service
(while the Teysca and other waters are frosen) against Tartasail by Teyny.
Against whom the Christians on our side make head, looking for certain
knowledge which way they intend to take, and being assured of their march, we
will with them of Seuenbergh meet them, committing our selves to God, in whose
quarrel we willingly lay down our lives, hoping he will defend his
distressed and afflicted flock.

More from Cassau the last of December.
THe Turks and Tartars perreyuing our intention to join with the
Seuenberghers, are for all their great multitudes, fearfully retired.
Nevertheless doubting their sudden return, we keep very careful watch.

The Confession of a Tartarian Horseman taken amongst other Prisoners.
depiction of an armoured knight with feathered helmet, lance, and spurs, on a
horse with plumes

FIrst he says, although the Turkish Emperor commanded them to winter in
Hungaria, they notwithstanding went forward, hearing their own Country was
afflicted, and sending sixteen thousand men before, they were all slain and
taken by the Christians of Seuenbergh.

2 Also he says, that the King of Tartars son, with the rest of the Army
lie about Tamusweer and Wesenbergh, and that of the Tartars only two thousand
shall remain there.

3 Also he says, that in the last skirmish three hundred Tartars, and one
hundred Turks, all horsemen, were sent to learn if the river of Rabnitz were
hard frozen to pass or no, but what they have done he knows not, for by the
stumbling of his horse he was taken prisoner: but he thinks they meant to set
upon Capurar.

4 Fourthly, he knows not what number of men were at Cappa, but at Rab there
were some fifteen thousand.

5 Fifthly he says, that no more Tartars must come down, but those that are
there, are commanded to set upon Erlaw.

6 Sixthly he faith, all those Turks that came last from Sea, being about
fifty thousand, are all perished.

7 Seventhly he says, the Turk has made peace with the Persian, but because
the Souldans son is dead at Perto, he knows not whether the peace will
hold.

8 Eighthly he says, he knows not whether the Souldan will hold war
against the Georgeani or no.

9 Ninthly he says, At Comar the Christians slew nine hundred Ianissaries:
but at Rab he knows not how many were slain, only he remembers that some
days three, some days four, and some days five hundred perished.

10 Lastly he says, The men of Comar so valiauntly resisted, that the Turks
were not able to continue their siege, but were forced to retire bark again
to Rab.

The true Copy of a Lamentable Petition exhibited in the names of the
afflicted Christians in the East parts, to the Christian Kingdoms in the West.
IF either humane pity (naturally grafted in man's heart) to compassionate the
oppressed, or the sweet bands of Christian Love wherein you and we (members
of one head) are mutually bound either to other: have any power to entreat
your hearty prayers or speedy help: we humbly beg the one, and beseech the
other.

You happy Princes of peopled Kingdoms, and blessed people of those happy
Princes: commiserate (for CHRIST'S cause) our miserable distress, that have no
day of happiness, no night of rest: but fear within, and terror without, dimmes
the brightness of our day, and doubles the darkness of our night. We hear,
(which adds heaviness to our grief) that civil wars, private quarrels,
and unchristian malice, weakneth the Arm of Christendom, that should be
strengthened among you. Alas, what need ye (like the earth-bred brethren)
maliciously let cut each others blood? when ye have a whole world of enemies to
war against: and we and you in all but a corner of the earth to oppose our
selves against their cruelty.

We hear how you provoke (as we have done) by the excess of sin, Gods
wrathful and heavy vengeance. Let our pride, be a president for you to learn
humblenes: our neglect of God, a warning that you leave such negligence: our
wrath, envy, and avarice, a mean to make you mild, loving and liberal: our
sloth, wantonness and excess, to increase your diligence, chastity and
temperance. Now for our rich array we put on sackcloath, our beauteous Ladies
sit with teare-distained faces, our Virgins sing not the Hymns of gladness,
but of sorrow, our Old-men faint feebly in the street, and our Yongmen prepare
themselves to venture their precious lives in open field,

Dear Christian Brethren, turn turn your pitying eyes upon our prostrate
misery. Remember the willingness of your forefathers in that great Expedition
to Jerusalem, under the leading of Godfrey Duke of Bulloigne. Then Princes,
Noblemen, and well disposed people, came in person from the utmost Western
Kingdoms, even from England, France, Netherland, and Scotland: the women gave
the soldiers their bracelets of gold and silver, yea, poor servants offered of
their small wages to mainetaine that holy War. Ah, where is that pity,
care, true love and mercy now become? The Turkish and unbelieving Enemies are
come by many Kingdoms far nearer your homes, and your commiseration is by
many degrees farther off. Let Antioch, the first City wherein the name of
Christians began (now made a Synagogue of unbelieving Infidels) move ye to
compassion. The Candlestickes are removed from the Churches in Asia as S. John
prophesied: the light of Christianity is wholly extinct among them. In Syria
Christ's Spouse has lost her beauty. In the Emperie of Greece, Kingdoms of
Epyrus, Lystria, Crete, Cyprus, and other the Mediterranean Nations, CHRIST had
(and that within these few years) his beloved Vineyard, planted, tended, well
dressed, compassed about. But now the Turks (like wild Boares are entered, the
Vineyard is wasted. In stead of wine, the earth (in all those and diverse other
kingdoms) is drunk with Christian blood: and there is no face of
Christianity left, no outward Church. Let that part of our Kingdoms already
lost, and the rest now hazarding, win ye to some compassion.

But it may be, because the Turk is far off, you think he never can have
power to hurt ye, you and your children shall be safe. Be not so gross
conceipted. Consider, we had Fathers that gathered for us, so had the Greeks,
and other the forenamed Nations: but now their wealth and ours lies open to the
Enemy. We had houses, but Turks posses them: Palaces, but they are spoiled:
Churches, but they are profaned: Cities, but they are wasted: and some more we
have, but how long they shall be ours, we little know. And yet within these few
years, we were thrice farther off from danger than you now are. Neither
flatter your selves that your Countries are populous, your Cities strong, your
Kingdoms fenced with the Sea: they and we had peopled Kingdoms, fenced
Cities, sea-walled Islands, but all was vain, they were singled one by one,
their neighbors denied them help, and first they, then those deniers perished.
Such will our case be, if we be not aided: such will yours be, if ye do not
aid us.

Besides, there is a rumor spread in some parts of Christendom, how the
Turks are just in keeping faith and promise. O fond and idle belief: What
faith can they keep that have no faith?

Such faith as not long since they kept with that noble Christian Prince of
Cyprus, the Turkish Emperor himself passing his word unto him. When that most
Princely Christian Warrior, had defended Famagosta till all munition and
vittaile failed: he and his small company yet worthily resolving, intended
dearly to sell their lives, and stood valiantly to defend the breaches. The
Turk seeing their resolution, offered the Prince, that if he would surrender
the City, himself and the soldiers, with their Arms, weapons, and colors
displaied, the Princess with her children, the other women, people, and
children of the City with bag and baggage should pass quietly through the
Turks Army, and be transported to what Haven in Christendom they desired.
The Prince accepted these conditions, the Turkish Emperor confirmed them with
an: oath: but (like a false miscreaunt) when they were issued, he compelled
the Prince and the able men to bear burdens of earth upon their shoulders to
repair the breaches: then commanded the Princess, her children, the women
and other weak people (after many shameful abuses) to be cruelly tortured to
death. Then stripped they the Soldiers and chayned them for slaves. Lastly
they pulled out the woeful Princes eyes, punched his warlike body full of
hoales, and hanged him on the top mast of their Admiral Galley, more to afflict
his poor subjects that rowed there as slaves.

Such faith will they keep as with the last Emperor of Greece they did: whom
(after many friendly seeming Ambassades) they suddenly besieged in his chief
City Constantinople, and in the chief Gate of that City, he and his children
were found mangled with many wounds, and trampled with their horses feet.

Such faith will they keep as lately they did with us of Hungary: Having
taken certain yongmen of noble Families. We labored for their liberty to
the Bassa of Buda. Their ransom was set down, and license granted for their
friends to bring it. The Bassa himself received it: and then tyrannouslie to
several stakes he tied the miserable young Gentlemen naked, and in presence of
their friends caused their bodies to be sliced with sharp knives, the flesh
cast unto hungry dogs, and the dead carcasses delivered their sorrowful
friends for the ransom they had paid.

This is the Turkish faith, this their vow, this their religion: let no
Christian State believe them, nor for lucre hold league with them, for they do
await time first to destroy us, then to extirpate them.

What should we say that you cannot conceive, look on your Cities, Palaces,
Fields, Meadows, walks, pleasant Gardens, think ours were like yours, but
now are nothing but receptacles of sorrow. Look on your wives and beauteous
daughters, and remember that we have such (though not so fortunate) yours safe,
ours subject to rauishment and spoil. Look on your sons and forget not
ours, of whom no small number are already with their woeful fathers chained in
Turkish slavery, the rest opposing themselves against their tyranny. And then
remember it is in his quarrel we strive, that has promised to reward a cup
of cold water given in his name: much more reward again with ten fold
blessings, your Christian mercy and pity toward us.

To him that is able to help as well by one as many, we commit ourselves: and
commend the consideration of our miserable estate to your Christian Charities.

From Prage, the 13, of January. Your poor afflicted Christian Brethren of
Boheme, Hungary, Austria, Polonia, and Heluetia.

FINIS.
Printed at London by John Danter, for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his
shop adjoining to London Bridge Gate. 1595.


