Aue Caesar. God save the King. The joyful Echoes of loyal English hearts,
entertayning his Majesty's late ariuall in England.

With an Epitaph upon the death of her Majesty our late Queen.

Our weeping eyes do bath Elizaes Tomb,
Our loving hearts yield James her Princely room.
LONDON, Printed for W F. and G L. and are to be sold in Popes-hed* Ally near
the Exchange. 1603.

Aue Caesar.
EVen as the Sun from forth a watery dowd,
That late well ny had drowned the world with r^ine:
Breaks with his brightness through that lable s^^^wd
Drying the moisture from earth's face again,
Reviving that by his kind Influence,
Which had decayed by Waters violence,
So Virtues Sun, great Monarch of these ^sles,
Thy splendant rays have wrought the like effect;
Our tears thou have converted into smiles,
To greater loves then ere we could expect:
The wit o'man, man's weak unable wit,
Admires the power of Heaven in working it.
That hand which came unto us with a rod,
And took away our peace-preseruing Queen:
That Scepter-giuer, Crowne-disposing God:
In doubt, and dread, his mercy placed between:
And where our sins for vengaunce, vengaunce cried
Compassion laid the sword of Wrath aside.
As Esaw wished for Isaacks dying day,
And said, the days of sorrowing are at hand,
My Father dead, I will my Brother slay:
So did the bloody Esawes of this land,
Whose plots to more then wishes did extend,
For many ways they did attempt her end.
But never could the Deui'll by his persuasion,
Effect his purpose to her overthrow:
Not Poison, Dagger, Pistol, nor invasion,
Could make days short, where heaven would years bestow.
He that of life does number every hour,
Will put life's lymits in no humane power.
Death came unto her having Gods Commission,
That she to heaven her progress must commence:
For to this world she came upon condition,
To leave the same when God did call from hence*
Her Kingdom here, was varying by succession,
But that is a Kingdom endless in possession.
It were ungrateful to forget the peace,
The plenty, and the great prosperity:
The manifold great blessings and increase,
In four and forty years felicity,
Under the Scepter of our gracious Princess,
Our peace-preseruing, world admired Empress.
If David mourned for the death of Saul,
And did the people thereunto prepare?
Have not we cause to become mourners all
For her, with whom King Saul was no compare;
Although some virtues in him might be found,
They were small Stars; her Sunshine did abound.
In Scarlet he did Isreal's Daughters cloth,
And ornaments of Gold unto them gave:
But she adorned soul and body both,
With richest clothing that a Realm can have.
There is a Garment has a Wedding name,
Most happy guest that can put on the same.
That glorious habit has her soul put on,
And in the Court of Heu'n is resident:
Where all sing praise to him sits on the throne,
The King of Kings, and God omnipotent
There rest fair Soul; thy Body here abide,
Thy fame fly through the world both far and wide.
An Epitaph on the death of her most Royal Majesty, our late Queen.
SAcred Celestial Deities Divine,
Mortall's that do proceed of humane line,
All you that know what griefs and sorrows be,
Come and teare-wash an E^p^e^e I ombe with me.
Melpomene thou tragike doleful Muse,
Put on some black, which thou did never use,
And in the saddest Sable can be had;
Let all thy Sisters in the like be clad:
There liquid Pearls in plenty we must borrow,
Because it is no common usual sorrow.
The Phoenix of the World to Heaven is flowne,
And of her Ashes there remeyneth none:
The Pelican that did her young-ones good,
Has yielded all her vital streams of blood.
Cynthia that gave the World a glorious shine,
Shall never more be seen with mortal eyes:
The fairest Rose, the sweetest Princely Flower,
Lies withered now by Death's coold nipping power.
You spirits of the highest Element,
You heavenly sparks of wit, with one consent
Conioyne, and from the treasury of Arts,
Give honor to the Queen of good-desartes:
The reverent Lady, Nurse of all our Land,
That swayed a Sword like Iudeth's, in her hand.
The Debora that judged Israel*
Whose blessed actions God did prosper well:
She that did never purpose wrong to any,
Though injuries to her, were done by many.
She that no longer rule on earth did crave,
Then best, and most desired, she might have*
She that with Mercyes wings adorned her Throne,
And yet with Justice balance sat thereon.
Report her Praise to all have ears to hear it,
Sound out her Fame as far as Fame can bear it.
Let from the Earth, her fame to Heaven sound,
Let from the Heaven, her fame to Earth rebounde:
Let through the Ocean waves pronounce the same,
And whiriing winds be agentes of her Fame:
Let Heaven, Air, the Ocean, and the Earth,
With Echoes sound blessed Elizabeth.
Yea let the very Stones where she shall lie,
Tell ages following, this of ours gone by:
Within our marble arms we do enclose
The virgin Queen, the White and Red-crown'd Rose,
That ruled this Realm so happy, forty four,
As never Prince did reign the like before.
From Men, with Saints she lives in high esteem,
Seated in bliss, which best does her esteem.
S. R.

STay Sorrows there about Elizaes Tomb,
From whence, with hopeful hearts we now retire:
Let Grief yield place* and give our Joys some rome
To entertain the King of our desire,
JAMES first of England, and of Scotland sixth,
He has our mourninges with all comforts mixed.
Our honorable true Nobility,
Most high renowned Worthies of the Land,
Have showed their loyal true fidelity,
Conioyn'd by God, as well in heart as hand:
These are careful proppes and pillars of our Nation.
Have given Caesar right, by Proclamation.
And who is he that does not give consent,
With hart-pronounced sound, God save the King:
Unless it be some Villian malecontent,
That mischief to his Country seeks to bring:
He that repineth at the Lords Anointed,
Like to a Traitor let him be disioynted.
Never did King set foot on English ground,
With more applaw'd then our renowned James:
For as great joys within our hearts abound,
As ever were contay'd in all his Realms:
Our loves to him the eyes of heaven does see,
Sound, as the subjects should to Sovereign be.
Not great King Henry, second of that name,
When with his royal Navy he did sail,
The rude and barbarous Irishmen to tame,
Where most victoriously he did prevail,
Subduing them under his Scepters length,
By honorable valor, Martial strength.
Nor his son Richard, Lyon-harted King,
That deeds of Arms in other lands pursew'd
Could cause more joy from peoples hearts to spring,
When they returned from Countries they subdew'd:
In entertayning them to Englands shore,
Where tongues did show what hearts the subjects bore.
Nor yet fifth Henry's coming out of France,
From those high deeds that there he undertook:
Nor's Father, whom desartes did so advance,
The peoples dear beloved Bullenbrooke,
Could have more love ready prepared to meet them,
Or more affection, pressing forth to greet them.
Their welcomes were from wars they had in hand,
Which loss of blood, and valor caused to cease:
Thy welcomes are from out a quiet Land,
Enlarging us a wondrous league of peace.
O welcome Prince of Peace and quietness:
The God of Peace thee and thine issue bless.
Most sacred Time, that with the World began,
And art ordayn'd Gods special Instrument,
To deal in all affairs concerning Man,
Numb*ring each minute that on earth is spent:
Thou that make expedition with the wind,
To fly, and run; with Eagle, and with Hind.
Lay down thy Sickle thou have in thy hand,
Because thou must perform a nimble place:
Turn quick about thine Hower-glasse of sand,
Run for thy life to entertain his Grace:
Make speed good Time in this, to do us pleasure,
For all the Realm does wait upon thy leisure.
Linger not by the way, to harken news,
But let thy charge be rightly understood:
Flying reports, let fools and Idiots use,
Tale-carriers thou do know were never good:
If any such thou chance to ouer-take,
A base account of them thou art to make.
I know thou know how to salute our Prince,
That have bin guide of Kings into their Thrones:
That office thou have well performd long since,
Unto all Gods elected holy-ones:
The chifest thing we have in expectation,
Is, that thou hie him to his Coronation.
Our Nobles all, to their immortal fame,
(Deserving Peers, of Honors best desartes)
Are duetifull prepared for the same,
With firm consent of all true English hearts,
Who from their souls unfeignedly do pray,
That even this present, were crownation day.
The City with the loyal Magistrate,
The Mayor, the Shriefes, the Aldermen, the rest,
Have faithful welcomes to him consecrate,
And all endeavor: love may be expre'st,
Yet can no triumph nor external show,
Describe aright the inward love they owe.
For often love abounding in the mind,
From center of the heart, which does contain it,
Cannot so absolute a passage find,
As in an outward fullness may explane it:
Loves treasury has very seldom bin
As soon laid out, as it is gathered in.
Descend you Muses from Parnassus hill;
Bring Art in librall hands, and now bestow-it:
Let every one present a flowing Quill,
In honor of our famous Kingly Poet:
And as the cheerful Lark does mounting sing,
So eleuate the honor of the King.
Jove add a length of years unto his days,
That long in peace, by us he be enjoyed.
Apollo tune thy Music to his praise,
To better use it cannot be imployd.
Sound Triton through the Seas vast kingdame, sound
That Englands King is coming to be Croun'd.
Ver, strew the Ground with thy delightful green,
For in thy season does our Monarch come:
Be all the Fields in Summers liuerie seen:
Attire the Trees, and let the Plants have some:
Be bount full and forward gentle Spring,
Thou can not welcome a more worthy King.
Above all Trees, be kindest to the Rose,
For it is a Flower of a princely price:
There is a White and Red together grows,
I think the Plant came (first) from Paradise:
Let it be watered with some heavenly shower,
For (on my life) it bears a blessed flower.
Blessed chiefly in the graft Earl Richmond made,
For till his time, those Roses were at strife,
He in a happy hour all quarrels stayed,
Taking fourth Edwards daughter to his wife:
So did the Houses both in one unite,
Mixing the kingly Red, with princely White.
A glorious Arbor from this root has sprung,
Of sweetest Roses, crowned with Diadames:
From Prince to Prince, the branch has run along,
And now the noble Flower is called King James.
Lord we entreat thee for our Countries good,
Grant that his stock may never want a bud.
Let Angels pitch their Tents about his Throne:
Be thou his strength, his trust, his God, his guide:
Grant that his days may be like Solomon,
A mirror unto all the world beside,
That these which hear his fame far of to ring,
Like Sa^aes Queen, may all admire our King.
FINIS.

