THE MYSTICAL MARRIAGE.

Experimental Discoveries of the heavenly Marriage between a Soul and her
Savior.

By F. ROVS.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse-street. 1631.

TO THE BRIDE THE LAMBS WIFE.

A REASON OF THIS WORK.
IF any man fearful of waste do ask, To what end serves this labor? I
answer, To the maine end, Gods glory by man's edification. And to this I think
it conduces many ways.

First, by the fitness of it to all times and seasons, either of prosperity or
adversity.

For if the times be joyful, this subject brings the best joy with it, and
enables us to rejoice with them: Yea it rectifies, amends, and exalts our
joys; for upon an earthly it sets a crown of heavenly joy. And indeed
without this joy, we may say to joy, Thou art mad, and to laughter, What is it
that thou do?

But if the times prove sad and dangerous, by pestilence, famine, sword, or
other calamities, this Doctrine brings strong consolation, even stronger than
all sorrows and discomforts. For our Communion with Christ is a fastening of
the soul to a mighty and impregnable Rock that makes her steadfast, even
against the gates of hell. By this Communion we are made Temples of the holy
Ghost, the very Comforter himself; and by him there is a Sanctuary made within
us, into which the soul may fly for rest, safety and comfort amid all fears
and dangers: For into this Sanctuary the Avenger may not enter. There is a
chamber within us, and a bed of love in that chamber, wherein Christ meets and
rests with the soul, and the force of friends, or men, either dares not or
cannot break in, to disturb the rest of Christ with the soul, nor of the
soul with Christ. It is an undeniable Axiom, We are more than conquerours
through him that loves us. An omnipotent lover gives an excessively
conquering, and unconquerable safety. And for this safety of us and our joy, we
have also the immediate word of the lover himself; I will see you again, and
your heart shall rejoice, and your joy shall none take from you. No wonder then
if the Disciple beloved of this Lover do tell us, that writing of this
communion, he writes, that our joy may be full: 1 Ioh. 1.
for in this communion stands the fullness of joy, both for soundness,
measure, and safety.

And surely with these last times of the world it has too great a fitness;
For it has been foretold that in these times the love of many should wax
cold: and what fitter remedy is there for love when it has taken cold, than
to kindle a fire to it; even that spiritual fire, which issues from the
spirit that baptiseth with fire?

A second advancement to edification is this, that that it presents to the view
of the world some bunches of grapes brought from the land of promise, to show
that this land is not a mere imagination, but some have seen it, and have
brought away parcels, pledges and earnests of it. In these appears a world,
above the world, a love that passes human love, a peace that passes natural
understanding, a joy unspeakable and glorious, a taste of the chief and
sovereign good.

Neither does the benefit of it rest only in the conviction of the
understanding, but, thirdly, it goes on to the will and affections. It warmes
and draws them, and by them the whole man to partake of the same pledges, and
by the encouragement of these pledges to go on laboriously and constantly to
the possession of the whole. And that as by a borrowed sight men are provoked
to come to tasting so by their own tasting, they may come to a sight of their
own, which only tasting can teach them: But withal that by these foretastes
they may be led on to that fullness, wherewith the soul shall eternally be
satisfied.

Fourthly, it may provoke others of this Nation to bring forth more boxes of
this precious ointment, even of that mystical love which droppeth down from
the Head Christ Jesus, into the souls of the Saints, living here below. For
so the house of God shall be filled with the savor of his ointments, and we
know, that because of the savor of his ointments, the Virgins love him. And
loving him, they cry, Draw me, and I will run after thee: So the more savor
of this ointment, the more love of Christ, and the more love, the more running
after Christ. But if the number of those who have written on this subject, of
mystical and experimental Divinity, be told, I think this work will not be
found supernumerary.

THE MYSTICAL MARRIAGE.
I. The soul seeks a Husband, and finds him.
I WAS first breathed from heaven, and I came from God in my Creation; I am
divine and heavenly, in my original, in my essence, in my character, and
therefore my happiness must be divine and heavenly: For to a divine and heavenly
essence, can agree no other but a divine and heavenly happiness. I am a
spirit, though a low one, and God is a Spirit, even the highest one; and God
who is a Spirit, is the fountain of this spirit. Where should a low spirit
find happiness but in the highest Spirit? and where should a created Spirit
seek happiness but in the Spirit that created it? Wherefore being a Spirit I
will fasten my self on a spiritual happiness, and this spiritual happiness
I will look for in no other, but in the first, and best Spirit, beyond whom
there is neither good, nor being.

Then what have thou to do O soul, any longer among these gross, thick, and
bodily things here below, to cast thy love on them, or to seek happiness in
them? what are they to thee? or what agreeableness is there between thy
purity, and their grossness? The body that lives by breathing the thin
element of air, may as well live in the bottom of the thick water, as thou
can live, continue, much less better thy Being, by sucking these gross and
bodily Creatures. Thy being is of a higher and purer nature, and therefore thy
well-being must be fetched from something that is higher and purer than they.
The maine use of them is to serve the body, which is some kin to their
grossness, but remember that the body it self is to serve the soul, and
what base felicity must that be, which she shall find in her servants servant?
Much more reasonable were it for the soul to fetch her well-being from some
being higher, and better than her self, (for such only can better her,) and
withal to lift up the body to the participation of the souls high and
spiritual happiness, (for there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual
body) then that the body should draw down the soul to the gross and
transitory things that are given to serve the body, in the bodies service of
the soul. And thus may man be perfectly happy, the soul a spirit by union
with the highest Spirit, and the body by union with the soul, united also to
that Spirit.

And now the soul is resolved of her choice, for she has fixed her love on
that Spirit, which is the true object of the love of spirits. But even that
excellency, which draws her love, awaketh her fear, and beholding admirable
purity and majesty, together with her own impurity and lowness, she is moved
at once both to run to happiness, and to fly from it. She stands
distracted, and in this distraction asks; Will God indeed dwell with men?
and will the highest Spirit who inhabiteth eternity, and cannot abide iniquity,
dwell with low spirits that are defiled, and be full of impurity? Who shall
dwell with the devouring fire, and who shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

But the Lord himself speaks to her, and says, Fear not, for thy maker is
thine husband, Esaias 54.
(the Lord of Hosts is his Name) and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the
God of the whole earth. It is the glory of the greatest spirit to bless the
lesser spirits, as it is the happiness of the lesser to be blessed by the
greatest. Fullness is glorified most by filling the greatest emptiness, and
majesty by succouring greatest infirmity. As for thy impurity, true it is that
thou art indeed too unclean to touch God in an immediate unity; but there is a
pure counterpart of thy nature, and that pure humanity is immediately knit to
the purest Deity. And by that immediate union, thou may come to a mediate
union. For the Deity, and that humanity being united, make one Savior, Head and
Husband of souls; and thou being married to him who is God, in him art also
one with God. He one by a personal union, thou one by a mystical. And being
thus united and married to him, his spirit flows into thy spirit, and the
sap of the Deity sheds it self into the soul. For as man and wife in a
corporal marriage, are one flesh, so in this spiritual and mystical
marriage, Christ and his spouse are one spirit. The spirit of Christ entering
into our spirits, lays in them an immortal seed, and from thenceforth those
whom he found impure, he makes pure; even pure in heart, so that they may see
God. The Son of God so loved the souls of men, that he would make them a
wife, and marry them. And that he might make this wife fit to be brought into
his Fathers house, he left his Father to come to his wife, that he might
cleanse her from spots and blemishes, and present her pure and glorious to his
Father. By his precious blood he purges her from her guilt, and by his spirit
he purifieth her from her uncleanness; and both of these he bestows on her
in his marriage with her. And then the soul thus washed, has boldness to
approach unto God, through her husband, the Son of God, who has loved her,
and given himself for her, and given himself unto her. For God beholds her,
and she beholds God, as one with his Son, even as his Sons wife.

Then draw near O soul to this husband of souls, the Lord is the spirit that
marieth spirits, and makes them one spirit with him in a knot of eternal
blessedness. Clear up thine eye, and fix it on him as upon the fairest of men,
the perfection of spiritual beauty, the treasure of heavenly joy, the true
object of most fervent love, and inflamed affections: and accordingly fasten on
him, not thine eye only, but thy mightiest love, and hottest affections. Look
on him so, that thou may lust after him, for here it is a sin, not to
look that thou may lust, and not to lust having looked. For the spirit has
his lust also; Gal. 5.17.
it lusts against things contrary to it, and it lusts for things
connaturall to it. Accordingly it lusts against the flesh; but it lusts
after spiritual objects; whereof Christ Jesus is the chiefest. Let thy spirit
then look and long, and lust for this Lord who is the spirit, the chiefest
spirit; let it cleave to him, let it hang about him, and never leave him till
he be brought into the chambers of the soul. Yea tell him resolutely thou will not leave him until thou here a voice in thy soul, saying; My
wellbeloved is mine, and I am my wellbeloveds. To this end be still gazing on
him, and still calling on him; Kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth; Yea kiss
my soul with such a kiss of thy spirit, that they may be no longer two, but
one spirit: say to him whom have I in heaven but thee, and whom have I desired
on earth besides thee? My soul thirsts, and pants for thee the living God.
Tell him that thou art sick of love. Vex him with Importunity, and put him
out of hope of ease, (as the widow did the Judge) but only by satisfiing thy
desires. It is the right-voyce of the spirit, I found him whom my soul loves,
Cant. 3.4.
I held him and would not let him go. If then thou have found him with thine
eye, hold him with thine heart, and wind thy affections round about him. And
if he see thee all on flame with love, and obstinate in Importunity by love, he
who is love, cannot deny the importunity of love. The bowels of love in him,
melt at the sound of love in thee, as one string danceth at the sound of
another agreeing with it. He was great with love before thou louedst him, and
he looked but for a love to draw his love from him. He was great with spirit,
and did but look for spirits, that by love would draw some spirit from him.
And now when his love meets with thine, Ioh. 14.21
his love joyneth with thine; when his spirit meets with thine, his spirit
powers it self out into thine; he is joined to thee, and thou art one spirit
with him, his spirit and thine being united and mingled in a blessed communion.

II. The soul has but one husband at once.
THere is a law in heaven, that the heavenly Bride may at one time have but one
Husband. The first marriage on earth was a pattern of this Law, for then God
gave one woman to one man: God that made this first marriage, gave not two
women to one man, nor two men to one woman, but he gave one to one, that two
(not three or four) may be one flesh. Accordingly the heavenly marriage-makers
espouse the Church to one husband, and that they may do so, 2 Cor. 12.2
they do teach, that the former husband must be dead, before the soul can
marry with another. No soul can marry with Christ Jesus, but a widow; for she
must be freed from the law of her old husband by his death, before she can
come to be subject to the law of the new. Her old husband was concupiscence,
to who she was married in carnal generation, and this husband must be slain,
and put off by death, if Christ Jesus the new and true husband of the soul
shall be put on in regeneration. And indeed if the soul will give her
consent, this new and true husband will kill the old, not so much an husband,
as a thief and adulterer: A thief he is, for he has stolen the foul, from
her first Lord and husband, even the Lord that made her; and an adulterer he
is, for he lives with her that belongs to another, and while he lives with
her, he keeps her not for love, but lust: wherefore let the soul give her
consent to his death, that thereby her true husband may recover his right in
her, and that she may receive her true husband, and in him, life, liberty, and
felicity.

And indeed she may well be weary of the old, for her living with him is most
unreasonable, most slavish, and most miserable. It is most unreasonable, for
there is no sense in the marriage of a soul with lust. What good can lust do to
a soul? there being no likeness, but a mere contrariety between them: and
we know that things are cherished and augmented by their like, but they are
destroyed by their contraries. The soul is light, and lust is darkness, and
can darkness give any increase of being or wellbeing to light? Yea does not
darkness go about to lessen, to quench and kill light? Again, lust has in
it a venom contrary to goodness, and can evil give any access or addition
of goodness to the soul? Yea this venom has in it a force and power to draw
the will and affections from that sovereign good, which is the true and only
beatificall object of the soul, and to glue and fasten her to objects of
vanity, yea of death and misery. Again, the soul in her substance is a
spirit, and what kindly or natural pleasure or profit can a spiritual essence
receive from gross and fleshly lust? The soul has no savor in the rank and
gross pleasures of the flesh, but they are to her as the onions and garlike of
Egypt to a dainty and delicate taste. Surely so well may the earth lighten the
Sun, and a tempest give rest to the sea, as lust can give light, or life, or
rest or happiness to the soul: but darkness and death, and misery it can and
does give, and so under the shape of an husband it is a cruel enemy and a very
murderer of the soul. And surely he could be no other but a mortal enemy of
the soul, that made such a marriage between the soul and her mortal enemy:
And he had need to be as cunning as malicious, to put a show of reason upon a
match so absurd and unreasonable.

And if in a second place we behold the slavery of the soul in this marriage
with lust, the tears that bewailed the virginity of Iephthahs daughter, are
not sufficient to bewail this slavish marriage. The body commands the soul,
earth heaven, and dust that noble and divine essence which was breathed into
man, even from Gods own mouth, and had his own image imprinted on it. Neither
is it the body of dust only that commands the heavenly soul, but the body it
self being commanded by lust, does command the soul; so is lust the chief
lord both of body and soul; even a certain venom, itch and fury dwelling in
this earth of man. There may be some proportion between the dust which God
turned into a body, and that soul which God made with his breath, though in a
large and remote distance and difference. But between the soul which God made
according to his own image, and this blind and wild lust which God made not
in man, there is no portion or part of proportion, whereupon any right or power
of command may be grounded. Yet in this base and wretched marriage, vile and
odious lust spurs up the soul with his commands, and makes her to trudge up
and down in businesses of darkness, filthiness and wretchedness: The soul is
set on work in things that are no kin to her, no good to her, yea that are
contrary to her being and well-being: For contrary they are to that image of
God which is in her, and consequently contrary to that God whose image this is,
and to who^ this image points and leads her as to her sovereign good. And
thus have we a third mischief of this marriage; even misery annexed to
slavery. For as the image of God in the soul turns the eye and heart of the
soul to look unto God her chief happiness, so lust turns about the eye and
heart of the soul from her happiness; and what can her prospect and object be
then but misery? And if the eye of the soul happen to cast up some glances to
heaven and happiness, yet the heart, even the will and affections are hurried
away by this lust to objects and works of vanity and misery; so that the soul
can only say, I see the better things, and follow the worse; I see happiness,
and run after misery. Thus by slavery she buyeth misery, and slavery it
self being misery, by misery she earneth misery. And indeed is it not the true
misery of an Egyptian bondage, that the soul should be still set on work by
lust in a fiery furnace, yea be beaten and tormented when she does not work,
though her work concern her self nothing, but only to strengthen her own
bondage, and to increase her own misery? And indeed therefore is she kept so
hard at this work, that she may have no leisure to think beyond bondage and
misery. Accordingly if the soul at any time do but lift up her eyes above her
present bondage, to that Lord of life, liberty, and happiness, which would
once have married her, and still makes new offers unto her, this tyrannous
husband like a Taske-master, strikes in deep lashes into her side, and tells
her she is idle, though she thinks on her nearest business, and dearest
happiness. If it be in the morning, there is a bargain of profit imposed on
her, and this lot of brick must be made that day, and about it must the soul
go, being pierced through with the thorns of covetousness, by the violent hand
of her false husband, that she may have no leisure, respiration or rest. And if
at night the soul be weary of this days work, and would feign go to bed
with the body, the night is lusts day, as it is the Owls, (for both are
blind) and then there is a wife whose husband is from home, and the poor
soul being a spirit must crafficke in this errand for the flesh, to make a
wary but a wicked meeting between her own lewd husband, and another man's
wife: and while she plots it, she does a work of slavery, and when she has
done it, she shall have no other but the wages of misery But endless were it
to set forth the whole story of this Egyptian bondage: Let the carnal man
read over the story of his own life, and he may see the one in the other. And
all being summed together amounts to this; that the marriage between the soul
and lust is monstrous, as between a woman and a beast; slavish, as between a
woman and a tyrant; mischievous and mortal, as between a woman and a serpent.

And I wish all this were sufficient to persuade the soul to give consent to
the divorce and death of this usurping and bloody husband, without whose death
there can be no marriage between her and happiness: for though all reason and
right do join for his removal, yet power and possession, and union work
mightily for him. The friends of the Bridegroom cry aloud, Put off the old
man corrupt through deceiuable lusts, Ephesians. 4.
and put on the new created in righteousness and holiness. And, If ye live after
the flesh ye shall die, Romans 8.13.
but if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, ye shall live. And,
Abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul. 1 Pet. 2.11
The authority, love, and reasons of these voices, deserve to be heard,
persuading the soul to no other, but a separation from a deadly enemy, who can
give her no dower but death eternal. And I wish that thus yet the soul may be
persuaded.

And when the soul is come even to the point of persuasion, even then will
lust come weeping after the soul, like the false husband of Michal: he will
raise up in her remembrance the images of gross and filthy pleasures, to awake
the old unhappy love, and to cause a cruel and unmercifull pity. For a cruel
pity it is, when the soul pitties her own murderer, and not her own
murder. But rather put on a merciful cruelty, being merciful to thy self,
by killing him that would kill thee. It is better he should endure one death,
who is not worthy to live, than that a soul should be ever dying, which should
live for ever. If thou kill not lust now, he must shortly die with the death
of the body, and this short life of his will cost thee everlasting death: but
if thou kill him presently, who must die shortly, by this small odds of death,
thou preservest to thy self everlasting life. Wherefore that which shall
shortly be necessary, make it presently voluntary, and so shall thou turn
necessity, into a sacrifice, (even a freewill offering,) and by his death thou
shall change thy own death into life eternal. And know that they are but
false tears which lust does shed, and his cries are lies: for there is no such
happiness in his union, as his tears would tell thee, but thy happiness is
then most, when thou art gotten free from lust; even when lust is dead, and the
soul new married to her Savior. For the first soul was happy before she was
married to lust, and miserable only after that accursed marriage. To be without
lust is a true Paradise; for man had not this lust when he was first placed in
Paradise, neither could Paradise endure man, when this lust was placed in him.
Therefore the true way to return to Paradise, (or the state of happiness,
whereof it was a type) is to put off this lust, wherewith began our misery. And
lust being put off from the soul by death, and she new married to the Lord of
life, then will she say that she was never happy till then, and that her former
imaginary happiness, was but painted and glittering misery. She will look on
dead lust as on a loathsome carcass; and she will loath the remembrance of
her former not loves but adulteries: she will be like one awaked from a foolish
dream, or an enchanted love, and she will wonder that she has so long been
bewitched with vanity, folly, sin and misery. But withal in her new marriage,
having tasted how sweet her Lord is, she will wonder and lament, that she
has so long lacked this sweetness. Excess of joy will be to her a cause of
sorrow, for her joy is now so great, that she is sorry she was no sooner
partaker of this joy. And in this joyful sorrow she will kiss the feet of
her Lord, and weep on them while she kisseth them. The feet of her Lord are
now more precious to her than the head and top of lust; for therefore she
kisseth them, because she loves the^, and therefore she weepeth, because she
has loved lust so long a time, and her Lord so little. For lust that once
falsely appeared to her as her greatest joy, now truly appears to her as her
greatest sorrow; and her now Lord in whom before she took no delight, now
appears to be her chiefest and truest joy: And both these her tears do tell
us.

CAP. III. The happiness of the soul in her second Marriage.
NAbal being dead, David marries his wife: lusts name is Nabal; and folly is
with him; and folly being dead, the Son of David, yea the Son of God, who
is the highest wisdom, marriage. A right kindly and blessed marriage, wherein
a spirit marries with a spirit, a derived spirit with the original and and
root of spirits; yea with a spirit that has abundance of spirit, and so can
continually refresh and nourish her with a new supply of spirit. For being thus
fed and supplied with a sap of her own kind, she growing in being and
well-being; she is more spiritual by receiving more juice and fatness of the
spirit, and consequently more full of divine light, beauty, love, virtue,
power, life, joy, and glory. Behold the highest knot of blessedness on earth,
and a preparation, yea a pledge of the highest happiness in heaven. And though
this inchoate marriage here on earth compared to the consummate marriage in
heaven, seem but like to a betrothing, yet even this betrothing compared to
earthly marriages, casts a shadow of darkness on them: for all the beauty, all
the glory, all the joy in the world are but beams, and rays, and flashes of
this King of glory, beauty, and joy. By him were all things made that were
made, and therefore the goodness of the things that are made by him, must be
borrowed of him that made them; and then must the borrowed goodness needs be
ashamed, to be compared with his goodness that gave or lent it. Christ Jesus
is all lights in one light, all glories in one glory, all beauties in one
beauty, all joys in one joy. When he gave light, and glory, and beauty, and
joy to the creature, he left the root of light, and glory, and beauty, and joy
in himself. So did he leave infinitely more in himself, than he gave out of
himself; for an internal, and infinite fountain, has infinitely more in it,
than all the streams that ever issued from it: and he is a fountain, for
largenes unlimited, and for spring without beginning and ending. The dew of his
birth is of the womb of the morning, even of that morning which has an
everlasting rising, and shall be free from setting, for all eternities. Thus
the soul being united to him, is united to an eternal root and fountain of
blessedness: she is lightened with the primitive light, she enjoys the
primitive beauty, she is adorned with the primitive glory, she tastes the
radical, utmost, and uppermost sweetness. Being made one with him who is God,
she has the taste of God, and God being tasted, overfloweth, and steepeth, and
drencheth the soul with overcomming and inebriating sweetness. For a high,
and large, and mighty joy, poured into a low, and measured, and weak spirit,
overcommeth her with quantity, and quality, and so carries her away into
ecstasy and ravishment: she is too narrow and feeble to contain and bear a
joy that is too large and strong for her; and therefore having filled her to
the utmost capacity, it goes beyond, and runs over. So is she blessed in that
fullness which her measure contains, yea she is more than blessed, even
blessed in a kind of excess, by being overcome and overflowed with
blessedness. And if we will consider the quality of this joy as well as the
quantity, there is no joy to the spiritual joy, the joys of the body being
base in comparison of it; the spiritual joy is pure, piercing, and full of
activity, the joy of bodies is gross, heavy, dull, and earthy. In the bodily
wine it is the spirit of the wine, that rejoices the spirits of the body. But
a wine that is all spirit, and spirit in the height and top of spiritualnes,
and newly drawn and sucked from the prime and chiefest spirit, how does that
rejoice, how does that ravish the spirits that drink it? when man's highest
part does taste the highest good. Man has no higher part whereby to taste and
receive happiness, neither is there any higher happiness to be tasted and
received. Therefore the soul that tastes this wine at her spiritual
marriage, says as the Master of the Feast at the earthly marriage; Lord, Thou
have kept the best wine until the last. And this being best, the soul gives
it the best place in her judgment and affection; she forgets that which is
behind, and endeavors to that which is before, she will not rest in the low
and backward joys of the body, but strives toward the high and forward joys
of the spirit: and having attained them, she rests in them, as in the best
joys, yet so rests in them, in this life of growth, that she desires to grow
by them presently to a greater capacity of them, and finally to a full, large,
and everlasting fruition of them, in a nearer access unto the very spring and
fountain of joys.

But when all is said of this marriage-happinesse, one taste of it will tell
thee more, than all that is or can be said. The true knowledge of the sweetness
of God is gotten by tasting, and therefore taste first, and then see how sweet
and gracious the Lord is. The taste of it will truly tell him that tastes it,
how sweet it is; but he that knows this sweetness by tasting, cannot deliver
over the full and perfect image of this sweetness to him that has not tasted
it. For this sweetness surmounts all known sweetness of the creatures, and by
that which is known must that which is unknown be made known. But if that
which is known be less and lower than that which is unknown, that which is
known may teach and tell us what the unknown is not, but not what it is. So
the joy of love and union in an earthly marriage, cannot express a heavenly
joy that is spiritually pure, and purely active. Only these and the like
comparisons may serve for stairs, whereby to ascend, even above these
comparisons, and to set our foot on something beyond them. For if the soul
rests on these, she rests short of the knowledge of the sweetness which is
beyond these; she is still in the sweetness of the creature, and has not
attained the sweetness of the Creator. Therefore when she has gone as far
as she may in the sweetness of the creature, let her advance one step more
into that spiritual union, wherein is to be tasted, and seen by tasting, the
sweetness of the Creator; and there shall she see more by tasting, than all the
creatures could show her by resembling: she has met with that joy, which only
can truly teach it self, 1 Pet. 1.8.
and therefore it is called unspeakable. And whereas before it was tasted the
being of it was doubted, and much more the manner and shape of it was unknown,
now it is both known to be, and the shape and manner of it is also known. And
being known, all other sweetnesses which before were alone known and
esteemed, are now despised, and as it were unknown. For this is that blessed
estate of spiritual love and union, whereof the spouse of Christ truly says:
If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, Cant. 8.7.
it would utterly be contemned. And indeed the spouse having Christ's love, she
has that which is better than all things; and having Christ with his love, how
can she with him but have all things also? Romans 8.32
Christ is the heir of all things, Heb. 1.
and the soul having married this heir, is a joynt-heire annexed with Christ.
She has him by whom the worlds were made, 1 Cor. 3.22.
and therefore she has also the worlds made by him: yet he that made the
worlds, being Infinitely better than the worlds made by him, she despises the
worlds in respect of him that made them: she quenches her thirst in the
fountain only, and she accounts it a folly, and a loss to leave the
fountain, and to run after the streams. Therefore setting her mouth to this
fountain, she is filled with the waters of life, with the oil of gladness,
with the new wine of the kingdom of God, with the joy of the holy Ghost, even
a joy unspeakable and glorious. In Christ Jesus she has all sufficiency, all
safety, all supply: she receives from Christ that spiritual ointment, which
gives her spiritual light power, goodness, love, and life; yea it adorneth the
soul with the most excellent beauty, even the likeness and image of God
himself. And being thus lovely, the bridegroom kisseth and embraces her with
spiritual visitations, he tells her his counsels, and his eyes are ever
toward her, even when he seems to be turned from her: For she is set as a
signet upon his heart, and much water cannot quench his love: and she also
looks on him, and is changed from glory to glory, as the Moon when with more
open face she beholds the Sun. But of the particular benefits ane
advantages of this blessed Marriage more hereafter. Cap. 4, 5, 6.


Thus happy, and thus growing in happiness, she walks on in this life of
marriage inchoate, until she come to the eternal life of marriage consummate.
She is happy now in her union with happiness, and she shall be happy hereafter
in a full fruition of happiness. She is happy now in the earnests and pieces
of that happiness which shall be full hereafter; yea daily more and more happy
here, by a daily enlarging of those earnests and pieces: and she shall be the
more happy hereafter, by how much more these earnests and pieces of happiness
have been here enlarged. And thus shall she walk by happiness unto happiness,
and by the increase of happiness to the increase of happiness, since the more
happy she is in time, the greater shall her happiness be in eternity.

CAP. IIII. The heavenly marriage is happy not only in the pleasures, but in
the labors of love.
A WISE husband though most loving, is not always embracing: he does love
ever, but does not ever embrace: For there is a time to embrace, Eccles 3.
and a time to be far from embracing. There is the service and labor of
love, as well as the pleasure of love: and accordingly as we read once that
Isaac sported with Rebekah, so we read also that she made savoury meat such
as her husband loved. No doubt she had pleased him before by the like service,
that she pleased him so certainly now; at least she was no better than Sarah,
who did her husband the service of making cakes for the entertainment of his
guests. So does the mystical wife also, she thinks sometimes how she may
please her husband by service, and not only how she may take pleasure in him,
and of him. For the souls husband will not only please, but be pleased; he
will not only give love, but take it, and the love which he takes, shall be
sometimes in the labors of love. He is her Lord, and therefore he expects
service from her, that she may not call him Lord in words only, but in
deeds, even in doing his will. Neither is this service, a mere service, or a
thing only of toil and trouble; but it is an easy yoke, and a light
burden: Mat. 11.29
yea it is full of profit and advantage, for it brings and increases rest
and happiness to the soul. For indeed love ever seeks the good of the
beloved, and accordingly Christ Jesus who is love, sets the soul on work for
her own good.

For the soul has many gains annexed to her work, she gains before she
works, she gains in her work, and she gains after her work: She gains
before the work; for this is one maine cause, why those weighty joys, sweet
embracements, and ravishing consolations are given her, that she may cheerfully
run the race, and perform the service set before her. When Angels bring
meat to Elijah, it is because he has a great journey to go; so that he is
beholding to his great journey for his Angels food. The outward Israel is fed
with the bread of heaven, to maintain him in his walk unto Canaan, and the
inward Israel is fed with the true bread that comes down from heaven, to
enable him in his works, and walks through this pilgrimage to heaven. Neither
does this course hold only in the service of doing, but in the service of
suffering; in the passive, as in the active obedience. Christ Jesus shows his
Disciples on the Mount a pattern of his heavenly glory, and then to Christ
thus gloriously transfigured, Moses and Elias do speak of the suffering which
he should accomplish at Jerusalem. So to the Head himself, the glory set
before him is an encouragement to the enduring of the Cross, Heb. 12.
and despising the shame: And if it be so to the head, it should be such also
to the body. And such it is indeed to the true members of that body, for they
receive not the grace of God in vain, but can do, and will do all things
through Christ that strengthens the^. Phil. 4.13.
For as they find that they are strengthened with all might, according to Gods
glorious power, so they know the end for which they are thus strengthened, even
unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulnesse. Col. 1.11.
Wherefore let us think that the parcels of glory, joy and strength which we
now receive in the visitations of Christ Jesus, are a kind of wages paid
aforehand to encourage us more cheerfully and confidently to the work of doing
and suffering. And accordingly having received them, let us not dream of rest,
but of labor; not of setting up Tabernacles, but of service and sufferings.
And let us not doubt, but if the Angels food be a preparation and call to a
long, or laborious journey, of doing or suffering; the same food will also
strengthen and enable us to perform the journey unto which it calls; so that
in the strength thereof we shall be able to walk even to the Mount of God.

Yet neither is all the comfort, encouragement, and gain given to the soul
before her work, but even in her work she gains. In the service of her
husband is continual gain, and that not of strength only, but of pleasure and
delight. For the soul having tasted Christ in an heavenly communion, so loves
him, that to please him is a pleasure and delight to her self: Yea there is
such a law of love shed into her by that communion, that his commandments are
so far from being grievous to her, that there is no pleasure in her taste
comparable to them. No sweet things, no precious things in her judgment may be
compared to the sweetness and preciousnes of commandments. Therefore it is the
true voice of the Spouse, and therein not so much her mouth as heart speaks,
They are more to be desired than gold, Psalm. 19.10
yea than much fine gold, sweeter also than honey, and the honey comb. Behold
how the soul married unto Christ delights in the law of her husband; and no
wonder if she love his law, when she loves him; neither if her heart be to his
law, when his law is written in her heart. Besides, the law of his lips is a
law of grace, and a law of grace is a lovely law. So she loves his law, because
his law is lovely; she loves it because it is his law whom she loves; she loves
it because the love of his law is written in her heart. And as she loves his
law, so she loves to fulfill it; for her love will not be quiet, until it see
her words turned into her deeds. And this she does not negligently, nor
heavily, but like a lover, pleasantly and cheerfully. Look but to a carnal
lover, and see how he affects the title of a servant, and is more than glad,
(even proud) to receive and fulfill the commands of his beloved. Give then
spiritual love to a soul, and she will rejoice also to perform the spiritual
commands of her beloved. If a man know not this, it is because he loves not,
but let him love, and then he will both know and do it. For the nature, and
law of love in the lover, naturally moves to the fulfilling of the law of the
beloved. And as the Sun in whom a law or covenant of motion is written,
rejoices like a giant to run the race and motion of that covenant, so the
soul in whom this law of love is written, Psalm. 19.5.
rejoices to run the race and motion of this law. Obedience is the kindly
fruit of a loving soul, Ier. 31: 33, 35, 36.
and a loving soul brings forth this fruit as kindly, as a good tree
brings forth good fruit.

And as this law of love is active, and laborious, so is it strong and mighty.
Even death it self cannot overcome love, Cant. 8.6. Rev. 12.11
for love is stronger than death. Yea love enjoys dangers, and death it
self; and takes them for advantages; as by which the excellence and vehemence
of love may be really expressed. Accordingly, the nearest and dearest friends
of the Bridegroom rejoice that they are counted worthy to suffer for his sake.
Acts 5.41.
The fire of divine love so inflameth the^, that much water of persecution
cannot queneh it; yea such is the nature of this fire, that it feeds on those
waters, and grows more fervent by that which would quench it. For the fire of
love upon opposition kindles another fire of an holy rage; which is full of
anger and scorn, that life or death, or any other creature should offer to
separate the soul from her loved Christ Jesus. And as the Bridegroom himself
rejected a great Apostle with the title of Satan, when he dissuaded him from
expressing his love to his spouse by dying for her, so the spouse her self is
angry, when she is dissuaded from expressing her love to her best-beloved in
the sufferings of love. One while being threatened with a fiery furnace, she
says, O King we are not careful to answer thee in this matter, but be it
known to thee, Dan. 3.
we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden image. And another while,
at other threats, Acts 4.17, 18.
We cannot but speak the things that we have seen and heard. And again, when
danger was denounced, and friends dissuaded: I am ready not to be bound only,
Acts 21.13
but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus. Thus may be seen, not only
what pleasures, but what power and might do accompany and bless the labors
and sufferings of love: love delights in doing and suffering; yea it is angry
when it may not be suffered to suffer: And as opposition rises against it, so
it rises against opposition, yea it rises by it, until it rise above it.

But besides the usual pleasure which love takes in suffering for the beloved,
there are unusual and extraordinary comforts allotted to the sufferings of
love. When the Bride suffers most for her love to the Bridegroom, the
Bridegroomes love must needs be most increased to the Bride; and consequently
the fruits and benefits of his love. Therefore there being an hundredfold
gain promised in this life to the sufferings of love, Mark 10.30.
the more those sufferings are, the more hundred-folde is that gain which is
promised to them. Besides, the Bridegroom sees that the Bride has then most
need of comfort, help and supply, when for his sake she is in most distress:
and therefore he that is a present help in trouble, cannot but be a greater
help, in a time of greater trouble; for he fitteth the measure of his help
to the measure of her trouble. Hence it arises, that there is a peculiar
height and abundance of consolations, which none can attain unto, but those
that have a special height and abundance of tribulations. For this proportion
the Apostle acknowledges when he says, As the tribulations do abound, 2 Cor.
1.5
so do the consolations. Thus is there continual gain in the sufferings of
love, and great gain in great sufferings; thus is the soul made a conqueror
and gainer in all labors, and losses, and crosses, through him that loves
her. What she loses in the creature, she has repayed with great advantage in
the Creator: what she loses in brass, she has repayed in gold, not barely
value for value, but weight for weight: yea the weight of the worse is far
exceeded by the weight of the better; 2 Cor. 4.17
for it is but a light affliction, and it is an exceeding weight of glory, and
parts of this weighty glory the soul now receives aforehand as earnests of
the whole; and having received them, she does now rejoice, (even through
manifold tentations of crosses and losses) with a joy unspeakable and glorious.
1 Pet: 1.
Her finite, measured, and utterable tribulations are overwaighed with joys
unspeakable; and that they are so, we see it in the effect of them; because the
soul despises the sufferings for the joys: yea the sufferings are so
overcome by the joys, that the sufferings do not turn her joys into sadness,
but the joys turn the sadness of the sufferings into joy; phil: 2.17, 1 These:
1.6, etc.
for she rejoices in her sufferings.

Lastly, the soul is a great gainer after the work; for the greatest gain of
the soul is at the end of all her labors: there is a time coming when she
shall rest from her labors; Rev: 14.13
but when she rests from them, they shall not rest from following her, for
follow her they shall into heaven, and bless her with eternal joys. Yea the
more she has labored and suffered, the more shall she be blessed and
glorified. The more afflictions, the more weight of glory, for the harvest will
answer the sowing; the present sowing in tears shall be followed with a
proportionable harvest of joy; so that he which loves sparingly shall reap
sparingly, 2 Cor. 9.6.
and he that sows plentifully, shall reap plentifully.

Upon the consideration of these threefold gains annexed to the labors and
sufferings of love, here arises a just reproof of those contemplative men,
who by neglecting or rather excluding these labors and sufferings, do
neglect, and shut out these gains. They would presently be at rest, and
presently would have nothing but rest and enjoying; but it is utterly a fault
and a loss to separate mystical Divinity from practical, for howsoever they
may be distinguished, they may not be separated; each having his turns, and
each giving hand to other, and strengthening one another. Nehem. 8.10
The joy of the Lord is our strength, and it strengthens us for something to
be done or suffered, and again these labors and sufferings do increase the
joy, for as the tribulations do increase, so do the consolations. True it is
that the mind of man would presently be at his works end, and having
received joys, spend the whole time in gazing on them, tasting of them, or in
recalling the tastes and images of them: But too much enjoying is a loss of
enjoying; for it loses all those gains (formerly mentioned) annexed to doing
and sufferings. For if a man will only busy himself in tasting present joy,
how can he expect those joys that are sent to prepare unto labors? or those
that accompany labors? or finally, (which is of most weight) those infinite,
and unmeasurable, and exceeding joys, which in the life to come are to follow
afflictions and labors? Will God give joy to enable us unto services, when he
sees he cannot have the services for which he gave the joys? Can we look
for an abundance of consolations, when we exclude the abundance of tribulatio^s
to which these consolations are annexed? Or can we look for that exceeding
weight of glory, which shall follow light and momentany afflictions, and yet
utterly refuse that light affliction which works this glory? Surely whosoever
thou art that thus do, thy loss hereby is manifold, but especially greatest
in turning thy seed-time into harvest, and in eating up thy seed: thou make
the time of sowing to be the time of reaping; yea thou eatest up thy seed,
which being sown, would have given thee an ensuing harvest. True it is that
joys are given thee here, and they are given thee to be enjoyed; but even this
enjoying is but a sowing; for thereby are sown in thee new supplies of faith,
hope, and love, and of all spiritual strength, even the seeds of future active
and passive services. Thou art by these joys mightily encouraged, fortified,
and enabled to an unwearied industry in the labors of the Lord, since by this
which is paid thee in hand, thou see, and feel, and tastest, that thy
labor is not in vain in the Lord. Thou do not receive thy earnest-penny to
be still gazing on it, much less to bound thy thoughts with it, or to think
thy self rich enough in it, but thereby to be drawn on to a cheerful running
in the race, that leads to the infinite treasure which is in heaven, whereof
this penny is an earnest. Wherefore if any man will set up his rest in present
joys, and speak of building Tabernacles in them, let him know what was said
of him that said so, and see whether the same agrees not also to another that
says the same agrees not also to another that says the same, He wist not
what he said. Luke 9.33
Surely this is not our rest, neither have we here a continuing City, but we
seek one to come: our Sabbath here is but one day in seven, but the eternal
Sabbath comes not, until we be past the works of the six days. There
remains a rest to the children of God, Heb. 4.9.
and that which remains is not presently. Therefore seeing that rest
remains, let us labor to enter into that rest: Verse. 6.11.
let us enter into this rest, by labor, not by rest: or if by rest, by that
rest, which encourages and enableth us to labor. Having eaten with Elias, let
us walk with Elias, having taken the earnest, let us do the work, having
eaten Manna, let us walk on to Canaan. Let us not grow restive by that which
was given to make us active; neither let us look to tie these joys together
in this life of action; which are therefore intermitted, that there may be
times for action, as well as for enjoying. Therefore if Jesus do sometimes
vanish out of sight, and withdraw himself into heaven, imagine you heard the
Angel saying unto you, Why stand ye gazing into heaven? Acts 1.
The same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as ye
have seen him go into heaven. He has times of going, and times of returning.
He has visited thee, and is gone out of sight, expecting the fruit of his
former visitation. As thou have seen him going, so thou shall see him coming;
when thy work is well done, he will come and comfort, and encourage thee to
the work that is to be done. But still remember that his best coming is his
last coming: then will he come to thee, and cause thee to come to him, and
this coming together shall be without any more going asunder. Then shall thou
rest, and only rest, for even thy actions which now are labors shall then be
rest. And then shall it be no grief of heart to thee, that thou have had here
interpositions of labors between thy rests, since these labors here shall
there be turned into the joys of a rest eternal. Neither shall it be a grief
of heart to thee then, that thou have had some abatements here of a temporal
rest, when those abatements have been occasions of increased degrees in a rest
and glory everlasting. Thou shall have thy joys increased according to the
increase of thy labors, for thy works shall follow thee; and if they follow
thee in abundance, they shall be followed with abundance of joys. If thy
labors have made thy five talents to be ten, thy Lord shall make thee Ruler
over ten Cities: and then shall thou find it best to enjoy most in the place
of most enjoying. And surely that must needs be the place of most, and best
enjoying, where both soul and body are enlarged and clarified to the greatest
capacity of enjoying; and where this greatest capacity does meet with the
greatest perfection, and fullness of joy. And this fullness of joy is at that
right hand, where the Bridegroom sits preparing a place for his Bride: And
into that place of fullness of joy shall this husband receive his wife, having
passed through the labors and sufferings of love, and there they shall be
changed to her into large, full and everlasting joys.

CAP. V. The Spouses estate in desertions though seemingly miserable, is
indeed profitable.
THE Spouse of Christ is now willing to labor, and to suffer for her husband,
yea contented that sometimes joys be intermitted for labors and sufferings,
which hereafter shall be exchanged into full and eternal joys: But this she
is both willing and able to do through her Christ that strengthens her, and
she is contented to do it, so that he be ever with her, though not still smiling
and embracing, yet still supporting and strengthening her: But she hears, and
she says she feels, that sometimes he withdrawes himself, and then her
heart is full of woe, Eccles: 4.10
even of Woe to her that is alone. She has left all things for him, for that
she knew to be the price of him, and she thought him well worth it; but now
he for whom she has left all things, has left her, and so she is left of him
and all things. Yea he seems not only to leave her, but to send terrors to
her, even terrors without and terrors within. Within, the remnants of the
old husband stir up the loathed images of the old, not love, but lust; and
though the head of this serpent be broken, yet the end of it will still be
moving. And while she sees nothing but these ugly shapes in the dark night of
desertions, she is affrighted at them, and at her own estate, for now she
thinks this to be her true and only estate, because she sees no other but
this. And without the old enemy of souls, and the first cursed marriage-maker
between the soul and sin, renewes his old business, and would yet again
make a bad match between the dying old man, and a living soul. And when he
cannot bring the soul to consent, he will will persuade her that she has
consented, and strive to make her believe that she has done it, even because
he cannot prevail to make her to do it. He would have had her to perish by
giving her consent to sin, and seeing he cannot do that, he will strive to
destroy her, by this desperate thought, that she is nothing but sin, and
nothing else shall be, seeing she is forsaken of him, who only takes away both
the guilt and reign of sin. And thus being filled with bitterness, if she
look out to men for comfort, there she finds many miserable comforters that
wound and smite her, and if she meet with that one of a thousand, that
speaks right words, and tells her true comforts, yet while the inward
Comforter is wanting that should turn the words into deeds, they remain bare
words, Job 6.6.
and are like the white of an egg, that has no taste in it.? For the soul
says still, Ruth 1.20.
Call me not Naomi, but Marah: for my Lord has dealt bitterly with me. Yet
still she looks out for her husband, but sees him not: she calls to
remembrance his former loves, that so she may enjoy him in the representations
of her former enjoyings. But then a world of fleshly and fearful thoughts
rush in upon her, and with a cloud cover that sight of him which memory would
give her: and if she yield not to them, she is vexed with importunity; and if
she yield to the^, she is vex't with guilt and self-accusation: the Tempter
buffets her with sharp and thornie temptations, to drive her to yield; and when
she yields, he buffets her with fearful accusations. Now what can be added
to her misery? Her best friend is gone from her, and her worst enemies are
round about her; yea her best friends seems to have surrendered her into the
hands of her worst enemies; for she feels a mighty force of her enemies, but
no strength of her beloved. Therefore her heart fails her, and she thinks
that she has wholly lost both her self and him. Cant. 5:
I opened (says she) to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and
was gone; I sought but I could not find him, I called him, but he gave no
answer. The watchmen that went about the City, found me, they smote me, they
wounded me.

But yet be of good comfort, thou weary, wounded, and distressed soul: thy
husband is a God that comfort the abject, that makes light to shine out of
darkness, that gives refreshing to the weary and heavie-laden, that brings
life out of death. Thy Lord has called thee as a woman forsaken, Esaias 54.6, 7.
and grieved in spirit, and as a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, says
thy God. For a small moment has he forsaken thee, but with great mercies will
he gather thee. The mercies of God, even when they seem to fail thee, then
do they gather thee; yea they gather thee by their seeming to fail thee. Thy
husband is God, and God is love, and love does ever good to the beloved. Yea
thou love him, and he has told thee that all things shall turn to good to
them that love him: Rom 8.28.
therefore even these desertions, though never so dreadful and discomfortable,
the almightinesse of Gods love shall make useful and advantageable.

This is so true, that many of these uses and advantages may particularly be
named; and I doubt not but thy husband himself will teach them to thee
experimentally; yet because while the cloud of desertion is upon thy soul, she
can hardly see by her own light, another that has light for the time, (though
perchance clouded himself as much or more another time) may tell her what he
sees by his light. And indeed when the soul is in the dark, and her own
light shines not, she may do well to get a guide, and to take heed to
borrowed light, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in her own
heart.

A first advantage then, that may come to the soul by the desertions of her
husband, is by desertions to prevent desertions: for by loosing him she may
learn not to loose him, and by the miseries of her former ill keeping him,
learn hereafter to keep him better. Perchance thou wast too careless in
holding him when thou had him, or in admitting him when he came to visit
thee, and to bring these thy faults to remembrance, that by remembering them
thou may amend them, he is now gone from thee. Remember whether thou did
not hear such a voice as this; Cant: 5.2.
Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is filled
with deaw, and my locks with the drops of the night. Remember also whether
this was not thy answer: I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have
washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Thou had taken up some rest in the
flesh, and had put thy self into a method of ease, and then it was a marring
of thy method, and a fowling of thy feet, to step into any action or passion
for thy beloved. He that was thy true happiness, was grown very cheap to
thee, and thou wast content to part from him rather than to give the price of a
little pains for him: And art thou not well worthy to lose him, whom thou
thoughtest so little worth the keeping? But now thou art put to learn the
value of him by absence, whom thou did so much undervalue being present. And
when by absence thou have learned this lesson, thou have gained more by
absence, than thou would have done by presence; for thou have gained the
true valuation of thy Lord by absence, which through thy fault and frailty thou
forgatest in his presence: and so by this first gain thou shall come to a
second; for by absence thou shall gain his presence. For absence having taught
thee truly to value him, and accordingly to desire and thirst after him, and to
give him due entertainment, when he comes hereafter and offers his love unto
thee; then shall thou by this benefit of absence, come to enjoy his presence.
Thy fullness brought thee to hunger, and thy hunger now brings thee to
fullness; for he fills the hungry with good things, and the full he sends
empty away. He will fill thee not only with good things, but with goodness it
self; for he will fill thee with himself, and he is goodness: yea thou shall
yet have a farther gain by this absence, for when he comes again, thou will
hold him faster, and keep him surer, and so enjoy him nearer and longer. Now
thou will embrace him, and cleave to him, and wind thy self about him, and
when thine eye sleeps, thy heart shall wake, that thou may still keep his
presence, whose absence was so bitter unto thee. Thou will bring him into the
chamber of the soul, and bind him with the cords of love, thou will claspe
thy affections about him, and hold him fast that he may no more escape from
thee: And being thus bound by the cords of love, and love loving to be bound by
love, he willingly abides in the bands which he loves: for both love and
faith are mighty with the Almighty, and make the spouse an Israel, even a
prevailer with God. Genesis 32.28 Luke 7.37
She that loves Christ much, may embrace him much, and kiss him much, and
hold him much; and if any man do trouble her, he himself will say, Why
trouble ye the woman? Matthew. 26.10.
And thus thrives the Spouse by her losses, while by losing her husband for a
time, she loves him better, and being returned, enjoyes him the more, and
holds him stronger and longer.

But secondly, there is yet a farther use and benefit of desertions. For it may
be thou have gone beyond neglect of thy beloved, and have proceeded unto some
offensive, cross and contrary carriage toward him; thou have entertained some
thought, purpose or act, which he cannot endure, and then it is best both for
him and thee, that he hide himself from thee. If thou come once to entertain
his enemies, and to lodge them in one room with him, how can thou expect but
that he should leave that room, since there is no agreement between light
and darkness, between Christ and Belial? And surely he should neither regard
himself, nor thee, if he should give thee his loves, when thou entertainest
his enemies. For since thy husband is thy happiness, the enemies of thy
husband are the enemies of thy happiness, and so both his and thine enemies.
Therefore is it good that thy friend should a while go aside, when that thou
grievest him, and hurtest thy self by the entertainment of his and thine
enemies. And while thus he is hid from thee, and thou art left to those
enemies whom thou have entertained in stead of him, thou may learn what odds
there is between a friend and an enemy; and what a folly it was to grieve him
that loved thee, by loving them that hate thee. Thou have perchance had a touch
with thy old husband the flesh, and jealousy, (which is the rage of a man,
Prove. 6.34.
much more of a man that is a jealous God) is angry with thy whorishnesse, and
puts a day of wrath upon thee, wherein he seems not to spare thee. Therefore
thy conscience is let loose upon thee, and it tears thee to pieces, it breaks
thy bones, and grindes thee to powder. Satan also who tempted thee has leave
to set upon thee, and to tear thee with vexations, whom he had seduced by
tentations. And now art thou left as it were wholly in hell, who would
entertain a piece of hell into thy heaven. And indeed it is both a just and
merciful dispensation to tire thee with thine own ways, to make the flesh to
come out at thy nostrills, to make thee weary of thine enemies, and to make
thee long, and look, groan, and cry for thy friend whom thou have grieved, and
driven out of thy sight. Therefore is heaven shut up, and become as brass unto
thee, and hell has enlarged her mouth to swallow thee: yea thou art like Jonah
in the belly of hell; thou art like Nebuchadnezzar cut down by the
commandment of the holy one, and driven away from men to the beasts of the
field; thou art like Sampson, when his locks were cut off, the good Spirit
leaves thee, and the evil Spirits like Philistims are upon thee.

But has God forgotten to be merciful? and has he shut up his tender mercies
in an everlasting displeasure? Will he break the bruised reed, and deliver
up the soul of his Turtle into the hands of her enemies? Nay, we shall not
die O Lord; Thou have ordained them for judgment, Hab: 1,32.
and O mighty God thou have established them for correction. The enemies of the
soul are suffered to scourge her for loving her enemies; so to beat that love
out of her, and to beat her into that old love from which in some great
degree she was fallen. Thus is she beaten by her enemies from her enemies, and
the stripes sent her from her friend, bring her back to him that sent them.
She had grieved the spirit of her beloved, and by the grief of her own
spirit she now learnes what the grief of a grieved spirit is, and thereby
learnes to grieve him no more. Hereupon she resolves to cast out whatsoever
has offended him, and to put on that singlenes and purity of soul, which
makes her one for one, and one fitted by holiness for that one who is holy.
She will be his alone, whose alone she is, and from henceforth she will scorn
and hate any sin that will offer to be a rival with her wellbeloved, and
especially that sin, whose rivalty has lately cost her so dear, as the
loss of his familiarity. And the soul being thus washed and trimmed by
repentance, holy resolutions, and renewing her covenant, the bridegroom of the
soul appears to her again, and gives her his loves. And now is she like a
garden watered after a scorching heat; the heat being overcome by moisture,
makes her more flourishing, and more fruitful: the belly of hell having
vomited up the soul of a Saint, (because it could not digest her) she then
runs much more readily in the ways of Gods commandments. The stumpe of the
tree (for it was not pulled up by the roots) springs and flourishes again
being watered with the dew of heaven, and is more glorious than before by a
greater acknowledgement and glorifying of the Lord of glory. The hair (for it
was only polled) grows again, and so does the strength of the spirit, and
greater exploits are done against the enemies of the soul, than ever before.
For the soul having been long kept fasting, feeds more heartily on the bread
of life; and this being the true bread that strengthens the heart of man, the
more feeding on it, the more strength of heart: A long dryness of spirit has
made her very thirsty, and the more thirsty she is, the more does she drink
of the waters of life; and the more she drinks of life, the more lively and
active she is. The late breach of love increases her love, and by love her
union with her Lord and husband: and the increase of that union is the increase
of holiness, and happiness.

There is yet a third profit by spiritual desertions, and it is the preventing
of pride, which usually arises upon spiritual revelations, or any other
excellencies of the spirit. It is a precious and a glorious thing to know the
counsels of heaven, and the secrecies of that kingdom, and these mysteries
does the husband of the soul often reveal unto her in the bed of love. There
is a secret murmr of things inutterable, and then the soul wonders at the
deep wisdom, and unspeakeable truths which are discovered to her: yea anon
she wonders at her self, and her own happiness, because they are discovered
to her. But then the flesh, which is apt to swell upon the apprehension of any
honor or eminence, steps in too often, and puts his swelling into the soul;
and then the thoughts of the soul are changed: For whereas before she was a
spirit that did magnify the Lord, and rejoiced in God her Savior, because to
her lowliness he showed high and great things; now she rejoices in her
self, because of that which she has received, even as if she had not received
it. She grows proud against the giver, even by his own gifts, and boasts of a
selfe-sufficiency, even against him from whom her sufficiency came, and
without whom she has no sufficiency. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Accordingly as she changes her thoughts, so she changes her voice; for now
she speaks in the language of Babel, I sit as a Queen; Rev. 17.
and of Laodicea, Rev. 3.
I am rich, and have need of nothing. But indeed this riches is the true way
to poverty and nothing. For the soul being once rich in her own opinion,
turns her eyes from her husband, that only gives her true riches, and so
looks from riches unto poverty. And again, her husband seeing her rich in her
own opinion, strips her, and sends her naked and empty away. But what a folly
and madness is it in the soul, (though indeed very agreeable to the blind
flesh that maddeth her) to think highly of the secrets and mysteries revealed
to her, and withal to stop the current of such revelations? For thus she
does by turning away the face, and turning the back unto the revealer. But on
the other side, it is a great mercy and favor in the revealer, to stop his
current of revelations, yea to send some spiritual affliction and desertion in
stead of them, to prevent or amend this turning away of the soul from her
husband the giver, because of his gifts: For thus by a short absence of both,
she may recover both the sooner, and keep them the longer; but if she should
have that which she will abuse, the having of it would cast her into the danger
of a greater and a longer loss. If the Moon being full, should grow proud in
her fullness, and out of that pride neglect the Sun, not caring though the
earth did ever keep him out of sight, were not this a way by the pride of her
light to bring her to an everlasting darkness? And were it not far better
for her, that the Sun by some short eclipse and interposition of the earth,
did show her her own darkness being without his light, that so she may the
more steadily and continually be lightened by a steadfast and continual looking
on him, from whom her light comes? And thus indeed does the husband and
Sun of the soul. Having sent light, he sends also some turn of darkness,
that by a short darkness he may prevent a longer, and that by darkness he may
send a greater light. Having visited the soul with his graces, he gives a
medicine and preservative against pride, the poison of grace, and a restorative
to humility the forerunner of grace. Humility is the bed, wherein the
Bridegroom lies down and rests with the soul: With whom shall I rest, says
he, Esaias 66.1, 2.
but with the humble and contrite soul? Wherefore let the soul account it a
benefit, when this bed is made by some spiritual affliction; for the King of
grace and glory is shortly coming to lodge with her in some gracious
visitation; he that gives grace to the humble, will visit her with abundance
of consolations; he will give her his loves, and his loves shall again tell
her his counsels: And then shall thou account thy self a gainer, if
affliction and desertion have been so great as to bring forth a great
humiliation, for a great humiliation shall be followed with a greatly gracious
and glorious visitation.

Fourthly, these desertions are profitable to try the truth of our love; and
the trial of our love shows us the faults of it, and by showing them calls
upon us to amend them. The husband of the soul will see whether his spouse
love him with the love of a wife, or of an harlot. The love of an harlot loves
a man only for his gifts, and so in truth loves not the man, but the gifts.
And though this be secretly true, when by outward fashion she seems to love
him, yet it is manifestly true, when the gifts cease, for then her love to the
man also cease. But the true wife loves her husband, even for himself, and
by himself, she loves him without gifts, yea she loves his gifts for his
sake, for she would nor take the same gifts from another man. Yea the true love
of a wife goes some degrees farther; for she does nor only love her husband
when he gives no gifts, neither does she only love his gifts for his sake,
but she loves him when he is absent from her, even when she is without both his
presence and his gifts: for even then the memory of him is precious to her,
she calls to remembrance his perfections, his virtues, and his loves. And yet
the true love of a wife goes farther; for she loves her husband, even when he
chides her, and is angry with her, though in that case an husband seems to be
more absent being at home, than an husband pleased being from home. All these
does the true spiritual love of the spouse perform unto Christ, and Christ
delights to see them performed. Christ Jesus loves his wife with a true love,
for he has laid down his true his true blood and life for her. Ioh. 15.13
And greater love has no man, than he that laid down his life for his
beloved. Now Christ thus truly loving his wife, he expects a return of true
and unfeigned love from his wife: And that it may be tried to be true, or
amended and made true if it be not so, these trials are sent to her in these
desertions.

And indeed in most of these degrees of love are we often faulty, the flesh
having often too great a part and influence in our love. For the flesh as
mainly for things present and palpable, and like Thomas is wholly for seeing
and feeling. And hence it is that our love dotes so much on the gifts of Christ
Jesus, that it cooles even to Christ Jesus himself, without his gifts. We are
all for Christ's light, and knowledge, for his kisses and embracements, for his
honey and his wine, for his sweetnesses and ravishings: and without these Christ
is a dry and loathed husband, as Manna to the fleshly Israelites was a dry and
loathed food. But when it is so with us, how far are we short of those higher
degrees of love, even of that love that loves Christ being absent and hid out
of sight, or that loves him being present in that utmost absence of anger,
chastisement, and seeming enmity. How far short are we of that Canaanitish
woman, Mat. 15.27
that kissed his rodds, and made love out of those reproaches, whereby Christ
seemed to drive her away? But since it is so, is it not high time for Christ to
remove his gifts, to whom our hearts are removed from Christ, that so our
hearts may again be removed to Christ from them? It is a right proper cure of
this adulterous love, to remove those things with which love did adulterate,
that so the right object of our best love may be sought and found, and
constantly proposed. And surely this cure is profitable to our souls, as it is
pleasing also to the husband of souls, for by it Christ has more interest in
the soul, and the soul in Christ. And if this be the fruit of desertions,
then art thou againer by desertions.

But that thou may be sure to gain by them, be sure to learn that which
they teach thee: they teach thee that Christ is better than his gifts, and that
Christ's love is better than the gifts of his love. Therefore learn especially
to fasten thy love on Christ, and next on his love; and think thy self happy
enough in having the^, though thou have nothing but them: yea know also that
thou have them, even when thou have them not; they are thine when thou see or
feel not that they are thine. He and his love see thee, when thou see them
not, yea they love thee, when thou feel them not; and he and his love are
better than the seeing and feeling of him and his love; and it is better for
thee that they are thine, than that they do appear to be thine. Yea, it is
good for thee sometimes, that they do not appear to be thine, that thou may
love them better then their appearing to be thine; and this love do thou
learn even from their not appearing.

Yea farther, Christ and his love are thine, even when he chideth and
chastises thee, for it is his very love that chideth and chastises thee. And
he does it to purge thy blemishes, to try and exercise thy virtues, and among
others, this excellent love which loves him chastening. Therefore though he
kill thee, do thou trust in him and love him, for He that loves thee so, that
he gave his own life for thee, may well be trusted with thy life. For his
own life was infinitely better then thy life; and he that gave so precious a
life for thy good, will not take so mean a life from thee but for thy good.
Hence it is that even by loosing thy life thou shall find it, and thou shall
find it with him, for whom thou loosest it, for thou shall find it hid with
Christ in God. Col. 3.3.
And when Christ which is thy life shall appear, the^ shall this hid life
appear with him; but not such a frail, and base life as that which thou
gave for him; but a glorious, immortal, and incorruptible life, shall that
be which he will give unto thee. Therefore at all times and in all estates,
even in darkest desertions, and greatest sufferings, trust him whose love
turns all things to good, unto his beloved, even death unto life. For be thou
assured that this Almighty husband, out of this eater will bring meat, and out
of this strong one will bring forth sweetness. He himself broke the gates and
bars of death, and carried the^ away, and so made away open for us to
eternal life. He quickened himself when he dyed an universal death, even
when all our deaths were included in his death. And as we all dyed in his
death, so in his quickening and rising, do we all rise again; as the
universal death of the head is given particularly to all the members, so shall
the universal Resurrection of the Head, be also particularly communicated to
the members. Much more easily in the desertions of this life, which are a kind
of sownings and seeming deaths, will he give thee life again, when thou have
learned by them that which thou would not learn without them. When thou
love Christ alone, when thou love him hiding himself, and chastising thee,
then he that said to the woman; O woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee
even as thou will: He will say to the Spouse, O woman great is thy love, be it
unto thee as thou will. Thou willest him most, be it unto thee even as thou will. For when thou willest him most, thou shall have him whom thou willest
most; he will come unto thee, yea he will come much unto thee, and thy latter
end shall be more then thy beginning. By wanting him, shall thou have him more,
then thou had before thou wantedst him, because by wanting him, thou do
love him more, then thou did when thou had him.

Fifthly, these Desertions are profitable to the Soul, by teaching her
patience; and by making patience to bring forth her kindly fruits waiting and
attendance. The husband of the soul is a King of glory, and he will sometimes
expect the honor, and service of patient attendance. He is a free agent, and
his Spirit blows when, as well as where he lists. John 3.8.
And to a free agent there is due a waiting patience: He that gives freely,
gives when himself will give, and not still when the receiver will have. In
this case, he will answer his Spouse, as he did his Mother, John 2.4.
Woman, my hour is not yet come. There are times and tides, wherein the spirit
moves; as it is said of Sampson, Judge. 13.25.
The spirit of the Lord moved him at times in the camp of Dan: The Angel of
the Lord, John 5.4.
not always, but at a certain season went down and moved the waters. Now
these times and seasons are in his own hands, and it is not in the souls
power, to know and appoint them. Therefore as the eyes of the handmaides are to
the hands of her Mistress, Psalm. 123.2
so must the eyes of the spouse be to her Lord, until he regard her. Her part
is patience and attendance, and the patient abiding of the righteous shall not
perish for ever. Psa. 37.34
When the soul has submitted her will unto his will, the Lords hour will
shortly come wherein the water shall be turned into wine, the water of cold
desertions, into the warming and comfortable wine of joyful visitations. When
thy Lord has the honor and service due to a most free and wise giver; then
shall thou have the crown of thy patience and attendance. For God has given
his word, that those which honor him he will honor: 1 Samuel 2.30
and again, Psalm. 37.
Wait on the Lord, and commit thy way to him, and he shall bring it to pass.
A blessed waiting which honors the Lord, and blesses his handmaid: and a
blessed absence, that procures this waiting which draws his presence,
accompanied with blessedness.

But take heed that thy patience be not the effect of dullness or neglect, nor
a cause of idleness: be not patient in the absence of thine husband, because
thou carest not for his presence: desire his presence above all earthly joys,
and the shining of his countenance above all corn and wine. Psalm. 4.6, 7
But let thy patience be merely grounded in a submission to his will; and let
his will be the cause that thy will is content to want that which above all the
world it desires. And this desire thou may express in prayers, praying to
drink the cup of salvation, as Christ prayed not to drink the cup of his
passion; but with Christ's reservation, even with a will submitted to the will
of God: Not when I will, but when thou will. Thou may say unto him, My soul
thirsts for God, even for the living God. Psalm. 42.2.
And thou may sigh out this longing unto thy Savior, When will thou come
unto me? and 102.2.
And thou may look for him more than they that watch for the morning, and
130.6.
even more than they that watch for the morning. For blessed shall thou be if
when he comes he find thee watching; that so when he knocks thou may readily
open, and he may readily enter; and that by thy slacknesse he do not turn
away to the flocks of thy companions.

And in the second place take heed that thou give not thy self over to a
desperate idleness, to doing nothing, because thou can not do as thou
would. This were a double offense, both because it is impatience, and
because it is idleness. This is to cut off the hands because they are feeble,
and because the feet halt, Heb. 12.12.
to turn them out of the way. But it were far better to strengthen thy weak
hands, and that thou may do by exercise, though it be but weak exercise;
and it were better for thee to halt in the right way, than to run or rest in
a false way. Wherefore if thou can not do the higher works, do the lower;
for doing is thy way, though thou go but softly in it, but idleness is a false
way. And when thy Master, Lord and Husband comes, and finds thee doing
according to that which thou have, thou shall be blessed in thy deed, by him,
who accepts our work, 2 Cor. 8.12
if it come from a willing mind, according to that which we have, and not
according to that which we have not. If thou art faithful in little, he will
make thee ruler over much; thy Masters joy shall shortly enter into thee, and
thou shall shortly enter into thy Masters joy. But contrarily look for no
gain from idleness, but the gain of loss and punishment. Thou may lose
him the longer, the less thou do to please him; yea he may come unto thee
with a rod, when thou expectest him to come with the spirit of meekness and
consolation. To the workers he comes with a penny, Mat: 10.
even with a reward, favor, and a good eye; but to the idlers he comes with a
frown and a check; Why stand ye all the day idle? Rather do that which may
win him to come, and may please him being come, than by doing nothing keep
him from coming, or make him angry when he comes. And if thou ask what
thou shall do; Thy most ordinary work is the work of thy ordinary calling,
yet may thou give times and turns to those works that more immediately
concern thy heavenly calling, even such as immediately call for thy heavenly
Lord to come into thy soul: sigh and pray, and read and hear, and by
heavenly meditations let thy soul be trimmed as a bride that looks for her
husband: yea with thy earthly labors may thou mix these heavenly thoughts;
thou may work and sigh, work and wish, work and pray in short
ejaculations: and thus working, and thus waiting, working in profitable duties,
and waiting with submissive patience, he that loves both thy works and thy
patience will come unto thee, and say, I know thy patience and thy works: Rev.
2.19.
yea he will come with such an increase of grace, that he will also say, Thy
last shall be more than thy first.

Finally, these desertions are advantageable to the soul, while they draw her
eye and affection from this place of interrupted joys, to the place of
incessant and everlasting joys. The Bridegroom here does but look in upon
the soul at a crany, and the soul sees him but by glimpses, but there shall
she behold him face to face; and this beholding as it is full, so it shall also
be perpetual. The soul is here walled up in an house of clay, and the
traffic between her and her husband is but by some chinke which the spirit
has bored. But this clay which is now in it self nothing but darkness, and
keeps out light, shall hereafter be made all glorious and lightsome; yea
whereas the soul is now much carnal, then the body shall be made spiritual:
1 Cor: 15.44.
and if the body be spiritual and lightsome, how pure and spiritual shall the
soul be which is now a spirit? Surely then shall we be as it were all eye,
even all clarity and purity, and so most capable of light and glory: and
according to the capacity of our receiving, shall the light, and glory, and joy
of our husband enter into us, and fill us: And of this fullness of joy and
glory there is no end, no interruption. Wherefore our husband wisely and
profitably, draws us by these desertions, from earnests unto full fruition;
from broken pieces to whole and entire joys. If the soul might still have
these glimpses, she would perchance be contented with them: and this were no
other than to be contented with perpetual starlight, even a light fitted for
this life of vanity, which is but a night, being compared to the bright day of
eternity. Yet lying in the bed of love, she would be content to look on her
beloved by this lesser light, and would not desire the perfect day, wherein the
Sun of glory might arise unto her; and by a large and glorious light, make her
largely and gloriously to see him, who is the fountain of that large and
light, by which she seeeth him. Wherefore this lesser light is profitably
taken from her, to stir her up to the seeking of the greater; and her beloved
does chastise her by desertions, to beat her away from resting in lesser, and
interrupted joys, and to beat her unto the seeking of fuller loves, mightier
joys, and everlasting fruitions. And indeed the earnests should have taught
her this lesson, but because they did not, these interruptions are sometimes
sent to teach it her. The earnests should have taught her, to look out for the
full exhibition of that whereof they are earnests; but because the soul in
stead of looking by them, beyond them, fastens and stays her eye on them, they
are taken from that eye which was unduely stayed on them, that so by wanting
them it may look beyond them, which it should have done, but did not by them.
And now the soul seeing that these earnests are not only, but drops and
parcells of an infinite fullness, but withal drops and (...) red forth; and
his actions are answerable to his name. As he was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, so does he give of his oyntmentes to the Bride
which is joined in communion and fellowshipp with him. For of his fullness does
she receive, even grace for grace. The precious Ointment drops from this head,
unto his body, the Church, and thereby she is made all glorious within;
glorious she is now within by grace; and she shall hereafter be glorious,
both within and without with perfect glory.

Among the benefits of this glorious Grace, wherewith the Church is inwardly
beautified, when the Bridegroom visits her with his spiritual ointments, this
is a great one, that the heavenly oil gives light to the soul: the soul is
a lamp, and with this oil is the Lamp of the wise Virgins trimmed, and becomes
a burnning and a shining light. They have that light from the bridegroom, by
which they look out for the Bridegroom. The eye salve is gotten from Christ,
by which the eyes of the Church being anointed do see him, and all things
that concern him. Spiritual things are spiritually to be discerned; and
Christ and his spouse are one spirit, and by that spirit whereby she is one with
Christ, does she discern spiritual things. The husband of the Church, is the
wisdom of his Father, and when wisdom goes into a soul he gives wisdom
to the soul. The Spirit by which he enters into us, Ioh: 17.14
takes of his, and gives it to us. Therefore as he is wisdom in himself, so
is he also made wisdom to us, 1 Cor: 1.30
Christ is light, and when light and the soul are knit together by that union
with light, there is a Communion of light. The wine of the Spirit is herein
quite contrary to the bodily wine. The bodily wine when it inebriates, darkens
the understanding, and being grosser than the soul, casts a mist upon the
soul. But the spiritual wine, being purer than the soul, enlightens and
clarifies her, and even then when it brings her to an extacie, it does it, not
by the diminution, but by the excess of light.

Wherefore let the soul make special use of this precious light which shines
within her, in the accesses of her husband, let her mark, and learn, and
record the discoveries of that light; for a spirit so enlightened will discover
more than seven men upon a watchtower. There are some mysteries and secrets
which thy husband will whisper unto thee by his spirit in the bed of love, and
then let him that has an ear, hear what his spirit says. But if he do not
speak to thee, do thou speak to him; know of him those things that are
needful for thee to know, and bring to his light those things that thou
would have truly seen and discerned. Go into this Sanctuary, and there
receive Oracles and Answers; for there shall thou find resolutions of those
things that were before too high and too hard for thee: Psalm: 73.17
and when thou have truly seen them, believe them to be that which by this
light thou see them to be, and resolve never to believe the flesh hereafter,
when it shall put any other shapes upon them. For darkness puts false and
imaginary shapes upon things, but it is light that makes all things truly
manifest.

For example, when this light shines in upon the soul, look out for thy
happiness; and that thou may find it, set all things before this light,
which are briefly these, The Creator and the creature, God and the world: and
having done this, thou may plainly see, where is true, solid, and permanent
felicity; and where is vanity, transitorinesse and misery: And when thou have
seen it, know it to be the very truth which thou have seen; and that which is
once truth is truth for ever. If thou want the skill of truly measuring time
and eternity, so that a short life seems to thee like eternity, and eternity
less than a short life; when this light shines in thy soul, bring the life of
man and eternity together in one view before it, and thou shall quickly learn
the art of numbering the few days of thy life, Psa: 90.12
and withal thou shall learn that the days of eternity cannot be numbered.
There is not so much proportion or likeness between them, as there is between
the very lowest and least point of the earth, and the circle of the uppermost
sphere. And what thou have now seen to be true, believe to be true ever, even
when this light is so obscured, that thou see not the truth of it. If thou
doubt which is better, the prosperity of the wicked, or the adversity of the
godly, bring them before this light, even into the Sanctuary and Temple of thy
soul, Psalm. 73.
wherein the holy Ghost dwells and shines; and there shall thou see that
prosperity ending in a never-ending misery, and that adversity ending in a
never-ending felicity. Besides, thou shall see the prosperity to be but a
light vanity, yet followed with a weghty misery; 2 Cor: 4.17
and thou shall see adversity to be but a light affliction, yet followed with a
weighty glory. And having seen this, thou may easily judge which is the
better, and as they appear now to thy judgment, such let thy memory present
them to thee for ever. If thou art doubtful of thy way, and thy path seeemes
to be covered with darkness, search thy way by this light, for it shall be to
thee instead of a voice, saying, Esaias 30.21
This is the way, walk in it. When after some dark nights the soul is
visited (through the loving kindness of her beloved) with these day-springs
and mornings of grace, then let her say, Psalm: 143, 8-10.
Cause me to see and know the way wherein I shall walk: and then, The good
Spirit will lead thee into the land of uprightness. If the word written be
dark to thee, bring it to this light, and if it be fit for thy measure, and
the glory of thy Lord, this light shall reveal it: For the Spirit does reveal
the hid things of God. 1 Cor* 2.10
If the infidelity of men without thee, or of thine own flesh within thee,
cast a mist of doubts on the Gospel of Christ Jesus, with this light behold
this Gospel, and thou shall see in it a plot of divine wisdom, and a
mystery of high and supernatural truth. Yea thou shall see the face of him
who is the sum of the Gospel, as the face of the only begotten Son of
God, John 1.14
full of grace and glory. For God who commanded light to shine out of
darkness, 2 Cor: 4.6
has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. It is an ancient promise, They shall be all
taught of God. And when will God sooner teach than when he visits a soul
with his spirit, Esa: 54.13
which communicates both his light, and his love unto her? For both light and
love are discoverers of secrets: light makes manifest things hid in
darkness, and love tells counsels unto the beloved. It is our Saviors own
inference, I have called you friends, Ioh. 15.15
therefore I tell you my counsels. But remember that the knowledge which thou
learnest from this teacher of hearts, be laid up by thee safe, as a precious
stock or treasure, and account it thy best learning, which thou have learned
of the best Teacher. Having bought this truth sell it not; Pro: 23.23 and 4.12.
keep it, and it shall keep thee: When thou go, thy steps shall not be
straightened, and when thou runnest thou shall not stumble: Therefore take fast
hold on this instruction, let her not go, keep her, for she is thy life.

Secondly, these seasons of love, are seasons of prayer. If thou want any thing
now ask it, for in these heates of love, thy husband will deny thee nothing.
These be the times when the spirit moves the waters; therefore now cast in thy
petition, and what soever grief it has in it, thou shall be cured of it. Now
the King holds out his golden Scepter, therefore let the Queen come in boldly
with her request, though it be for a kingdom. Yea this King likes it best, If
thou do first seek a kingdom: Mat. 6 33.
wherefore whatsoever thou ask, be sure to ask this kingdom, yea to ask
it first, and the righteousness inseparably annexed to it. It were a madness in
thee to offend him by asking a less gift, when thou may please him by asking
a greater, especially, since if thou ask and obtain the greater, the lesser
by promise is annexed to the greater. And accordingly thou may come down in
thy petitions from the greater, to the lesser, and having desired the main
petitions, that the King of glory may be glorified, by the coming of his
kingdom of grace, with the righteousness thereof, then after may thou petition
for daily bread to be given thee. Yea, know that thou art now in a high
degree, the Temple of the holy Ghost; and whatsoever prayer or supplication
shall be made in this Temple by a man that shall know the plague and grief of
his own heart, 1 Kings 8*38
He that dwells in Heaven will hear the prayer made on earth, 2 Chronicles: 7 14,
15
he will forgive and do according to that prayer. The spirit of prayer and
supplication is in this Temple, Zach: 12.10.
and he is most powerful in these seasons of love, and he who gives this
spirit of prayer, will hear the prayer of the spirit which himself gives.
For he gave this spirit of purpose, to make those prayers in us, Romans 8.26
which himself might approve and grant. We know not how to pray as we ought,
for we are carnal, and flesh will not ask so, as it may be pleasing to a
spirit. A spirit loves a spiritual prayer; and therefore he gives the spirit,
that he may have that spiritual prayer which he loves. So when he hears his
spouse, he hears himself, and how can any one deny his own prayers? Christ
and his Spouse are now, (and that in a height of eminence) one spirit. And if a
man who is flesh, do not hate his own flesh, but cherishes it, surely much
more assuredly the Lord who is a spirit, cannot hate his own spirit, but
loves and cherishes, and consequently hears it.

Thirdly, when the soul is visited by the spirit of the Bridegroom, then set
upon some good, yea upon some great work. The spirit which we receive is a
spirit of power, 2 Timothy: 1.7
and when the spirit flows much into us in these tides of grace, we receive
much power. Now great power can do a great work, and it were both a loss and
a shame to thee, with a great power to do a little work, when thou may do
a great one. Therefore if there be a work which was before too great and too
hard for thee, yet now set upon it; for when thy strength is greater, thou
may do that work, which thou could not do when thy strength was less.
Our Savior says to Peter, Thou can not follow me yet, but thou shall follow
me hereafter: Ioh: 13.36
thou can not follow me yet, until thy strength be greater, by a greater
portion of the spirit: But when thou art more strengthened by the spirit, then
thou shall follow me. And accordingly he that before Christ's resurrection
denied Christ at the voice of a maid, after his resurrection confessed him in
the face of a Council: And no wonder, for for it is then said of Peter, that
he was filled with the holy Ghost. Acts 4.8.
Neither is it true of Peter alone, that a great measure of the spirit enables
to a great work, but in others also. When the spirit of the Lord comes
mightily upon Sampson, he does mighty works; Judge: 15. and 16.
for he breaks cords as flax, and slayes a thousand with the bone of an
ass. And Paul being filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 13.6.
works a miracle, by which at once he confounded Elymas, and converteth the
Deputy. Though two talents gain but two, yet five can gain five: Therefore
mark when the spirit comes mightily upon thee, and then attempt some mighty
work. As the Seaman watches the natural wind and tide, so do thou watch
the wind and tide of the spirit: The spirit blows when he lifts, and when
he lists to blow, then set forth on some noble action: when the tide of the
spirit flows, then put thy hand to the oar, for then if thou row strongly,
thou may advance mightily. The soul lying in flesh and blood, is like a
boat on ground, all the rowing in the world will not move it, but let the tide
come and set him afloate, the same tide that enables him to move, will also
mightily advance the motion, which it first enabled. Wherefore if there be any
virtue, or any work of excellence, not yet well done, think upon it in these
times and tides of grace: now set upon them, that so thou may go from virtue
to virtue, until thou be skillful, and active in all virtues; and having
attained the full number of them, then strive to the fullness and perfection of
degrees. On the contrary, if thou have some mighty enemy, that has been too
hard for thee, even some raging and wasting concupiscence, fear, distrust, or
other tentation, now set upon him mightily, for now can thou best see the way
to conquer him, and now have thou most might to effect this conquest, and to
do what thou see. Having tasted this honey, thine eyes shall be opened, 1 Samuel 14.29, 30.
and thy strength revived; wherefore make thou now a more mighty slaughter of
the enemies of God, and thy soul. And let thy fighting be against all these
enemies, though chiefly against the chiefest. There are some little foxes that
have strong holds, and these will ask some strength, to be dug out and
taken. Remember that thy warfare is against the whole Nation of the Canaanites,
thou may not suffer a little one to live. Thou must strive against all sin,
and strive for all righteousness; for the fruit of the spirit, is all
goodness, righteousness and truth. Ephesians: 5.9
It is the saying of a Saint, I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me. Phil. 4.13.
If therefore Christ strengthen thee, strive thou to do all things also.

Neither have thou in these times, only a greater strength to encourage thee
to great works, but also a great joy. Neh: 8.10.
And indeed the joy of the Lord is our strength: The joy that is in us is a
piece and pattern of the joy set before us, and by this piece of joy within
us, beholding the joy set before us, we may despise the shame, Heb. 12
and endure the Cross, and run with patience the race set before us: As sure
as we have this pawn, so sure shall we have the performance: and therefore
we may labor comfortably in the works of doing and suffering, because our
labor is not in vain in the Lord. The joy which we have excites us to labor,
because as this joy is followed with labor, so shall the labor be followed
with an over-waighing joy: and the greater the labors are to which this joy of
the spirit encourages us, the greater shall those joys be which follow these
labors; for he that sows plentifully to the spirit in labors, shall reap
plentifully of the spirit in the joys life everlasting. Though no life
everlasting can be longer than another, yet one life everlasting may be more
joyful than another, and this greater joy shall follow those that dying in the
Lord do rest from greater labors. And as the joy precedent, and the joy
subsequent do encourage us to the labors of holiness, so does also the joy
concomitant. The spirit thriveth, grows fat, prospers and rejoices in the
doing of good works, even like the mighty man in the running of his race.
Psalm. 19.
As the natural man pleases himself in eating and drinking, so does the
spiritual man delight himself in well-doing; and it is meat and drink to an
heavenly Son, Ioh. 4.34.
to do the will of his heavenly Father. When a thing works naturally, it
works pleasantly, and it is natural to the godly nature to work godliness.
Therefore by all these ways, 2 Pet. 1.
Blessed is the people that knows the joyful sound, Psa. 89.15.
they shall walk in the light of thy countenance, O Lord. They that know the
joyful sound, are blessed, and they are walkers: The joyful sound is a
precedent blessedness, and a present blessedness it is, to walk in the light
of Gods countenance, and the future is to walk by that light unto the
countenance it self, which is perfect blessedness. The joyful sound, and the
light of Gods countenance, do not allow any to take up their rest here, but
they call on them to walk, even to walk cheerfully in good duties, by these
streams of blessedness, unto the ocean and fullness of blessedness.
Wherefore let us make this use of the precedent, present, and following joys,
even to walk and run that race of piety which is here prevented with that
sound, accompanied with gladness and the light of Gods countenance, and shall
be followed with the never-ending sight of that countenance which is the
fountain of that light, and which to behold is true felicity.

Fourthly, in these times of plenty lay up a stock of confidence and comfort
for times of scarsity. It has bin told thee before, and thou shall find it
true, that the Bridegroom sometimes hides his face, and holds back his
ointments, and the spirit which blows when he lists, blows not when he
lists not. Therefore go unto the Pismire, and learn of him in the summer of
consolation, to provide for the winter of desertion. John 20.27 28
If with Thomas thou have seen and felt Jesus to be Jesus in his near and
palpable approaches and visitations; and have then truly called him, My Lord,
and my God: lay up this truth for the times of desertion, and believe that
truth to be then true, when thou feel not the truth of it; and that though
thou art changed, yet Jesus Christ is yesterday, Heb. 13, 8.
to day, and the same for ever. And for the better help of thy memory, and
assurance of thy soul, set down upon record these testimonies and tokens of
love, and seals of union which Jesus gave to thy soul when he visited her in
the bed of love. In an ill matter Tamar kept a seal and a staff, Genesis 38.25
for the safeguard of her life: in a good matter do thou much rather keep
these seals for the safety of thy soul. And if thine enemy, who is both a
Tempter, and an Accuser, and in these times of desertion does commonly tempt by
accusing, do call thy soul into question for her life, accusing her to be an
adulteress of the flesh, and not a spouse of Christ Jesus, bring forth thy
seals and tokens which lie by thee, and tell him, that whose these are, his
thou art; thy well-beloved is thine, and thou art thy well-beloveds: Tell him,
That thou have not followed cunningly devised fables, 2 Pet. 1.16
but have been an eyewitness of Christ Jesus and his love: And what thou
have seen and heard, 1 John 1.
and felt, that declare and show to the face of thy accuser: tell him, The
spirit of Jesus has left a testimony with thy spirit, Romans 8.16 Gal: 4.6, 7
that thou have been one spirit with Jesus in an heavenly marriage; and then
say also, Wherefore we are no more two but one spirit; let no tempter, nor
temptation put asunder, what God has put together. Thus in laying up the
seals of union, thou layest up a stock of confidence; and thou may see
Saint Paul making the same provision, and the same use of it; God has given us
the earnest of the spirit, 2 Cor: 5.5, 6
therefore are we always confident.

Neither do thou only from these Memorialls gather confidence but comfort. True
it is that confidence it self will bring comfort, for hope is the juice of
confidence, and this juice is an especial comfort and cordial to the soul.
But besides this comfort which arises from the apprehension of the things to
come, thou may take comfort in that which is past, and therewith refresh thy
soul in times of drought and weariness. By these memorials and pledges, call
to remembrance his loves his sweetness, his kisses, his ointments. Renew the
Images, and keep them fresh in thy soul, and these shall comfort thee, when
the things themselves are absent. It will be a pleasure to thee, to taste over
his loves, again and againet by renewed remembrances of them. It will be a
pleasure to thee to repeat the pleasure thy soul has enjoyed, and to say,
His love was pleasanter then wine, and I eat under his shadow with great
delight, Cant. 1. and 2.
and his fruit was sweet to my taste. Thou have tasted and by tasting seen
that thy Lord was gracious, and now see and by seeing taste how gracious thy
Lord was. For as tasting brought forth seeing at the first, so now a revived
seeing will also bring forth a revived tasting; each mutually begetting other.
Yea, many times when thou do this only by remembrance and representation of
that which is past, thou shall bring into thee, the substance of that whose
shadow thou recallest: And so while Jesus and his sweetness are represented to
thee, as they have been heretofore seen and tasted, they will even now
present themselves afresh to be tasted and seen by thee. While the Disciples
going to Emaus talked of Jesus as of one that was absent, Luke 24, 15, 19.
Jesus became present unto the^, and then their hearts burned with an heavenly
fire. And so while thou talkest with thy soul of Jesus, of his beauty, of his
graces, of his sweetness, he will present himself to thee, and thou who
would have accounted it a great comfort, to sit under the shadows of his
remembrance, shall now enjoy his real presence, and eat of his most pleasant
fruits; for when he comes, he comes with abundance of consolations. Thy
remembrance of him, brings him into thee whom thou do remember; and then
thou need not to borrow comforts out of the stock of thy former
remembrances; for thou have the Comforter himself to give thee new comforts,
and so may add them to the stock of thy memorialls and remembrances, for
future encouragements and consolations.

Lastly, let the pieces and earnests of heavenly joys stir up thy desires
and affections, to the fruition of the fullness of joys; let these drops of
Gods sweetness inflame thy soul with a thirst and longing to enjoy God the
fountain of this sweetness. Let these kisses of Christ Jesus kindle in thee
such a fervent love of Christ, that thy soul may pant to be united to him in
a perfect and consummate marriage. And out of the heat of these longings and
enflamed desires, send up the aspirations and breathings of thy burning soul
in vehement wishes, and groaning complaints: My soul thirsts for God, Psa:
42.2
when shall I come and appear before God? My tears have been my meat day
and night, while the flesh says to the spirit, Where is thy God? I desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil: 1.23.
which is best of all. Surely Christ is best of all, and therefore is it best
of all to be with Christ. Thou have tried in the drops of his sweetness which
thou have tasted, that he is best of all, for the taste of Christ in them has
distasted all the taste of the creatures. Thou have tasted and seen that the
goodness creating is better than the goodness created; and therefore Christ is
best of all. These drops of the Creator are better than all the visible
creature, and he that is the fountain is better than the drops that distill
from the fountain, and so is he better than that which is better than the
creature, and therefore is best of all: and if he be best, surely it is best
for thee to be with him; the enjoying of the best is the best enjoying.
Therefore call unto him, Psalm. 43.3.
O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me
unto thy holy hill: let thy good spirit lead me and bring me to thy blessed
presence, that as I have seen thee in these modells, and mirrours, and
earnests, so I may behold thee face to face. And though thy pilgrimage be
prolonged, and being present in the body, thou art absent from the Lord, 2 Cor:
5.8
yet desire rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord.
Accordingly let thy affections be ever rowing in these streams of the Deity to
the Deity it self: by these patterns of rich oar, having discovered a far
richer mine, do not stand gazing on the patterns, nor think thy self rich
enough in them, but by them be stirred up to get and possess the full riches
of the Mine. Indeed the pattern shows thee the richness of the Mine, it
being a part of that riches which the Mine will give thee. But remember it is
but a piece, and a piece cannot be equalled to the whole; for the whole has an
infinite fullness of such pieces in it. And hereby there is such odds between
a piece and the whole, that a piece is more valuable for being an earnest of
the whole, than for his own value. It is more to be prized for that which it
promises, than for that which it exhibiteth. Therefore value it highly for the
worth which it has in it self, but value it infinitely more highly, for that
excessively exceeding weight of glory which it promises. Look upon it for the
goodness that is in it, but much more on the goodness without it, which the
goodness within it promises. So by looking on it, look from it, even beyond
and above it; for though these earnests first do call thy affections to them,
yet being considered as earnests, then do they remove thy affections, to that
whereof they are earnests: our rest is not in them, but in him, that gave these
earnests, who gave them for this end, that they might direct our faith and hope
to him who is our rest. Wherefore as God spoke to Israel by Moses, so speaks
he to the true Israel by these earnests, Exodus 14.15.
Go forward. Why stand ye still gazing and resting on these earnests, when
even the earnests themselves call on you to go forward? The earnests call on
you to go forward from earnests to full performances, from grace to glory,
from faith to vision, from the drops of the Deity to the Deity it self, the
only true rest and Sabbath of the soul. And when God says, Heb. 10.38
Go forward, If any man draw back, his soul shall have no pleasure in him.
But of all drawing back, let us most of all beware of drawing back from God
to the world. This were yet a farther degree of going back from God; for
whereas the drawing back from God to the earnests is one degree, this going
back from the earnests to the world is a second and a most fearful degree.
This is a true returning from Canaan to Egypt: but let us remember what the
Apostle says of the right possessours of these earnests: Heb. 10.39
We are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul. If we believe, we do look forward, and go forward,
for faith looks not on things seen, but on things not seen, and such are the
things before us; yet because the strong taste of the onions of Egypt, (even of
fleshly lust) does stick still in our teeth, and often would make Manna to
seem but a dry meat, it is not amiss, that this word Go forward, be often
sounded in the ears of the heavenly pilgrims. These earnests are Manna, and
this Manna is not such a dry meat, as the flesh would make it, for it serves
to carry us unto the land of eternal felicity: Number 11*6 Josh. 5*12.
it both calls upon us to go to our husband who is our happiness, and it
enables us to go that journey, whereunto it calls us. Therefore let us
hearken to the voice of it when it calls, because the same that calls us,
does also enable us. 2 Cor. 5.
We have received the earnest of the Spirit, therefore are we always bold, and
willing to be with the Lord, whose earnest we have received. We would put off
these bodies of dust and lust, that our souls may put on Christ in a full and
fruitive union. Yet neither would we wholly be uncloathed of our bodies, but
put them off, to put off their baseness and sinfulness, and to put them on
again glorious and holy. And then shall it be a fit garment for the soul in
the day of her gladness, and capable with her of the consummate marriage with
the King of glory. And for this marriage does the spirit and the bride say,
Come: the bride says it by the spirit, and the spirit says it in the bride:
This is the voice of the bride, and not of her tongue only, but of her spirit;
and not of her spirit only, but of the spirit in her spirit. If then thou have
the same spirit of love, because thou love, do thou also speak and say,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

CAP. VII. The signs, and marks of the true and right visitations of the
heavenly Bridegroom.
IT is necessary to show what these visitations are, to convince that they are,
and so to undeceive those that think they are not. It is also necessary to
free those from error, who believing that they are, yet do mistake those that
are not, for those that are. Such visitations there are, for they are seen and
felt by men seeing and waking; and seeing and waking not only with the bodily
eyes, but with two better eyes, the one of humane reason, and the other far
excelling that, divine and heavenly light. Spiritual light beholds these
spiritual sights, and shows them to the understanding, which being convinced
by that which it sees, believes them it self, and would also deliver over the
sight, and the belief of them to others. But the thoughts of man are narrower
than these joys, and words are narrower tha^ thoghts. But, which is worst of
al, the heart of an earthly man is narrower than the narrow words of a
spiritual man; for the carnal man perceives not spiritual things, though
they be held up before his fleshly eyes; yet in the mouth of two or three
eyewitnesses a word should stand; and stand it does, though blind men see it
not standing before them, and therefore stumble at it. But who knows whether an
Ephatah may come down from heaven, that while a spiritual object is proposed,
a spiritual sight may be infused? Howsoever the words of heavenly wisdom are
not spoken in vain to the children of wisdom; and especially those who are
yet but children, and not perfect in tae art of discerning good and evil, must
not be left to the dangers of error and mistaking. The black Angel sometimes
changes himself into an Angel of light, and then may he also make some shows
of lightsome visitations. There is also a sanguine and natural lightsomnesse,
and a bright beam of adustion, that sometimes shine in the mind, and these
also may be mistaken to be divine. But the spirit is not flesh, much less is
he that evil spirit, which is contrary to him. And because the spirit is that
which these are not, the visitations are such, as those imaginations are not
which come from these. And that this difference may the better be discerned,
let let us behold the true characters of a spiritual visitation, which the
soul sees when the husband of souls does visit her.

A first mark and sign of his presence is light; a light not fitted for the
eye but the soul, even a light spiritual, and shining spirit and truth into
the soul and spirit. For the Lord is a spirit, and when he comes into the
soul, he comes with abundance of that spirit which leads into all truth.
He is the light of the world, even of the great world of mankind, and
therefore when he comes into the little world of one man, how great is his
light? And when this light shines brightly, then the soul by it does see
spiritual things as truly and assuredly, as the corporal eye does corporal
things. For there is an agreement between a spiritual eye, and spiritual
objects, as there is between the bodily eye, and bodily object. By this light,
things formerly not known are seen and discovered, and spiritual things
known before only by a carnal, which is a false knowledge, are spiritually,
and so truly discerned; for the light is that which makes manifest, and this
light being spiritual makes spiritual things so manifest, that it gives a
full assurance of understanding, and makes us know that we know the^. Even
those things which before seemed fables and foolishness to the carnal eye, to
this spiritual sight and light, appear plainly to be deep mysteries, and
most wise truths. Especially the great Bridegroom of souls, who to the Jews
is a stumbling block, and to the Grecians foolishness, to this light appears
clearly to be the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.
and the power of God. For the light begotten acknowledges the light
begetting, and Christ is seen in the soul by his own beams. He is seen
there as a Head and Husband to the Church, as a root of life; as an
All-sufficient Savior, fit and able to restore a decayed and lost creation, to
disperse and tread down a combined association of adversary and mighty
spirits, and to unite and recapitulate the scattered members of a mystical
body both in heaven and earth, each to other, and all to the Deity. He is
beheld as the fairest of men, the souls well-beloved, an infuser of that
blessed sap of spiritual life, by which the soul is purified here, and made
capable of the beatificall vision in an eternal life hereafter. And as this
derived light shows us the primitive light which begat it, and being
spiritual, shows us that Lord who is the spirit from whom it proceeded, so
does it also discover to us diverse other spiritual truths, and is a kind of
Oracle that gives divine answers and resolutions.

Now that we may certainly know this light to be a truth, and not an
imagination, and withal to be truly spiritual and heavenly, and not carnal,
earthly, much less infused by a counterfeit Angel of light; let us first
observe that this light of the spirit does agree with the light of the word:
The same spirit of God which shines now in our souls in these heavenly
visitations, did first shine in the word; so that the light of the word, and
the light in our souls are twins, and resemble each other, and agree like
brethren. If therefore there be this agreement, then there is this brotherhood,
and if no agreement, then there is no brotherhood. Therefore to the law, to the
testimony, Esaias 8.20.
if thy thoughts speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them: for indeed if our thoughts be truly enlightened, we shall find
some words in the word of God confirming them; yea many times this light within
will call up some place of the word without for a witness to it, to confirm a
truth which in that place was not formerly perceived. Such is the harmony and
power of harmony between the spirit and the word, that when you hit a
spiritual truth in your soul, there will often come a sound, answer and echo
from some place in the word agreeable to it. And as the word does approve this
light, so does this light approve the word. It loves to look on it, it sees a
heavenly wisdom in it, yea it sees secrets in it; yea many times it will in
some short sentence, yea in some single word, find out a Mine of heavenly
doctrine, and as at a little crany discover a world of divine truths. And so
the light of the spirit does approve it self, not only by being approved of
the word, but by approving, and improving it.

This is a sufficient trial and touchstone of this heavenly light, though if
need were I might add, the willing resignation of reason, even of the
natural light of the soul to the sovereignty of this divine and heavenly
light. The understanding is not fettered and bound by a violent hand, but it
yields it self up freely to be subdued and captivated by a light that
surpasses the light which it self has. The reasonable light of man
continues in man, even when this supernatural light shines; it knows what
other men know, and knows what it self knew and thought before this light
came to it; but this light being come, it yields willingly to it, and
surrenders both it self and the man whom it formerly guided. This homage of
reason shows a sovereignty in that spiritual light to which reason does this
homage. The going out of the light of a candle, (not by quenching, but
not-shining) acknowledges a greater and more excellent light to be present.
And indeed reason even with reason gives way, that a greater light should
rather guide than a lesser; yea with reason it gives way, that it self being a
lesser light, should be increased and enlarged by a higher and greater, that so
it may discern higher and greater things. And this increase it experimentally
finds: for by this new and greater light, the soul sees the supreme light
which begat it, she sees him to be her sovereign good; she sees the way to
him, and is directed to union with him, and to the full fruition of him. And
because she sees these excellent things now, which she saw not before, she
justly and wisely resignes her self to that light by which she sees those
excellent things which she saw not before, and to that sight by which she sees
in a more excellent manner of seeing.

A second Character and mark of a divine visitation, is joy, even a joy of a
different kind and character from other joys; For this joy arises not
originally from natural principles neither fastneth it self on natural
obiectes, but is supernatural in the root of it, and fixes it self on
supernatural objects. It is no sanguine joy, neither made of humor and
complexion, for it arises often in the midst of sadness within, and crosses
without. The spiritual man therefore thus truly describes the manner of the^,
In the midst of the sorrows of my heart, Psalm. 94.19
thy comforts have refreshed me. Even when the outward man decays, and dies
away, the inward man renews and rejoices: 2 Cor. 4.16
When the disciples are talking doubtfully and are sorrowful; Luke 24.15.17.
then Jesus appears to them, and warmes their hearts, with an heavenly fire.
When the wine of natural joy is spent, and there is nothing left but the
waters of affliction, the^ does Christ turn this water into wine. Thou have
turned (says David) my mourning into dancing, thou have put off my sackcloth,
Psalm. 30.11
and girded me with gladness. There is a river that makes glad the City of God,
there is the new wine of the kingdom, that makes the heart merry; there is a
heavenly oil that makes that face pleasant and joyful, which is the image of
God; these flow forth from the throne in heaven, from the true vine, from the
right olive, and that it may appear that they do so, they are commonly sent
into thirsty, Matthew. 5.3, 4, 6.
weary, mourning and almost despayring souls; that the excellency of them may
appear to be of God and not of man: when the soul is parched with drynes, the
sap of joy cannot naturally come out of drines; even Moses himself says,
Numb. 20 10.
Shall I fetch you water out of this rock? when there is no wine, and there
appears nothing but water, even tears and sorrows, it must be a divine hand
that turns this water into wine. When the soul is oppressed with spiritual
wants, and sees nothing but grief within, and terrors without, it must be the
work of God to make this oil to run, 2. King 4.
until the vessels be full. Therefore Saint Paul rightly infers, 2 Cor. 8.12
that it is the right hand of the most High, even in an high degree, which
makes this chang. Yea there is in it more then a change, even a harmony and
agreement between contraries; Much affliction and joy in the Holy Ghost. 1.
These. 1.6
And so Saint Peter, 1. pet. 1.6.
Ye greatly rejoice, though ye are in heaviness: Wherefore since to the
Saints there arises a light in the midst of darkness, Psalm. 112.4
could not make this light, but he only who is the light of the world and by
whom first the light came to shine out of darkness. 2 Cor. 4.6.


And as this joy is divine and heavenly, flowing from a divine and heavenly
fountain, so is it also divine and heavenly, because it fasteneth on divine and
heavenly objects. Things that love are like: the natural joy delights in
natural objects, and a spiritual joy in spiritual objects. Accordingly while
the natural joy looks out for corn and wine, Psalm. 4.
the spiritual joy looks out for the countenance of God. God is a spirit, and
he delights in spirit, because it is like him: and the joy of the spirit
delights in God, yea delights in him most, because he is the supremest spirit,
and consequently highest in this likeness. And because the union of our spirits
with this spirit is only in Christ, with whom the soul becoming one spirit
has union with the highest spirit, therefore the soul having found Christ,
rejoices in him above all things, with a joy unspeakable and glorious. She
rejoices so in him, that she will sell all natural things, Phil. 3.8.
to buy the spiritual happiness that is to be found in him. And thus both by
the absence, and by the contempt of natural things, this joy may be known to
be supernatural. For as it does not faint nor fail when natural things are
absent, if Jesus be present, so does it not fix or feed on them being
present, if Jesus also be present with them. Yea if the soul may feel Jesus
to be more present, because they are more absent, she enjoys that absence, 2
Cor. 12.9, 10.
by which the presence of her beloved is more enjoyed. She delights in the
tribulations, Romans 5.3.
whose abundance has caused an abundance of consolations: she so much loves
Christ, that for his sake she loves things that are to nature most hateful,
and rejoices in them. And thus while the soul rejoices in things contrary to
nature, for the love of things supernatural, this joy cannot be natural, and
of the same kind that those things are which it despises, but must needs be
supernatural, Romans 8.5.
and of the same kind that those things are in which it especially delights.

Another property of these joys, by which they prove themselves to be
spiritual, is this, that they are nutrimentall to the very soul and spirit of
man. They feed, they satisfy, and in their measure fill the soul, and give
her an inward thriving, and increase. Bodily joys are thick and gross, and
by their grossness stick behind in the body, and pierce not to the soul;
and if any thing come to the soul from them, it is commonly but filth, dregs,
guilt, vexation or shame. She may be more clouded by them, made more dull,
earthy, and foul, by materiality, or filth, cast upon her; but they enter not
into the inward parts of the soul, to water the root of her, and to give her
true, kindly, and real increase. As mudde is to the thirsty bodies, so are
these to thirsty souls, they cannot drink them in, nor quench their thirst
with them: But the spiritual joys enter in, and enlarge the very soul of
man; they make her who is a spirit more spiritual, for she opens her mouth
wide to them, and then she is filled with that spiritual and divine sap,
which accompanies them, and wherein they are founded. And then as she has
heard, so she has seen and tasted, Prove. 17.22.
that an heavenly joy is to the soul a restaurative medicine: and that when
she enjoys her Savior in the contemplations and tastes of his love, then is
she filled with marrow and fatness. Psalm. 63.5.


But I hasten to a third Mark of spiritual visitations, and that is
holiness. For when Christ visits the soul, as he does clarify her with
light, and ravish her with joy, so he does beautify her with holiness.
External joys, and joys of the body, have not this virtue, neither can they
give it to the soul: but when Christ comes into the soul by his spirit, the
same spirit that does enlighten and glad her, does also hallow her; yea as by
the light she is directed to holiness, so by the gladness she is lifted up,
encouraged, and actuated unto holiness. In these accesses of Christ there are
heights of union, and the increases of union bring with them increases of
uniformity. The spirit of union is fire, and fire turns that into it self to
which it is united: and the fuller and closer this union is, the more is this
turning. So Christ Jesus, the more he comes into a soul by his spirit, the
more spiritual does he make her; yea the more does he melt a soul into
himself; the more does he turn her will into his will, and the more does he
increase his own image in her; and we know that his image is righteousness
and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.
He brings with him those ointments for which the Virgins love him, and those
ointments also make them more lovely. Hence are they inwardly more glorious,
and hence outwardly they smell more sweetly in their conversations. The Kings
daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.
and her garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia. In these touches of
Christ if in any other, Mark 5.30
there comes forth virtue from him: The spirit of the lover passes into his
beloved, and makes her of one heart and will with him, and this conformity of
the will with Christ is true holiness.

The spirit by which Christ visits his spouse is an holy spirit and a spirit
of power; Luke 1.35
and accordingly when this spirit is shed into the soul, 2 Timothy 1.7
there is power and holiness infused with him, and by him. And hence it is that
they who receive the true ointments of the spirit in true visitacions, they
pass beyond a speculatiue and discoursing holiness even beyond a form of
godliness, and advance to the power of it, and to a fruitful expression of this
power.

Yea I may say, that hereunto the very love of Christ constrayneth us. For in
these visitacions, and by them, the love of Christ is shed into our hearts. Romans
13.10.
The spirit of power and holiness, is the spirit of love; and this love given by
the spirit may be called holiness, for it is the fulfilling of the law. They
that love Christ are certainly willing to please him, Ioh 14.21
and to keep his commandments; and they that have the spirit of love cannot
but love him.

Yea they cannot but love him for the union they have with him, and the joys
of this union: And loving him they will desire to bring forth fruit unto him,
Romans 7.4.
and by him, even fruit that may be like him. The pleasure of love and union
in outward marriage, is a kind of hire of fruitfulnes: and in the spiritual
marriage, the joy of love and union is the hire of a fruitful holiness.
Wherefore those that truly enjoy Christ in these spiritual accesses, both
desire and obtain this spiritual fruitfulness; for the spouse of Christ is
most truly that vine, Psalm. 128.
which is fruitful by the sides of the house, and whose children stand like
olive plants: yea in old age is she full of fruit. Psalm 92.14


Wherefore if with light and joy, the soul do feel, that the spirit of
Christ, by spiritual heat, power, and love, have wrought a powerful, and
fruitful holiness in her, let her know that Christ Jesus himself has been
with her. Carnal and corporal things cannot do this, evil Angels neither
can nor will do it; good Angels though they rejoice to see it done, yet they
do it not, but that spirit alone both can do it, and does it, which is the
power and right hand of God; and which only writes the laws of God in the
hearts and souls of men. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. 2 Cor. 3.3.
He it is alone that gives the soul the new wine of the kingdom, wherewith
the soul being once refreshed, she rejoices as a giant to run the race of
holiness: It is the spirit of Christ alone that so anoynteth the soul, that
she runs after Christ in the ways of righteousness. And as it was said to
this Head and Husband of the Church, Thou have loved righteousness, and hated
iniquity, therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows: Psalm. 45.
So it may be also said to the Spouse, Thou have loved righteousness, and
hated iniquity, therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above all those that were thy fellows by carnal generation. For there
is no oil of gladness, that has with it the love of righteousness, but that
wherewith Christ Jesus the Head was principally anointed, and which dropping
from Christ the Head to the Members and Spouse of Christ, makes her to excel
the rest in virtue and holiness. And as there was not any such spice, as the
Queen of Sheba brought unto Solomon, so there are no such ointments of grace
and gladness, as a greater than Solomon does give to his Queen, when he and
she are met in the heates of a spiritual conjunction, and the excesses of a
fruitive union.

CAP. VIII. A Corollary of counsels and directions, to those that are entered
into the estate of this blessed Marriage.
LEt it be the maine endeavor of a soul married to Christ, to keep her self
still in that point wherein she may keep him; and so keep him, that she may
still say, and feel what she says, My well-beloved is mine, and I am my
well-beloveds: To this end, let her still cast, and consider with her self,
what those things are which he most loves, and make her most lovely in his
eyes: for the spirit of this lover, loves to be there where his love is.
Therefore if there be any praise, any virtue, think on those things, and set
them as pearls, and jewels about thy soul, to make her glorious and amiable
in his sight. Let the face of the soul, even the image of the most excellent
Deity, shine brightly in his eyes, being anointed with fresh oil; and let her
be lovely to him by those ointments which make him lovely to her.

Let her often go out of the body, yea out of the world by heavenly
contemplations; and treading on the top of the earth with the bottom of her
feet, stretch her self up, to look over the world, into that upper world,
where her treasure, her joy, her beloved dwells. Let her stand in this
watchtower, and look out for her lover, as the watchman looks out for the
morning; and then the dayspring from on high shall visit her. Turn thy face
away from the enchantments of this world, Numb. 24
from dreams of earthly profit and preferment, and turn thy face to the
wilderness, even turn this world into a wilderness, and a nothing before thy
face; and the spirit of God shall come upon thee, and thou shall see the vision
of the Almighty. And when this Sun of the soul shines upon her, let the eye
of the soul, made clear and piercing by faith, (like the eye of an Eagle)
look on the Sun; for this Sun looks on the eye that looks on him, yea he
loves the eye of a faith working unto love, and cries out that he is wounded by
this one of her eyes. Cant. 4.9.
It is his own speech to the soul, Seek my face continually: and it is an
answer which he loves to receive from the soul, Psalm. 27.8.
Thy face, O Lord, will I seek. And thus beholding Christ Jesus with open
face, thou shall see, and feel things inutterable; thou shall also be changed
from beauty to beauty, 2 Cor. 3.18
from glory to glory by the spirit of this Lord. The more the soul sees, and
is seen of him, the more lovely shall she grow, and the more lovely she is,
the more will he delight to see and be seen of her.

Again, if with that hearty lover, whose heart was according to the heart of
his well-beloved, thou can truly say, Psalm. 25.15
Mine eyes are always to the Lord; having procured his coming, thou shall
also stay him from going: Thy heart shall watch him, and keep him, and hold
him; for where he is so watched and held from going, he is willing to abide.
The story is well known, that though he seemed as though he would have gone
further, Luke 24.28, etc.
yet when they constrained him, he went in to tarry with them. And though he
should after some tarrying vanish out of sight, yet if our hearts be thinking
and talking of him, he will eftsoons stand in the midst of them, and bring
his peace with him.

And that thou may keep his love fresh, and fervent to thee, keep thy own
love fresh and fervent to him. For love draws love, and fervent love makes
love fervent like it self. Love is like burning coals, and burning coals
will kindle coals that are not burning. Therefore kindle thy love, and make it
to flame, by thinking on his beauty, on his sweetness, on his goodness. Kindle it
by renewing the old tastes of him, which thou have formerly tasted. Kindle thy
love, by reviving the images of loves past: put thy self into the same
thoughts wherein thou wast, when thou did enjoy him. And so if thy mind be
fitted, and put into a state of enjoying, it is likely that he will come into
a mind so fitted, and thou shall enjoy him. And if he come not yet into thee,
stir up thy spiritual concupiscence, and therewith let the soul lust
mightily for him, and let her lusts and desires ascend up to him in strong
cries and invocations, Luke 11.13
and then by his spirit he will descend unto thee.

Be careful that there be a perpetual consent of thy will unto his will, and
a perpetual issuing of thoughts and actions from this consent and conformity.
In the house of this husband there must be but one will, and that is the
husbands. The wifes will must be melted into the will of the husband, and her
will must not live, but her husbands will must live in her. And then this
husband will delight to be much at home, where he may be Master; and he will
delight often to give the unity of fruition, where there is an unity of will
and affection: but where the wifes will does cross the will of the husband,
there is he wearied away, and that house is to him as a place of continual
dropping, offensive, and indeed unfit to entertain that Lord who is the King
of glory. A King loves to be in his Kingdom where he commands and is obeyed;
and therefore if thou will have this King to visit and dwell with thee, let him
command and reign in thee: for he has told thee himself, If any man love
me, and keep my commandments, Ioh. 14.21
I will love him, and will appear plainly to him.

Wherefore if the soul desire to please her self by the fruition of his
presence, let her especially and mainely strive to please him: for by pleasing
him, she shall be pleased by him, whose pleasure is infinitely greater than that
which arises out of her pleasing of her self. Let her give away her own will
for his will, and in so doing she shall be a double gainer: for she changes a
worse will for a better, and withal gains him whose the better will is, and
who is infinitely better than her self. Wherefore strive to please him, and to
give him his will, yea strive to give it much and mainly; for the more thou
give it, the more thou receivest into thee a most excellent will, and a most
excellent husband. Thus shall thou please thy self most, by pleasing him, and
not thy self. What husband is there, who seeing his wife to neglect her self
for him, but he will love and cherish that wife the more, the more she
neglects her self for him? And then by how much his love and cherishing is
more advantageable and pleasing than her own, so much is her gain advanced,
by loving and pleasing him more than her self.

And because there is some beauty and good in the creature, (though indeed
subject to vanity, and blasted with a curse) and there is a law of the members
reigning in the worst, and not wholly rooted out of the best, which loves to
look on the creature, and by looking lusts after it; let the soul married to
Christ be very wary how she turns her eye, and fixes it on the creature. For
if her eye go much after it, and fettle long upon it, her love is likely to
come after her eye. She may look on it, and behold the goodness of it, but in
beholding the goodness of it, she must again look from it, to that
transcendent, original, and infinite goodness of her husband, of whom this
goodness was borrowed. For by him all things were made, John 1.3.
that were made. Again, she may look on it to see the vanity of it, that by
seeing the vanity of it, she may look from it to her Lord and Husband, in
whom is stability, and perpetual felicity. And yet again she may look on it,
to see the curse that is cast upon it, and in the terriblenesse of that curse,
she may see the horror of sin, that looking from it again to her Lord and
Savior, she may see the excellency of his love, and inestimable value of his
person, who has taken away the curse, and the sin from his beloved Spouse,
and gives her a blessed use of the creature, and full blessedness in the
eternal fruition of the Creator. Thus looking to the creature, by looking to
it, she looks from it, she rests not in it, but passes by it to her only
true rest. And indeed by these and the like removals the soul should ever be
kept loose from the world. For as when we would not have things to glue and
fasten, we do often touch, and turn, and moove them; so the soul being apt
to glue and fasten to the world, we must by these and the like meditations
often touch and remove her, that so she may be kept continually loose from it.

But because the cyment which joins the soul to the world is the flesh, and
she must adulterate first with this old husband, before she can prostitute her
self to the world; let the soul take especial care to watch and resist the
approaches of this fly, but deadly enemy, that comes in the shape of a lover.
This is he whom the true husband, whose name is jealous does perfectly hate,
Exodus 34.14. Gal 5.17.
for there is a perfect contrariety between them. Therefore so much as thou
admittest the flesh, so much thou expellest thy Lord and Savior. But so much
as thou banishest the flesh, so much room do thou make for Christ to come
into thee by his spirit. Therefore be thou so far from loosing thy husband,
for this old adulterer, that thou gain him the more, by expelling and killing
the other. The flesh is good for nothing but to be slain, and therein there is
this gain, that the more he dies, the more thy love and life loves thee, and
lives in thee. Therefore whereas the flesh would make it thy pleasure to live
after the flesh, do thou make it thy pleasure to kill the flesh: let the
hunting, pursuing, and killing of the lusts of the flesh be thy pastime and
pleasure, even the hunting and destroying of these foxes, Gant. 2.18
that would destroy thy vineyard. And then will the Lord of the vineyard get up
early to his vineyard, the vine shall flourish, and the tender grape appear,
and there shall he give thee his loves. Cant. 7.12


But if through thy own remissness, or the fleshes importunity, the soul by
concupiscence has conceived sin, make haste to the fountains set open for
Judah and Jerusalem to wash, Zach. 13.1
and to be clean. Wash thy self in tears and blood; Psalm. 51.7.
the spirit of penitence, contrition, and conversion washes white, Rev. 7.14.
Esaias 1.16, 1.
and the blood of the Lamb washes whiter than snow. And by the cleansing
spirit is given to thee the cleansing blood. That false husband whom thou have
pleased, he has defiled thee, and thy true husband who^ thou have offended,
he it is that must wash thee; therefore he came by water and blood, to wash
thy guilt with his blood, and thy filth by his spirit; that thus being washed
thou may be without spot and blemish, and again lovely in his eyes, and
acceptable in the eyes of his Father. And being thus made fair by his washing,
he will yet again embrace thee, and put thy evil out of his remembrance, by
his own overcomming goodness. But then let his goodness overcomming thy
evil, teach thee to overcome thy own evil with goodness. Hate and resist
all sin, and especially that sin by which thou have most offended so loving
a husband; and hate and resist that false husband who tempted thee to this sin.
Love thy true husband the more, the more thou have offended him, and the more
he has forgiven thee. Luke 7.47
And the more thou love him, the more strive not to offend him. And if thus
after thy sin, thou art the farther from sin, more fair in holiness, and
fuller of love to thy heavenly husband, thou shall hear from his mouth the
voice of joy and gladness, Psalm. 51.8.
and shall feel from his mouth a kiss of peace in thy soul. And this
spiritual kiss shall drop a spiritual ointment, the very pledge and seal of
pardon and peace; Romans 5.1. 5.11.
even a testimony of his spirit speaking to thy spirit, Hebr. 10. 19,22.
Thy sins are forgiven thee.

And having regained him, make thy self more one with him, and increase thy
communion with him. Touch him hard with thy faith, suck him strongly with thy
love, that more virtue may come out of him, to cure that issue of sin yet
abiding in the remnant of the flesh, and to make thee more one and uniforme
with him. For as a bough, the more he suckes from the tree, the larger is his
union with the tree, and the more is his likeness to the tree, so the more a
soul draws from Christ, the more is she one with him, and the more is she
like him. And again, the more she is like him, the more will he delight to
be one with her; and thus shall she go on in an endless circle of happiness.
The highest and happiest, and sweetest harmony is, when the soul is in an
unizon with her Savior and husband: every touch and sound of the soul thus
tuned to Christ Jesus, resoundeth in him, touches and moves him. And as with
the sound of outward music the spirit of God came upon the Prophet; 2 King.
3.15.
so with the sound of this inward music (be it in holy contemplations,
ardencies, desires, invocations, resolutions) the spirit of Christ Jesus
comes more powerfully and plentifully into the soul. And when he comes, do
thou draw from him that spiritual sap and nourishment, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
by which thou may grow up to the stature appointed thee. By the supply of
this head grow up to this head in a due proportion, even to the fullness of
that part which thou hold in his body. And let not the head be the head of a
man, yea of the fairest and goodliest of men, and thou a starved, dwarfish,
crooked or misshapen hand or foot, but both in measure and shape strive to be a
member proportionable to so comely an Head.

And that thou may thus grow, let not swelling, but growth be the end of thy
sucking. Desire the sincere milk, 1 Pet. 2.
and honey and wine of the Deity, that thou may grow thereby, in solid
substance, not in frothy and puffy imaginations. Grow thou in the real
excellence of a divine Nature, and not in the empty swellings of a fleshly
pride. For the flesh has sometimes a desire of spiritual excellencyes, but it
is for a fleshly end, even to puff it self up by the^. But seek not these
pearls, to cast it to these Swine, nor this Bread of heaven to give it to such
dogs. Rather buffet this flesh and beat it down, lest a messenger of Satan be
sent to buffet thee for not buffeting it, and so when thou look for a good
spirit to exalt thee, an evil spirit be sent to beat and humble thee. Christ
comes into thee, not to feed, but to kill the flesh; wherefore thy end and his
are contrary, if thou desire his co^ing to feed that, which he comes to kill.
If then thou would have him come indeed into thee, join with him in the
proposal of one and the same end; even the exaltation of the Spirit, and the
death of the flesh: allow not fleshly swelling to be an end: no not a
subsequent, of thy meeting with Christ; but kill it, if after this meeting it
arise in thee. The flesh has no part nor portion in this service; but to be
slain by it: therefore let not this left hand of the flesh, know, what the
right hand of the spirit does in thee: but be thou wholly spiritual, in a
spiritual, in a spiritual business, and by it grow more spiritual, and, not
more, but, less carnal.

Again, desire not these sweetnesses of spiritual union, only because they
are sweet; for in this the flesh also may have his part, both in desire and
fruition. Be not like the children of Israel, Number. 11.4
in the wilderness, who desired meat for their lusts: for of such a desire
there is an il beginning, and an il end may be expected, since lust is both the
beginning and end of it. But blessed is the land, Eccl. 10 17
when her Princes eat for strength, and not for riot; and blessed is the
Church when her Nobles eat this spiritual food for spiritual strength, and
not for lust and luxury. It is a kind of luxury to make taste, and not
strength the maine end of eating: but let the sweetness of the taste be used
as an encouragement unto eating for strength. Out of the strong one comes this
sweetness, that by this sweetness thou may be made partaker of his
strength. Wherefore having found this honey, eat with Jonathan, that thou may
be strengthened in services to be done, and against enemies to be resisted.
Eat that thou may strengthen thy faith, and that the eyes of the inner man
being enlightened, thou may the more clearly discern the riches of glory
given to thee in Christ Jesus. Strengthen thy faith also, that thou may more
fully, and closely cleave unto him with thy will, whom thou have seen with thy
understanding to be the treasure of perfect felicity. Yea let not thy faith
leave growing from strength to strength, until it bring thee beyond faith unto
vision. Eat that thou may strengthen thy hope, and that thou may hope the
more perfectly to receive the full fruition of that sweetness, and
blessedness, whereof here by this eating thou have received the foretastes and
pledges. Eat that thou may strengthen thy love, and that thou may love him
with a love above all loves, whom thou have seen and tasted to be fairer and
sweeter than all that can be loved. And by strengthening thy love to him,
strengthen also thy love to his will, and to his law the copy of his will. The
sweetness which thou tastest, must needs love the law, for they are twins;
this sweetness being shed into our souls, and the law written in our hearts by
one and the same spirit. And as the sweetness brings with it a love of the
law, making it sweet to us, Psalm. 19.10
(even sweeter than honey, and the honey comb,) so does the law lead us to the
fulness and fountain of this sweetness. Gal. 6.16. Rev. 22.14
Be thou also strengthened by this sweetness, more strongly to resist the
enemies of thy soul, and of thy Lord and Savior. Let the sweetness of the
spirit turn the sweetness of the flesh into bitterness, and the sweetness
of the world into contempt: and let it make thee to spit out against the taste
of all tentations, which the evil spirit shall offer thee: for how sweet
soever the same tentations may now seem in thy mouth, they shall at last be
turned into an everlasting bitterness and gnashing of teeth. But the
sweetness of thy husband grows like a river, until it come and bring thee
to a boundless Ocean of perpetual sweetness. Briefly, let this sweetness
now tasted by thee, fill thy heart and soul, and life with sweetness. Let thy
garments smell of myrrh, Psalm. 45.
cassia, and frankincense; let thy conversation yield forth the sweet fruits
of righteousness, sweet figs, and sweet grapes, Judge. 9.11.
that cheer God and man. Having received sweetness from Christ, sweeten
others also; and being strengthened by this sweetness strengthen thy brethren.

Be not discouraged, if he come not so often to thee, nor stay so long with
thee as thou desire. The baits of a traveller are short, and his journey
long. The meals of Elijah were but two, 1 King. 19
but his journey was forty days. This kind of food has in it an eternal
nourishment, and therefore it may strengthen long, though but shortly taken.
Besides, if thou had this meat so long and so fully as thou desire, it may
be thou would not so long and so fully desire and love it, as now thou
do. There is a loathing upon fullness, and a restivenesse upon spiritual
fatness, as upon the bodily. Therefore Iesburun being fat, Deu. 32.25
kicketh against him that made her fat, and Israel being fully and daily fed
with Manna, falls to loathing it. But thy husband, who is wisdom in
perfection, and knows thee better than thou know thy self, prevents this
dangerous fullness and fatness, and carries his kindness in so temperate a
moderation, between glutting and starving, that the soul be neither too fat
nor too lean. And indeed as she is then most comely in the eye of her
husband, so is she then most healthy, active, and fit for the services of her
husband. Wherefore let her be content with these turns of coming and going,
with short meals, and long journeyes. If the meals be sufficient to bring us
to our journeyes end, even to Gods holy Mountain, we may well be contented.
For these journeyes and labors that here seem to be long in regard of the
rests that come between them, shall bring us at last to an eternal rest which
has no interposition of labors. And then it shall be no sorrow of heart to
us, that through short rests, and long labors we have arrived to that state of
happiness, which has in it no labor, but is all, rest.

Again be not discouraged, if he come not still when thou think that thou
have prepared thy soul, and made the bed of love for him. Thou may
perchance be short of that fitnes which thou think, for he is a God of pure
eyes, 1 Cor. 4.4.
and thou even when thou know nothing by thy self art not free from
Impurity. He will have thee yet more fitted for his coming, by a narrower
search of thy own blemishes and unfitness; yea he will have thee fitter for
his coming, by being composed and decent without his coming. He will have
thee fitted and trimmed by faith, as well as by love, and teach thee to believe
his love, when thou feel it not, as well as when thou feel it. And indeed
that is most like faith, which believes what it feels not, but how can thou
show this virtue, if still thou have feeling? He expects perchance that the
old stock of assurances in visitations and sensible aproches should have lasted
longer with thee, and thou should not so soon have need of new tokens of
love on his part, and new feelings on thine own. The former tastes and tokens
of his love, should have longer told thee, that he still loves thee, though thou
do not still receive tokens from him and tastes of his love. True it is that
he seldom fails to meet a soul, duly trimmed and prepared for him.
Nevertheless he is still free, and perchance will have it sometimes to appear
so. And if he do thus at sometimes when we are prepared, then at other times,
he comes being unexpected; and so by a compensation gives us that which we
asked, though only with a difference of time. And indeed his dispensations
are wiser then our desires, and it is fittest that times and seasons should be
in his hands and not ours, especially for his own gifts. For we indeed do not
all ways open our mouths in due season, but he always opens his hand,
Psalm. 145. 15.
and fills us with his blessings in due season: and accordingly though the
spouse sometimes seek him and find him not, yet another time he is found of
her that seeks him not; for when she is sleeping, he comes knocking; and
says, Open to me, my sister, Cant. 5.2.
my love, my dove, my undefiled. Wherefore let us look mainely to our own
part; to have our lamps trimmed with faith, and love; and let us trust him
with his own part; the choice of the times and seasons of his coming.

Yea again and again, be not discouraged, though hitherto thou have not felt
the spiritual kisses of Christ Jesus, the extasyes of his wine, nor the
rauishments of his union. It may be the hour of thy Lord and Savior is not
yet come, nor the day wherein he shall say, Luke 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. This day was the last day to him,
to whom it was first said, and it may be one of thy latter days wherein it
shall be said to thee, this day will I be with thee, and make a Paradise
within thee. Yet let not these days be late days, much less last days by
thy delays, howsoever late they may be his dispensations. Remember him in thy
youth, Eccl. 12.1,
and first days, and be thou as a servant ever ready and hearkening when his
Lord will come and knock, Rev. 3.20.
that when he knockes, thou may open, and he may come in and dwell with thee
for ever. It is just that the giver should choose his own time for his own
gifts; and it is just that if thou refuse his time, he should refuse thine; and
then will he be like one that turns aside to the flocks of thy companions.

And yet less let those be discouraged, who have small, and but small tastes
of these spiritual joys. He that made us knows our frame, and what is the
fittest proportion both for our age, and measure. There are babes in Christ,
and we seldom give wine to children, because it is too high for them. Mark 4.33
Christ gave his doctrine so as they were able to hear it, and so gives he the
joy of his spirit, as we are able to bear it. As by the strength of the same
spirit the joy may be converted into into spituall advantage, and not perverted
by the flesh into carnal voluptousnesse, security, or swelling: the soul must
be faithful in little, before she be an owner of much; and therefore there
is commonly some time of trial and acquaintance between Christ and the soul,
before he will trust her with great familiarity, and give her the great and
high degrees of his hidden joys.

Besides, it must be known and considered, that Christ Jesus has some parts,
whose measure even at their full growth is so small, as the infancy of other
parts. A finger in his full growth is not so big as the leg of an infant.
And such little parts may have less feeling of these joys, because of their
littleness: and yet they may be as lively as the greater, for a finger lives
as well as an arm. And indeed let such especially look that their life be
sound in them, and that shall they know by the actions of life. If faith and
love be active in them, then are they lively and living. For it is no other
but the life of Christ in them which makes faith and love to be lively and
operative in them; Gal. 2.20. and 5.6. 1 Ioh. 3.14
and then let them not fear, for they are passed from death to life. On these
fruits therefore let them especially look, for though they have not here many
sweetnesses and joys, yet if they have many fruits of faith and love, they
shall hereafter have a greater measure of joys in heaven, than those who have
had here greater joies than they, and have not improved them (as they should
have done) to a fruitfulness greater than theirs whose joys were lesser.

Yet farther if this matter be duly weighed, we shall see in Gods
dispensations a great wisdom and equity for commonly those that have the
greatest consolations, have also the greatest tribulations. And the one are so
balanced with the other, that the soul is kept in an evennesse, the
tribulations not making her to sink, by reason of the counterpoising
consolations, nor the consolations over much weighing her down into pride,
(for pride though seeming to look upward is an infernal thing) because of the
counterballancing tribulations. Wherefore if thou envy another man's
consolations, why do thou not also envy his tribulations? If thou wish to
be rapt with Paul into the third heaven, 1 Cor: 4.11 and 2 Cor. 11.23.
wish also to be in labors often, in watchings often, in perils by sea, in
perils by land, and under that load of sufferings which he fulfilled for
Christ. But withal take heed what thou wishest, lest thy own wishes being
granted do sink thee. If thou know not thine own strength, God knows it,
and what thy vessel is able to bear both of the one and other. And be thou
contented, if with less tribulations he give thee less consolations, this
lesser measure of both being fitted for a lesser vessel, and yet the same
proportion between both, in the lesser that is in the greater.

CAP. IX. A Song of Loves.
THou have touched my soul with thy spirit, O most beloved, and virtue is gone
out of thee into me, and draws me to thee. Thy spirit is a loadstone of love,
and where it touches spirits, it leaves love, and this love makes a soul to
move to her beloved, that touched her. So by thee does she run after thee, O
thou fountain and rest of loves: thy ointments draw her to the anoynter, her
loves begin and end in thee. O let my soul ever run this circle of love; let
her ever be tasting of thy loves, and ever love thee by tasting them. Let the
savor of thy ointments, whose very breath is love, be ever in her nostrills,
that she may ever love thee for that savor, and by it. Give me the flagons of
the new wine of the kingdom, which may lift up my soul above her self in her
loves, and give her better loves than her own, where with to love him that is
far better than her self. Yea let her drink plentifully, that she may be
mounted up in a divine ecstasy above her carnal and earthy station; that she
may forget the low and base griefs, and cares, and distractions, of carnal
and worldly love, and by an heavenly excess be transported into an heavenly
love, to embrace her beloved, who is the Lord from heaven, with a love that is
like him.

O my beloved, thou art most lovely; even when I love thee not, yet then art
thou most lovely: and when my soul covered with flesh sees not thy beauty, yet
then art thou most beautiful, and most worthy to be beloved. But then thy
loveliness is lost to me, because love loves not, what it sees not. Therefore
ever anoint mine eyes with thine eye salve, that my soul may ever see thy
loveliness, and seeing it to be most lovely, love it with her best loves, and
despise a world of beauties in comparison of thine, and a world of loves in
comparison of those loves wherewith she loves thee.

Let my love rest in nothing short of thee, neither let it be content merely
to rest in thee, but kindle it, inflame it, enlarge it, that it may rest
largely in thee. Enlarge the crany which thy spirit has bored through the
flesh into my spirit, that I may largely see thee, and so largely love thee.
Enlarge the arteries and conduit pipes by which thou the head and fountain of
loves, flowest into thy members, that being abundantly quickened and watered
with the spirit of love, I may abundantly love thee. And do not only come
much, but often into me, and let my spirit often be one spirit with thee in
communicative and fruitive unions. For such often unions with thy spirit will
make my spirit more spiritual; and the more spiritual she is, the more will
she love him who is a spirit.

Again, the more spiritual she is, the more will he who is a spirit love her;
and the more he loves her, the more will he visit her with his spirit; and the
more he visits her, the more lovely, and beloved shall she be. Wherefore by
often visitations, put thy own image and beauty more and more on my soul, and
then love thy own beauty in my soul, and my soul for thy own beauty, which
thou have put on her, and let my soul love thee infinitely for being
infinitely more beautiful, than that beauty which thou have put on my soul,
and therefore infinitely more lovely than that which thou love in my soul.
Will thou, my Lord, love the image, and shall not the image much more love the
pattern? O thou most lovely, my love to thee should be far greater, than thy
love to me, because my object of love in thee, is infinitely greater than thine
in me. But I being a poor and narrow creature, have not love enough to love
thee sufficiently, an infinite Creator; and indeed there is no love but thy
own sufficient to love thee, whose love only is equal to thy loveliness.
Thy being is loveliness it self, and thy being is love it self, for God is
love. Come therefore into me, O thou that art love, and love thy self in me.
Come into me, and by thy own most excellent love, fitly love thy own most
excellent loveliness. And while thou love thy self in my soul, let my
soul according to her measure, taste and see, and love that love. Let her with
all her might (though that might be far too weak for this work) consent and
approve that love of thine, and on the torrent of thy love, let her most
active, strongest, and largest affections swim to thee, O thou Ocean and
unbounded fullness both of lovelines and love. And thus though she cannot make
her own love sufficient to love thee, yet let her make thy all-sufficient love
her own by receiving some of it into her, according to her capacity; by
assenting to it, by approving and magnifying it, and by a desire to resemble
it, as much as a poor, measured creature, may resemble that which is
unmeasurable. It is thy own word, O thou lover of souls, that where there is
a willing mind, thou acceptest that which a soul has, and not that which she
has not.

But Lord, though that love which I have, attain not to that measure which is
unmeasurable, yet Lord let it be a full measure which thou pourest into me, and
let there be nothing void in my heart, and unfilled with thy love. Yea let thy
spirit of love come so fully into my soul, that it stretch and enlarge her
measure, and make her to grow from the measure in which she is, unto the
measure in which she should be; even to that stature which is appointed her in
thy body. And thus by fullness in a less measure, let her grow to a fullness
in a greater measure, growing still in measure, and growing still in that which
fills her measure. Yea let the measure sometimes be not only full, but
running over; even running over to a spiritual drunkenness, but not unto
drowning, for these ecstasies and excesses of love, shall somewhat advance my
ability of loving thee. For when my understanding, will and affections are all
overflowne, overcome, and amazed, then shall my wonder gaze on thee, and my
very faintings shall be enflamed toward thee, and melt me into thee.

Neither does my soul desire the pleasure of this love, and Joys of thy union
merely for pleasure: But I desire that the joy and sap of thy spirit powered
into mine, when they two are one spirit may be generatiue and fruitful. Far be
it from my soul to love thee like an harlot, and not like a wife; let me
desire union with thee because I love thee; and because I love thee let me
desire to bring forth fruit unto thee. Yea I will not cease to cry unto thee,
Give me children or else I die. Genesis 30.
For thou can not reply unto me; Am I in Gods stead to give the fruit of the
womb. For verily thou art that God who gives the fruit of the womb, both
spiritual and corporal. Give me therefore children by this union with thee
even fruits of thy spirit which may resemble thee, Romans 7.4.
and be pledges to me of thy union with me. And when I have brought them forth
let me give the praise unto thee; Ioh. 15.5. psalm. 113.9
For thou only make the barren to bear; and to be a fruitful mother of
children.

And when thou have made me fruitful by coming to me, come more often to me
be cause thou have made me fruitful. It was the voice of a natural wife long
ago: Gen: 30.20
Now will my husband dwell with me because I have borne him six sons. Let it be
said now also by a spiritual wife, Now will my husband dwell with me, Ioh: 14.23
because his dwelling with me has made me fruitful. Make my soul a
fruitful paradise bearing every good fruit of love, divine and humane, and
then come often into thy garden, to behold, and gather the fruits of it. Cant:
4.16


And that I may bring forth fruits wholly thine, and not another beside thee,
burn and consume whatsoever would grow one with my soul besides thee. Thou
art a burning and consuming fire, and the spirit by which thou art one with my
spirit, baptizeth with fire; O let the fire of thy spirit, so wholly turn my
soul into spiritual fire, that the dross of the flesh and the world being
wholly consumed, she may be only spiritual, and so bring forth fruits only
to thy spirit.

Thus, and thus says my soul to her beloved, but when she says thus, her
beloved is not far from her, for by him she speaks to him: when he is near,
his ointments yield their savor, and the savor of his ointments draws
souls to run after him. There has been of late a fruitive union, and such
fruitive unions do individuate, and inflame the love of the soul to him, whom
she has enjoied in that union.

But alas the husband of the soul is sometimes like that husband which is not
at home, Prove. 7.19
but is gone a long journey. He is gone so far from me, as if he were not
mine, yea so far sometimes, as if he were not at all. The summer is gone from
my soul, and the winter is come; and the true olive so draws in his
fatness, that my soul though a branch, yet doubts whether there be a root
that bears her. The ointments of light and love, are not seen or felt, and
how can she love the loveliness that she sees not, and if she saw it, how can
she love it without love? In such a darkness, the greatest loveliness affects
not the eye, and in such a deadness there is no love wherewith to love the
greatest loveliness. The soul does not now taste how sweet her Lord is, and
therefore his sweetness is to her as a thing forgotten, or a thing mistaken,
or at best, as a thing which was, and is not, and will be no more. The often
unions that are passed, are wholly past, and the very images and
representations of them, are near wholly vanished. And now my soul that will
ever be a lover of something, and a seeker of good in one object or other,
being left to the flesh by the enchantment of the flesh, runs to the
creature to seek good in it. For as the spirit runs to Christ, so does the
flesh to the creature. But alas the dove of Christ thus flowne from the Arc in
her thoughts and affections, finds no rest; for she is gone from her rest,
and how can she find rest, by going from rest? Put forth thy hand, O thou
lover of souls, and take her in unto thee, yea first make her to return to
thee, by finding her when she seeks thee. Seek her, O Savior, Psalm. 119. 176
when she goes astray from thee like a lost sheep; for even when she thus
goes astray, she has not utterly forgotten thee, thy loves, nor thy laws. One
look of thine will awake her love, and make her weep bitterly, Luke 22.61,62.
that she loved thee so little, whom to love sufficiently, her best and
mightiest loves are most insufficient. Prevent her seeking with thy seeking,
and be thou present with her in thy providence, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and preserving power, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6.
even when thou seem to be far off, in the tastes of thy sweetness, and
fruition of thy loves. Love her, even when thou do not give her thy loves;
yea love her by not-giving them. Do her good even by the subtraction of thy
goodness; show her that her safety is not in her own hands, show her that her
goodness is not her own, show her that she is nothing in her self but that
which is worse than nothing; and that thou, and thy grace make her wholly to be
that which she is. Then shall she be more humble by seeing her own vileness in
thy absence, and thou shall be more lovely and precious to her, whose presence
gives her all her worth and excellence. When she has regained thee, she will
hold thee more hardly, and keep thee more fastly, and love thee more
vehemently. She will value thy loves above treasures; yet she will love thee
more than thy loves, and she will provide a stock of loves in the summer,
against the winters, if they percha^ce shall return again.

For in these loves she will behold the pledges of a love eternal; in these
joys of thy presence, she will behold the earnests of eternal joys in an
eternal presence; and for the sure hope of these eternal joys, she will
patiently endure the sorrows of these temporal absences. Yet let these
temporal absences be as thorns in the sides of my soul to stir her up to
the desire of that eternal presence. And be not lacking overlong, O thou life,
and love, and guide of my soul, but ever and anon visit her with thy presence,
stay her with thy flagons, Gant. 2.5.
comfort her with apples, for she is sick of love, when she wants her
beloved. When thou wast here on earth, Mat. 15.32
thou had compassion on the multitude, that had nothing to eat, and would
not send them away fasting, lest they should faint by the way. O sweet
Savior, thou art no less merciful in heaven than thou were on earth, Heb.
4.15, 16.
and an hungry soul is a fitter object of mercy, than an hungry body; and my
hungry soul has a farther way to go than their bodies, for she must go
from earth unto heaven. O refresh her, and that right soon with thy mercies,
with the joys of thy presence, with the bread of heaven, and water of life
which thy spirit plentifully gives to my spirit, when thou come unto her.
Be thou her guide even to the life which is beyond death, and grant that
through these changes of temporal presences, and absences, she may run in
one even, and unchanged path of love and holiness, until she come unto that
eternal presence, where is the fullness of joy without ebbes, and perpetuity
of joy without interruptions. There shall she see her beloved clearly and
plainly, even face to face; and there shall she enjoy her beloved so fully,
as she sees him clearly; yea she shall enjoy him, with all her might of
enjoying. Her being shall be the measure of her enjoying; for as much as she
is, so much shall she enjoy: she shall be in a perpetual union with her
beloved, and in a perpetual fruition by union; and so in a perpetual rack,
extent and uttermost of joy. The fountain of joy shall flow continually into
the mouth of the soul; the new wine of the kingdom shall still overcome her,
and set her up in a continual trance, and ecstasy of joy. Her life shall be
rejoicing, and her life shall be eternal, and so shall be her rejoicing. Her
life shall be love, and this love shall give an overco^ming sweetness to the
enjoying of him whom she loves, and the sweetness of her enjoying shall
inflame her love to him, by whom she enjoyes this sweetness; and thus shall she
run an everlasting course between the pleasure of love, and the sweetness of
enjoying.

Therefore thus says my soul to her beloved; Come away my beloved; and be as
a Roe on the tops of the mountains. My life is hid with thee my love; Appear
quickly thou which art my life, that I may quickly appear with thee in the
glory, and happiness of a consummate marriage. Make me fair with thy spirit,
and put the golden vesture and the needleworke of thy manifold graces upon me,
and bring me speedily into the presence of the great King. Let the day of
gladness quickly come wherein both soul and body even my whole self may
eternally enjoy thee. Psalm: 63.1. Romans 8.23.
For thy spirit being now in both, makes both to thirst for thee; and my flesh
faints as well as my soul, and each pants after thee. Neither will they
still be put off, with these tastes and earnests, but their love and longing is
rather enflamed by them to the fruition of thee. The very voice of these
earnests is, come; yea they scarce know any other language, but, Come;
therefore again and again they say, come; Yea after they have said, come; as if
that were not enough, they say, Come quickly. Now thou who know the meaning
of the spirit, give an answer to the speaking sighs and groans of the spirit.
Thou who have enflamed the heart of thy spouse, to speak unto thee in this
silent, yet loud language of ardent desires, speak again to the heart of thy
spouse, and answer the desires, which thou have made to speak unto thee

But harken; for he speaks: Those lips speak which are full of grace; and
such lips cannot but speak grace, and peace to his spouse, to his beloved.
Hearken therefore and hear what he says; Behold, I come quickly. Rev. 22.20.
O honey, and sweetness it self to the soul that loves her beloved comes
quickly; her consummate marriage comes quickly, her full joy, and perfect
happiness comes quickly. And now what can the soul say more to her Lord?
Only as before she still said, Come, so now will she still say, Amen; and
Even so come Lord Jesus, Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

