A RECORD of ancient Histories, entitled in Latin: Gesta Romanorum.

Discoursing upon sundry examples for the advancement of virtue, and the
abandoning of vice. No less pleasant in reading, then profitable in practice.

Now newly perused and corrected by R. Robinson, Citizen of London.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Est. 1595.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Margaret Duglas, her grace,
Countess of Lineux, Richard Robinson Citizen of London, wishes long and
happy life, increase of honor, and the fruition of everlasting blessedness.
HORACE the POET testifies (right Honorable and virtuous Lady) that Poets in
times past, have been addicted either to profit and pleasure them selves and
others, either else in commune to write both sweet and necessary things, for
the life of their posterity. As Heathen Poets have had this humor, meriting
worthy fame, in that by their fained imaginations, they seemed to favor and
further the welfare of human life. So other writers have endeavored, but not
all leueling by one live to publish their works, some after one manner, some
after another, either according as the holy spirit of God had operation of
their hearts, either lose as their own singularity lead them to profit and
pleasure them selves and others, whose imperfection, as their age could not so
well discern, but flattered her self with the nusled ignorance of the time
then present, sleeping in absurdity: so when it pleased ye Lord to spread forth
the bright beams of his glorious gospel over the nations of the earth, such as
sauoured of the spirit of God, have more and more illuminated the^ selves and
others and such as were blinded in their own inventions, being nakedly
manifested to the world, have with the world been reduced to full perfection,
and awaked out of their dreams, by their posterity: where upon even the most
ancient Poets, Historiographers and writters, were they now living, they might
find no small occasion to rejoice at the good industry of their posterity,
even in these days where it is apparently exta^t, yt by studious practitioners
of our age, the works of sundry ancient authors have made the most fertile
increase of fallowed grounds by the sweat of others, which their remissness and
imperfection had left as wast ground before, whereby their fame is more
amplified then decreased, virtue more advanced then abandoned, and the age
present and henceforth more edified, then defrauded of so noble benifits of
knowledge, and perfection of life.

This as my simple capacity by daily experience could comprehend in the
travails of others: So reputing it a thing acceptable and laudable with God
and man, I have wished such ability in me, that I might wade through this
stream, to the grateful acceptance of God, and the world. And the rather do
I take good courage unto me here in, because I have found no small
grateful good will of such as in this my native Country, fauouringe virtue
and furthering good literature, have once or twice heretofore accepted my
former slender consecrated studies, in such sort, that I agnize my self more
indebted to them in power and good will, then I am able, or think I shall be
able to perform requital to their condign demerites. Among whom the tried
testimony of your honors most noble bounty, has not a little excited me to
the consideration of my greatefull duty herein. And I cannot tell whether God
gives it me for my good hap, that I lately had this work brought me by one,
whom I suppose sauoureth my good proceeding in, this point. Albeit this work
it self (before I took it in hand) was both of imperfect phrase in the
history, and of indecent application in the Morality, bearing the title of
the History of Gesta Romanorum: which when I had diligently perused the
circumstance thereof, I thought it beehooued me so to travail therein, that I
might not only make a simple thing better, but so to handle the same, that it
might gain me the better credit for my good meaning. And when I had reformed
and repolished so well as I could, the several histories, and corrected the
application of the Morality in many places, I thought best to add thereunto
(not impertinent for better light and farther intelligence of the Readers
capacity) a form of Argument purposed before every history which being done,
I entitled it A record of ancient Histories, videlicet, Gesta Romanorum,
newly persued and corrected, wherein wishing to be profiting and pleasing the
best, grateful unto all, and grudged of none, void of scruple and blemish of
suspicion in every part, I yield the same with all humble and hearty duty,
under the Honorable patronage and protection of your most noble and magnificent
prerogative. Most humbly craving pardon of your honor for my bold
presumption, in dedicating so simple a travail unto you, and no less humbly
beseeching your good Ladishippes thanckfull acceptaunce of my uttermost good
will in presentatio^ hereof. I hope then to have the better good will of all
others, for supportation of my pretended good meaning herein. And so right
Honorable and virtuous Lady, shall I find manifold causes of dutiefull
respensation what I may, though to dyspe^se I shall not be able, yet in good
will and power, I am and will be pressed to the uttermost performance of my
exacted duty. In practice and prayer, resting bounden to all my will willers.
Unto the living God I pray amongst all others for the long and prosperous good
estate of your Honor in this life: And finally for your established felicity
immutable in the life everlasting, which God grant.

Amen.
Your Honors most humble and heartifull bounden Orator, Richard Robinson
Citizen of London.

THE HISTORY of Gesta Romanorum.
The Argument.
Man's soul is dearly beloved unto God her Father. And yet for her sundry good
graces, she is tempted of ye devil by iij diverse means, at iij. several ages
in this mortal life, if she resist and overcome the same, she is thereby
adopted to the fruition of ma trimoniall joy in heaven, with Christ the son
of God.

The first History.
SOme time there dwelt in Rome a mighty Emperor, which had a fair creature
to his daughter named Athala^ta, whom diverse great Lords and many noble Knights
desired to have to wife. This Athala^ta was wo^nderous swift on soote,
wherefore such a law was ordained that no man should have her to wife but such
as could out run her and take her by swiftness of foot.

And so it befell that many came and ran with her, but she was so swifte that
no man might overtake her by course of running. At the last there came a
Knight named Pomeis, unto her Father, and said to him thus. My Lord, if it
might please you to give me your daughter to wife, I will gladly run with
her. Then said her father, there is such a ^aw ordained and set, that who so
will ^aue her to wife, must first run with her, and if he fail in his
course, that he over take her not, he shall loose his head, and if it fortune
him to overtake her, than shall I wed her unto him.

And when the emperor had told him all the peril that might fall in the
winning of her, ye Knight voluntarily granted to abide that ieoperdie. Then
the Knight let ordain him three balls of gold against the running. And when
they had begun to run a little space, the young Lady over ran him, than the
Knight threw forth before her the first ball of gold. And when the damosel
saw the ball, she stooped and took it up, and that while the Knight wanne
before her, but that auayled little, for when she perceived that, she ran so
fast that in short space she gat before him again. And than he threw forth
the second ball of gold, and she stooped as she did before to take it up, and
in that while the knight wanne before her again, which this young damoysell
seeing, constrained her self and ran so fast till at the last she had him at
a vau^tage again, and was before him, and by that time they were nigh the mark
where they should abide, wherefore ye knight threw forth the third ball before
her, and like as she had done before stooped down to take up the ball, and
while she was in taking up ye third bal, the knight gat before her, and was
first at the mark. And thus was she wo^ne.

The Moral.
By this Emperor is understood the father of heaven, and by this damoysell is
understood the soul of man, with whom many devils desired to run, and to
deceive her through their temptations, but she withstandeth them mightily and
overcomes them.

And when they have done their power, and may not s^eed, than makes he three
balla^ of gold, and casts them before her in the three ages, of man, that is
to say, in youth, in manhood, and in old age. In youth the devil casts the
ball of lechery before hi^, that is to say, the desire of the flesh,
nevertheless for all this ball, oftentimes man overcomes the devil by
acknowledging of his sins unto god, by hearty repentance and ame^dement of
life. The second ball is ye ball of prid^, the which the devil casts to man
in his ma^hood, that is to say, in his middle age: but this bal, man oftentimes
overcomes as he did ye first, but let him beware of the third ball, which is
covetousness, that the devil casts to man is his old age, which is
dreadful. For except a man may overcome this ball with these other two, he
shall leese his honor, that is to say, the kingdom of heaven. For when man
burns in covetousness, he thinks not on ghostly riches, for ever his heart
is set on worldly goo^s, and reckeneth not of prayers ne of well doing, and
thus leseeth he his heritage, to the which God has bought him with pis
precious blood, unto the which our Lord Jesu Christ bring us all.

The Argument.
As God allotteth diverse men diverse callings and estats of living in this
world, so is every man ^ryed by the rules of life and doctrine, whether his
pract^e agree with his profession, in p^ofiring himself without prejudice of
others, wherein if he so bold himself ^o^tent, for such a son, the heavenly,
father has planted a tree of heavenly treasures, in the life everlasting.

The second History.
THere dwelt sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise named Anselme,
which bare in his arms a sheld of silver with five red Roses. This Emperor
had in* sons, whom he loved much, he had also continual war with the King
of Egypt, in the which war he lost all his temporal goods, except a virtuous
tree. It fortuned after on a day, that he gave battle to yt said King of
Egypt, wherein he was grieuosly wounded. Nevertheless he obtained ye
victory, not withstanding he had his deadly wou^d, wherefore while he lay at
point of death he called unto him his eldest son and said, My most dear
and welbeeloued son, all my temporal richesse I have spent and almost
nothing is left me, except a virtuous tree the which stands in the midst
of mine Empire, I give to thee all that is under ye earth and above the earth of
the same tree. O my reverent Father (quod he) I thank you much. Then said
the emperor, call to me my second son. Anon his eldest son greatly ioying
of his fathers gift, called in his brother, and when he came, than said
the emperor. My dear son (quod he) I may not make my testament for as much
as I have spent all my goods, except a Tree which stands in mine Empire, of
the which Tree I beequeath to thee all that is great and small. Then answered
he and said. My reverent father I thank you much. Then said the Emperor,
call to me my third son, and so it was done. And when he was come, ye
Emperor said. My dear son, I must die of these wounds, and I have but only
a virtuous Tree, of the which I have beequethed thy brethren their portion,
and to thee I bequeth thy portion, for I will that thou have of the said tree
all that is wet and dry. Then said his son. Father I thank you. Soon after
that ye emperor had made his bequest he died. And ye eldest son anon took
season of the tree When the second brother heard this, he said. My brother,
by what law or tytell occupy ye this tree Dear ^brother (quod he) I occupy
it by this title, my father gave me all that is under the earth and above of
the said tree, and therefore by reason this tree is mine. Unknowing to thee,
quod the second brother, he gave me all yt is in breadth, length, and deepnes,
of ye said tree, and therefore I have as great right in the tree as you. This
hearing ye third son came to the^ and said. O ye my best beloved brethren,
it beehoueth you not to strive for this tree, for as much right have I in this
tree as ye, for well ye wot by ye law, that ye last will and testament ought to
stand, for of truth he gave me of the said tree all that is wet and dry, and
therefore by right ye tree is mine, but for as much as your words are of great
force, and mine also, my counsel is that we be justified by reason, for it
is not good nor commendable that any strife or dissencio^* should be among us.
Here beeside dwells a king of reason, therefore to avoid strife, go we
there unto him, and each of us la^e his right before him, and like as he will
judge, let us stand to his judgment. Then said his brethren, this counsel
is good, wherefore they went all three unto the King of reason, and each of
them severally showed forth his right unto him, like as it is said before.

When the King had heard their titles, he rehearsed them all again severally,
first saying to the eldest son thus. Thou say for thee, quod the King, that
thy father gave thee all that is under the earth and above the earth of the
said Tree. And to the second brother he bequethed all yt is in breadth, length,
and deepnes, of that tree. And to the third brother he gave all yt is wette
and dry. And with that he laid ye law for them, and said that the last will
ought to stand. Now my dear sons, briefly I shall satisfy all your
reasons. And when he had thus said, he turned him unto the eldest brother,
saying thus. My dear son, if you list to abide the judgment, of right it
behooves you to be letten blood of the right arm. My Lord, quod he, your will
shall he dene. Then called the king forth a discreet Physician, commanding
him to let him blood. When the eldest son was thus letten blood, the king
said to them all three. My dear sons, quod he, where is your father buried.
Then answered they and said: Forsooth my Lord in such a place. Anon the King
commanded to dig in the ground for the body, and to take a bonne out of his
breast, and to bury the body again, and so it was done. And when the bonne was
taken out, the king commanded that it should be laid in the blood of the
elder brother, and it should lie till it had received kindly the blood, and
then to be laid in the Sun and dried, and after that it should be washed
with clear water, his servants fulfilled all that he commanded. And when
they beegan to wash, the blood vanished clean away, When the king saw this,
he said to the second son. It beehoueth that thou be letten blood as thy
brother is. Then said he. My Lord thy will shall be fullfiled, and a non he
was done unto like as his brother was in all thing, and when they began to wash
ye bone, the blood vanished away. Then said ye king to the third son. My deer
child it behooves thee also to be letten blood. He answered and said. My
Lord it pleases me well so to be. When the youngest brother was lette^ blood,
and done unto in all thing like as his two brethren were before, when the
kings servant began to wash the bone, they might neither for washing ne for
fretting do away ye blood of ye bone but ever it appeared bloody. When the
king saw this he said: It appears openly that this blood without doubt is of
the nature of this bone, thou art his true son, and these other two ben
bastards I give to thee the tree for evermore.

The Moral
Dear friends this Emperor is our Lord Jesu Christ which bare a shield of
silver with five red roses, that is to say, his body yt is so fair, so clear,
and more radient the^ any silver, according with the Psalmist saying thus.
Speciosus forma pre filijs hominum. That is to say, he was more special and
fairer of shape the^ all the children of men. By these v. roses we understand
his v. wounds, which he suffered for mankind. And by the King of Egypt we
understand the devil, against whom he fought all ye time of his life, and at
the last he was slain for mankind. Nevertheless, before his death he made
his testament to his iii. sons.

By the first to whom he gave of the Tree that was under the earth and above
the earth, we shall understand such mighty men and others, of all estates of
this world, as not content with their calling seeks ambiciously ye subuersio^
of others to magnify and cralt them selves.

By the second son to whom he gave the tree in length, breadth and deepnesse,
we understand such worldly wise men in this World which in their subtle
attempt to win all, loose all.

The Moral.
By the third son, to whom he gave all that was wette and dry of the tree,
we shall understand every good christian prince, noble man, maiestrat or
meaner person, in every common wealth where so ever, which (eschewing all
ambition and covetousness) holds him self content with the providence of
GOD, and in his own calling labors simply and truly to do good unto all
men, yea though now and then themselves sustain injuries in the world,
suffering now poverty, then troub. c, now solace, then care, now cold, then
heat, and all this they received thankfully, to have this noble tree that was
thus bequethed them. This tree is the tree of Paradise, that is to say,
everlasting joy of heaven, which is given to us all, if we take it thankfully,
nevertheless it is heaven in diverse wise, and not egally, for some has more,
and some has less, after that measure of Gods good grace. This
notwithstanding every man obtains not, therefore it behooves the^ to go unto
the king of reason, that is to say, unto the father of heaven, that knows all
thing or they be made. The first son was let blood, and in his blood the bone
was wrapped. By this bone we shall understand our strong faith in Christ's
merits. And by the blood the lively and fruitful sap of good works
proceeding out of the same. Which are rare things to be found in those that
seek there own private gain to live, caring not how they come by it by hook
or by croke, to the prejudice of others, which when they are let blood by the
sharp Lance of gods Justice, though it be stablished with divine predication
and made dry with the Sun of outward profesion: yet being washed with the
water of swelling pride, mallis, envy, wrath, and such other, than the strong
faith in Christ's merits, is as though we had never received it, and the lively
and fruitful sap of good works, has no power to tarry upon it, but
vanishes a way. And thus fares it, with those two, the first and second
tonnes. But the third son being contrary unto the other in profession and
practice of life and manners, be he Prince, noble man magistrate or mean
person, upon earth. The bone of such a man will ever be firm of faith in
himself and toward others, from such a man's bone ye blood of lively fruits, to
himself and all others profitable, will never be washed away with the water of
wretchedness. But the more it is dried in the Sun of true trial, the better
it is, such are the true children of God, of whom our Lord speaks thus. Ye
the which have forsaken all thing for me: all, that is to say, ye that have
forsaken the will of sin, shall receive an hundredth times more, ye is to say,
ye shall not only receive the tree of Paradise, but also ye heritage of
heaven. These two other sons are basterds, for why, yt they promised in their
baptism they wrought all the contrary, through their wicked living. And
therefore he that desires to obtain the joys of heaven, him behooves to abide
steadfastly in profession and practice of good life and manners, and then by
Christ shall he obtain the tree of Paradise, unto the which the Lord bring us
which lives and reigns eternally world without end.

Amen.
The Argument.
God so loved sinful man, that he sent his only begotten son to redeem him
out of the captivity of the wicked world, to rest with him in the joys of
heaven.

The third History.
IN Rome there dwelled some time a noble Emperor named Dioclesian, which above
all worldly goods loved the virtue of charity, wherefore he desired greatly to
know what foul loved her birds best, to the intent that he might thereby grow
to more perfect charity. It fortuned after upon a day, that this Emperor
walked to the forest to take his disport, where as he found the neast of a great
bird (that is called in latin Struthio Camely, in English an Oistridge) with
her bird, ye which bird, the emperor took we him, and closed him in a vessel
of glass. The dam of this little bird followed after unto ye emperors place,
and slew into the hall where her bird was closed. But when she saw her bird,
and might by no means come to her, ne get her out, she returned again to the
forest, and there she abode three days, and at the last she returned again
to the Pallys, bearing in her mouth a worm that is called Thumare. When she
came where her bird was, she let the worm fall upon the glass, thorough
virtue of which worm, ye glalsse brake, and the bird escaped, and slew forth
with his dam.

When the emperor saw this, he praised much the dam of the bird, which so
diligently labored for the deliverance of her byrd.

The Moral
My friends, this Emperor is the father of Heaven, which greatly loves them
that live in perfect love and charity. This little bird closed in the glass
and taken from the forest, was Adam our forefather, which was exiled from out
of Paradise, and put in the glass, that is to say in hell. This hearing the Dam
of ye byrd, that is to wit, the son of God descended from heaven and came to
the forest of the world, and lived there three days and more, bearing with him
a worm, that is to say, manhood according with the psalmist saying. Ego sum
vermis and non homo. That is to say, I am a worm and no man. This manhood was
suffered to be slain among the Jews, of whose blood the vessel eternal was
broken, and the byrd went out, that is to say, Adam went forth with his
mother the son of God and flew unto heaven.

The Argument.
A clean spirit and undefiled soul, is the daughter of God so tender and
dear unto him, that he bestows her not upon the rich man wanting the wisdom
of God, but upon the poor manne that is wise and lives in the fear of God,
which if she at any time transgresle by frailty of flesh, than for the
recovery of her health by the medicine of amendment of lyse, to such a one
though poor, shall his soul be not only in this life espoused with much
solace and joy each of other, but in the world to come shall live with Christ
in joy and everlasting bliss.

The fourth History.
SOmetime dwelled in Rome a worthy Emperor and a wise, which had a fair
daughter and a gracious in the sight of every man. This emperor be thought
him on a day to whom he might give his daughter in marriage, saying thus. If
I give my daughter to a rich man, and he be a fool, then is she lost, and if I
give her to a poor man and a witty, than may he get his living for him and
her by his wisdom.

There was that time dwelling in the city of Rome a Philosopher named
Socrates, poor and wise, which came to the Emperor and said. My Lord
displease you not though I put forth my peticion before your highness.
The Emperor said, whatsoever it pleases thee tell forth. Then said Socrates:
My Lord ye have a daughter whom I desire above all thing. The Emperor answered
and said. My friend, I shall give thee my daughter to wife upon this condition,
that if she dye in thy feloship after that she is wedded to thee, thou shall
without doubt leese thy head. Then said Socrates. Upon this condition I will
gladly take her to be my wife. The Emperor hearing this, let call forth all
the Lords and states of his Empire, and made a great feast at their wedding.
And after the feast Socrates led home his wife to his own house, where as they
lived in peace and health long time. But at the last this Emperors daughter
sickned to death, when Socrates perceived this, he said to himself. Alas and
woe to me, what shall I do, and whether shall I flee, if the Emperors
daughter that is my wife should dye: and for sorrow this Socrates went to a
forest there beeside and wept bitterly. The while he thus wept and mourned,
there came an aged man bearing a staff in his hand, and asked the cause of
Socrates why he mourned. Socrates answered and said. I wedded themperours
daughter upon this condition, that if she died in my feloship, I should leese
my life, now she is sickned unto the death, and I c^n find no remedy nor
help, and therefore I mourn more than any creature can think. Then said the
old man, be of good comfort, for I shall help you if ye will do after my
counsel. In this forest be three herbs, if ye make a drink of the first to
your wife, and of the other two a plaster, and if she use this medicinal
drink and plaster in due time without doubt she shall recover to perfect
health. Socrates fulfilled all as the old man had taught him. And wha^ his
wife had used a while that medicinal drink and plaster, within short time
she was perfectly whole of all her sickness And when the Emperor heard that
Socrates wrought so wisely, and how diligently he labored for to heal his
wife, he promoted him to great dignity and worship.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is our Lord Jesu Christ, his daughter so fair
and so gracious is the soul, made to the si(...)de of God, which is full
gracious and glorious in the sight of him and of his Angels, while that she
is not defiled and abides in her own proper cleanness. This soul God would
not give it to a rich man but to a poor man, that is to say, a man that is
made of the slyme of the earth.

This Socrates is a poor man, for why, every man comes poor and naked into
this world from his mothers belly, and every man takes his soul in wedlock
upon such condition, that if she die in his fellowship by deadly sin,
without doubt he shall loose eternal life.

Therefore O thou man, if thy wife sicken so through frailty of flesh unto
sin, do then as Socrates did, go unto the forest, that is the Church of
Christ and thou shall find there an old man with a staff, that is, a discreet
preacher, which shall minister unto thee those three herbs, wherrof may be
confect the medicine of thy recovery unto health, namely the first herb is
acknowledging of sin, the second repentance, and the third newnes of life
according to the will of GOD, if these herbs be used in plaster, the sinner
without doubt shall receive his health, and his soul shall be delivered from
sin, and by all right he shall have everlasting life. Unto the which bring us
our Lord Jesus.

The Argument.
Many folish Idiots of this world do commonly flow and flote in abundance of
worldly wealth and pomp, with thinking they shall live here always, are
labored unto by the preachers of gods word to be admonished of their momentany
felicities, and so to prepare themselves in bestowing well their short time
here, to emoye the blessings of everlasting felicity in the world to come.

The fifth History.
SOmetime there reigned in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise, named Frederike,
which had one only son, whom he loved much. This Emperor when he lay at
the point of death, he called unto him his son, and said. Dear son, I
have a ball of Gold which I give thee upon my blesseing, yt thou anon after my
death shall give it to the most fool that thou may find. Then said his
son. My Lord without doubt your will shall be fulfilled. Anon this young
Lord after the death of his father, went and sought in many Realms and found
many rechlesse fools, because he would satisfy his Fathers will, labored
farher til he came into a realm where the law was such, that every year a
new King was chosen there, and this King had only the guiding of that Realm
but a year, and at the years end he was deposed and put in exile in an
Island, where as he should wretchedly finish his life.

When the Emperors son came to this Realm, the new King was chosen with
great honor, and all manner of Musical instruments went before him and brought
him with great reverence and worship unto his regal sea^^. And when the
Emperors son saw that he came unto him and saluted him reverently and
said. My Lord, lo, I give thee this ball of gold, on my fathers behal^e. Then
said he, I pray thee tell me the cause why thou give me this ball. Then
answered this young Lord and said. My father charged me in his death bed
upon pain of forfaiting of his blesseing, that I should give this ball to the
most fool that I could find, wherefore I have sought many Realms, and have
found many fools, nevertheless a more fool then thou art, found I never, and
therefore this is the reason. It is not unknown to thee yt thou shall reign but
a year, and at the years end thou shall be exiled into such a place where as
thou shall die a mischeuous death, wherefore I hold thee for the most fool that
ever I found, that for the Lordship of a year, thou would so wilfully leese
thy self, and therefore before all other, I have given thee this ball of gold.

Then said the king, without doubt thou say truth, and therefore when I am
in full power of this realm, I shall send before me great treasure and riches
wherewith I may live and save my self from mischeuous death, when I shall be
exiled and put down. And to this was done, wherefore at the years end, he
was exiled and iued there in pear, upon such goods as he had sent before,
and he died afterward a good death.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is the father of heaven, the which ^eequet^^d the
ball, that is to say, worldly riches to fools and ydiots, which sauoureth
nothing but that is earthly. This Emperors son, that is to say, a preacher
and a discreet minister, travailed about many Realms and lands to show to
misbeeleeuing men and fools, their peril. The Reame wherein no King might
reign but a year is this world. For who so had lived an hundred year, when
he comes to the death him shall seem that he has lived but the space of an
hour, therefore do as the King did, while that ye be in power of life send
before you your treasure, that is to say, firm faith in Christ's merits, and
the fruits of Gods word proceeding from the same. Then certainly when we be
put in exile out of this world, we shall live in peace, and shall find the
mercy of God plentiful, whereby we shall obtain everlasting life. Unto the
which bring us, he yt for us shed his precious blood.

The Argument.
The evil disposed whcked wise men of this world are here advertised of their
greedy groping after the sweet temptation of the devil, wherein such do
rejoice, till death coming suddenly upon them, then fall they into the
horrible pit of desolate darckenesse, due to their deserts.

The sixth History.
Dioclesian reigned in ye city of Rome in whose empire dwelt a noble
Philosopher, the which set up by his craft an image in the midst of the
City of Rome, the which image strethed out his arm and his foremost finger,
whervppon stood this posie written in Latin, Percute hic. Strike here. This
image after the death of this Philosopher stood still a long time, and many
great clerks came thither for to read the superscription that was on the
finger, but none of them understood what it meant, wherefore there was great
wondering among the people. And at the last a long time after there came a
strange clarke out of far countries, and when he saw this image, he read ye
scripture, strike here.

And then upon a day when he saw the shadow of ye hand, he took a mattocke
and brake up the ground under the hand where the shadow was, according to the
understanding of the superscription, and anon he found an house all of Marble
underneath the ground, wherein he entered and came into a hall, wherein he found
so much riches, so many Jewels, and so great maruailes, that he never saw ne
heard of such, nor so many before that time. At the last he saw a table ready
covered, and all manner of things necessary thereto set there upon. He beheld
further and saw a carbu^cle in the hall yt lightened all ye house. And Against
this Carbuncle on that other side stood a man holding in his hand a bow with
an arow ready to shoot. The clark maruailed much when he saw all these things,
and thought in himself, if that I tell this forth, there will no man beeleeue
me, and therefore I will have somewat of these goods in token of proof. And
with that he law a knife of gold upon the table, the which hoe took and
would have put it in his boosome. But anon the Archer smote the Carbuncle and
brake it, where with the whole house was shadowed and made dark. And when the
clarke perceived it, he wept more bitterly then any man might think, for he
know not by what way he might go out, for as much as ye house was made dark
through ye breaking of the carbuncle. And that darkness abode still for evermore
after. And so finished the clarke his life there in that darkness.

The Moral.
Dear friends this image so standing is ye devil which says evermore Strike
here. That is to say, seek after earthly riches, and not for heavenly
treasure. This clarke that diggeth with ye mattocke, betokneth the wicked wise
men of this world, as some evil disposed pleaders in the law, crafty
atturneyes and other wicked worldlings that ever be smiting, what by right and
what by wrong, so that they may get the vanities of this world, and in their
smiting they find great wonders and maruails, that is to say, they find
therein the delgihts of the world, wherein many men reioyseth. The carbuncle
that gives light is the youth of man, which gives hardines to take their
pleasure in worldly riches. The archer with his arrow is death, which la^eth
watch against man to slay him. The clarke that took up the knife is every
worldly man that coueteth ever to have all thing at his will. Death smites the
carbuncle, that is to say, youth, strength and power of man, and than lies he
wrapped in darkness of sin, in which darkness oftentimes he dies. Therefore
study we to flee the world and his desires, and then shall we be sure to
win everlasting life, unto the which Jesu bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
We are generally here put in mind that the devil beseeging ye world, our
champion Christ Jesus is ready to take our quarrel in hand, who defending and
saving us from the invasion and circumuention of satan, is yet accused for us
as a transgressor, and is for our sakes moreover, content to suffer death for
our full justification.

The seventh History.
IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Titus, a wise man and a
disereete, which ordained in his days such a law, that what knight dyed in his
empire, should be buried in his armor, and who so ever presumed to spoil any
knights armor after he were dead, he should die without any withstanding or
gain saying.

It befell after within few years that a city of the Empire was beseged of
themperours enemies, wherefore that City was in peril of leesing, for none
that was within that City might not defend themselves by no manner of craft,
therefore great sorrow and lamentation was made through out all the City. But
at the last within few days there came to the City a young Knight and a well
favored, valiant in feats of Arms, whom the worthy men of the City
beholding, and understanding his prowes^e, cried with one voice. O thou most
noble Knight, we beseech thee if it please thy worthiness to help us now at
our most need, lo ye may see this City is in peril of leesing. Then answered
he and said. Seye not sirs, that I have none armor, and if I had Armor I
would gladly defend your City. This hearing a mighty man of the city said to
him in secret wise.

Sir, here was sometime a doughtie knight which now is dead and buried with in
this city according to the law, and if it please you to take his armor ye
might defend this city and deliver us from peril, and that shall be honor
unto you and profit unto all the Empire.

When this young knight had heard this, he went to the grave and took the
armor and arrayed himself therewith, and sought mightily against his enemies,
and at the last he obtained and had the victory, and delivered the city from
peril and when he had so done, he laid ye Art^our again^ in the grave. There
were some men in the City that had great indignation and envy at him,
because he had obtained the victory, and accused him to the Judge, saing thus
Sir a law was made by the emperor that w^o^o^uer ^^spoiled a dead Knight of his
Armor should dye, this young Knight ^ennd and ad Knight and took away his
A^mour, therefore we beseech thee that thou pr^ceede in the law against him, as
against him yt has offended the law. When the Justice heard this, he made the
Knight to be taken and to be brought before him. And when he was examined of
this trespass against the law, he said thus. Sye it is written in the law,
that of two harms the least is to be chosen, it is not unknown to you that
this City was in peril to be lost, and but I had taken this armor, I had
neither saved you ne the City, therefore me thinks ye ought rather to
honor and worship me for this good deed that I have done, than thus
shamefully to reprove me, for I am led as he that is ready to be hanged, and
also good sirs an other reason I may lay for mine excuse. He that steals or
robs violently, purposes not to restore that thing that he robeth, but it
is not thus with me, for though I took the armor of the dead knight for your
defense and sauegard, when I had obtained the victory, I bare it again to the
same place, and so the dead knight has that is his by the law. Then said the
Justice, a thief that breaks a house that he may steal and bear away such
as he may find, and though he bring again that he has taken, I ask of thee
if that the breaking of the house be lawful or not. The knight answered
sometime the breaking of an House may be good, where as it is made in feeble
place, which should cause the Lord of the house to make his wall stronger,
that the thieves after that break not the walls ^o lightly in a^^o^ing of more
harm.

Then said the Justice, if the breaking of the house be good, nevertheless in
that breaking, violence is done to the Lord of the house. And so though thou
d^dd^st good with the Armor of the dead Knight, nevertheless thou did
wrong to the dead knight in taking away his armor. The knight said, I have
told you that of two harms the least is to be chosen, and that harm where
through great goodnsse comes, ought not to be called harm, but it should
rather be called good. For if that any house within the city were on fire and
began to burn, it were more better to throw it to the ground and three or
four houses thereby, the^ they should be set on fire also, whereby all the
city might be burnt. Right so if the Armor of the dead knight had not been
taken, the city and ye all had been lost. And when the Justice heard that he
answered so well and so reasonably, he might give no judgment against him. But
he yt which had accused this knight slew him, for whose death, there was great
weeping throughout all the city, and his body was worshipfully buried in a new
tomb.

The Moral
Dear friends, this Emperor is the Father of Heaven, and this city is the
world, the which is besieged of the devil and deadly ssnne. And as many as
were within this city, were all in peril to be lost. This young knight that
came to the city, is our Lord Jesu Christ, which had not the armor of our
humanity, till he went to ye grave that is to say, to the womb of the
glorious virgin Mary: by the annunciation of the Angel, saying: The holy Ghost
shall light in thee: etc. Lo thou shall conceive and bear a son. And thus in
the womb of the virgin, he took the armor of the dead knight, yt is to say,
he took ye manhood of Adam our forefather and saved the City, that is the
world with mankind from peril, by his blessed passion that he uffered on the
cross, and that he put the armor again into the grave when his blessed body
was buried, but the citizens ^n^ied him, that is to say, the Jews of Jury
accused him to Pilate, and laid the law against him saying. If thou suffer him
thus, thou art not the Emperor Caesar's freinde, we have a law, and after the
law he ought to dye. And thus our Lord Jesu Christ of his enemies was
condemned to the death of the cross, and after ascended up to heaven* where
our Lord Jesu bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
The fornication of wicked worldly men is here detected by the providence of
God, and by his gracious favor delivered out of the thraldom of sin unto the
liberty of life everlasting.

The History.
THere reigned sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise named Betolde,
which ordained a law that what woman were taken in aduoutry her husband being
a live, she should be cast into perpetual prison. There was that time a
knight that had a fair lady to his wife, which committed aduoutry her husband
being a live, and was with child, therefore by the law she was put in prison,
where within short time after she was delivered of a fair son. This child
grew up till he was seven years old, his mother daily wept heartily. And when
the child hand this he said to his mother. O mother why weep ye thus, and
for what cause are you thus perplexed. Then said his mother. O my sweet
son, I have great cause to mourn, and thou also, for above our heads is
people walking, and the sun shines in cleerenes, and great solace have all
men that are above us, and we be here continually in such darkness yt I may
not see thee, ne thou me, alas yt ever I conceived thee. Then said the son,
such joy, ne such light as ye spoke of, saw I never, for I was borne here in
this darkness, therefore if I had meat and drink enough, here would I live all
the days of my life, therefore mother weep ye not, but show me solace. This
lamentation that was between the mother and the son, heard* the Emperors
Steward that stood above their heads, whereof he had great compassion, and
wept unto the Emperor, and kneeling, beesought him of his grace, that the
mother and the son might be delivered out of prison. The Emperor as a
merciful Lord granted that they should be delivered. Nevertheless if they
trespassed so in time to come, they should be punished with double pain, and
after that they were delivered, this woman ended her life in that City.

The Moral.
Dear friends, this Emperor is the Father of heaven that made this law, that
what wedded woman, yt is to say, what soul that is wedded to our Lord, and
does commit aduoutry, that is to say, does worship strange gods, should be cast
in the prison of hell, therefore a sinful soul has great cause to weep, for
she is departed from light, that is to sa^e, from the ioys of heaven. Her
son that desired meat and drinck, are the wea^thie wicked worldlings of this
world, that say to the prelates of the Church, and to the preachers that
preach unto them the joys of Heaven. that while we may live and have all the
solace of the world, we desire none other heaven. The Steward that heard their
lamentation is our Lord Jesu, that knows all the priuities of our sorrowful
and repentant hearts for our sins, b^ sought the Father of heaven for us, that
we might be delivered from the prison of sin, and yt we might come to
everlasting life, to yt which bring us all our Lord Jesus.

Amen.
The Argument.
Christ proclaims the joyful feast of heaven, wherein the Lamb, to say, the
poor Preachers of the Gospel, having their sight or knowledge i^ gods word,
are suppo^ed of the blind lay^^, and each do mutu^lly comfort other, till they
approach unto the proclaimed feast of perpetual felicity.

The Moral.
SOmetime in Rome dwelt an Emperor named Pompe^, which above all other things
was merciful. This Emrerour procliamed throughout all his Empire a great feast
and that poor and rich should come to this feast. And whosoever came to that
feast should not only be well fed, but also he should have great gifts.
When the herawld had warned all manner of men to come to this feast, at that
time there ware two poor men lying by the way, the one was lame, and the other
was blind, This blind man said to the lame man. Alas and woe to us both, how
shall we do, for the emperor has proclaimed a feast, and who so ever comes
there shall not only be well fed, but also he shall have great gifts, and
I am blind, and thou arts lame, how shall we do. Then said the lame man to
ye blind man, I shall tell thee counsel, if thou will do after me, thou
shall let for nothing. I am lame and feeble and may not go, nevertheless I
may see, and thou art blind and strong, and may not see, take thou me upon
thy beack and bear me, and I shall lead thee the right way, and thus shall
we both come to the Emperors feast. Then said the blind, after thy counsel
let us do, come on my back and I shall bear thee, and you shall lead^ me the
right way, and so they did that they came both to the feast, and recuied great
rewards and gifts among other men. And thus ended their lives in peace.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is our savior Jesu Christ, that proclaymeth a
feast, that is to say, the joys of heaven unto the which joys he called all
mankind, and forsakeht no man that will come unto him. This lame man
betokens ye poor mini sters of ye gospel, which wanting worldly pleasures,
live by ye providence of God. And this blind man beetokeneth the lay men which
konw not the right way to heaven. It be loves ye the blind man, to wit, ye
late m^n to bear ye lame man yt is to say, ye ministers of the gospel,
sustaining and feeding the^ with ye duties of ye church, then ye ministers for
gods cause, are bound to teach and to inform us the way to heaven, where as we
shall not only have a feast, but also great reward and joy, unto yt which god
bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
Heaven and hell are here ^o^pared to two cities, to the^e two cities are two
contrary ways. To heaven (which is the city of all heavenly treasure and
felicity) is a narrow, cr^ked, craggy, and painful way, having three enemies
the d uell, the world, and the flesh. To hell, (being the city or cincke of
sorrow and sadness.) a ^ay^e way, broad, plain and eas^e, having three
gu^^es, to wit, pride of life couetise of the eyes, concupiscence of the flesh.

The tenth History.
SOmetime in Rome dwelt an Emperor named Folliculus, the which was right wise,
merciful and rightful in all his works This Emperor builded in the East a
noble City, wherein he put all his treasure and precious stones and riches to
be kept.

Unto this City the way was stony and full of brambles and sharp thorns, and
three knihgts were armed ready to fight with the^ that would come to that
City. Therefore the emperor ordained yt whosoever overcame these knights
should enter the City, and take at his will of the emperors treasure After
that, this Emperor did make in the North west, a city wherein he ordained all
manner of pain, forme^ting, sorrow and mischief, for malefactors, to the which
was a broad way, verte delectable, growing full of Roses and sayre L^^kes, and
in that way were three knights, ever waiting if any man came toward ye city
of the north, to serve him with all manner of delicates and necessary provision.

And if it fortuned any man to enter within that City, ye custom was such
that the people should take and bind him hand and foot, and cast him in
prison, there to abide ye coming of ye Justice. When this was cried through
out all the Empire, there were two Knights dwelling in a city there beeside
one named Ionatas, who was a wise man, the other hight Pirrius, which was a
fool, nevertheless there had continued betwne them great love. This Ionatas
said to Pyrrius. Dear friend there is a common cry made throughout al lands,
that the Emeperour has made a City in the East wherein he has put all his
treasure, and who so ever may enter that city, shall take of the treasure that
he list, therefore my counsel is that we go to that City. Then said
Pyrryus thy counsel is good, and I desire to fulfill it.

The wise Knight said, if it be so that thou will follow my counsel, I pray
thee that faithful friendship may continue beetweene us, and in token of love,
that thou will drink my blood, and I shall drink thine, that none of us
depart ne fail other in this journey.

The foolish knight said it pleases me right well all that ye say,
wherefore they were both letten blood, and each of them drank others blood.

When this was done, they went forth together on their iourny, and when they
had done three days iourneis toowardes the City where the treasure was, they
came to a place where was two ways, one was sharp, stony, and full of
thorns, the other was plain and fair and full of sweetness and delites. Then
said the wise Knight to his fellow. Dear friend here are two ways, one
sharp and thornie, nevertheless if we go this way we shall come to this City
that is so rich, and there shall we have that we desire.

Then said the folish Knight to his fellow. I wonder greatly of you that you
speak such things, for I will rather beeleue mine eyes than your words, I
see here openly, and so do ye, that here is a hard way and full of thorns,
and as I have heard say, there be three Champions armed in this way: ready to
fight against all men that go that way toward the City of the East, and
therefore I will not go that way, but here is (as ye may see) another way
plain and easy to walk in, and in this wa^ there are three knights ready to
serve us and give us all manner things necessary to us, and therefore by this
way will I go, and not by that other way. Then said the wise knight,
certainly if we go by that way, we shall be led into the City of the
North, wherein there is no mercy, but perpetual pain and sorrow, and there
shall we be taken and bound and cast in prison.

Certainly said the foolish Knight, this way is the ready way, and as I
believe it is more profitable then the other way. Then went they both forth ye
fair way, and anon three knights met with them, which received them
courteously for one night, and gave them all manner of thing that was necessary
to them. And on the morrow they took their tourney forth toward the City,
And when they were within the City, anon ye Emperors officers met with them
and said: dear friends why come ye hither, in so much that ye know the law of
this city is so cruel of long time here before, sooth^y ye shall be se^u^d now
after the law Anon they took ye wise knight and bound him and put him in
prison, and after that they took the foolish knight and bound him fast and
cast him into a dich. Sone after it befell that the Justice came to the City to
give judgment on them that had tresspassed the law, and anon all the prisoners
were brought forth before the justice among whom these two knights were brought
forth, one from prison, and the other from the dich. Then said the wise Knight
to the Justice: Reverend Lord, I complain of my fellow that is guilty of my
death, for when we two came to ye two ways whereof the one led to the City
in the East, and the other to this city, I told him all the peril of this
City, and the reward of that other City, and he would not believe me, and
said to me in this wise, I believe mine own eyes better than thy words, and
because he was my fellow, I would not let him go alone in this way, and thus
came I with him, wherefore he is the cause of my death. Then said ye foolish
knight, I complain that he is the cause of my death, for it is not unknown
to you ^ll that I am a fool, and h^^ wise man, and therefore he should not to
^^ghtly have followed my folly, for if h^ had forsaken this way, I should have
followed him, and therefore he is cause of my death. Then said the Justice to
the wise knight, because that thou with all thy wisdom and great
understanding so lightly contented and followed the will of the fool and his
foolish works, and thou fool because that thou would not do after the
coun^aile ne fulfill the holesom words of this wise man and believe him, I
give judgment that ye be both hanged for your trespass. And so it was done,
wherefore all men praised greatly the Justice for his discrete judgment.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is almighty God, and in the East, is the city of
heaven, wherein is treasure infinite. And unto this city is an hard way and
full of thorns, that is to say, the way of repentance, by the which way full
few walks, for it is hard and strait according to holy Scripture saying
thus. Est arta via que du^^t ad vitam. It is a strayte way that leads to ever
lasting life.

In this way are three armed knights, that is to say, the devil, the world,
and the flesh, with whom it behooves us to fight, and to obtain the victory
or we may come to heaven. The second City that is in the North is hell, and
to this accords Scripture, saying thus. Ab aquilone pondetur omne malum. Out
of the North comes all evil. Certainly to this City is the way plain and
broad, and walled about on every side with all manner delicates, wherefore many
men walk by this way The three Knights that give to every man going this way
what thing them needs, are these. Pride of life, covetousness of the eyes,
and co^cupicence of the flesh, in which three ye wretched man greatly deliteth,
and at the last they lead him to hell. This witty knight betokens the
soul, and the foolish knight betokens the flesh, the which is always foolish,
and at all times ready to do evil. These two are fellows and knitte in one,
for either of them drinks others blood, that is to say, they shall drink of
one cup, either joy or pain shall they have after the day of dome.

The soul chooses the way of repentance, and in as much as she may she
stirs the flesh to do the same. But the flesh thinks never what shall come
after, and therefore she goes in the delight of this world, and flees the
delight o^ repentance. and thus the soul after the death is cast into hell,
and the flesh is cast into the ditch, that is to say, into the grave But then
the Justice comes, that is our Lord Jesus Christ at the day of dome, to
judge all mankind. Than the Soul shall complain upon the slesh, and the flesh
upon the Soul. But than the Justice that will not be deceived neither by
prayer ne by price, shall condemn the Soul because she followed the fra ^tie
of sleshe, and also he shall condemn the flesh because it would not believe
the Soul, wherefore let us study to tame our flesh, that we may obey God,
and than shall we have everlasting life, Unto the which bring us our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
The soul of man being possessed in the princely territory of Paradyse, was
by the devil provoked to sin against her creator, and for the same
transgression so being thence into this wide world exiled, lost that her
former heritage: But by Christ's precious death and passion was restored unto a
more happy heritage of everlasting felicity.

The 11. History.
THERE dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Frederick, which had
no children save one only daughter, to whom this Emperor after his decease
beequethed all his Empire. This understanding an Earl yt dwelt there beeside
came unto this young Lady and wooed her, and provoked her to sin all that he
might, wherefore this young lady in short process of time enclyned to the
Earl, and this Earl anon lay with her and defiled her, and after that she
departed from her heritage, and exiled her out of her Empire, wherefore she
made a great lamentation, and fled unto a realm there beside, where as she
daily weept and mourned. It befell after on a day yt while she sat mourning by
the hye way side, there came riding by her a fair young knight upon a good
horse, which came toward her a great pace, and very courteously saluted her and
asked ye cause why she mourned so sore. Then answered she and said.

My reverend lord I am an Emperors daughter descended of royal blood, my
father is dead which left me all his Empire, because he had none other heir,
and after his decease an Earl there beside deceived me, deslowred my
virginity, and after that he put me violently out of mine heritage, so that
now I am feign to beg my bread from door to door, and this is the cause of my
sorrow. Then said the knight, far damsel I have great compassion on thy
beauty and on thy gentleness, therefore if thou will grant me one thing, I
shall fight for thee against the Earl, and I protest unto thee the purchase of
the victory. Then said she, alas good sir, I have nothing that I may give unto
you but my self. And I ask no more of thee said ye knight but yt thou
would be my wife and love no man so much as me. Then said she, Reverend
sir, that I will do gladly, and more if I might.

Then said the knight I will that thou do for me one thing, that if it
fortune me to dye in fight for thee, and obtain the victory, thou shall take
my bloody shert and hang it upon a beam in thy chamber, and this shall thou
do for two things. The first is, that when so ever thou beholdest the shert,
thou shall weep for me. The second is, that what so ever man come to woo^ thee
to be his wife, then shall thou hastily run unto thy chamber and beehould my
bloody shert, and think heartelye within thy self thus.

The Lord of this shert dyed for my love in baftayle, the which recovered my
heritage, God forbid that I should take any other man after his death. Then
said she. Reverend sir, all this shall I fulfill by the grace of God. And
when the knight heard this, he assaylled to fight against ye said earl and
obtained the victory, and the Earl was overcome and fled: and this young lady
was brought and received again into her heritage.

Nevertheless this knight was deadly wounded in that battle, whereof he
died, but or he died he beequeathed his bloody shert unto this damsel,
desiring her to keep her promise. When this young Lady heard of his death, she
wept sore, and made great lamentation for his death. And in his shert was
cu^ningly wrought this verse. Think on him and have in mind: that to thee was
so kind. Anon when she had received ye shert, she hanged it upon a beam in
her chamber, and as oftentimes as she beheld it, she wept bitterly It beefell
not long after yt the states of her Empire came to her and desired her to take
a husband. But then she went to her chamber and beeheld the bloody shert, then
wared she sorofull and said oftentunes, woe and alas thou sufferedst death for
my love, and thou also recoueredst again mine heritage, God forbid that I
should take any other man more but thee. And thus she answered every man that
came to her, and so they went away disapointed of their purpose, and ended her
life in peace and rest.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is the father of heaven, and his daughter is the
soul of man, made to the similitude of God, to whom God gave and bequethed
the Empire of Paradise. But there came an Earl, that is the devil, and
provoked her to sin, when she eat of ye apple, and said to her thus. In
what hour ye eat of ye apple ye shall be like Gods, wherefore we breaking
Gods commandment we were all exiled out of Paradise, and chased to ye realm
of this world here to live in great wretchedness, like as ye psalm: says: In
sudore vultas tui. In you sweat of thy visage shall you eat thy bred. But then
came a fair young knight and a strong, that is to say, our Lord Jesu Christ,
which had compassion upon mankind, taking upon him our flesh and and our
blood, gave battaille to the devil and overcame him, and thus wan he again
our heritage. Therefore let us do as this young Lady did, lay we up this
bloody short, that is to say, the mind of the passion o^ Christ on the beam
of our heart, and think we how our Lord Jesu Christ shed his precious blood for
us. And if any man, that is to say, the devil or any other would stir us to
sin, anon think we of ye passion of Christ, and say we thus. I shall take
none other but thee which have shed they blood for me, and thus shall we win
everlasting life. Unto the which God bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
We are ^eere generally advertised of honorineg the Saboth day, how for the
redeeming of time to be occupied in Ghostly contemplation profitable to the
soul and body. The preachers of Gods word often times for saying truth
purchase inconuenyence, if we beestow our talents in the amplyfying of faith
and furdering one another with good works. We shall then inheritie the
^r^i^on of eternal blessing prepared for the elect of Christ Jesus.

The 12. History.
SOmetime dwet in Rome a mighty emperor named Apolloninus which ordained for
a law that eury man upon pain of death should celebrate the day of his
Nativity. This Emperor called to him a clarke that hight Virgill, and said.
My dear master, there be many hamous offenses done in my Empire contrary to
the law, therefore I pray thee that thou by thy cunning would make some craft
whereby I might know who trespasseth against the law privily or appertly.

Then said Virgill. My reverend Lord your will shall be done. Anon this
Virgill through his craft made an Image, in the midst of the City of Rome,
which denou^ced and told the Emperors messengers who trespassed against the
law, and who not. There was that time dwelling in the City of Rome a smith yt
hight Focus* which for nothing would celebrate the nativity of the emperor.
It befell upon a night as the smith lay in his bed, he thought upon the Image
that had accused so many men before, and dread least the Image would accuse
him, wherefore he rose and went to the image and said. I make a vow to God, if
thou accuse me, I shall break thy head. And when he had thus said, he went
home. The Emperor on the morrow after following sent his messenger to that
Image (as before times he was accustomed) to know and understand who had
trespassed against the law. And to them then said the Image, lift up your ^yne
and beehold what is engraven in my forhead. And then they looked up and saw
this posie written. Tempore mutan^ur homines determinatur. Times be changed
and men be worse and worse. For who will say the truth, shall have his head
broken, therefore go ye forth to your Lord and tell him all that ye have
read and seen. The messengers went forth and told the Emperor all that they
had heard and seen.

Then said the Emperor, arm your self and go to the Image, and if that you
find any man that have mentioned or threatened to hurt the Image, bind him
hand and foot and bring him to me. Then went ye messengers forth to the
Image and said to it. Tell us the truth if any man have threatened thee, and we
shall avenge thee anon. Then said the Image. Take the smith Focus, for he is
the man that will not honor the nativity of the Emperor: straight way the
messengers led forth the smith before the Emperor and there upon examined
him why he kept not ye day of the Emperors nativity in reverence and honor
according to ye law. Then answered ye smith and said. Reverend Lord I beseech
you that ye will here mine excuse and if I answer not reasonably to all
manner of points that ye will ask me, I will yield me fully to your grace.
Then said The Emperor, I shall hear thee, and that is rightful I shall do.
Then said the smith, It behooves me to have v^ii. d. every day in the week,
and yt I cannot get without great labor, and therefore I may in no manner wise
keep that day holy day more than other days: Then said the Emperor. Why
behooves it thee to have these viii. d. Then said the Smith, I am bound to
pay daily ii. d. and ii. d. I lend, and ii d. I leese, and ii. d. I spend.
Then said the Emperor, tell me more e^pressely of these viii. d. Then said the
Smith. I am bound every day to pay ii. d. to my Father, for when I was young,
my father spent on me ii. d. daily, and therefore am I bound to help him, and
pay him again his ii. d. for his sustentation. Also ii. d. I leese on my wife.
Then said ye Emperor, why lesest thou that ii. d. on thy wife. Then sayd^ he,
where saw ye ever woman but she had one of these points, either she is
wilful, or contrary to her husband, or of hot complexion, and therefore
that I give her I leese. Also ii d. I lend to my son, wherewith he is
sustained, that when I come to age and poverty, he may pay me again ii. d.
like as I do my Father. Also I spend ii. d. on my self in meat and drink,
and that is little enough. Then said the Emperor, thou have answered well and
wisely. Not long after it befell that the Emperor dyed, and this Smith Focus
was chosen to be Emperor, because he spent his viii. d so wisely and so
profitably and thus he ended his life in peace and rest.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is our blessed savior Jesu Christ, which ordained
by his holy law that every man should keep holy the Saboth day.

This Virgill that made this image is the holy ghost, which establishes among
us, Preachers to teach virtues, and to reprove vices, and that should not spare
the poor ne the rich. But now if a Preacher would say the truth against any
man, anon he shall be thretened of the enemies of Christ, that is to say, by
evil men that neither love God nor man, wherefore the Preacher may say now a
days that posey which was written in the forehead of ye image Times been
changed from good to ill, and men been daily worse: For who so would say the
truth now a days, shall have his head broken. Therefore it is need they be
armed, that is to say, that every Preacher be armed with virtuous examples of
their good life toward other, and than it needs not to dread, in so much yt
they have ye truth of God to stand by them, according to the Apostles saying.
Si Deus nobiscu^, quis contra nos. If God be with us who is against us. By this
smith Focus, is understood every good Christian man, which daily should spend
his time in wary redeeming every hours travail with some profit corporal
and spiritual, and then ought he to be presented before the heavenly
Emperor. This Focus paid ii. d. to his father, and so we should pay to our
Father of Heaven ii. d. that is to say, honor and love. For when we were the
children of wretchedness and put in bondage, almighty God sent down to the
earth his son to redeem us, according to S. John the Evangelist, laying:
Deus dilexit mundum vt filium suum vnigenitum daret pro mundo. God loves the
world so well yt he would give his only son for the salvation of the world.

Also this Focus lent ii. d. to his son, that is to say, every Christian man
ought to lend to ye son of god our lord Christ Jesu good firm faith and
fruitful good works and deeds in our life, and he will repay us again at ye
day of dome with his heavenly mercy, when soul and body shall be glorified, and
in that he is our brother, it may well be proved by ye text of Esaias, saying
thus. Puer natus est nobis, etc. A child is borne to us. This Eocus lost ii. d.
on his wife. Thy wife betokens thy flesh, upon whom thou lost ii. d. yt is to
say, unlawful love and consent to sin, for why, the flesh is contrary to the
spirit, and ever is ready to harm. This Focus also spent ii. d. on himself, yt
is to say, by ye first penny ye shall understand penance done, in which the
soul greatly delights in heaven, and there is glorified. And by the second
penny we ought to understand the steadfast perseverance in amendment of life,
for he that abides unto the end, shall be saved. And who that spends well
these two pens shall obtain everlasting life. Unto the which bring us our Lord
Jesu Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
Man being blind through sin, and either by infirmity of frail flesh, or
suggestion, tr^spassing with evil and lewd company, though God of his mercy
be favorable unto him in this life time by reason of the foresaid respects, yet
if he ac^ustomably walk himself in the dr^nck of this worldly wickedness, his
wil^ul blindness shall not there excuse him but accuse him in the day of
judgment most grievously to have offended God in abusing his mercy offered,
and therefore least worthy to have the reward of the simple soul, that
repentantly, yea with modesty, lineth toward the fruition of everlasting
bl^sle.

The 13. History.
SOmetime in Rome dwelled a noble emperor which amo^^^ other virtues loved best
m^t^^, wherefore he ordamed a law, that every bline: man should have an hundred
shillings by the year of his treasure. It besell ^^ a day that there came
cer^^^^^ men to a Lauerne to drink Wine, and after that these men had sitten
in the Cauerne three days, the sourth day they were greatly in the tauerners
debt, and had no money to pay for their wine, wherefore the tauerner came to
the^ and charged them that they should not voy^e till they had paid for their
wine. Then said one of the drinckers to his fellows. Syrs quod he, the emperor
has made such a law, that every blind man shall have an hundred shillings of
his treasure, therefore let us cast lottes among us, and to whom the lot
falls, let ^^d eyes be put out, and so may he go to the Emperors pallayes
an^ get^^ an hundred shillings,

And this greatly reioysed them, I said that the (...) was right good, wherefore
they can lottes among them (...) otte ^^l on him that gave the (...), and than
his fellows for^hwith put out his ey^l. And when he was blind, he went to
themperours pallayes,* asked of the steward an hundred shilings, according to
the Emperors law.

Dear friend said the steward, thou might see with both thine eyes
yesterday, and thou also understand the law amiss, for the law is made for
men that are blind through infirmities, or by the will of God, and yesterday
thou badst thy sight in the Tavern, but wilfully thou have lost thine enne,
therefore go to the tavern again to thy fellows and discharge there that
tho^^^wes^, for here gettest thou not a ^arthing. Then went this wretched man
forth and told his selowes of the stewards answer, and with that came in the
tauerner and dispoyled them of all their clothes and b^t them, and thus drove
them with shame out of the city, and so were they never seen there after.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is ou^ savior Christ, which ordained for a law
that every blind man should have an hundred shillings of his treasure. This
blind man betokens every sinner, which sins through infirmities, or
entising of the devil, the world, and the flesh, which shall receive an
hundred shillings, if he be inwardly repentant of his sins, that is to say,
he shall have an hundred times more joy, according to scripture, saying thus.
Centuplum accipi^e* and vitam eternam posidebitis. Ye shall receive an hundred
times more joy, if ye be repentaunt and turn from sin, and also ye shall have
everlasting life. These men that came to the Lauerne to drink wine, be
sinners, which often times come to the Tavern of our adversary the devil and
drink of his carnal appetites, that is to say, they there consume and wast
away all ghostly virtues, which they received when they received the sacrament
of baptume, wherefore the devil our enemy dispoyleth them and makes them to
leese all their good deeds that ever thy wrought before they cast lotts, that
is to say, they cast among them the custom of sin, and this lot of sin
falls on such as are worshipful and without mercy, and such a man wilfully
becomes vlind, that is to say, he becomes wilfully a foul sinner like
Judas, that betrayed our Lord without any suggestio^ or entising, and therefore
such men sin more grienously when they come before the steward, that is to
say, before the prelates of the church, they may not lightly obtain the joys
of heaven, for why, they be not in the right way to leave their sin.
Therefore study we with all our diligence, to please God, that we may obtain
everlasting life: which is laid up in store for all those that live modestly,
looking for the eternal salvation. Unto the which bring us our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
A certain Initiat vow of love being made beetweene the soul of every
faithful christian and the fair daughter of Jesus, eternal life, we have to
consider the merciful and gracious covenant of God toward the faithful and
careful of his covenant, and their own vow was study to be furnished with
all divine virtues, so as they are the prefixed day of promise undefiled,
which shall then wisely purchase the provided place of everlasting glory for
all them that seek the glory of God and their souls health.

The 14. History.
IN Rome dwelled some(...) mighty emperor named (...) mius, which had only a
daug(...) a damsel, fair and gracious in the sight of every man, which had
to name Aglaes. There was also in themperours pallayes a gentle knight that
loved this lady above all thing in the world. It beefell after upon a day that
this knight talked with this lady and vttred in secret w^^e his disire to her.
Then said she courteously, since ^ee have v^tred to me the pri^^ty of your
heart, I shall in like wise for your love utter to you the secrets of mine
heart, and truly I say that above all other I love you best.

Then said the knight. I purpose to visit the holy Land, and therefore give
me your troth, yt this seven year ye shall take no other man, but only
for my love to ^arry for me so long, and if I come not again by this day un.
^eere, (...)ke then what man ye like best. And (...)e wise I shall promise you
yt with(...) seven year I shall take no wife. (...) said she, this covenant
pleases me (...) When this was said, each of them (...)othed other, and then
this knight (...)ke his leave of this Lady and went forth to the holy land.
Anon after that the Emperor treated with the king of Hungary for the marriage
for his daughter. Then came the king of Hungary to the Emperors pallays to see
his daughter, and when he had seen her, he liked maruaclously well her beauty
and her goodness, so that the Emperor and the King were accorded in all
things as touching the marriage, upon the condition that the damsel would
consent. Then called ye Emperor t(...) young Lady to hin and said. O my
fay(...) daughter, I have provided for thee t(...) a King shall he thy
husband, if thee (...) so assent, therefore tell me what (...) swear thou will
give to this.

Then said she to her father, it (...) seth me well, but of one thing
dee(...) there I you beseech, i^ it might plea(...) to grant me for the love
of (...) have auowed my chastity only (...) for this vii. year, therefore
dear (...) I beeseech you for all ye love that (...) tweene your gracious
fatherhoo(...) me, that ye name no man to be m(...) band till these vii.
year be ended, and (...) I shall be ready in all things to full(...) your
will. Then said the Emperor, since it is so that thou will no husband have
this seven year, I will not break thy vow, but when these seven years been
passed, thou shall have the king of Hungary to thy husband:

And then themeperour sent forth his letters to ye king of Hu^gary, praying
him if it might please him to abide vii. year for the love of his daughter,
and then should he speed of his intent without (...)isle. Hereof the King was
pleased, (...)d granted to abide ye promised day. (...) when these vii. years
were ended (...) a day, ye young Lady stood in her (...)er mindow and wept
sore, say(...)us. Woe and alas, as to morrow (...)e promised to be with me
again (...)e holy land, and also the King of (...)ary to morrow will be here
for to (...) me, according to my fathers (...), and if my love come not at a
(...)e hour, then am I utterly de(...) of the inward love of him.

(...)en the day came the king arrayed (...) toward the Emperor with a
(...)at company to marry his daughter, and was royally be seen and arrayed in
purple. And while the king was ryding on his way, there came a knight so^ainly
riding by him, to whom he said thus.

Dear friend whence art thou, and whence come thou. The knight answered and
said, I am of thempyre of Rome, and now am come late from the holy land and am
ready to do your service such as I can. And as they rode talking by the way,
it beegan to rain so fast, that all the kings apparel was almost spoiled.
Then said the knight. My lord, quod he, ye have done foolishly, for as much
as ye brought not with you your house. Then said the king why speak thou
so, my house is large and broad and made of stones and mortar, how should I
then bear with me my house, thou speak to me like a fool. When this was
laid they rod farther till they came to a great water and a deep, the king
smote his horse with his spurs and leapt into the water, so that he was
almost drowned. Then the knight saw this, and was over on that other side of
the water without peril, he said to the king. Ye were in peril, and
therefore ye did foolishly because ye brought not with you your bridge. Then
said the king, thou speak meruaylously, my bridge is made of lime and
stone, and contains in quantity more then half a mile, how should I then
bear with me my bridge, therefore thou speak foolishly. Well said the
knight my foolishness may turn thee to wisdom.

When the king had ridden a little farther, he asked the knght what time of
day it was. Then said the knight if any man have list to eat, it is time of
the day to eat, and therefore my reverent Lord I pray you to take a modicome
with me, for that is no disworshippe to you but great honor to me before the
states of this Empire. Then said the king, I will gladly eat with thee, They
sat both down in a vine garden, and all that were with the King and with the
knight dined. And when dinner was done, and that the king had washen, the
knight said to the King. My Lord quod he, ye have done foolishly, for yt ye
lead not with you your father and your mother. Then said the king, what say
thou, my father is dead, and my mother is old, and may not travail, how
should I then bring them with me, therefore to thee I say the truth, a
folisher man then thou art saw I never. Then said the Knight, every work is
praised at the end. When the Knight had ridden a little farther and was ^y
hand to themperours pallaies, ye Knight asked seaue to go from him, for this
cause, he knew a nearer way to the palace to the young Lady that he might come
first and lead her with him. Then said the king, I pray thee sir tell me by
what place purposest thou to ride. Then said ye Knight I shall tell you truth,
this day seven year I left a net in a place, and now I purpose to visit it and
draw it to me, and if it be broken I will leave it, and if it be whole then
will I take it to me, and keep it as a precious Jewel, and when he had said
what him list, he took his leave of the king and read forth, and the King
kept the broad high way.

When the emperor heard of ye Kings coming, he went toward him with a great
company, and royally received him, causing him to shift his wet clothes and
attire him again with new clothes. And when the Emperor and the king were set
to meat, the Emperor welcomm^d him with all the cheer and solace that he
could. And when they had dined the emperor asked tidings of the King. My Lord
said he, I shall tell you what I heard this day by the way.

There came a knight to me and reverently saluted me, and anon after there
came a great reign, which greatly spoiled my apparel, and anon ye knight
said, sir thou have done foolishly, for so much as thou broughtst not with thee
thy house. Then said the emperor, what clothing had ye knight on him. A cloak
quoth the king. The^ said the emperor, forsooth that was a wise man, for ye house
whereof he spoke was a cloak, and therefore he said to you that ye did
foolishly because ye came without your cloak, for if you had brought with you
acloake, then had not your clothes ben spoiled with rain. Then said the king,
when we had riden a little farther, we came to a deep water, I smote my horse
with my spurs and almost I was drowned, and he (...) on the other ^^de of
the water and found no peril, and then said he to me, ye have done folishly,
for so much that ye led not with you your bridge. Forsooth, said the emperor he
said truth, for he called the bridge your ^quires, that should have ridden
before you and assayde the deepenes of the water. Then said the king, we rode
farther, and at the last he prayed me to dine with him, and when we had dined
he said, I did unwisely, for I led not with me my father and my mother.
Sothly said the Emperor he was a wise man and said troth, for he called your
father and mother bread and wine, and other vitailes. Then said the king we
rode farther and anon after he asked me leave to go from me, and I asked
diligently whether he went. And he answered again and said. This day vii.
year I left a Net in a privy place, and now I will ride to visit it, and if
it be broken or torn, than will I leave it, and if it be whole as I left it,
then shall it be to me right precious, and I shall bear it with me. When
the emperor heard this he cried with a loud voice and said. O ye my knights and
my servant come ye with me spedily unto my daughters chamber, for sothly
that is the net whereof the knight spoke. And anon his knights and his
servants went unto his daughters chamber and found her not, the soresayde
knight had taken her with him. And thus the knig was deceived of the damsel.
And he went home again to his own country ashamed.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor is our Lord Jesu Christ, and this fair daughter
is everlasting life, the which the emperor had ordained for kings, knights and
other men. The knight that loved this young Lady, is every good christian
soul, which holds him self not worthy to come in the sight of God, unto
such joy as the apostle says. Non est condign passionis hu^s temporis ad
futu^a^ glo^a^ They be not so worthy of suffering this time to attain unto y
glory that is to come. This knight was viiyeeres absent from his love, like as
a good Christian man all the days of his life should labor and ^rauaile in
^ulfilling the vii. works of mercy. By the king that came without a cloak in
the rain, is to understand some nyghtie men of this world as that have cloaks
to cover all their other clothes. By this cloak is understood charity, as the
apostle says* Charitas cooperit multitudinem peccatorum. Charity covers the
multitude of ^inn^s. But many men have not this cloak, wherefore they be wet
in the rain of pride, avarice, and lechery.

This king also was almost drowned, because he lacked his bridge, that is to
say, perfect faith. For we see daily that there may no man pass over a great
water, broad and deep without a bridge, or some other thing that is able to
bear him. Right so with out faith it is impossible to please God. And thus may
no man be saved without faith, when theilet their life in worldly ^oy or
worldly help, more than in the help of God, which is mighty to do all
things, wherefore he says himself thus. Si habueritis fide sicut granum
sinapis pote^^s etc. If ye have faith as the grain of musterd, then may ye say
to the hills remove out of your places, and they shall remove. But many of us
now a days has over feeble faith, and therefore they shall suddenly fall in
the clay of desperation and by deadly sin oftentimes they offend God. Also
this king had not brought with him his father and his mother. By ^he father
which is cause of generation is ^o understand humilytie, without whom there is
no virtue in any man. And thereto accords sain^t Gregory, saying thus. Si
quis cete^^^ vertutes sine humilitate congregat, etc. He that gathers all
other virtues without humilytie, is like a man that (...)th dust in the wind.
His mother betokens hope, therefore he that will obtain everlasting life,
him behooves to have the cloak of charity, bridge of faith, a father of
meekenes, and a mother of hope, as the apostle says. ^pe salu^ facti sumus.
Also this knight went the straight path way and the king the broad way. For he
that will be saved, it behooves him to go a strayt way, that is to say, the
way of fasting, alms deeds, chastity and repentance. Of the which way
speaks the apostle. Stricta est via que ducit ad vitam eternam. The way is
strayte that leads to everlasting life. But many men go ye other way which
leads to hell, that is to say, by the way of sleshly lust, and such men been
gone out of the way of everlasting lise, but such men be deceived through ye
way. Therefore study we to walk that way whereby we may obtain euerlsting life.

The Argument.
By this history is figured as apeareth in the moral, the soul of every good
christian to him holden as his daughter. But being seduced, carried away, and
defiled by satan our foul enemy, she is reduced by the help and valiant
prowes of our heavenly champion Christ Jesus unto his former habitation. Yet
man being ungrateful to his Redeemer forgets his duty, and for good,
rewarding evil to his champion Christ Jesus delivering him to be judged by the
law as an offender, but when the champion avouches what he has done for man
and his soul, than is he with shame of his ingratitude constrained to have
remorse and call for grace to repent and amend his life by the death and
passion of this champion Christ possesses life of everlasting joy and bliss.

The 15. History.
SOmetime dwelled in Rome a noble Emperor named Agias, which had retaining
unto him a Knight called Gerard, which was a worthy warrior, nevertheless he
was as meek as a Lamb in the Emperors court, but in the field he was like a
Lion.

This Emperor had a fair daughter, whom the strong and mighty Earl of
Palester carried perforce away and defiled, nevertheless it displeased more
the emperor the defiling of his daughter than the carrying of her away,
wherefore he called unto him his counsel and said. Dear friends it is not
unknown to you the despite and violence done to me in deflowring of my
daughter, and therefore I purpose to give battle to the Earl, wherefore I
pray you to be ready at a day, that ye may proceed with me in battle. And
they said, Lord we be ready to live and dye with you in battle.

When the appointed day of battle came, they met on both sides, and a cruel
sharp conflict was prosecuted on both sides, and all that were of themperours
part were slain. And as the emperor himself should have been sorceably
assailed, the knight Gerard put himself among his enemies before the emperor,
and fought manfully, and so The Emperor escaped, and the knight abode and slew
the earl, nevertheless this knight had diverse wounds. This notwithstanding he
abode still till ye blood ran down to his foot.

And when his enemies saw that the Earl was slain, they fled, and the
Knight with his people ^^^^owed on the (...) till he came to the place where
themperours daughter was, and ^^dde her with him. And thus with triumph and
victory he ^^^urned again^ to the emperor. For ^^^ which victory and reobtaining
of themperours daughter he was greatly pea^^^d of all people.

Not long after it befell that this knight had a su^e to move themperours court,
wherefore the knight came unto the emperor and prayed him meekely to be
favorable in his cause, and furthermore he prayed him to do the reason
touching his honest demand.

When The Emperor had heard him, he called to him a Justice and said. ^ir
Justice our will is, that you perform all equity unto this knight, and that
that the Law will. And when the knight heard this, he cried with a loud voice.
Alas, alas, who heard ever such a thing of an Emperor, thou were, said he in
battle, where thy head should have been smitten off, and I in mine own
person and none other man, put my self in ieopardy for thee, and saved thee,
and now thou have assigned an other man to be Judge in my cause, alas that
ever thou were borne. And with that word the knight put of all his clothes and
sheweh his wounds that he had received in the batt^^^e, unto all the men yt
were there present, and said. Lo^, what I have suffered for thee, Oh Emperor,
and I put none other man in my st^de, and now thou assignest an other man in my
cause. For sooth I say to thee, that I never served such a Lord before.

When the Emperor heard this, being almost confounded in himself, said thus.
O Dear friend all that thou say is troth, thou sauedst me from death,
thou did reobtaine my daughter again, and for my sake thou have suffered
many wounds. For sooth it is right that I in my own person come down and make
an end of thy cause, such as may be honor and joy to thee.

And when the emperor labored busily in this matter, and made thereof an end
according to the knights entente, wherefore all men greatly commended the
Emperor,

The Moral
Dear friends this Emperor may be called every Christian man, or else all
mankind, which had a fair daughter, that is to say, the soul made to the
similitude of God. This Earl beetokeneth the devil, which carries away and
deflowreth by sin the soul of man through eating of the fruit of the tree
knowing good and evil, wherefore all mankind was in thraldom, til a strong and
valiant knight came and put himself on the Cross to suffer death, as a
redeemer of mankind from the devil. For if that had not been, we had all
been partakers of thraldom euerlaistngly, and this Knight reduced and
reobtayned the Soul of man unto the Church, wherefore he suffered many great
wounds in his body. And now this knight, that is to say, our Lord Jesu Christ
has a matter to do among us, that is to say, to find in us perfect life,
wherefore he calls on us daily that we should be ready at all times, saying
thus in ye Apocalipse. iii. Eccesto ab hostium and pulso: si quis mihi
aparuerit introibo and c^nibo. That is to say. Lo I stand and knock at the
door, if any man will open to me I shall come in and suppe with him. But many
men do as the Emperor did, the which appointed the knight an other Judge then
him self. But now a days there be some men that will do no repentance for
the love of him, which assigned no man but himself to fight for us. And
therefore against unthankful persons it shall be said thus. Lo he suffered
for us on the Cross, despoyled of all his clothing, and shows to us all his
wounds that he suffered for us.

Be we therefore thankful unto God for his graces that we may suffer for
his love some sorrowful repentance. For he that suffers pain for the love
of God in this life, shall receive an hundrid times more reward in the life
everlasting, and also he shall obtain everlasting life: unto ye which our
Lord Jesus bring all mankind.

Amen.
The Argument.
The soul of man is here warned to eschew the pleasant baits and subtle
craft of the devil, that she yield not to his allutments, least she be
overcome of him, and he get the vantage of this mortal course from her, and
bereue her of the joys in the life to come.

The 16. History.
THere dwelt sometimes in Rome a witty emperor namid Pompey, which had a fair
daughter called Aglas. This daughter had many virtues above all other women of
that Empire.

First, she was fair and gracious in the sight of every man. She was also
swift in running, that no man might overtake her by a great space. When
The Emperor understood these two virtues in his daughter, he was right joyful,
wherefore he made to proclaim throughout all his Empire, that what man poor
or rich would run with his daughter should have her to wife with great
riches, if he might ouerrunne her and come sooner to the mark then she, and
if she over run him and come sooner to the mark then he, his head should
be smitten off.

When the states of that Empire, as Dukes, Earls, Barrons and knights heard
this cry, they offered themselves one after an other to run with her, but
ever this young Lady ouer-ranne them all, wherefore they lost their heads
according to the law. That time there was a poor man dwelling in Rome, which
thought within himself I am a poor man and come of poor kindred, there is
made a common cry, that what man so ever might ouerrunne the Emperors
daughter by any wise, should be promoted to great honor and richesse,
therefore if I might overcome her by any manner way, I should not onley be
promoted to great honor but also all my kindred. This poor man provided
himself of three Jewels, whereby he might win her. First he made a garland
of red roses and of white.

Secondly, he made a fair girdle of silk runningly wrought. Thirdly he made
a pursse of silk imbroder^d with precious stones, and within the pursse was a
ball of three colors, and upon this pursse was wrought this posey. Who
plays with me, shall never be weary of my play.

Then put he these three things in his bosom, and went forth to the pallayes
gate crying and saying. Come forth fair Lady come forth, for I am ready to
run with you and fulfill the law in all things.

When the emperor heard this, he commanded his daughter to run with him.
This young lady went to her chamber window, and when she saw him, she despised
him and said. I have overcome many worthy knights, and now must I run with a
chorle, nevertheless I shall fulfill my fathers commandment.

Anon the damsel arrayed her for to run with him. And at the last they
ran together, and within short space the damsel went far before him.

When this Jugler saw this, he threw forth ye garland of flowers before her.
And when the damsel beheld and saw that, she stouped down and took it up*
and set it upon her head, and that while the Jugler went before her. And when
this young damsel saw this, she wept sore, and for sorrow she threw the
garland in a ditch and ran after him diligently, and at the last she
ouertooke him, and lift up her right hand and gave him a buffet, saying to him
thus: Abide thou wretch, it beeseemeth not thy fathers son to have me to his
wife. And this young Lady went before him a great space. And when the Jugler
saw this, he took ont ye girdle of his bosom and threw it before her. And
when she saw that, lightly she stouped down and took it up, and anon gyrde
her therewith, and then the Jugler went again before her.

And when she saw that, she made great lamentation, and took the girdle with
her teeth and tare it in three pieces, and then threw it from her, and then
she ran fast after him and at the last over took him, and then she took up
her hand and gave him a great blow, saying these words. O wretch, think thou
to overcome me, and with that she ran before him a great speace. The
Jugler ^as slye and sub^^il, and abode till that she was almost at the mark,
and then he threw forth before her the Pursse, and when she saw this Pursse,
anon she stouped down and took it up, and opened it, and found the ball,
and red the posey, Who plays with me, shall never be weary of my play. And
then began she to play, and so long she continued in playing till that the
Jugler was before her at the mark. And thus he wanne thmperours daughter.

The Moral
Dear friends this Emperor is our savior Christ, and his fair daughter is
man's Soul, which was made clean with the water of regneration or baptism,
and was also swift in running, that is to say, in virtue, while that she is in
cleanness, so that no deadly sin might overcome her.

This Jugler that is of so subtle and crafty living is the devil, the which
studieth day and night to deceive innocents.

He provides him of three things: First, of the garland which betokens
pride by this reason, for why a garland of flowers is not set upon the arm nor
upon the foot, but upon the head, that it may be seen. Right so pride would
be seen: against proud men speaks saint Augustine, saying thus.

Quemcunque superbum videris, filium diaboli dici non dubites. That is to say,
what proud man that thou may see, doubt ye not to call him the son of the
devil.

Do thou therefore as the maiden did, bewail thy sins and take of the
garland of pride and cast it in the ditch of hearty repentance, and so shall
thou give the devil a great buffet and overcome him.

But when this Jugler, that is to say, our ghostly enemy, the devil sees
himself overcome in one sin, than he returns and tempts a man in an
other sin, and casts before man the girdle of lechery.

But alas there be very many gyrd with the gyrdel of lechery, of the which
gyrdle speaks saint Gregory saying thus. Gyrde we our loins with the gyrdle
of chaslitie, for who so ever is gyrt with this gyrdle shall not leese the
course of life.

Then casts the Jugler forth (that is to say, the devil) the pursse with
the ball. The pursse that is open above and close under, betokens the heart,
which evermore should be close in the bottom against earthly things, and open
above to heavenly joy, and the two strings that opens and shitteth the
pursse, betokens the love of God and of our neighbors. The bal which is
round and moveable to every part of his difference, betokens couetise, which
moves ever both in young and in old, and therefore ye posey was good and true
yt was wrought on the pursse, Who so plays with me, yt is to say, with
covetousness shall never be satisfied. Therefore says Seneca: Cum omnia pectam
senescunt, sola cupiditas iuuenescit. When that all sin was old, than
couetise all only waxes young. Therefore let us take heed that we play not
with this ball of covetousness, and tha^ without doubt we shall obtain and
gain the game with the tennes Ball in the bliss of heaven yt never shall have
end. Unto the which bliss bring us he that shed his precious blood for us.

Amen.
The Argument.
The preaching of Gods word every good prayer and practice as it is a sou^ding
melody in the ears of God, and has a time of felicity for the delectation of
man's mind, yet there is now and than stirred up some one or other sinister
means, by satan our whistling adversary that the same is hindered for a time
till the providence of God send forth godly preachers which with the hook of
gods word do win again the lost felicity, and so recover the fall of such
souls as were seduced into the perpetual feloship or angels in heaven.

The 17 History.
Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty Emperor and a wise, named Theodosius, which
above all other thing he loved best two things, namely, the Music upon the
Harp, and past^^e of hunting. It befell after upon a day as this Emperor
hunted in a forest, he heard so sweet a noise of harp sthat through the
sweetness thereof he was almost ravished of his wits, wherefore he sought about
the forest to sinde that melody, and at the last he espied at the end of the
forest a poor man sitting beside a water playing on a harp so sweetly, that
the emperor before that day heard never so sweet a melody. Then said
the emperor, good friend, proceeds this melody from thy harp or no. The poor
man answered and said. My reverend Lord I shall tell you the troth. Beside this
water my wife and my child and I have dwelled. xxx. year, and God has given
me such grace, that when so ever I touch my harp, I make so sweet melody,
that the fishes of this water come out to my hand and so I take them, where
with my wife, my child, and I be sustained daily in great plenty. But al^s and
welaway, on the other side of this water there comes a whistler and
whisteleth so sweetly that many times the fishes forsake me and go to his
whistling, and therefore my reverend Lord I beseech you of help against his
hissing and whisteling. Then said the emperor, I shall give thee good help and
counsel, I have here in my pursse a golden hook which I will give thee,
take thou it and bind it fast at the end of a rod, and with some worm for
the bait upon the hook, then cast thy rod into the water forthwith, and ply
thy play upon thy harp, and when thou perceiuest the fish to byte on the bait,
draw them up to the land with that hook, and then his whisteling ne hissing
shall not avail. When the poor man heard this, he reioysed him greatly, and
did all thing as he had taught him. And when this poor man began to touch his
harp the fishes came to the bayte and than he took them up with his hook,
and lived there by in better estate long time, and at the last ended gratiousiy
his life in peace and rest.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens Jesu Christ, which greatly delights to hunt the
soul of mankind in the forest, that is holy Church. He loves also the
melody of the harp, that is to say, he loves much those yt teach the holy
word of god. This poor man that sat by the water side betokens ye prelates
of the church and the preachers of the word of god, which ought to sit beside
the world, and not in the world, yt is to say, they should not set their
delight in worldly things. The preachers ought to have the harp of holy
seripture, wherewith they may praise and honor God, and also therewith draw
out of this world ye sinners. Therefore says the psalmist thus. Praise ye god
in timpanes and sing ye to him on the harp and the psalter of ye x stringes.
But now a days the preacher may say alas, for when I preach and teach holy
scripture, the devil comes and whsteleth so sweetly, that the sinners draw
to him, and will not here the word of god, but they turn themselves only to
the delight of sin. The devil deceives also mankind by diverse ways.
First in time of preaching he makes some to sleep, and them that he cannot
make to sleep, he causes them to talk and clatter, and them that he cannot
make to clatter, he makes them so dull that they may not understand what the
preacher says, and them that he cannot beguile by these means, he puts in
them business, and causes them to go out of the Church.

Lo so many ways the devil has to deceive mankind, and to let the word of
God. Theresore every prelate and every Preacher beehoueth to have the golden
hook of gods grace against this whiseeling, by the which grace they may draw
sinners out of this world up to heaven, unto the which bring us our Lord Jesus.

Amen.
The Argument.
Man's soul the daughter of our Sauiuiour is so dear unto him, that he being
careful for the conversation of her in state of sincere li^e, is yet seduced by
the sugestion of the flesh, which being a grievous transgressor, is by earnest
repentance and amendeme^t of life enforced to b^ing the said soul again unto
dutiful obedience toward God and man, that thence forwards continuing, she
may attayn unto the ^o^es of everlasting blislednesse. etc.

The 18. History.
THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise, named Polemus,
which had no child save only a daughter, whom he loved so much, that day and
night he ordained to have her guarded with armed knights. And above these
knights he ordained a comptroller well erperienced in every thing for to teach
and instruct them how they should do. He ordained also a steward for to guide
his household. And when all this was done, on a night as he lay in his bed he
beethought him that he would go visit the holy land. And then when all thing
was ready for his journey according to his purpose, he called unto him his
steward and said. My trusty servant I purpose now to go see the holy land, and
therefore I leave my daughter in thy keeping, and also I charge thee yt she lack
nothing, but that she have all manner of joy and gladness that pertains to
a virgin. Secondly, I leave in thy keeping five knights that been her keepers,
and charge thee yt they lack nothing which to them beehoueth.

Also I leave to thee my greyhound commanding that thou nourish and feed him
as it appertains, and if thou fulfill all this that I have said, you shall at
my coming again receive a great reward. The^ said ye steward, my dear Lord in
all yt I may I shall fulfill your will. When this was said ye emperor, took
his journey toward ye city of Jerusalem and the steward a long time kept well
and truly themeperours ordinance, and charge enjoined him. But at the last it
befell upon a day that this steward had espied this young Lady walking alone in
an Orcheyard with whose love he was suddenly surprised, wherefore straitway
against her will he des^oured her.

And when he had committed sin with (...), he gave her ^ll language and
hated her* more after th^n ever he loved her (...), and dr(...) her out of ye
pallais, wherefore this da(...) by this means being driven to (...) and great
po(...), went from door to door and begged her bread. But when the knights
that were her kepers heard of this, they re^or^ed shamefully ye steward of that
sinful deed. Then the steward waxed wroth, and for great hate that he had in
his heart, he dispoiled ye h^ights of their goods, and drove them fro ye
pallayes. And when they were thus robbed and exiled, some for lack of livings
became thieves, and some mankillers, which through this inconvenience they
wrought great harm.

Soon after this, there came tidings that the emperor was arrived in far lands
coming homeward. And when the steward heard this, he was greatly troubled and
moved in himself, and thus thinking in himself, he said thus. This may not
be but needs I shall be accused for my treaspasse yt I have committed
against themperours commandment, he is my God and merciful Lord, therefore
better it were that I go and meet him with all honor and humility, and
accuse my self to him, and ask him mercy, then any other should prevent me
and accuse me to my Lord of my treason. Then the Steward straight put of all
his clothes save his hosen and his shert, and took three ropes with him in his
right hand, and bare foot went and met the Emperor. But when the emperor had
espied him coming a far of in such manner, he wondered greatly. And when the
steward was come so near that he might speak to the Emperor, he fell down
on his knees and saluted him reverently. Then said ye Emperor, what is
beefalne thee that thou m^etest me after such a sort, for so much as thou art
my steward, thou should have met me with a great company of knights. A my
Lord, quod he, there is beefallen me an heavy case, for the which it
beehoueth me thus to meet your highness. Then said the Emperor, what case is
that, that is beefallen thee. My reverend Lord, quod he, it be houeth first
your (...)nesse to ask of me why I bring with me these three ropes. Then
said the emperor, why bear you these three ropes in thy hand. Then answered
this woeful steward and said. This first cord I bring with me to bind my
hands and feet so hard, till ye blood brast out on every side, for that I have
well deserved* The second rope I bring with me to draw me by a horse tail
upon the pauement, till that ye bones be bare without flesh, for you shall be
due to me for the great treason I have done against you. The third rope that I
have brought is to hang me with, upon an high galous, so long that the byrds
light on my head, and on my body, and feed them selves of my flesh, and these
things are due to such trespassers and breakers of the law as I am, and
therefore my reverend Lord have mercy on me, for I dare not knowledge my
trespass till I be certain of thy mercy and pity. The^ said the emperor, I
see in thee great meekness and contrition, therefore tell forth thy
treaspasse, soothly thou shall find mercy and grace. Alas, alas, then said
he, I have defiled thy daughter, and driven her out of thy pallais, and now in
extreme necessity she beggeth her bread from door to door. I have also
dispoiled thy knights of all their goods, and now some of them by means they
lack livings beecome thieves and robbers, and some mankillers, and the
comptrowler of the knights I have slain. But I have fed thy graihound with
the best meat as long as I might, and tied him with a chain, but at the last
he brake his chain and went his way, so that now he runs about in the
country.

When the Emperor heard this, he was sore astonished and said. Have thou
de^loured my daughter whom I loved so well, and also exiled my knights, and
slain their comptrowler, and the greyhound which I loved best, of whom I gave
thee charge is gone also, certes were it not that I had forgiven it thee, and
that thou humble thy self so greatly, I should put thee to the most vilest
death that could be thought. Therefore depart hence forthwith and bring again
my daughter, then may thou marry with her, and if any harm hereafter
beefall to ^^r in thy default, then shall I double thy punishment. Also bring
thou again my knights, and restore to them their goods, and let them in their
state and office as they were before. And also seek dilig^tly my greyhound
till thou sinde him and then make him t^st, so that in she hereafter may be
sound no default. And when the steward heard this, he bowed with most humble
submission down his head and thanked the Emperor of his great (...).

And then he went soorth and sought through all the Empire so long till he
had sound ye Emperors daughter and the knights, and also ye greyhound, and
brought them again. And after that he had got to wise ye young lady with great
honor and joy, and also restored again the knights goods. And at the last
he ended his life in peace and rest.

The Moral
This Emperor beetokeneth our Lord Jesu Christ. His daughter beetokeneth the
soul of man, made after the similitude of our Lord God. And ye v. knights
beetokeneth ye v. wits, armed with the virtue of baptim for ye preservation of
ye soul. The comptrouller of ye knights is reason which ought to rule ye wits.
The greyhound is ye flesh of man. The steward betokens every man to who^e god
has given life and soul to keep under pain of leesing everlasting life. But
a wretched and wicked man remembryng not that is to come, full often corrupts
and poluteth his soul with sin, and repelleth her from her Pallayes of
heaven, and then wandreth she from door to door, that is to say, from sin to
sin. He dispoiled these v. knights of their goods, that is to say, the v.
wits of theirs, or rather gracious virtues, taking away the natural light
from their eyes, exhorts them disorderly, and also mouyng* the ears to
listen unto slander and backbiting, and so forth of all the other wits, and
thus some be made thieves, and some mankillers. The master of these v. wits
is flame when so ever man is ruled by will, and not by reason. The greyhound,
that is the flesh, wherein a man deliteth, was fed and bound with a chain of
reason, which he breaks full o^t and runs out, and does much harm.

The coming again of this Emperor from the holy land betokens the coming
of our Lord Jesu Christ at the day of dome to judge all mankind.

Therefore do we as the steward did, accuse we first our self of our
sins least the devil and the world accuse us, then it is to late to ask
mercy, therefore put we off our clothes betime, that is to say, our sinful
life, and take we three ropes in our hands.

The first rope that should bynd our hands and feet, beetokeneth the rope of
true repentance which not only ^ught to bind our hands and feet, but also
both our hearts within us and our outward conversation in such austeritie of
life, yt the blood brast out on every side, that is to say, that sin might
issue and void it felse. Here to accords Ezechiell saying thus. In
quacunque hora egerit pen^tentiam pecator saluus erit. When so ever the sinful
man does repent himself he shall be saved. The second cord for to draw the
trespasser, is acknowledging of our sins which should draw us from the
beginning of our life unto our lives end, by the party reconsiliation to our
selves to God and man, unto the time that the flesh be fallen from the bones,
that is to say, till the lust of the flesh be turned away by the stones of
repentance. For in like wise as the stone by nature and kind is hard, right so
the way of repentance ought to be hard. The third rope that should hang the
felon, is the rope of amendment of life. For as the scripture says, t^ere is
more joy in heaven over one sinner that turns unto the Lord in time, than
over etc. Like as the stewa^d brought again Themper^urs daughter. ^o it
behooves us to seek about by fruitful faith, yea to find our soul that we
lost, and bringing her again to the church, to rule well our five wits, to
seed our greyhound as we should, and make our lise so clean and pure, that we
fall not again to sin, for fear that it fortune to us worse, and that we
have no leisure to ask mercy again at our need. And it we fulfill all this
truly unto our lives end, without doubt we shall obtain everlasting life.
To the which our Lord bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
The violating of our innoce^cie in not ^^^nitating the law of God, is here
described with being adjudged after the slesh* yet by the merits of Christ our
savior, we obtain our salvation.

The 19. History.
IN Rome dwelt sometime a mighty Emperor and a wise named Edsenne, which
ordained a law for yt whosoever ravished a maid, should be at her discretion
wherewith she would put him to death, or that she would take him to her husband.

It befell after that a man ravished in a night two fair matdeus, the first
damsel which he ravished desired that he should dye, and the second desired
him to her husband. The rauisher was taken and led before the Judge, that
should satisfy both these damosells through his wisdom and equitir of the
cause. The first damsel desired the death, according to the law. Then said
the second, I desired to have him my husband, for like as thou hase the law for
thee, so in like case I have it for me, and neuertholesse my petition is more
better than yours, for it is more charitable, therefore me thinks in my
reason that the Justice should give sinsence in favor and furtherance of my
desire. Then the Justice understanding the great mercy of the second damsel,
gave judgment that he should take her to his wife, and so it was done.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens our lord Jesu Christ. The rauisher betokens every
sinner, which rauisheth gods mercy as often he violateth the commandments of
God by sin, for the devil may never overcome man but if it be suffered by
will. For saint Austin says* Non est peccatum nisi sit voluntarium. It is no
sin but if it be volu^tary. The rauisher also is called before the Justice
when the soul is departed from the body, and anon the first damsel
(Innocence) laid against the sinner that he ought to dye everlastingly by the
law of righteousness. But that other maiden (that is Christ his merits) laid
for her how the mercy of God ought to help by hearty repentance and
acknowledging our sins, which is the high way to everlasting life. Unto the
which God bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
The mother of the child of grace and of the reprobate, is here declared
which of them shall be saved, and which of them dampened, is not yet revealed
unto the world, till the day of judgment.

The 20 History.
SOmetime there dwelt in Rome a mighty Emperor and a rich named Lipodius,
which took to wise a fair virgin and a gentill, ye daughter of the king of
Assiria, this young lady conceived and bear a child. And in the birth of her
son she dyed. And anon after her decease this Emperor married an other wife,
and had by her achilde also. And immediately after that these children were
borne, he sent them both into a strange land for to be norished. Then said the
mother of the second child. My reverend Lord ten years be now fully
expired since I bare my child, and yet saw I him never but once, and that was
the first day of his birth, therefore I beseech you my Lord to send for him,
that I may once rejoice me of his sight. Then said the Emperor, I have an
other child by my first wife, and if I send for thy son than must I send for
both, and than anon he sent for them. And when they were come they were of
passing faiture and well trained, well instructed and passing like in all manner
things: so as hardly the one might be known from the other, but by the
father only discerned. Than said the mother of the second child. A my Lord,
tell me which of these is my son, and he called to him his son yt he
begat on his fiest w^^e. When the Empress hea^d this, she gave all her care
to nourish him, and despised the other child. When the Emperor saw this, he
said to his wise. Certainly I have deceived thee, for him that thou love so
much is not thy son, but that other is thy son.

Than set she all her care upon the second, and forsook the first.

When the Emperor saw this, he said. Truly I have deceived thee without
doubt, this is not thy son, but one of them two is thy son. Then said the
mother. A my Lord for his love that dyed for mankind, tell me without
cauellacion, which of them is my son. The Emperor answered and said,
certainly I will not tell you till they come both to man's state, for this
reason. First I told you that this was your son, and him have you cherished
as thy son, and forsaken that other, and when I told you that this was your
son, than despised you the first and cherished the second, therefore I will
that you bring up and cherish them both, till that you may have joy of them.

When themprisse heard this she nourished them both a like. And when they were
both come to age, the Emperor made a great supper, and before all his gestes
he told his wife openly which of them was her child.

Than reioysed the Empress greatly, and with her son she ended her life in
peace and rest.

The Moral.
This Emperors sons betokens those that be chosen to everlasting life, and
those that be not chosen. The mother of them is ye providence of God that
nourishes the^ both. Therefore our Lord will not that his providence should let
the world know which be chosen and which be not chosen. For if she knew that,
than would she love the one and hate the other, and so should charity be
overthrown among us, and should live in discord and strife, but troth at the
day of Judgment shall tell us which of them shall be saved, and which of them
shall be dampened. Therefore pray we in this world that we may come to the
everlasting feast in heaven. Unto the which God bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
The ungodly of this world will take no pains to live virtuously, and yet
often times are they enriched for the most pait with the gifts of fortune,
neither careful of the reward laid up for pure virtue in heaven, nor fearing
the torments of hell deputed for the rich and vicious worldlings.

The 21. History.
SOmetime there dwelt in Rome a noble Emperor named Polenus, which had three
sons whom he loved much. It beefell upon a day when this Emperor lay upon
his bed, he bethought him to which of his sons he might give his Empire after
his decease. Then called he to him his three sons and said. Which of you
three that is slowest shall have mine Empire after my decease. The first son
answered and said. Thine Empire by reason shall be mine: For I am so slow
that if my foot were in the fire, I had rather it should be brent then I to
take it out.

Then said the second, I am (quod he) more apt to the Empire then thou, for
though there were a rope about my neck wherewith I should be hanged, and if I
had a sharp sword in my hand for great sloth yt I have I would not put soorth
my hand to cut the rope for to save my life: And when these two brethren had
said, the third said for him thus, I ought to be Emperor before you both,
for I pass you in sloth, and that will I prove thus. I lie upright in my bed,
and there droppeth water upon both mine eyes, and for great sloth that I have
I move not my head neither to the right side of the bed nor to the left
side, for saving of my self. When the Emperor heard this, he beequethed the
Empire unto the youngest son as to the slowest of the brethren.

The Moral.
This Emperor beetokeneth ye devil, which is lord and father over the ungodly
in this world, by the first son is understood a man that chau^ceth into evil
compainy by whom he falls into misdemenour and had lever to be brent in ye
fire of sin, then depart from them. The second son betokens him that
knows himself bound with ye band of sin, wherewith he is to be hanged on ye
gallous of hell, and is so slothful yt he will not put them away with the
lawful sword of repentance. By ye third son is understood a man yt hears
the teaching of the joys of heaven and of the pains of hell and will not move
him self to the right for love and desire of reward, nor to the left side to
forlake his sins for fear of eternal pain. Such a man without doubt for
his sloth shall obtain the kingdom of hell, from the which keep us our Lord
Jesus.

Amen.
The 22. History.
ALexander the mighty Emperor sometime ruled, which beseeged a city of the
king of Egypt with a great host, never the less this Emperor lost many
mighty Knights without any hurt of stroke. And thus from day to day his people
dyed suddenly, whereat this Alexander wondered greatly and was full sorrowful
thereof in his mind, and anon let call before him the wisest Philosophers that
might be found, and prayed them to tell him why his people dyed thus suddenly
without wou^d. The Philosophers answered and said.

My Lord it is no wonder, for upon the walls of that Castle within the City
is a Cocatrice, through whose sight your men dye, for they are infected with
the venime that comes of his eyes, and there upon they dye.

Than this Alexander asks if there were any remedy against that cocatrice. The
Philosophers answered and said. My Lord, there is good remedy, which is this,
pleases it you to set up a large myrrour of clear glass over against this
Cocatrice, between your host and the wall of the city, and when the cocatrice
beholds him self in the myrrour, the deadly nature of this venomous sight
shall return again to himself, and thus he shall die, and your men shall be
saved. The Emperor wrought by the counsel of the Philosophers, and let set up
straight a large myrrour of glass, and thus was the Cocatrice slain, and the
Emperor with his host made an assault to the City, and obtained the victory.

The Moral.
This Emperor may be called every Christian man which ought to gather an
host of virtues, for without virtue there may no man fight ghostly.

The City against whom ye shall fight is the world, wherein there is an high
Castle, that is to say, vanity of vanities. Vanitas vanitatum. And all
vanity, in this vanity stands ye Cocatrice that is to say, pride of life,
desire of the eyes, and lust of the flesh, wherefore this pride infecteth so
many, that they die at the last everlastingly. Therefore ye greatest remedy
against this pride, is ye consideration of our uncleanness, how we came naked
into this world, and if it be asked why a man is proud, certainly it may be
answered thus, for defanlte of robbing himself with virtues, what shall we do
when we die thus gostly but set up a pure mirror of conscience, and by that
conscience we may consider our will and our brittilnes as in a glass, where you
may see thy own default, and if we do thus without doubt ye Cocatrice,
that is pride of life, desire of the eyes, and lust of ye flesh, we shall
utterly destroy and obtain the victory of this worldly city, and then be we
sure to win everlasting life, unto the which God bring both you and me.

Anen.
The Argument.
The soul of man being occupied in the body with the flesh, she seeks by
sinister means to overthrow the soul with her unclean lusts, after ye world,
where though the soul for a time suffers shipwreck of worldly felicity, yet
the Lion of the tribe of Judah is of power, not only to comfort him in
necessity, but also to revenge his miury, and make him to repossesse with his
former estate a more firmer everlasting felicity in the world to come.

The 23. History.
A Mighty Emperor sometime ruled the Romans maned Archelaus, the which in
his old age espowsed a fair young lady, whom a young knight loved, and had
to do with her as often as him list.

It beefell on a night that this Emperor beethought him in his bed to visit
the city Jerusalem, wherefore without any more delay he ordain^d al thing
necessary to his journey, and took his leave of the Emprisse and of the states
of thempyre, and went toward the said City.

When the Emprisse heard this, she took the master of ye ship and said: If
thou will consent to me and be true, ask of me what thou will and thou shall
have it. The master of the ship was corrupt with covetousness and said. O my
dear lady, what so ever you will command me I shall without fail fulfill
it, so that ye will reward me for my labor. Then said the Empress, or thou
do ought for me I shall give thee what thee list to have, so that thou will
swear to be true to me and keep my counsel.

The master of the ship anon made his oath to be true to her.

Than said the Empress. My Lord goes with you in your ship, therefore when
he is in ye midst of the sea, cast him out that he may be drowned, and ye
shall obtain your reward without any withsaying.

Then the master of the ship swear a great oath and said. By the great God
Jubiter after he comes once within my ship, ye shall never see him more.
Then the lady paid him as much gold as he would have, and forth he went to
his ship.

And within short time after the emperor took his ship, and when he was in
the mids of the sea, the master of that ship took The Emperor and threw him
over board into the sea.

Then the master returned again and told the Empress that the Emperor was
cast into the sea, whereof she was full glad.

This Emperor yt was thus cast into ye sea had learned in his youth to swim,
and swam forth till he saw an Island in the sea, but ever in his swimming
when he was faint and like to have been drowned, he prayed to God to be his
help, and wept sore, till at the last he came into a little Island wherein was
nothing but Lions and Lybberds and diverse other beasts that swam thither from
other lands.

When this Emperor had taken land in that isle, he spyed a young Lion fighting
with an old Lybbard, and the Lion was almost overcome. The Emperor had great
compassion on the Lion and drew out his sword and slew the Lybbard. The Lion
even from ye time forth followed the Emperor, and would not leave him for
nothing, but ^uery day the pray that this Lion took he brought and laid it
before ye Emperors feet, and anon the Emperor smote fire on the slint
stone, and boiled the body in the skin, and thus was he fed long time, till
at the last he walked to the Sea strand, where he saw a ship come sailing by,
and anon with an high voice he cried. And when the shipmen heard the voice,
they wondered what it might be, wherefore they sailed toward him, and when they
were come to him he said good friends take me with you, and I shall pay you
a good freight. And anon they took him into their ship, and the Lion followed
him swimming in the Sea after the ship: And when the Lion was in point to
have been drowned, the shipmen had pity on him, and took him into the
ship. And when the Emperor came to land he paid his freight, and when he
had paid them he went forth till he came near his own Pallais, where he
heard trumpets and Claryons, with all manner of other minstrelsie, and as he
hearkened what it might be, there came from the Pallayes a Squire toward him
that was of his knowledge, but the Squire knew not him, to whom the Emperor
said thus. Good friend I pray thee tell me what melody is this that I hear.
The Squire answered and said. The Empress is married this day, and there
be all the states of the Empire at her feast, and therefore they make such
melody to make her gestes merry.

Then said the Emperor to the squire, where is her husband that was the
Emperor before. The squire said that he was gone to the holy land, and was
drowned by the way in the Sea. Then said the Emperor, I pray thee sir that
thou would do my errande to thempresse and to the Lord that would be her
Husband, that I may come into the Pallayes and show their majesty's some
disport with my Lion.

The squire granted to do his errande, and went in and told the Lord and the
Lady, that at the gate was a goodly old man that desired to come in and play
with his Lion before you. Then said the new wedded Lord, bring him in, and if
he be worthy percase he might get his meat for his play.

When the Emperor with his Lion was brought in, the Lion anon without any
comfort or setting on, ran upon the young knight that was newly married and
slew him, and when he had so done, he ran upon the Empress and devoured her
to the hard bones before all the Lords of the Empire. And when the states saw
this, they were greatly aghast and began to flee. But the Emperor with his fair
speech comforted them and said. Lo this is the vengeance of god, for this is my
wife that has used aduoutry long time with this knight that lies here dead,
and she practiced my death with the master of the ship, and here upon the
master threw me into the Sea, but God saved me from the death, and because I
holp once the Lion at a need, he forsook me never since, and now as ye see
all when I come into my Pallays without any comfort of me, he has slain
both the adoultere^s, and therefore understand ye for troth that I am your
Lord the Emperor.

Anon when they heard this, they lift up their eyes and beehelde him, and at
the last they knew him for their Lord, wherefore they were greatly reioysed and
praised God for ye miracle, which had saved their Lord and Emperor. And they
lived after in rest and peace.

The Moral.
By this Emperor ye may understand every Christian man that purposes to v^^c
the City of Jerusalem, that is to (...), to get everlasting life through
fruitful f^^^^. But his wife, that is, ye wretched sl^^h murmureth against the
soul, and loves better an adulte^er, that is, deadly sin^e, th^n hi^ husband.
This emperor went into the ship, taking his journey tow^rd the city of
Jerusalem, that is to ^ay, he went to the Church of God, which is the way to
God. But the wife, that is to say fleshly men, accu^ed him to the master of the
ship, yt is to say, to the Prelates of the church, for great rewards, which
often times blinds the sight of many Justices, where through, many perfect
men be cast out of the ship into the sea to be drowned, that is to say out of
the Church, in^o the Sea of this world. But what shall he do then, that is
thus cast to be troubled in this world, certainly this ought he to do^, let
him learn to swim, that is to say, let t^ him put all his hope in God, and
then by his grace he shall come to an Island, that is to say the religion of
heart, and that he shall love ever the better to keep himself out of this
world, and therefore says saint Jeames thus. A clean religion and vnde^il^d
is a precious thing in the sight of God. And ^e that is in this religion shall
find a Lion whom he behooves to ha^^ against the devil. This Lion is our
Lord Jesus Christ, that came of the tribe of luda, which ^ighteth ever against
the devil, and if a man have holp^n this Lion at any ^yme, t^^s^ well then
that he will not forsake him, but be with him in all his need, according to
the Psalmist saying thus: Cum ipso sum in tribulatione. I am with him in
trouble. By this Lion thou may take thy wife, that is to say, thy flesh, with
repentance, and slay thy sin, and then without doubt thou shall obtain the
empire of heaven. Unto the which bring us our Lord Jesus.

Amen.
The Argument.
The soul of man espoused to Christ in baptism, yet dies by means of
sin, leaving behind her son called reason, or rather the word of God,
which heals the disease of man her sinful father, and being sent for to
cure the malady of her stepmother, will, refuses to administrate ghostly
comfort unto her.

The 24. History.
SOmetime in Rome bare sway a mighty Emperor named Gorgonie, which had
married a courteous Lady and a fair, to his wife. This young Lady in due
process of time conceived and bare a son, a fair child and an amiable. When
this child was ten year old, his mother the Empress died. And anon after the
Emperor married an other wife. The second wife loved in no wise the Emperors
son, but did him all the shame and reproach that she might. When the Emperor
perceiur^ this, willing to please his wife, exiled his son out of his Empier.
And when this child was exiled, he went and studied Physic, so that within
short time h^^ ^ when he heard that h^^ ^^^^^ ^^^ such a Physician, he sent for
^^Spand^^ letters, praying him that he would c^^^ ^^ him without any delay. And
then the son willing to obey and sulsill h^s ^^thers commandment, in all
have came unto him. And when he had s^ene his father, and felt his ul^^s and
his veins, all the i^knesse he had was soon healed with his medicines from
all manner of dangers.

Soon after that, the empress his stepmother began to ware sick, and many
physicians said that she would dye. And when the emperor heard this, he prayed
his son to help her of her sickness. Then said his son, certainly
father, I will lay no ^and on her. Than the Emperor began to ware wroth and
said. If thou will not obey my commandment, thou shall h^refoorth depart m^
empire. His son answered and said: If ^^e d^e so (dee^e father) ye do
unrightfully, for well you kn^w, that you ^x^l^d ^^ee, out of your Empire
through her suggestion, and mine absence was cause of your sorrow and
sickness, and in likewise my presence is cause of her sickness, and therefore
I will not meddle with her, and also I w^ll ^s^ no more medicines, for
of^entimes physicians are deceived, and therefore I dare not ^^ye hand on her,
lease m^n would say, (if it fortuned her to dye) that I were the cause thereof.
Then said the Emperor: She has the same sickness that I had.

His son aunsshered and said, though she has ye same sickness,
nevertheless y^^ be not both of on^ complexion. For whatsoever I did to you,
ye held you content, and when ye saw me come within the Palace, ye
rejoiced of my coming, and greatly were ca^ed to see him that ye b^^gat.

But when my stepmother saw me, she sw^il^d for anger, and took cor^ie at her
heart, and therefore if I should speak to her, her sorrow should increase, and
if I should touch her, she would be from her self. And also a Physician
pro^iteth naught, but whereas the sick patient delights in him.

And when the Emperors son had said his mind, he escaped and went his way.

The Morali.
This Emperor beetokeneth every christian man which is wedded to Christ, in
the baptism of regeneration. For then ye soul is made ye spouse of Christ, on
whom man gets a son, that is, reason. But this wife, that is to say,
Christendom dies, whenever a man lies in deadly sin, and after her a man
matcheth himself with a bitter woman, a stepdame, that is to say, wickedness,
as oftentimes as he is ruled by will, and not by reason, wherefore a man that
lives by fleshly lust, oftentimes exileth reason, and then anon the soul
waxes sick, for the absence of reason is yt cause of the sickness of the
soul. For when Gods word is working in the reasonable soul, as a good and
ghostly Physician, she recouereth health unto the sick soul.

But when the stepmother waxes sick, that is to say when froward will waxes
sick, then is ye flesh kept in awe by repentance. And therefore study we to
keep in awe our flesh so by repentance, that we may come to everlasting joy.

Amen.
The Argument.
Jesus Christ the son of God, ought to be cherished and fostered in our
hearts by faith and fruitful good life. Which is taken from us when we are
unthankful unto him, in gods graces. Wherefore the prechers of gods word as
good Physicians, are comfortably sent unto us for the admonishment of us in
perseverance to amendment of life, and constancy in Christ's merits, so to
harbor him in our hearts, as he may thereby bestow on us the promotion of
heavenly bliss everlasting.

The 25. History.
SOmetim^ dwelt in Rome a mighty Emperor named Folenus, who had taken to wife
the Kings daughter of Germany, ^^^re lady and a courteous, which w(...) short
time conceived and bare a son. (...) th^s child was borne, ye states of the
Empire come to the Emperor, and every one of them beesought the Emperor to
nourish his son. The Emperor answered and said. To morrow shall be a
to(...)y, and there shall ye all be, and which of you does best, and obtains
the victory, shall have the keeping of my son.

And if ^ee train him up well. I shall promote him to great dignity and
honor. And if he do the contrary, he shall d^e the foulest death that can be
thought. Then said they. Dear Lord, all this pleases us well.

On the morrow when every man was come to the tourney, the states lusted and
held tourney with great valiance a long time, till at ye last there same a
worthy knight named ^osias, that so courageously bare himself among the^, yt
he obtained the victory. And immediately after the tourney was all done, this
^osias, took the child and led him forth with him.

And because this Emperors son should be received in his country, he sent
before to his Castle and commanded his officers that it should be royally
provided for, and prepared both without and within, and that ye child's lodging
should be in the midst of the Castle, and also that ye seven Sciences should
be pourtrayed about the child's bed, that when the Child waked out of his
sleep, he might lie in his bed and beehold the same. This knight had a
fruitful and a wholesome well by the childs beds side, wherein be used to
bath himself and the knights wife bare the keye of this well, and there was a
window where at the Sun might comfortably shine upon him. It fortuned upon a
day the Lady that kept the keye, left the window open through negligence.

Which beeinge so done, there came a Bear and saw the Window open, and went
to the well, and bathed him therein, of whose bathing the well sau^u^ed after
for the great h^a^e which was ye (...) in the chafed bear, wherefore who so
ever drank thereof waxed leperous with in short time. And so it fortuned
within a little space, that by means of using the same water, ye Lord the Lady
and all their household were lepers, and notwithstanding it appeared not
suddenly. And in ye mean time there came a great Eagle in at the window where
the Emperors son lay, and ^are ye child away out of his cradell. And when
the knight perceived this, he wept bitterly and said. Alas alas and woe to
me, wretched creature, that ever I was borne, what shall I do, for now I am
the son of death, for I am become a loathsome lea^er, and so in my wife and
all my household. And while he was thus mourning, there came to him a Physician
and said to him. Sir, if ye will do after my counsa^le, it shall not repent
you. First it beehoueth you and your wife, and all your household to be letten
blood, and after that to be bathed and washed clean. And then shall I lay to
my medicine.

And when ye are whole, then shall you and your household walk to ye
mountains, and seek the Emperors son, for the Eagle has let him fall in
some, place. The knight wrought all thing by the counsel of this Physician,
and incontinent after was letten blood and received the medicine, and then he
was all whole and his wife and all his household, wherefore he took his horse,
accompanied with three Squires, and rode forth to seek the child. And at the
last he found him whole and sound lying in a valey, whereat he greatly rejoiced.

And for the great joy and gladness that was in him for finding of ye
Emperors son, he led the Child home to his father. And when the Emperor
saw his son in good health, he was right glad, wherefore he promoted him to
great worship, and so after that long time lived he there in heavenly state, and
at the last he ended his life in peace and rest.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens the father of Heaven, his son beetokeneth our Lord
Jesus Christ, whom many men desired to nourish, at such t^^^s as they received
the sacrament of his death and passion. He nourishes him that dealt ^usteth
with the devil, and overcomes him through godly life. The knight that took
this child with him, beetookeneth a good christian man that evermore
absteineth truly from doing evil, and laboreth continually to do good to all
men. Therefore do we as ye knight did, send we before messengers to prepare
and make clean the Castle of our hearts, from all spo^s of sin by fruitful
faith, and so shall this child Jesus rest and light in the midst of our heart.

The well beetokeneth mercy, which ought to be next our Lord. For who so ever
is without mercy and truth may not nourish that blessed child Jesu. But it
happens often that the Knights wi^e (that is the flesh of m^n) bears ye key
of mercy, and often leaves that well open, and then comes the bear) that
is, the devil, and leaves the loathsome filth in the well of mercy, and who
that tastes thereof shall be infected with leprosy of sin. The window wherein
the Sun shines, is the grace of the Holy ghost, by whom ^en live and are
comforted ghostly. By this window the Eagle comes in, that is to say, the
people of almighty G^d, and took away the child Jesus from the heart of man,
and then manne has great ca^s^ to weep, but what shall we do when the Child
is gone, but send for a subtle physician, that is to say, a disereet minister
of the word of God which shall give him counsel and let him blood and all his
househould, that is to say, to put out sin through acknowledging thereof, and
reconciling himself with earnest repentance unto his heavenly Father.

Then must he bath himself with tears of contrition, and Compunction of
heart, and after that, take the medicine of amendment of life, and so live
pure and clean from all manner o^ sin, and when he has done thus, he must
leap on the Palfray of good perseueraunce from evil, and ride forth with his
three squires, that is to say, fasting from evil, prayer unto God, and well
deserved toward man, and then without doubt, he shall find the child Jesus
in the ^^ley of humility, and not on a hill, that is to say, pride. And if he
do thus doubtless he shall have might and power to nourish that blessed
child Jesus, for whose nourishing, the father of heaven shall promote him unto
everlasting joy. Unto the which joy, God bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
Christ the king of everlasting glory, has proclaimed mutual joy and bliss in
heaven, as well to the poor as to the rich, But the rich often times coveting
all, loses that prerogative which the poor in heart enjoy by the providence
of god. Yet as he is a righteous God, he ordayneth both for the rich and the
poor, in such sort, that if they will, they may together joyfully be
satisfied with the fruition of his abundant graces.

The 26. History.
SOmetime dwelt in Rome a mighty Emperor named Fulgentius, which governed his
people nobly, and ^oued them so much, that he made to proclayme throughout all
Nations, whosoever should come to him rich or poor at a certain day, should
have their petitions whatsoever it were.

When the mighty men heard this, they were glad, and came at the day assigned,
and every man put forth their petitions, unto the Emperor, and immediately
their petitions were granted and fulfilled, insomuch that a great part of the
revenues of the Empire was distributed among them. The^ every man was joyful,
and went home again and took season of such lands and Castells as the
Emperor had given them.

Straight way after, the poor men in the Emperors dominions, gathered them
together and said. A common cry was made, that all men both ^oo^e and rich,
should come to the emperors pa^l^^ce, and there they should have what soever
they asked. The rich men have been there lately, and obtained the^^ petitions.
Therefore go we now and try ^^ we may obtain any good of the Emperor. The
counsel was approb^^e and allowed among them all, wherefore they went forth
till they came to the emperors pallaice, and there they put forth their
petitions according to the emperors proclamation.

When the emperor had heard them, he said to them. Dear friends, I have heard
all your petitions, and it is troth that my proclamation was, that every man
indifferently should come and have their petitions, but the rich and mighty
men have been here before you, to whom I have given all that I had, save only
the royalty of my Lordship, and so have I nothing left to (...) you, whereat
the poor men pitiously reply^d^^h ^ood and gracious ^ouereigne, have
compassion on us, and let us not go hence empt^ a way, for we know well, yt it
is our own defalt, yt we came not rather with these other rich and mighty
men, but ^^th it is so, we ask your grace that we may obtain somewhat by
the which we may live. Than said the Emperor. Good friends though I have
given most of my lands, rents, tenements, and cattells to the rich men that
came before you.

Nevertheless I have kept s^ill in mine own hands the Sovereignty and
dominion over them, and that I do give to you, and so shall they be your
servant, and be obedient to you all. And when the poor men heard this,
greatly hereat rejoicing, kneeled down to the Emperor and thanked him saying.
Lo though we come late, yet we be made Lords over all these other. And with
this they took their leave and went home again. But when ye rich and the
mighty men heard that, they were greatly moved and ordained a common
parliament among themselves. And thus it was spoken among them. Alas, alas, how
may we serve them that sometime were but pesants and our subjects in all manner
things, and now they be made lords over us. Therefore go we all with one
assent to The Emperor and pray him of remedy. When this was said, their
counsel was commended, and forthwith they went to the Emperor and said to
him. Reverend Lord what may this be, those that were our servants be our
lords, we beseech you meekly that it may not be so.

Than said the Emperor. Good friends I do you no wrong, for my cry was
common, that what so ever you asked of me you should obtain your petition, and
ye asked nothing of me but lands, rents and honors, and all that have I
granted you at your owene will, in so much that I kept nothing for my self,
and each of you were well content at your away going, and after that came
simple and poor men, and asked of me some goods according to my proclamation,
and I had nothing to give them, only the Souer aigntie and Dominion over you,
which I kept in my hands, and when the poor men so cried on me, I had
nothing to give them, save only the authority over you, and therefore ye
should not blame me, for yt ye asked ye had. Than said they. A good and
gracious Lord, we pray you effectuously of your counsel in this case, and of
your help. The Emperor answered and said. Sirs, if ye will work after me, I
shall give you good and profitable counsel. Than said they, we be ready to
fulfill whatsoever ye say to us for our profit. Then said The Emperor. My good
friends, ye have of me both lands and tenements, with other moveable goods,
and that great plenty, the which by my counsel ye shall depart with to the
poor men, that they may grant you the souera^gntie and dominien which they
have. And anon these rich men gladly granted to this, and departed all their
goods among the poor men, and than they gave them again the authority over
them, like as they had of ye rich men. And thus were they both content, and the
Emperor was greatly commended of all the people, because he accorded both the
parts so wisely.

The Moral.
By this Emperor is understood our Lord Jesu Christ, which made a
proclamation by his Prophets, Patriarks, Apostles and Preachers, that every
man both poor and rich should come and ask everlasting joy, and without
doubt they shall obtain their petition. But the rich and mighty men asked
none other thing but worldly honor and transitory riches, for this world shall
pass and all the covetousness thereof, wherefore he gave them so much of
worldly goods, that he had nothing left of himself, according to the
Scripture. The byrds of heaven have neastes, and the Foxes in the earth have
caves, but the son of GOD has nothing in the earth where he may put his
head. The poor men be such as be meek in heart. Of the which poor men
speaks our Lord saying. Blessed be the poor in heart, for the kingdom of
heaven is theirs.

And if it should seem that they have soeueraintie in Heaven above mighty men
of this world therefore these rich men ought to depart their temporal riches
with poor men, according to the scripture, saying thus. Give ye alines, and
all thing shall be clean to you. And thus may ye attain unto ye kingdom of
heaven, unto the which I beeseech almighty God to bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
The Emperor of eternal glory Christ has two daughters, the one fair the
other foul, the fair daughter is this world, and the pleasures thereof: the
soul is poverty and trouble. The fair daughter is desired of many, the foul
daughter of few, who so loves the world sets not by god nor heavenly
things, but by the vanites of this world, who so loves God and heavenly things
will suffer in Christ all persecution and trouble for the obtaining thereof,
dispising the world and all that therein is.

The 27. History.
SOmetime in Rome dwelt a mighty Emperor named Domician, which had two
daughters, the one of them was passing fair, but the other foul and evil
favored, wherefore he let cry throughout all his Empire, that what man would
have his fair daughter to wife, should have nothing with her but her
beautiful and comely personage. And who so would marry his foul daughter
should have all his Empire after his death. And when ye proclamation was made,
there came many Lords that desired to marry his fair daughter. To whom the
Emperor answered thus. Sirs, quod he, ye wot not what ye desire, right
well ye know that if ye marry her, ye shall have nothing with her but her
beautiful and comely personage, and farthermore if I give her to one of you
and not to an other, then will ye strive for her, therefore if ye will needs
have her and forsake my soul daughter, it shall beehoue you first to Just for
her, and he that wins her, shall wed her.

Than the nobles and stats of the Empire greatly reioysed, and anon only for
love of ye beautiful damsel they would just and also fight, wherefore thy set
a day of battle, and many worthy men were slain on both sides,
nevertheless one obtained the chief victory, and espoused that fair Lady.

The second daughter which was foul and evil favored, seeing her sister so
beestowed with great solempnitie mourned and wept daily, therefore the Emperor
her father came to her and said.

Dear daughter why mournest thou thus. Alas dear father, quod she, it is no
wonder though I mourn, seeing my sister is married with great honor and
gladness, and every man is joyful of her, and no man loves my company, and
therefore dear father, what I may best do, sothly I wot not. Then said the
Emperor. O my dear daughter, all that is mine is thine, and it is not
unknown to you that he which marries thy sister had nothing with her but her
beutiful corpse, and therefore I shall proclaim in mine own person through all my
empire, that what man marries thee, I shall make him assurance by letter
patent of all mine Empire after my death. Then this young Lady though she was
foul and evil favored, nevertheless she rejoiced in the promise of her
father, immediately after ye proclamation was made; there came a young knight and
a ge^til which espoused the lady, and after the death of the Emperor seized
upon all the Empire into his jurisdiction and was crouned Emperor and she
Empress.

The Moral
This Emperor betokens our Lord Jesu Christ which has two daughters the one
saire and the other foul.

The fair daughters betokens this world, which is full fair and delectable
to many men. The other foul, beetokeneth poverty and trouble, whom few men
desire to marry with.

Nevertheless a common cry was made by ye holy scripture, that who so would
have his fair daughter, yt is the world should have nothing with her but her
fairnes, that is to say, the worldly vanities which fade and fall away like as
the beauty of man.

But who that will marry the foul daughter, that is to say, voluntarily
receives poverty and trouble for gods love, without doubt he shall obtain
the Empire of heaven, according to the Scripture, saying. Ye that have
forsaken all thing for my love to follow me, shall have everlasting life.

Many noble and worthy men have Justed for the fair daughter, that is to
say, have foughten both by Sea and by land for this world for couetise of
worldly riches, and at the last there be many slain, for there is nothing
here but pride of life, covetousness of the eyes, and of the flesh, where
through these grievous sins, all the world is put to great mischief.

But he that marryeth ye saire daughter, that is to say, the world, is he
that sets all his affection and desire in ye wretchedness of this world,
and will not for any thing forsake this world, like a wretch and covetous man.
But he that marries the foul daughter, is a good christen man, which for the
love of the kingdom of Heaven forsakes all this world, and not only does
thus, but also despises himself, bodily obeying unto his soueraines in all
thing. Such a man certainly shall obtain the Empire of heaven. Unto the which
Jesu Christ bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
Devotion, prayer, and thanks giving unto God for his gifts, is a sounding
Music delectable in ye ears of God, We are warned not after our first
offending, to return to our vomit with the dog, no, rather let us bath our
Souls in the Well of sorrowful and hearty repentance and perceiueraunce of
good life, that we may ly^e with Christ in everlasting joy and bliss.

The 28. History.
SOmetime in Rome dwelt a mighty Emperor named Andromick, which above all
thing loved the harmony of Music. This Emperor had within his Castle a well of
such virtue, yt whosoever were dronk by drinking, the water thereof should
incontine^t make him fresh again, and delivered from all kind of
drunkenness. There was also dwelling in this Emperors court a Knight named
Ydrony, whom ye Emperor loved much, but often times he was dronken, which
vice the Emperor heted above all thing. And when this knight perceived himself
dronken, then would he go to the well and drinck of that water and refresh
himself, so that what so ever The Emperor said to him he would answer him
so reasonably, that no dronkenesse might be seen in him, and for his witty
answer he was greatly beeloued of the Emperor. Nevertheless his fellows of
the court envied him much, and imagined among them selves how they might
withdraw the Emperors love from him.

It fortuned on a day that this Emperor went to the Forest and heard a
Nightingale sing so merrely, that often times after he would rise early in
the morning, and sometimes from his meat, and walk to the wood for to hear
the sweetness of her song, wherefore many of his men sard among themselves.
Our Lord delights so much in the Nightingales song, that he rekoneth little
of our profit, in so much that thorough two things his love is withdrawn from
us that is to say, by Ydrony the knight, and by the sweet song of the
Nightingale.

Then said an old knight that was among them. Syes quod he, if ye will do
by my counsel, I shall deliver you of the knight Ydrony, and of the
Nightingale without hurt or death.

They swear and said, what so ever ye bid us do, we shall straight way
fulfill with all our heart. When this knight heard this, within a while after
it cha^ced he espied this Ydrony dronken, wherefore, he locked fast ye well,
and as this knight Ydrony came to refresh himself, he found the well fast
locked.

The Emperor had a great matter to treat of, wherefore in have he sent for
this knight, because of his great wisdom to have his counsel. And when he
came before the Emperor he was so dronken that he might not once move his
tongue, neither had wit, reason, nor understanding to answer ye Emperor to
his matter.

But when the Emperor saw this, he was greatly grieved, for so much as he
hated that vice, wherefore he commanded anon that from ye day forth he
should no more be seen within his land, upon pain of death.

This hearing his soes, were very glad and said unto the old knight. Now we
be delivered of this knight Ydrony, there is no more to do but that we might
find the way to be delivered of ye Nightingale, in which the Emperor
delights so much.

Than said this old knight, your ears shall hear, and your eyes shall see,
that this Nightingale shall be destroyed in short time. Not long after this
old knight espied that the Nightingale used to sit upon a tree even above ye
foresaid well, whereas her make came and coupled with her, nevertheless in ye
absence of her make she took oftentimes an other make and coupled with her,
when she had thus done, than would she descend to the well to bath her self,
that when her make came, he should feel no savor ne evil odor of yt she had
done. When the knight had seen this, on a time he locked the well, and when
the Nightingale would have descended to bath her self after her coupling with
ye other make, she found the well closed, wherefore she flew up into ye tree
again and mourned sore in her manner, and left her sweet song. Then came her
make and saw that she had done against her nature, he returned again and in
short time brought a great multitude of Nightingales which slew his make, and
tare her all to pieces.

And thus was the wise knight put away and the Nightingale slain, and the
Emperor put from his pleasure, and solace such as he was wont to have.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens our lord Jesu Christ which loves greatly the song of
devotion, for when we pray, we speak with God, and when we read, God
speaks unto us. The well that was in the pallaies, betokens acknowledging
of our sins to God, therefore if any man be dronken with sin, let him
drink of yt well of acknowledgeing his sins* and without doubt he shall be
safe. This Ydrony betokens every man that wilfully returns again to sin
after his acknowledged sin, like as a dog that makes a vomit and casts
up the meat that he has eaten before, and afterward when he is hungry,
comes and eats it again. Nevertheless if a man that has sinned thus will
drinck of the well of acknowledgeing his sin, he shall receive his ghostly
strength. The Nightingale yt sat on the tree, betokens ye soul yt sits on
the tree of holy doctrine. And her song betokens the soul that sits on
the tree in de^out prayers to God. But this soul does commit evil as
oftentimes as she consents to sin. Nevertheless if she run to the well
of acknowledged sin, and bath her with the water of contricion, God shall
love her. But her foes that be the fendes of hell, seeing this that God is so
merciful, they stop the well of acknowledgement of sin, that is to say,
they would withdraw us from dutiful acknowledgeme^t and from due reconciliation
of our selves between us and God, and between us and man, without shame and
dread of repentance, not to declare our sins. And thus been many exiled and
put to death everlasting. And therefore study we to bath our life in the well
of acknowledging of sins with the water of contrycion, and than may we be
sure to coms to everlasting life. Unto the which God bring us all.

Amen.
The Argument.
The soul of every good Christian man, has to prepare him armed virtues to
withstand the assaults of the devil, we are here put in mind of our
deliverance out of thraldom by the precious blood shedding of Jesus Christ,
which is a terror to all the hagges of hell, not to dare to assault us, so
long as we live firm in Christ's faith, and believe in him, the bulwark of our
salvation.

The 29. History.
IN Rome there dwelt sometime a mighty Emperor named Darmes, which had a
mighty strong City and exceeding strongly walled about, and a Bell hanging in
the midst of the City, and when so ever this Emperor went to battle with
out the City, this Bell should be ro^ng, but there should no man ring the
Bell but a virgin. Within short time after it beefell, that Dragons, Serpents,
and many other venomous beasts empoysoned much people, so that the City was
almost destroyed, wherefore the states of the City went with one assent to the
Emperor and said. Lord what shall we do, lo, our goods and our City is
almost destroyed, and you and we be in peril to perish, through these fell
beasts that consume us, therefore take we good counsel, or else we are but
lost.

Then said the Emperor, what say you is best to be done in this matter, and
how may we best be defended. Than answered one of the wisest and said. My
Lord, hear my counsel, and do there after, and ye shall not forethinke it,
ye have (quod he) in your place a Lion, and set up a piece of timber for the
purpose, and thereupon let the Lion be nailed and made fast, and when other
venomous beasts see him thus used and dealt withal, they will dread, and so
shall they forsake this City, and we shall be in rest and ease. Then said the
Emperor, it pleases me well that he be hanged in saving of you. Than took
they the Lion and used him in manner as aforesaid. And when the other Lions and
venomous dragons came toward the city and saw ye Lion thus hanging, they sled
away for dread, and durst come no nearer.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens the Father of heaven, the City well walled with the
bell in the midst, betokens the soul walled about with virtues. The bell
betokens a clean conscience that warns a man to battle, when he should
fight against the devil, that he might arm himself before with virtues. The
virgin that should ring this bell is reason, the which as a virgin enclineth
all unto rightful clennesse. The venomous dragon that bears the fire,
betokens ye flesh of man which bears fire of gluttony and lechery, yt which
brent Adam our forefather, when he eat of the forbidden Apple. The venomous
beasts that poisoned the men beetokeneth the fiendes of hell, which for the
most part have destroyed mankind.

The states of the City, betokens the Patriarks and Prophets, which besought
God of counsel and remedy that mankind might he saved, and anon it was
counsayled for the best remedy, that a Lion (that is Christ) should be nailed
upon the Cross, according to the Scripture saying thus. Expedit vnus mo^i^tur
homo pro populo vt gens non pereat, etc. That is to say. It was requisite that
one man should dye for the people, least all flesh should perish. Tha^ took
they Christ and hong him on the Cross, for yt which the devil dreadeth
Ch^sten people, and dare not come nigh them. And thus by the grace of God,
christen men shall come to everlasting bliss. Unto the which bring us the
Lamb of God which shed his precious blood for us.

Amen.
The Argument.
Here is signified the thraldom of man unto satan by sinful life, till
Chirst the son of God descended with the power of the holy Ghost to set him
at liberty, and put him in possession of the pallais of everlasting felicity.

The 30. History.
IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty emperor and a merciful, named Menalay,
which ordained such a law, that what misdoer were taken and put in prison, if
he might escape and come to ye Emperors pallais, he should be there safe for
all manner felony, treason, or any other trespass that he had done in his life.
It was not long after but it befell that a knight trespassed, wherefore he was
taken and put in a strong and dark prison, where he lay long time, and had no
light but at a little window, whereas scant light shone in, that lightened him
to eat his simple meat that was brought him by his keeper, wherefore he
mourned greatly and made sorrow that he was thus fast shette up from the sight
of men. Nevertheless when the keeper was gone there came daily a Nightingale
in at the window and sang full sweetly, of whose song this woeful knight often
times was fed with joy, and when this byrd ceased of her song then would she
fly into the knights bosom, and there this knight fed her many a day, of
the vittayle that God sent him.

It beefell after on a day, that this knight was greatly desolate of comfort.
Nevertheless the byrd that sat in his bosom feeding upon kyrnells of Nuts,
and thus he said unto the byrd. Sweet bird I have sustained thee many a day,
what will thou give me now in my desolation to comfort me, remember thee well,
that thou art ye creature of God, and I also, therefore help me now in my
grert need. When the byrd heard this, she flew forth from his bosom, and
tarried from him three days. But the third day she came again, and brought in
her mouth a precious stone, and laid it in the knights bosom: And when the had
so done she took her ^light and flew from him again.

The knight meruayled of the stone and of the Byrd, and there with he took the
stone in his hand and touched his gives and fetters therewith, and anon fell
of all his fetters and chains wherewith he was bound. And then he arose and
touched the doors of the prison and anon they opened, and so he escaped and
ran fast to the Emperors pallais. When the keeper of the prison perceived
this, he blew a horn thrice, and raised up all the folk of the City, and
lead them forth crying with an high voice. Lo ye thief is gone, follow we
him all. And with that he ran before all his fellows toward the knight, and
when he came nigh him, the knight bent his bow and did shoot an arrow wherewith
he smote the keeper in the lungs and slew him, and then he ran to the
Pallays, whereas he found succor, according to the law.

The Moral.
This Emperor beetokeneth our lord Jesu Christ, which ordained a law, that
what misdoer, that is to say, what sinner might escape and come to the pallayes
of his heavenly habitation through repentance and true amendment of life,
should find perpetual succor and help.

This knight ^^etokeneth every sinner that is taken in deadly sin, and judged
unto the prison of hell by ye law of God, and he is straightly bound with
chains, of sin, wherefore he weepeth and mourns daily his trespass.

The keeper of this prison betookeneth the devil that keeps such a man hard
bound in sin, and serves him with riches and delights of this world, that
he should not escape from him.

The Byrd that sings so sweetly beetokeneth the voice of heaven yt says to
the sinner. Reuertere reuertere sunamitis. Turn again, now turn again thou
prisoner, that is to say, turn again thou sinner, and I shall receive thee
to grace.

For when mankind was in thraldom to satan in the prysonne of hell. Then
came a Bird, that is to say, the Godhead bearing with him a stone that
beetokeneth our Lord Jesu Christ, according to the holy Scripture, saying. Ego
sum Lapis, etc. I am a stone. The Soul of Christ decended with the Godhead,
and brought with him al man kind out of the prison of hell, therefore if any of
us be in the prison of deadly sin, touch we our sins with the stone, that
is to say, with the virtue of our Lord Jesu Christ, by acknowledging our
sins, and by true contrysion, and then without doubt the chains of our
sins, with his stone, shall be broken and fall from us, and the doors of
heavenly grace, shall be opened, and we shall obtain help and succor in the
pallayes of heavenly habitation. And if the keeper of the prison, that is to
say, the devil (which is the blower of the horn of pride, lechery, or
couetise) stir up any sinners, then turn we again toward him manfully, and
shoot at him the Arrow of faith in Jesu Christ, by true and unfeigned
repentance, and without doubt he shall flee from us.

And then by the grace of Almighty God we may obtain to the pallais of
Heavenly bliss, where we shall beehold the King of all glory. Unto the which
bring us Lord Jesu Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
A poor man exalted to dignity, is here admonished not to be unthankful, and
to render evil for good. But even to the most simple ones to be grateful for
any benefit, else surely the God that gives thee this promotion, will make the
brutish creaturs of the earth thine enemies, and depose thee from thy dignity,
and he that has helped thee, be he never so base, may then in sine, have
better favor with God and man then thy self, wherefore be warned of
ingratitude, by this example, and know thy self, thy God, and thy friend.

The 31. History.
THere dwelt sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Ebolides. It fortuned on
a day, that this Emperor walked into the Forest, where he met suddenly with
a poor man, and so soon as this Emperor saw him, he was greatly moved with
mercy and said. Good friend whence art thou. My sovereign Lord quod he, I am
your subject, borne in your land, and now in great poverty and need. Then said
ye Emperor. If I knew that thou were true in every thing, I should promote
thee to great riches, therefore tell me what is thy name.

My Lord quod he, I am called Lenticulous, and I plight you my troth and true
service, and if I do otherwise, I submit me unto you and to all manner of
punishment that ye can put me to. When the Emperor heard this, he promoted
him incontinent to great riches, and not long after that he made him a knight
and steward of his land. And when he was thus exalted to riches and honor, he
waxed so proud, that he despised both his superiors and his inferiors. Not
long after it beefell yt this steward rode by a forest, where as he met with
the foster, and charged him that he should make an hundredth pitts in the
ground, and cover them over with green grass and small bows, that if wild
beasts fortuned to go in the forest that same way, that they should then
fall in, and so should they be taken and brought to the Emperor. The Foster
answered and said. Sir as ye have said it shall be done. Not long time
after it fortuned that this Steward rode to this forest again to se if these
pittes were made, and as he rode he be thought him how welthy a man and how
mighty in power he was made, and how all thing in the Empire obeyed to him,
and was ready at his will.

As he rode thus thinking, he said to himself. There is no GOD save only
I, and with that he smote his Horse with his spurs, and suddenly he fell
into one of the deep pittes that he had ordained before himself, for the
wild beasts, and for the great deepenesse thereof he might not arise again
by no manner of craft, wherefore he languyshed in great perplexity. And
straight way after him came a hungery Lion and fell in the same pit, and
after the Lion an Ape, and after the Ape a Serpent. When the Steward was thus
walled with these three beasts he was greatly moved, and feared much.

There was that time dwelling in the City a poor man named Guy, that had no
good save only an Ass, wherewith daily he carried sticks and wood that fell
from trees and such as he could get in the Forest, and those he brought to the
market and sold them, and in this wise he sustained himself and his wife as
well as he might.

It fortuned that this poor Guy, went to the ^orrest as he was wont, and ^s he
came by the deep pit, he heard a man cry and say. O dear friend what art
thou, for gods sake help me, and I shall recompense thee so well, that thou
shall ever after be the better.

When this poor Guy heard that it was the voice of a man, he meruayled
greatly, and stood still on the Pittes brinck and said Lo good friend I am
come for thou have called me. Than said the knight, dear friend I am
Steward of all the Emperors lands, and thus by fortune I am fallen into the
Pit, and here be with me three beasts, that is to say, a Lion, an Ape, and
an horrible Serpent, which I fear most of all, and I wot not of which of them
I shall be first devoured, therefore I pray thee for gods sake get me a long
cord wherewith thou may draw me out of this deep pit, and I shall warrant
thee to make thee rich in all thing for evermore here after, and but I have
help the rather, I shall be devoured of these beasts. The^ said this poor Guy
I may full ill entend to help thee, for I have nothing to live on, but that I
gather wood and carry it to the market to sell, wherewith I am sustained,
nevertheless I shall leave my pretended labor and fulfill thy will, and if ye
reward me not it shall be great hinderance to me and to my wife. Than the
steward made a great oath and said, that he would promote him and all his, to
great riches. Then said Guy, if you will fulfill your promise, I shall do
that you bid me. And with that went again to the City and brought with him a
long rope and came to the pit and said. Sir steward, lo, I let down a rope to
thee, bind thy self about the middle therewith, that I may pull thee up. Than
was the steward glad, and said. Good friend let down the rope. And with that
he cast the end of the rope down into the pit. And when the Lion saw that, he
caught the rope and hild it fast and Guy drew the Lion up, wening to him he had
drawn up the steward, and when he had so done the Lion thanked him in his
manner, and ran to the wood. The second time that Guy let down the rope, the
Ape lept to it and caught it fast, and when he was drawn up, he thanked Guy as
he could, and ran to the wood. The third time he let down the rope and drew
up the Serpent, which thanked him, and went to the wood. The steward cried with
an high voice. O dear friend now I am delivered of three venomous beasts, now
let down the cord to me, that I may come up. And this poor Guy let down
the rope, and the steward bound himself fast about the middle, and anon Guy
drew him up. And when he was thus help out of this deep pit, he said to
Guy as follows.

Come to me at three of the clock to the pallaies, and than I shall make thee
rich for ever. This poor Guy reioised thereof and went home without any reward.
Than his wife demanded of him why he (...) no wood wherewith they (...) that
day. Then told he her all the (...) as it be^ell, how ye steward (...) into
the prt, and also the Lion, the (...) the serpent, that he had made in the said
forest, and how he had helped him with a cord, and saved him from devouring of
ye three ve^^mous beasts, and how he should go to the Steward and fetch his
reward on the morrow.

When his wife heard this, she reioysed greatly and said. If it shall be so
good ^^r arise to morrow at a due hour, and go to the pallayes and receive
your reward, that we may be comforted thereby.

So in the morning Guy arose and went to the Pallays and knocked at the gate,
Than came the Porter and asked the cause of his knocking. I pray thee quod this
Guy, go to the steward and say to him that here abides a poor man at the
gate that spoke with him yesterday in the forest. The porter went and told
the steward as the poor man had said; Than said the Steward, go thou again
and tell him yt he lies, for yesterday spoke I with no man in the forest,
and charge him that he go away, and that I see him there never after. The
porter went forth and told poor Guy, how the steward had said, and charged
him to go away. Then was this poor Guy sorrowful and went home, and when he
was come he told his wife how the steward had answered him.

His wife comforted him in all that she might, and said. Sir go ye again and
prove him thrice. Then on the morrow this Guy arose and went to the palace
again, praying the porter to do his errand once again to the steward. The
porter answered and said, gladly I will do thine errand, but I fear me sore
that it shall be thy hurt.

And then went he in and told the steward of the coming of this poor man.
When the steward heard that, he went out and all to beat this silly Guy, and
left him in peril of death. When his wife heard this, she came with her Ass
and led him home as she might, and all that she had she spent upon surgions and
Physicians to help him. And when he was perfectly whole, he went to ye forest
as he was wont, for to gather sticks and small wood for his living. And as he
went about in the Forest, he saw a strange Lion driving before him Asses that
were laden with chaffer and merchandise. This Lion drove forth ye Asses before
Guy, which dread sore the Lion, least he would have devoured him, nevertheless
when he beheld the Lion better, he knew well that he was the same Lion that he
drew out of the pit. This Lion left not Guy till all ye Asses with the
merchandise were entered into his house, and than the Lion did him obeysaunce
and ran to the wood.

This Guy obtained these fardells, and found great riches therein, wherefore he
made to proclaim in diverse Churches, if any man had lost such goods, but
there was none that challenged them. And when Guy saw this, he took the
goods, bought therewith house and land, and so was made rich. Nevertheless he
haunted the Forest as he did before. And after that as he walked in the
forest to gather wood, he espied the Ape in the tope of a tree, the which
brake bows busely with her teeth and claws, and threw them down, so that in
short time Guy had laden his Ass. And when the Ape had so done, she went her
way, and Guy went home. And on the morrow Guy went to the forest again, and as
he sat bynding his faggots, he saw the Serpent that he drew out of the pytte
come toward him, bearing in his mouth a precious stone of three colors the
which stone the Serpent let fall at Guyes feet and when she had so done she
kissed his feet and went her way. This Guy took up the stone, and meruailed
greatly of what virtue it might be, wherefore he arose up and went to a
Jeweller named Peter, and said. Dear brother I pray thee tell me the virtue
of this precious stone, and I shall reward thee well for thy labor.

When this Jeweller had well beeholden and understood the nature of the stone,
he said. Good friend if thee list to sell thy stone, I shall give thee an
hundredth mark. Then said Guy, I will not sell my stone till thou tell me
truly the virtues thereof. Then said the merchant, without doubt this stone
has three virtues the first virtue is, that whosoever bears this stone upon
him, shall have joy without sorrow: the second virtue is, that he shall have
plenty without want: the third virtue is, he shall have light without
darkness. And it has also an other virtue, that no man may sell it but for
as much as it is worth, and if he do the contrary, the stone returns again
to the first owner.

When Guy heard this, he was right joyful, and said to himself, in a good
hour I drew these beasts out of the pyt.

Not long after it beefell that this Guy by the virtue of this stone was made
passing rich and bought great possessions and liuelode, wherefore with in a
while he was made knight.

It was not long after the Emperor had knowledge how sir Guy, had a stone of
such virtue, wherefore he sent for sir Guy, commanding him to come to him in
all have, and so he did. And when sir Guy was come to the Emperor, the
Emperor said to him. My friend, I have heard say yt sometime thou werte in
great poverty, and now thou art made rich by ye virtue of a little stone,
therefore I pray thee that thou sell me that stone. Sir Guy answered and said,
that may I not do, for so long as I have that stone, I am sure of three
things, that is to say, of joy without sorrow, plenty without want, and light
without darkness. When the Emperor heard this he had greater desire to buy
that stone then he had before, and said to him, Sir Guy, of two things thou
must choose one, that is, choose whether thou will forsake this Empire and all
thy kindered, or else sell me thy stone.

Then said Sir Guy.

My Lord, if it must needs be thus, be it at your will, nevertheless I
shall tell you the peril of this stone, if ye pay not therefore as it is
worth, without doubt if will come to me again. Then said the Emperor, sothly
I shall give thee sufficient, for thou shall receive of me therefore a
thousand pound, and so it was done. Sir Guy received the money and went home.
On the morrow early he opened his cofer and found the stone, and then he told
to the Lady his wife how he had sold the stone to the Emperor and delivered
it, and how he found it again in his cofer. The^ said his wife, good sir in
all yt have ye can go again to the Emperor and take him the stone, least
that he be displeased, and through mallyce repute some deceit in us.

Then went forth sir Guy again to the Emperor and said to him. My Lord
yesterday I sold you a stone the which if it please you I would feign see. The
Emperor went for the stone to his treasure and found it not, wherefore he was
right sorrowful, and came again and told Sir Guy how it was lost. Then said
Sir Guy, My Lord grieve you not, for I told you yesterday that I might not
sell it, but if I had the value thereof, and yesterday I received a thousand
pound of you therefore, and this day I found it in my Cofer again, and
therefore if I had not brought you the stone again peradventure you would have
showed me your heavy countenance, and with that he showed forth the stone,
whereat the Emperor maruailed greatly and said. Sir Guy by thy troth that thou
owe to me, tell me how thou came by this Stone.

Then said sir Guy, By my faith that I owe to you, I shall tell you the very
troth as touching this stone.

Your steward that is promoted up of naught, let make many deep pittes in your
Forest, and it fortuned not long after, yt he fell down into one of them
himself, and might not rise again for deepenesse of ye pit, it fortuned also
the same day, that a Lion, an Ape, and a serpent fell into the Pit with him,
at which time I was a very poor man, and took great pains for my living, and
as I walked into the forest with mine Ass for to gather wood, he cried to me
that I should help him out of the pit, and save him from death, for there
were in ye pit with him three venomous beasts, that is to say, a Lion, an Ape,
and a foul Serpent, and then he promised me by his word to promote me and
all my kin to great riches. And when I heard that, I was glad, and let
down a long cord unto him, supposing to have drawn him up, and then I haled
up a Lion, and after that an Ape, and then a Serpent, and at the last your
Steward. The Lion gave me ten Asses charged with merchandise, the Ape gave me
as much wood as mine Ass might bear, and the Serpent gave me this stone that
I have sold you, but your steward beat me and wounded me full sore for my
good deed, that I was borne home upon mine Ass.

When the Emperor heard this, his heart was greatly moved against the
Steward, wherefore he examined him of that false deed, but he was dome and
would not speak, for so much that he could not deny his falsehood.

Then said the Emperor, O thou wretched creature, unreasonable beasts as the
Lion, the Ape, and the Serpent, rewarded him for his good deed, and thou that
art a reasonable man have almost beaten him to death that saved thee, and
took thee out of the pit, therefore for thy falsehood and wickedness I judge
thee to be hanged this day on the gallows, and all thy goods and lands I
grant to Sir Guy, and also I ordayn that Sir Guy shall occupy thy place, and
be Steward, and so it was done. When Sir Guy was thus rewarded by the
Emperor, and made steward, he was well beloved of every man, as long as he
lived, and at the last ended his life with honor and good peace.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens the Father of Heaven, the poor man beetokeneth every
man that comes into this world, feeble and naked from his mothers womb, and
at the last is promoted to great riches and worldly honor, as the Psalmist
says. De stercore erigens pauperem. God lifts up the poor man out of the
mire, and many such men know neither God, ne themselefe, but cause to make
deep pittes, that is to say, unkindness and mallyce they ordain against
simple men, in the which pit the devil causes them often to fall, according
to a text in Ecclesiastico. Boueam qui alteri facit, ipse incidit in eam. That
is to say, who makes a Pyt for an other man, himself falls therein, which
text was well proved by Mardocheus.

This Guy that went daily to the forest with his Ass to gather wood
betookeneth every just and godly man, fearing God in the forest of this world,
the wood that he gathers b^etokeneth his simple meaning to live ^ell, that
he carries on his Ass, which beetokeneth the body of man, wherewith his
soul may joy and live in the ta^^^na-cle of Heaven. And as the Steward, the
Lion, ye Ape, and the Serpent that fell into the Pit, right so when a sinful
man falls in the pit of sin. The Lion of the stock of Jude (that is Jesu
Christ) decendeth with him as oftentimes as ye sinner has will to come to
grace. Therefore says the Psalmist. Cum ipso sum in tribulatione. That is to
say, I am with him in tribulation. This Guy draws up the Lion, that is to
say, Jesu Christ out of the pit by the cord of virtues. He drew up the Ape
also, that is to say, contrary will to reason, that he might obey to reason.
For of all manner beasts ye Ape is most like to manne, right so among all the
strengthes of ye soul, will ought to be lykened unto reason, and to obey
reason. He drew up also a Serpent, by the which is understood repentance,
for two causes. For the Serpent bears in his mouth venim, and his tail is a
medicine. Right so repentance bears at the beginning bitterness to the
doer, nevertheless it is full sweet and medicinable unto the soul at the
end, and therefore every lust man should draw to him the serpent of repentance.

And at the last he drew up the Steward from the pyt of sin, according to
Christ's saying.

I am not come only to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Also it is written, that Seneca which taught an Emperor many laws and
virtues of truth, and at the last like as this Steward did, so did this
Emperor seek the death of his master Seneca.

Also Christ gave power to Judas to work miracles, like as he did to other
Disciples, nevertheless he beetrayed him at the last.

Right so now a days be many children of Beliall which delight more to do
harm the^ good, in especial to them that wou^d instruct them perfectly both
for the soul and for the body.

The Lion gave to the just and godly poor man ten Asses charged with
merchandise, that is to say, our Lord Lesu Christ gives to every righteous
man ten commandments charged with virtues, by yt which he grows to the
riches of heaven.

The Ape also gathered him wood as often as the just man works the fruits of
faith. For wood voluntaryly is profitable for two things, that is to say, to
make fire and to build houses.

Right so perfect charity heateth the Angel, according to scripture saying.
Quia magis gaudium est angelis, etc.

That is to say. More joy is among angelis for one sinner doing repentance
etc. Charity also reyseth the house of heaven against the coming of ye soul.
The Serpent also gave him a stone of three diverse colors: the which betokneth
our Lord Jesu Christ, whom we seek by repentance. Therefore says saint
Jerome in the second table thus. Post naufragium est penetendum. That is to
say. We should repent us after our trespass. That Christ is the stone, may be
proved by him self saying.

Ego sum lapis viuus. That is to say I am a living stone, Christ has three
coullours, which betokens the power of the father, the wisdom of the son,
and the humility of the holy Ghost.

Therefore who so may get this stone, shall have the Empire of heaven, joy
without sorrow, plenty without any want, and light without darkness: Unto
which light bring us our Lord Jesu Christ that dy^d for all mankind.

Amen.
The Argument.
By the nativity of Christ proceeds joyful gladness to the world and
salvation unto mankind. Yet man is unthankful unto God contrary to his promise
made in Baptism: we are warned in all worldly tempests to cleave unto Christ
by faith and hope, to continue in well doing and to impugn the mallis of the
devil: the prechers of gods word are sent of god to confound the devil by
sound doctrine and good life, life and death is set before man, we ought
then to chose that life that may be for our everlasting comfort.

The 32. History.
IN Rome dwelt sometime a mighty Emperor named Anselme, which had wedded the
kings daughter of Jerusalem, a fair Lady and a gracious, in the sight of
every man, but she was long time with the Emperor or she bare him any child,
wherefore the Nobles of the Empire were right sorrowful, because their Lord had
none heir of his body begotten. Till at the last it befell that this Anselme
walked after supper in an evening in his garden, and bethought himself how he
had none heir, and how the king of Ampluy warred on him continually for so
much as he had no son to make defense in his absence, wherefore he was right
sorrowful and went to his chamber and slept. And at the last him thought he saw
a vision in his sleep, that the morning was more cleerer than it was wont to
be, and that the Moon was much more paller on the one side, than on the other.

And after he saw a bird of two colors, and by that byrd stood two beasts
which fed that little byrd with their heat. And after that come many ^o
beasts, and bowed their breasts toward the byrd, and went their way.

And than came there diverse byrds that soung so sweetly and pleasantly that the
Emperor awaked. In the morning early this Anselme remembered his vision and
wondered much what it might signify, wherefore he called to him his
Philosophers, and also the states of his Empire, and told them his dream,
charging them to tell him the signification thereof upon pain of death, and if
they told him the true interpretation thereof, he promised them great reward.

Then said they. Dear Lord tell us your dream, and we shall declare unto
you what it betokens.

Than the Emperor told them from the beginning to ye ending as it is before
said. When ye Philosophers heard this, with glad cheer they answered and said.
Lord, the dream that ye saw, betokens good, for the Empire shall be more
clearer than it is.

The Moon that is more pale on the one side than on the other, beetokeneth the
Empress, that has lost part of her color through the concepcion of a son
that she has conceived. The little byrd betokens the son yt she shall
bear.

The two beasts that fed this bird betokens all the wise men and rich
men of this Empire shall obey thy son. These other beasts that bowed their
breasts to the bird, beetokeneth that many other nations shall do him homage.
The Byrd that soung so sweetly to this little Byrd, betokens the Romans,
which shall rejoice and sing, because of his birth.

Lo this is the very interpretation of your dream. When the Emperor heard
this, he was right joyful. Soon after that the Empress travailed in child
birth and was delivered of a fair son, in whose birth was great joy made
without end.

When the king of Ampluy heard this, he thought in himself thus. Lo, I have
warred against the Emperor all the days of my life, and now he, has a son
the which will revenge all thee wrongs that I have done and wrought against
his Father when he comes to full age, therefore it is better that I send to
the Emperor and beseech him of trewse and peace, that his son may have
nothing against me when he comes to manhood. When he had thus said to
himself, he wrote unto the Emperor, beseeching him to have peace. When the
Emperor saw that the king of Ampluy wrote to him more for fear then for love,
he wrote again to him, that if he would find good and sufficient suertie to
keep the peace, and bind himself all the days of his life to do him
service and homage, and to give him yearly a certain trybute, he would
receive him to the peace.

When the king had read the tenor of the Emperors letters, he called his
Counsel, praying them to give him counsel how he might best do as touching
this matter. Then said they. It is good that ye obey the Emperors will and
commandment in all things.

For in the first he desires of you suerty for the peace, and as to this we
answer thus. Ye have but a daughter, and the Emperor but a son, wherefore
let a marriage be made beetween them, and that may be a perpetual covenant
of the peace. And also he asks homage and rents which is good to fulfill.
And than the king sent his messengers to the Emperor, saying that he will
fulfill his intent in all thing, if it might, please his highness yt his son
and the Kings daughter might be wedded together. All this pleased well the
Emperor, nevertheless heesent again, that if his daughter were a clean
Uirgin from her birth unto that day, he would consent to that marriage. Than
was the king right glad, for his daughter was a clean virgin.

Therefore when the letters of covenant and compact were sealed, the king
furnished a fair ship, wherein he might send his Daughter with many noble
knights, Ladies, and great riches unto the Emperor for to have his son in
marriage. And when they were sailing in the sea toward Rome, a storm arose so
extremely and so horribly that the ship all to brast against a rock of stone,
and they were all drowned save only that young lady, which fixed her hope and
heart so greatly on God, that she was saved. And about three of the clock the
tempest ceased, and the Lady drove forth over the waves in that broken ship
which was cast up agine, but an huge whale followed after, ready to devour both
the ship and her, wherefore this fair young Lady when night came she smote
fire with a stone, wherewith the ship was greatly lightened, and than the
whale durst not adventure toward the ship for fear of the light. At the
cock crowing this young Lady was so weary of the great tempest and trouble of
the sea, that she slept and within a little while after the fire surceased, and
with that came the whale and devoured this virgin.

And when she wakened and found her self swallowed up in the whales belly,
she smot fire, and within a little while she wounded the Whale with a knife in
many places, and when the Whale felt himself wounded, according to his nature
beegan to swim to land.

There was that time dwelling in that country an Earl that was a noble man
named Pyrris, the which for his recreation walked by the Sea shore, and as he
was walking thus, he saw where as the Whale was coming toward that land,
wherefore he turned home again, gathered many strong men and women and came
thither again, and fought with this Whale, and wounded him sore, and as they
smote, the Maiden that was in his belly cried with an high voice and said.

O gentle friends have mercy and compassion on me, for I am a knights daughter
and a true virgin from ye hour of my birth unto this day. When the Earl
heard this he wondered greatly, and opened the side of the Whale and found the
young Lady, and took her out. And when she was thus delivered, she told him
forthwith whose daughter she was, and how she had lost all his goods in ye
sea, and how she should have been married unto the Emperors son. And when ye
Earl heard this she was right glad, wherefore he comforted her the more, and
kept her still with him till she was well refreshed. And in the mean time he
sent messengers to the Emperor, letting him to wit how this knights daughter
was saved. Then was the Emperor right glad of her sauety and coming, and had
great compassion on her, saying: A good Maid for the love of my son thou
have suffered much woe, nevertheless if thou be worthy to be his wife soon
shall I prove. And when he had thus said, he let bring forth three vessels,
the first was made of pure Gold well beesette with precious stones without and
within, full of dead men's bones, and thereupon was engraven this posey. Who so
chooses me shall find that he deserves.

The second vessel was made of fine silver, filled with earth and worms, and
the superscription was thus.

Who so chooses me shall sinde that his nature desires. The third vessel was
made of Lead, full within of precious stones, and thereupon was insculpt this
posey. Who so chooses me, shall find that God has disposed for him.

These three vessels the Emperor showed to the Maiden and laid. Lo here
daughter, these be noble vessels, if thou choose one of these wherein is
profit to thee and to other the^ shall thou have my son. And if thou choose
that wherein is no profit to thee nor to none other, sothly thou shall not wed
him.

When the Maiden saw this, she lift up her hands to God and said. Thou Lord
which know all things, grant me grace this hour so to choose, that I may
receive the Emperors son. And with yt she beeheld the first vessel of gold
which was graven royally, and read this superscription. Who so chooses me.
etc. saying thus. Though this vessel be full precious and made of pure gold,
nevertheless know not I what is with in, therefore my dear Lord this vessel
will I not choose.

And then beheld she the second vessel that was of pure silver, and read
the superscription, who so chooses me, shall find that his nature desires.
Thinkeing thus within her self, if I choose this vessel, what is within I
know not, but well I wot there shall I find that anture desires, and my
nature desires the lust of the flesh, and therefore this vessel will I not
choose.

When she had seen those two vessels, and given an answer as touching two of
the^, she beeheld the third vessel of lead, and read the superscription, who
so chooses me, shall find that God has disposed. Thinking within her self
this vessel is not passing rich, ne thoroughly precious, nevertheless the
superscription says, who so chooses me, shall find that God has disposed,
and without doubt God never disposed any harm, therefore as now I will choose
this vessel, by the leave of God.

When the Emperor saw this, he said, O good Maiden, open thy vessel, for it
is full of precious Stones, and see if thou have well chosen or no. And when
this young Lady had opened it, she found it full of fine gold and precious
stones, like as the Emperor had foretold her before.

And than said the Emperor, O my dear daughter, because thou have wisely
chosen, therefore shall thou wed my son. And when he had so said, he ordained
a marriage, and wedded them together with great solempnitie, and much honor,
and so continued to their lives end.

The Moral
This Emperor betokens the Father of heaven, yt which was long time without
a natural Son, wherefore many men were in danger of perishing in hell.

The Emprisse conceived when the Angel Gabriell said. Lo thou shall conceive
and bear a child. And than the firmament began to clear when this little
child* lightened the world with his birth. The Moon that beegan to ware pale
when the face of the Uirgin Mary, was ouershadowed by virtue of the grace of ye
holy ghost, and not only her face was thus shadolwed, but also her body, for
she was conceived with child as an other Woman, wherefore Joseph would have
forsaken her privily and gone away. The little byrd that came from the one side
of the Moon betokens our Lord Jesu Christ, which at mydnight was borne of
our Lady, wrapped in clothes, and laid in an Ox stall. The two beasts
beetokeneth the Ox and the Ass that Joseph brought with him, which honored
him in his birth. These other beasts that came from far, beetokeneth yr
herds in the field, to whom the Angel said thus. Ecce nuncio vobis gaudium
magnum. Lo, I show to you great joy.

The byrds that sung so sweetly, beetokeneth the Angels of heaven which sung
at his birth this joyful song. Gloria in excelsis. Joy to God above, and peace
to men in earth.

The king of Amply which held war again the Emperor, beetokeneth all
mankind, that was contrary to God as long as he was in the devils power. But
immediately when our Lord Jesu Christ was borne, he bowed himself to God, and
beesought him of peace when he received his baptim, for at our baptising we
promised to drawonely to God, and forsake ye devil and all his pomps. This
king gave his daughter in marriage to the Emperors son. Right so each of us
ought to give his soul in marriage to Gods son, for he is always redye to
receive our soul to his spouse according to ye scripture saying thus.
Desponfabo ipsam mihi. I will spouse her to me. But or the soul may come to
the pallays of heaven, her beehoueth to sail by the sea of this world in the
Ship of good life, but oftentimes there aryseth a Tempest in the Sea, that is
to say, trouble of this World, the temptation of the flesh, and the
suggestion of the devil aryseth suddenly and drowneth the virtues that the
Soul receives in Baptism, nevertheless yet falls she not out of the
ship of charity, but keeps her self surely therein by faith and hope. For
as the Apostle says. Spe salui facti sumus. By hope we be saved.

For it is impossible to be saved without hope or Faith. The great Whale that
followed ye Maiden beetokeneth the devil, which by night and by day lies in a
wait to overcome the Soul by sin, therefore do we as did the Maiden, smite
we fire of charity and love out of the stone, that is Christ according to
this saying: Ego sum lapis, I am a stone. And certaynely the devil shall have
no power to grieve us.

Many men begin well as did the Maiden, but at ye last they be weary of their
good works, and so sleep they in sin. And anon when the devil perceives
this, he deuoureth the sinner in evil thoughts, delights, consent and work.

Therefore if any of us feel our self in such life under the power of the
devil, let him do as the Maid did, smite the devil with ye knife of bitter
repentance than kindle the fire of charity, and without doubt he shall cast
thee on the land of good life.

The Earl that came with his servants to slay the Whale, betokens a discreet
Preacher, which dwells beeside the sea, that is to say, beeside the world,
and not in the world, that is to say, not drawing to worldly delectation, but
ever is redye with good words of holy scripture to sly the devil and to
distroy his power: we must all cry with an high voice as did this Maiden,
knowledging our sins, and than shall we be deiliuered from the devil, and
nourished with virtuous exercise.

The Emperor shows this Maiden three vessels, that is to say, God puts
before man life and death, good and evil, and which of these that he chooses
he shall obtain. Therefore says Sampson: Ante hominem mors and vita. Death
and life is set before man, choose which him list. And yet man is uncertain
whether he be worthy to choose life before death.

By the first vessel of gold full of dead men's bones we shall understand
some worldly men, both mighty men and rich, which outwardly shine as gold in
riches and pomps of this world.

Nevertheless within they be full of dead men's bones, that is to say, the
works that they have wrought in this world been dead in the sight of god
thorough deadly sin. Therefore if any man choose such life he shall have that
he deserves, that is to say, hell. And such men be like toumbes that be white
and roially painted and arrayed without and covered with cloth of gold and
silk, but within there is nothing but dry bones. By the second vessel of
silver we ought to understand some Justices and wise men of this world which
shine in fair speech but within they be full of worms and earth, that is to
say, their fair speech shall avail them no more at the day of judgment,
than worms of earth, and paraduenture less, for than shall they suffer
everlasting pain, if they dye in deadly sin.

By the third vessel of lead full of gold and precious stones, we ought to
understand a simple life and a poor, which the chosen men choose, that they
may be wedded to our blessed Lord Jesu Christ by humility and obeisance, and
such men bear with them precious stones, that is to say, faith and her
fruitful works, pleasinge to God: by the which at the judgment day they be
espoused to our Lord Jesu Christ and obtain the heritage of heaven, unto the
which bring us he that dyed on the Cross.

Amen.
The Argument.
Manne by Baptism promises to live in the fear of God, and forsake the
devil. Christ sorroweth for our sins, he requires dutiful service of us
at vi. several ages, but we are always unready for him, yet the mercy of
God is so favorable toward us that he spares us even till the last age of man, vouchsafing if than we repent us and call for grace, believing in his
mercies, he will receive us into the throne of his heavenly grace. etc.

The 33. History.
SOmetime in Rome there dwelt a mighty Emperor named Calopo du, which took a
fair lady to his wife, they were not long together but that this Empress
conceived and bare him a son, a goodly child and a fair, when he was of
age, he was set to schole. And when he came to twenty years of age, he desired
his Fathers heritage, saying. Dear father, ye are an old man and may not
govern your Empire, therefore if it please you to give it me, it shall be to
your profit. Then answered the Emperor and said. Dear son, I dread me
sore that when the Empire is in thy power thou will not fulfill my will ne my
desire.

Then answered the Empress (for so much as she loved her son better than
her husband) and said. My Lord quod she that may not be, for thou have but
one son, therefore as I believe he will fulfill thine intent in all thing,
this Empire may help him well, and therefore it is not best to grant him the
Empire. Then answered the Emperor and said. I will first have of him a letter
obligatory, that when so ever he does any thing against my will, that than I
shall deprive him of the Empire without any withstanding.

The son granted to this, and let make the obligation, and sealed it. And
when this was done, this young Emperor waxed so proud, that he feared neither
God nor man, and did very much harm. But ever his father suffered it
patiently, for he would not be corrected by no man. Till at the last there fell
a great dearth in ye Empire, so that many men dyed for want of food. This old
Emperor was all alone himself and began to have need, wherefore he went to
his son for to have some substance, which his son granted and suffered for
a time.

But within short time his father began to wax sick, wherefore he called his
son, and prayed to him to give him ^ draught of must. His son answered and
said. That will I not do, for my must is not good for your complexion. Than
said the Emperor, I pray thee son give me a draught of thy wine. His son
answered and said, that he should have none, for my wine is not yet fined,
and if I touch it, it will trouble, and therefore I will not broch it till it
be clear and fined. Then said his father. Give me some of the second tonne.

That will I not do, quod he, for ye wine is passing mighty and strong, and
such wine is not good for a sick man. Than his father prayed him heartily for a
draught of the fourth tonne. Than answered he and said, thereof get ye none,
for it is feeble and without any sustentacion, and such wine is not good for
you, for it is not comfortable.

Than said his father, now good son give me tha^ of the fifth tonne. That will
I not quod he, for that tonne is full of ^ees or dregs, and such is not for
men nor uneaths for hoggs. When his father saw he might get nothing of him,
and after was as whole as ever he was, than went he to the king of Jerusalem
and made his complaint of his son, and showed him the letter obligatory which
his son had made, wherefore his father might put him out of the Empire
without any withsaying. When the king heard this, he called ye Emperors son
to answer his father. And when he came he could not answer to his father
with no reason, wherefore the king put him from his Empire, and seasoned his
father therein again, and so he contineued all the days of his life.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens our lord Jesu Christ, according to the Psalmist. He
is thy father that has thee in possession and made thee of naught. The son
betokens man, to whom he gave all the Empire of this world, according to
this scrpture.

Cel^m celi domino, etc. That is to say. Heaven he has given our Lord, and
earth to man. Mankind made an obligation unto our Lord Jesu Christ when he
received the sacrament of Baptism, where he promised him suertie to serve him
truly, and to forsake the devil and all his pomps and vaineglory.

This Emperor began to wax sick on a day, that is to say, our Lord Jesu
Christ is troubled as oftentimes as a christian man sins and breaks his
commandments, wherefore he thyrsteth greatly the help of our soul, and
than he asked a draught of the first tonne, that is to say, he asks of man
his first age of his childhood to be spent in his service. But incontment the
wicked man answers and says.

I may not do so, for my childehood is mustie, that is to say, it is so
tender and so young, that it may not attempt so soon to serve God, which is
manifestly against the truth, for the child of one day is not without sin. For
saint Gregory in his dialogues says, the children of v. years of age put out
finds from the bosoms of their fathers. And when God sees that he may not
have of the must of his childhoode, then desires he the wine of the second
tonne. Then answers ye wicked man and says, that his wine is not yet clear
enough, that is to say, he is not apt to serve God, And when God may not have
of the second tonne, then asks he of the third tonne, that is to say, of the
third tonne of his youth. Then answers ye wicked man and says, the wine is
strong and mighty, and therefore his youth ought to be spent about virtuous
deeds in this world, and not in good lise, which should make him feeble and
weak. When God sees that he may not have of this tonne, then asked he the
fourth tonne.

And then answered the wicked man and says, that an aged man is feeble and may
not fast, no do no heard repentance, and if he died, he should be cause of
his own death. And then asked our Lord of the fifth tonne, yt is to say, of his
old age when he does creep and may not go without a st^sse.

But the wicked man ^xcuseth himself and says, that this Wine is feeble to
give such a feeble man, for if he should fast one day, it were time on ye
morrow to make his grave.

And when our Lord sees that he may not have of the ^ift tonne, then asks
he of the sirt tonne, that is to say, when a man is b^inde ^ may not go to
sin no more, yet desires he of such a man drinck, yt is to say, the help of
his soul. But the wretched manne lying in despair says. Alas, alas to me,
because I served not almighty God my maker and redeemer, here in times past
while I was in youth and in prosperity, but now there is nothing left but
only the lees and the dregs of all wretchedness, therefore what shall it
avail me now to turn toward GOD. But for such men we should lament.

Nevertheless God is so merciful, that though he might have no service of man
in all his time, yet is he content to have the lees of his tonne, that is to
say, his good will, though he may not serve him otherwise, and so shall his
good will stand him in steed of penitent life. For in what hour the sinner
does repent him, he shall be saved, as Ezechiel witnesses. But there be many
that will give no wine, ne none other thing to him wherefore god shall
complain unto the King of Jerusalem, that is to say, to his Godhead at the
judgment day, and then as he is God and man, shall he give a sentence
defensible against such men, saying. Esuriui and non dedistis, etc.

I have hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I have thirsted, and ye gave me no
drinck. Lo, thus shall he rehearse to thee the fruits of faith.

And when this is done then shall they be put to everlasting pain, and ye just
men into everlasting bliss, where they shall have Joye withouten end. Unto
the which bring us our lord Jesu Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
Man being captiued by satan, the world refuses to do for him: till the
godhead of the heavenly Father, bearing an earnest affection unto him did
espouse him and embrace him within the bosom of inward and entyer love,
adventured what he might to set mankind at liberty, yet grudgeth the world
that we should always serve our God and forsake the world therefore to eschew all
the snares thereof, we are taught in this history.

The 34. History.
IN Rome dwelt sometime a mighty Emperor named Antony, under whose reign the
Rouers on the Sea had taken prisoner a mighty man's son of an other Region,
and brought him to the Emperors prison, being bound. When this young man was
thus in prison, he incontinent wrote to his father for his ransom, but his
father would no ransom pay, ne none other thing send to comfort him.

This when his son heard he wept sore and might not be comforted for the
unkindness of his father.

This Emperor had a fair daughter which visited every day this prisoner, and
comforted him as much as she might. To whom the prisoner answered and said.
How shall I be merry, or how may I joy, thus for to lie fast bound in prison
from the sight of man, and not withstanding this, it greeueth me more that my
father will not pay my ransom.

When this maiden heard this, she was moved with pity, and said. Dear
friend, I am sorry for thee, nevertheless, if thou will grant me one thing, I
shall deliver thee from this anguish, and pain. What thing is that quod he.

That thou will take me to thy wife.

Then said the prisoner, I promise you surely to fulfill your intent and
desire, and for the more assurance I plight you my troth.

When he had so done, it was not long after the Damsel delivered him out of
prison, and fled away with him home to his fathers house. When the father saw
his son and ye Maiden together he asked the cause why he brought the Maiden
with him.

Then said his son. Sir, this Damsel delivered me out of prison, and
therefore she shall be my wife. Then said his father, I will not consent that
she shall be thy Wife, for two reasonable causes, which I shall forthwith
show thee.

The first is this, it is not unknown to thee that the Emperor her Father
might have had for thy deliverance great foyson of riches, and for as much
as she was untrue to her own Father and true to thee, it seems well yt thou
should not trust long in her, for who is false to her own Father, by reason
should be very false and untrue to an other manne. The second reason is this.
The cause why she delivered thee out of prison, it was neithar for pity nor
for love, but for carnal lust that she had to thee. For at thy deliverance
she made covenant with thee to be thy wife, and had of thee thy troth, and
therefore son (says he) it is not reason yt she should be thy wife. The
Maiden answered to this question and said.

As for the first reason that thou layest against me that I should be untrue
to my father, that is falfe, for my father has plentye of riches, and thy
son is but poor, and therefore I help him for pity, and for none other
cause, and nevertheless thou that art his father would not pay his rau^some
that he might be delivered out of prison.

Lo for this cause I have delivered him therefore I am kinder to him then thou
that art his own father, and he is more beeholding to me then to thee.

Unto that other reason, whereas thou say that I delivered him because of
carnal lust. I answer and say plainly that it is no troth.

For all manor of carnal love is cause of strength or else of fairness, but
thy son is not strong, for his imprisonment have done away his strength.

He is not fair, for by the pain that he has had in prison he is brought
low and vnlully to the sight, and therefore pity only moved me to deliver
him and not carnal lust.

Then said the son unto his father.

Dear Father for as much as I was in peril of death, and wrote unto thee that
thou would pay my ransom that I might be delivered, and thou would not
help me, but this Damsel of her gentilnesse and for pity has saved me
from death, and delivered me out of prison, and therefore sothly she shall
be my Wife, therefore forthwith he married her with great honor, and with
her ended his life.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor heetok^neth the Father of Heaven. The young man
which was taken with the Pirates of the sea betokens all mankind, which was
taken with the devil by the sin of our forefather Adam, and was cast into ye
prison of hell with great sorrow and pain.

His father would not ransom him, that is to say, the world would do nothing
for him.

This fair daughter betokens the godhead, which came down from heaven and
took manhood of the virgin Mary, and so made a ghostly marryage beetweene him
and man. And upon this condition he delivered mankind out of this prison of
hell, when he came from heaven and forsook the fellowship of Angels for to
dwell with us in this wretched valley of tears. But the Father that betokens
the world, grudged ever against him, and would not suffer that the soul of man
should become the spouse of Jesu Christ, but than she should always serve him and
should forsake our Lord.

Therefore if we follow the world and his vanities, certainly we shall fall
in to the snare of the devil. From the which defend us our blessed Savior
Jesu Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
It is the ordinance of God that no man shall labor for worldly promotion by
couetousnesle* and falsehood. Man for his first transgression should have been
adjudged to perpetual torment in hell, had not the son of god voluntarily
offered him self to the death, to save mankind and destroy satan ^is enemy,
so that thereby he might place him in the habitacle of heavenly joys
everlasting.

The 35. History.
SOmetime in Rome there dwelt a noble Emperor of great liuelood named
Alexander, the which above all virtues loved the virtue of bounty, wherefore
he ordained a law for great curiosity, that no name under p^yne of Death
should turn a Playce in his dishe, at his meat, but only eat the white
said and not the black, and if any man would attempt to do the contrary, he
should dye without remedy, but or he died he should ask three requests of the
Emperor what him list, (except his life) which should be granted him.

It befell after on a day that there came an Earl and his son of a strange
country to speak with the Emperor.

And when this Earl was set to meat, he was served with a Playce, and he
which was hungry and had an appetite to his meat, after he had eaten ye white
side, he turned the black side and beegan to eat thereof, wherefore straight
way he was accused to the Emperor, because he had offended against the
law.

Than said the Emperor. Let him dye according to the law, without any delay.
When the Earls son heard that his father should dye, immediately he sat him
down on both his knees before the Emperor and said. O my reverend Lord, for
his love that dyed upon the cross, let me dye for my father, Than said the
Emperor.

It pleases me well that one dye for the offense of the law.

Then said this Earls son, since it is so that I shall dye, I ask the
benefits of the law, that is to say, that I may have three petitions granted,
or I dye. The Emperor answered and said, ask what thou will, there shall no
man say thee nay.

Than said this young knight. My Lord, ye have but one daughter yt which I
desire of your highness that she may lie with me a night or I dye. The
Emperor granted, though it were against his will in fulfilling of his law.

Heuerthelesse this knight deflowred her not as that night. Therefore pleased
he greatly the Emperor. The second peticion is this, I ask all thy treasure.
And immediately the Emperor granted because he should not be called a breaker
of his own law*

And when this Earls son had received the Emperors treasure, he imparted it
both to poor and rich, by means whereof he obtained their good wills.

My third petition is this, I ask my Lord that all the eyes may be put out
incontinent which saw my father eating of the black plaice. Wherefore the
Emperor let make inquisition immediately who it was that saw the Earl turn
the black Plaice. And they that saw him turn the playce bethought the^ and
said within themselves. If we knowledge that we saw him do this trespass than
shall our eyes be put out, and therefore it is better that we hold us still.
And so there was none found that would accuse him. When the Earls son saw
this he said to the Emperor. My Lord quod he, ye see that there is no man
accuses my father, therefore give ye right full judgment. Than said the
Emperor. For as much that no man will knowledge that they saw him turn the
place, therefore I will not that thy father shall dye.

Lo thus the son saved his fathers life, and after the decease of the
Emperor married his daughter.

The Moral
Dear friends, this Emperor betokneth the father of heaven, which ordained a
law, that no man should furne the black side of the Plaice, that is to say,
there should no man labor for riches or promotion by covetousness and
falsehood.

The Earl that came to the Emperor betokens Adam our fore father, which
came out of the land of Eden, to the Court of Paradise, and turned up the
black side of the Plaice when he eat of the Apple, wherefore he should have
been condemned to everlasting death.

But his son, that betokens our lord Jesu Christ: For he took slesh of
Adam, and proffered himself voluntarily to dye for him. The Father of Heaven
granted that he should go dwone to dye for mankind.

Nevertheless or he dyed he asked three petitious of his father of heaven. The
first was this, that he might have by him his daughter which betokens the
Soul of man, and bring her with him into the bosom of heaven, according to
the words of Osee saying.

De sponsabo came mihi. That is to say, I shall wed her to my wife.

The second petition was this, all the Emperors treasure, which betokens the
treasure of heaven, according to this scripture. Sicut disposuit mihi pater.

That is to say, like as my father has disposed for me, so I dispose for you.

The third petition was this, that all their eyes should be put out, that is to
say, that the devil which daily accuses man might be put from the light of
heavenly grace.

And thus saved he mankind and led him up with him unto the Pallayes of
heaven. Unto the which pallayes bring us our Lord Jesus.

Amen.
The Argument.
The Father of Heaven of his mere grace promotith some poor men, raising them
from the dust to sit amongst Princes.

But extolling themselves without regard of gods goodness, they are made
abiects unto him, the devil works deceit in his members* against the godly.
Christ came down from heaven to minister the water of eternal life unto man,
and by his death and passion to re^i^e our souls, (which before were dead)
unto the firm state of eternal felicity.

The 36. History.
IN Rome there dwelt sometime a mighty Emperor named Le m^^us, which on a day
rode to a forest to disport him, where as he met suddenly with a poor man
to whom he said* thus* Friend whence come thou, and who art thou.

My Lord quod he, I come from the next City, and your manne I am. Than said
the Emperor, thou seem poor, therefore if thou will be good and true I
shall promote thee to great riches and honor.

Then answered the poor man and said. My Lord I promise you faithfully to be
true to you as long as I live.

The Emperor anon made him knight and gave him great riches. When he was thus
promoted, he waxed so proud that he thought himself more able to be an
Emperor then his Lord, wherefore he made suggestion to diuerrse lords of that
Empire that he might vs^rpe and take upon him through strength of them to be
Emperor. When the Emperor heard this, anon he exiled him and all those that
were consenting to him, so that they lived abiects in great wretchedness and
srrow, and then the Emperor ordained other men in their steedes, and gave them
all ye possessions of the traitors.

And when the banished men heard that strangers had taken possession of their
lands and goods, anon they conspyred against them, and through treason
requested them to a banquet.

And they as (...) thinking upon no such treason, came at the day assigned and
were served with ^iu^ ^^^s^s, which were poisoned, wherefore as many as tasted
of that vice dyed incontinent.

When the Emperor heard this, he was greatly moved, and assembled his
counsel, to wit what was best to be don of this treason and of their death.
Then said the Emperors son. My Lord I am your son, and ye be my Father,
and therefore I shall give you good counsel and profitable to all men.

Not far hence is a little nation wherein dwells a fair Maiden and a gracious
in the sight of every man, which has an orchard wherein is a well, the water
thereof has such virtue, that if it be cast upon a dead man, straight way he
shall live again and recover his life. Therefore my lord I shall descend unto
that nation and seek that water whereby they that were slain at the Banquet
might be restored again to life. And when the Emperor heard this, he was
greatly rejoiced and said. Son, thy counsel is good. And straight way the
Emperors son went into the said nation, and fell inconceit with the Maiden,
in so much that he entered in the garden and assailed to taste the water of the
well. And when he had so done, he made five deep trenches in the ground, in
the which the water ran till it came where the dead men lay buried, thereupon
when the water touched them, they arose from death to life.

Then the Emperors son led them unto his Father. And when the Emperor saw
this, he was right ioyefull, wherefore he crowned his son with a Laurate
crown, in tooken of victory, and so ended his life in rest and peace.

The Moral.
This Emperor beetokeneth the Father of Heaven. The poor man that was
promoted, beetokeneth Lucifer, the which was exalted of naught, and enthroned
in the Empire of heaven with so great Joye and clearness, that him seemed
through his pride, he would be like unto almighty God.

and not only like him, but more than almighty God wherefore the Father of
heaven exiled him and all them that consented unto him to hell: and in their
place man was exalted to great joy and honaur.

The devil seeing this, envied him that man should come to such glory and
honor, and bad Adam and Eve, to a banquet, when they eat of ye Apple against
Gods commandment, and counseled them thus, saying. In what hour ye eat of
ye Apple ye shall be like gods. And at this coursed banquet they were served
with v. m^sses that were poisoned, that is to say, their v. wits were accorded
in eating of the Apple, whereof man was insect and dyed.

This hearing the Emperors son moved with (...)ame down from heaven into
this world and acquainted him so well with ^ blessed Uirgin Mary, that he sound
in her the well of manhood, and co^ioyned it to his Godhead, according to the
Scripture. I am the well of ly^e, who dunketh of it shall not thirst. After
that he let make five trenches in the ground, that is to say, ^iue wounds
in his body, of the which ran both blood and water, whereby all mankind was
raised from death to life, and led them up into the palace of heaven, Unto the
which bring us our blessed Savior Jesu Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
The Father of heaven extends his goodness diverse ways toward frail man,
yet he taking contrary ways, lives in spiritual fornication, for the which
being exiled from the state of felicity, he is compelled to lead a miserable
and painful life. But being reconciled by the death of his savior, he
possesses the heritage of heavenly felicity.

The 37. History.
SOmetime in Rome there reigned a mighty emperor named Dunstain in whose Empire
there dwelt a gentill Knight, that had two sons. One of his son matched
himself against his fathers will with a common harlotte. The knight hearing
this, exyled his son from him. And when he was thus exiled, he begot on this
woman a son. And soon after that he wared sick and in penury, wherefore he
sent messengers to his father, beseching him of his mercy. This hearing his
father, had compassion and ruth on him wherefore he was reconciled

And when he was thus brought again to his fathers grace, he gave his chtide
which he had gotten tofore on this common woman to his father. And he full
kindly received it as his son, and nourished it.

When his other son heard this, he said to his father, father quod he, it
seems to me that thou art out of thy right mind, which I will prove by
this reason. For he is out of his right mind, that receives a salse hear
and nourishes him, whose Father has endomage and disease tosore.

For my brother which begat this child have done thee great injury when he
married the common woman against thy will and commandment, therefore me
seems that thou art out of thy right mind.

Then answered the father and said. Because thy brother is reconciled thou art
envious to me, and also unkind to thy nowne brother, willing to put him from
my fellowship for evermore, and sothly no unkind man shall have mine heritage
except he be reconciled.

But yet thou never reconciledst to him of his unkindness, for thou might
have reconciled him, but thou would not, therefore of mine heritage gettest
thou no part.

The Moral.
The Father of the two brethren betokens the Fether of Heaven.

And his two sons betokens the nature of Angels and the nature of man.

For man was married to a common woman or harlot when he eat of the Apple
against the commandment of God, wherefore he was exilled by the father of
heaven and put from the Joys of Paradise.

The son of ye common woman beetokeneth mankind. This knights son that is
to say A ^am, lived in great misery, for after his sin he was put from joy
into this wretched valley of tears and weeping, according to this Scripture, In
suodore vultus, etc. In ye sweat of thy brow thou shall eat thy bread. But
after by the passion of Christ he was reconsiled. But the other Son that
betokens ye devil was ever unkind, and grudged daily against our
reconciling, saying yt by sin we ought not to come unto the heritage of
Heaven. Unto the which bring us our Lord Jesu Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
we ought in every vocation and calling to beehaue our selves justly and to use
the poor man with equite, we must not injury the rich man.

The mighty men are to be honored and not defrauded of their dignity and
estate being men of cinceare life: they that did contrary to the meaning of
dutiful behofe heerin are worthy of everlasting death.

The 38. History.
SOmetime there dwelt in Rome a mighty Emperor named Donate, which did let
make three Images of the which one held out his hand straight unto the people
and had on his finger a ring of Gold.

The second Image had a beard of gold. And the third had a mantell of Purple,
commanding upon pain of death that no man should bear these Images of the
ring, the beard, nor the mantell. It befell afterward upon a time that one
Dyonise tyrant, came into the temple and took away ye ring from the first
Image, the beard from the second, and the mantell from the third. And when he
had thus done, he was forthwith accused unto the Emperor and brought before
him, and straightly examined of that trespass, why he dispoyled the Images
against the Emperors commandment. Than answered Dionise and said as
follows.

My Lord it is lawful to answer for me, when I entered into the Temple, the
first Image held forth his hand straight to me, as who would say, I give
thee this ring, and therefore I took the ring at the gift of the Image, being
loath to refuse his gentle offer.

And when I law the second Image having a beard, I thought thus with in my
self.

I knew sometime the father of this Image which had no bearde, and now his
son has a beard which is against reason, the son to have a bearde and the
father none, and therefore I took from him his bearde, that he should be like
his father.

After that when I saw the third Image clothed in a mantell of Gold, I thought
that a mantell of gold was not behoueable to him in winter, for gold is
naturally cold, which might be cause of his death, and therefore I took it
from him because it was to cold in winter, and to hot in summer. When
Dionise had excused him by these reasons, the Emperor answered and said. Thou
have answered wickedly for thy self, what should cause thee rather than any
other man to dispoyle these Images, for as much as I commanded that no man
should take any thing away from them, and thine own mouth has condemned
thee. Anon the Emperor called to him one of his Squires, and charged him to
smite of his head, and so it was done.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens Almighty God the Father of Heaven. The three Images
betokens the poor men, the rich men, and the mighty men of this world. The
tyrant Dionise, beetokeneth all officers in every estate lewdely behauing
themselves, which take away from poor men the ringe of their fingers, and
say thus. I may take that is given me. But when the poor man has ought to
do, he must needs put forth his hand to give whether he will or no, if he
shall speed. They take also the beard from the rich man an say thus.

This man is richer tha^ his father was, therefore take we his liueloode from
him and make him like his forefather. They take also the mantell of ^olde from
the mighty men, when they see any man of honor and of good ^^^ing, w^ling to
correct such misdo^^s, then say they, this man is to cold for he enclyneth
nothing to our opinions, and also he is to hot of power in working against us,
therefore go we and take from him the mantill of might, and so they accuse him
and put him out of office.

But certainly all such men stand in peril of everlasting death. From the
which save us he that shed his precious blood for us.

The Argument.
Man ought to nourish Christ in his heart by faith and fruits of good life The
reward of such as have care upon the conservation of Christ and his
institutions, we must watch least we enter into temptation, these things
concidered; we shall then by gods gracious good providence, at^ayne unto the
reward of his heavenly and everlasting bliss.

The 39. History.
THere dwelt sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Euas, which had a fair
young Lady to his wife, upon whom he had begotten a fair son. When the
states of the empire heard this, they came unto the Emperor and besought him
to have the keepeing of his son.

Immediately the Emperor sent a Herould throughout the city, proclaiming that
in whose house were first found fire and water, the good manne of that house
should have his son in keeping, and to nourish. And than the emperor made a
proclamacion, that who so ever had his son to keep, should nourish him
cleanly, and feed him with wholesome meats and drinckes. And when the child
came to age, than should the keeper be promoted to great honor, wherefore many
men let make ready fire and water, in hope to have the child. But on the night
when every manne was a sleep, there came a tyrant named Sulapius, that
quenched the fire and threw out the water.

Nevertheless among all other there was a man named Ionathas, that labored so
diligently that he kept both day and night fire and water. In a morning early
the Herald at the Emperors commandment went through the City and sought in
every house for Fire and Water, but he could find none till he came to
Ionathas house, where as he found both Fire and Water ready, wherefore he
was brought before the Emperor, and delivered him his son according to his
proclamacion. When Ionathas had the Emperors son, he led him home unto his
house.

And soon after he sent for masons and carpe^ters, and let make a strong
chamber of lyme and stone. And when the chamber was made, he sent for painters
and let paint on the wall within the chamber x. Images, with this posey painted
above their heads.

Who so defiles these Images, shall dye a cruel death.

And than he let draw on the door agallous, and figure of a man hanging
thereupon, with this posey painted above his head. So shall he be served that
noursheth the Emperors son amiss.

Also he let make a chair of gold, and himself sitting therein, crowned
with a crown of gold, with this superscription above his head.

Who so nourishes the Emperors son cleanly, thus shall he be honored.

When this was done, often times as he was a sleep he was greatly tempted to
defyle these ten excelent Images, but anon he read the superscription above
their heads, and than all the temptations ceased. And when the Emperors son
was evil kept, than went he to the gallows and read that posey which was
written above his own head, and for dread thereof kept the child better, and
was diligent to give attenda^ce on him.

And when he beheld the chair and himself sitting therein crowned with a
crown of gold, he was right joyful, thinking to have a good reward for
keeking of the Emperors son. When the Emperor heard of his diligent
demeanor about his son, he sent for him and for his son, thanking him
for his well keeping and nourishing of him, and after promoted him to great
honor and worship.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens the father of heaven. The Empress beetokeneth the
blessed virgin Mary.

The Emperors son betokens our Lord Jesu Christ. The Herald that was sent
throughout the City betokens saint John Baptist, which was sent before our
Lord, to prepare the way for him, according to holy scripture. Ecce mitto
Angelum, etc. Lo I send mine angel before me etc. The states that desired
the Emperors son to nourish beetoken ye Patriarchs and Prophets, which
desired greatly to nourish our Lord Jesu Christ, and also to see him, but they
might not see him ne nourish him, for fire and water which should have been
cause of their sight, was not with them perfectly.

The fire betokens the holy Ghost, which had not yet appeared in them, for
they were not washed with the water of Baptism. Also ye may understand by the
fire perfect charity, and by the water true contricion, which two now a days
fails in many men, and therefore they may not have the little child Jesus in
their hearts.

Ionathas that watched so diligently betokens every good Christian man, which
studieth ever to watch in well doing, yielding to GOD for sins the fire of
charitable repentance, and the watter of contrition.

But oftentimes the tyrant which beetokeneth the devil, puts out the fire
of charity from out of men's hearts and casts out the water of contrition, so
that they may not nourishe the little child Jesus. Therefore let us watch as
lonathas did, that w^e enter not into temptation. And call we unto us Masons,
that is to say, descrete Preachers, which can make in our hearts a chamber of
stone, that is to say, a sure Faith and hope. Than call we to us Painters,
that is to say, ministers of Gods word, which can painte in our hearts ten
Images, that is to say, the x. commandments, which if thou keep and observe
daily, without doubt thou shall be honored in heaven.

And if thou keep well the Emperors son, thou shall sit in a chair of
Gold, crowned with a crown of Gold. And if that thou nourish him not well,
without doubt thou shall be in danger of torment in hell. From the which
preserve us our blessed Savior Jesus.

Amen.
The Argument.
The soul of man espoused unto Christ the flesh procures the same to sin.
The Christian soul by faith withstan death temptation. The redemption of
mankind from sin and death. The deceits of unthankful hearts. The spirit
heals the defectes of the flesh, after a pure repentance follows
perpetual joy and felicity, both of soul and body.

The 40. History.
IN Rome dwelt sometime a mighty Emperor named Menaly, which had wedded the
Kings daughter of Hungary, a fair Lady and a gracious in all her works, and
specially she was merciful. On a time as the Emperor lay in his bed, he be
thought him that he would go^ visit^e ye holy land. And on ye morrow he
called to him the Emprisse his wife and his own only brother, and thus he
said. Dear Lady I may not ne I will not hide from you the priuities of my
heart, I purpose to visit the holy land, wherefore I ordain thee principally
to be Lady and governor over all mine Empire and all my people. And under thee
I ordain here my brother to be thy steward for to provide all things that may
be profitable to mine Empire and to my people.

Then said the Emprisse. Since it will none otherwise be but ye needs ye will
go to visit the City Jerusalem, I shall be in your absence as true as any
turtle that has lost her mate, for as I beeleeue, ye shall not escape thence
with your life.

The Emperor anon comforted her with fair words and kissed her, and after
that took his leave of her and of all other, and so went forth unto the city
of Jerusalem.

And anon after yt the Emperor was gone, his brother became so proud, yt he
oppressed poor men and robbed rich men, and yet did he worse the^ this, for
daily he stirred the Emprisse to commit sin with him. But ever she answered
again as an holy and devout woman, and said. I will quod she, never consent
to you ne to none other, as long as my Lord lives. Nevertheless this knight
would not leave with this answer, but ever when he found her alone he made
his complaint to her, and stirred her by all the ways that he could to sin
with him. When this Lady saw that he would not cease for no answer ne would
not amend himself, when she saw her time she called to her three or four
of the worthiest men of the Empire and said to them thus. It is not unknown to
you that my Lord the Emperor ordained me principal governor of this Empire,
and also he ordained his brother to be steward under me, and that he should
do nothing without my counsel, but he does all the contrary, for he oppresses
greatly poor men, and likewi^e robs the rich men, and yet he would do
worse then this, if he might have his intent, wherefore I command you in my
Lords name that you bind him fast and cast him in prison.

Than said they, sothly he has done many evil deeds since our Lord themperor
w^nt, therefore we be ready to obey your commandment, but in this matter ye
must answer for us to our Lord the Emperor. Than said she, dread ye not, if
my Lord knew what he has done as well as I, he would put him to the foulest
death that could be thought. Immediately these men set hand on him and bound
him fast with iron chains, and put him fast in prison, where as he lay long
time after, till at the last if fortuned there came tidings that the Emperor
was coming home, and had obtained great worship and victory. When his brother
heard of his coming, he said: Would to God my brother might find me in
prison, for than would he enquire the cause of mine enprisonment of ye
Emprisse, and she will tell him all the troth, and how I procured her to
commit sin, and so for her I shall have no favor of my Brother, but loose my
life, this know I well, therefore it shall not be so. Then sent he a
messenger unto the Emprissee, praying her for christ's passion that she would
vouchsafe to come unto the prison door, that he might speak a word or two with
her. The Emprisse came to him, and enquired of him what he would have. He
answered and said.

O lady have mercy upon me, for if the Emperor my brother find me in this
prison, then shall I die without any remedy. Then said ye Emprisse, if I might
konw that thou would be a good man and leave thy folly, thou should have
grace. Then did he promise her assuredly to be true and to amend all his
trespass. When he had thus promised, the Emprisse delivered him anon, and
made him to be bathed and shaven, and apparelled him worshipfully according to
his estate, and then she said unto him thus. Now good brother take thy steed
and come with me, that we may meet my Lord. He answered and said, Lady I am
ready to fulfill your will and commandment in all things. And than the Empress
took him with her and many other knights, and so rod forth to mee^ with the
Emperor, and as they rode together by the way, they saw where a great heart
ran before them, wherefore every man with such hounds as they had chased him
on horse back, so that with the Empress was left no creature, save only the
Emperors brother, which seeing that no man was there but they two, thus he
said unto the Empress.

Lo Lady, here beside is a privy forest, and long it is agone that I spoke
to thee of Love, come now and consent unto me that I may lie with thee.

Then said the Empress a fool what may this be, yesterday I delivered thee
out of prison upon thy promise, in hope of amendment, and now thou art
reto^rned to thy folly again, wherefore I say now to thee as I have said
before, there shall no man do such thing with me save only my Lord the
Emperor, which ought of very duty so for ^^ do. Then said ^ee, if thou will
not consent to me, I shall hang thee here upon a tree in this Forest, where
no man shall find thee and so shall thou dye an evil death. The Empress
answered meekely and said. Though thou smite of my head and put me to death
with all manner of torment, thou shall never have me to consent to such sin.
When he heard this, he vnciothed her all save her smock, and hanged her up by
the hair upon a tree, and tied her steed beside her, and so rode forth to
his fellows, and told them that a great host of men met him, and took the
Empress away from him. And when he had told them this they made all great
sorrow.

It befell on the third day after there came an Earl to hunt in that Forest,
and as he rode beating the barks, there started a Fox, whom his hounds
followed fast till they came near the tree where the Empress hanged.

And when the dogs felt the savor of her, they left the Fore and ran
toward the Tree as fast as they could. The Earl seeing this wondered greatly
and spurred his horse and followed them till he came where as ye Empress hanged.
When the Earl ^aw her thus hanging, he maruailed greatly, for as much as she
was right fair and gracious to behold, wherefore he said unto her in this
manner wise. O woman who art thou, and of what country, and wherefore hangest
thou here in this manner wise.

The Emprisse that was not yet fully dead, but in point ready to dye answered
and said, I am quod she a strange woman, and I am come out from far country,
but how I came hither God knows. Than answered the Earl and said. Whose
horse is this that stands by thee bound to this tree. Than answered the lady
and said, that it was hirs. Wha^ ye earl heard this, he knew well yt she was a
gentle woman, and came of noble lineage, wherefore he was the rather moved with
pity, and said unto her. O fair lady thou se^est of gentle blood, and
therefore I purpose to deliver thee from this mischife, if thou will promise to
go with me and nourish my fair young daughter, and teach her at home in my
castle, for I have no child but only her, and if thou keep her well thou
shall have a good reward for thy labor. Than said she. As far soorth as I can
or may, I shall fulfill thine intent. And when she had thus promised him he
took her down of the tree, and led her home to his castle, and gave her the
keeping of his daughter that he loved so much, and she was cherished so well
that she lay every night in the earls chamber, and his daughter with her, and
in his chamber every night there brent a lamp, the which hanged beetweene the
Empress bed and the earls bed. This lady beehaued her so gently, that she was
beloved of every creature. There was that time in ye earls court a steward,
which much loved this Emprisse exceedingly above all things, and oftentimes
spoke to her of his love. But she answered him again and said.

Know ye dear friend for certainetie, that I have made a solemn vow to God,
that I shall never love any man in such manner wise but only him whom I am
greatly beholden to love, by gods commandment.

Than said the Steward, Thou will not than consent unto me. My Lord quod she,
what needs thee any more to ask such thing, the vow yt I have made, truly I
shall keep and hold by the grace of god.

And when the steward heard this, he went his way in great wrath and anger,
thincking within himself, if I may I shall be revenged on thee. It befell
upon a night within short time after that the Earls chamber door was forgotten
and left vnshet, which the steward had anon perceived. And when they were all
a sleep, he went and espied by the light of the lamp where the Emprisse and
the young Maiden lay to gether, and with that he drew out his Knife and cut
the throat of the Earls daughter, and put the bloody knife into the Emprisse
hand she being a sleep and nothing knowing thereof, to the intent that when
the Earl awaked he should see the knife in her hand, and that he should
think that she had cut his daughters throat, wherefore she should be put to a
shameful death, for this mischeuous deed. And when this damsel was thus
slain, and the bloody knife in the Emprisse hand, the countess awaked out of
her sleep and saw by the light of the Lamp the blouddie knife in the
Emprisse hand, wherefore she was almost out of her wits, and said to the
Earl, O my Lord, behold in yonder Ladies hand a wonderful thing.

Anon the Earl awaked and beheld on the Emprisse bed and saw the bloody knife
as the countisse had said, wherefore he was greatly moved, and cried to her and
said. Awake woman out of thy sleep, what thing is this that I see in thy hand.
Anon the Emprisse through his cry awaked out of her sleep, and in her waking
ye knife fell out of her hand, and with that she looked by her and found the
Earls daughter dead by her side and all the bed be sprent with blood,
wherefore with an huge voice she cried and said. Alas alas and welaway, my
lords daghter is slain

Than cried the cou^tisse unto the Earl with a pitious voice and said. A my
lord, let ye devilish woman be put to the most foul death that can be thought,
which thus has slain our only child.

And when the countisse had said thus to the Earl, she said to the Emprisse
in this wise. The high God knows that thou mischeuous woman have slain my
daughter with thine own hands, for I saw the bloody knife in thy hand, and
therefore thou shall dye a foul death. Than said the Earl in this wise. O
thou woman, were it not that I dread God greatly, I should cleave thy body
with my sword in two parts, for I delivered thee from hanging, and now thou
have slain my daughter, nevertheless for me thou shall have no harm,
therefore go thy way out of this city without any delay, for if I do find
thee here this day, thou shall dye a most evil death.

Than arose this woeful Emprisse and did on her clothes, and after leapt on her
palsry and rode toward the east alone without any safe conduct. And as she
rode thus mourning by the way she espied on the left side of the way a pair of
gallous and seven officers leading a man to the gallous to be hanged, wherefore
she was moved with great pity, and smote her horse with the spurs and rode
to them praying them yt she might redeem that misdoer, if he might be saved
from death for any meede. Than said they, Lady it pleases us well that thou
redeem him. Anon the Emprisse accorded with them and paid his ransom, and
than he was delivered. Thus said she to him. Now dear friend be true till
thou dye, since I have delivered thee from death.

On my soul quod he, I promise you ever to be true. And when he had thus
said, he followed the Lady still till they came nigh a city, and than said
the Emprisse to him.

Good friend quod she, go forth thy way before me out of the City, and
take up for us an honest lodging, for there I purpose to rest a while* This man
went forth as she commaun^^^ ^ took up for her a good lodging and an honest,
whereas she abode long time. When the men of the City perceined her beauty,
they wondered greatly, wherefore many of them craved of her unlawful love, but
all was in vain, they might not speed in any wise. It fortuned after on a day
that there came a Ship full of merchandise, and arrived in the haven of that
City. When the Ladys heard this, she said unto her servant. Go to the ship
and see if there be any c^oth for mine use. Her servant went forth to the
ship, whereas he found many precious clothes, wherefore he prayed the master
of the ship that-hee would come into the City and speak with this Lady. The
master granted him and so he came home to his lady before and warned her of
the coming of the master o^ ye ship. Anon after ye master of the ship came
and s^luted the Lady worthyly. And the lady received him according to his
degree, praying him yt she might have for her money such cloth as might b^
profitable for her wearing. Anon he granted yt she should have, and soon
they were agreed, wherefore the servant went emmediately again with the
Master of the Ship. And when they were both within the Ship boorde, the
Master said to the Ladies servant. My dear friend to thee I would open my
counsel, if I might trust in thee, and help me, thou shall have of me a
great reward. Then answered he and said. I shall (quod he) be sworn unto
thee on the holy Evangelist, that I shall keep thy counsel and fulfill thine
intent, as far forth as I can.

Then said the Master of the ship, I love thy Lady more then I can tell thee,
for her fayrenesse is so great, that I would give for the love of her all the
gold that I have, and if I may obtain the love of her through thy help, I
shall give thee what so ever thou will desire of me.

Then said the Ladies servant tell me by what means I may best speed. Then
said the Master of the Ship. Go home to thy Lady again and tell her that I
will not deliver to thee my cloth, except she come her self, but bring her to
my Ship except the wind be good and able, for then I purpose to lead her
away. Thy counsel is always good quod the Ladies servant, therefore give me
some reward, and I shall fulfill thine intent.

And when he had received his reward he went again to his Lady and told her
that by no means ye Master of the ship would not deliver him the cloth but
if she came her self. The Lady beeleeued her servant and went to the ship.
And when she was within the ship board her servant abode without.

When ye Master saw yt she was within the Ship, and the wind was good, he
drew up the sail and sailed forth. When the Lady perceived this, thus she
said to ye master. O Master (quod she) what treason is this that thou have
done to me. The Master answered and said. Madame certainly it is so that I
must needs lie with thee, and afterward espouse thee. For sooth quod she, I
have made a vow that I shall never commit such sin but with him unto whom I
am bound by right and by the law. Soothly quod he, if ye will not grant me
with your good will, I shall cast you out into ye midst of the sea, and there
shall ye die an evil death. If it be so quod she, that I must needs consent
or else dye, than I pray thee to prepare a privy place in the end of the
Ship, whereas I may fulfill thine intent or I dye, but first I pray thee that
I may say my prayers unto the father of heaven, that he may have mercy on me.

The Master beeleeued her, wherefore he let ordain her a Cabin in the end of
the Ship whereunto she set her down on both her knees and made her
prayers, saying on this wise. O thou my Lord GOD yt have kept me from my youth
in cleanenesse, keep me now that I be not des^oured* so yt I may serve thee
ever with a clean heart and mind. When she had thus ended her oryson, there
arose suddenly a great tempest in the sea, so that the Ship all to brast, and
all that were within perished save ye lady yt caught a Cable and saved her
self, and the Master of the Ship an other, nevertheless she knew not of him,
ne he of her, for they were driven to diverse coasts. This lady landed in her
own Empire beeside a City where in she was worshipfully received, and she
lived so holy a life, that GOD gave her grace and power to heal sick folk,
of all manner of diseases, wherefore there came much people to her, both
crooked, blind, and lame, and every man through the grace of God and her good
demeanure, were healed, wherefore her name was known thorough diverse regions.
Nevertheless, she was not known as Emprisse. In the same time the Emperors
brother (that had hanged her before by the heir) was smitten with a foul
Lepry. The knight that slew the earls Daughter, and put the bloody knife in
her hand, was blind, deaf, and had the palsy The thief that beetrayed her
to the Master of the ship, was lame and full of the Crampe. And the Master
of the ship distraught out of his wits.

When the Emperor heard that so holy a woman was in such a City, he called
his brother and said to him thus.

Go we dear brother unto this holy woman that is dwelling in the City, that
she may heal t^ee of thy lepry. Would to God (quod he) that I were healed.
Anon the Emperor with his brother went toward the City. And when ye Citizens
heard of his coming they received him Worshipfullye with procession. And then
the Emperor enquired of the Citizens if any such holy woman were among them
that could heal sick folk of their diseas. The Citizens answered and said,
that such a one was there.

Then was the Empress called forth before the Emperor, but she muffled her
face as well as she could, that the Emperor her husband should not know her,
and when she had so done, she saluted him with great reverence, as it
appertained to his estate.

And he again in like wise, saying thus. O good Lady, if thou list of thy
grace to heal my brother of his lepry, ask of me what thou will, and I shall
grant it thee, for thy reward.

When the Emprisse heard this, she looked about her and saw there the
Emperors Brother, a foul Leprie, she saw there also the knight yt slew the
earls daughter blind and deaf. The thief that she saved from ye gallows
lame, and also ye Master of ye Ship distraught out of his wits, and all were
come to her for to be healed of their sickness, but they knew not her: for all
yt they knew not her, she knew them well. Then said she unto the Emperor
thus.

My reverend Lord, though ye would give me all your Empire, I may not heal
your Brother, nor none of these other, but if they knowledge openly what they
have done.

When the Emperor heard this, he turned him toward his Brother and said
unto him. Brother, accknowledge openly thy sin before all these men, that
thou may be healed of thy sickness. Then anon he began to tell how he had
led his life, but he told not how he had hanged the Emprisse in the Forest
by the hair of her Head, most dispightfully.

When he had knowledged all that him list, the Empress replied and said.

Sothly my Lord, I would gladly lay unto him my medicine but I wot right well
it is in vain, for he has not made a full confession. The Emperor hearing
this he turned toward his brother and said again in this wise.

What evil sorrow or unhappy wretchedness is in thee, see yt not how that
thou art a foul lepry, therefore knowledge thy sin truly that thou may be
whole, or else avoid my company for evermore.

A Lord quod he, I may not tell my life openly, but if I be first sure of thy
grace. What have thou trespassed against me quod the Emperor. Than answered
his brother and said. Mine offense against thee is gr^euous, and therefore I
ask mercy. The Emperor thought not on the Emprisse for as much as he
supposed she had been dead many years before, he commanded his brother to
tell forth what he had offended him, and he should be forgiven.

And when ye Emperor had thus forgiven his brother, he beegan to tell openly
how he had desired ye Emprisse to comemitte adultry with him, and he had
hanged her by the hair in the Forest, because she would not consent by any
means to him.

And when the Emperor heard this, he was almost beeside himself, and in his
rage he said thus. O thou most wreched creature, ye vengeance of God is fallen
upon thee, and were it not that I have pardoned thee thou should dye the
most shameful death that could be thought. Then said the Knight that slew
the earls Daughter. I wot not (quod he) of what Lady ye mean, but I wot
that my Lord found on a time such a Lady hanginge by the hair in the Forrist,
and brought her home to his Castle, and he took her his daughter to keep,
and I provoked her as much as I could to sin with me, but she would in no
wise consent to me, wherefore I sl^w the earls Daughter that lay with her,
and when I had so done, I put the bloody Knife in the Ladies hand that the
earl should think she had slain his daughter with her own hands, and than
was she exiled thence but where she became I wot not.

Than said the theife I wot not of what Lady ye mean, but well I wotte that
seven officers were leading me to the gallows and such a Lady came riding by
and bought me of them, and than went I with her, and afterward I beetrayed her
unto a master of a ship.

Such a Lady (quod the master of the ship) received I, and when we were in
the midst of the sea, I would have layne with her, but she sat down to her
prayers, and anon there arose such a tempest that the ship all to brast, and
we were all drowned save she and I, but what afterward befell of her I wot
not.

Than cried the Emprisse with a loud voice and said. Soothly dear friends ye
do now truly confess and declare the truth, wherefore I will now apply my
medicine, and anon they received their health.

When this lady the Emprisse had thus done, she opened her face to ye Emperor
and he forthwith knew her, and ran to her and embraced her in his arms, and
kissed her oftentimes, and for joy he wept bitterly saying.

Blessed be God, now have I found that I desired. And when he had thus said,
he lead her home to his Pallayes with great joy, and alter when it pleased
almighty GOD, they ended both their lives in peace.

The Moral.
This Emperor betokens our Lord Jesu Christ. The Emprisse betokens a holy
soul. The Emperors brother betokens the flesh, to whom our Lord has given
charge of this Emayre, but most principally to the soul. Nevertheless the
wretched sleshe often provoke the soul to sin. But the soul that loves God
above all things withstandeth that temptation, and calls to her her ghostly
power, that is to say, reason, will, understanding and conscience, and makes
them to enprison the flesh that is disobedient to the soul, in the prison of
true repentance, unto the time he obey to reason in all thing. And thus in
hope of mercy he sins again, to whom holy writ says. Maladictus homo que
peccat in spe. Curssed be that man that sins in hope. And at the last the
soul enclyneth to the flesh, and lettith him out of the prison of repentance,
and washes him from the filth of sin, and arayeth him with good virtues, and
makes him leap on the palfray of charytable humility, and so rydeth forth
to meet our Lord with the sacrifice of thanks giving. But alas, full often the
sinner trespasseth against holy scripture, wherefore the heart, that is to say,
the lust of flesh and of sinners arises before him, and after runs great
hounds, that is to say, evil thoughts, and so long they chase, till the body
and the soul be left alone, and than the flesh stirs that noble Soul,
being the Spouse of Almyghtie God.

But the pure and undefiled soul that is so well beloved with God, will not
forsake her Lord and consent to sin, wherefore the wretched flesh full often
despoi^eth her of all her clothing, that is to say, of all her virtues, and
hangs her up by the hair on an oak, yt is to say, on lusts and delights,
and there she hangs till the good earl comes, that is to say, a discreet
preacher in the forest of this world, to preach and teach the word of god and
takes her down and leads her forth to the Church to nourish his daughter
that is to say, to nourish conscience with fruitful faith. The earl had in his
chamber a lamp, right so every discreet Preacher should have before him the Lamp
of holy Scripture, whereby he may see both the greuaunce and profit of the
Soul in teaching of virtues, and putting away of vice.

The steward that stirs her to sin, is none else but pride of life, which
is steward of this world, by whom many men be deceived.

But when the soul that is so well beeloued with Christ, will not consent unto
the sin of pride, than takes this evil steward ye knife of cou^tise,
wherewith he slaieth the earls daughter, that is to say, conscience, according
to Scripture, saying: Gold and silver has blinded the eyes of Judges, and has
ouethrowen wise men, so that equity and righteousness might not enter, but
stood afar, and turned their backs. This Lady also redeemed a man from death,
that is to say, from everlasting death, which he had deserved by deadly sin.
Therefore do we as did this lady, smite we o^r*horse, that is to say, our
flesh with the spurs of repentance, and so ride we forth in all have, to
save our neighbor from ye sinck of deadly sin, help him both bodily and
ghostly as Saloman says.

Woe be to that man lying in deadly sin, that has no man to lift him out
thereof. Therefore awake thy neighbor and help him. For a brother that is
helped of an other is like a sure city, and if he give no more but a cup of
cold water to him in the way of help, he shall not lose his reward.

But many now a days be very unkind, as was this theife, which falsely
deceived his lady after yt she had saved him from hanging. The master of the
ship betokens the world, by whom many men be deceived. But nevertheless as
often as a man takes on him voluntarily the charge of poverty, and obeys unto
the commandments of God, and forsakes the world, then breaks the ship.
For it is impossible to please God and man, and the world all at one time..

When this lady had espied the tempest of the sea* she went to a City: that ie
to say, the soul, after the troubles of this world, went to the holy life, and
than she healed all manner sick folk, that is to say, every man that is
troubled in his soul, that is to say infecte with diverse sicknesses, that
this Lady heals through holy life.

But the Soul might not be seen of Christ her husband, till she had
knoweledged openly all her five wits. But when she had made a pure
acknowledgement of her sin, than the Emperor our Lord God her husband knew
her, and took her in his arms, and led her home to the pallaice of heaven.
Unto the which almighty God bring us all for his sons sake.

Amen.
The Argument.
Every supreme magistrate and other inferior, is to be honored and reverenced.
Every true Christian man ought to consider his duty herein, every false
Christian peruerteth the ways of the godly, the reward of such is hid up in
hell, but the just shall inherit the blessed life everlasting.

The 41. History.
IN Rome dwelt sometime a mighty Emperor namid Martin, which for entier
affection kept with him his brothers son, whom men called Fulgencius. With this
Martin dwelt also a knight that was steward of his Empire, and uncle unto the
Emperor which envied this Fulgentius, studying day and night how he might
bring the Emperor and this child at debate: wherefore ye steward on a day went
to the Emperor and said: My Lord quod he, I that am your true servant am
bound in duty to warn your highness, if I hear any thing that touches your
honor, wherefore I have heard such things that I must needs utter it in secret
to your Lordship beetweene us two. Then said the Emperor: Good friend (quod
he) say on what thee list.

My most dear Lord (quod the steward) Fulgeneious your cos^n, and your nigh
kinsman has desamed you wonderfully and shamefully, throughout all your
Empire, saying that your breath stinketh, and that it is death to him to serve
you of your cup. Than the Emperor was grievously displeased, and almost
belide himself for anger, and said to him thus: I pray thee my good friend
tell me ye very troth if that my breath so stincketh as he says. My Lord
(quod the steward) ye may beeleeue me, I never perceived a sweeter breath in
my days than yours is. Then said ye Emperor, I pray thee good friend tell me
how I may bring this thing to a good proof.

The steward answered and said. My Lord (quod he) ye shall right well
understand the troth, for to morrow next when he serves you of your cup,
ye shall see that he will turn away his face from you, because of your
breath, and this is the most certain proof that may be had of this thing.
Forelooth quod the Emperor, a truer proof can not be had of this thing.
Wherefore anon when the steward heard this, he went straight to Fulgencious
and took him a side, saying thus. Dear friend, thou art my kinsman, and also
nephew unto my Lord the Emperor, therefore if thou will be thankful unto
me, I will tell thee of the vice whereof my Lord the Emperor complayneth often,
and thinks to put thee from him (except it be ye rather amended) and that
might be a great reproof to thee. Then said this Fulgencious. A good sir for
his love that dyed upon the cross, tell me why my Lord is so sore moved with
me, for I am ready to amend my default in all that I can or may, and for to be
ruled by your good and discreet counsel. Thy breath quod the steward
stincketh so sore, that his drinck does him no good, so grievous is unto him
thy stinking breath of thy Mouth. Then said Fulgentious unto the Steward.
Truly, that perceived I never till now, but what think you of my breath. I
pray you to tell me the very truth. Truly (quod the steward,) it stinketh
greatly and foul. And this Fulgentious beeleeued all that he said, and was
right sorrowful in his mind, And prayed the Steward of his counsel and help
in this woeful case. Than said the steward unto him, if that thou will do
by my counsel, I shall bring this matter to a good conclusion, therefore do
as I shall tell thee.

I counsel thee for the best, and also warn thee, that when thou seruest my
Lord the Emperor of his cup, that thou yt turn thy face away from him, so
that he may not feel thy stinking breath, unto ye time that thou have
provided thee of some remedy therefore.

Then was Fulgentious right glad, and swear to him that he would do by his
counsel.

Not long after, it beefell that this young man Fulgentious served his Lord as
he was wont to do, and therewith suddenly he turned his face from his Lord
the Emperor, as the Steward had taught him.

And when the Emperor perceived the avoiding of his head, he smote this young
Fulgentious on the breast with his foot, and said to him thus.

O thou leude varlet, now see I well it is true that I have heard of thee, and
therefore go thou anon out of my sight, that I may see thee no more in this
place. And with that this young Fulgencious wept full sore, and avoided the
place, and went out of his sight. And when this was so done, the Emperor
called unto him his Steward and said.

How may I ryd this varlet from the world, that thus has defamed me? My most
dear Lord quod the steward, right well you shall have your intent.

For here beeside, within these three miles ye have brickmakers, which daily
make great fires for to burn brick, and also they make lyme, therefore my Lord
send to them this night, and charge them upon pain of death, that whosoever
comes to them first on the morrow, saying to the^ thus: My Lord commands
you to fulfill his will, that they take him and cast him into the Forncis with
the stones, and this night command you this Fulgentious that he go early in
the morning to your workmen, and that he ask them whether they have fulfilled
your will which they were commanded, or not, and then shall they according to
your commandment, cast him in the Fire, and thus shall he dye an evil death.

Surely quod ye Emperor, thy counsel is good, therefore call to me that varlet
Fulgentious. And when this young man was come to the Emperors presence, he
said to him thus: I charge thee upon pain of death, that thou rise early in
ye morning and go to ye brenners of lyme and brick, and that thou be with
them early before the sun rise three miles from this house, and charge them
in my behalf that they fulfill my commandment, or else they shall dye a most
shameful death.

Then spoke this Fulgentious. My Lord, if God send me my life, I shall fulfill
your will, were it that I should go to the worlds end.

When Fulgentious had this charge, he could not sleep for thought, but that
he must arise early for to fulfill his Lords commandment. The Emperor about
midnight sent a messenger on horseback unto his brick makers, commanding them
upon pain of death, that who so ever came to them first in the morning saying
unto them, the Emperors commandment, (which is before rehearsed) that they
should take and bynd him and cast him into the fire, and burn him to the bare
bones.

The Bryck makers answered and said, it should be done. And then the
messenger returned home again incontinent, and told the Emperor that his
commandment should be diligently fulfilled.

Early in the morning following, Fulgentious arose and prepared him toward
his way, and as he went, he heard a bell ring to service, wherefore he went
to that Church for to hear Service, and after the end of service he fell a
sleep, and there he slept a long while, so that the priest ne none other might
a wake him.

The steward desiring inwardly to hear of his death as he did hope, about one
of the clock he went unto ye workmen, and said unto them thus, Syrs quod he,
have ye done the Emperors commandment or no.

The Brickmakers answered him again and said. Nay surely we have not yet
done his commandment, but anon it shall be done, and with that they laid
hands on him. Then cried the steward with an high voice, and said. Good sirs
save my Life, sor the Emperor commanded yt Fulgentious should be put to
death. Then said they, the messenger told not us so, but he bad us that
whosoever came first to us in the morning, saying as ye before rehearsed, that
we should take him and cast him into the Furnace and bourne him to ashes. And
with that word they threw him into the fire.

And when he was bournt, Fulgentious came to them, and said. Good sirs have you
done my Lords commandment, yea, soothly said they, and therefore go^ ye
again to the Emperor and tell him so. The^ said Fulgentious. For Christ's love
tell me that commandment.

We had in commandment said they upon pain of death, that who so ever came
to us first in the morninge, and said like as thou have said, that we should
take him and cast him into the Furnace. But before thee, came the Steward, and
therefore have we fulfilled on him ye Emperors commaundoment, and now is he
bournt to the bare bones.

And when Fulgentious heard this, he thanked God that he had so preserved him
from death, wherefore he took his leave of the workmen and went again to the
Pallaice.

When the Emperor perceived him, he was almost distract of his wits for
anger, and thus he said: Have thou been with the Bryckmaker and fulfilled my
commandment? Soothly my gracious Lord I have been there, but or I came
there, your commandment was fulfilled. How may that be true, quod the
Emperor?

Forsooth said Fulgencious, the steward came to them before me, and said that I
should have said: and when they heard that, they took him and threw him into
ye forneis, and if I had comen any rather, so would they have done to me, and
therefore I thanck God that has preserved me from death.

Then said ye Emperor, tell me the truth of such questions as I shall
demand of thee. Then said Fulgentious unto the Emperor. As I beeleue you
never sound in me any falsehoode, and therefore I wondered greatly why ye had
ordained such a death for me, for well ye know that I am your own brothers
son. Then said ye Emperor to Fulgentious: It is no wonder, for that death I
ordained to thee through counsel of the steward, because thou did defame me
throughout all my Empire, saying, that my breath did stinck so grievously, that
it was death to thee, and in token hereof, thou turnedst away thy face when
thou seruedst me of my cup, and that saw I with mine eyes, and for this
cause I ordained for thee such a death, and yet thou shall dye except I hear a
better excuse.

Then answered Fulgentious and said, A my most dear Lord, if it might please
your highness for to hear me, I shall show you a subtle and a deceitful
imagination. Say on quod the Emperor. The steward (quod Fulgencious) that now
is dead, came to me and said, that ye told him that my breath did stinck,
and there upon he counseled me that when I served you of your cup I should
than turn away my face, I take God to witness I lie not. When the Emperor
heard this, he believed him and said. O my neuew, now I see through the right
wise judgment of God the steward is brent, and his own wickedness and envy
is fallen on him selse, for he ordained this malice against thee, and therefore
thou art much bound to almighty God that has preserved thee from death.

The Moral.
Dear friends this Emperor beetokeneth every supreme magistrate and other
inferiors. And Fulgentious his neuew beetokeneth every true christian man,
which should duly and truly serve them with faithful homage and duetifull
loyalty, like as Fulgentious served the Emperor of his cup, wherefore ye shall
be greatly loved of God. This steward betokens every false Christen man, as
Cayne, which oftentimes turns the hearts of right wise men from God, saying,
that his breath stinketh, that is to say, that the life of the magistrate is
not acceptable to GOD nor man, which is against this Scripture, saying thus,
Nolite iudicare. etc.

That is to say, judge not, and ye shall not be judged. But oftentimes such
malicious peole accuses righteous men, wherefore they shall be cast into ye
everlasting fire of hell, where is wayling, weeping, and misery without
charity. And rightwise shall ascend to everlasting life. Unto the which bring
us our Lord Jesu Christ.

Amen.
The Argument.
Tyrants and ungodly persons walk without knowledge of the truth, till they
come to the Church of God, the wicked persecute the godly. But they are
preserved by the mighty providence of god, so we ought not to sleep in sin.
A figurative speech of three several meanings, videlicet, Take, Yield, and
Flee, the significacion thereof.

The 42. History.
THere dwelt sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Delphinus, which had no
children save only one daughter, which was a fair creature and well-beloved of
her father. As this Emperor walked on a day on hunting in the Forest,
suddenly he rode out of his way, and lost his men, wherefore he was greatly
discomforted, for he wist not whether he rode, ne in what place he was, till at
the last when he had rydden thus all the day alone, in the evening he saw a
house, and thither he rode a great pace, and knocked at the gate.

Immediately the good manne of the house heard him and asked the cause of his
knocking, and what he would have. Dear friend quod the Emperor, lo it is
night as ye may se, therefore I desire you of lodging for the love of God. When
he had thus said, the goodman of the house unware that he was the Emperor,
answered thus and said Good friend quod he, I am the Emperors Foster, and
have plenty of venison and other vittailes for you.

When the Emperor heard this, he was right glad in his mind, nevertheless he
told him not that he was the Emperor. And the Foster opened the gate, and
received him as worshipfully as he could, and set him to his supper, and
served him honestly.

And when he had supped, the Foster brought him to his chamber, and when time
was he went to bed. In the same night it befell that the Fosters wife was
travailing of child in another chamber fast by, and was delivered yt same
night of a fair son.

And as the Emperor lay in his bed sleeping, him seemed he heard a voice
saying to him thrice, these words. Take, take, take. And with that he awoke,
and meruailed greatly what it might be, saying to himself thus: A voice
bids me take, take, what shall I take? And immedately he fell a sleep
again, and the second time, he heard a voice, saying unto him these words.
Yield, yield, yield. And with that he wakened again, and wondered greatly,
saying unto himself. What may this signify? First I heard a voice that said,
take take, and nothing I received.

And right now I heard another voice that said, yield, yield, yield, what should
I yield.

And as he lay thus thinking to him self he fell a sleep again. And when he
heard the third voice, saying these words thrice, flee, flee, flee, for this
night is a child borne that after thy decease, shall be Emperor. When the
Emperor heard this, he wakened and wondered greatly what it might be.

In the morning carely solowing, ye emperor arose, and called to him the
foster and said. Dear friend, I pray thee that thou w^lt tell me if any child
be borne this night to thy knowledge. My wife quod the Foster, this night is
delivered of a fair son. I pray thee said the Emperor show me thy son. When
the Emperor had seen the child, he saw a mark in the childs visage,
whereby he might know him an other time, and than he said to the Foster thus,

Dear friend, know thou who I am, nay southly quod the Foster, for I saw
you never before this time, as far as I am remembered, nevertheless it
seems that ye be a gentleman.

Than answered the Emperor and said, I am quod he the Emperor your Lord,
whom ye have lodged this night, wherefore right heartily I thank you.

This hearing, the foster fell down upon both his knees at his feet, and
besought him of mercy, if that he had offended his hightnesse in any thing,
praying him of forgiveness. Then answered the Emperor and said, be thou
nothing afraid, for I thank thee heartily of thy good cheer, and thy son
that was borne to night I will have for to nourish and bring up in my court, and
to morrow I shall send for him.

O my gracious Lord quod the foster it is not agreeable that such a noble
Emperor should nourish the child of his subject and servant, nevertheless
your will be fulfilled, for when your messengers come I shall deliver them my
son. When this was said, the Emperor took his leave and rode home toward
his pallaice.

And when he was come home, he called unto him such servant as he trusted
best, and said to them thus.

Go ye, quod he, unto my Foster, with whom I was lodged this night in the
forest, and receive of him his son, of which his wife was delivered this
night, and upon pain of death I command you that ye destroy him by the way,
and cast his flesh to the dogs, but bring with you the heart to me. And
except ye fulfill my commandment, ye shall dye the most foulest death that
can be thought. Anon his servant went to the forest, and received the
Fosters son and brought him with them, and when they were come near unto the
pallaice, one of them said. How shall we do, that we may fulfill our Lords
commandment in distroying of this child. Some answered and said, that the
child should be slain, and some would have saved his life, and while they
strove thus among themselves, one of them that was most merciful said unto
the other. O my good friends, hear my counsel, and ye shall not forethinke
it. If ye murder this innocent child, we shall greatly offend almighty god,
and therefore here be young Pigges, kill we one of the^, and then may we
take with us his heart, and present it unto the Emperor saying, that it is the
heart of the Childs blood. Then said they, thy counsel is good, but what
shall we do with ye Child. Good friends (quod he) let us wrap him in some
clothes, and late him in some holow tree, for peradventure God will help him
and save his life.

And when he had thus said, they did gladly after his counsel in all things,
and killed the Pigge, and went their way and carried home with them the Pigges
heart to the Emperor, saying unto him thus: Lo, gracious Lord, we have
destroyed ye Child as ye commanded us, and with that they showed him the
Pigges heart. The Emperor supposing that it had been ye Childs heart, took it
and cast it into the fire, despitefully saying.

Lo, that is ye heart of him which should have been Emperor after me. Lo, what
it is to beeleeue in dreams and visions, which be naught else but fantasies
and vain things. The second day after that ye Child was put into the hollow
tree, there came an earl for to hunt in the forest, and as his hounds chased
an heart, they came to this hollow tree where the Child lay, and when they
felt ye savor of the Child, they would go no farther.

The Earl seeing this, maruailed greatly why his hounds abode there, and
smote his horse with his spures and rode a great pace till he came to them. And
when he came unto the tree wherein the Child was laid, he looked in at an hole
and saw there the child lying, and then was he right glad, and took up the
Child in his arms full lovingly, and bare him home unto his Castle, saying
unto the Countess his wise. Lo, my dear wise, this day by fortune I have
found a very fair Child in an holow tree as I hunted in the forest, whereof
I am right glad.

And because that I never begat son daughter on thee, ne thou never yet
conceived a child, therefore I exhort thee that you wilt feign they self
travailing with child, and say that thou have borne this child. The Countess
fulfilled right gladly the earls will and desire, and said. My most dear
Lord, your will in this thing shall be done.

Not long after this, news went throughout all the country, yt the countess
was delivered of a fair Son, wherefore every man reioysed much.

The Child beegan to grow and was right well beloved of every man, and most
specially of the earl and of the Countess. It beefell after, when the Child
was xv. years of age, the Emperor made a solempe feast unto all ye Lords of
his Empire, unto ye which feast this earl was called, and at the day assigned
he came and brought his Child with him which was at ye time a fair young
squire, and ^aruer at ye board before the Earl. The Emperor greatly beeheld
him, and espied the token in his forehead which he had seen before in the
Fosters house, wherefore he was greatly moved, and vexed within him self and
said unto the Earl in this wise. Whose Son is this, certes said the Earl,
he is my son. Than said the Emperor. By the says and troth that thou
owe unto me, tell me the troth.

The earl seeing that he might not excuse himself by no manner wise, but
that neeeds he must tell him ye troth, than told he him altogether, how he
had found him in the forest in an hollow tree. This hearing, the Emperor was
almost distracte of his wits for anger, and called unto him his servants,
which he had sent before to destroy the Child.

And when they came before him, he made them to swear upon a book that they
should tell him the troth what they had done with the Child.

Gracious Lord said they, we yield us unto your grace and goodness, for
without doubt pity so moved us, that we might not destroy him, and then we
put him in an hollow tree, but what afterward befell of him, certainly we know
not, and in his stead we kilde a Pyg and brought you the heart thereof.

When the Emperor had heard the very truth of this matter, he said unto the
earl. This young man quod he, shall abide here by me, the earl immediately
granted, though it was greatly against his will.

And when the feast was ended, every man took his leave of the Emperor, and
went whereas they list.

And at that time it fortuned that the Emprisse and her daughter soiourned in a
great country, far fro thence by the commandment of the Emperor. It befell
not long after ye Emperor called unto him that young Squyre and said, it
beehoueth thee (quod he) to ride unto the Emprisse my wife with my letters. I
am ready at your commandment my Lord, said he, to fulfill your desire.

Immediately the Emperor let write letters, whereof his intent was this.
That the Emprisse should take the bearer of these letters, and let him be
drawn at the horse tail, and after that she should let him be hanged till
he were dead, and yt upon pain of death.

When the letters were all made and sealed, then the Emperor took them unto
ye young squire, commanding him to speed him on his journey. And straight way
the young Squier received the gladly, and put them ^ure in his bore, and rode
forth on his journey. When he had rydden three or four days on his journey,
in an evening he came unto a Castle where as dwelt a knight, and gently desired
him of a nights lodging.

The knight seeing and beeholding the good favor of this young squier,
granted him lodginge, and made him good cheer and well to fare, and afterward
brought him unto his chamber, and when he was there, he went to bed: And
immediately fell on sleep, for he was full weary of his ^ourney, and forgot his
box with the Letters lying openly in his chamber.

When the knight saw the bore, he opened it, and sound the letters sealed with
ye Emperors sign manuel, and was greatly tempted to open them, and at the
last, he opened them full subtylly, and than he read how the Empress upon
pain of death should put the bearer of them to death, and then he was right
sorrowful, and said within himself, Alas (quod he,) it is great pity to
destroy such a fair young man, and therefore if I may, it shall not be so.

And immediately after, the knight raced out that writtinge, and wrote in the
same paper a letter, saying these words. Upon pain of death I command thee
that thou take the young Squire bearer of these letters, and let him be wedded
without any delaie unto my daughter and yours, with all the honor and
solempnitie that can be thought, and when they be married that ye take him
as your own son, and that he keep my room till I come unto you myself.

When ye knight had thus written, he closed ye letters subtylly and put them
into the bore again.

Early in the morning ye young Squire arose and very hastily made him ready,
and took his leave of the knight, and rode forth on his journey, and the third
day after, he came unto the Emprisse, and saluted her right worshipfully in ye
Emperors beehalfe, and took her the letters. And when the Empress had read
them, anon she sent forth her messengers through the country, commanding
the states and gentilmen to come unto her daughters wedding, at a certain day
assigned.

When the day was come, thither came many great Lords and Ladies, and anon,
this young Squire espoused the Emperors Daughter, with great honor and
worship, according to the tenor of the letters, and was right well beloved
and most honored among the people.

Not long after it befell, that the Emperor came into that Country, and when
the Empress heard of her Lords coming, she took with her, her son in law,
with much other people, and went toward the Emperor, for to welcome him.

When the Emperor saw this young Squire leading the Emprisse his wife, he was
greatly moved within himself and said. O thou curssed Woman, because thou
have not fulfilled my commandment, thou shall dye an evil death.

A my dear Lord (quod she,) all that ye commanded me to do I have
fullfilled. Nay curssed woman said the Emperor, it is not so, for I wrote to
thee that thou sholdest put him to death, and now I see him alive.

My Lord quod the Emprisse, saueing your grace, you wrote to me yt I should
give him your dauhter to wife, and that on pain of death, in witness whereof
lo here your letters with your own seal manuell.

When the Emperor heard, this, he wondered greatly and said. Is he espowsed
then to my daughter. Yea soothly said the Empress, long ago with much
solempnitie and great worship, and as I perceive your Daughter is with child.

Than said the Emperor. O thou lord Jesu Christ it is great folly to strive
against thy ordinance, therefore since it is so, thy will must needs be
fulfilled. And with that he took his son in law it his arms and kissed him,
which after his death was Emperor, and ended his life in rest and peace.

The Moral.
This emperor maybetoken Herod, or else every tyrant which walked alone
without truth, till he came to the fosters house, that is to say, the Church
which is the house of God. This Herod would have slain this child Jesu,
wherefore he sent messengers to seek him, according to the scripture of saint
Matthew, telling how he commanded the three kings to seek him, and bring him
tidings again where he was, that he might come and worship him also, but this
said he not for love, but for deceit.

The Foster betokens Joseph our Ladies husband which kept him.

But when the messengers came, that is to say, when the three kings came, they
slew him not, but worshipped him on their knees, and left him in the holow tree
of his Godhead. The Earl that came and found this child, betokens the holy
ghost, which warned Joseph by the Angel in his sleep, that he should take our
Lady and his son and flee in to the land of Egypt.

This morality, may be vndestoode otherwise. This Emperor may be token a
sinner that walks in the forest of this world, seeking vanities and naught
else, unto the time he come to the house of god. and there he is received
benignely of the Prelate of the Church, if he will obey the Commandments
of GOD.

But many of us now a days sleep in the Church, when they practyse not
according to their profession, and therefore ought they also to dread thee
voices which I have rehearsed by the first take, that may be understood the
great benisit that he gave thee when he put in thee a soul, made at his own
similitude. By the second take, is wnderstoode the son of the father of
heaven, which was borne of the blessed Uirgin Mary. By the third take is
understood the same son of God, which dyed upon the cross.

By the first yield, is understood, that we ought to yield our Soul unto
almighty God, as clean and as fair as he gave it us after our regeneration
in haptisme. By the second yield, is understood, that we ought to yield honor,
worship, and love unto Almighty God and man. By the third yield, is
understood, that we ought to yield to God true confession of faith, contricion
of heart, and amendment of life.

The first she, beetokeneth sin which we should ^lee. The second flee,
betokens the world which we should flee, for the great salsehoode and
temptations that are therein. The third ^lee, betokens everlasting pain, the
which we ought to ^lee, through faith and her fruits, by the tyrant: She lies,
for she is my wife, and I have found her in adultry with an other man, and
therefore I will slay her. Than said the knight: I believe better the woman
the^ thee, for lo the tokens of truth appear openly in her visage, that thou
have ravished her, therefore will I fight with thee for her deliverance. And
immediately they buckled both together and fought egerly till they were both
sore wounded. Nevertheless the knight obtained the victory, and put the
tyrant to slight.

Then said the knight unto the woman, Lo, I have suffered for thy love many
sore wounds, and have saved thee from thy death, will thou therefore promise to
be my wise.

That I desire you quod she, with all my heart, and thereupon I betake thee my
troth. When she was thus ensured, than said the knight as follows.

Here beside is my Castle, go thither and abide there till I have visited my
friends and my kinsmen, to provide for all things needful for our weddinge,
for I purpose to make a great feast for thine honor and worship. My Lord quod
she, I am ready to fulfill your will. Than went she forth unto the Castle,
where as she was worshipfully received. And the Knight went unto his friends
for to make him ready against the day of marriage. In ye mean while came
Poncianus the tirant to ye knights Castle, and prayed her that he might
speak with her. Than came she down from the castle to him. This tirant
subtly flattered her, and said: Gentle love if it please you to consent to
me I shall give you both gold and silver, and great riches, and I shall be
your servant, and ye my sovereign. When the woman heard this, full lightly
she was deceived through his flattering language, and granted him to be his
wife, and took him with her into the castle.

It was not long after but that this knight came home and found the castle
gate shut, and knocked there at, but long it was ere he might have an
answer. And at the last the Woman came and demanded why he knocked at the
gate. Then said he to her: O dear lady why have thou so soon changed my
love? let me come in. Nay surely said she, thou shall not come here, for I have
here with me my love, which I loved before. Remember quod the knight thou
gave me thy troth to be my wife, and how I saved thee from death, and if thou
ponder not thy faith, beehold my wounds which I have suffered in my body for thy
love. And anon he unclothed himself naked save his hosen, that he might show
his wounds openly. But she would not see them, ne speak more with him, but
shet fast the gate and went her way. And when the knight saw this, he went to
the Justice and made his complaint to him, praying him to give right wise
judgment on this tyrant and this woman.

The Judge called them before him, and when they were come, the Knight said
thus: My Lord quod he, I ask the benefit of the law, which is this.

If a man rescew a woman from rauishinge, the rescuer shall marry her if him
list, and this woman delivered I from the hands of the tyrant, therefore I
ought to have her to my wife, and furthermore she gave me her faith and troth
to marry with me, and thereupon she went to my castle, and I have done great
cost against our wedding, and therefore as it seems me she is my wife, as
by the law. Then said the Judge to the tyrant. Thou know well that this
knight delivered her from thy hands, and for her love has suffered many
grievous wounds, and therefore well thou wottest that she is his wife by the
law, if that him list. But after her deliverance with flattering spech thou
have deceived her, therefore I judge thee to be hanged.

Than said the Judge to the woman in likewise, O woman, thou know how this
knight saved thee from death, and thereupon thou be tookest him thy faith and
troth to be his wife, therefore by two reasons thou art his wife, first by the
law, and after by thy faith and troth. This notwithstanding thou concen^idst
afterward to the tyrant, and broughtest him into the Knights Castle, and
shottest the gate against the knight, and would not see his wounds which he
suffered for thy love, and therefore I judge thee to be hanged. And so it was
done, both the rauisher, and she that was ravished were condemned to the
death, wherefore every man praised the judge for his right wise judgment.

The Moral
This Emperor beetokeneth the father of Heaven, which ordained for a law that
if the soul of man were ravished from God by sin, the sauer of the soul
should espouse her, if him list. The woman that was ravished beetokeneth the
soul of man, which was ravished by sin of our forefather Adam and led out of
Paradise, into ye forest of this wretched world by ye tirant Poncianus which
betokens the devil, and he not only defouled her by leasyng of the heritage
of heaven, but also he would sley her with everlasting pain. But the soul
cried with a high voice, whose cry our Lord Jesu Christ heard.

This cry was made when Adam cried after the oil of mercy. And ye Patryarkes
and prophets cried for remedy, saying these words: O thou highness in the
Cast, and so forth, visit thou us. etc. The knight betokens our Lord Jesu
Christ, which came from Heaven, and fought with the tyrant, that is to say, the
devil, and both they were sore wounded. For our Lord Jesu Christ was wounded
in the flesh, and the devil maimed in his kingdom, wherefore the woman, that
is to say, the soul gave her faith and troth unto almighty GOD when he became
christian, saying these words: I forsake the Devil and all his pride, and
believe in God the father almighty.

Than ordained our Lord Jesu Christ a marriage between him and her, with the
(...)


