News FROM ROME, Spain, Palermo, Geneuae, and France.

With the miserable state of the City of Paris, and the late yielding up of
sundry Towns of great strength, unto the King.

Translated out of Italian and French into English.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Nelson, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1590.

News from Rome.
IT is credibly reported by Letters from Chiauenna that there was one of the
Famelie of Lucemburge, a Papist by profession, and yet a servant to the French
King, passed through Chiauenna, with three score horse, and stayed there one
day. And the next day following, he departed from thence to Zappei de Briga
toward Venice. He goes in the behalf of the house of Burbon: from sundry the
chief of the Nobility of France, to deliver a message to the Pope, and to
have conference with him and the Princes of Italy, for the firm establishing
of Henry de Borbon King of Navarre, now the lawful French King: under whose
obedience they are willing to live. Which thing he very boldly avouched unto
the Popes face, and told him that they sought to have it confirmed with
quietness. Adding further that if the Pope and those Princes of Italy would
not allow thereof, that they would defend the same with fire and sword. And
hazard their lands and livings in maintenance of his right. Whereupon the
Pope after due consideration taken, gave answer to the Messenger, viz. That
fore much as he says he is lawfully descended thereunto. And that the chief
States and Potentates of Germany are determined to defend him for the recovery
of his said right. That he would not any more send aid to trouble and vex
him, as heretofore he has done: so as the King would acknowledge himself
established therein by the Popes means. And in so doing and yielding unto some
such Popish conditions as the Pope would deliver him in writing: he would
therein further him to the uttermost (whereto this Messenger made answer that
he knew certainly, that the King would never condescended thereunto.) Whereat
the Pope replied saying: That were it not that the King is a Hugonite by
profession: he worthily deserves to bear this title. Viz. The great Caesar
of the World. With which glorious Title he offered to grace and honor the
King, so as he would change his Religion.

IN the City of Rome, there is an old ancient Monument long since erected of
stone, and it is called Pasquill: whereon many notable things are from time to
time set up in the disgrace of the Pope of Rome. Upon which said Pillar,
there was set up soon after the departure of this Champian: three several
pictures, either of them being contrary to the other.

The first picture was as it is here lively pourtraghed forth Viz. First the
Pope set out gorgiouslie in his Robes and triple Crown: and a stranger
holding him by the beard, with a dagge set close to his breast pronouncing this
sentence unto him: viz.

Read Rationem villicationis tuae. Which being seen to the Common people made
them greatly to murmur and be of sundry imaginations. Some were of this
opinion, that it pretended the murdering of the Pope, or some treason to his
holiness: others imagined, that it prophesied the fall of the Popes kingdom,
and alteration of the Antichristian Religion and state of Rome, and others
supposed it to be done only in the derision thereof. Whereupon some favorer
of Christian Religion in the City of Rome, that durst not openly be known,
wrotte certain verses upon either of those several Pictures: and after
scattered them in the streets of Rome, where soon after speedy search was
made for the Author of them, but he could not by any means be found out.

pope in his regalia being threatened by a commoner (...)




Thou Pope that do for gold, deceive full many souls.
And seek naught at all, but spoil of Christians blood,
Fall down before thy God, whom thou do still offend,
And let Repentance be, the staff of all thy stay.
Else shall thou soon perceive, Gods wrath is on thy head.
Unto thy charge preach truth, cast of thy paltry trash,
Thy Masses and thy Marks of plain Idolatry,
Seek not to blind those men, that do thy folly see,
But of thy wicked life, see just account thou make,
Against God do not rebel, nor those whom he annoints,
But shed forth brinish tears, for all thy deeds amiss.
Else shall thou be cut off, and kingdom trodden down,
By him that now in France, of right does were the crown.
FINIS
THe second Picture before recited was in this manner. There was Pictured forth
the King of Spain lying in his bed sore sick: and a Physician standing
before him, who taking the King by the hand and feeling of his powlees: says
unto him. Viz.

Durabit tempore Curto. the ailing king of Spain attended by a physician

The vearses made upon that Picture were these. Blind King what do thou mean
to bath thy hands in blood
Of Innocents, and such as guiltless be,
Thou couetst to obtain the glory of this world,
Which is like sleeting Snow that melts in the Sun:
Thy gold does thee besot, and God thou do forget,
Thou thirstest after that which thou shall never win:
Thy kingdom is too large, and that does thee bewitch,
Thou aimest full at France, yet do thou miss the mark,
Because thou woldst thereby procure sweet Englands harm.
Well may thou send to seas, thy shipping tall and huge,
To do thy neighbor hurt, and gain thy self no good:
But when thou so have done, thy self if so thou live,
Shall see and say with me, that God is sore displeasd,
And bids thee be content, thou have not long to live:
Seek therefore for thy end, and set thy soul at rest:
So shall thou live for aie, else die with great unrest.


FINIS.
The third and last picture was in this manner, viz. The City of Geneua
defended by the hand of almighty God, (though assaulted by the Duke of Sauoy)
was delivered from danger of the Dukes forces: and he forced to fly away
naked, looking back upon the said City of Geneua, and cries out saying,

Nessio amplius quo vadam. the Duke of Savoy fleeing the city of Geneva

The verses written on the third Picture were these. Thou Sauoy Duke that
headlong seemst to run
To spoil a City of no small account,
Whose walls and gates are kept by God himself,
Who bids thee back or he will daunt thee so
As greatly shall return to thy unrest,
Retire thou thence, and say as other did,
When seven stout Kings by force did it bessiege,
God does and will defend it still from harm.
It is not force of Canon can do good
To win thy will of that fair maiden town,
Shoot thou strong bullets, it for to disgrace,
They will rebound even back unto thy self
Retire for shame, and if thou manage arms,
Bestow thy force gaynst them that will thee fear,
Even such I mean as fight against the Lord,
And daily seek his Gospel to deface,
But if thou be of that disloyal mind,
And wilt not pray to God to pardon thee,
And so repent thee of thy former miss,
Then fly from God. Geneua sure is his.


FINIS.
These Pictures and Vearses did so far incense the Pope with all the
fraternity of Friars, Monks and Abbey lubbers in Rome, that they fell in a
rage, cursing and condemning with bell, book, and candle, the Deviser, Painter
and Author of those pictures and vearses, and did oppose themselves against the
authors thereof, swearing to pursue them to death if ever they were known.

The News from Spain is.
THat the King is sickly, very weak and wonderouslie grieved with his great
losses of men and munition which he has sustained within these two years, as
well within his own dominions, as also on the coasts of England and Ireland,
France and Flanders. He was lately complotting of a new intended mischief, and
with some convenient speed pretended a new Invasion for England, whereto he
made great preparation: and to that purpose sent sundry traitorous persons
secretly into England, being seminary priests, to persuade the people from
their obedience, and to hearten on leude and wicked members, to become
favorers and associates of that Invasion. But I think no subjects in England
having seen the fruits of the Spanish and Popish dissembling, will now become
favorers of such treasons, nor be harborers of such traitors. But all things
therein does fall out contrary to the King of Spaines expectation. For now his
own subjects do resist him, and have made plain denial for coming at any
time hereafter in warlike sort against the Realm of England: For which cause
the King of Spain has put to death sundry of his chief Captains and men of
good birth and calling, and has sworn the death of the Duke of Medina for that
cause only. Who in the defense and safety of himself, has taken an Island:
and sundry men of calling and soldiers do take parts with him, and are
become very mutinous against the King of Spain. This Duke de Medina was
chief General of the huge army of Spaniardes that came by sea to invade
England, when it pleased God that the most part of them were slain with the
sword and drowned in the sea: the success of whose voyage danted the hearts
of all Spaniardes for ever, for inuading this land. Which as the Almighty
has sundry times defended from danger, so no doubt but he will still defend
and supporte the same from Turk, Pope, and all other enimes whatsoever: which
thing is likely by the prayers of good Christians to be the more easily
compassed, for that God is the anchor-holde of Englands hope and safety.

The News from Palermo in Cicilie.
THe certain news is, that the Nobility of Palermo in Cicilie (being within
the dominions of the king of Spain) have of late utterly banished from thence
the Spanish Inquisition, which has of long time continued there amongst them
in very sharp sort, and was unto them of Palermo wonderful grievous: for
such was the severe proceedings of those Inquisitours, that they would spare no
man, woman, or child from the fiery and extreme tortures of death, that did
once repine, mislike, or speak against the superstition of their Friars and
idolatrous religion there used. Whereupon the Pope, the King of Spain, and
chief of the Inquisition, are determined to send power thither, and to make
war against them, only to constrain them again to receive the said
Inquisition, which they utterly refuse to do, and are all sworn to the
contrary.

The News from Geneua.
THat whereas the City of Geneua was lately besieged with a mighty power,
brought thither by the Duke of Sauoy, who intended to have rased the walls
thereof, made a conquest of the City, and to have put the Citizens with their
wives and children to the sword, yet God be thanked the Citizens have of late
greatly discomforted the Dukes power, and caused him to remove his forces
further, which is greatly weakened both by sword and sickness, so that there is
great likelihood you shall hear of the Dukes departure thence very shortly,
to the better quietness of the Citizens thereof.

The News from France, and misery of Paris.
SInce the most wonderful and miraculous work of God (now bruted in the cars
of the world) concerning the great victory, which he gave unto the Christian
King Henry of Bourbon (a man for his valor, worthy everlasting honor) it is
not unknown, how after he had pursued the enemy in chase full five hours and
more, and having put many thousands of them to the sword, though they were more
the^ three to one. And after yt he had put the Duke de Main to flight, who
since has withdrawn his wife and children from Paris unto Perone, that
sundry towns has since yielded them selves to the mercy of the Kings
Majesty, as Vernon, Mentz, and sundry other towns of strength are now
presently like to be delivered into his Majesty's hands. Great and likely was
the sign that God fought for this gracious King, when the night before the
battle he showed a miraculous token of victory to the Kings side, namely,
by a pitched battle seen in the sky, where in fight of many thousand
persons, the lesser number did overcome the greater: as it fell out afterward
by the Kings side, who being but a small number, did put many thousands of the
greater number to the sword. Since which his good success the King has gotten
the towns of Corbeyle and Melum.

Corbeyle was yielded up unto his Majesty, but the town of Melum he won by
the sword, where was great effusion of blood upon the enemy. These towns
stand upon the river of Seine and Laigney upon the river of Marnes, by means
whereof his Majesty has stopped up all the passages of the rivers, so as no
aid can come unto them of Paris.

The King is at Clow, and having cut off them at Paris from receiving in any
succor of victual or otherwise: he has besieged Meos, and sends some of
his forces against Saint Dennis.

The Pope has lately sent his Legate into France, to disch^rge the King of the
excommunication which was before pronounced against him, saying he did it
before by false information, and hops that he will become a most Christian
King, and that the Crown of France does of right appertain unto him: and to
that purpose the Pope has written to the Clergy, commanding them to obey and
pray for the King upon pain of his excommunication.

It is wonderful to see the present and grievous estate of the inhabitants of
Paris, which City is still with hold from the Kings Majesty: yet they have
sought to the King since the departure of the Duke de Maine, to receive the
said City upon conditions, whereto the King will not grant. He wills them
to yield it up unto him as his right, and to stand to his mercy, which they
have refused to do, but in the end it will be the worse for themselves.

They of Paris do continue seeking to have speech at Noise, and do verily
think that the Duke de Maine will forthwith send them some great and mighty
army to succor them, being now hardly pressed up for want of victualles:
which thing is impossible for him to do, by reason of the passage which is
stopped up, as is before specified. The greater part of the inhabitants in the
City of Paris, are ouerruled by their governors, that they begin to grew
mutinous amongst themselves. And the Friars do daily preach unto them, and
persuade them still to resist the King, though it be with the loss of their
own lives. Which thing the poorer sort are constrained to consent unto, though
contrary to their wills, and by reason of their want, they are ready to kill
one another for victuals.

Death stands there in every man's door, and threatens their utter ruin for
their wilful stubburnnesse: and though the poorest do live in great penury,
yet the richest among them do make many a hungry meal. So that now it is
the common report of every French, man in France, They of Paris cannot hold
out above ten or twelue-daies at the most Those of Quillebeufe have taken a
gally which came from Roane, laden with goods of the Duke de Aumal and other
chief men: who had taken those goods from out the houses of the Kings servants.

Thus have you heard how wonderfully God has defended the Kings Majesty even
in the danger of death, where at such time as the enemy made full account to
have slain the King in his flight, he was by Gods providence constrained to
the himself, and in the flight compelled to warm himself, and to escape in a
soldiers iacket. This was the will of God, to confound him that sought the
confusion of his King, and as the same God that so defended him, has sent him
since towns of great strength, to resist and tame the fury of so mighty a so,
so doubtless the same God will still deliver him from danger, and speedily send
him his chief and strongest Cities and walled towns yet detained from him:
and as well deliver his chiefest enemies into his hand, as also to draw the
hearts of all his subjects unto him, maugre the malice of such miscreant
hel-hounds and detestable traitors, or the hellish crew of the unholy League,
now up in arms against his Majesty, for whose speedy confusion and
overthrow, all the true and faithful favorers of the King, will continually
pray. And for the prosperity and defense of their most gracious King and
Country.

FINIS.


