TWO TREATISES OF THE LORD HIS HOLY SVPPER: THE ONE INSTRVCTING THE SERVANTS
OF GOD HOW THEY should be prepared when they come to the holy Supper of our
only Savior Jesus Christ:

Whereunto is annexed a Dialogue containing the principal points necessary to
be known and understood of all them that are to be partakers of the holy
Supper:

The other setting forth Dialoguewise the whole use of the Supper: Whereunto
also is adjoined a brief and learned treatise of the true Sacrifice and true
Priest.

Written in the French tongue by Yues Rouspeau and John de l'Espine Ministers
of the word of God, and lately translated into English.

1. Corinthians. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup.

JOHN 6.58. This is the bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers
have eaten Manna, and are dead. He that eats of this bread, shall live for
ever.

PSALM. 51.16. Thou desire no sacrifice, though we would give it: thou
delitest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a
contrite and broken heart, O God, thou will not despise.

Imprinted by Thomas Thomas Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1584.

YVES ROVSPEAV TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, FROM OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST greeting.
AMong the causes of all public calamities, and of the scourges wherewithal
diverse realms and countries are grievously chastised: S. Paul makes mention
of the notable abuse and contempt of the Lord his Supper. For this cause, says
he, many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep: for if we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. Whereupon we have not to marvel, that the
Lord God has so sharply punished this poor realm of France the last year,
1562. with plague, war, and famine, seeing it is manifest that the contempt
of the Gospel with the abusing and profaning of the holy Supper of the Lord,
has brought upon us the foresaid miseries and afflictions. And for this cause,
both the Pope his adherents may stop their mouths, with the which they are so
ready to cast reproach upon our God, and they that make profession of the
Gospel in this lan^ may keep like silence, seeing the causes have flowed from
both parties indifferently, and the fault belongs as well to the one, as to
the other. To begin with the Papists, we may boldly avouch out of the word of
God, that their Mass is stuffed full of blasphemies: that it abolisheth the
holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ: that the remembrance of his death and
passion is therein suppressed and made o^ none effect: that in the same there
is no communion: and that, whereas Jesus Christ has given a general charge to
all the professors o^ his name, to take, eat, and drink the bread and wine,
in the Mass there is but one that takes, eats and drinks for all the
rest. Further, we see how there the creature of God, even a morsel of bread,
is worshipped in the place of God himself the creator: how they seek Christ
Jesus upon the earth, whereas the word of God, the Creed of the Apostles, and
the ancient Canons do teach us to have our hearts lifted up on high, and to
seek him by Faith above in the heavens. Lastly, in it we may behold many
other most shameful and grievous abuses, which for this time I think best to
cover with silence. Now seeing that many do so stoutly and obstinately stand
upon that point, that in the defense and quarrel of a thing so vile and
wicked, they have put to death so many godly and honest men, so many holy
personages and true martyrs of our Lord Jesus Christ, I conclude that we have
justly been visited of God for their offenses. As for the Protestants, we see
they also have been marked with the foul spots and blemishes of many gross
and notable abuses. How many of them have bin found as unable to render reason
of their Faith as very Papists, and have offered, like bruit beasts, their
presence at the holy Supper of the Lord, some for learning as ignorant as
Asses, others for life, as beastly as swyne. I ouerpasse an infinite number of
hypocrites, of false brethren, of traitors, and such as have fallen from their
faith and knowledge, who being inwardly unknown, carried outwardly a show and
color of great virtue and holiness. And therefore not without cause has the
wrath of God been kindled against his people, and they have received double
correction, seeing that in the strength of their knowledge they have wittingly
abused the knowledge of his holy name. Now to the intent that our good God by
his Son Jesus Christ may cast his eye of pity and compassion upon this poor
realm that lies so desolate and forlorn: it behooves the one and the other
henceforth to learn, how they may better perform their duty of service and
honor to their God according to his word, then they have done in time passed:
and chiefly that they be very circumspect and heedfull not to defile or
profane the holy Supper of our Lord in any kind of condition whatsoever. To
this end I have addressed this small Treatise unto their reading, wherein they
shall find that the true preparing unto the Supper, consists not in the
furniture of the body, in rich and costly attire, in gorgious and stately
shows, in counterfeit colors, and in outward professing of the name of God:
but in pureness of heart and uprightness of conscience, that God which is a
Spirit, may also be worshipped of his in Spirit and truth.

A TREATISE TEACHING THE SERVANTS OF GOD, HOW THEY SHOULD BE prepared when they
come to the holy Supper of our only Redeemer Jesus Christ.
The Preface.
THat we may worthily come to the holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, we must
examine our selves, The examining of our selves, and wherein it consists.
as we are advised and counseled by the Apostle. There be four principal
points wherein we have to sound our hearts and consciences at the bottom,
namely Faith, Repentance, Thanksgiving, in respect of our God, and Charity
toward our neighbors.

OF FAITH. The first Article.
FIrst it is requisite that we have Faith, that is to say, What Faith is.
a certain and undeceivable assurance, and steadfast persuasion, that God, in
the name of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he delivered up to death for
our behoof, is a Father to us of all mercy, favor, and compassion. The
causes of Faith God.
This Faith comes not from our selves, neither is it built upon us, or upon
any thing to be found in us, but it comes from God, and is built upon God the
Father, His word.
the Son, and the holy Ghost, and upon the promises made in the Gospel, The
holy Ghost.
which are inwardly ratified in us by the working of the holy Ghost which
cries in our hearts Abba, that is to say, Father. And this Faith is nourished,
confirmed, and increased in our hearts by the holy Sacraments. The Sacraments.
For in the Supper, God, most like a loving and careful Father, after he has
brought us into his Church by Baptism, The effects of God in the Supper.
does feed us in spririte with the very substance of his Son Jesus Christ,
applying and making proper to every one of us in particular the merit of his
death and passion. Why Jesus Christ gives the bread and the wine of the
Supper: and bids us to take eat and drink. Matthew. 26.
To which purpose it is, that Jesus Christ himself does give us the bread and
the wine: that he commands us To eat and to drink: that he says, the
bread is his body which is given for us, and the wine his blood which is
shed for the remission of our sins. In which words he gives himself unto
us wholly, he will be our spiritual food and life: he will remain in us by
his holy Spirit, and will have us to abide in him by Faith, to the end that in
believing we do not perish, but may obtain that life everlasting whereof he is
the only inheritor and giver. What we learn by the breaking of the bread.
In like manner the breaking of the bread in the Supper serves for the
confirmation of our Faith, and ratifying of our salvation: forasmuch as it
assures us, and causes us to see with our spiritual eyes, that Jesus Christ
was once in the city of Jerusalem broken with the sorrows of death, for our
deliverance from everlasting death and to purchase unto us everlasting life.
And whereas by the commandment of Jesus Christ we take the bread into our
hands, and then the cup: and further that we eat the bread and drink the wine
which are converted into the food of our bodies: we are taught by the hands of
Faith we should seize upon our Lord Jesus Christ, and embrace him for our only
Savior and Redeemer, and that by the same Faith we should spirituallie eat
his body, and drink his blood, continuing in hope of everlasting life. But
the life of every man in particular lies in his own Faith, according to the
confession made in the Apostles Creed, wherein it is written for every one
apart to say, I believe, not in general, we believe. We are not in this case
to busy or trouble our heads with the faith and belief of another, with his
worthiness or unworthiness, but wholly to rest and to stay us upon our own. For
S. Paul does not teach us that we should examine other men, neither yet that
other men should examine us, but he speaks plainly and precisely in these
words, 1. Cor. 11.
Let every man examine himself. Wherefore let every one of us in several
assure his conscience, That Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 1.
the true Messiah, is come into the world to save sinners, of whom he ought,
following the example of S. Paul, to account himself the chiefest. Let him
believe that Jesus Christ came down from heaven to abide upon the earth, that
he might lift him up from the earth into heaven: that Christ was made the son
of man to make him the child of God: that he was conceived by the holy Ghost,
and was borne of the virgin Marie, to purify and cleanse the sinfulness of his
conception and birth. Let him persuade himself that the son of God has
overcome the devil, to free him from the cruelty of that tyrant: that he has
fulfilled the whole law (loving God his Father with all his heart, power, and
strength, and his neighbor as himself) to purchase righteousness for him: that
he made his appearance before Pilate an earthly judge, and received sentence of
temporal condemnation as an offender, to exempt him from appearing before the
dreadful throne of God his justice where he was to hear sentence of eternal
condemnation pronounced against him for his offenses committed against a God
Almighty and everlasting. Let him be assured in heart, that the same Jesus
Christ descended into hell for his cause, that is to say, endured the sorrows
and terrible pangs of the second death, and the heavy wrath of God, to acquit
him from that fearful judgment: that he died a death accursed of God in
hanging on the cross, to obtain for him both life and blessing before God:
that he rose again from death for an earnest penny and a warrant of his
resurrection: that he ascended into heaven for a certain token of his
ascension into the same kingdom: that he sits on the right hand of God his
Father, to be for him an everlasting Priest, Teacher, King, Defender,
Reconciler, and Advocate. And to be short that he shall come at his second
coming, to his endless consolation, and perfect redemption. In like manner,
it is necessary that every one of us do in particular apply unto himself
all those graces and treasures that are in Jesus Christ, in as much as in giving
himself unto us, he has also given us all his riches. And therefore, in that
he is God, it is that we may be partakers of his Divinity: in that he is heir
and Lord of the whole world, it is that we may have part of his Lordship and
inheritance: and that in him we may recover the title of such possessions as we
lost in Adam our first parent: in that he is the well-beloved of his Father, it
is that we also may be acceptable in him: in that he is rich, it is to bless
us with his riches: in that he has all power against the Devil, sin, hell,
Antichrist, the world, and all our enemies, it is to be our warrant and defense
against them al: in that he is righteous and good, it is to justify us, and to
make us good: in that he is blessed and immortal, it is to indue us with his
blessedness and immortality. Thus when we shall apply unto our selves all
the actions and benefits of the Lord Jesus Christ particularly, in like
manner all his essential qualities, affying us wholly in him and in his
promises, and distrusting wholly our own strength; then we may boldly draw
near unto the table of the Lord, where we shall, by the benefit of Faith,
have full fruition of Jesus Christ, God and man, and further shall feel the
same Faith increase and grow in us exceedingly to our great comfort. And now it
behooves us to note, that it is impossible we should be made one with Jesus
Christ and enjoy the rich treasures that are in him, unless we do first
renounce Antichrist and his kingdom: and unless we have in utter abomination
all idolatry, superstition, and such traditions of man as are in a direct line
set against the pure service of God, the bounds and terms whereof are plainly
set down in his holy word. Forseeing that God is our only creator, and that
in the person of his son Jesus Christ the true Isaac, in whom all the nations
of the earth are blessed, he gives himself entirely unto us his creatures; it
is great reason that in like manner we by Faith should give and resign up our
selves wholly to God our maker. And behold, for this cause does God justly
require his people, and command them in his Law, that They have no other Gods
before him: Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 6.
That they love him with all their heart and soul, with all their strength,
and understanding: that is to say, with all their parts, as well inward, as
outward. And for this cause also, God not only reprooueth those that halte on
both sides, but also commands that they which sacrifice to strange Gods,
should be put to death. To this purpose S. Paul aduertising the Corinthians to
fly Idolatry, uses an argument taken from the conjunction and union that we
have with our Lord Jesus Christ in the Supper, saying after this manner. 1.
Cor. 10.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? As if he would say, that seeing the Corinthians did not come to the
Supper, simply and only to receive those earthly elements, but really and in
deed to receive the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the end they
might be linked unto him by Faith, and made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone, it should be more then exceeding impiety and abomination to be present
at the meetings and assemblies of infidels, and to take part with them in their
idolatries: and therefore the Apostle soon after adds to his former reason,
that the Corinthians Cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of the
Devils: and that they cannot be partakers of the Lord his table and of the
table of Devils. Wherein he teaches us to understand, that it is impossible,
at once to serve both God and the Devil, and that whosoever has fellowship
with idolatry, does set up a banner of defiance as it were against the Lord
Jesus. Forasmuch as therefore, neither is darkness more contrary to light,
nor vice to virtue, nor death to life, nor hell to heaven, then the Pope and
his doctrine is contrary to Christ and his holy Gospel: it is necessary that
all those that have true faith in Jesus Christ, do all their endeavor to fly
from that poison of papistrie, and without delay to shake of the yoke of that
Antichrist of Rome, that they may entirely offer up themselves to the service
of this good Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ. And if so be, that neither the
fellowshippe which we have with the Son of God, nor yet the promises of our
heavenly father can alure and induce us to resign up our souls and bodies
unto God, to put our affiance in him alone, to serve and to worship him alone,
according to his good will and pleasure, but we will nevertheless stick fast
to Antichrist, and join right hands to perpetual alliance with him, his
ministers, and vpholders: yet let us set before our eyes, to the end they may
strike deeply into our hearts, and we thereby may be driven with fear from
their pernicious fellowship, the grievous threatenings, and the heavy judgment
of God denounced against us to that purpose, as namely when he says, Apoc.
18.4.
Depart out of Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues. Apoc. 14.9.
Again, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in
his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, yea, of the pure wine, which is powered into the cup of wrath, and he
shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the
Lamb, and the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore: and they shall
have no rest day nor night, which worship the beast and his Image, and
whosoever receives the print of his name. And again in another place, Apoc.
21.8.
But the fearful and unbelievers, and the abominable, and murtheres, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liers, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. Therefore let us have at the least this point well printed in our
hearts, to the end we be not led out of the way, and so for ever cast away with
the tymemen of this world, which suppose it is not a thing impossible at once
to serve both God and the Devil, Jesus Christ and Antichrist, and to follow
the commandments of God and of men, and to fulfill the affections of the flesh
and of the spirit.

OF REPENTANCE. The second Article.
THe former preparing of our selves in respect of Faith, which applies Jesus
Christ to us in particular, with all his graces and blessings, can by no means
have any place in our hearts, but it speedily begets in us a true and
unfeigned repentance: that is, a true and earnest loathing of that which is
evil, and an ardent love and affection toward that which is good: which we
see for our instruction in the examples of David, Peter, Paul, and other holy
personages. We must mourn inwardly, even in our bowels, and sorrow
unfeignedly that we have offended the Majesty of God, that we have most
wickedli^ in former times abused our creation, read(...)on, and baptism: that
we have provoked G(...) anger in all the members of our body: that we have
abused our wit, our heart, our tongue, our feet and our hands: that we have
vnchastelie laid open our bodies and souls (which are the temples, wherein
our God will have his abiding) to al kind of infidelity, idolatry,
filthiness, blasphemy, whoredom, ravening, usury, theft, gluttony,
drunkenness, ambition, excess, pride, and of all the other vanities of this
world: which is in effect as much, as if we would have God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, to lodge in a base and vile backroome, full of
deadly infection and filthy stinking. Wherefore we must be sorry for our
wicked life forepassed, calling our selves to a true and strict account which
may breed in our hearts an earnest grief and trembling, that we have in
former times torn in pieces, and broken in all the parts thereof the law of
God, to follow the will of the world, of the flesh, and of the devil. The
breaking of the bread in the Supper, ought not only to move us unto the
knowledge of our wickedness, but also to an abomination thereof, being none
other then whatsoever is to be found in us repugnant and contrary to the pure
and holy law of God. For whereas the bread is broken for us, or rather we
break the bread of the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, we are to learn, that
it is we, that it is our sins and iniquities, which have crucified and (...)
to death the author of life, which is even (...) the same our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. And therefore we may not do as the infidels in times past, which
made great lamentation, and devised sharp inuectiues against the Jews,
Pontius Pilate, Herod, Judas, and those that had executed and put to death
Jesus Christ, and yet in the mean time flattered themselves, gloried in their
merits, and considered not narrowly, that Judas, Pontius Pilate, and Herod
were none other, then the executours and ministers of their impieties and
offenses. Let us consider therefore in the breaking of the bread, that our
sins, yea the sins of every one of us in particular, have crucified the
Son of God, and have broken him with the pains of the first and second
death: And even so is it preciselie witnessed in the Supper, that the body of
Jesus Christ was broken for us, and that his blood was shed for the remission
of our sins. And our heavenly Father himself does testify the same by the
mouth of his Prophet Isaiah, saying: Isa. 63.
But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities.
Now if it be so, that our sins being weyed in the balance of God his justice,
are found to be of so great consequence and importance, that his anger and
displeasure conceived against us, can by no means be appeased, but by the
death of his only Son, yea, by the cruel and shameful death upon the
cross, by which alone satisfaction is per(...)ed; why should we not
henceforth abhor(...)ur sins and wickedness, the cruel and bloody
murderers of the only Son of God? Behold, the Sun and the Moon, the
elements, the veil of the Temple, the stones and rocks were moved at the
death of Jesus Christ, and showed tokens of sorrow and heaviness; and shall not
we, which bear about us the cause of this death, abhor so foul,
euil-fauored, and unfortunate a guest, who has taken up his lodging in our
hearts? and shall we suffer him to abide, or rather to dwell within us, until
he have brought everlasting death into his lodging? No verily. But contrariwise
we ought to esteem him most detestable, as one that first did set up a wall of
separation between us and God our sovereign happiness: and as one that has
caused us to loose that image and resemblance of God, whereunto at the first we
were created. It is he that has defiled us within and without: it is he that
has spoiled us of our holiness and righteousness: it is he that has driven and
chased us out of Paradise: it is he that has brought us in bondage to the
tyrany of the Devil: it is he that has made us subject to poverty and
sickness, and finally to the first and second death: It is he, that after he
had barred and divided us from God, caused us to see our filthiness, and brought
upon us shame and black reproach, that caused us to tremble at the voice of our
God, which before was to our ears most sweet and amiable. It is he, by whom
the wrath of God is heaped up against al mankind, which is in cause that the
earth becomes barren, and brings forth thorns and briars, that women do
labor and bring forth children in sorrow, and that men eat their bread with
the sweat of their face and travail of their bodies. Now seeing that sin does
bring upon us continually so many evils and mischiefs, it follows that we
ought to retire and withdraw our selves from it, except we will be voluntary
hinderers and enemies of our happiness and salvation. And here I call into
presence al such, as wallowing in all kind of sin and wickedness, and giving
occasion of grievous offense to the children of God, are nevertheless so
shameless, as they dare presume to present themselves at the Lord his table. I
would have them to answer, what it is that they promised to God, and to his
church in their Baptism? They will say; they promised to forsake the Devil
and al his works. Even so: but sin is one of the chief and principal works
of the Devil: and why then do they not abstain from it? why are they
traiterous and disloyal to God and to his Church? why have they conspired with
the Devil, the world, and the flesh, against their own salvation? how dare
they present themselves before God, to crave pardon and remission of their
sins at his hands, seeing that from time to time they do heap sin upon
sin, and outragiouslie crucify again, as much as in them lies, the Son of
God, or at the least deride the purgation of his blood, which was applied to
them in Baptism? Let the case be of an offender, beggarly, needy, and
destitute of al help and succor, that he were fallen into a foul and filthy
bogge, whereout by his own strength and wit he could not escape, and of a King
his son passing by the said place, that he took the pains to draw him out
of this myrie hole, that he made him clean, and that he decked him richly
with brave and costly attire. If this miseralbe wretch shall return again into
this pit of filth and mire, defiling therein both his body and his garments,
and further, placing his life in extremity of danger; may we not justly
think him to be unthankful above measure, and careless of that princely
bounty and humility? On the other side, may we not boldly affirm, that he
has wittingly and willingly taken an oath, as it were, against his own life
and safety? and that he is worthy to come to ruin, and to perish without al
help and succor? Like is the case between us and Jesus Christ. We are al
fallen into the foul pit of sin, in the person of Adam: we are al offenders
before God, worthy of innumerable gibets: we cannot of our selves by any
means possible get out of this pit of our destruction, into the which we are
fallen by our own defaulte and folly. The Son of God, the King of Kings,
the Lord of Lords, not only draws us out of this filthy pit, but washes us
clean also with his precious blood, and vouchsafes to cloth us with his own
garment of righteousness and innocence. If we fall to tumble and to wallow
again in the pit of sin, if we please our selves therein, if we defile and
stayne the garment of innocence, which he gave us in Baptism clean and
unspotted; do we not manifestly contemn the love and the benefit of Jesus
Christ not able no be valued and esteemed? and are we not worthy to rot an
hundred thousand times in our uncleanness, or rather with the Devil in hell
to gnash our teeth for ever? It is out of al controversy. Then since it is so,
that the end of our redemption, Baptism, and justification, requires that we
should abstain from sin (so far as is possible, and the fraylenes of man's
nature can permit) it behooves us to employ al our pain and diligence by the
mighty power of the Spirit of God, to drive out of our souls and bodies al
uncleanness, filthiness, idolatry, blasphemy, rebellion, hatred, murder,
whoredom, stealing, usury, and al other things contrary to his holy law,
unless we will be unthankful toward Jesus Christ, and open enemies to his
Church, and to our own salvation.

Now, because it is not sufficient, to the end we may be endued with true
repentance, that we know our sins, that we abhor them, confess them, and
abstain from them; but we must also know, desire, and do that which is good,
as we are charged in the word of God: We are to look narrowly to those
reasons, whereby we ought to be stirred up to sanctify the name of God. First,
whereas we are joined and knit to Jesus Christ in the supper; whereas we are
made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; whereas we live by his holy
Spirit: ought not these things to move us to fashion our selves after the image
and likeness of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? Can he dwell in us? can he
feed us with his own substance? can he quicken us with his Spirit? can he
join us unto himself, and tie us with the linkes of Faith, and yet neither
he, nor the holy Ghost, nor Faith shall prevail with us to the bringing forth
of good and holy works and actions? Further, seeing it is so, that he gives
not himself unto us by the half, neither yet void of his most excellent
qualities and treasures, but guarded with all spiritual graces and blessings,
adorned with righteousness and perfection, having innocence and holiness in
his train: how is it possible we should receive Jesus Christ enritched with all
his treasures, but that the righteousness of our head must shine in us which
are his members? yea in every of our parts, whither they be of the soul
inward, or of the body outward. Is it meet, that the parts of our soul,
which are two in number, to wit, our understanding and our will, which ought to
lay hold upon the promises of God, which ought by Faith to receive the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is to say, Jesus Christ al and some,
very God, equal in all points to God his Father, and very man, compounded of
humane soul and body; is it meet (I say) that these, our understanding and
will, should be applied to the meditation of worldly and wicked things, and
should be void of the knowledge and love of God, and of due charity toward
our neighbor? Is it meet, that our body, which is the Temple of God, should
be profaned and made unholy? that our ears, which God created, to the end we
might hear his voice, should be stopped at the sounding of the heavenly
voice, and open at the bursting forth of vain and wanton talk, of unchaste
songs and lewd sonnets? Is it meet, that our tongue, which is bound by the law
of creation to sing out the praise of God, and by the law of redemption to
preach the tidings of the Lords death until his coming; is it meet, Isaie,
that this tongue, so fit an instrument to God his glory, should be mute in all
good occasions, and loose to backebyte, to slander, to blaspheame without
ceasing, or, at the least, most slipperie to cast out idle words, for the which
we shall one day give account before the throne of God his Majesty? Is it
meet, that our mouth, which receives the sacred sign of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, should suppress the benefit of our redemption, and that the
poison of aspes should lurcke within our lips? Is it meet, that our hands,
which lay hold in the supper upon the assured gage of God his love, of the
league which he has entered with us, and of our salvation, should not only be
heavy to do good, but also nimble to spoil, to steal, to murder, to
oppress, and to use violence? Is it meet, that our feet, which ought to run
to al good actions, should be ready and swift to run after evil? No
certeinlie: neither is it tolerable in any condition. But Eue^ as he which
calls us is holy, so ought we, both inwardly and outwardly, to shine with
holiness. As he by holy Baptism has brought us into his holy house, which is
the holy Church, the communion of Saints: so we ought in the same Church to
lead a godly life, and to be of an holy conversation. As he has washed our
sins away by the precious blood of his Son Jesus Christ: so ought we to die
unto sin, and to live unto righteousness. As he has called us to a never dying
or decaying hope of a blessed resurrection and life everlasting: so ought we to
lift up our hearts on high, and not to be buried like moales in this frail and
transitory earth, which with all things above and under it is sure to vanish.
To be short, Tit. 2.11.
seeing the grace of God is offered unto us from day to day, and his holy word
sounds in our ears continually for this end only, that the same may bring
salvation unto us, and that we denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, should
lead a sober, righteous, and godly life in this present world, looking for the
blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ: we must pray unto God, that by his grace we may so carry our
selves toward him in holiness, so toward our neighbor in righteousness, and so
toward our selves in sobernes, that we may be found unblameable at the great
and terrible day of the Lord, by the mean of the same his well-beloved Son,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

OF THANKSGIVING. The third Article.
Thirdly it is requisite, that we be hartelie thankful to God for the
exceeding benefit of our redemption. For to the end was the holy supper
called Eucharistia, that is to say, a thanksgiving. And surely if our meats,
and the daily bread which God gives us for the food and nourishment of our
bodies, ought to be sanctified by the word, and received with giving of thanks:
is it not our parts, so much the rather to give God thanks, for the heavenly
bread, and for nourishment of our souls offered and given effectually unto us
in the holy supper? yea, that which ought to be unto us a notable provocation,
we see that our Savior himself has by his own example declared unto us our
duty in this behalf. For when he took the bread, S. Matthew and S. Mark
record, that he blessed it before he brake it and gave it to his disciples
which word of blessing S. Luke expounds to be giving of thanks. Now seeing
that Jesus Christ when he took the bread, gave thanks to God his father, which
he did in like manner when he took the cup, and all for the redeeming of
mankind: is it not a principal and chief point of our duty, to render like
thanks, seeing it is we only which receive so great and excellent a benefit?
But to the end we may be the better moved and stirred up to this acceptable
sacrifice of thanksgiving, it behooves us to think upon the worthiness of
the benefit of our redemption, and upon that most excellent present which God
bestows upon us at this holy Table: which cannot be done except we enter
into a deep and due consideration of our miserable estate and condition, a
sign whereof was long since expressed unto us in the te^porall captivity
and bondage of Gods people in Egypt. We see there, how Pharoh was strong and
mighty, how he knew not the Almighty, how he pretended to put to death the
whole stock and seed of the Israelites by the suppression and cutting short of
the male children. We see also how he enjoined the Hebrews to labor excessive
and unreasonable, yea without all hope of any wages or reward: how he would
not suffer them to offer sacrifice unto the Lord, nor to depart out of the land
of Egypt. And this opinion continued not for one year or two, but by the space
of four hundred and thirty years: wherein we may clearelie behold the
lively picture and resemblance of our most wretched and miserable estate. We
were all lost in Adam, and brought to ruin and destruction. We were retained
captives in the infernal Egypt, under the tyranny of the spiritual Pharaoh,
which is the Devil. This tyrant was stong and mighty: he would not suffer us
to serve our God: he made us to take an endless and restless labor in the
servile and fruitless works of sin, for the establishing of his kingdom:
he slew not only our male children, but carried us al without any difference
into everlasting destruction of body and soul. Which tyranny had not
continued and endured only for a short season, but had been even in a proved
strength and fulness for ever, if we had not been thence delivered by the power
and mercy of our God, through the ministry and mean of that true Moses, our
Lord Jesus Christ, the true lamb delivered as it were into the jaws of death,
that we might be saved and obtain eternal life. For so it is plainly
testified in the scripture, that God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten son, to the end that whosoever believed in him, should not
perish but have everlasting life. Now seeing that God has been so bountiful
and merciful unto us, that he has set us at liberty from the tyranie of the
Devil, of sin, of death, and of hell: seeing that his love toward us has
been so wonderful, that he has suffered his only son to endure a cruel
and shameful death, to deliver us which wear servants and bondslaues to the
devil: his well-beloved, for us which were his enemies: the righteous and the
lamb without spot, for us which were sinful and altogether corrupted: the
only inheritour of heaven, for us the true and lawful heirs of hell: ought
we not to be ravished with an admiration of this wonderful and unutterable
love of our God toward us? and to have our tongues continually unfolded and
untied to chaunt out with loud and clear voice the praise of this benefit of
our redemption? Let us remember that Jesus Christ himself does put us in mind
of our duty in this behalf, when he says touching the celebrating of his
holy Supper, Do this in remembrance of me. Luke 22.19. and 1. Cor. 11.24.
And S. Paul expounds this remembrance, where he gives us to understand that
as often as we shall eat this bread and drink this cup, 1. Cor. 11.26.
we show the Lords death until his coming. Then since it is so, that God
requires at our hands a true and unfeigned acknowledging of those benefits
which we receive of his bounty and largenes, by the mean of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; let us be well advised, that we be not spotted or
infected with the vice of ingratitude, except we will incur the wrath and heavy
displeasure of God, and so find him a sharp and severe judge, whom we would
not acknowledge a loving, gentle, and pitiful father: to which purpose S. Paul
threatens al unthankful, where he says, Whosoever shall eat this bread, and
drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, 1. Cor. 11.27.
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. and soon after in the same
Chap. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation. And surely it stands with good reason that the vengeance of God is
discharged upon al those which wickedly suppress the glory of God, especially
in that thing which concerns their own salvation. For if a thief being now
in the hands of the hangman for felonnie whereof he was justly and lawfully
condemned, rejecting the Prince his free pardon and grace, and not vouchsafing
to thank him for the same, is well worthy to be dispatched with expedition: or
if a child which daily and howerly receives of his father all things
necessary for his life and maintenance, and has not once in his mouth the
word of kindness, I thank you father, is worthy to be beaten with many
stripes: how much more are we, which for our manifold and outrageous offenses
and trespasses have justly deserved to be hanged up in hell, when we contemn
and set at naught the grace and favor of God our sovereign Prince, and make
no account of the eternal blessings, which he gives us in Christ, offered unto
us in the holy Supper: how much more (I say) are we worthy to perish for our
unthankfulness, so foul and odious a sin before God and man? Now concerning
this matter of thankfulness, these points following are to be diligently
regarded and observed. First, we must make this recognisance to God alone, by
his only Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For even as God by his Son
alone has created and redeemed us from everlasting death: so he would have us
to render thanks to him alone for all his benefits, and that by his only Son
in whom he is well pleased. This we may learn of S. Paul in many places, and
specially in his Epist. to the Ephe. where it is written in this wise. Ephesians.
1.3.4.
Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ, as he has chosen us
in him before the foundation of the world. Then they that call upon Saints,
that put their trust in them or to their merits: they that make them the
patrones and advocates of their causes: also they that are reposed upon their
own strength, free will, or good works, do manifestly rob God of his glory,
and cannot truly perform the giving of thanks for the singular benefit of
their redemption. For we cannot attribute to any creature, be it never so
little in the matter of our salvation, but we shall be culpable of treason in the
highest degree against the majesty of our maker. And therefore, let us,
renouncing our selves and all the creatures of God in the whole or in part, say
with the Apostle, Now unto the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God
only wise, 1. Tim. 1.17.
be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Secondly, this giving of thanks must not only sound out of the mouth, but it
must also proceed from the heart. For seeing that God is a Spirit, he
requires of us such a kind of service as is fitly answerable to his nature,
that is to say, he will be worshipped and served of us in Spirit and truth. And
therefore when we shall be occasioned to praise God for the benefit of
redemption, we must have our hearts erected: that there may be a sweet
agreement and mutual accord between our affections within, and our tongue
without, as we see that David exhorted himself to this manner of serving and
praising God. My soul, says he, Psalm. 103.1.
praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy name. My
soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. And the holy
Virgin sings the same notes, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
rejoices in God my Savior. Then we may hereby understand, that all hypocrites
and dissemblers, and all those that sing and praise God in an unknown language
are here reproved for their service. For without understanding there can
neither be affection, nor will, nor consequently Faith, without the which what
duty so ever we perform to God, bear it never so fair a color in
appearance to the eyes of men, is sin abominable in the eyes of God. Then
let us take heed that we be not taken halting in this point, lest we be
condemned with the people of the Jews, which worshipped and served God in
vain, Esaias. 29.13.
because They came near unto him only with their tongue, and honored him with
their lips, but their hearts were far from him.

Thirdly, this duty is at al times to be performed, that is to say, as well in
time of adversity, as in time of prosperity. Psalm. 34.1.
To which purpose the Prophet David protests, that He will alwaie give
thanks unto the Lord: and that his praise shall be in his mouth continually. 1
These. 5.18.
And S. Paul admonishes the Thessalonians To give thanks in all things, with
this addition, For this is the will of god in Christ Jesus. This precept is
greatly contrary to our tymemen, and to al such as court the Gospel in time of
prosperity, and are then right glad and easily entreated to praise the Lord,
whom afterward in time of adversity they curse and dishonor. The cause of
this mischief is, for that they came not to be of the Church for any true end
and good purpose, as namely, to exalt the glory of God, to procure their
salvation with the salvation of their brethren: but rather to become great and
mighty in possessions and honorable places, and to satisfy their own private
and particular humors. Whereupon it comes to pass, that so soon as the
devil lifts up his horns against the church of God, and that persecution is
at hand, immediately they melt away in affliction as wax before the fire, they
are offended, they are dried up and parched in the sun of the cross, they
are sorry for all the good which they have done, and repent they have been
carried with so hasty a swinge, to confess the name of the lord Jesus Christ
in the assembly of the faithful: they would they had never known either God,
or his word, or his church, or his ministers: because they set more by a mess
of potage as Esau did, Genesis 25.38.
then by the birthright and blessing of the heavenly Father. But let this kind
of people know, that it shall no more profit them, then it auailed Cain, Esau,
Saul, and Judas to have made a good beginning, and as it were to have lifted up
their shield and target lustilie at the first in the Lords quarrel. For seeing
the sentence is general, Whosoever perseuereth and continues to the end, he
shall be saved: it follows on the contrary, that all such as hold not out
constantly in the confession of the son of God, and such as shall be let and
hindered by their worldly goods and possessions, by offices of honor, by the
love of the world, by the ease of their bodies, from confessing and
acknowledging as it were in one and the same a continual vain, the worthy
benefit of their redemption: I say, it follows that such shall perish
everlastingly.

Lastly, it is to be noted, that we may not only acknowledge Gods benefits
when we are alone, but also when we are assembled in public places, even in
the face and presence of the whole congregation. And therefore says David,
Psalm. 116.12
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows
unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his people. Also in another
place. I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation: Psalm. 40.9.
lo, I will not refrain my lips, O Lord, thou know. I have not hid thy
righteousness within mine heart, but I have declared thy truth and thy salvation:
I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the great congregation. This
is a thing to be deeply imprinted in the hearts of al such as are yet but weak,
and of al those that are ashamed to confess and to praise our Lord Jesus
Christ in open and public meetings. For seeing that God does openly aduouch
us for his people, and gives himself freely to us and to our children in the
person of his well-beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, we can do no less then
aduouch him publicly for our God and Savior, in the person of the same his
dear son our Lord Jesus Christ?

OF CHARITY. The fourth Article.
FAith, Repentance, and Thanksgiving to God, can have no place in our hearts
and consciences, and it is to no purpose that we are called Christians, or that
we brag and vaunt of the practice of the commandments contained in the first
Table concerning the service of God above mentioned, except we show the effects
and fruits thereof in keeping the commandments of the second Table, which
touch our charitable affection toward our neighbor, without the which we
cannot come worthily to the holy Supper. To this end and purpose, Jesus Christ
in that Sermon of the Supper, which he made to his Apostles that very night
when he was betrayed and delivered up to death for us, diligently put them in
remembrance of this lesson. By this shall all men know, says he, that you are
my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Also, John 13.35. John 15.12.
This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. To
the same end also tends that action of our Savior, when he washed his
Apostles feet the same night: after which washing he said unto them* Know ye
what I have done to you? ye call me master, and Lord, and ye say well: for so
am I. If I then, John 3.12.
your Lord and Master, have washed your feet: ye also ought to wash one
another feet. for I have given you an example, that ye should do, even as I
have done to you. We must therefore according to the commandment and example
of the son of God; have a careful regard that we be furnished with a true and
an ardent affection toward our neighbor, if we will come worthily to the holy
Table of our Lord. And if any man ask a description of this Charity, to know
the better what it is, he may go to S. Paul, who has painted it out in very
lively and beautiful colors, writing to the Corinthians, after this manner.
Love suffers long: it is bountiful: love enuyeth not: love does not boast it
self: it is not puffed up: it disdaineth not: it seeks not her own things:
it is not provoked to anger: it thinks not evil: it rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: it suffers all things: it believes al
things: it hops al things: it endures all things: This is the charity which
we ought to have, and to use toward our neighbor: the several parts whereof
we must diligently provide that we can be able to fetch out of our own bosoms.
And to this we are diverse and sundry ways exhorted in the Supper of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

First, whereas it is our duty to stay one for another, and it is not lawful
for every one of us to receive the Supper single, but when the whole
congregation is assembled, all the faithful together do take* and eat, and
drink, the bread and the wine of the Supper, according to the commandment of
Jesus Christ, saying, Take, eat, drink ye al of this: it is a certain token
and witness that we ought to be all united and knit together. Further, whereas
we being all met in one and the self same house of God, which is his Church,
we all do there together call upon one and the self same father which is in
heaven, we have al one and the self same head, advocate, and intercessour
which is Jesus Christ: whereas we do al hear one and the selfsame word of God,
whereas we do all eat one and the self same spiritual meat, and do al drink
one and the self same spiritual drink: and whereas we all as brethren lay
claim to one and the self same inheritance, which is the kingdom of heaven:
ought we not to be stirred up and inflamed hereby to carry an unfeigned and an
earnest affection one toward another? Lastly, the very making of that bread
and wine which is used in the Supper, does teach us what union and concord of
hearts and minds there ought to be between us the children of one and the same
heavenly father. For even as we see that the bread is made of diverse corns,
which nevertheless is but one loaf: and as the wine is made of many grapes,
which nevertheless, when it is made, is but one wine: so ought all Christians
which in themselves are many, to be united by love in one body, which is the
Church, whereof Jesus Christ is to be the sole head, and captain. Then we must
note that this love, whereunto we are exhorted in the supper by so many
arguments, is absent where men are infected with hatred, strife, rancor,
debate, factions, and with hot suits to the hinderance of their brethren. and
therefore before we come to this Supper, which is a witness of our uniting as
well with Jesus Christ, as with his Church, if there be any strife or quarrel
between us and our brethren, we must in all good and amiable sort be
reconciled: if we have bin offended, we must freely and frankly forgive our
brethren, yea our enemies: as we would have God to forgive us, and as we see
that our Lord Jesus Christ left us an example of this love and charity, when
he prayed to God his father for his enemies which put him to a cruel death:
whereof Saint Steven also gives us a godly example. Also it is to be noted,
that this love is to be practiced of all estates: as well of kings who are to
love their subjects, to be nources for the church of God, to be lovers of the
public peace of the land, to entreat their subjects gently and moderately: as
also of the people whose part is to honor the king, to pay their tributes
truly and faithfully, to obey all his Liuetena^ts and his officers. It is the
sheapherds duty to love his flock, to watch, to labor, and to pray for it
without ceasing. Also it is the part of the sheep to love their sheepeherd: of
fathers to love their children, of children to love their fathers and mothers:
of the wife to love her husband, and of the husband to love his wife: of
masters to love their servants, and of servants to love their masters: and
lastly it behooves every one of us for his particular part, to exercise
charity in that vocation wherein God has placed him in his eternal providence
and wisdom. For otherwise we shall never be able faithfully to acquit us of
our duty as well toward God as toward men, except we be guided and governed
by the rule of charity, in all our affairs and business whatsoever.

Necessary observations for all those that desire to come to the Lord his
Table.
THus we have understood, wherein the examining and proouing of our selves
consists: whereunto is to be added a good aduisement and due consideration of
the points and observations following. First we must take good heed, that we
be not over busy in making a curious search of the life of another: following
the steps of many, which sift so narrowly the imperfections of their
brethren, that in the mean while their own infirmities are utterly forgotten.
Well may we pray, yea we ought to procure with all our power and ability, that
the church may be preserved and kept in purity, and altogether without
appeara^ce or show of any offense. But for so much as in this world, the corn
shall be always mingled with the chafe, the good fish with the bad, Judas with
the true Apostles, the foolish virgins with the wise: it is not meet that any
of us should hastily take offense thereat, but contrariwise that he endeavor to
find that perfection in himself, which he seeks to bring into another.

Secondly, we may not think that Faith, repentance, thanksgiving, and love,
and the other virtues, which God requires at our hands, can be perfect in us
during this mortal life. For there will be always to be found in us, be we
never so thorowlie and perfectly renewed, some relics of sin, of unbelief,
of impenitencie, of unthankfulness, and of selfeloue: which al are directly
contrary and manifestly opposed to the love of our neighbor. So long as we
live, there is a law in our members, which rebelleth against the law of our
mind: the Devil and the world will rise up against us in battle, as we may
sufficiently be instructed by the lives of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles: yea, even until our last breathing we shall have need to pray unto
God, that it may please him to forgive our hourelie sins thorough his Son,
our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But yet, the imperfections and
iniquities abiding in us, ought to prevail so little to the withdrawing of our
seues from God, that if we be heartely sorry and grieved for the same, they
should rather cause us to draw near unto him, and to this holy banquet, to the
end that, like miserable starued creatures, we might receive Jesus Christ with
the more greediness, who is the true and only food and nourishment of our
souls.

Thirdly, albeit a perfect Faith, repentance, giving of thanks, and love, is
not necessary to the end we may come worthily to the Supper: yet they must be
al true, and not counterfeit; they must come from the heart, and from the
spirit. Our Faith may not be feigned, our repentance may not be dissembled, as
is the manner of the hypocites: the thanks which we give to God, may not
proceed only out of the mouth: neither must we love our brethren only in
word, and not in deed: but the whole profession of our Faith and Christian
life, must above all things be far removed from vain boasting and
dissembling, that we may take more care and pains to be effectualy and before
God, then to be esteemed and taken for good Christians before men.

Against those that wittingly and willingly abstain from the Lord his Supper.
AS they are many which fault in coming unworthily to the Supper: so there
are many which offend of the contrary, namely, in not coming at al, nor
presenting themselves to the said holy banquet: fearing (as they say) to be
partakers of the same unworthily, and so consequently, to be culpable and
guilty of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. But let them know, which
abstain of set purpose from the table of the Lord, that it is no less a vice,
thorough unthankfulness and contempt of the holy meats, which God sets
before us in the Supper, to abstain, then it is to receive it unworthily: even
as the patient which is daungerously sick, if he make no account of the
Physician his receipt and order, deserves no less blame then he that abuses
the same receipt and diet, and does not use it with discretion and moderation
according as it was ordered by the Physician. And let them not therefore abuse
and flatter themselves, as if hereby they might escape unblameable before God
and men, seeing it is a case most clear, and a thing most certain, that so
gross unthankfulness cannot be current nor by any means possible bear
excuse. For first, they wittingly despise the commandment of Jesus Christ, who
says to all that be his, Do this, take, and eat. Secondly, they set light by
the happy memory of the death and passion of the Son of God, who says to
the faithful, that they shall celebrate and keep solemn the supper in
remembrance of him. Thirdly, they contemn the price of their redemption, to
wit, the precious body and blood of Jesus Christ, which are given and parted
to al true Christians in the Supper, as it is written: This is my body, which
is given for you, this is my blood which is shed for the remission of your
sins. Lastly, they despise the Church, and the union thereof, and of their
own accord excommunicate themselves from the fellowship that the faithful have
in the Supper, as well with Jesus Christ, as one with another. Thus we see,
that these contemners of the Lord his Supper, do grossly falt and grievously
sin in this behalf, and are altogether void and unworthy of excuse. Let us
therefore take heed that we follow not their example, except we will run into
the like danger with them that for their oxen, fermes, wives, and traffic of
merchandise refused to come to the marriage in the Gospel.

Of them that come unworthily to the holy Supper of the Lord, and ought not to
be admitted.
Of them that sin against the first Article of the first preparation, which
consists in true faith.

AL Atheists, unbelievers, and ignorant of God and of his word, al heretics,
and false prophets, all magitians, idolaters, and superstitious persons which
are partakers of the table of devils: Furthermore, al such as have but an
historical faith: all the adherents and ministers of the antichrist of Rome, and
al such as any way establish his kingdom, or depend thereupon: all such as are
not yet brought to be of the number of the church of God, and have not made
profession of their faith: finally al such as make it but an ordinary and
common matter to swear by the name of God, or by their faith, and apply the
same to vain and fruteles matters: al such, I say, may not presume to touch
the holy table of the Lord, because they have not true affiance and trust in
God, without the which we can not be members of Jesus Christ, and so
consequently can not be fit and able to receive life of him, who is the only
head and chief of all the faithful.

Of those that sin against the second article of the second preparation,
which consists of Repentance.
AL such as lead an odious, an impudent, and a loose life, all the contemners
of God, of his word, and of his holy congregation: all they that deny and
blaspheme the name of God: all such as contemn the correction and discipline
of the church: again, they that ordinarely frequent and haunt evil company:
they that walk in the council of the ungodly, that stand in the way of
sinners, or sit in the cheer of the scorneful: finally that give no hope of
amendment of life, or of renewing of their minds: that commit outrageous,
gross, infamous, and monsterous sins, such as are punishable by the civil
magistrates, al these, I say, being known to be of so foul a race, may not be
admitted to this supper: and if they offer themselves, they are to be refused,
least that which is holy be given to dogs, and to swine, to the great dishonor
of God, and offense to the Church and Congregation.

Of those that sin against the third article of the third preparation which
consists in thanksgiving.
WIthout true faith and unfeigned repentance, we cannot be meet to publish the
praises of God, which will not be praised out of the mouth of the wicked and
ungodly: wherefore all they that are void and destitute of faith, of knowledge
and of repentance, do also sin against this article, and ought not to be
received at the Lords table. They also that are bereft of their wits, and
foolish by nature, or by accident: they that being under age, as little
children, can not show forth the Lords death until his coming; are al
incapable of his supper. Finally they that through weakness, unthankfulness,
and want of taking knowledge of Gods benefits, have in the troublesome and
heavy times of adversity forsaken Gods cause and quarrel, and have renounced
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, ought not to have access unto his holy
table, before they have made confession of their fault in public, and be
reconciled to the Church of God.

Of those that sin against the fourth article of the fourth preparation,
which consists in Charity toward our neighbor.
AL such as are disobedient to fathers, and mothers, to the magistrate, and to
al superiors: also all seditious persons, fighters, murtheres, and such as
bear hatred or malice against their neighbor: they that are possessed and
carried with a spirit of revenging: whoremongers, adulteres, unchaste, given to
unnatural lust and uncleanness, drunkards, gluttones, full of deceit, of
covetousness, of theft, of usury: backebiters, skorners, false witnesses, liars,
men convicted of common perjury, and generaly all such as make a trade and
occupation of abusing the love of our neighbor, contained in the second table
of the law of God, are to be excluded out of the number of the faithful to
whom it belongs to be present at this holy and spiritual feast. For seeing
the Scriptures pronounce and testify that such have no fellowship with the
Lord, that they are shut out of the kingdom of heaven, and that they shall not
rest upon the holy hill of the Lord: they ought by great reason to be barred
from those holy singes, by the which the faithful are joined to Christ, and
made possessours of everlasting life.

A DIALOGVE WHEREIN WE are taught how we should come to the holy Supper of our
Lord Jesus Christ.
Father. HOw must we be prepared, when we come to the Lord his table, that we
may be worthy receivers of his holy Supper?


Child. We must examine our selves diligently, as we are warned by S. Paul in
his Epistle to the Corinthians.


F. In how many points lies this trial and examination of our selves?


C. Verily in two points. First, that we carry our selves toward God, who
calls and bids us to this holy banquet, as he has ordained in his
commandments, and as we are bound by our obedience: Secondly, that we have
regard of our behavior and bearing toward our brethren, which are no less
bidden nor welcome guests, then we, to this holy Banquet.


F. What is required in regard of our duty toward God?


C. There be three points, which are principal and heads to many other, wherein
this our duty toward God is founded.


F. Rehearse those three points wherein principally this duty stands.


C. The first is Faith: the next Repentance: and the last Thanksgiving.


F. What is Faith?


C. It is a firm and fast persuasion, or a certain assurance, that God is our
Father and Savior, in the name of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ.


F. Does this Faith spring out of our hearts as out of the founteine?


C. we are not the authors thereof: John 1.13.
but it is the gift of God, for the faithful are not borne of flesh nor of
blood, nor of the will of man, but of God.


F. What be the means which God uses to beget us unto him, and to endue us
with Faith?


C. None other then his holy and heavenly word, John. 17. Romans 10. Romans 8.
Galat. 4.
established and confirmed in us by the mighty working of his holy Spirit,
which cries in our hearts, Abba, that is to say Father.


F. Is not this Faith made firm and warrantable in us by the Lords Supper?


C. It must needs be so* first our Faith is signed and sealed in the Supper in
this respect, that therein Jesus Christ gives himself unto us, Matthew. 26.
Mark. 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 21.
assuring us that his body was given for us, and his blood was shed for the
redemption of our sins: and secondly, because the bread and the wine, which
we take, eat, and drink according to Gods ordinance and institution, teaches
us that by faith we take, eat, and drink the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
as the only food and norishment of our souls.


F. How say you by all the faithless and unbelieving members of mankind? can
they eat the body of Jesus Christ and drink his blood?


C. By no means: because they want true faith, without the which we cannot be
members of Christ, and so consequently cannot receive any life of him who is
the only head of all the faithful.


F. Then what benefit receives the Infidel if he communicate with the
faithful in this sacrament?


C. He is so far from receiving an earnest or pledge of his salvation, 1.
Cor. 11.
that he eats and drinks his own damnation.


F. In what place is Jesus Christ to be sought for of the faithful, minding to
lay hold on him, and to possess him?


C. Coloss. 3.
In heaven. For if we be risen with Christ, we must seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God his Father.


F. Is not that the reason, why the Priests in old time, when they ministered
the Supper, used to say to the people: Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts?


C. It is the very true reason of that manner: and to the same purpose the
people answered, Habemus ad Dominum, we lift them up unto the Lord.


F. Then how can we be coupled, or rather be made one with Jesus Christ, who
rests in the heavens, we remaining upon the earth?


Child. By Faith, and by the mighty working of the holy Ghost, to whom it is
an easy matter to knitte and to join together whatsoever things be divided
and severed by distance of place.


F. What is your mind, or what shall we say to those that seek Christ Jesus
in the elements of the Supper, namely in the bread and the wine, affirming
that the very substance of the bread and wine is chainged into the substantial
body and blood of Jesus Christ?


Child. We may boldly affirm, that they are out of the way, for diverse
causes. First, in that directly they gainesay three several Articles of our
Faith, namely, those that import the ascension of Christ up into the heavens:
his sitting at the right hand of God: and his continual abiding there until
he come to judge the quick and the dead. And secondly, by their vain and
ridiculous changing of substances, they abolish and take away the sign of the
Sacrament, to wit, the bread and the wine, and so consequently they take away
the supper it self, which cannot remain, if the sign thereof be taken away.


F. Are not other gross and unreasonable points to be found, in this strange
doctrine of their changing of substances?


C. There are yet more: as these by name: that it gives that which is holy to
filthy swine, and no less then the faithful, makes the Infidel and
unbeliever partaker of this holy banquet, wherein Jesus Christ is given to be
eaten, and only of the faithful: again it causes men to become idolators,
and to worship the Sacrament: also it makes the glorious body of Jesus Christ
subject to putrefying and to become no better then the filthy dung of man's
body: and lastly it abolisheth the true humanity of the Son of God,
because it would have his body to be infinite, and to be at once in all places.


F. Why? has not Jesus Christ witnessed, saying, And lo, I am with you always
until the end of the world? Acts 3.21.
and again, for where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am
I in the midst of them.


C. So it is: but these places import the presence of his divinity, not the
presence of his humanity. And this I prove by the testimony of Jesus Christ
himself, who says in the Gospel: The poor ye shall have always with you,
but me ye shall not have always: also by that which S. Peter witnesses in the
Acts, saying in these words concerning Christ, Whom the heaven must contain,
until the time that all things be restored.


F. Then you conclude, that Jesus Christ, albeit he is among us by his
divinity and his holy spirit, in respect of his humanity can be in no more
then in one, and that one a certain place, and namely in heaven.


C. That is my meaning, and so meant S. Augustine saing, Till heaven and earth
shall be destroyed, the Lord shall continually remain above in the heavens. The
Truth of the Lord also remains with us: for it must needs be, that the body
wherein he rose up, should be in one, and that a certain place: but his Truth
is spread over the face of the whole earth.


F. What is the sum of this true faith, which seeks Jesus Christ, not upon
the earth, but in the heavens?


C. Math. 28. Math. 18.20
This is the sum: I believe in God the father, who has created me: I believe
in Jesus Christ, who has redeemed me from sin, from Satan, from hell* and
from death: I believe in the holy ghost, who sanctifies me.


F. Why say you so in particular, I believe, and say not in general, we
believe?


C. Because Every man must examine himself, Habac. 2. Romans 1. Gal. 3. Heb. 10.
and live by his own faith, not by the faith of other.


F. And how may this be done?


C. If we shall apply to every of us in particular, Jesus Christ himself with
all his blessings and rich treasures.


F. What are the rich treasures to be found in Jesus Christ?


C. There is salvation for them that are lost, life for them that are dead,
truth for them that are liars, wisdom for them that are ignorant,
righteousness for sinners, holiness and sanctification for the ungodly, and
redemption for captives, and them that are in bondage.


F. Must we not then by faith apply all those things unto our selves, seeing
we are all by nature lost, dead, liars, ignorant, sinful, defiled, ungodly, and
captives.


C. Yes verily. For Jesus Christ has taken upon him al our need and misery,
to make us partakers of al his blessings and rich treasures which in very
deed, are distributed unto us in his holy Supper.


F. Now let us speak of the second part of our duty toward God, which
consists in Repentance: and first, what is Repentance?


C. It is a disliking of that is evil, and a love of that is good.


F. To the end we may have our sins in disliking and hatred, is it not
necessary, that we know them?


C. It is necessary.


F. How come we to have knowledge of the evil that dwells in us?


C. Johan 3.
First we know by our original birth. For that which is borne of the flesh, is
flesh. Secondly because we transgress the law of God, the rule of al
perfection and righteousness. And thirdly, by the ordinary afflictions and
calamities that God sends upon us for our sins and iniquities.


F. May we not also behold in the Sacraments a mirror of our sins and
offenses?


C. We may. For if we were no sinners we should not stand in need of that
forgiveness of the^ which is signified in Baptism. And again, except we were
dead, it should be in vain that we come to the Supper to seek life and
salvation in Jesus Christ.


F. When we know our sins, are we there to rest, and not to proceed further,
namely to make confession of the same?


C. Psalm. 31. and 51. Luke 18.
We must also confess our sins after the example of David and of the
Publican, if we will obtain righteousness before God.


F. Why should it be necessary for us to know and to confess our sins
before God?


C. To the end we may obtain forgiveness, and a full and absolute remission,
according as God is just and faithful to perform his promises.


F. Why does God forgive us our sins?


C. Math. 5. and 18.
To three especial and principal ends and purposes. First that we should be
reconciled to our enemies: secondly, to the end we should freely forgive them,
and thirdly, to the end we should abstain from sin and live after
righteousness.


F. Is there ought in the Supper which puts us in mind to fly from sin,
and to abhor it?


C. There is* for even the very breaking of the bread in the Supper, does
teach us that our sins have broken and bruised the son of God with the
sorrows of death.


F. What is hereupon to be gathered?


C. That we ought to condemn our sins and to have them in abomination, as
the causes of the death of the son of God.


F. Is it sufficient to abstain from evil, without further proceeding in doing
of good?


C. No forsooth. Math. 3. and 7
for Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire.

And therefore is the evil and foolish servant cast into utter darkness, Math.
25.
not because he had vnthriftilie spent his masters talent, but because by his
diligence and painfulness he had done no good therewithal, ne had raised any
commodity thereby unto his master.


F. Then be like it is requisite that every one according to the talent which
he has received of God, should glorify him in that vocation wherein he is
placed and appointed.


C. Surely so it is, if we desire to enter with the good servant into the joy
of his master.


F. To the end we may do the thing that is good, ought we not to seek the
knowledge thereof?


C. We ought: and namely by these means, by the law of God and generally by
all the parts of the holy scripture, which teaches us plainly what those
good works are which God requires us to perform.


F. Whether does the Supper, or any part thereof exhort us to a godly life, or
no?


C. It does: for whereas we are united to Jesus Christ, made flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone: also, whereas we are made partakers of his
holiness and righteousness, we are taught that we should be holy as he is
holy.


F. What else?


C. Whereas we meet and assemble together in his holy Church, which is the
communion of sancts: whereas by the working of the holy ghost, we call upon one
father, who is most holy: lastly whereas we hear his holy and heavenly word,
and also have part of his holy sacraments: we are exhorted, I say, by all these
reasons to an holiness and pureness of life.


F. Is this holiness, which God requires of us, perfect in this world or no?


C. It is not: for so we understand even by the examples of the sancts
themselves during their life of mortality. And contrariwise, even until the
very last gasp, we shall continually have need to be humble suitors to God for
the remission of our sins in Jesus Christ.


F. Can this holiness being imperfect be pleasant and acceptable to God which
is pefect?


C. Yea verily: so far as we endeavor by the assistance of his holy spirit
and by Faith, to obey the commandments of God, by Jesus Christ, who with the
cloak and ma^tle of his own righteousness, covers all our defalts, wants, and
imperfections.


F. Now let us come to the third point of our duty toward God. Wherein said
you ere while it did consist?


C. In acknowledging the benefits we have received and daily receive of God,
and chiefelie the benefit of our redemption by Jesus Christ.


F. Is it not therefore, that the ancient fathers called the holy Supper,
Eucharistia, that is to say, a Thanksgiving?


C. It is: and I say further, that this acknowledging of Gods benefits is
necessary for all those that communicate at the Lords table: as Jesus Christ
himself has taught us by his own example: and has commanded us beside, to
celebrate the Supper in remembrance of him.


F. How many conditions are to be regarded of us in this acknowledging of Gods
benefits?


C. There are four principal points: of which the first is, that this
recognisance is to be made to one God, by his only son Jesus Christ: the
second, that it proceed not only out of our mouths, but also out of the
very bottom and secreat corners of our hearts.


F. Does it not follow hereupon, that all those that call upon sancts, and
render not thanks to God alone by his son Jesus Christ, are greatly deceived?


C. Yes verily: and on the other side, all hypocrites praying in an unknown
and strange language, are no les out of the way, because they honor and worship
God with their lips only, and not with their hearts.


F. What be the two other conditions annexed to this recognisance, to the end
it may be acceptable and agreeable to God our heavenly father?


C. The one is, that it ought to be used at al times, to wit, as well in
adversity as in prosperity: the other that it be practiced privately and also
in public and in the midst of the congregation of the faithful.


F. Now, seeing we have sufficiently spoken of our duty toward God: let us
speak of our duty toward our neighbor.


C. I say, it consists in true love and brotherly union, which of necessity
attends and waits upon Faith and upon the pure serving and worshipping of
God.


F. What is the true rule of love and charity toward our neighbor?


C. That we love our neighbor as our selves: or that we love one another, as
Christ has loved us.


F. How has Jesus Christ loved us?


C. He loved us when we were his enemies, wicked, ungracious and abominable in
the sight of God.


F. Are not we taught by his example, to love our enemies, though they be
wicked and ungodly persons?


C. We are: for in that point we must also be framed and fashioned after the
image of our head, Jesus Christ.


F. Was the love of Christ Jesus, wherewith he loved us, a feined love, or has
it continued only for a season?


C. No truly: for he has loved us, not only in word, but also in deed* he
has not loved us only for a short time, but also even to the end, to the
death, and to the shedding of his precious blood for our ransom.


F. And ought we not herein to follow his example?


C. Yea that we ought, for the avoiding of all dissembling and inconstancy, so
often as there is occasion to love our brethren, and to declare this our love
unto them by our deeds.


F. Besides the example of Jesus Christ, are we not exhorted to this true love,
by certain reasons and arguments in the Supper?


C. We are: and first in that we communicate all together in one company, that
we eat the same meat, that we call upon the same father, that we have all of
us one head Jesus Christ, that we are al quickened by his holy spirit, in these
respects I say, we ought to be stirred up to true love and brotherly Charity
one toward another. Secondly the making of the bread and the wine which we
receive in the supper, ought to exhort us to the same charity.


F. How so?


C. Because, that, even as the bread is made of many corns, which afterward
are joined together to the making of one loaf* and eue^ as the wine is made of
many grapes, which afterward are pressed together to the making of one
liquour: so ought all the professors of Christ, which are many being considered
single and several, to be made one by love in one body, which is the church of
God.


F. Can this love whereunto we are exhorted in the Supper by so many reasons,
abide and dwell in them whose hearts are full of hatred and malice toward
their brethren?


C. It cannot: and therefore we must put all wrongs and injuries out of our
minds, we must be reconciled to those with whom we have bin offended, we must
forgive and pardon them freely, even so as we pray unto God that he would
forgive and pardon us.


F. Then we may well conclude upon the whole that has bin hitherto spoken, that
all those, which do not their duty as well toward God as toward their
neighbor, ought not to be admitted to the holy Supper.


C. We may indeed and therefore the true minister of Christ, ought to be very
circumspect and well advised, that he Give not that which is holy to those that
are commonly known, and as it were pointed at of al men with the finger, for
Dogs and swine.


F. The God of al mercy and love so garnish and furnish our hearts with faith,
and repentance, that with a pure and sincere affection we may both publish and
show forth his praises, and also love our neighbors as Jesus Christ has loved
us, to the end we come not to his holy table as infidels and impenitent
wretches do, to our own damnation, but rather to our everlasting salvation:
being well assured and certainly persuaded, that so truly we shall enjoy the
life, the benefits, and the rich treasours of Jesus Christ, as we use the
elements which he has appointed and ordained to be most certain and
infallible tokens of life everlasting, in the same his well-beloved Son our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.


C. Amen.


FINIS.
A DIALOGVE ENTREATING OF THE LORD HIS SVPPER. Made by I. de l'Espine, Minister
of the word of God.
The Minister. YOu know my brethren, that Jesus Christ when he instituted his
holy supper commanded us to prove our selves before we do eat of the
bread and drink of the cup which are offered unto us therein; threatening
and fearing us with our own condemnation if we presume contrary to his
commandment to eat and to drink not discerning the Lord his body. And
forasmuch as by reason of my duty, I have to account before his majesty, not
only for my self, but also for you which have been committed to my charge:
I purpose to examine you all one after another, touching this point, before I
do admit you, or any of you to this holy table: that I may understand whether
you have sufficient instruction in these matters, and have rightly conceived
and kept in memory such points as I have of late times handled for your better
preparing thereunto. Wherefore I pray you Eusebius answer me, and tell me
what is the chiefest thing and most requisite to be known for the sufficient
understanding of this whole mystery.


Eusebius. The chiefest point wherein you said we ought to be perfectly informed
and instructed, was to my understanding and remembrance, touching the Author,
by whom the Supper was ordained: and that it was not to be taken for some
dream, or thing only imagined and conceived in the brain and fancy of man,
but for an holy and an inviolable ordinance of our God; which, without great
impiety and prejudice to our own salvation, we can neither break in the
whole, nor neglect in any part or parcel.


Minist. What was my reason for this first and principal point?


Eusebius. It was to this effect, that except we have a certain knowledge and
assurance, that this ceremony is one of God his own ordinances, we cannot be
persuaded in our consciences, that in keeping the same we do please his
majesty: and further, that except this point have taken deep root in our
hearts by the power of his word, we are prone and ready continually to take
away the honor and estimation thereunto belonging: and by reputing it either a
vain and needelesse matter, or at the most a thing indifferently to be
received or refused, we are ever at the point to set light by it and to deride
it: For even therefore despise we the whole rabble of Turkish and Jewish
ceremonies, because they are grounded only upon the will of such as ordained
them, and upon the superstitious ignorance and blindness of the common people
which keep and worship them.


Minist. Show me now by whom it was appointed: to the end we may understand
what we do, when we come to the Lord his table. For as you have very well
said, it is not only requisite for the assuring and staying of our
consciences that our faith be builded upon his promises, but also that our
obedience be squared and ruled by his commandments: to the end that our inward
intention and meaning in all things may be guided and governed by the light of
his word: and as we do acknowledge him to be our father by the trust that we
repose upon his goodness, so we may in like manner confess him to be our
sovereign Lord, by the fear and reverence which we shall carry toward his
heavenly majesty, and by the careful minds which we shall show to be in us
toward the keeping of his ordinances: protesting hereby that we will hope to
receive nothing but at his hands, and that we will commit nothing which shall
not be agreeable to his holy will and pleasure.


Eusebius. This holy supper was ordained and appointed by our Lord and master
Jesus Christ, as it appears by that which is written by his holy Evangelists,
Matthew. 26. Mark. 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
saint Matthew, Mark, and Luke, in their several writings, and by his Apostle
S. Paul in his first to the Corinthians: in which places after he had
distributed the bread and wine to his disciples he commanded them to do the
like in the remembrance of him, and thereby to declare his death, and to preach
the same until his coming.


Minist. Then it is out of all doubt that the supper is a ceremony ordained
and appointed by God, and that all the faithful thereof capeable, are bound
to celebrate the same by his commandment. But forasmuch as that duty ought
to be most reverently performed, and for the better and more holy use thereof
it is needful to understand to what end and purpose it was ordained, I would
have you to show me for the second point, what is the end of the Lord his
supper.


Eusebius. The supper was instituted to this end and purpose, that we might
thereby be edified and instructed, which thing Jesus Christ did always set as
a mark before his eyes in all that he either taught or appointed to be done in
his Church.


Minist. How and wherein are we taught and edified by celebrating the supper?


Eusebius. We are instructed in Faith and Charity, the only points wherein the
salvation and duty of al Christians, and in general the whole body of the
religion of our savior Jesus Christ is contained.


Minist. How I pray you is our faith hereby edified?


Eusebius. Our faith is edified, 1. Cor. 15.
as the Apostle says, when we are instructed, comforted, exhorted, and assured
by the word of God, and when as by his spirit the power thereof is engraven
in our hearts. Now both the Sacraments, that is to wit, of Baptism and of the
Lord his Supper, are nothing else (as it is notably said of Saint Augustine)
but visible words, wherein, as it were in goodly and fair Tables, God sets
out before our eyes, his love, his favor, his benefits and graces drawn in
lively and natural colors: to the end that we beholding the same therein,
and setting our eyes firmly upon the gracious goodness that he shows to
us therein expressed, might be well assured and comforted in our consciences
and be even so affected, as we are when we do either read the gracious
letters or behold the lively pictures of our loving friends.


Minist. What be those graces and benefits which we are principally to
consider in the Supper?


Eusebius. That Jesus Christ, who is there represented, is our life; that is the
heavenly bread sent down from his father upon the earth for the nourishment
and sustentation of our souls: that in taking the bread and wine, we are
received into the communion of his body, and so consequently, assured to be
partakers of his righteousness and obedience, which are imputed to all them
that are knit together and united in one with him: further, that he has
redeemed us, and made eternal satisfaction for all our sins: that he has
purged and cleansed our filthy spots and blemishes with his blood: that the
sentence of condemnation pronounced against him, is our absolution: that the
payment, which he has made, is a full and perfect acquittance and warrant for
all our debts: that he is the sacrifice, by the which the wrath of God against
us has been appeased and pacified: and that his death is the mean, whereby
we are reconciled to him, and received into his favor; without the which we
can hope neither for life nor salvation.


Minist. You say, Eusebius, that the principal point, that is taught us in the
mystery of the supper, and that we are to learn therein and to call to
remembrance so often as we come to the table to celebrate the same, is that
Jesus Christ is our life: nevertheless it seems that this is contrary to
that which you lately said, speaking of the fruits of Faith and attributing
thereunto our salvation: and further repugnant to that which is written in the
Psalms, where David magnifying the graces of God, Psalm. 36.
says, That in him is the well of life; and that our light proceeds only
from his brightness. Fo if the humanity of Jesus Christ crucified and offered
up unto God for our redemption, is the cause of our life, how can it be that
God and our Faith are the causes and occasions thereof?


Eusebius. The one of these is no hinderance to the other, as you declared unto us
at large in one of your sermons. It is most certain, and of al men confessed,
that God is the author of our life: and that in him we have our being, feeling,
moving, and understanding. Further, that in beholding his shining countenance,
consists the full contentment of all our desires, and our most perfect and
blessed estate: because it is the chiefest and most sovereign good, which
comprehending under it all other particular good things, has sufficient in
that respect to content and satisfy all our appetites and desires, when we
have obtained and do enioie the same. But the mean to have fruition and
possession thereof, and to draw near unto him, is Jesus Christ his son. For
even as without God there is no life; so without Jesus Christ there is no God,
as S. John does witness, saying: 1. Ioh 2.
whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father: and, whosoever
confesses the Son, the same has the Father also. And Saint Paul in his
Epistles written to the Galathians and Ephesians; to whom he shows that in
the time of their ignorance, and when they knew not Jesus Christ, they were
without God in the world. And this is the cause why he was called by the Angel
and by the Prophet, Emanuel, which in Hebrewe is as much to say, as, God is
with us: to show unto us that there is no other mean to join and knit us
together with him, then that mean of his son; which may also be proved by
this reason. It is not possible for us to have any fellowshippe with God, who
is righteous and a most clear and perfect light, so long as we continue in
our sins and darkness: in as much as two things so fully and directly
contrary, cannot meet together, ne endure each other. Wherefore it must needs
be that before any agreement or league can be entreated of between him and us,
we are to be freed and deliucred from the causes of our separation from God,
which can by no other mean be compassed and obtained then by Jesus Christ. For
he is the true light which enlighteneth every man th^^ comes into the world:
Ihon 1.
he is the Lamb that takes away our sins. Whereupon it follows of
necessity, that if we will be reconciled and joined unto God, we must be made
partakers of the righteousness of his son and must be lightened by his
spirit: to the end that he covering our filthynesse and imperfections with the
one, and driving away by little and little the darkness that dwells in us
with the other, may hereby take away the lettes and hindrances, by the which
this happy league and agreement is broken and turned aside from our benifite.
And forasmuch as he is the way by the which we are to come to this agreement,
and so consequently to the life and felicity that depends thereon. For this
cause he is called life as well as his Father. John. 6.
Whosoever eats my flesh (says he) and drincketh my blood, has eternal
life: for my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As the
living Father has sent me, so live I by the Father: and he that eats me,
even he shall live by me. Al which places do serve to no other end and purpose,
then to give us to understand, that his humanity, crucified for our sins
has the power to bring us to life, and to quicken us, by reconciling us unto
God, when we eat thereof: that is to say, when we by a true and lively Faith
do, as it were, get a propriety in the sa^e unto our selves, and being united
and ingrafted into it, do lie there as it were at a sure anchor, by a firm and
steadfast trust and confidence. For by this mean we are joined unto the
divinity, which is the well of life and of al blessedness. For this cause
Tertullian says that our flesh is fed with the flesh of Jesus Christ, to
the end that our soul may be refreshed and filled with God. To which purpose
we may refer two notable places of S. Augustine, the one in his commentaries
upon S. lohn: where he says (speaking of the faithful man) By Christ thou
come to Christ: by Christ man, to Christ God. By the word which was made
flesh, to the word which was in the beginning with GOD: by the bread which is
eaten of men, to that which is eaten of Angels. The other place is in one of
his Homilies upon the Psalms, where he sets forth a most excellent
comparison taken from the Nource and her young child. The nource and the
child (says he) do eat one self and the same meat, but after a diverse
manner: for the milk which the child sucketh out of her breasts, is the
bread that his nource before had eaten: but for the better preparing and
ordering of it in such sort as the child might let it down, and thereby
receive his nourishment, it was needful that first i^ should be incarnate in
her, and that it should be turned into blood in her liver, to the end it
might become the more sweet and delicate for the child his drinking, and
being carried from the liver to the breasts, that it should be there changed
into milk, and even there should receive a strange kind of whiteness, least
the child seeing it in the former color should have been afraid of it and
abhor it. Even so (says he) soon after applying his comparison, the Angels
and we do live and are fed with one and the same food: for neither they nor
we have any strength or life, or liveliness, but by the only everlasting
and almighty word of God: neither is there any other difference, but that
the food that they receive in meat, we receive in milk: for by reason of
our infirmity and weakness, it was needful that this word should be made
flesh, and by that mean should be applied to the capacity and strength of our
stomach, that we might be able to digest it, and to be nourished and sustained
by it.


Minister. I perceive Eusebius, that you were not in sleep at my sermon, who
do so faithfully rehearse what you have heard. O that it might please God
that all the rest of my auditors would be so attentive and had so great and
singular desire to make profit by the word, as I verily believe you have.
But the further I proceed in my exercise, I have the better experience, that
for the most part they are so cold and careless, that I am constrained to
complain of them, and to show you my grief in that behalf.


Eusebius. If I be diligent to learn the word of God, and in any small
measure capable of the knowledge thereof, I am bound to render unto him all
praise and thanks, and to confess that without his Spirit of my own nature
I should have as little taste and feeling thereof, as the most carnal and
earthly manne in the world. But to the end we do not discontinue and break
off our former matter, if memory fail not, for a further and more full
declaration of the mystery whereof we do now entreat, to the former
similitude of saint Augustine you joined another taken from the body of man,
the members whereof cannot by any means have part of the life which springs
and proceeds from the soul remaining in the body, except they be united and
joined with it: no more is it possible for us to be quickened by this fullness
of the Godheade which (as saint Paul says) dwells bodily in Jesus Christ,
Coloss. 2.
and gives life to the whole Church, except we be members of his body, flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bone.


Minister. You have sufficiently declared how the humanity and flesh of Jesus
Christ is the mean of our life. But as concerning Faith, whereof the Prophet
and Apostle have written, Abac. 2. Romans 1.
that the just shall live by it, how are we to understand this point?


Eusebius. I said at the first that there is no life without God, and next, that
there is no God without Jesus Christ: now I say following the like course,
that there is no Jesus Christ without Faith* for by Faith we rcceiue him, as
Saint John witnesses: John. 1.
and he comes to dwell in our hearts, as Saint Paul writes to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.
by Faith: which he confirms by his own mouth, saying. If any man love me
he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and will dwell with him. For the union which we have with him is spiritual and
like to that which is between the husband and the wife. For even as they be
joined and coupled together for ever by mutual promises and by that faith and
truth wherein those promises are mutuallie accepted, notwithstanding that their
bodies do change neither the outward shape and form, ne yet their natural kind
and sex; and that for this coupling and knitting of man and wife it is not
required or meant that both of the^ should visibly become one body, like as wine
and water being mingled together in one cup or vessel: so to marry and to
join us to Jesus Christ, it is not needeful that our bodies should be bound in
one with his body, as we see the members of one body are bound together by
the muscles, cords, sinews and gristles of the same: which happening it would
be the most monstrous thing that a man could imagine to be in nature. But the
chief and only matter is, that those promises which he makes unto us,
namely, to comfort us, if we will come unto him, to defend us, to save, to
quicken us, to redeem us, to raise us up from the dead, to pardon us, and such
like, that his promises (I say) be believed of us and firmly persuaded, that
we like and accept of them, and have assurance in them, promisinge unto him in
like manner on our behalfes, that we acknowledge none other then him alone for
our King and Priest, our sheppard and our Prophet: that we will hear no other
voice or doctrine but his: that for our satisfaction, remission, and salvation
we will use no other sacrifice the^ that, which is once offered for us: that we
will choose none other Advocate or Attornie then him, when we would be
recommended in any of our necessities to the good grace and favor and aid of
his Father: that for our defense and safeguard against the evil spirit and
against al other our enemies we will have recourse, and put our whole affiance in
his power and strength: and to be breife, that we will not hold our life and our
whole felicity of any other then of him. In these promises given, taken, and
kept of both parties, consists the alliance and league, that we have with
Jesus Christ. And even as a woman, that is lawfully married to an husband
misdoubteth not, albeit her husband abide at Constantinople and she at Paris,
that notwithstanding the sundring of their bodies, and great distance between
the places, where they abide, they are nevertheless one flesh, and that there
is a perfect conjunction between them, and such a bond and knot of friendship
as is not to be loosed: so albeit that Christ Jesus be in heaven and we upon
the earth, we ought certeinely to be persuaded that after the marriage made
between him and us by the mean of Faith, wherein we have accepted his
foresaid promises, we are one with him, and that this union is nothing
impeached by the difference of places, where we abide and continue.


Minist. Then your meaning is, that Faith is not the cause of our life, but
inasmuch as it does marry us to Jesus Christ, by whom we are afterward led
and conducted even to God, with whom we find all the happiness that we can
ask and desire. This is very well meant and understood of you: But what will
you say to that which Saint Paul has written touching the word of the Gospel,
Romans 1.
that it is the power of God unto salvation to all believers?


Eusebius. Saint Paul says so, because there is no Faith without the word, no
more then there is Jesus Christ without Faith: Romans 10.
for Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And to this
purpose is the preaching of the Gospel, and the administration of the
sacraments. By the one the Spirit of God inspireth and planteth Faith in our
hearts, and by the other he confirms and establishes the same: to the end
that by this mean being made the members of Jesus Christ, we might draw nearer
unto God, and live in him.


Minist. Then the sum of all that you have hitherto discoursed is, that our
blessed estate and eternal life, is to possess God; and to possess him, to be
members of Jesus Christ: and to be his members, to have Faith; and to have
Faith, that the Gospel be preached and the Sacraments administered unto us: in
as much as Faith is engendered by the word, and after confirmed nourished, and
increased in us, by the Sacraments thereunto annexed.


Eusebius. You propounded unto us a similitude of the lamp which seemed unto me a
very fit and proper way to declare unto us in some good manner, the
properties and use as well of Faith, as of the Sacraments: you said that Faith
was like unto the fire, in as much as by the light thereof it brings us to
the sight and knowledge of God, of Jesus Christ our saving health, and of our
selves: that the cotton, about the which the fire is lighted, did resemble the
word and the gracious promises, whereon the said Faith is built and founded:
and that the sacraments are as the oil, that serves to keep in the fire, so
as it neither be diminished, nor put out altogether.


Minist. Can you remember the matter, which I drew out of this similitude, and
the end wherefore I brought it into my discourse?


Eusebius. I take it that it was to show unto us, that the Supper can serve us to
small purpose, unless that first we be furnished with Faith in our hearts, and
that is it of no more use then oil is in a lamp when no fire is lighted, or
then a seal to a letter wherein is nothing written.


Minist. Then you may perceive, Eusebius, and understand, that it is not
without great reason that the ancient fathers have called these two ceremonies
of Baptism, and of the Supper, mysteries and sacraments, the deep, divine,
and hidden sense and meaning of them considered: and that S. Augustine has not
amiss applied that unto them, which is written of God by David in the Psalms:
Psalm. 18.
that He made darkness his secret place, and his pauilion round about him,
even darkness of waters, ana clouds of the air. For who would think at
the first assaie, that the gracious favor of God, the benefit of Jesus
Christ, the forgiveness of sins, and generally all the parts of our
salvation, and redemption, were so excellently set out in a little water,
bread and wine, as you have ^eclared unto us in particularitie? David called
the ancient ceremonies and the order that was kept in the Church in his days,
The face of God, Psalm. 24.
because the faithful did therein see and behold, as in a glass, his promises,
his favor, and his gracious goodness. But this name may be more properly
given to our ceremonies, because they are more significant, and do bear the
marks and tokens of his favor toward us, more lively and perfectly set
out, and more deeply imprinted in them, then the other. But I suppose you
have now sufficiently declared how our faith is edified by the Sacraments:
proceed to the rest, and show me by what mean our charity is instructed.


Eusebius. 1. Cor. 10.
Saint Paul says, that we that are many are one bread, and one body,
because we all are partakers of one bread. Even as therefore in the supper we
are taught that there is no other mean to obtain salvation then by Jesus
Christ, dead and crucified for us: so we do protest by the bread and wine
that we receive, that, if we will be partakers of this salvation, we must be
united and made one with him, and in him al of us together one with another.
Whereunto is required a charity, not of the tongue, the outward gesture or
speech, not common or ordinary, not cold and remiss: but an ardent and
hearty affection, holding us also fast, and locking us, at it were, so sure
and so close together in one body, that if it were a thing possible a man
might no sooner sunder and divide us one from an other, then the grains of
corn after the bread is baken, or the grapes can be divided when the wine is
tunned.


Minist. Yea, but can it be that when we come to the table we should so
perfectly love each other, as that there be not in the whole body of the
Church more then one heart, one soul, one spirit, and one mind?


Eusebius. In this case we do not speak of that Faith and Charity, which we
have, or can have when we celebrate the supper: but of that only which is
taught us therein: for I have heard you say, and rehearse often, that their is
great difference between the power of man, and the duty of man, between his
practice, and his precepts, and that we are always more indebted then we use
to pay, even as we are ever better taught and instructed, then we can learn or
follow. For the wisdom of God being perfect and infinite, it cannot be but
the law (as David says) proceeding from him, Psalm. 19.
must needs be very entire and perfect. But if our power and ability to
keep the law be either none at all, or so weak, as it can very hardly
stir ad remove it self: how is it possible that our obedience should not be
imperfect? in like manner our faith, our charity, and in general whatsoever
we do, or whatsoever proceeds from us?


Minist. You say well, Eusebius, we may not confound or trouble the order
that is to be kept in handling of this matter: and it suffiseth that you have
now showed us what is taught and signified unto us in the Supper: for you shall
more fitly and more conveniently show forth the property of Faith and
Charity which we are to bring with us to this Supper, when we shall entreat
what course and mean we ought to follow, to come unto it worthily. Now to
continue the vein of your discourse, you shall give us to understand, who
they be that are invited and bidden to this supper, and whither that all manner
of persons indifferently are fit to celebrate the same?


Eusebius. As they did eat (says S. Matthew) Jesus took the bread, and after
he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his disciples. He notes
plainly, that the bread which he did take and break in the supper was given
only to his disciples and scholars, to signify unto us, that we do eat it
unworthily, if we know not Jesus Christ, and be not in some good measure
instructed in his gospel. And so by this reason are excluded and barred from
this feast al ignorant persons, all Infidels, contemners, and blasphemers. For
if the Sacrament was not ordained to any other purpose, as was said before,
then for the confirming, exercising, and increasing of our faith: what benefit
would it be unto us if there were no faith to be found in our hearts?
Furthermore, is the end whereunto it was deputed, be to shadow forth and to
set before our eyes Jesus Christ crucified, how can this end be attained and
compassed, if our eyes be out and we remain in blindenes? For the light is for
none other then for such as have eyes to see it. Again if we be dead, as in
truth we are no better being utterly void of knowledge and belief, the bread
that is ordained only to shape and to strengthen the life of him that eats,
cannot be profitable unto us, except we be first revived and raised up again
from death. And yet further, for what reason wills S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11.
that we should Examine and prove our selves before we come to the table, But
only to give us knowledge, that we are utterly unworthy of that benefit,
being unfurnished of Faith, which is so necessary for the good and lawful use
thereof? for if al things be polluted and defiled to the unbelievers, yea if
our daily and ordinary meats are not sanctified but by the word and by
prayer: if whatsoever is done without Faith, be sin: how should not this
holy mystery be profaned and made unholy, when we, either plainly
ignorant, or not sufficiently taught, are so hardy as to set us down at the
king his table, and to go to the marriage of his son without our wedding
garment? Further why is it that Jesus Christ so straightly forbids his
Apostles, To give that which is holy unto dogs, and to cast pearls before
swine, but only to admonish them that they become wise, and well advised to
dispense the word and the mysteries of God? Again, the commandment of God,
wherein we are charged, that We take not his name in vain, is plainly and
generally given to al men: neither yet may we suppose, as you did teach us
very well, that only false oaths are in that commandment forbidden: for
every unlawful using as well of his name, as of his word, and of his ordinances
is in like manner therein contained. Wherefore it remains that we conclude
upon the former reasons, that the faithful only are capeable to celebrate the
Lord his Supper. And by the faithful I do understand those that have a lively
and actual faith, begotten of the word of God, and grounded upon his promises.


Minist. I take great pleasure and contentment in you, Eusebius, in that you
are so diligent and paineful to gather such textes and reasons, as are alleged
to prove and to persuade that which a man shall undertake. For it is not
possible that by any other mean the faith of any man in the world could be
fast, and firm, and well assured, and that he could render a reason of his
belief, to those that require him to make an account thereof: which thing is
easily experimented in diverse, that have some knowledge and opinion of the
truth; but because the same is not well grounded nor fensed with scripture, it
cannot be sound and perfect, ne yet of any great edifying, which I thought
good to touch beside the matter, whereof we do principally entreat, to the end
that hereafter you be yet more curious to follow the same course and custom.
And now to come again to our chief matter; having showed what is the mystery
of the supper, and who they be that God bids to the same; it is time that
you proceed and go forward, and that you tell us how we ought to draw near,
and to present our selves unto it.


Eusebius. 1. Cor. 11.
The Apostle says: Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup. Wherein he warns us diligently to
examine our consciences, so often as we are minded and purposed to celebrate the
same.


Minist. Wherein ought we to examine our selves?


Eusebius. In two points: to wit, whither we have both Faith and Charity.


Minist. What manner of Faith is required?


Eusebius. The whole Christian Faith is in a sum contained in the Apostles Creed:
wherefore we are to consider, not only whither we do understand the history of
those things, which are briefly set forth therein by articles; as, That Jesus
Christ has taken our nature, that he died, rose again, and ascended into
heaven, where he sits at the right hand of his Father, and from thence he
shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: but it is further requisite,
that we search and sound the bottom of our hearts, to know whither they be
settled and reposed upon that which we confess, as upon the only mean of our
salvation, and whither we be resolved to persevere and continue constantly in
this affiance and trust only, even to the end of our natural life,
renouncing all other as most vain and pernicious to our salvation. And above
all things we ought to beware that we be not deceived by hypocrisy or
simplicity, which may bring us in a conceit, that a bare opinion and
credulity or lightness of belief, is true Faith: for there is nothing that
can make so grievous a fault excusable, but rather it is damnable before the
majesty of God.


Minist. Whereby may we learn and judge that we have a true and sincere faith,
and such a Faith as is required to the worthy eating of the bread at the Lord
his table?


Eusebius. When we do perfectly understand the things that are delivered in the
articles of the Apostles Creed, with the end of Christ his coming into the
world: when we are well and surely persuaded of the truth and certeintie of
them, and this persuasion does comfort and assure our consciences of the
remission of our sins, in such manner as it takes away the horror and the
dreadful conceit that we have apprehended of God his eternal judgment;
Lastly, when this is so deeply engraven and imprinted in our hearts, that
notwithstanding any temptation or affliction that may happen unto us, we do
always hold a steadfast hope of his gracious favor, and of the life eternal
that depends upon the same: then we may assure our selves that we have a
Christian Faith allowed and approved of him, in the use and receiving or
understanding of his mysteries.


Minist. And would you require in a man perfect knowledge of the Creed, in the
which the whole sum of the scriptures is in a manner contained? and further,
perfect trust and affiance in all the promises of God, the accomplishment and
fulfilling of the which is procured unto us by the intercession and favor of
his son? and thirdly a constancy in all this so perfect, that no temptation
should shake us and make us to stagger therein, or otherwise exclude it and
cast it out from the Supper?


Eusebius. No: for the Apostles themselves, to whom Jesus Christ did first
distribute the same, were imperfect in all this matter, as experience showed in
the temptation that happened unto them soon after. Further, if we should not
be fit to receive it except our Faith were fully perfect; then it is evident it
should have been instituted and ordained in vain, for so long as we continue
in this mortal life, we are no more able to believe in God perfectly, then we
are able to know or to love him perfectly. Again, the end for which it was
ordained, is it not to uphold and to underset our Faith? If then our Faith had
been sufficiently strong and able of it self, what use should there be of
the sacraments? These reasons are sufficient to prove, that we are not
incapable of the Lord his supper, by the imperfection and weakness of our
Faith: provided allwaies, that the same be unfeigned, and that we acknowledging
the baseness and weakness thereof, do pray unto God to have it augmented
and increased by the working of his holy Spirit: and also that to this end we
use the means that he has left to be used.


Minist. It is sufficient that we believe that Jesus Christ by his obedience
has purchased unto us the grace of God, and in this grace and favor has
gotten us righteousness and life: and that by his cross, he making
satisfaction for our sins has appeased his wrath, and has freed us from the
danger of death, and of the curse?


Eusebius. No sir; but when we have believed thus much, we must be well assured
that we are received into the communion of this obedience and satisfaction,
when we receive the bread and the wine which are presented unto us in the
supper. And for the last and most principal point, we must believe that we are
made one, and incorporate with Jesus Christ, and allowed of him and of his
Father, not only for his flock, his disciples, his brethren and friends, but
also for members of his body, and flesh of his flesh. Out of which point we
may draw matter of singular and manifold comforts and consolations. For by
this mean we are sure, that so long as we continue in this union, we cannot be
condemned ne kept and holden in the bands of death, no more then he himself:
and that the prince of this world has no more part in us, or power over us,
then he has in or over him: and that righteousness and life are as well
inseparable from us, as from him: and that we are coheires with him of all the
honor of his kingdom: and that where he is, there we shall be of necessity, not
impeacheable by all the power and practices of the Devil.


Minist. I have two questions to ask you, touching that you said even now of
the participation, that we have in the humanity of Jesus Christ, when we do
take and eat the bread in the supper. The first is, whither that before the
bread is given unto us, we be not already united unto him; and if we be, what
profit we can receive by the supper?


Eusebius. It is necessary that by Faith we be joined unto him, before we come
unto the table: otherwise we should be wholly unworthy: and yet we come, that
we may be yet more neerelie knit in one with him. For even as two diverse
things, when they be tied and bound together with a cord, may be yet tied
with another; and if a man would use an hundred cords to that purpose, it
might be very well said, that they are still tied together more and more: so
albeit that we by baptism and Faith, wherein we hear and obey the word of
God, are allied unto him, and ingrafted in the body of Jesus Christ, yet that
is no hinderance, but that by the supper, when we do celebrate it, this
alliance is renewed, and more and more confirmed.


Minist. What needs it, that we have so many assurances of pledges and
tokens, to confirm the agreement that he has made with us? for it might be
gathered hereupon, that he should be a deceiuer or inconstant, and that we
therefore could not be to sure and to wary in our dealing with him.


Eusebius. The word of God is eternal, and the effect thereof most sure and
certain: even as he being the speaker, is everlasting and unchangeable, his
gifts and his callings without repentance, neither is our unbelief able to
make the Faith or truth of God of no effect. Yea (as S. Paull says) the
verity of God is more abundant, through our lying, unto his glory. Therefore
the reason why he swears, and seals his promises with a double seal, after
they be made, is not, for that they are, of their nature, doubtful and
uncertain, but because our hearts are so full of suspicion and wicked
distrust, that we will never take his bare word for sufficient assurance: yea,
we will hardly trust him with all the solemnities of swearing, signs, and
sealing, that are used of him for our warrant in this behalf.


Minist. Herein the frowardnes and wretchedness of our nature is the more
apparent. For we can be content to rest our selves wholly upon the dreams and
conceit of our own vain and foolish wisdom, or upon the bare word of a
mortal man, by nature a liar, and every moment changeable: yea, diverse times
not proouing and seeing upon what ground, what reason and appearance it is
either conceived or delivered. Nay, we go further then so: for all the errors,
lies, fooleries, illusions, dreams, and vain visions that the Devil can
forge to destroy and seduce from God, we receive both without any difference
or difficulty, and also without any reasoning or debating of their nature, or
of their end. I will say more, that if God were on the one side telling us one
thing, and Satan on the other affirming the contrary, this Father of lies and
prince of darkness will find more credit and faith with us, then God shall
find with all his truth and light. And hereof we have long agone seen and
known the woeful experience of our first parents, who being wiser and better
then all their children that came after them, only Jesus Christ excepted,
were soon and easily persuaded the very contrary to that which God had
spoken, yea by the serpent being but a beast, and using no great and long
discourse or many words to confirm his sayings. And that which makes me to
marvel, and to detest the more our malice herein, is that we are so ready to
receive and believe whatsoever this wicked abuser and deceiuer of mankind is
able to put into our ears to our destruction, though he have no reason or
argument to prove his purpose: and that on the contrary we are so slow to allow
that which God does tell us, and confirms by so many oaths, signs,
witnesses, and miracles that we might be saved. But I will leave that matter to
ask you another doubt, to wit, whither the vnio^, whereof you have spoken,
which we have with Jesus Christ be of our bodies, or of our souls and minds
only: and whither we are to go up into heaven from the earth where we abide,
or he is to come down from heaven where he remains, that we may be joined
and coupled together.


Eusebius. You propound a question unto me, which in these days much troubles
and exercises the heads of many men: yet me thinks, that a man of a modest
and sober mind, that seeks not to be contentious, might satisfy himself
with so much as you have taught us in that point: that is to wit, that the
union is corporal and of the bodies, but the mean is spiritual: even as the
uniting together of man and wife, which is the fittest comparison that can in
this case be used and alleged. Their bodies are united and coupled together,
not corporally, or so as their union may be discerned and judged by the
outward senses (for we see that they are diverse times sundred by distance and
difference of places) but by the Faith of wedlock which they have mutuallie
given.


Minist. It is not sufficient to say or to do any thing, but the same must be
with reason, to the edifying of them that see our works, or hear our words.
Wherefore Eusebius, you shall rehearse, if it please you, such reasons as you
take to be the fittest for the proouing of that which you have said.


Eusebius. Ephesians. 5.
The first is, that S. Paul, after he had taught that we are members of his
body, of his flesh and of his bones, alleges not only the resemblance, but
also the first institution of marriage, saying: For this cause shall a man
leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they twain
shall be one flesh. This is a great secret, but I speak concerning Christ, and
concerning the Church: To the end he might show us the mean whereby this
conjunction is made; and for our better and more ready conceiving of the same,
that we might set before our eyes the union and conjunction that is between
the husband and the wife.

The second is, that the kingdom of Jesus Christ is spiritual: whereupon it
follows that the order, the government, the laws, the promises, the power,
the glory, and all other things that apperteine to the honor and renown of a
kingdom, are in the kingdom of Jesus Christ spiritual. Therefore when we do
speak of the conjunction of the members with the head, which is one of the
principal members, we may not think, that the mean to atteine unto it, is
other then heavenly and spiritual.

The third is, that Jesus Christ entreating of this matter covertly under the
figure and shadow of eating of his flesh; and seeing that some of his disciples
had forsaken his company, and were offended at his talk, because they had not
well understood them, and had interpreted them carnally: said for the better
and more ample expounding of them, as follows: It is the Spirit that
quickens: the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you are
spirit and life. Can there be any thing more clear to show that the eating of
his flesh, that is to say, that the union which we have with his humanity, is
made and brought to pass spirituallie? Even as therefore the ignorance and
bluntness of Nicodemus deserved to be blamed, and to be controuled of Jesus
Christ, because he did carnally expound and construe the reasoning of Jesus
Christ, touching the new birth of the faithful: so if any man hearing speech
of the eating of his flesh, or of the drinking of his blood, made simply and
according to the letter, understand the same without all figurative speech and
spiritual meaning; his ignorance were not only to be derided as a vain and
foolish thing, but also to be contemned as impious and tending to the
diminishing of our faith and of the glory of God.

The fourth is, that Our Fathers (as Saint Paul says) did all eat of the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink of the same spiritual drink: for
they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was
Christ. Now certain it is, that they could not eat that rock corporally, as
we do eat our bread made of corn: because Christ Jesus was not yet incarnate
and made flesh. wherefore it must needs follow, that as their eating is
spiritual, so is our eating spiritual, being wholly like unto theirs, if we
will believe the Apostle.

The fifth is, Act. 3.
That the heaven (as Saint Peter says) must contain Jesus Christ, until the
time that all things be restored, which God had spoken by the mouth of all his
Prophets since the world began. And this is one of the articles that we
protest, that we hold, when we rehearse the Creed. Therefore it is a great
folly, yea an impiety, to think that it is requisite for the eating of his
flesh, and the drinking of his blood, that he should come down from heaven,
and that corporally, and in person, he shoud deliver the same unto us to that
end and purpose.

The sixth is, that Jesus Christ speaking to his disciples, said unto them, John
16.
That it was expedient for them, that he should leave the world, and go his
way. Whereupon it follows, that it should be a thing not only
unprofitable, but also hurtful and dangerous to the Church, that he should
return hither in his own bodily shape before the time prefixed and purposed.

The seventh is, that the supper must be celebrated in the remembrance of him,
as it is plainly showed in the commandment that he gave when he did
institute the same: now the remembrance that we have of any matter,
pre-supposeth the same to be absent corporally: for otherwise if it be present,
there is no more a remembrance, but a sight and enjoying: whereupon it
follows, that because the Supper is ordained to exercise us in the
remembrance of Jesus Christ, he is absent from us in body.

The eight is, that we are not commanded to celebrate and to declare his
death, but until the time of his coming: and therefore if he should come among
us in body when we are assembled for that purpose, we ought to cease and to
leave of this whole ceremony.

The ninth is, that as a glorious and spiritual body does not eat: so it
cannot be eaten corporally: for otherwise we might say that it might be
disgested in the stomach as other meats may be, and consequently might be
subject to corruption: which is a thing contrary to the condition of bodies
glorified, which are not only immortal, but also free from all corruption.

The tenth is, that the thing that is not ordained for the life of our bodies,
is not to be eaten corporally. But the flesh of Jesus Christ crucified, and
his blood shed for our redemption, are not ordained for the life of the body,
which may be and is preserved and kept by other means: therefore we must
needs conclude that we neither eat the one, nor drink the other corporally.

The eleventh is, that Saint Paul says, that Meats are ordained for the
belly, 1. Cor. 6.
and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them. Teaching
us, that as this life is frail and subject to corruption, so are also all
those bodily meats that are ordained for the nourishment of the same: so then,
if the flesh of Christ were bodily eaten, it should follow that it should be
subject to corruption: a thing clearly and merely contrary to that whole
discourse of S. John upon this matter: whosoever eats my flesh, John 6.
has eternal life. Where he further makes a difference between it and
Manna, given to our Fathers in the wilderness; saying, that the one is
corruptible, the other is void and free from all corruption.

The twelfth is, that if Jesus Christ were bodily eaten, there were no
necessity to prove and to examine our Faith or our conscience, when we would
prepare our selves to the eating of his supper; but only our teeth, to wit,
whither they were sharp, and able enough to chew it: and the stomach, to see
whither it were apt to digest it: as we do in all other corporal meats.

The thirteenth is, that we eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Jesus
Christ, even in the self and same manner, as the Apostles have done long before
us. But they did not eat the same corporally: for so men might have seen the
Apostles eating his body with their bodily eyes, even as well, as they did see
his body before them, when he ministered the same unto them. Now we must
infer, that no more do we eat his flesh corporally. If any will say, that
God by a miracle provides that this eating be not discerned with bodily eyes,
to the end it should not be abhorred; I answer, that in this case the only
conceipte and inward imagination were sufficient: as we read of S. Peter, who
in a vision abhorred the eating of those creatures, Act. 10.
that were in the law forbidden to be eaten.

The fourteenth is, that it is plainly forbidden in Genesis, Genesis 6.
To eat flesh with the life thereof, that is, with the blood thereof.
Whereupon it may be inferred, that Jesus Christ, who is not come to abolish the
law, but to fulfill the law, has not enjoined us a thing so strictly
forbidden, and even more abominable then murder. And the reason alleged by
S. Augustine, to show, that all the places, wherein Jesus Christ does exhort his
disciples to eat his flesh, and to drink his blood, are used by way of
figured and shadowed speeches. I will turn the place of S. Augustine in his
book of Christian doctrine, to the end that the readers may understand his
judgment in this matter. If there be any sentence, or any manner of speech
in the Scripture (says he) that seems to command any outrage or
wickedness, or contrarily, to forbid any bountiful and liberal action, the
same is spoken by way of a figure. But this sentence following, Ioh. 9.
Except you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you; seems to command an horrible and detestable case: wherefore
it follows, that this is a figure, by the which he commands us to be
partakers, and to have communion in the death and passion of the Lord: and for
the profit and comfort of our consciences, to enclose this point within the
most secret corners of our memory, that his humanity was crucified and
wounded for our cause. This is S. Augustine his judgment, which I have turned
word for word.

The fifteenth is, that we cannot receive the corporal eating of the flesh of
Jesus Christ, but we must admit and allow his body to be infinite: which thing
entirely derogateth from the truth of his nature, and by the same means
utterly overthrows the chiefest grounds and most principal foundations of
our Faith. For except we believe him to have bin man, and the son of man in all things (our sins and imperfections only reserved) like unto us: whereupon
shall we build our assurance and persuasion, that he has redeemed and ransomed
our nature, and that he is our high priest, which has compassion upon all our
infirmities? Further it may be alleged, that we cannot devise to speak any
thing more favorable and available for the herises of Marcion and
Apollinaris: the one of whom maintained that the body of Jesus Christ was a
fantastique body, and the other said, that it was an heavenly body, as the
foresaid corporal eating of the flesh of Jesus Christ is heavenly.

The sixteenth is, that if we eat the flesh of Jesus Christ bodily, the
substance of our bodies must of necessity be augmented therebie, and
nourished, even as it is by other corporal meats that we receive: a thing
wholly and altogether contrary to experience, for the bodies of the faithful,
notwithstanding the eating only of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, must
of necessity perish and wither away, except they be nourished and preserved
by some other food or else by some other mean.

The seventeenth is, that as we do not eat corporal meats spirituallie:
even so we can not eat according to this proportion, things spiritual
carnally.

The eighteenth is, That if we eat the flesh of Jesus Christ corporally, so
little a body as his was, being so broken in pieces and parted, should not
suffice so many, as by eating were made partakers thereof.

Wherefore we may safely infer upon all these reasons, that the mean whereby
we are joined to Jesus Christ is spiritual, and that by Faith wrought in us by
the power of the Spirit we do eat his flesh and drink his blood, that is to
say, that we are united and ingrafted in his body, and more and more lincked
and allied unto him. And so says Saint Augustine very plainly, writing
upon the 26. Psalm: Behold (says that holy father) our pledge and our
assurance: that we by Faith, Hope, and Charity are for ever joined to our head
in heaven: as he by divinity, bounty, and union is with us upon the earth
even unto the worlds end. And upon the 30. Psa. Whole Christ is the head with
the body, the head is the savior of the body, the head (I say) which is
already ascended up into heaven: and the body is the church, which yet does
labor and is sore troubled here upon the earth. Now if the body had not bin
joined and bound to the head with a chain of Charity, that of the head and
body there might be made but one, he would never have spoken from heaven in
this manner rebuking that persecutour Saul: Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me?
Act. 22.



Minist. Then this joining is not after the manner of things natural, or
contained and circunscribed and enclosed in any place, as the joining together
of two stones in one place with lime and sand, or of two pieces of wood the one
to the other with glue; but it is a divine and mystical joining as you have
sufficiently declared, and what manner of faith we ought to bring with us when
we come to celebrate the Supper. Now if it please you I would have you to
proceed, and to show me in like manner what manner of Charity is required.


Eusebius. We may carry no hatred ne any evil affection in our heart against
our neighbor, but forget and pardon one another all such injuries and offenses
as being remembered might break or otherwise offend that mutual friendship
which ought to compass in and enclose the whole body of the Church. And yet
thus much is not sufficient: but we must moreover, reknowledge our selves to
be brethren and the sons of one father, and members not only of one body
but also of another, have but one heart, one soul and one mind. And as we
have but one Baptism, one Faith, one Law, one spirit, one savior, one
heritage, one hope, and one table: so we may not be but one body in our God
being evermore pressed and ready to help one another both with such blessings
as God has outwardly bestowed upon us, and also with council, with
carfulness, with painfulnesse, with our friends, and generally with our
whole strength and power, whereof our neighbors may stand in need. And
forasmuch as we are all of us imperfect in this charity, as well as we are in
Faith: when we come to the supper, we must remember to call upon God that it
would please him to increase the same in us by his spirit, and to forgive us
our manifold infirmities and imperfections.


Minist. Then it is not sufficient that we have this Faith and this Charity,
which you have handled, to come to the supper: but it is further required that
we humble our selves before God, and pray unto him, that notwithstanding our
unworthiness it would please him to receive and to admit us thereunto of his
bountiful, gracious, and free favor.


Eusebius. It is even so, sir, as you say.


Minist. May it please you, Eusebius, to rehearse the form both of your prayer
and of the confession that you use when you come to the Supper? might it not be
overmuch trouble unto you, I would gladly hear it in those self and same
terms, wherein it is your wont and manner to utter it.


Eusebius. I join them both together, and falling down before God, I say unto
him in this manner following.

O Lord, who and what am I, that I should receive so many graces and favors at
thy hands? to be invited, received and entreated so honorably in thy house? to
sit at thy table and there to be fed and refreshed with the flesh and blood
of thy son, to be lincked and joined with him in such sort as we shall never
be sundered, to be called to take part of all the benifits and blessings, and
to be adopted by thee into a certain hope to be thine heir, and to enjoy the
glory of resting and abiding for ever in that life and true blessedness which
thou have promised, and keep to the benefit and behoof of thy children? Was
it not sufficient, my unthankfulness and unkindness toward thee considered,
and the spoil and wast of all thy good blessings bestowed upon me remembered,
that when I came home again to thee, thou would forgive my trespasses and
offenses, and taking pity of me thy poor creature lost and utterly cast
away, thou would make me as one of thy hired servants? Luke 15.
and yet Thou did embrace me in thine arms, and kiss me, and yet thou
did cause the best robe to be brought forth and to be put upon me, thou
did put a ring upon my hand, thou did kill the fat calfe that I
might eat and be merry in so great joy, and so good company of my friends.
Was it not sufficient, this being regarded that my condition was no better, and
it may be, well worse then the condition of a dog, that thou would suffer
me, only to gather the croomes that fell from thy table, Matthew. 15.
as the poor Cannanite besought thee? but thou gave me the whole loaf,
which belongs only to thy children, or that thou would only speak the
word? and yet thou did come under my roof, and even into my house to heal
me. Am I more worthy, is my faith greater then the faith of the Centurio^, who
accounted himself unworthy of so great favor? was it not sufficient, that as
thou did pass by, thou would vouchsafe only to speak unto me, and to
look toward me? and yet thou did come home with me even into my house,
Luke. 19.
and thou did feast me at thy proper costs and charges, was it not
sufficient, that thou would call me after the marriage to break my fast with
the leauings at thy table? and yet thou did bid me to the feast, and receive
me to the chiefest of the banquet, wherein thine oxen and thy fatlings were
prepared and served. Is it not marvelous much, Matthew. 22.
that in things which proceed only of thy gracious liberality, thou have added
an oath and signs and seals, yea and have left thy holy spirit for a gage
and pledge of thy promises, to the end we should in no case doubt but that it
will please thee to perform them, and having thy bond under so many
assurances, that we might go with boldness and confidence to thy throne of thy
mercy, to be helped of thee in due time, and there to obtain both pardon and
life? Is it not wonderful, that with all thy creatures thou would give thy
self unto us, and after we have justly deserved many afflictions and
calamities, we have contrarily received of thee so great blessings as we are
not able to value nor to number them, not to comprehend them, nor sufficiently
to consider them? And what means this, O Lord, that to make satisfaction for
our sins and to redeem a company of robbers, murderers, thieves,
adulterers, blasphemers, proud, covetous, traitors, faithles, liers,
idolators, tha^kles, and such roges, and beggars, as wear, thou thy self have
delivered thy only son to the death, not only in hostage for our deliverance,
but also in pledge that he might abide in the same in our place, if happily he
had not bin of sufficient righteousness to ra^some us, and of sufficient power
to fight with death, and of sufficient life to swallow him up and to confound
so deadly an adversary. What means this, O Lord, that thou have contrary
to thy justice, thy nature, thy custom, and thy promises not acknowledged him
for a season, notwithstanding he was thy son? refused and cast him off,
notwithstanding he entreated thee? forsaken and let him pass, notwithstanding
that in thee he had reposed al his hope: looked upon him without all pity and
compassion, notwithstanding that he endured great extremities, and that his
soul as he himself witnessed was heavy and sorrowful even unto the death.
And further, what is this, that as if thou had been the most cruel tyrant
that ever was heard of, thou have condemned him being innocent and guiltles:
and curssed him being the blessed seed, and having perfectly accomplished the
whole Law: and lastly delivered him into the hands of many executioners to be
put to death between two thieves, the most shameful death that ever man died:
notwithstanding he was righteous, faithful, and the author of life unto all
creatures. Who could believe, if thou had not spoken it, if it were not
written in thy word, if thy signs and tokens did not show it, and lastly if
thy holy spirit did not assure it unto our consciences, that a God, merciful,
patient, and slow to anger, that a God of all comfort and consolation, and a
loving Father, as thou art, the stay and refuge of all afflicted and forlorn
persons, the haven and sunnie seat of all those that are tossed and wearied,
the freedom and safety of all sinners when they are chased and pursued: who
would believe (I say) that such a God had locked up as it were, al his pity
and compassion from his own son, and that he had now no more either eyes to
behold and to look upon him in his distressed estate, nor ears to hearken
unto his prayers and complaints. Was it not sufficient, that he should come
into the world, but he must live here in so great misery as he did? or if he
must needs live here; that he might not have died? or if he must needs die;
that he might not have died on the cross? or if upon the cross; it might have
been without shame? or if with shame; it might have been without the curse?
or if with cursing, at the least it might not have been without some pity on
thy part? If thou be forced, after we have infinitely and grossly sinned, to
take up thy rods and scourges to give us due correction, thou art grieved: if
thou see that we are stiffnecked, thou art well contented for the first to let
us see thy rods in readiness: if we be not the better after that sight, thou
liftest thy arm, thou shakest it long before thou strikest, thou stretchest it
out, and then suddenly pullest it in again and withholdest thy stroke: and
thou show plainly by thy countenance what grief and pain it is unto thee
to smite us: if thou smite us, thou do it sparingly, and often feel the
hurt that thou do us sooner then we our selves: if we cry out unto thee,
by and by thou ceasest thy correction and repentest: yea we can no sooner open
our mouth to show our sorrow and to confess our sins unto thee, but thou
openest thine also at the same instant to forgive the same, and to comfort us
in our distress. Wherefore then being so gentle and easy toward us who are
no other then wolfes and very Devils in the shape of men have thou held so
hard and so sharp an hand over this Lamb, who is so much more mighty,
unspotted, and innocent then all his Angels, as they cannot have the like
pre-eminence and advantage over us? what had he deserved to be so little
spared? or we, to be so greatly forborne? if he have not offended, in That he
made himself of no value and took on him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.
when as he, being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God his Father, and in that he humbled himself and became obedient unto
the death, even the death of the cross. Wherein has he so greatly offended,
that he should deserve so strange and rigorous punishment? If Satan himself,
as Saint Matthew said, could place his hope in thee, and call upon thee, he
should find place also in thy grace and mercy: and yet thy son who felt in
his soul an horrible distress, and was oppressed with the anguishes and
panges of death, notwithstanding his often cryings and humble requests and
prayers, yea the bloody sweat that dropped down his face, even unto the
earth for very anguish and pain that he endured in bearing that huge and
heavy burden which thou did lay upon his shoulders, could not in the
extremity of this his misery provoke one drop of pity and compassion in thy
bowels. What means all this I say? alas! O Lord, I may not enquire, nor
reason long with thee to seek the cause thereof and to understand it. For it
is nothing else but a singular and sovereign mercy which it pleased thee to
show us that we might be saved: and on the other side, the like justice which
thou have executed against thy son, in him to punish our trespasses and
transgressions. It is we that have sinned, and it was thy pleasure that he
should receive the shame, the condemnation and the torments: he was righteous,
and the only innocent and guiltless before thee in all the world, yet his
innocence did profit him nothing to escape thy judgment. For we have
gathered the fruit, and by thy grace have received the glory, the life, the
recompense, and generally all the good things that he had deserved: he was made
a sinner in us, and we are made righteous in him: he became poor, to make us
rich: sick, to make us whole: low and humble, that we might be exalted and set
aloft: and received nothing of us but a mortal misery, giving us in
counterexchange a blessed life, so certain, as it cannot be changed, so great,
as it cannot be increased, so lasting, as it can never be ended. Before, by our
sins and evil deserts, we were lost, but now, by thy gracious favor, and by
the merits of thy Son we are found again: before, we were dead, but now we
are raised up again: we were banished out of thy presence and out of thy
realm, but now we are called back again, and our banishment is repealed: we
were the servants and slaves of Satan, in continual fear of death: but now we
are made thy friends and children, to whom by promise thou have given a
certain hope of life. Out of hell in a moment thou have raised and lifted us up
into heaven, and of earth and doung (as we were) thou have made us precious
vessels unto thy golrie. The very depth of darkness remained in us and in our
nature: but by the power of thy word and of thy Spirit, thou have caused the
day to shine continually in thy church, and that some of the members of the
same do glyster as the stars of heaven, other more bright then the Sun it
self. This is our second creation, thus have thou of nothing renewed us the
second time, and made us of nothing new creatures. S. Peter perceiving that he
was escaped out of the hands of Herod, and out of the prison, wherein he was so
streightlie kept and locked, thought for a season that he dreamed of his
deliverance. And is not this a dream, O Lord? or is it true? I mean that
which I think and speak of thy innumerable graces toward us, and of this most
blessed freedom, wherein thou have set us by the death of thy Son. No, no,
it is no dream by any means. For there is nothing so certain as thy graces
and blessings upon al those, that will receive them with confidence in thy
promises. I cannot speak in the honor of them so much as I conceive, nor
conceive so much as I believe, nor believe so much as is in truth. For they are
so great, that my tongue, my cogitations, and my Faith cannot reach and
atteine, nor measure the greatness and height thereof. David considering the
infinite vnco^ceiuable malice and wickedness of mankind, asked this question,
whither there were any that could reckon and understand their faults? But
contrarily, Psalm. 19.12.
I ask this question: who is he that can number, or speak, or think of al
thy benefits? For albeit that our sin abounds, yet thy grace abounds more:
without the which, O Lord, what should become of me? whither should I go? what
hope should remain for me? upon the earth there is nothing but thy curse:
from heaven thy wrath is reueiled upon my wickedness and unbelief: in all things
that are under the sun, there is nothing but vanity. Therefore when I look to
see from whence my help shall come, after I have cast mine eyes every way
round about me, I must of force confess with thy Prophet, that from thy
goodness only I am to look and to wait for my help: and, Psalm. 52.
that among men there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved, then the name of thy son. I am wicked and wretched more then I can
express: but thou art good and merciful, more then I can think or conceive,
when I look upon my self, al my hope of salvation departs: but as soon as
thou turnest thy face toward me, by and by my hope returns, namely, when
thou show in thy countenance the compassion that thou take of my misery,
to defend me against the fancies and illusions of my carnal understanding, and
to uphold me in the dreadful and terrible skirmishes, wherewith my poor and
weak conscience is often assailed and sore amassed, to repel and to drive back
all the temptations of the wicked Spirit, and to give me courage and an assured
hardiness against those horrible threatenings laid out in thy law against all
the transgressors of the same: and in brief, to keep me from falling, and to
lift me up when I am down, I have no other mean but thy mercy, and the grace
that thou have promised me by the merits of thy son. This is my forte and
castle, when I am beseiged by the enemy of my salvation, and my place of
refuge and rescue, when thy wrath and judgments do follow and pursue me. This
is the staff and the proppe, not only of my age, but also of my whole life:
for there is no part or age of my life, wherein I am not so weak, that
without it I cannot be able to stand. O most excellent and perfect receipt,
which never man yet proved, but was cured of his sickness, and redilie found
remedy of al his diseases. Am not I greatly bound to the, that thou have
taught me this receipte? and further, that thou have made it for my use, and
applied it to my infirmity, and healed me by it? O good God! O how great and
how wonderful is thy goodness? There is nothing so great, as I suppose, as
are the benefits that thou have bestowed upon me, and do continue upon me
day by day. And yet I must believe and confess, that they are small, and
almost of no price, in respect of those, which thou keep in store for me,
and I look for and hope for at thy hands. But this seems a very pitiful
case, that they should be so great; and on the contrary, that my Faith should
be so little and so weak to receive them, and my spirit so rude and ignorant to
understand them, and my tongue so vnsmooth to express them, and that which is
worst of al, my affection so cold to acknowledge and to esteem them at their
price and value. And yet this cursed and damnable unthankfulness of mine does
not withdraw thy goodness and largeness toward me, which day by day thou
do continue more and more, yea in such sort, as the latter favor and graces
which thou show me, do far surmount and surpass the former, which thou have
bestowed upon me. It is not possible to reckon or to imagine the thanks that I
owe unto the: the let and the hinderance whereof is partly my own
insufficiency and weakness, and partly the hugeness and infinite number of
thy benifits. But to discover all my shame and all my nakedness unto the, it
proceeds from the small remembrance and feeling that I have of thy goodness,
what remains, but that I shall be esteemed altogether unthankful toward thee?
nothing remains, but only to pray thee that thou would open my lips by
thy holy Spirit, to the end that I may acknowledge and confess mine
unthankfulness and unworthiness, to be sorrowful that I can no better feel
and conceive of thy benifits in my heart, to cry out alowd, that thou art
infinite in goodness, who have bestowed so many graces upon me, and that for
my part I am infinite in wickedness, who do price, esteem, and regard them so
little: and in general to protest in public, that my salvation proceeds
from thee, and my destruction from my self, if it were not thy good pleasure
of thy singular grace and favor to provide for and to meet with that
inconvenience. Help me now, o Lord, that I may do this by the whole course of
my life, and that the readiness and good affection hereunto, that thou have
given me at this present, be not in vain and of none effect. Suffer me not, o
God my father, to take delight and pleasure in any other thing, the^ in the
knowledge, meditation, speaking, and praising of thy mercy and great favors
toward me: and of the contrary, to take no greater sorrow and displeasure,
then in the crimes, offenses, and lewd demeanours, that I commit against thy
Majesty. This is the prayer and confession that I make, before I come to the
table of my Savior.


Minist. Yet this is not all that I will require: for you must now let me
understand, what you think at the very instant, when the bread and wine is
ministered?


Eusebius. The bread and wine that I take, that I see and behold, and that I
taste, are, as it were, certain steps and traces, to guide, and to lift up my
spirit by little and little, to the regard and remembrance of that league and
alliance, which God has made with us, of the forgiveness of my sins, of
life everlasting, of the adoption of children, of the inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven, of al spiritual joy, of perpetual rest, of glory, of
grace, of peace, and in general, of all the great and true felicities therein
contained. After that I call to mind Jesus Christ, the Mediator and worker of
this new league, who has by his death found means, that it shall be available,
and of full strength and virtue, and cancelling the bond and obligation wherein
we were bound before, and acquitted us, and set us free from all the whole
curse. Thence I go farther, and I come on to behold the charity and love of
God toward us, not able to be conceived; who spared not his only Son, but
delivered him and gave him over to the death, that he might make satisfaction
for our iniquities and offenses. Lastly, I do shut up my inward thoughts, with
repeating over and over, when I arise from the table, how many ways I am
bound unto him, and with rendering unto him such thanks, as it pleases him to
inspire into my heart.


Minist. You have greatly satisfied and contented me, Eusebius, in all your
answers: and I thank God for the knowledge, that he has given you of the
substance and meaning of this mystery: beseeching him, (to the end it be not
profaned and made unholy) that by his good will and pleasure al such, as
shall be to celebrate the same mystery, may have like measure of understanding.
And now, because I have no leisure to continue longer with you, I will commit
you to God, and leave you to his protection, until our next meeting.


A TREATISE OF THE TRVE SACRIFICE AND TRVE PRIEST. Made by I. de l'Espine,
Minister of the word of God.
THere be many that marvel why we refuse and condemn the Mass with so great
constancy and vehemency, and slander us grievously in that respect:
spredding and sowing rumors of us in the ears of the common people, and also
of great and mighty Princes, that we are opinatiue, arrogant, seditious,
rebellious, factious, and many other slanderous lies wherewith they do fill
and break continually the ears of the unlearned and ignorant, and of those
that take any delight in hearing them. But to show that we are not led by any
opinion or fond and foolish fancy, nor by seeking of any vain glory, nor by
any other passion which troubles and carries away our wits, I will in this small
treatise render reason, as it were in a sum, of that which we hold and
maintain, to every one that is willing to know the same. And I doubt not, my
Lord, if it will please you to do me so much favor as to read and to mark my
writing, but you will stop your ears henceforth against the lying and
slanderous speeches of our adversaries whereby they seek to defame and to
discredit us, and in time you will take upon you the protection and defense of
our cause.

I will not spend time in expounding the name of the Mass, nor in showing of
what pieces, in what age, and by whom it was first patched together: neither
will I blase the crosses and other petty aperies and monkeries therein used,
serving more to move laughter then to edify in true piety and godliness. All
such trifles I will ouerpasse, and will handle only the chiefest and most
principal points, such as are thought to be the grounds and foundations of the
Mass, namely the office of the Priest, the Sacrifice, and the things that have
been added to the one and the other.

Touching the office of the Priest it is an honor and an estate, the title and
execution whereof cannot belong to any other then to Jesus Christ. For we
believe, that he alone is our Christ, that is to say; he whom God the Father
has anointed and ordained to be our king: that he might govern and defend
us: and our Prophet to teach and to instruct us in all things apperteining to
our salvation, and to his honor and glory: and our Priest to offer Sacrifice,
and by his sacrifice to appease the heavy wrath and displeasure of God against
us: and further to pray and to make intercession for us, and by his suit to
entertain and to keep us in his favor. Therefore even as it were
blasphemous, to acknowledge and approve any other king and lawmaker to rule
and to govern our consciences then Jesus Christ, or any other master and
teacher then him to train us up in matters of God: so we commit blasphemy
against his honor, if we admit or acknowledge any other Priest to sacrifice
for us then him.

Further, no man may attribute unto himself any honor herein Except he be
called thereunto of God, as Aaron was. But there is none save only Jesus
Christ, whom God has glorified by ordeining and creating him high Priest, and
to whom he has said, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
Whereupon it follows, that unto him alone belongs this honor and dignity.

Heb. 7.26.
Again the qualities and conditions of the Priest of the new Testament are
these, that he be holy, innocent, unspotted, separated from sinners, and
exalted far above the heavens. Which points cannot belong to any other the^ to
Jesus Christ, because al men, he only excepted, being borne and brought forth
of flesh, are flesh, that is to say, defiled and sinful, as their parents
were, and therefore incapable of the Priesthood.

Again, the Priest must be eternal and for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech: Heb. 7.3.
that is to say, as it is expounded by the Apostle, without father, without
mother, without kindred, having neither beginning of his days, neither end of
his life. Which cannot be applied to our Priests nor to any mortal man.

Again, Heb. 7.22.
He needs not daily to offer up Sacrifice for his own sins, as the
Priests of Leui did need. From which necessity there is none that can be
freed and delivered, but only Jesus Christ; insomuch as by reason of sin
abiding in them, and of infirmities wherewith they are enclosed and compassed,
they have need continually to pray unto God and to ask him pardon for the
same.

Again, if any other were capeable of the estate of the Priesthood then Jesus
Christ, they must needs be Priests after one of these two orders: to wit, of
Leui, or of Melchisedech: but they cannot be after the order of Leui, because
all the ancient ceremonies, yea, and the Law it self that commanded them, are
now abolished. So it should remain that They must be after the order of
Melchisedech. Psalm. 110.
But that is no more possible the^ the other, because they should be Priests
for ever, which is not incident to any mortal man.

Again, the Priest must be more worthy and honorable then the sacrifice that
he does offer: for the Sacrifice of whatsoever it be, cannot please God, but
only in respect of him that offers. And it is the reason alleged by the
Apostle, Heb. 11.
why Abel by Faith did offer unto God a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain:
meaning thereby that the price and worthiness of the Sacrifice proceeded
hence, that he which offered being faithful, was by Faith acceptable to God.
Whereupon it must needs be that if the Mass Priests were true sacrificing
Priests and did offer Jesus Christ in their Mass, as they pretend, that they
should be of more worthiness and honor then he, and that he should not be in
the favor of God but by their credit and favor.

Lastly, whosoever is Priest, by the same mean is become Mediator between
God and man, for the end of the Sacrifice is to procure the remission of
sins, and so consequently to reconcile man unto God. So if the Massepriests
could be Sacrificing Priests they should also be Mediators, which they cannot
be. For even as there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator between God
and man. And thus ye see by these proofs that the name, the title, and
dignity of Priesthood cannot belong to any other then to Jesus Christ, and
without great and monstrous blasphemy that we cannot attribute the same to any
other.

In like manner it is he only that can exercise the office of priesthood: for
the Priest must appease the wrath of God, and reconcile him unto men that are
in his displeasure, And this is not possible to be done, without a most perfect
obedience: even as his wrath and heavy displeasure at the beginning was stirred
up and inflamed against us by no other thing, then the disobedience of our
first parents. But none is able, except Jesus Christ alone, to yield such
obedience to God as is required, by reason of the perfection and integrity of
his nature. Therefore for this respect, no man can execute the office of the
Priest but he.

Further, the Priest must satisfy the justice of God for the iniquities and
transgressions of those, in whose favor he offers the sacrifice, inasmuch as
he appears and presents himself before him, as a pledge and a surety for
their debts: which no carnal and sinful man is able to perform. For how should
he acquit the debts of another, Luke 7.
being himself always indebted, and unable to pay his own? as it appears
by the parables of those two, that were bound to one creditor, who^ they could
not pay and satisfy: and of him, Marth. 18.
that ought the King ten talents, which by no means he was able to discharge:
and by the ordinary confession of the Church, Matthew. 6.
which (I say) the Catholic Church does make unto God, praying for the
remission and forgiveness of her sins and offenses. Wherefore, there is no
other, that can in this point discharge the office and duty of the Priest.

Heb. 9.
Again, The Priest must obtain remission of sins for those for whom he does
sacrifice, which cannot be obtained without sheading of blood: Heb. 9.22.
For without sheading of blood (says the Apostle) is no remission. And this
blood may not be the blood of bulls, goats, calves, lambs, or of any other
beast, which cannot purge and purify the conscience; but it must be the blood
of the Priest himself, and the same without spot. Seeing then that never in
the world there has bin blood with that condition, but only the blood of
Jesus Christ, we may hereby well conclude, that it is he only, that can
execute the office of the Priest.

Heb. 9.17.
Again, the Priest must procure the confirming and ratifying of the Testament,
and of the new league and alliance with God. But the Testament is yet of no
force, as long as he that made it is alive. If the^ our Massepriests could be
true sacrificing Priests, they ought, for the performance of their duty and
charge, to dye, and so to become testators, to the end, that by their death the
Testament might be confirmed. Now they are no Testators, because they are not
God; neither do they yet die: and albeit they should die yet their death would
not be auailable to the confirming of the Testament, which they had not made
before, wherefore it follows, that they cannot exercise the state of the
Priesthood.

Heb. 9.26.
Further, The office of the Priest is to destroy sin: as the Apostle shows,
which is not possible for any mortal man to do, being the servant and slave of
sin, bearing it about him in his bosom, nourishing and mainteining it
continually with him, giving it being, strength, and vigor, bringing it forth
of his mothers womb, and keeping it ever after until his dying day; and being
unable to live without it, so greatly unwilling to destroy it, that if it were
dead in him, he would quicken and revive it. Seeing then that there is none but
Jesus Christ, that is come into the world, to destroy sin, and the other
works of the Devil (as S. John says) there is none but he that can execute
the office of the Priest. 1. John. 3.5.


Again, the office of a Mediator, Heb. 9.
is to appear before the face of God, continually to make intercession for
us, and to keep us in his grace and favor. But none, save only Jesus Christ,
can perform this point. For Isaiah the Prophet, speaking of men, says in this
manner: Esaie 33.14.
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell
with the everlasting burnings? And David confirms the same, saying; The
foolish shall not stand before thy face, nor come into thy presence: thou hate
all them that work iniquity. Then if no man be altogether pure and free from
foolishnes, but every one commits often times iniquity, we must infer
hereupon, that the Massepriests, which are like other men, have need them
selves of one to present them unto God, and to bring them to the presence of
his Majesty, which otherwise they were not able to come unto, so much are they
unable to bring in a sinner into the presence of God, to beg his pardon, or
by their own credit and favor to inclyne and to bend the Majesty of God to
show him favor.

We have showed, that the Priest must pacify the wrath, and appease the anger
of God. Now I say that he is to pass on farther, and namely, to charge his
own shoulders with the burden of God his wrath, to the end that he may
discharge those, that he would reconcile unto him. Now we are to consider what
strength a mortal man can have, to bear so great and so heavy a burden, as
the heaven, the earth, the mountains, and the whole frame of the world is not
able to endure. Jesus Christ himself being innocent, the arm, the power, and
the right hand of God, did shrink, and sweat blood in great abundance, for
the hugeness and heaviness of this burden, when he had taken it upon his
shoulders. For it was the very feeling of the judgment of God, and not of the
death of the body, which caused him to feel such anguishes as he endured and
complained of, when the hour of his crucifiing was at hand. And how then can a
poor Chaplin, clothed with all manner of iniquity, and drinking down
unrighteousness as water, be so hardy as to offer himself to bear so heavy
a burden, under which Jesus Christ, with all his strength and innocence,
remained almost overwhelmed?

Lastly, the office of the Priest is, Heb. 2.
To have compassion of the infirmities of all the elect that are in the world,
to comfort them, and to sweeten the bitterness of their evils and sorrows.
And this is not to be done of any, but only of Jesus Christ: because there is
none but he, that can understand them, and provide remedy for them. For the men
of the West cannot learn the afflictions of them that dwell in the East: nor
they of the South, the miseries of those that inhabit the North, by which
reason, they cannot take any pity either of other, nor provide due remedies
for them, by reason of their weakness and insufficiency. By this reason with
the former we may conclude, that they can by no means execute the office and
estate of the Priesthood.

We have proved, that our Priests cannot be true Priests for sacrifice,
neither yet discharge that office. Now let us prove in like manner, that their
sacrifice cannot be auayleable nor forceable to please or to appease God, nor
any manner of way to procure or to obtain the remission of sins.

First, a sacrifice, to be of such a property, must be perfect, as Moses
taught us in the law: when as by the ordinance of God he commanded so
expressly, that the beasts, which should be offered unto him, to shadow him,
should be perfect, and without blemish, and whole of al their members. But the
sacrifices of men cannot be perfect, because they themselves being imperfect,
and al their works imperfect, have not in regard of their persons, or of
their righteousness, any other perfection then that which is imputed unto them
by the grace of God, in the name and favor of Jesus Christ. Therefore it
follows, that they can offer nothing unto God, that may make him well pleased
and favorable unto sinners.

Further, it is required, that all Sacrifices (as al other works) should be
joined with obedience, and so by consequent, that they should be commanded. For
otherwise they should be offered without Faith, and so become abominable
before God. Yea the very sacrifice, that Jesus Christ did make of his own
body, if it had not been foreappointed of his Father, had not been received
nor accepted. And therefore it is, that he makes the greatest reckoning and
the greatest account of his obedience. For thus he says: Psalm. 40.9.
Burntoffering and sinoffering have thou not required: then said I: lo, I
come. For in the roll of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy
will, o God. S. Paul in like manner does attribute all the fruit and profit,
that comes by the death of Jesus Christ to his obedience, when he says, That
he became obedient to his father even until the death, and therefore that God
had highly exalted him. Now let our preistes show us by scripture, that God
has commanded them to chaunte and to sing mass, if they will have us to
approve their sacrifice. If they cannot do it, no more can we without it avouch
their sacrifice to have power and virtue to satisfy and to please God as they
do hold, neither yet that it is acceptable nor holy before God. Again the
power of such a sacrifice must be eternal and infinite that it may surpass
and exceed the disobedience of the first Adam. And as the one has spread
abroad the poison thereof, and a general calamity upon all the men in the
world, in what country, time, or age soever they have lived: so the obedience
of the second Adam being opposed to that of the first must bring a general
blessing and felicity upon al them, that are predestinate to eternal life: to
the end, That where sin has abounded, Romans 5.
there the grace of God might more abound. But the sacrifice of a Popish Priest
cannot have this virtue and power, yea less then the ancient sacrifices of the
Priests of Leui, which were ordained and appointed of God, and were a type and
shadow of Jesus Christ. Then let us conclude against their opinion, that it
neither is, nor can be sufficient to please God.

Also, the sacrifice, wherewith God must be pleased, and his wrath appeased,
must be but one: for otherwise it should not be perfect, if it were renewed,
neither the power and virtue thereof infinite, wherefore the Priests that sing
so many masses, do evidently declare by the multiplying of their Sacrifices,
that they are imperfect, and therefore they cannot be propitiatory; that is to
say, of nature and force to please and to satisfy God. If they say (as
commonly they do) that they offer Jesus Christ; we answer: First, it cannot
be so: because Jesus Christ can die no more: Romans 6. Heb. 9.
which must needs be, if he were sacrificed again: because there is no
Sacrifice without death.

Secondly, this renewing of the Sacrifice should be unprofitable and serving
to no use, in respect of the remission of sins, which by Faith we do believe
and obtain: Heb. 10.
for Where no remission is, there is no more sacrifice for sin. For if the
end of the Sacrifice be, to sanctify and to perfect him, for whom it is
offered; what need we to have any more sacrifices, seeing that by the
sacrifice, Heb. 7.
that Jesus Christ did offer unto God, of his own body, we are already
sanctified and made holy for ever.

Thirdly, it would be a great prejudice, and a notorious injury to him, if his
Sacrifice should be renewed and offered again by any other, then by himself.
For if it were so, then should he be robbed and spoiled of his honor, Heb. 7.
and the oblation that he made once of his body, should be reputed and taken as
imperfect and insufficient: for the renewing is a certain reason and argument
of imperfection.

And if there were other Priests to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin, Heb.
8.
and Jesus Christ were yet abiding upon the earth, he should be no Priest at
all. For if he were Priest, he should be Priest alone, neither can he have any
fellow to be joined and associate unto him in the Preisthood, no more then in
his other offices. So we may be resolved, that we ne have, ne can have other
Priest to reconcile us to God, then Jesus Christ: ne other sacrifice then that,
which he has once offered, to purchase unto us remission of al our sins. And
so He is both the Priest, and also the oblation, as says S. Augustine. For as
there was never in the world any perfect body, save his only, worthy to be
offered up unto God in sacrifice: so there was never any other man so perfect,
as he was fit and capable to offer up the same body in sacrifice.

The third point, which we have to consider in the Mass, is touching certain
things annexed to the sacrifice and to the Priesthood: which point may
briefly and in few words be dispatched. For they are confessions, prayers,
or praises, or the reading of Epistles and Gospels, or of ceremonies. As
concerning praises, such as are the orisons or confessions, made at the
beginning and entrance of the Mass, they are to be rejected and refused:
because they are for the most part, against the express commandment of God,
consecrated to creatures. Psalm. 9.
As concerning prayers, this is much ungodliness or impiety, and no less
infidelity or unbelief in them, forasmuch as the intercession or merit of
some Saint is most commonly mingled and joined with them. Iosue. 7.
As for the reading of the Epistle and Gospel, in that the name of God is used
and taken in vain, because they be read in a strange language, it cannot
bring any edifiing to the congregation. As for the ceremonies, to the end I
say nothing more grievous, they are al superstitious, because they are all the
inventions of men, without any sense or signification, save only such, as
slumbering and dreaming Monckes have forged in their mindlesse and witless
brains, and after have pleased to bestow upon them: yea some of them are
mere idolatries: as the worshipping of the bread, censing, and kneeling.

By this that has bin discoursed, as in a sum, touching the chief and
principal points of the Mass, every one may judge what it is, and in what
account and reckoning to be holden, and whither we have many and sufficient
reasons to condemn, and to abhor it, and to withdraw all men from taking
part in so horrible blasphemies and impieties, whereof it is pieced and
patched together. 1. Cor. 10.
For, It is impossible (as S. Paul says) that we can be partakers of the Lord
his table, and of the table of devils. Then whosoever he be that goes to the
Mass, he leaves, in so doing, the Lord his table, and forsakes all the
benefits there presented: that is to say, he renounceth the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ and all that thereupon depends: to wit, his righteousness, life, the
grace of God, and all the happiness that he is to hope for, and to look for
one day in his kingdom.

There be sum that say (to cloak and to cover their forfeit and offense in
this behalf) that albeit they are present at Mass, yet notwithstanding they
mean not to be partakers thereof, but in truth it is not possible for a man
to do the one, but he shall commit the other. For as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 6.
He that eats of the flesh of the sacrifices, is he not partaker of the
altar? that is to say, whosoever comes to the ceremonies, makes present
profession, that he is partaker of the mysteries therein understood and taught,
that he that goes to the Mass, forsakes and departs from the table and
benefits of Jesus Christ. This reason only might be sufficent to withdraw all
men from the same, and to hinder that they should not be present: and also that
we have an express commandment, that by no means we do communicate with the
vnfuitefull works of darkness, but rather that we do blame them and reprehend
them. Again, That we do not couple our selves with infidels: that we depart
out of their company: that we separate our selves from such, and handle
nothing that is defiled or unclean, for the reasons following: Because there
is no fellowshippe between righteousness and unrighteousness, between light
and darkness, between Christ and Belial, between the faithful and the
infidel, lastly, between the temple of God and Idols. Again, we are
commanded To depart out of Babylon, that we be not partakers of her sins, nor
feel her wounds. Which testimonies of Scripture are clear and plain enoughe
to turn aside the minds of all men, that they have no fellowshippe nor
agreement with infidels, and chiefly in the exercise of religion, and of all
things thereunto belonging.

I beseech God who has given you, my Lord, this willingness and desire to be
informed of this great abuse, I mean of the Mass, that it would please him to
lighten your understanding that you may rightly and truly conceive this
treatise, breifely handeled and in few words: and to give you such strength
and fit occasions, as you may thereby be hable to withdraw your self wholly
from all these cursed abominations and horrible impieties, no doubt the cause
and principal root and spring of all the miseries and cursinges that are this
day throughout the whole world. And surely, my Lord, there is no other way to
win and to keep the favor of God, from the which only you are to look for
all the honor, prosperity, and increase, that you desire and promise to your
self, then to seek by all means possible the setting up of his service and
honor: yealding and applying your self with your whole heart to his whole
pleasure: and contrarily, eschewing and avoiding whatsoever may offend and
displease him: chiefelie and principally, all the kinds of idolatry, which
above all other crimes and sins is most odious to him and most abominable. I
pray God to give you the grace to seek, and to procure unto him this honor
and service.

FINIS.

