A TRVE RELATION of the most prosperous voyage made this present year 1605, by
Captain George Waymouth, in the Discovery of the land of Virginia:

Where he discovered 60 miles up a most excellent River; together with a most
fertile land.

Written by JAMES ROSIER. a Gentleman employed in the voyage.

LONDINI Impensis GEOR. BISHOP. 1605.

TO THE READER.
BEing employed in this Voyage by the right honorable Thomas Arundell Baron of
Warder, to take due notice, and make true report of the discovery therein
performed: I became very diligent to observe (as much as I could) whatsoever
was material or of consequence in the business, which I collected into this
brief sum, intending upon our return to publish the same. But he soon
changed the course of his intendments; and long before our arrival in England
had so far engaged himself with the Archduke, that he was constrained to
relinquish this action. But the commodities and profits of the country,
together with the fitness of plantation, being by some honorable Gentlemen of
good worth and quality, and Merchants of good sufficiency and judgment duly
considered, have at their own charge (intending both their private and the
common benefit of their country) undertaken the transporting of a Colony for
the plantation thereof; being much encouraged thereunto by the gracious favor
of the KINGS MAJESTY himself, and diverse Lords of his Highness most
Honorable Privy Council. After these purposed designs were concluded, I was
animated to publish this brief Relation, and not before; because some foreign
Nation (being fully assured of the fruitfulness of the country) have hoped
hereby to gain some knowledge of the place, seeing they could not allure our
Captain or any special man of our Company to combine with them for their
direction, nor obtain their purpose, in conueying away our Saluages, which was
busily in practice. And this is the cause that I have neither written of the
latitude or variation most exactly observed by our Captain with sundry
instruments, which together with his perfect Geographicall Map of the country,
he entendeth hereafter to set forth. I have likewise purposedly omitted here to
add a collection of many words in their language to the number of four or
five hundred, as also the names of diverse of their governors, as well their
friends as their enemies; being reserved to be made known for the benefit of
those that shall go in the next Voyage. But our particular proceedings in the
whole Discovery, the commodious situation of the River, the fertility of the
land, with the profits there to be had, and here reported, I refer to be
verified by the whole Company, as being eyewitnesses of my words, and most of
them near inhabitants upon the Thames. So with my prayers to God for the
conversion of so ingenious and well disposed people, and for the prosperous
successiue events of the noble intenders the prosecution thereof, I rest.

Your friend I. R.

A TRVE RELATION of Captain George Waymouth his Voyage, made this present
year 1605: in the Discovery of the North part of Virginia.
Upon Tuesday the 5 day of March, about ten a clock before noone, we set sail
from Ratcliffe, and came to an anchor that tide about two a clock before
Grauesend.

From thence the 10 of March being Sunday at night we ankered in the Downs:
and there rode til the next day about three a clock after noone, when with a
scant wind we set sail; and by reason the wind continued Southwardly, we
were beaten up and down: but on Saturday the 16 day about four a clock after
noon we put into Dartmouth Haven, where the continuance of the wind at South
and Southwest constrained us to ride till the last of this month. There we
shipped some of our men, and supplied necessaries for our Ship and Uoyage.

Upon Easter day, being the last of March, Upon Easter day we put to sea.
the wind coming at North-North-East, about five a clock after noone we
wayed anchor, and put to sea, In the name of God, being well victualled and
furnished with munition and all necessaries: Our Company 29 persons.
Our whole Company being but 29 persons; of whom I may boldly say, few voyages
have been manned forth with better Seamen generally in respect of our small
number.

Monday the next day, being the first of April, by six a clock in the
morning we were six leagues South-South-East from the Lizarde.

At two a clock in the afternoon this day, the weather being very fair, our
Captain for his own experience and others with him sounded, Sounding.
and had six and fifty fathoms and a half. The sounding was some small
black perrie sand, some reddish sand, a match or two, with small shells called
Saint James his Shells.

The foureteenth of April being Sunday, between nine and ten of the clock in
the morning our Captain descried the Island Cueruo: which bare South-West and
by West, about seven leagues from us: by eleven of the clock we descried
Flores to the Southward of Cueruo, We fell with the Islands of Azores.
as it lies: by four a clock in the afternoon we brought Cueruo due South
from us within two leagues of the shore, but we touched not, because the wind
was fair, and we thought our selves sufficiently watered and wooded.

Here our Captain observed the Sun, and found himself in the latitude of
40 degrees and 7 minutes: so he judged the North part of Cueruo to be in 40
degrees.

After we had kept our course about a hundred leagues from the Islands, by
continual Southerly winds we were forced and driven from the Southward,
whither we first intended. And when our Captain by long beating saw it was but
in vain to strive with winds, not knowing Gods purposes herein to our
further blessing, (which after by his especial direction we found) he thought
best to stand as nigh as he could by the wind to recover what land we might
first discover.

Monday, the 6 of May, being in the latitude of 39 and a half about ten a
clock before noone, we came to a riplin, which we discerned a head our ship,
which is a breach of water caused either by a fall, or by some meeting of
currents, which we judged this to be; for the weather being very fair, and a
small gale of wind, we sounded and found no ground in a hundred fathoms.

Monday, the 13 of May, about eleven a clock before noone, our Captain,
judging we were not far from land, sounded, and had a soft oaze in a hundred
and sixty fathomes. At four a clock after noone we sounded again, and had
the same oaze in a hundred fathoms.

From 10 a clock that night till three a clock in the morning, our Captain
took in all sails and lay at hull, being desirous to fall with the land in
the day time, because it was an unknown coast, which it pleased God in his
mercy to grant us, otherwise we had run our ship upon the hidden rocks and
perished all. For when we set sail we sounded in 100 fathoms: and by eight a
clock, having not made above five or six leagues, our Captain upon a sudden
change of water (supposing verily he saw the sand) presently sounded, and had
but five fathoms. Much maruelling because we saw no land, he sent one to the
top, who thence descried a whitish sandy cliffe, which bare West-North-West
about six leagues off from us: but coming nearer within three or four
leagues, we saw many breaches still nearer the land: at last we espied a great
breach a head us al along the shore, into which before we should enter, our
Captain thought best to hoise out his ship boat and sound it. Which if he had
not done, we had been in great danger: for he bare up the ship, as near as he
durst after the boat: until Thomas Came, his mate, being in the boat, called
to him to tacke about and stand off, for in this breach he had very showld
water, two fathoms and less upon rocks, and sometime they supposed they saw
the rock within three or four foot, whereon the sea made a very strong
breach: which we might discern (from the top) to run along as we sailed by it
6 or 7 leagues to the Southward. This was in the latitude of 41 degrees, 20
minutes: wherefore we were constrained to put back again from the land: and
sounding, (the weather being very fair and a small wind) we found our selves
embaied with continual showldes and rocks in a most uncertain ground, from
five or six fathoms, at the next cast of the lead we should have 15 and 18
fathoms. Over many which we passed, and God so blessed us, that we had wind and
weather as fair as poor men in this distress could wish: whereby we both
perfectly discerned every breach, and with the wind were able to turn, where
we saw most hope of safest passage* Thus we parted from the land, which we had
not so much before desired, and at the first sight reioiced, as now we all
ioifully praised God, that it had pleased him to deliver us from so imminent
danger.

Here we found great store of excellent Cod fish, and saw many Whales, as we
had done two or three days before.

We stood off all that night, and the next day being Wednesday; but the wind
still continuing between the points of South South-West, and West-South-West:
so as we could not make any way to the Southward, in regard of our great want
of water and wood (which was now spent) we much desired land, and therefore
sought for it, where the wind would best suffer us to refresh our selves.

Thursday, the 16 of May, we stood in directly with the land, and much
marvelled we descried it not, wherein we found our sea charts very false,
putting land where none is.

Friday, the 17 of May, about six a clock at night we descried the land,
which bare from us North-North-East; but because it blew a great gale of wind,
the sea very high, and near night, not fit to come upon an unknown coast, we
stood off till two a clock in the morning, being Saturday: then standing in
with it again, we descried it by eight a clock in the morning, bearing
North-East from us. The description of the Island.
It appeared a mean high land, as we after found it, being but an Island of
some six miles in compass, but I hope the most fortunate ever yet discovered.
About twelve a clock that day, we came to an anchor on the North side of this
Island, about a league from the shore. About two a clock our Captain with
twelve men rowed in his ship-boat to the shore, where we made no long stay, but
laded our boat with dry wood of old trees upon the shore side, and returned to
our ship, where we rode that night.

This Island is woody, grown with Fur, Birch, Oak and Beech, as far as we
saw along the shore; and so likely to be within. On the verge grow
Gooseberries, Strawberries, Wild pease, and Wild-rose bushes. The water issued
forth down the Rocky cliffes in many places: and much foul of diverse kinds
breed upon the shore and rocks.

While we were at shore, our men aboard with a few hooks got above thirty great
Cods and Hadocks, which gave us a taste of the great plenty of fish which we
found afterward wheresoever we went upon the coast.

From hence we might discern the maine land from the West-South-West to the
East-North-East, and a great way (as it then seemed, and as we after found it)
up into the maine we might discern very high mountains, though the maine
seemed but low land; which gave us a hope it would please God to direct us to
the discovery of some good; although we were driven by winds far from that
place, whither (both by our direction and desire) we ever intended to shape the
course of our voyage.

The next day, being Whit-Sunday; because we rode too much open to the sea and
winds, we weyed anchor about twelve a clock, and came along to the other
Islands more adjoining to the maine, and in the rode directly with the
mountains, about three leagues from the first Island where we had ankered.

When we came near unto them (sounding all along in a good depth) our Captain
manned his ship-boat and sent her before with Thomas Came one of his Mates, whom
he knew to be of good experience, to sound and search between the Islands for a
place safe for our ship to ride in; in the mean while we kept aloof at sea,
having given them in the boat a token to weffe in the ship, if he found a
convenient Harbor; which it pleased God to send us, far beyond our
expectation, in a most safe birth defended from all winds, in an excellent
depth of water for ships of any burden, in six, seven, eight, nine, and ten
fathoms upon a clay oaze very tough.

We all with great joy praised God for his unspeakable goodness, who had from
so apparent danger delivered us, and directed us upon this day into so secure
an Harbor: in remembrance whereof we named it Pentecost-harbor, Whitsund^y.
we arriving there that day out of our last Harbor in England, from whence we
set sail upon Easterday.

About four a clock, after we were ankered and well mored, our Captain with
half a dozen of our Company went on shore to seek fresh watering, and a
convenient place to set together a pinnesse, which we brought in pieces out of
England: both which we found very fitting.

Upon this Island, as also upon the former, we found (at our first coming to
shore) where fire had been made: and about the place were very great egg
shelles bigger than goose eggs, fish bones, and as we judged, the bones of
some beast.

Here we espied Cranes stalking on the shore of a little Island adjoining;
Cranes.
where we after saw they used to breed.

Whitsun-munday, the 20 day of May, very early in the morning, our Captain
caused the pieces of the pinnesse to be carried a shore, where while some were
busied about her, others dug wells to receive the fresh water, which we
found issuing down out of the land in many places. Here I can not omit (for
foolish fear of imputation of flattery) the painful industry of our Captain,
who as at sea he is always most careful and vigilant, so at land he refuses
no pains; but his labor was ever as much or rather more than any man's: which
not only encourages others with better content, but also effects much with
great expedition.

In digging we found excellent clay for brick or tile.

The next day we finished a well of good and wholesome clear water in a great
empty caske, which we left there. We cut yards, waste trees, and many
necessaries for our ship, while our Carpenter and Cooper labored to fit and
furnish forth the shallop.

This day our boat went out about a mile from our ship, We fished.
and in small time with two or three hooks was fished sufficiently for our
whole Company three days, with great Cod, Haddocke, and Thornebacke.

And toward night we drew with a small net of twenty fathoms very nigh the
shore: Abundance of many good fishes.
we got about thirty very good and great Lobsters, many Rockfish, some Plaise,
and other small fishes, and fishes called Lumpes, very pleasant to the taste:
and we generally observed, that all the fish, of what kind soever we took,
were well fed, fat, and sweet in taste.

Wednesday, the 22 of May, we felled and cut wood for our ships use, cleansed
and scoured our wels, and dug a plot of ground, wherein, amongst some garden
seeds, we sowed peaze and barley, Corn sowed.
which in sixteen days grew eight inches above ground; and so continued
growing every day half an inch, although this was but the crust of the ground,
and much inferior to the mould we after found in the maine.

Friday, the 24 of May, after we had made an end of cutting wood, and carrying
water aboard our ship, with fourteen Shot and Pikes we marched about and
through part of two of the Islands; the bigger of which we judged to be four or
five miles in compass, and a mile broad.

The profits and fruits which are naturally on these Islands are these: The
fruits of the Islands.
All along the shore and some space within, where the wood hinders not, grow
plentifully
Rasberries. Gooseberries. Strawberries. Roses. Currants. Wild vines. Angelica.
Within the Islands grow wood of sundry sorts, some very great, and all tall:
Birch. Beech. Ash. Maple. Spruce. Cherry-tree. Yew. Oak very great and good.
Firre-tree, out of which issues Turpentine in so marvelous plenty, and so
sweet, as our Surgeon and others affirmed they never saw so good in England.
We pulled off much Gum congealed on the outside of the bark, which smelled
like Frankincense. This would be a great benefit for making Tar and Pitch.


We stayed the longer in this place, not only because of our good Harbor
(which is an excellent comfort) but because every day we did more and more
discover the pleasant fruitfulness; insomuch as many of our Company wished
themselves settled here, not expecting any further hopes, or better discovery
to be made.

Here our men found abundance of great muscels among the rocks; and in some of
them many small Pearls: and in one muscell (which we drew up in our net) was
found fourteen Pearls, Pearl.
whereof one of pretty bigness and orient: in another above fifty small
Pearls: and if we had had a Drag, no doubt we had found some of great value,
seeing these did certainly show, that here they were bred: the shells all
glistering with mother of Pearl.

Wednesday, the 29 day, our shallop being now finished, and our Captain and
men furnished to depart with her from the ship: A Cross erected.
we set up a cross on the shore side upon the rocks.

Thursday, the 30 of May, about ten a clock before noon, our Captain with 13
men more, in the name of God, and with all our prayers for their prosperous
discovery, and safe return, departed in the shallop: leaving the ship in a
good harbor, which before I mentioned, well mored, and manned with 14 men.

This day, about five a clock in the afternoon, The Saluages came first to us.
we in the ship espied three Canoas coming toward us, which went to the
island adioining, where they went a shore, and very quickly had made a fire,
about which they stood beholding our ship: to whom we made signs with our
hands and hats, weffing unto them to come unto us, because we had not seen any
of the people yet. They sent one Canoa with three men, one of which, when they
came near unto us, spoke in his language very loud and very boldly: seeming as
though he would know why we were there, and by pointing with his oar toward
the sea, we coniectured he meant we should be gone. But when we showed them
knives and their use, by cutting of sticks and other trifles, as combs and
glasses, they came close aboard our ship, as desirous to entertain our
friendship. To these we gave such things as we perceived they liked, when we
showed them the use: bracelets, rings, peacocke feathers, which they stuck in
their hair, and Tobacco pipes. After their departure to their company on the
shore, presently came four other in another Canoa: to whom we gave as to the
former, using them with as much kindness as we could.

The shape of their body is very proportionable, they are well countenanced, not
very tal nor big, but in stature like to us: Three sorts of colors of painting.
they paint their bodies with black, their faces, some with red, some with
black, and some with blew.

Their clothing is Beauers skins, or Deares skins, cast over them like a
mantle, and hanging down to their knees, made fast together upon the shoulder
with leather: some of them had sleeves, Their clothing and buskins.
most had none: some had buskins of such leather tewed: they have besides a
piece of Beauers skin between their legs, made fast about their waste, to
cover their priuities.

They suffer no hair to grow on their faces, but on their head very long and
very black, which those that have wives, bind up behind with a leather
string, in a long round knot.

They seemed all very civil and merry: showing tokens of much thankfulness,
for those things we gave them. We found them then (as after) a people of
exceeding good invention, quick understanding and ready capacity.

Their boats.
Their Canoas are made without any iron, of the bark of a birch tree,
strengthened within with ribs and hoops of wood, in so good fashion, with such
excellent ingenious art, as they are able to bear seven or eight persons, far
exceeding any in the Indies.

One of their Canoas came not to us, wherein we imagined their women were: of
whom they are (as all Saluages) very jealous.

When I signed unto them they should go sleep, because it was night, they
understood presently, and pointed that at the shore, right against our ship,
they would stay all night: as they did.

The next morning very early, came one Canoa abord us again with three
Saluages, whom we easily then enticed into our ship, and under the deck: where
we gave them porke, fish, bread and pease, all which they did eat: and this I
noted, they would eat nothing raw, either fish or flesh. They marvelled much
and much looked upon the making of our can and kettle, so they did at a
head-peece and at our guns, of which they are most fearful, and would fall
flat down at the report of them. At their departure I signed unto them, that
if they would bring me such skins as they ware I would give them knives, and
such things as I saw they most liked, which the chief of them promised to do
by that time the Sun should be beyond the midst of the firmament; this I
did to bring them to an understanding of exchange, and that they might conceive
the intent of our coming to them to be for no other end.

About 10 a clock this day we descried our Shallop returning toward us, which
so soon as we espied, we certainly coniectured our Captain had found some
unexpected harbor, further up toward the maine to bring the ship into, or
some river; knowing his determination and resolution, not so suddenly else to
make return: which when they came nearer they expressed by shooting volleies of
shot; and when they were come within Musket shot, they gave us a volley and
haled us, then we in the ship gave them a great piece and haled them.

Thus we welcomed them, who gladded us exceedingly with their ioifull relation
of their happy discovery, which shall appear in the sequel. And we likewise
gave them cause of mutual joy with us, in discoursing of the kind ciuility we
found in a people, where we little expected any spark of humanity.

Our Captain had in this small time discovered up a great river, trending
along into the maine about forty miles. The pleasantness whereof, with the
safety of harbor for shipping, together with the fertility of ground and other
fruits, which were generally by his whole company related, I omit, till I
report of the whole discovery therein after performed. For by the breadth,
depth and strong flood, imagining it to run far up into the land, he with speed
returned, intending to flank his light horsman for arrows, least it might
happen that the further part of the river should be narrow, and by that means
subject to the volley of Saluages on either side out of the woods.

Until his return, our Captain left on shore where he landed in a path
(which seemed to be frequented) a pipe, a brooch and a knife, thereby to know
if the Saluages had recourse that way, because they could at that time see none
of them, Trifles left on shore.
but they were taken away before our return thither.

I return now to our Saluages, who according to their appointment about one a
clock, came with 4 Canoas to the shore of the island right over against us,
where they had lodged the last night, and sent one Canoa to us with two of
those Saluages, who had been a board, and another, who then seemed to have
command of them: for though we perceived their willingness, yet he would not
permit them to come abord: but he having viewed us and our ship, signed that he
would go to the rest of the company and return again. Presently after their
departure it began to rain, and continued all that afternoon, so as they
could not come to us with their skins and furs, nor we go to them. But after an
hour or there about, the three which had been with us before came again,
whom we had to our fire and covered them with our gowns. Our Captain bestowed
a shirt upon him, whom we thought to be their chief, who seemed never to have
seen any before; we gave him a brooch to hang about his neck, a great knife,
and lesser knives to the two other, and to every one of them a comb and
glass, the use whereof we showed them: whereat they laughed and took gladly;
we victualled them, and gave them aqua vitae, which they tasted, but would by
no means drink; our beueridge they liked well, we gave them Sugar Candy,
which after they had tasted they liked and desired more, and raisons which were
given them; and some of every thing they would reserve to carry to their
company. Wherefore we pitying their being in the rain, and therefore not able
to get themselves victual (as we thought) we gave them bread and fish.

Thus because we found the land a place answereable to the intent of our
discovery, The intent of our kind usage of the Saluages.
viz. fit for any nation to inhabit, we used the people with as great kindness
as we could devise, or found them capable of.

The next day, being Saturday and the first of June, We traded with the
Saluages.
I traded with the Saluages all the fore-noone upon the shore, where were eight
and twenty of them: and because our ship rode nigh, we were but five or six:
where for knives, glasses, combs and other trifles to the value of four or
five shillings, we had 40 good Beauers skins, Otters skins, Sables, and other
small skins, which we knew not how to call. Our trade being ended, many of
them came abord us, and did eat by our fire, and would be very merry and
bold, in regard of our kind usage of them. Toward night our Captain went on
shore, to have a draught with the Sein or Net. And we carried two of them with
us, who marvelled to see us catch fish with a net. Most of that we caught we
gave them and their company. Then on the shore I learned the names of diverse
things of them: and when they perceived me to note them down, they would of
themselves, fetch fishes, and fruit bushes, and stand by me to see me write
their names.

Our Captain showed them a strange thing which they woondred at. His sword and
mine having been touched with the Loadstone, took up a knife, and held it
fast when they plucked it away, made the knife turn, being laid on a block,
and touching it with his sword, made that take up a needle, whereat they much
marvelled. This we did to cause them to imagine some great power in us: and for
that to love and fear us.

When we went on shore to trade with them, Their Bows and Arrows.
in one of their Canoas I saw their bows and arrows, which I took up and
drew an arrow in one of them, which I found to be of strength able to carry an
arrow five or six score strongly: and one of them took it and drew as we
draw our bows, not like the Indians. Their bow is made of Which Hazell, and
some of Beech in fashion much like our bows, Their Bows.
but they want nocks, only a string of leather put through a hole at one end,
and made fast with a knot at the other. Arrows.
Their arrows are made of the same wood, some of Ash, big and long, with three
feathers tied on, and nocked very artificially: headed with the long shanke
bone of a Dear, made very sharp with two fangs in manner of a harping iron.
They have likewise Darts, Their Darts.
headed with like bone, one of which I darted among the rocks, and it brake
not. These they use very cunningly, to kill fish, foul and beasts.

Our Captain had two of them at supper with us in his cabin to see their
demeanure, and had them in presence at service: who behaved themselves very
ciuilly, neither laughing nor talking all the time, and at supper fed not like
men of rude education, neither would they eat or drink more than seemed to
content nature; they desired pease to carry a shore to their women, which we
gave them, with fish and bread, and lent them pewter dishes, which they
carefully brought again.

In the evening another boat came to them on the shore, Tobacco excellent.
and because they had some Tobacco, which they brought for their own use, the
other came for us, making sign what they had, and offered to carry some of us
in their boat, but four or five of us went with them in our own boat: when we
came on shore they gave us the best welcome they could, spreading fallow Deeres
skins for us to sit on the ground by their fire, and gave us of their Tobacco
in our pipes, which was excellent, and so generally commended of us all to be
as good as any we ever took, being the simple leaf without any composition,
strong, and of sweet taste: they gave us some to carry to our Captain, whom
they called our Bashabes: neither did they require any thing for it, but we
would not receive any thing from them without remuneration.

Here we saw four of their women, who stood behind them, as desirous to see
us, but not willing to be seen: for before, whenever we came on shore, they
retired into the woods, whether it were in regard of their own natural
modesty, being covered only as the men with the foresaid Beauers skins, The
description of their Women and Children.
or by the commanding iealously of their husbands, which we rather suspected,
because it is an inclination much noted to be in Saluages; wherefore we would by
no means seem to take any special notice of them. They were very well
favored in proportion of countenance, though colored black, low of stature,
and fat, bare headed as the men, wearing their hair long: they had two little
male children of a year and half old, as we judged, very fat and of good
countenances, which they love tenderly, all naked, except their legs, which
were covered with thin leather buskins tewed, fastened with strops to a girdle
about their waste, which they girde very straight, and is decked round about
with little round pieces of red Copper; to these I gave chains and bracelets,
glasses, and other trifles, which the Saluages seemed to accept in great
kindness.

At our coming away, we would have had those two that supped with us, to go
abord and sleep, as they had promised: but it appeared their company would not
suffer them. Whereat we might easily perceive they were much grieved: but not
long after our departure, they came with three more to our ship, signing to us,
that if one of our company would go lie on shore with them, they would stay
with us. Then Owen Griffin (one of the two we were to leave in the Country, if
we had thought it needful or convenient) went with them in their Canoa, and 3
of them stayed aborde us, whom our whole company very kindly used. Our Captain
saw their lodging provided, and them lodged in an old sail upon the Orlop; and
because they much feared our dogs, they were tied up whenever any of them
came abord us.

Owen Griffin, which lay on the shore, reported unto me their manner, The
ceremonies of ye Saluages in their idolatry.
and (as I may term them) the ceremonies of their idolatry: which they
perform thus. One among them (the eldest of the Company, as he judged) rises
right up, the other sitting still, and looking about, suddenly cried with a
loud voice, Baugh, Waugh: then the women fall down, and lie upon the ground,
and the men all together answering the same, fall a stamping round about the
fire with both feet, as hard as they can, making the ground shake, with sundry
outcries, and change of voice and sound. Many take the fire-sticks and thrust
them into the earth, and then rest awhile: of a sudden beginning as before,
they continue so stamping, till the younger sort fetched from the shore many
stones, of which every man took one, and first beat upon them with their fire
sticks, then with the stones beat the earth with all their strength. And in
this manner (as he reported) they continued above two hours.

They lie with their wives secretly.
After this ended, they which have wives take them apart, and withdraw
themselves severally into the wood all night.

The next morning, as soon as they saw the Sun rise, they pointed to him to
come with them to our ship: and having received their men from us, they came
with five or six of their Canoas and Company houering about our ship: to whom
(because it was the Sabbath day) I signed they should depart, and at the next
Sun rising we would go along with them to their houses: which they understood
(as we thought) and departed, some of their Canoas coursing about the Island,
and the other directly toward the maine.

This day, about five a clock after noone, came three other Canoas from the
maine, of which some had been with us before; and they came aboard us, and
brought us Tobacco, which we took with them in their pipes, which were made of
earth, very strong, black, and short, containing a great quantity: some
Tobacco they gave unto our Captain, and some to me, in very civil kind manner.
We requited them with bread and peaze, which they carried to their Company on
shore, seeming very thankful. After supper they returned with their Canoa to
fetch us a shore to take Tobacco with them there; with whom six or seven of us
went, and carried some trifles, if peradventure they had any trucke, among which
I carried some few biskets, to try if they would exchange for them, seeing they
so well liked to eat them. When we came at shore, they most kindly entertained
us, taking us by the hands, as they had observed we did to them aboard, in
token of welcome, and brought us to sit down by their fire, where sat together
thirteen of them. They filled their Tobacco pipe, which was then the short
claw of a Lobster, which will hold ten of our pipes full, and we drank of
their excellent Tobacco as much as we would with them; but we saw not any great
quantity to trucke for; and it seemed they had not much left of old, for they
spend a great quantity yearly by their continual drinking: and they would
sign unto us, that it was grown yet but a foot above ground, and would be
above a yard high, with a leaf as broad as both their hands. They often would
(by pointing to one part of the maine Eastward) sign unto us, that their
Bashabes (that is, their King) had great plenty of Furs, and much Tobacco.
The dwelling of Bashabes is Eastward from ye great River.
When we had sufficiently taken Tobacco with them, I showed some of our trifles
for trade; but they made sign that they had there nothing to exchange; for (as
I after conceived) they had been fishing and fowling, and so came thither to
lodge that night by us: for when we were ready to come away, they showed us
great cups made very wittily of bark, in form almost square, full of a red
berry about the bigness of a bullis, A red berrie which they feed on.
which they did eat, and gave us by handfuls; of which (though I liked not the
taste) yet I kept some, because I would by no means but accept their
kindness. They showed me likewise a great piece of fish, whereof I tasted, and
it was fat like Porpoise; and another kind of great scaly fish, broiled on the
coals, much like white Salmon, which the Frenchmen call Aloza, for these they
would have had bread; which I refused, because in manner of exchange, I would
always make the greatest esteem I could of our commodities whatsoever;
although they saw aboard our Captain was liberal to give them, to the end we
might allure them still to frequent us. Then they showed me four young
Goslings, We had young Goslings of the Saluages.
for which they required four biskets, but I offered them two; which they
took and were well content.

At our departure they made sign, that if any of us would stay there on shore,
some of them would go lie aboard us: at which motion two of our Company stayed
with them, and three of the Saluages lodged with us in manner as the night
before.

June 3.
Early the next morning, being Monday the third of June, when they had brought
our men aboard, they came about our ship, earnestly by signs desiring that we
would go with them along to the maine, for that there they had Furs and
Tobacco to traffic with us. Wherefore our Captain manned the light-horseman
with as many men as he could well, which were about fifteen with rowers and
all; and we went along with them. Two of their Canoas they sent away before,
and they which lay aboard us all night, kept company with us to direct us.

This we noted as we went along, they in their Canoa with three oars, Their
Canoa outrowed us.
would at their will go ahead of us and about us, when we rowed with eight
oars strong; such was their swiftness, by reason of the lightness and
artificial composition of their Canoa and oars.

When we came near the point where we saw their fires, where they intended to
land, and where they imagined some few of us would come on shore with our
merchandise, as we had accustomed before; when they had often numbered our men
very diligently, they scoured away to their Campany, not doubting we would have
followed them. But when we perceived this, and knew not either their intents,
or number of Saluages on the shore, our Captain, after consultation, stood
off, and wef^ed them to us, determining that I should go on shore first to take
a view of them, and what they had to traffic: if he, whom at our first sight
of them seemed to be of most respect among them, and being then in the Canoa,
would stay as a pawn for me. When they came to us (notwithstanding all our
former courtesies) he utterly refused; but would leave a young Saluage: and for
him our Captain sent Griffin in their Canoa, while we lay hulling a little
off. Griffin at his return reported, they had there assembled together, as he
numbered them, 283 Saluages.
two hundred eighty three Saluages, every one his bow and arrows, with their
dogs, and wolves which they keep tame at command, and not any thing to
exchange at all; but would have drawn us further up into a little narrow nooke
of a river, for their Furs, as they pretended.

These things considered, we began to join them in the rank of other
Saluages, who have been by travelers in most discoueries found very
treacherous: never attempting mischief, until by some remissness, fit
opportunity affoordeth them certain ability to execute the same. Wherefore
after good advice taken, we determined so soon as we could to take some of
them, least (being suspicious we had discovered their plots) they should absent
themselves from us.

Tuesday, the fourth of June, Fish in the Harbor.
our men took Cod and Hadocke with hooks by our ship side, and Lobsters very
great: which before we had not tried.

About eight a clock this day we went on shore with our boats, to fetch aboard
water and wood, our Captain leaving word with the Gunner in the ship, by
discharging a musket, to give notice if they espied any Canoa coming: which
they did about ten a clock. He therefore being careful they should be kindly
entreated, requested me to go aboard, intending with dispatch to make what
haste after he possibly could. When I came to the ship, there were two Canoas,
and in either of them three Saluages; of whom two were below at the fire, the
other stayed in their Canoas about the ship; and because we could not entice
them abord, we gave them a Can of pease and bread, which they carried to the
shore to eat. But one of them brought back our Can presently and staid abord
with the other two; for he being young, of a ready capacity, and one we most
desired to bring with us into England, had received exceeding kind usage at
our hands, and was therefore much delighted in our company. When our Captain
was come, we consulted how to catch the other three at shore, which we
performed thus.

Our manner of taking the Saluages.
We manned the light horseman with 7 or 8 men, one standing before carried our
box of Merchandise, as we were wont when I went to traffic with them, and a
platter of pease, which meat they loved: but before we were landed, one of them
(being too suspitiously fearful of his own good) withdrew himself into the
wood. The other two met us on the shore side, to receive the pease, with whom
we went up the Cliffe to their fire and sat down with them, and whiles we
were discussing how to catch the third man who was gone, I opened the box, and
showed them trifles to exchange, thinking thereby to have banished fear from
the other, and drawn him to return: but when we could not, we used little
delay, but suddenly laid hands upon them. And it was as much as five or six of
us could do to get them into the light horseman. For they were strong and so
naked as our best hold was by their long hair on their heads: and we would
have been very loath to have done them any hurt, which of necessity we had
been constrained to have done if we had attempted them in a multitude, which
we must and would, We caught five Saluages, two Canoas, and their bows and
arrows.
rather than have wanted them, being a matter of great importance for the full
accomplement of our voyage.

Thus we shipped five Saluages, two Canoas, with all their bows and arrows.

The next day we made an end of getting our wood aboard, and filled our empty
caske with water.

Thursday, the 6 of June, we spent in bestowing the Canoas upon the orlop safe
from hurt, because they were subject to breaking, which our Captain was
careful to prevent.

Saturday, the eight of June (our Captain being desirous to finish all
business about this harbor) very early in the morning, with the light
horseman, coasted five or six leagues about the Islands adioining, and sounded
all along wheresoever we went. He likewise diligently searched the mouth of the
Harbor, and about the rocks which show themselves at all times, and are an
excellent breach of the water, Sounded about the rocks and mouth of the Harbor.
so as no Sea can come in to offend the Harbor. This he did to instruct
himself, and thereby able to direct others that shall happen to come to this
place. For every where both near the rocks, and in all soundings about the
Islands, we never found less water than four and five fathoms, which was
seldom; but seven, eight, nine and ten fathoms is the continual sounding by
the shore. In some places much deeper upon clay oaze or soft sand: so that if
any bound for this place, should be either driven or scanted with winds, he
shall be able (with his directions) to recover safely his harbor most securely
in water enough by four several passages, more their which I think no man of
judgment will desire as necessary.

Upon one of the Islands (because it had a pleasant sandy Coue for small barks
to ride in) we landed, and found hard by the shore a pond of fresh water, A
Ponde of fresh Water.
which flowed over the banks, somewhat ouergrowen with little shrub trees, and
searching up in the Island, we saw it fed with a strong run, which with small
labor, and little time, might be made to drive a mill. In this Island, as in
the other, were spruce trees of excellent timber and height, able to mast ships
of great burden.

While we thus sounded from one place to another in so good deepes, our
Captain to make some trial of the fishing himself, caused a hook or two to
be cast out at the mouth of the harbor, Great plenty of Cod fish.
not above half a league from our ship, where in small time only, with the
baits which they cut from the fish and three hooks, we got fish enough for our
whole Company (though now augmented) for three days. Which I omit not to
report, because it shows how great a profit the fishing would be, they being
so plentiful, so great, and so good, with such convenient drying as can be
wished, near at hand upon the Rocks.

This day, about one a clock after noone, came from the Eastward two Canoas
abord us, wherein was he that refused to stay with us for a pawn, and with him
six other Saluages which we had not seen before, who had beautified themselves
after their manner very gallantly, though their clothing was not differing from
the former, yet they had newly painted their faces very deep, some all black,
some red, with stripes of excellent blew over their upper lips, Their ornaments
of gallantnesse.
nose and chin. One of them ware a kind of Coronet about his head, made very
cunningly, of a substance like stiff hair colored red, broad, and more then
a handful in depth, which we imagined to be some ensign of his superiority:
for he so much esteemed it as he would not for any thing exchange the same.
Other ware the white feathered skins of some foul, round about their head,
jewels in their ears, and bracelets of little white round bone, fastened
together upon a leather string. These made not any show that they had notice of
the other before taken, but we understood them by their speech and signs, that
they came sent from the Bashabes, and that his desire was that we would bring
up our ship (which they call as their own boats, a Quiden) to his house,
being, as they pointed, upon the main toward the East, from whence they came,
and that he would exchange with us for Furs and Tobacco. But because our
Company was but small, and now our desire was with speed to discover up the
river, we let them understand, that if their Bashabes would come to us, he
should be welcome, but we would not remove to him. Which when they understood
(receiving of us bread and fish, and every of them a knife) they departed; for
we had then no will to stay them long abord, least they should discover the
other Saluages which we had stowed below.

Tuesday, the 11 of June, We went up with our ship into the River.
we passed up into the river with our ship, about six and twenty miles. Of
which I had rather not write, then by my relation to detract from the
worthiness thereof. For the River, besides that it is subject by shipping to
bring in all traffiques of Merchandise, a benefit always accounted the richest
treasury to any land: for which cause our Thames has that due denomination,
and France by her nauigable Rivers receives her greatest wealth; yet this
place of it self from God and nature affoordeth as much diversity of good
commodities, as any reasonable man can wish, for present habitation and
planting.

The first and chiefest thing required, is a bold coast and fair land to fall
with; the next, a safe harbor for ships to ride in.

The first is a special attribute to this shore, being most free from sands or
dangerous rocks in a continual good depth, with a most excellent land-fall,
which is the first Island we fell with, named by us, Saint Georges Island. For
the second, by judgment of our Captain, who knows most of the coast of
England, and most of other Countries, The profits of the River.
(having been experienced by employments in discoueries and travels from his
childhood) and by opinion of others of good judgment in our ship, here are
more good harbors for ships of all burdens, than England can afford, and far
more secure from all winds and weathers, than any in England, Scotland, France
or Spain. For besides without the River in the channel, and sounds about the
islands adioining to the mouth thereof, no better riding can be desired for an
infinite number of ships. The River it self as it runs up into the main
very nigh forty miles toward the great mountains, The breadth of the River.
bears in breadth a mile, sometime three quarters, and half a mile is the
narrowest, where you shall never have under 4 and 5 fathoms water hard by the
shore, but 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathoms all along, and on both sides every half
mile very gallant Coues, some able to contain almost a hundred sails, The
ground soft oaze and clay.
where the ground is excellent soft oaze with a tough clay under for anchor
hold, and where ships may ly without either Cable or Anchor, only mored to the
shore with a Hauser.

What flow of water.
It flows by their judgment eighteen or twenty foot at high water.

Dockes to grave and carine ships.
Here are made by nature most excellent places, as Docks to grave or Carine
ships of all burdens: secured from all winds, which is such a necessary
incomparable benefit, that in few places in England, or in any parts of
Christendom, art, with great charges, can make the like.

The Land.
Besides, the bordering land is a most rich neighbor trending all along on both
sides, in an equal plain, neither mountainous nor rocky, but verged with a
green bordure of grass, does make tender unto the beholder of her pleasant
fertility, if by clensing away the woods she were converted into meddow.

The wood.
The wood she bears is not shrubbish fit only for fuel, but goodly tall
Fur, Spruce, Birch, Beech, Oak, which in many places is not so thick, but
may with small labor be made feeding ground, being plentiful like the outward
Islands with fresh water, which streameth down in many places.

As we passed with a gentle wind up with our ship in this River, any man may
conceive with what admiration we all consented in joy. Many of our Company who
had been travelers in sundry countries, and in the most famous Rivers, yet
affirmed them not comparable to this they now beheld. Some that were with Sir
Walter Ralegh in his voyage to Guiana, in the discovery of the River Orenoque,
which echoed fame to the worlds ears, This river preferred before Orenoque*
and why.
gave reasons why it was not to be compared with this, which wants the
dangers of many Shoules, and broken ground, wherewith that was incombred.
Others before that notable River in the West Indies called Rio Grande; some
before the River of Loyer, the River Seine, and of Bordeaux in France; which
although they be great and grodly Rivers, yet it is no detraction from them to
be accounted inferior to this, which not only yields all the foresaid
pleasant profits, but also appeared infallibly to us free from all
inconveniences.

I will not prefer it before our river of Thames, because it is Englands
richest treasure; but we all did wish those excellent Harbors, good deeps in a
continual convenient breadth, and small tide gates, to be as well therein for
our countries good, as we found the^ here (beyond our hopes) in certain, for
those to whom it shall please God to grant this land for habitation; which if
it had, with the other inseparable adherent commodities here to be found; then
I would boldly affirm it to be the most rich, beautiful, large and secure
harboring river that the world affoordeth.

Wednesday, the twelfth of June, our Captain manned his light-horseman with 17
men, and ran up from the ship riding in the river up to the codd* thereof,
where we landed, leaving six to keep the light-horseman till our return. Ten
of us with our shot, and some armed, with a boy to carry powder and match,
marched up into the country toward the mountains, which we descried at our
first falling with the land. Unto some of them the river brought us so near,
as we judged our selves when we landed to have been within a league of them:
but we marched up about four miles in the maine, We marched up into ye land
about 4 miles.
and passed over three hills: and because the weather was parching hot, and
our men in their armor not able to travel far and return that night to our
ship, we resolved not to pass any further, being all very weary of so tedious
and laboursom a travel.

Good pasture
In this march we passed over very good ground, pleasant and fertile, fit for
pasture, for the space of some three miles, having but little wood, and that
Oak like stands left in our pastures in England, good and great, fit timber for
any use. Some small Birch, Hazle and Brake, which might in small time with few
men be cleansed and made good arable land: but as it now is will feed cattle
of all kinds with fodder enough for Summer and Winter. The soil is black,
bearing sundry herbs, grass, and strawberries bigger than ours in England. In
many places are low Thicks like our Copisses of small young wood. And surely
it did all resemble a stately Park, wherein appear some old trees with high
withered tops, and other flourishing with living green boughs. Upon the hills
grow notable high timber trees, masts for ships of 400 tun: and at the bottom
of every hill, a little run of fresh water: but the furthest and last we
passed, ran with a great stream able to drive a mill.

Dear. Hares. Hogs.
We might see in some places where fallow Dear and Hares had been, and by the
rooting of ground we supposed wild Hogs had ranged there, but we could descrie
no beast, because our noise still chased them from us.

We were no sooner come aboard our light-horseman, returning toward our ship,
but we espied a Canoa coming from the further part of the Cod of the river
Eastward, which hasted to us; wherein, with two others, was he who refused to
stay for a pawn: and his coming was very earnestly importing to have one of
our men to go lie on shore with their Bashabes (who was there on shore, as they
signed) and then the next morning he would come to our ship with many Furs
and Tobacco. This we perceived to be only a mere device to get possession of
any of our men, to ransom all those which we had taken, which their natural
policy could not so shadow, but we did easily discover and prevent. These
means were by this Saluage practiced, because we had one of his kinsemen
prisoner, as we judged by his most kind usage of him being aboard us together.

Thursday, the 13 of June, by two a clock in the morning (because our Captain
would take the help and advantage of the tide) in the light-horseman with our
Company well provided and furnished with armor and shot both to defend and
offend; we went from our ship up to that part of the river which trended
Westward into the maine, to search that: and we carried with us a Cross, to
erect at that point, which (because it was not daylight) we left on the shore
until our return back; when we set it up in manner as the former. We set up
another cross.
For this (by the way) we diligently observed, that in no place, either about
the Islands, or up in the maine, or along the river, we could discern any
token or sign, that ever any Christian had been before; of which either by
cutting wood, digging for water, or setting up Crosses (a thing never omitted
by any Christian travelers) we should have perceived some mention left.

But to return to our river, further up into which we then rowed by estimation
twenty miles, the beauty and goodness whereof I can not by relation
sufficiently demonstrate. That which I can say in general is this: What profit
or pleasure soever is described and truly verified in the former part of the
river, Conueniency of transportation.
is wholly doubled in this; for the breadth and depth is such, that any ship
drawing 17 or 18 foot water, might have passed as far as we went with our
light-horsman, and by all our men's judgment much further, because we left it
in so good depth and breadth; which is so much the more to be esteemed of
greater worth, by how much it trendeth further up into the maine: for from the
place of our ships riding in the Harbor at the entrance into the Sound, to the
furthest part we were in this river, by our estimation was not much less than
threescore miles.

From each bank of this river are diverse branching streams into the maine,
whereby is affoorded an unspeakable profit by the conueniency of transportation
from place to place, which in some countries is both chargeable, and not so
fit, by cariages on waine, or horseback.

Here we saw great store of fish, some great, leaping above water, which we
judged to be Salmons. All along is an excellent mould of ground. The wood in
most places, especially on the East side, very thin, chiefly oak and some
small young birch, bordering low upon the river; all fit for meadow and pasture
ground: and in that space we went, we had on both sides the river many plain
plots of meadow, some of three or four acres, some of eight or nine: Meddow and
Grass.
so as we judged in the whole to be between thirty and forty acres of good
grass, and where the arms run out into the Maine, there likewise went a space
on both sides of clear grass, how far we know not, in many places we might
see paths made to come down to the watering.

The excellency of this part of the River, for his good breadth, depth, and
fertile bordering ground, did so ravish us all with variety of pleasantness,
as we could not tell what to commend, but only admired; some compared it to the
River Seuerne, (but in a higher degree) and we all concluded (as I verily
think we might rightly) that we should never see the like River in every
degree equal, until it pleased God we beheld the same again. For the farther
we went, the more pleasing it was to every man, alluring us still with
expectation of better, so as our men, although they had with great labor rowed
long and eat nothing (for we carried with us no victual, but a little cheese
and bread) yet they were so refreshed with the pleasant beholding thereof, We
were loath to leave this River.
and so loath to forsake it, as some of them affirmed, they would have
continued willingly with that only fare and labor 2 days; but the tide not
suffering us to make any longer stay (because we were to come back with the
tide) and our Captain better knowing what was fit then we, and better what
they in labor were able to endure, being very loath to make any desperate
hazard, where so little necessity required, thought it best to make return,
because whither we had discovered was sufficient to conceive that the River ran
very far into the land. For we passed six or seven miles, altogether fresh
water (whereof we all drank) forced up by the flowing of the Salt: which after
a great while eb, where we left it, by breadth of channel and depth of water
was likely to run by estimation of our whole company an unknown way farther:
the search whereof our Captain has left till his return, if it shall so
please God to dispose of him and us.

For we having now by the direction of the omnipotent disposer of all good
intents (far beyond the period of our hopes) fallen with so bold a coast, found
so excellent and secure harbor, for as many ships as any nation professing
Christ is able to set forth to Sea, discovered a River, which the All-creating
God, with his most liberal hand, has made above report notable with his
foresaid blessings, bordered with a land, whose pleasant fertility bewraieth it
self to be the garden of nature, wherein she only intended to delight her
self, having hitherto obscured it to any, except to a purblind generation,
whose understanding it has pleased God so to darken, as they can neither
discern, use, or rightly esteem the invaluable riches in midst whereof they
live sensually content with the bark and outward rind, as neither knowing the
sweetness of the inward marrow, nor acknowledging the Deity of the Almighty
giver: having I say thus far proceeded, and having some of the inhabitant
nation (of best understanding we saw among them) who (learning our language)
may be able to give us further instruction, concerning all the premised
particulars, as also of their governors, and government, situation of towns,
and what else shall be convenient, which by no means otherwise we could by any
observation of our selves learn in a long time: our Captain now wholly
intended his provision for speedy return. For although the time of year and
our victual were not so spent, but we could have made a longer voyage, in
searching further and trading for very good commodities, yet as they might have
been much profitable, The cause of our speedy return.
so (our company being small) much more prejudicial to the whole state of our
voya(...) which we were most regardfull now not to hazard. For we supposing not
a little present private profit, but a public good, and true zeal of
promulgating Gods holy Church, by planting Christianity, to be the sole intent
of the Honorable ^, (...)rth of this discovery* thought it generally most
expedient, by our speedy return, to give the longer space of time to make
provision for so weighty an enterprise.

Friday, the 14 day of June, early by four a clock in the morning, with the
tide your two boats, (...) an^ a little help of the wind, We ank^rd at the
mouth of the River.
we rowed down to the rivers mouth and there came to an anchor about eleven a
clock. Afterward our Captain in the light horseman searched the sounding all
about the mouth and coming to the River, for his certain instruction, of a
perfect description.

The next day, being Saturday, we wayed anchor, and with a briese from the land,
we sailed up to our watering place, and there stopped, went on shore and filled
all our empty caske with fresh water.

Our Captain made his certain observation.
Our Captain upon the Rock in the midst of the harbor observed the height,
latitude, and variation exactly upon his instruments.

1 Astrolabe. 2 Semisphere. 3 Ringe instrument. 4 Cross staff. 5 And an
excellent compass made for the variation.
The certainty whereof, together with the particularities of every depth and
sounding, as well at our falling with the land, as in the discovery, and at our
departure from the coast; I refer to his own relation in the Map of his
Geographicall description, which for the benefit of others he intends most
exactly to publish.

The temperature of the Climate (albeit a very important matter)? The
temperature of the Climate.
had almost passed without mentioning, because it affoorded to us no great
alteration from our disposition in England; somewhat hotter up into the Maine,
because it lies open to the South; the air so wholesome, as I suppose not any
of us found our selves at any time more healthful, more able to labor, nor
with better stomachs to such good fare, as we partly br(...)ught, and partly
found.

Sunday, the 16 of June, the wind being fair, and because we had set out of
England upon a Sunday, made the islands upon a Sunday, and as we doubt not (by
Gods appointment) happily fell into our harbor upon a Sunday; so now
(beseeching him still with like prosperity to bless our return into England
our country, and from thence with his good will and pleasure to hasten our next
arrival there) we waied Anchor and quit the Land upon a Sunday.

Tuesday, the 18 day, being not run above 30 leagues from land, and our
Captain for his certain knowledge how to fall with the coast, having sounded
every watch, and from 40 fathoms had come into good deeping, to 70, and so to
an hundred: this day the weather being fair, after the four a clock watch,
when we supposed not to have found ground so far from land, and before
sounded in above 100 fathoms, we had ground in 24 fathomes. Wherefore our
sails being down, Thomas King boatswaine, presently cast out a hook, and
before he judged it at ground, was fished and haled up an exceeding great and
well fed Cod: then there were cast out 3 or 4 more, and the fish was so
plentiful and so great, as when our Captain would have set sail, we all
desired him to suffer them to take fish a while, because we were so delighted
to see them catch so great fish, so fast as the hook came down: some with
playing with the hook they took by the back, and one of the Mates with two
hooks at a lead at five draughts together haled up ten fishes; all were
generally very great, some they measured to be five foot long, and three foot
about.

This caused our Captain not to marvel at the shoulding, A fishing bank.
for he perceived it was a fish bank; which (for our farewell from the land)
it pleased God in continuance of his blessings, to give us knowledge of: the
abundant profit whereof should be alone sufficient cause to draw men again, if
there were no other good both in present certain, and in hope probable to be
discovered. To amplify this with words, were to add light to the Sun: for
every one in the ship could easily account this present commodity; much more
those of judgment, which knew what belonged to fishing, would warrant (by the
help of God) in a short voyage with few good fishers to make a more profitable
return from hence than from New Foundland: the fish being so much greater,
better fed, and abundant with train; of which some they desired, and did bring
into England to bestow among their friends, and to testify the true report.

After, we kept our course directly for England and with ordinary winds, and
sometime calmes, upon Sunday the 14 of July about six a clock at night, we
were come into sounding in our channel, We came into sounding.
but with dark weather and contrary winds, we were constrained to beat up and
down till Tuesday the 16 of July, when by five a clock in the morning we made
Sylly; from whence, hindered with calmes and small winds, upon Thursday the 18
of July about four a clock after noone, we came into Dartmouth: which Haven
happily (with Gods gracious assistance) we made our last and first Harbor in
England.

Further, I have thought fit here to add some things worthy to be regarded,
which we have observed from the Saluages since we took them.

First, although at the time when we surprised them, they made their best
resistance, not knowing our purpose, nor what we were, nor how we meant to use
them; yet after perceiving by their kind usage we intended them no harm, they
have never since seemed discontented with us, but very tractable, loving, and
willing by their best means to satisfy us in any thing we demand of them, by
words or signs for their understanding: neither have they at any time been at
the least discord among themselves; insomuch as we have not seen them angry,
but merry; and so kind, as if you give any thing to one of them, he will
distribute part to every one of the rest.

We have brought them to understand some English, and we understand much of
their language; so as we are able to ask them many things. And this we have
observed, that if we show them any thing, and ask them if they have it in
their country, they will tell you if they have it, and the use of it, the
difference from ours in bigness, color, or form: but if they have it not, be
it a thing never so precious, they will deny the knowledge of it.

They have names for many stars, which they will show in the firmament.

They show great reverence to their King, and are in great subjection to their
Governors: and they will show a great respect to any we tell them are our
Commanders.

They show the manner how they make bread of their Indian wheat, and how they
make butter and cheese of the milk they have of the Rain-Deere and
Fallo-Deere, which they have tame as we have Cowes.

They have excellent colors. Indico and other excellent colors in the
country.
And having seen our Indico, they make show of it, or of some other like thing
which makes as good a blew.

One especial thing is their manner of killing the Whale, which they call
Powdawe; and will describe his form; how he blows up the water; and that he
is 12 fathoms long; and that they go in company of their King with a multitude
of their boats, Their killing of the whale.
and strike him with a bone made in fashion of a harping iron fastened to a
rope, which they make great and strong of the bark of trees, which they veare
out after him: then all their boats come about him, and as he rises above
water, with their arrows they shoot him to death: when they have killed him
and dragged him to shore, they call all their chief lords together, and sing a
song of joy: and those chief lords, whom they call Sagamos, divide the spoil,
and give to every man a share, which pieces so distributed they hang up about
their houses for provision: and when they boil them, they blow off the fat,
and put to their peaze, maiz, and other pulse, which they eat.

A brief Note of what profits we saw the Country yield in the small time of
our stay there.
TREES.
Oak of an excellent grain, strait, and great timber. Elm. Beech. Birch, very
tall and great; of whose bark they make their Canoas. Wich-Hazell. Hazell.
Alder. Cherry-tree. Ash. Maple. Yew. Spruce. Aspe. Fur. Many fruit trees,
which we knew not.
FOWLS.
Eagles. Hernshawes. Cranes. Ducks great. Geese. Swannes. Penguins. Crows.
Sharks. Ravens. Mewes. Turtle-doues. Many birds of sundry colors. Many other
fowls in flocks, unknown.
BEASTS.
Raine-Deere. Stagges. Fallow-Deere. Bears. Wolves. Beauer. Otter. Hare. Cony.
Hedge-Hoggs. Polcats. Wild great Cats. Dogs: some like Wolves, some like
Spaniels.
FISHES.
Whales. Seals. Cod very great. Haddocke great. Herring great. Plaise.
Thornebacke. Rockefish. Lobstar great. Crabs. Muscels great, with pearls in
them. Cockles: Wilks. Cunner fish. Lumps. Whiting. Soales. Tortoises. Oisters.
FRVITS, PLANTS, and HERBS.
Tobacco, excellent sweet and strong. Wild-Vines. Strawberries abundance.
Raspberries abundance. Gooseberries abundance. Hurtleberries abundance. Current
trees abundance. Rose-bushes. Peaze. Ground-nuts. Angelica, a most sovereign
herb. An herb that spreads the ground, and smells like Sweet Marioram,
great plenty. Very good Dies, which appear by their painting; which they
carry with them in bladders.
The names of the five Saluages which we brought home into England, which are
all yet alive, are these.
1. Tahanedo, a Sagamo or Commander. 2. Amoret Gentleman. 3. Skicowaros
Gentleman. 4. Maneddo Gentleman. 5. Sassacomoit, a servant.

