THE ONLY REMEDY, THAT CAN CVRE A PEOPLE, When all other Remedies fail.

By F. ROVS.

HOS. 6. 1. Come let us return to the Lord: for he has torn us, and he will
heal us. LONDON, Printed for JAMES BOLER at the sign of the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard. 1627.

To my Country.
BRethren, my hearts desire for this our Israel, is, that it may be saved:
Saved temporally, saved eternally. And from the abundance of this desire in my
heart, my mouth speaks. True it is, that I am not willing to increase the
unnecessary burden of words, under which the world groneth; yet therefore
necessary words may not be retained. And as I said in the former, so may I not
say yet in this latter, Is there not a cause? Is there not yet a cause to take
more physic, as long as there are yet more diseases? Nevertheless, these are
thrifty additions, both in measure and manner. That is added which seems to
be necessary; and where things are already done, men are directed to fetch new
health out of old Medicines. But indeed a Medicine should not be accounted old
as our Fashionists term oldnesse, as long as new health is to be gotten out of
it. In bodily sickness, a man will not loathe a Medicine that can cure him,
because he knows it: much less will he avoid to be thoroughly recovered by
it, because in part thereby he has been already recovered. And least of all
should any man think, that the reading of a Receipt without the taking of it,
is able to cure him. This were to use it for a Charm, and not for a Medicine.
Yet the fashion of men now a days, is in these kinds most unreasonable, and
most lamentably to their own loss: For they read things profitable, only for
pleasure; and so being content with a vanishing shadow; they willingly lose a
solid and substantial good. The pleasure of newness, or some handsome shape,
wherein wholesome matter does appear, is the tentation of their reading. But
this is the very folly of children, who love to play with gilded Pills,
because they are gilded, but will not take them as Pills, or means of health.
Surely, I wish that these men who profess to hate oldnesse, would hate this
fashion; for it is an old one, even as old, as the captivity of Israel. Thou
art unto them as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant voice, Ezekiel.
33. 32.
and can play well on an Instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do
them not. But though this wantonness may fall out in health, yet it ill
becomes sickness. Wherefore let men consider whether they have any grief, or
not; and if they have, let them leave their playing with physic, and fall to
taking of it. Especally physic, which is so confirmed by proof, that of all
those that have taken it soundly, none did ever perish.

THE ONLY REMEDY.
AFTER a terrible Tempest, 1. The neglect of premonitions makes us to fall into
judgments.
a dark and discomfortable Storm, wherein neither Sun, nor Stars appeared,
Act. 27.
Paul stood forth, and said, Sirs, you should have hearkened to me, and so have
saved this harm and loss. After many dark and discomfortable Storms, I may
likewise say, you should have harkened to the Word of God spoken by the
servants of God, and then no doubt much loss and harm had been saved. There
has been Counsel heretofore given, to make use of old Chastisements by
Repentance, that so the need of New might be saved. I will instance in one
particular application of this Counsel, for the preventing of the New
Pestilence by making use of the Old, a year or two before the New came. And
that I may be sure to make a right relation of it, I will here insert the
words wherein it was delivered. The punishment which I spoke of, Oil of Scorp.
Sect. 2.
is the Pestilence which almost devoured our chiefest City, and with the
Sickness of the Head, the Body of this Land was also distempered. I doubt not
but some that have forgotten it, will be almost angry to have it remembered;
but it were better to have a profitable remembrance of the same Plague, than to
have a reuengefull remembrance by another. It is the forgetfulness of Gods old
Chastisements that makes us so soon to have need of new ones, etc. If this
Counsel had bin followed, I verily believe, the Old might have been a
preservative against the New, and God having attained his End by the former,
he would have saved the latter. And if we consider how it was stayed, we may
well think, that the same Repentance and Humiliation may prevent a Plague,
which can stop it when it is come. But this is the misery, that though nothing
in the world is more weighty than the word of God, and those admonitions which
are raised from that word, yet there is nothing in the world more lightly
esteemed, by sensual, carnal and foolish mankind. Yea the folly of mankind,
which sets her own colors on the wisdom of God, makes such monitions to
look like folly: and so Lot telling his sons in law of the judgment of God
ready to light on Sodom for her sins, Genesis 19. 14
seemed unto them as one that mocked. Yet it is most true, that the word of God
is Fire, and Sinners are but Stubble: and as a man of Stubble should fear the
breath of a Furnace, so and much more should a Sinner fear the word of GODS
mouth when it pronounces judgments against him; For our God is a consuming
Fire: But because this fear is too far from us, therefore Judgment lays hold
on us, yea Judgment upon Judgment, that so the Lessons may be beaten into us
by feeling, which we will not learn by hearing: Because we are like the deaf
Fishes, that move not for any voice, but only leap when they are in the net
of GODS Judgments, therefore Gods wrath is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

But though the counsel of God, has been heretofore neglected, and we have
bin too careless of warnings, to our loss and harm; yet even by these losses
let us learn to be more careful hereafter. By the chastisments of Gods wrath
that are past, let us learn to fly from the vengeance to come. So shall a
light arise to us in the midst of darkness, yea the darkness it self shall
become to us a means of light, while by chastisements we learn that which
freeth us from chastisements. So shall the words and warnings of God sent by
his Messengers, be turned to our health and safety, whereas being despised
they add more to our sins, and so to our punishments. For where Gods word
does not quicken, there it does kill; being still either a quickening word, or
a killing letter. And as fire, that which it does not purify by melting, it
does commonly consume by burning; so the word of God, whom it does not cleanse
by melting in Repentance, it does lay hold on to fret and consume unto ruin
and destruction.

2. But if we hearken to the warnings of God, Gods great goodness is to be
obserned, which commonly sends warnings before judgments.
besides the benefit of present safety, God will continue to give us such
warnings, and so continue our safety. For such is the great goodness of God,
toward them to whom this goodness is precious, that he is slow to anger, and
his anger goes on slowly to punishment; and commonly between the wrath and the
punishment, there are certain forewarnings, that so the wrath may be stayed,
and the punishment prevented. How often would he have gathered Israel under
his wings, as a Hen gathers her chickens? 2 Chronicles. 36. 15.
The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up
betimes and sending them, because he had compassion on his people. Neither
has he compassion on that people only, but in this point of goodness, God who
is a God of the Jews, is a God of the Gentiles also. To the Ninevites a
Prophet was sent to give them notice of a destruction approaching toward them.
And Nebuchadnezzar being yet a man, was foretold of his being a beast, that he
might break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by mercy.
Neither has he left these parts of the world, without testimonies of his
goodness; for even the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of God.
Surely the men of this Nation have Prophets of their own, that have spoken to
them, in the word of the Lord, and from thence have both piped forth the
mercies of God, and mourned forth his judgments. And if we look up to former
Ages, and believe the Records which we read of those times, we may read of
Gildas, that forewarned the Brittons of their destruction by the Saxons. And I
have heretofore remembered that Record which speaks of a man of God,
Huntingdon. lib. 6. in oil of Scorp.
that named the sins of the Saxons, page 73.
or English, for which they should be punished. And if we look abroad, even
before this great desolation of Germany, we may find a premonition given to
that Nation. The noble and learned Camerarius* in his Historical Meditations,
Lib. 5.
has a chapter under this title, Cap. 14.
Of Drunkenness and the evils that come thereby. This chapter he begins with
the loathsome story of a Gentleman near Norimberg, who at his marriage, caused
a prize of Drunkenness to be played. For he propounded a reward, for him
that could best deserve that Woe, Esa. 5. 22.
which is denounced against them that are mighty to drink wine. And these
wages of iniquity were won by one that drank the sixth part of a Pipe of
wine. Hereupon he infers, Such detestable, and drunken tricks are not to
be tolerated in a well-gouerned State or Kingdom, much less among those that
are called Christians: and it is greatly to be feared, they will draw down a
sudden destruction upon Germany.

Behold their sin pointed out to them, and a judgment attending at the
heels of their sin. And O that they had known the things which belong to
their peace, and that their sin had not been so rooted in the people, that
the people it self must be rooted up, to pull up that sin by the roots. For
so stands the case, when the people and the sin are so knit together that the
one will not part from the other. Though Israel had sinned, yet Judah should
not have transgressed. Though the ignorance of Popery might have fostered such
a sin; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7
for, Romans 13. 13.
they that are drunk, are drunk in the night: yet the light of the Gospel
should have shamed it out of sight: for they that walk in the day, should walk
decently; not as fools, but wisely. And as no man that does evil comes to
the light, so no man that comes to the light should do evil, because the
light discovers and reproves his evil: And how can the Light look upon this
evil, but it must needs reprove it? An evil to which the Gospel of Light is
most contrary, as the increasing of light is to the diminishing of light; as
the lifting up of a man into the station of Saints and Angels, is to the
debasing of a man below the state of brutish beasts. A state wherein a man is
neither good for God, for the Commonwealth, for his family, for his soul, for
this world; but only for hell. But if there be yet any of those beasts, that
after the Lion has roared in the Thunder of war, are not yet afraid to
continue in this sin, I pray God to awake them by his spirit, which only
opens the ear to hear, what God speaks to the Churches, in the Language
of his Chastisements. And being awaked, I pray that they may take this sin
for which this great Tempest is upon them, and cast it into the Sea: For then
the storm may cease, and the Guilt of sin, with the sin it self, may be
buried in the Sea. Micah. 7. ^8.
For God retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy. He
will turn again, and have compassion on them: He will subdue their
Iniquities and cast all their sins into the Depths of the Sea.

And now to shut up this point of Gods merciful Dispensation, in forewarning
men of Evils to come; It is so manifest, that they who searce acknowledge the
cause, yet confess the effect. The great Achitophell of these latter times,
that makes little odds between God and Nature, Intelligences and Angels,
Southsayers and Saints, yet he acknowledgeeth, that by-Saints as well as by
Soothsayers, such warnings are given. And when you hear him speak, imagine
you heard the Devil confessing Christ. His words are these: Discourse upon T.
Liuy, lib. 1. cap. 56.
I know not whence it comes, but it is evidently seen, both in ancient and
modern stories, that there never comes destruction, desolation, or any other
grievous Harm, upon a City or Country, but there are () holy Personages to
whom it is revealed long before.

3. But if it be replied, Judgments peremptorily foretold, yet do not still
peremptorily bind.
That forewarnings of judgments if they be true, they are of little use,
because they are sure to come to pass, and so a man gains but the longer
knowledge of his Misery, by knowing it before it come. To this I might answer,
That a wise Man does thereby rather increase his Fortitude, than his Sorrow:
yea by the increase of inward strength, he diminishes his sorrow. For the
soul being strongly resolved before hand to suffer what will certainly come,
she puts on patience, and patience puts off sorrow. But I say rather,
that those fore-warnings which are sent by God, though seeming to shut up a
Nation round about with a wall of Brass, yet have they generally a secret
Door and Issue for those that are shut up. With how many prophecies were the
Jews hedged in, and by how many Prophets? yet even at the last cast, when the
sword was whetting, and ready to strike, a Door was opened to them: Amend
your ways, Ierem. 26. 13.
and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will
repent him of the evil, that he has pronounced against you. What could be
more peremptory than the prophecy of Jonah against the Ninevites? A day was
prefixed, which stood before them and seemed to enclose them, that they should
never go beyond it. Yet their faith had espied this door of Mercy, as it were
by a little Crany; Jonah 3. 9.
Who can tell, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger that we perish not? Behold a strange Faith, that so much believed in
Gods mercy, that it seemed to doubt of his truth. Nay, far be that from so
excellent a Faith. They believed both the Truth and Mercy of God; for they so
much believed and hoped in his Mercy to penitent sinners, that they believed
that the same Mercy had left some secret way of Truth by which it might pass
unto them, and they go forth unto it. And in this point their faith seemed to
exceed the faith of the Prophet: For the Prophet thought his own honor would
be lost, if so peremptory a sentence were not peremptorily performed: But
these men believed it stood well with the honor of God, that a peremptory
sentence upon penitence might be dissolved. And indeed, theirs was true faith,
and his thought was but an error. For the word of God, whose Truth is a true
ground of Faith, is the very foundation of that which they believed: At what
instant, Ier. 18. 7.
I shall speak of a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to
pull down, and to destroy it: if that Nation against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their Evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto
them. Thus we see in the denunciation of Gods Judgments, there is an implied
Reservation, and this Reservation is the Door at which the Nineuites, and
other believing penitents may find a way to escape. Yea, the peremptorinesse
of the sentence which seems to hedge us in, may be the very means, to bring
us to the way of escaping. For the peremptorinesse of a sentence, strikes the
sentence strongly, as it were a spur into the sides of resty, and dull flesh
and blood, and stirs up mankind hardly to labor for that Issue, which seems
so hard and almost impossible to be found. And indeed this finding, God
usually proposes as the scope of his warning. He tells us of Judgments
coming, that we may find the way to avoid them. If he meant to destroy, his
readiest way were not to forewarne. It was Saul's case, when he was near to the
period of Ruin, The Lord answered him not, neither by dreams, 1. Sam. 28 6.
nor by vrim nor by Prophets. Let us therefore account premonitions to be
Summons unto Judgment, but yet by a silent and implied Reservation, offering
us Mercy: And between the time of denunciation and full performance, let us
think that offer continued to us. For the Time of warning is commonly a time
of Truce between God and Man, and a time of Respite between Wrath and
Punishment. Therefore is it called The day of a person, or people, even a day
of Grace, Luke 19. 42
wherein judgment is suspended, and may be prevented. And if in this their
day, those things are not hid from their eyes, which may make their peace with
God, the peace of God will preserve them, from the Judgments of God. Wherefore
let us not think that every forewarning is a binding; for a prediction
ordinarily binds no farther than men's impeni tence binds it. For in it
self, a premonition is an offer of loosing, as well as a sentence of binding.
There is a gate of Mercy in it, and man has a Key wherewith to open it. Yea
the Judge himself, who seems to enclose us in prison, calls upon us to make
use of it, and by the hardness and difficulty of escaping, stirs and spurs us
up to an earnest seeking of the means of our Freedom.

4. If any man ask what is the Key, by which this gate is opened; Spiritual
helps are the true helps, to set us at liberty from Judgments. 1. Sam. 10.
27.
he may plainly see it in the places alleged: In every one of them it is
Repenting, and Turning from evil ways. But flesh and blood replies in the
language of Belial; For as the men of Belial said of the King whom God had
anointed, Shall this man save us? So flesh and blood says of the means which
God has sanctified, Shall such an ayerie and invisible thing save us? Yet most
true it is that invisible things must save us, or we cannot be saved.
Spiritual things are invisible, and spiritual things must save us. And no
wonder, for spiritual things work our eternal salvation: and if they can
work the greater, why should they not be able to work out the lesser
salvation? When a question is made concerning the great Salvation, Act. 2. 37.
38.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? The first word of the Answer,
is, Repent. And why should not the same answer serve for a lesser salvation?
Again, if we look upon the way wherein we came to be bound, we shall find
a spiritual way, to be our only way to loosing. If we look to heaven, we
shall find it is God that binds us there; and God is a spirit. Now, Ioh. 4.
24.
according to the reason of CHRIST himself, if God be a Spirit, it is a
spiritual means that can only be powerful with a spirit. And if we look
below, we shall find it is sin that provoke God to bind man; and sin is a
spiritual disease, even a deprauation of the Image of God in the soul and
spirit of Man, or a fruit of it. Now it is plain, that a spiritual remedy can
only cure a spiritual disease. The soul will not be fed by the food of the
body, neither by bodily physic will it be cured; Wherefore in regard of God
who is offended, and in regard of thy sin that has offended him, behold the
word of God, turning thee from carnal, and visible, to spiritual, and
insuisible Remedies: Micah. 6. 7
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of
my body for the sin of my soul? He has showed thee O man, what is good;
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to humble thy self in walking with thy God? Neither has God herein given
mere words, but his deeds have been as good as his words. The Scripture is
full of examples, that this means which the world thinks to be weakness,
has been strong unto manifold saluations and deliverances. Yea the
deliverances have in some sort borne the resemblance and proportion of the
means. A piece of a deliverance, has followed a piece of repentance: and such
was that of Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 12. 7. 12. 14.
whose heart was not perfect with the Lord; 1 King. 21. 29.
and a temporary deliverance, 2 Chronicles. 15. 8. 15.
a temporary repentance, and such was that of Ahab; and a full deliverance a
sound and full repentance, and such was that under Asa.

5. Wherefore I said to the foolish, For spiritual helps are the true helps,
yea, they are the helps of the temporal.
Deal not foolishly, and speak not with a stiff neck: Say not, Ashur shall
save us, and we will fly into Egypt. Natural helps are like the Egyptians,
who are weak for that very reason for which thou think them strong, and the
invisible means are strong for that very reason for which thou think them
weak. And herein let God himself be judge between us: Isa. 31. 3.
The Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit.
Wherefore behold the issue; When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he
that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and they all
shall fail together. Men and horses are things visible, God and spirits are
things invisible, and therefore do visible men fail to help, because they
are not equal in power, to the invisible God: and therefore shall horses
fail, because they are not equal to spiritual and invisible strength.
Wherefore henceforth do thou especially choose those helps which are
spiritual and invisible, because they are strongest; and believe more strength
to be in the weakness of God, (which therefore only seems weakness, because
the strength of it is not perceived by the fleshly eye) than in the strength of
man. 2 King. 6. 16. 17.
And if thou see not the spiritual things to be strongest, do not blame
them for weakness, but thy self for blindness; and pray to God to open thy
eyes, for then shall thou see a most mighty power in them; and that when
spiritual helps are on our side, There are more with us, than there are with
them that have earthly and visible helps. Wherefore henceforth far be from
us, the trust and rest in natural things, which is the common and first refuge
of flesh and blood when it is pressed with troubles. Ier. 17. 5.
And let those thoughts and words be loathsome to us, which ordinarily issue
from this fleshly blindness and error. One thinks, that Armies can subdue all
enemies, and another that Parliaments can cure all politic diseases; a third
(and I wish it had not been spoken before the late pestilence in my hearing)
that the new River had washed away the plague for ever from the City. But I
think, I need not to tell them that they are deceived. And no wonder; for all
outward helps, are but the body of help, but spiritual helps are the soul
of help; and as the body without the soul is dead, so all bodily helps,
without spiritual help, are without life and power. Wherefore we must strive
by putting our selves into a right spiritual estate, to get the favor of the
Highest spirit, that he may breathe life into these dead helps; and then they
shall have life and strength as well as the dead bones, when he said, (...) 37.
^.
Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain that they
may live. This is the true order, to come by the spiritual helps, to the use
of the temporal, to begin with God and to end with man. In this case we must
proceed Descendendo, not Ascendendo; we must get help first from the Creator,
and then we may descend to the use of the Creature, but we must not begin to
seek help of the Creature, and then think we may be either confident or
careless of the help of the Creator. It is the maine wisdom, and success of
the Creature, to go with the Creator. He that goes without him, goes without
strength, and he that goes against him, runs against the rock of
Omnipotence, and is sure to make most horrible shipwreck. Wherefore Moses
says wisely; Exo. 33. 15.
If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. There is no going nor
stirring, if God go not with us: But if God be with us, who shall be against
us? If God be with us, we may be saved without Means, for God is able to save
being alone. He can also raise up means where are none, and he can bless the
Means where are some, and he can make the Means of our destruction to become
the means of our preservation. The last seems most difficult, yet does he
often do it. The Syrians had brought a most deadly famine upon Samaria, so
that the same bowels were fed by that which received life from them: And by the
same Syrians Samaria was so delivered from the famine, and stored with plenty,
2 King. 6. 7.
that a Measure of fine flower was sold for a shekell. The same Egyptians which
kept Israel in a most cruel bondage, were made to be the men that should be
urgent upon Israel to haste away out of bondage, Exodus 12. 33. etc.
yea, they suffered them not to go empty, but spoiled themselves, to enrich
those whom they had spoiled. Even Death it self, which the Devil intended to
have made a Gate to eternal destruction; the outstretched arm of God has
made a gate to eternal salvation. Reu. 14. 19
So that a voice is heard from heaven saying, Write, Blessed are they that dye
in the Lord. Now if God be so absolute a Lord of all things, that of contraries
he can produce contraries, we may see that he has taken all trust from the
creature, and reserved it to himself; and that the power which is in the
Creature, being given it by him, can at his pleasure be taken away from it,
and a contrary power put into it. Theeefore our eyes are to be fixed on God,
and to look up first to him, to see whether he will suffer the Creature to
retain the power of Help, which he has given it; yea and when helps fail,
to see whether he will raise up helps, yea farther, whether he will help
without helps, and yet farthest of all, whether he will turn our hindrances
and punishments into helps. And thus depending on God, and laying the
foundation of our hope and help, in the name of the Lord, we may safely and
comfortably use the means which he gives us. And if he give means, with a
blessing put unto them, they may be of absolute necessity, when they have
received such blessing and power from him. Many points of this doctrine are to
be found in the voyage of Paul. Act. 27.
Natural helps can do nothing without God; so the Mariners could not save
Paul's company: for they are lost in regard of Natural helps, whom God of his
mere grace bestows upon Paul. Yea natural helps, being opposed against
spiritual, are ready helps to destruction; so the Master and owner of the
ship being believed against Paul, become the means of the ships destruction.
Natural helps, if they be not stayed and held by spiritual helps, will
then run away from us, when we have most need of them: so the Mariners would
have run away, when they might have stood most in steed, if Paul had not stayed
them. Spiritual helps, are they that save us when natural helps do fail
us; so the love of God to Paul saved both him and his companions, when they
were destitute of the help of man. And lastly, when spiritual help and
blessing is given to the means, then the means can save us, yea then the
means are so necessary, that without them we cannot be saved. So when God is
pleased to give success to the service and help of the Mariners, then they
are useful to bring the ship where the passengers may be saved; Yea they are
then so necessary, that without the Mariners, they cannot be saved. Thus we
see that spiritual helps, are the strong helpers, and outward helps are
themselves helped by them. Spiritual helps are the foundation, and temporal
helps are a building upon that foundation. Wherefore if we will be wife
builders, first let us be sure to make the foundation strong, and then may we
hopefully rear up the walls. Let us by penitence draw near unto God our
Rock, and being spiritual, fetch strength and help from the Almighty Spirit.
Then may we say and not till then, The Lord is my strength and my shield, my
heart trusted in him, and I am helped. Yea he is a Sun as well as a shield;
Psalm. 28. 7.
and when this Sun returns, Psalm. 84. 11.
then there comes a spring upon a Nation.

6. Being thus put upon spiritual helps, Sure and sound Repentance is a sure
and sound help.
and particularly upon Repentance, as upon that which reconcileth to us the
strong and All sufficient helper, A first part of it, is the sight and
acknowledgment of sin.
let us give all diligence to make this repentance sure unto us. And sure it is
made to us, by making it our own: and it is made our own, when we our selves
do practice it. For then repentance only can heal us, when by particular
applying of it to our own souls, we make it our repentance. And as it should
be a sure repentance, so should it be a full repentance; For then is it most
sure in it self to heal us, when it is most entire and perfect. And so being
sure in it self, and sure to us, I hope we may be sure to be saved. Now to
come to this fullness of repentance, let us view the parts of it, yea let us
view some Accessions, and necessary improuements of it, yea let us see the
Crown and consummation of it. And let us not only see, but do, that we may
be blessed in the Deed of it.

The parts of it, Oil of Scorp. page 219.
I have heretofore showed: They are a Sight and Acknowledgment of Sin, a
Detestation of Sin, and, a Turning from Sin to the contrary Righteousness. And
first the Sight and Acknowledgement of our sin is absolutely necessary. It is
necessary in respect of God, and in regard of our selves. In respect of God it
is necessary; for thereby we give the glory that is due to the Justice of God:
When we see our sins and acknowledge them, we confess that God is just in his
punishments, and that he has rightly afflicted us. Dan. 9. 5. 7. 14.
We have sinned (says Daniel) and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even
by departing from thy precepts and judgments. And thereupon he inferres, O
Lord, righteousness belongs to thee, but to us, Confusion of Faces, as at
this day. And a little after; Therefore has the Lord watched upon the Evil,
and brought it upon us: for the Lord our God is Righteous in all the works
that he does; for we obeyed not his voice. Thus from the Acknowledgement of
sin, arises Glory to Gods Justice in punishing Sins; and this Glory he
expects before the Sinner be dismissed. He will have an acceptance of his
punishments, as of things justly due unto us: and it is an excellent degree
toward Mercy, to say with the penitent Thief on the Cross, We are
righteously here, Luke 23. 4^.
and receive the reward of our deeds. Yea with that holy Man, Thou, O God,
Ezra 9. 13.
have punished us beneath our iniquities. But if this be the fruit which God
expects of his punishments for sin, that his Justice should be so far
approved, that the punishments should be accepted, how contrary an effect do
men commonly return to God, who in stead of acceptance return nothing but
murmuring and repining? They employ their thoughts most on the stones that are
cast at them, and they bound their imaginations with the evils that press
them. And they are so far from this right fruit and use of them, that they
neither see them as punishments for sin, neither do they see the Justice of
God in sending these punishments, yea they do not see God at all in them; but
(which is most lamentable, and fearful, because it is the very character of
the wicked ones) God is not in all their thoughts. Psalm. 10. 4.
But while thus we look downward to Effects, without looking up to Causes,
we look on our punishments, rather like beasts than men. And whatsoever toil
we take about the Effects, if we do not remove the Causes, it is but loss
of labor. But how can we remove the Causes, when we do not see them? Sin is
that which moves Gods Justice to punish us; and God will have his Justice
approved and accepted in the punishment of Sin, before he will remove those
punishments. And if it be our own sin, and the Justice of God, that lay
these evils upon us, I wonder what good thou do toward the cure of these
evils, by biting the stone that by these is thrown at thee. For if thou
should bite it to powder, as long as the Justice of God remains unappeased,
because thy Sin remains vnacknowledged, the great God of Justice, who in
Mercy can turn stones into children of Abraham, in Justice can turn any
sons of Adam into stones to batter thee. Yea I will tell thee farther, that
as long as thou stand off from God, and do not take notice of him, and
much more while thou stand out against God, and only snarlest at his
punishments, he will defend even his punishments against thee. The punishments
of God, while they are in Gods business, and till they have done their errand,
are the servants of God, and God will mainetaine them in that service, until
it be done. Therefore whatsoever become of Nebucadnezzar when his work is
done, yet in doing of Gods work, God himself does call him, My servant
Nebucadnezzar. Ier. 25. 9. and 27. 6. and 43. 10.
And for this very reason, when God bids Shimei to curse David, 2. Sam. 10.
David durst not to meddle with him; for he knew, he that set him on work was
to be feared, and could not be resisted; but as long as God pleased to employ
Shimei, David thought it fitter to submit himself unto God, and so to appease
him, than to fly into the face of his chastisement, before he was appeased.
When a Father corrects his son for a fault, if the son in stead of
confessing and amending his fault, and thereby acknowledging the justness of
his correction, do nothing else but fly upon the Rod, and tear it in pieces,
does not this increase his fault, and so increase his punishment? Wherefore
lift up thy head, and look on thy Chastisements, like a man, and not like an
unreasonable creature. Come down by the Causes, to cure the Effects, having in
the Effects beheld the Causes. When thou see the Rod, see withal who has
appointed it. It is God that sends it: Amos 3. 6
For is there any. Evil (of punishment) and the Lord has not done it? And why
are the Evils of punishment laid upon us, but because of our sins: We wait
for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness,
etc. The Cause is annexed: Isa. 59. 9.
For our Transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify
against us. So to take the right course, we must begin with the first Cause,
and take notice thereof; and that is our Sin. Therefore it follows, verse 12.
Our Transgressions are with us, and as for our Iniquities we know them. We
must know our sins, and by acknowledgement of our sins, give glory to Gods
Justice in the punishing of our sins. And when by this Confession Gods
righteous judgments are approved and accepted, this is a right step, and a
good degree of Repentance, toward the abolition both of sins and punishments.

Another reason of seeing and confessing our sins, is in regard of our
selves. For how shall we come to loath and forsake those sins, which we do
not know and acknowledge? And if we do not come to forsake them, we can
never come to be cured of them, and the evils that attend them. Therefore
Solomon, Pro. 28. 13.
makes his Cure of sins, to begin in Confession of sins; and so he goes
on to forsaking, and so to the finding of Mercy. And surely, if we did clearly
see them, they would appear most loathsome to us, and we should plainly
find, that the sight of sin is the way to the detestation of sin. But
sin being a spiritual defect, or spot, it must be spiritually discerned.
And for lack of this eye, it comes to pass, that sin does not appear out
of measure sinful. For if a clear spiritual eye, did see the spots of sin
in the glass of Gods Law, it would appear as black as an Aethiop, and as
loathsome as Leprosy: Yea, the righteousness that has but a tainte of it,
would show like filthy cloutes, and the soul would hate even a garment spotted
with the flesh. But because we are darkness, therefore all colors are like
to us; for darkness takes away the difference, even of contraries. Therefore
Laodicca, Revel. 3. 17.
when one of her miseries is blindness, she thinks her self rich and to have
need of nothing, though indeed she be miserable, and poor, and naked; and
what is the reason? because being blind she knows it not. Therefore her way
to find her own misery, that so she may be cured of it, is to beg of Christ
Jesus that eye-salue, with which her eyes being anointed, she may see. And when
she sees, she cannot but see her nakedness, and seeing it, she cannot but
loathe it, and loathing it desire to be clothed with the grace and
righteousness of God in Christ Jesus.

7. But of the true sight of sin, Oil. of Sc. 226. A second part of
Repentance: Detestation of sin.
I have elsewhere more fully spoken, and likewise of the detestation of sin.
Yet this I add, That if we cannot detest sin a priori, by loo king it in the
face, and seeing the ugly and hideous shape of it, yet let us detest it, a
posteriori, by seeing, yea by feeling the miserable effects and consequences of
it. All the torments of a distracted Leuit. 26.
soul, Deuteronomy. 28.
the rack of the conscience, the terrors of hell in the mind; All the
diseases of the body, fevers, pestilences, and rottenness of the bones; All
the fearful storms that light on the things of this life, lightning and
tempest, cold and fire, wrack of estates by Sea or Land, they are some small
resemblances of sin; the evil of doing, being a little (though not at full)
represented in the evils of suffering. If then there be such a loathing and
detestation of such evils being suffered, know, that the evils are more
loathsome for which they are suffered: for God does not go beyond justice in
the punishment of mankind, yea, he is yet far short of it. For after all
these evils, attending sin here on earth, the Lord shall come in flaming
fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction.
Wherefore as deep as the loathing and hatred of all pains and torments, both
on earth, and in hell, does enter into thy heart, so deep let the detestation
of sin enter; yea a little farther, as an evil cause deserves some more
hatred, than that evil which is made by it. And indeed thou must take notice,
that this detestation must go deep with thee, even to the bottom of thy
heart; for it being the needle which makes way for conversion from sin, that
conversion will not come, but where this detestation has gone before. And here
should I come to speak of the true expressions of this hatred of sin, in
selfe-reuenge, by fasting and other exercises of humiliation: but of these also
I have already spoken; only in some other place, I may have occasion to speak
of the excellent use, and power of fasting, being joined to the substantial
parts of repentance.

8. And now come we to A third part of Repentance:
the turning from sin unto the contrary righteousness: Turning from sin
unto the contrary Righteousness.
and I would to God we were indeed come home unto it. For this is the maine
work of repentance, that sets the soul, yea all things in joint again, and
makes a full agreement between God and us; for sin having separated us, the
wall of this separation being drawn down, there is intercourse between God
and us. The Image of God in us looks cheerfully upon God, whose Image it is,
and God looks cheerfully on this Image, because it is his. Likeness breeds
love, and on the love of God attend all blessings, and the removing of all
curses. And indeed why should we not leave sin? what is there in it, or with
it, that we should not leave it and loathe it? Surely if we look nearly and
clearly upon sin, we shall see all the reason that may be, to cast it from
us, and utterly to abhor it. Among others, let us consider the deformity of
it (mentioned before) the vanity of it, and the misery of it. The deformity of
it should especially be looked on, as that whereby God is offended; and the
offense of God should chiefly be regarded. Surely sin is an ill-fauoured
thing: and it cannot be otherwise; for it is contrary to the most absolute
pureness, beauty, and glory of the Deity; it crosses the will of God, the
Rule of righteousness; it crosses and opposes God who is light, because it
is darkness; it is a blot and spot upon the Image of God; and it cannot but
be a thing odious and hateful to God, to see his Image and superscription
blotted and defaced; it turns men into a generation of Vipers, it makes them
ravening Wolves, it makes them like the Horse and Mule which have no
understanding. Yea, it makes them worse than the beasts that perish: Esaias 1. 3.
For the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters cribbe; but Man by
sin casts off his owner and Master, even the high Lord and Master of the
whole Creation, because the sole and whole Creator of it. And what do we now,
to save this sin from death and destruction, which makes us fit for nothing,
but the wrath of God, and the plagues that attend it? And if we behold the
vanity of sin, that may make us weary of it, and willing to forsake it. For
the maine cause of keeping our sins, are certain pleasures with which the
devil has bayted them; and we so love this bayte, that we take down the
hook with it, and by taking it, we are taken. And indeed if we could see sin
stripped of this pleasure, that is, the hook without the bait, we should
both fear and hate it. And of this men have some sight, in the end of
pleasures, and in the day of sickness, and death. But look upon them now in
the very time of thy health, if thou can but bring thy flesh a little on
sleep, while thy soul is waking. For if thy flesh would be quiet, while thy
soul is in this contemplation, thou might answer, out of thy own
knowledge, unto this question of the holy Ghost, What fruit have ye of those
Romans 6. 21.
things whereof ye are now ashamed? Take all the pleasures that are past, and
squeese them with all thy might, and see what drop of fruit thou can wring
of them. They are past and gone, and there remains no one jot of them, but
they are perished with the using. Coloss. 2. 22
And as these have dealt with thee that are past, so shall they serve thee that
are to come. There is nothing left of the former, neither shall there be of the
latter, but they shall be all swallowed up of one emptiness and nothing. But
in stead of the pleasure of sin which is vanished, thou may have a sting of
sin that will not easily vanish; and this mere natural reason has told us.
Habet omnis hoc voluptas,
Boeth:
Stimulis agit fruentes
Apiumque par volantum,
Vbi grata mella fudit,
Fugit, and nimis tenaci,
Ferit icta corda morsis.
And if the pleasure of sin vanishes, and the sting remains, how much
better is the labor of righteousness, whose labor vanishes, but the comfort
and reward of righteousness for ever abides? But if nothing else, yet let the
miseries of sins, which are so many blows of an offended God, beat us from
sin. When we see it attended with Plague, Famine and Sword, with Sickness,
Death, and Hell, with vnsuccesfulnes in Armies and Nauies, with terrors
within, and without, at home, and abroad, yea, with all the evils of soul,
body and estate; then let us hate it, if not for it self, yet for the
fearful consequences, and followers of it. Yea let us hasten from it, as Lot
was hastened out of Sodom; for to hasten out of sin, is to make haste from
fire and brimstone, and from all the torments, that may be inflicted by an
omnipotent wrath.

9. But if we mean thoroughly to leave sin, To leave sin thoroughly, we must
root up sinfulnes.
we must leave sinfulness; we must not pluck off the branches, but pluck
up the roots of it. We must not heal sin downward, but upward; we must
go to the bottom of it, and begin to purge and heal it at the bottom, and
so come forward to make it whole at the top. If we pull up the root of it,
the branches will die, but if we do but break off the branches of it, the root
will bud again, and bring forth both branches and fruit. The tree of knowledge
of good and evil that brought-in lust to be the law of our hearts, which is a
contrariety to the law of God; must be pulled up by the roots. And why should
it not? For when this is done, a man is in no worse case by it, than Adam was
in his perfection, even when he was happy, and before his unhappiness. Yea,
thou shall hereby free thy self from a most miserable bondage; and so let thy
liberty, as well as the excellency of this estate, move thee. Thou art now a
slave to thy lust, even an Egyptians bond-slaue; if it bid thee go, thou must
go, if it bid thee come, thou must come; and would thou not rather choose to
be free from so blind and base, and imperious a master, to serve the highest,
and most glorious Creator, even the true and living God. True it is, that
sinfulness is rooted somewhat strongly in thy nature, but there is a mighty
power that is able to root it out, even the same power that first created
Nature, and that can raise the dead, yea which raised Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1. 19.
20.
This mighty power and outstretched Arm, is that which helps souls in their
passage from Egypt, and gives them safe conduct into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. Wherefore fear not to encounter the power of sin, and to
cast off the yoke of it; for thou have a mightier power to make good thy
freedom, even a power against which Pharaoh and his hosts, 1 Ioh. 4. 4.
the devil, sin, and the gates of hell shall not be able to prevail. The
Lord in his mercy Exo. 15. 13.
leads forth the people whom he has redeemed, and guides them in his
strength unto his holy habitation.

10. Neither must we only put off sin, When sin is put off, righteousness
must be put on. Mat. 3. 10.
but we must put on righteousness. There are certain fruits, which are
worthy or suitable to amendment of life, and these must be brought forth. For
when the Axe of Gods judgments is laid to the roots of the Trees, none but
the tree that bears good fruit, shall escape hewing down and casting into
the fire. But the righteousness of outward works, is neither true nor
lasting, without a seed and nature of Righteousness. Therefore to make the
fruit truly and continually good, the tree must be made good. For the good
tree only bears good fruit, and cease not to bear it. Wherefore as the
root of sinfulness must be pulled up, so a root of Righteousness must be
planted. As the old man must be put off, the new man must be put on. Ephesians. 4.
22. 23.
This New man is borne of the spirit, as the old man is borne of the flesh.
Joh. 3. 6.
For that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit is spirit. And if that which is borne of the spirit be in us, then have
we in us a root of Righteousness. For the fruit of the spirit is in all
goodness, Ephesians. 5. 6.
and righteousness, and truth. This is the root of the tree planted by the
river side, Psalm. 1. 3.
that brings forth his fruit in his season: his leaf also shall not wither,
but whatsoever he does shall prosper. This is the seed that falls into good
ground, yea it makes the ground good into which it falls, Heb. 6. 7.
so that it brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, and
receives blessing from God. And indeed no wonder if it receive blessing from
God, and turn away the curses of God; for when the heart of man is thus made
good ground, fruitful earth, and a good tree by the virtue of Gods spirit; the
heart of Man is according to the Heart of God; And from this harmony and
agreement, issue all blessings and blessedness. There is friendship between
God and man, when face answers to face, the face of man's soul, to the face
of God, to whose Image it was first created, and after the fall it must be
renewed. Prove. 27. 19.
Then will God delight to dwell among us, he will walk with us, he will be
a Father to us, 2 Cor. 6. 17.
and we shall be his sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Deuteronomy. 28.
12. 13.
The Lord shall open to thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain
unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: And
thou shall lend unto many Nations, and shall not borrow: And the Lord shall
make thee the head, and not the tail, and thou shall be above only, and not
beneath, if that thou hearken to the Commandments of the Lord thy God, to
observe and do them. Infinite is the blessedness, and infinite are the
blessings which follow this new creature and Image of God: And places of
Scripture are almost endless that express them. Briefly and for a sum,
Godliness is profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. Now what
shall I infer hereupon? yea, let God himself make the inference, by his
blessed Apostle: Having therefore these promises, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Let us put on the New
Creature, and walk by that rule: for as many as walk by that Gal. 6. 1^^
rule, peace shall be upon them; Peace between God and us, peace between us
and our own souls, and peace between us and the Creatures.

10. Having thus put on The Crown of repentance is a Covenant with God.
the glorious and blessed Image of God, in our repentance from dead works, and
the body of sin, let us crown and consummate this happy work with a
Covenant. For thus did the ancient Conuerts; they bound up their Repentance in
a Covenant, that entering into a Covenant with God, God might enter into a
Covenant with them, and so the knot of Happiness and Love might be knit and
made sure between God and Man. The heart of man is very deceitful and
backsliding, and it is not enough to put it into the way of agreement with God,
but being there, it must be bound by strong resolutions, yea those resolutions
have been bound with an oath. And thus our will binding it self to the will
of God, by a settled resolution, and vow, it continues the closer and more
inseperable, since as soon as temptation comes, it dasheth it self in
pieces against the Rock of this Covenant. The heart being as it were hardened
and steeled with Resolution, is in vain assaulted, and the Billow of
temptation flying against it, non frangit, sed frangitur, the Billow is broken,
but the house or the heart falls not, because it is become rocky being firmly
built on the Rock Christ Jesus. Yea Satan seeing the soul settled and
resolved to resist him, flies away, and remoues his engines to places and
persons of less resistance. But on the other side, God seeing the heart bent,
and resolved, and bound, to a constant service of God, he meets it with a
constant love, and the kiss of perfect peace is between them. I might bring
forth diverse examples of Covenants. There was a Covenant under Moses, Deuteronomy. 20.
12.
under Joshua, under Josiah, Josh. 24.
under Ezra, Ezra. 10.
but I especially propose the Covenant of 2 King. 23. 3.
Asa, because it was the pattern of a perfect Covenant, and a happy success.
And because I wish the later, I propose the former. This Covenant is thus
described. There came a Prophet and spoke unto Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15
and all Judah and Benjamin: He told them of the miseries of those which were
without the true God, a teaching Priest, and without law: That forsaking God,
they were forsaken of God: And in those times there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the
Inhabitants of the Countries: And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of
City, for God did vex them with all adversity. On the other side, The Lord
is with them, while they be with him, and if they seek him, he will be
found of them. Yea being vexed for their sins, when in their trouble, they
did turn unto the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.
Thereupon the Prophet infers, Be ye strong therefore, and let not your
hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded. And Asa indeed grew strong;
for the Scripture says, He took courage and put away the abominable Idols
out of Judah and Benjamin; he renewed the Altar of the Lord, and offered a
great sacrifice to God: And to bind up this new obedience, and to make it sure
by setting a seal to it; They entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of
their fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul. This Covenant
they bind with a high penalty; yea, they bind it farther with an oath.
Neither was this oath taken with a grudging, and repining heart, (such as too
many of our hearts be, that are afraid to be too far engaged in the service
of God, though it be to our own preservation) but knowing that God loves a
cheerful giver; They swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with
shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets. And when they had sworn, they
were not sorry they had done a good deed, (which kind of repentance to be
repented of, is too common among us,) But Israel, yea, all Israel rejoiced at
the oath: and behold the reason; For they had sworn with all their heart, and
sought him with their whole desire. And now behold the happy success; God was
found of them, and he gave them rest round about. Behold here a path, that
leads to rest. And the men are named, that have already travailed in this
path, and by it came unto rest. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
And wherefore does the Scripture so punctually trace out this path? but that
ages to come might learn by this example, in the same path to come to the same
rest. The same seeking the Lord with the whole heart, and binding it with a
Covenant, and binding the Covenant with an Oath, or solemn Vow, are things
which may be done, and being done, they are followed with rest. What remains
to be said, but that rest stands before us, and the way to rest is also open
to us, and the Spirit encourages us by these examples, and says; This is the
way, walk in it, and ye shall find rest to your souls? If it seem heavy to
us, it is because we do not seek God with all our heart, and our whole
desire: for we see that they who seek the Lord with their whole heart and
desire, rejoice at the Covenant, yea at an oath upon the Covenant, at a Bond
upon a Bond. For they think that all Bonds are little enough to bind the
heart to him, whom all the heart does seek and desire. If a woman do affect a
man with all her heart to make him her Husband, surely she will account it a
very joy full thing to be bound to him by a solemn Matrimonial vow. For it
is nothing else but to bind the heart to him above all, whom the heart does
affect above all. It is a pleasure to be bound to that which we love.
Wherefore if we love God, we will take a pleasure to be bound to him, yea we
will not only cry with the Spouse, Draw me, but bind me to thee, Cant. 1. 4.
with cords of love, and I will run after thee. Neither is it any new thing
to bind our hearts to God by a Covenant, for it is but a repeating of the same
Covenant which we made in our Baptism: And it binds us already, if we do
not renouce our Baptism, and so our Christianity. Yea, the same Covenant we
renew and repeat in the Lords Supper. For the whole work of Grace working in
the Church Militant, is comprehended and bound up in a Covenant, which we
read to be thus summed up in the Scripture. God forgiueth our sins, Ier.
31. 31
and writes his Laws in our hearts by his Spirit, and so he becomes our
God, to direct, protect, and bless us, and we become his people, to serve,
love, and obey him. This Covenant we enter into in Baptism, Heb. 8. 10.
undertaking then to be led by the Spirit of Regeneration, and not by the
Flesh, the World and the Devil. Now the Lords Supper is a seconding of this
Covenant: Therefore says our Savior, Luke 22. 20
This Cup is the New Testament, or Covenant (for so the words are enterchanged,
Heb. 8. 8. and 9. 20. and 12. 24.) in my blood. And indeed because by the
frailty of the flesh, whose relics remain after Regeneration, though the
Reign be abolished, we often go aside from the Rule of the Spirit, (we go
aside, I say, as a ship goes aside and falls off from the rule of the Needle or
Compass, though the Compass be not cast ouer-boord, neither fall out of the
ship) therefore this Sacrament is appointed to bring us again into the path of
the New Covenant, the guilt of those frailties and errors being washed away by
the blood of Christ, and the spot by the spirit of Christ. Which spirit of
Christ also refreshes and reuiueth the Law of God written in our hearts, and
strengthens us to a more perfect walking and abiding in this Law. So the
Judgments of God do but call us to the same Covenant to which the Sacraments
bind us: but indeed they call us to a more real performance of that
Covenant, which having undertaken in the Sacraments, yet we have failed to
perform. For this Cause, says St. Paul, many are weak and sickly among you,
1. Cor. 11. 10.
and many sleep. And the Lord by his Prophet, Ier. 11. 8.
Therefore I will bring upon them all the words of this Covenant, which I
commanded them to do, and they did it not. And if he, That despised Moses
Law, died without mercy, Heb. 10. 28.
of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing? And thus while
judgments come upon us for the breath and contempt of our Covenant with God,
the same judgments call us to a Cure by the contrary, that is, by renewing our
Covenant again, and steadfast keeping it. 1. Cor. 11. 31
For if we would thus judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord.
Behold, here is life and death set before us, and there are examples of both.
The breach of the Covenant is judged and avenged with destruction: An example
of that breach and judgment, are Judah and Jerusalem, who besides their many
breaches, after many renewings, brake one, even a little before their Baby
lonish Ier. 34. 10. 11. 17. 18.
Captivity. The making of a Covenant with the whole Heart, is followed with
Rest and Prosperity: and an example of that is Asa with all Judah and
Benjamin. What shall I say? Choose life that ye may live! Every ones heart, I
think, should say so to it self. And the speech of another should be
prevented or stopped, as Elisha put to silence the children of the Prophets: I
knew it, Genesis 12. 1.
hold you your peace. But then I say as Jacob to his sons: Why do ye look
one upon another? I have heard there is Corn in Egypt, get ye down thither,
and buy for us from thence, that we may live and not dye. Why stand ye still
gazing on Gods chastisements which ye see upon your selves and others, and do
not go about to cure them? Our Joseph, even Jesus that delivers us from the
wrath to come, whose coat was dipped in his own blood, Phil. 2. 6. 7. 8.
even the coat of his Humanity, wherein the Divinity was apparrelled like a
Man, yea like a Servant; He, even he has provided the food of eternal life,
to which all temporal blessings are annexed by promise: for those who in this
Egypt, this sinful land, or world of sin, do go down to the Vallie of
Tears, in a full and hearty repentance; what remains, but that with a full
and whole repentance, we purchase these temporal and eternal blessings, that
we may not die but live?

11 This full and consummate Profitable and necessary Associates of Repentance.
Repentance should be followed with Invocation, or we may rather say, it does
follow it. For Invocation and Prayer is indeed the natural Issue of true
Repentance. For sin being put away by Repentance, which stood as a Cloud
between God and the soul, and did hide the Face of God from the Eyes of the
soul, now the light of Gods countenance shines on the soul, and the
comfortable beams of his favor do refresh her. God does meet the soul with
a favorable aspect, from which, gathering courage and comfort, she dares
speak unto him, and say, Psalm. 51. 18.
A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise: Do good in thy
good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. When the soul
feels the weight of sin abated, and lightened by Repentance, hope of pardon
increases, and from hope increasing arises confidence, and then from this
confidence springs up prayer. Again, when the body of sin is diminished
and brought low by Repentance, then the new man flourishes and prospers. The
flesh and the spirit are like two seals, whereof one being depressed, the
other mounts up; and now the flesh being put down by Repentance, the spirit
rises up and grows strong; and the spirit being strong, utters strong cries
and groans that cannot be expressed. She speaks to God in the very language
of Heaven, which flesh and blood understands not; but he knows the meaning of
the spirit, who gave the spirit unto man. There is an Abba, Father, which no
man knows but he that has it, and he that has it cannot express it: it is
like the earning of a Lamb, whereby she owneth her Damme; by which she owneth
her, but knows not her self whereby by she owneth her. There is a secret
earning and owning of God for a Father, put into the soul of a son of God,
by the Spirit which new-begetteth him, and thereby he calls God Father; and yet
not he, but the very feed and spirit of his Father in him. And when this call
ascends up unto God, it moves his bowels of compassion: So that if a mother
could forget her child, yet God cannot forget his son. Esaias 49. 1^
It is it self a forcible motive to bring down blessings, and it makes way for
other prevailing petitions; and therefore Christ does set this word of Father,
as an head on his absolute prayer, that by it the petitions following may
pierce like an arrow, and enter into the presence and acceptance of the
Almighty. Wherefore having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, Heb.
10. 22.
and our bodies washed with pure water, let us draw near with a true heart in
full assurance of faith. Having repented let us ask mercy and forgiveness,
and that remission of punishments which follows the remission of guilt. Yea,
if our hearts be hard, and cannot repent as we desire, let us ask the grace
and spirit of Repentance. For on the one side it is condemned in the Jews,
that they pray not for Repentance in their punishments for sin. So says holy
Daniel: Dan. 9. 13. 14.
All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our Prayer before the Lord
our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy Truth:
Therefore has the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us. And on
the other side, it is said, All things that ye shall ask in Prayer, Mat. 21.
22
believing, ye shall receive. Luke 11. 13
Yea, God will give the Holy Ghost to them that ask him. Pray then for the
Spirit of Compunction and Repentance, of him that has promised to give it, and
pray for the Compunction and Repentance, when thou have the spirit, making this
the burden of thy Psalm, Turn us again O Lord of Hosts. And not only so, but
add hereunto, Psalm. 80.
Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved: that is, pray for
Repentance, and having repented, pray for the favor of God, and the Salvation
or Deliverance which attend it. And indeed so inseparable is Deliverance from
Prayer, that if God does promise to send a Deliverance, yet he expects that
Prayer should come to fetch it of him. God had promised a Deliverance to the
Jews from the Captivity of Babylon after seventy years. Yet he says; Ier.
29. 12.
Then shall you call upon me, and shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you. And even upon this foundation did Daniel Dan. 9. 2.
build his excellent prayer unto God for his Nation. Wherefore let us take Gods
own way which he points unto us, to come to his own Blessings: A way so often
beaten and tried to lead assuredly to blessings, and even to the blessing of
Deliverance from the punishments of sin, that the story of the Judges is
full of continual patterns. Neh. 9. 27. 28.
These Nehemiah summeth up: When they cried to thee, thou heardest them from
Heaven, and according to thy manifold mercies, thou gave them Saviors, who
saved them out of the hand of their Enemies. Yea he says again: When they
returned and cried unto thee, thou heardest them from Heaven, and many times
did thou deliver them, according to thy Mercies. Wherefore since crying to
God is the way to deliverance, let us never leave going in this way until we
come to Deliverance.

12 But let us know withal To prevail with God, our petitions must aim to
Gods glory. Psalm. 50. 15
that he which said, Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will deliver you
(...) this also, And (...)glorify me. To glorify (...) God, must (...)
intended by us, when we seek a Deliverance; and performed by us, when we have
it. Yea, having received some deliverances already, let us be thankful for
them, and that is the way to get more. For when God has the fruit of his
Mercies, he will not spare to sow much, where he reapes much. First, we must
intend the Glory of God in the Prayers which we make for Deliverance from
troubles, or any other blessing. Yea, by this very point of Gods glory, let us
bind and adjure him: For that is a principal means, by which to prevail
with God, to make Gods glory the scope of our prayers. Therefore our Savior
who is the wisdom of God, makes the first petition, of his perfect prayer,
That Gods Name may be hallowed: For he knew, that if in the first and
chiefest place we doc desire Gods glory, all the petitions that come after, and
are in order to this glory, must needs be effectual and powerful with God.
And for this reason, so many prayers of the Saints, in whom the Spirit of
Christ conformed their prayer unto the prayer of Christ, do so often adjure
GOD by his great Name, and for his Names sake, to grant their petitions. So
Joshua when he went about to save Israel, who was now ready to be destroyed,
he had no mightier Argument, whereby to bind God to preserve them, than this,
Josh. 7. 9.
What will thou do to thy great Name? And indeed when you strike on Gods glory
with your petition, you strike on that which is principal in the heart of God,
and therefore principally touches and moves him. You adjure him by that which
is dearest to him, even by that which is his own end; Esa. 48. 11.
and is so particularly his own, that he will not give it to another. His
wisdom he communicates, and his justice he distributes, and his mercy he
bestows, but his glory he will not give away: 1 Cor. 1. ^ 30. 31.
for all glorying is excluded, and he that glories, may not glory in his
wisdom, power, goodness, or any thing else, but he must only glory in the
Lord. And justly is glory most precious to him, and he may rightly challenge
it as alone due to himself; for there is no fit end of God but himself. In
all his Creation, in the work of redemption, in the dispensation of his
providence, and all that he does both in heaven and earth, God only is a fit
end of God, Gods glory of the works of God. He cannot but end in himself,
what he begun from himself; neither can he make a creature his end, whose
very beginning is from him. Therefore the Scripture rightly inferres, Reu. 5.
11.
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Romans 11. 36
And, of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for
ever. So that as all things are of God, so all things are to him, and to him
they are by the glory which arises from them; for this is the maine fruit,
and return that comes unto God from his works. So that if you come to him this
way, you come to him his own way, and he will walk with you in this way, until
you come to the ways end. Amos. 3. 3.
But can two walk together, except they be agreed? If you agree not with God
in your petition, can you think to have God to walk with you to the end of
your petition? If your end be the Creature, or some perishing use of it, and
Gods end is himself the Creator, do you think God will leave his end, to
walk with you to your end? If your end be your own ease, or pleasure, or
safety, yea the quiet or safety of a Country, and Gods end be his own
glory, exeept you level your end to his end, and so indeed make yours cease to
be your end, by making his end yours (for there can be but one utmost end,
which indeed alone is an end) do you think your petition can be pleasing or
auailable with God, while it goes not to the end proposed by God? Certainly a
Nation is so far from being Gods end, Esa. 40. 18. 22.
that all the Nations of the earth are reputed as nothing before him, Dan. 4.
35.
that is, they are nothing in comparison of him. When God looks upon Man, and
himself together, Man vanishes away into nothing before him. Therefore Joshua,
when he will save his Nation, goes not to move God by the way of the Creature,
as by saying, It is a great Nation, it is pity such a Nation should be
destroyed; but he goes to the Creator by his own way, even by the glory of
the Creator. But the contrary is the cause why we so seldom thrive in our
petitions, because we make man the end of God, and not God the end of man. We
will only make use of God, to serve man's turn, and then it is well enough; but
that man, being helped, should after serve Gods turn, we little intend. But
let us know, that this is the only way to have our petitions, not only denied,
but despised: Despised, I say, because they have such base ends; base in
comparison of that great and glorious God, who only is the true end of all his
Creatures, and ought to be so proposed, when we seek any thing of him, for
the good of the Creature. But this maine end being proposed, even God and his
glory, then we may commendably and hopefully, pray for the good of the
creature, yea we may bind God in our prayers, and contest with him for his
own glory. And this kind of petition and prayers are most forcible with God:
for we may be sure God will not be wanting to himself; his goodness,
wisdom and power, shall never fail his creatures, when they may advance the
creatures to the glory of the Creator.

13. In a second place I must say, Our petitions having prevailed, we must give
God the glory, due for their prevailing.
it is some encouragement to God to grant new petitions, if he have received
the glory due to him for granting the old. For how should he hope for more
glory of new benefits, if he have not that which is due for the old? That man
deserves not to have a second good turn, that is not thankful for the first.
But if God have his end, that is, his glory, by his benefits past, our
petitions may be bold with him for blessings to come; for God will not
sparingly sow, where he does plentifully reap. It was the barrenness of the
tree, that brought upon it the fearful sentence, Luke 13. 7.
Dig it up, why combreth it the ground? Both the people and the petitions,
can look for little other end, who having received the grant of former
petitions, do not return to God the fruits of glory and thanksgiving.
Glory and thanksgiving are the fat of our sacrifices, and our petitions are
lean and ill-fauoured, like Pharaohs latter kine, that have not this fat.
Malach. 1.
If ye offer the blind and lame and lean for sacrifice, is it not evil?
offer it now to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee? yet I am a great
King, says the Lord of Hosts. And indeed when we speak to a King, and desire
some grace from him, it is an usual thing to begin with praise and
acknowledgement of former favors, Act. 24. and 26.
and goodness. Tertullus did it to less than a King, and Paul was not much
behind him in the same. But he dealt thoroughly in this kind with Agrippa,
and so much praised him for believing the Scriptures, that he almost made him
that, which was the end of his praise, even almost a Christian. Now if God be a
great King, let us give him great praises; he deserves them, and we shall be
gainers by them. For as his greatness is, so is his goodness; and he that is
good to us in great things, deserves great praises: And if this debt be paid,
he will go on in lending. David knew this, and therefore when he seeks new
help in new extremities, he begins commonly with praises for Gods old and
ancient goodness. Psalm. 9. 1. 10. 11. etc.
I will praise thee O Lord, with my whole heart; I will show forth all thy
maruailous works: They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, for
thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee: Sing praises to the Lord
which dwells in Sion, declare among the people his doings. When he makes
inquisition for blood, he remembers them, he forgets not the cry of the
humble. And then comes prayer, when praise has made way for it; Have mercy
upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble, which I suffer of them that hate me,
thou that liftest me up from the gates of Death. And both praise and prayer
are followed with success; The Heathen are sunk down in the pit that they
have made. In the net which they hid is their own foot taken. The Lord is
known by the Judgment which he executes; the wicked is snared in the work
of his own hands, etc. Nehem. 9.
The Levites also after their return from the Captivity, by praising God for
his old benefits, winde-in their prayer and petition for new. For they knew,
that Gods ear is open to due praise and thanksgiving; and when it is open to
praise, then also may prayer enter, the door of grace and audience being open.
Behold the sum of both; ver. 32.
Now therefore our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who
keep Covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem little before thee
that has come upon us. And surely if any Nation, this Nation has a fair way
whereby to come unto God: For no Nation has received greater favors and more
wonderful deliverances; so that a large door is open to them, for their
petitions to enter, if great praise and thanksgiving, for great blessings and
deliverances, be (and so it should be) sent before to make way for them. Our
Deliverances have bin many, and withal so eminent, that the eyes of the world
have plainly seen the great power of God in them: and if others have taken
notice of them, how much more should they affect us, who have tasted the
sweetness and benefit of them? The deliverance of Eighty Eight, is a thing
wondered at by the world; and the Discovery of the Powder Treason, very near,
if not one with a Miracle. To these we may add even very late and New
Deliverances, and turnings away of judgments, whereof I desire to take a more
full consideration, toward the close of this work; it being one maine end of
it, to continue the memory of Gods goodness, Psalm. 107.
and of his wonderful works to the children of men: And not only the memory,
but to make the memory useful, by giving God due glory for his mercies, and to
make us the fitter for new mercies, by a right use of the old. For lamentable
it is to see, how soon Gods benefits grow stale and dead to us; so that we
shut up our own way, to new benefits, and to our prayers that are made for
them, by forgetting the old. We are all for craving, and nothing for
thanksgiving, and therefore our craving is not heard, because it comes without
thanksgiving. We separate that which God by his blessed Apostle does so often
join together, prayer and thanksgiving. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. 18.
We are all for our selves, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
and nothing for God; and therefore it is no wonder if God do nothing for us.
We are like the Horse-leech ever crying, Give, give; yet this giving which we
so much desire of God, we will not allow God to expect from us. There is much
odds between giving of benefits and giving of thanks; yet we that expect so
much giving of the greater, will not afford the lesser, yea though it be a
ready way to procure the greater. In worldly things it is all the wisdom and
endeavor of Traffic, by a thing of less price to get a thing of greater
value; only in spiritual traffic, and in commerce with God, we will not lay
out little things, to obtain his great things. But this arises much from a
poison in our nature, which loses the taste of things had, and reaches out
the appetite strongly to things not attained. Now the true way whereby to raise
up and to continue thankfulness, is to stir up and continue the true and
first taste of Gods benefits. We must have such a taste of them, as we had
when we first received them. Yea we should put our selves into the same case of
danger or necessity wherein we were before we received them; and then
consider, how such a Deliverance does taste being received in such a danger. If
thus thou taste the goodness of God in his mercies, this goodness of God will
fill thy soul as with marrow and fatness, and from thence will naturally
arise a due eructation of praise and thanksgiving. And thus will be an endless
Circle of Blessings. The more blessings God sends us, the more shall we
bless him; and the more we bless him* the more blessings he will send us.
Amen, Amen.

Thus the great Help of Miseries has been presented to view, with his
Allies, and Associates. A Help which is able to help us, without worldly
helps; a Help that helps worldly Helps; and a Help without which no other
Helps will help us. For this Help brings us to the strong Helper, and gets
him to remove his own judgments. But without this all Helps are vanity,
because they look not unto the Holy one of Israel, Esa. 31. 1. 2.
neither seek the Lord; yet he also is wise, and will bringeuill, and will not
call back his words, but will arise against the Help of them that work
iniquity.

14 But because this Remedy does call for Returning; The sins from which we
should return in Repentance.
Returning from sin unto God by righteousness, you will ask perchance with
the old Jews, Mal. 3. 7.
Wherein shall we return? Surely a question too easy to be answered. We are
all in many sins, from which we should return; and the maine body of them
is so tall and eminent, that like the pride of Israel, it does testify to our
faces. Hosea 5. 5.
There are particular sins, of which it is rightly enjoined by that King of
penitents, Jonah 3. 8.
Let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in
their hands. There are also particular-common sins, even sins of particular
persons, which by their heinousness bring a common judgment, especially if
they be favored and approved. The sin of Achan being one man's sin, brought
a judgment upon many; and the sin of some men of Gibeah, approved by a
Tribe, brought a judgment upon the Tribe: yea almost an utter destruction.
Concerning these, Iud. 19. and 20.
whosoever have power of Reformation, no doubt God expects it of them: but
those that have not this power, let them be sorry for that evil which they
cannot amend. And so while they turn their hearts from it and against it, it
may be God will not punish them for that which they disallow; yea let them pray
to God to reform it, 2. Pet. 2. 7.
and in the same prayer say with the Mariners, We beseech thee O Lord, we
beseech thee, Jonah 1. 14.
let us not perish for this man's life; for the sin, or sinful life of
another. There are also National, or at lest common sins, and indeed there
is too great a sink of these sins in this Nation. The abundance of these evil
humors, is that which lies heavy upon the heart of this Nation, and makes it
sick at the very soul of it. And though many of these Diseases have been
discovered by many, yet few are cured; and some there are which can scarce be
beaten into the notice of those that are sick of them. Besides numberless
others, who have sought the Health of this people, by showing them their
Diseases, I have loved, if not furthered, the word and work of the great
Shepherd; I will seek that which is lost, Ezekiel. 34. 16.
and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was
broken, and will strengthen that which was sick. And to this end I have
endeavored to discover their Sicknesses, and to show them the Remedies. But
alas! the Diseases live, and the Remedies dye; they live that are our
destruction, and they dye by which we should live; and what will be the end
hereof? Therefore mine eye weepeth in secret, and my heart is afraid, Ier. 6.
10.
Because their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken; behold the word
of the Lord is unto them a reproach, they have no delight in it. Still do the
known and notorious sins call one to another, as the wild beasts of the
Islands cry in desolate houses: Esa. 13. 22.
Luxury calls to Drunkenness, and Drunkenness calls to Blasphemy, and
Blasphemy answers every sin, that it speaks with. And I wish this sin did
not speak to those that speak not to it* but abhor to hear it, and that it
did not haunt the passenger from one end of the City, yea of the Land, to
another. A dry, barren, and saplesse sin; he that would do any thing for God,
or for his own soul, would surely leave such a sin, which has no taste of
profit or pleasure in it: but he that will not leave a few needless words for
God, will certainly do nothing for him; yea they take a pride in this
madness. And whereas a man that fears God, fears to use his Name vainly,
though it were but in the usual and unnecessary forms of admiration; these
men strive to fill up their speeches with many repetitions of the Name of God;
that they may often name him, whom they do not believe to be at all: or if
they believe that there is a God, their wickedness is the greater, because
they wittingly dishonor him, whom they believe to be God. Let such men walk
under what name they will, the name of Heathen is the least that belongs to
them. For, can they be other than Heathens, that do not so much as savor of
the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments? in one of which there is a
Petition, that Gods Name may be hallowed, and in the other a Precept, that his
Name should not be profaned. And if there be any odds between such Christians
and Heathens, the odds of goodness is on the Heathens side. For the Heathen
knows not this Prayer, nor these Commandments; so that if he offend, he
offends against that which he knows not. But these false Christians, no
question, have known them, at least in their childhood, and so do offend
against that which they knew. Now since Christ has pronounced a heavier
sentence on these than the other, no doubt they are worse than the other: for
he says, The ignorant Heathens shall be beaten with few stripes, Luke 12.
and these with many. But against this and many other sins, there has
sounded out the Word of God so often in vain, that it may even now truly be
said, Esa. 65. 2.
All the day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient, and
gainsaying people. Which gives cause to fear, lest all the day long GOD also
stretch forth his hand upon a disobedient and gainsaying people. And I wish yet
at length, that though they have not taken it to heart when his hand is
stretched out unto them, yet they may lay it to their heart, when his hand is
stretched out upon them.

15. The continuing of these and other roaring sins, Continuance in sin, binds
the sins of the fathers to the children. Of which a great one, is shedding
innocent blood.
with a high, wilful, and presumptuous hand, makes me to doubt, that the
stock of our sins, even of the sins of this Nation, grows on to a fullness,
and that the sins of our Ancestors coming down upon us by a continual and
unbroken succession, the treasure of wrath grows to a fit and full measure for
a day of wrath. And if these sins should descend upon us, one of them which I
should especially fear, is Blood, and especially the Blood of the Martyrs. For
this sin stuck fast to Israel, and followed them, even through the days of
good Josiah, and has this fearful Doom set upon it, That God would not
pardon it. 2 King. 24. 4.
And I suppose a man may see the blood of the Martyrs work on some Houses
particularly; and if particularly, why not generally? especially there being
such a bending in many, See oil of Scor. Sect. 10.
to touch with the whore, that is drunken with the blood of the Saints. And
surely her touch does defile those that are knit to her, with the blood of the
Saints. The cure of this hereditarie evil.
But a Remedy against this and other sins of our Forefathers is given by God
himself: If he beget a Son, that sees all his Fathers sins which he has
done, Ezekiel. 18.
and considers, and does not such like, he shall not dye for the iniquity of
his Father. This is the way, which God himself has showed, whereby the sons
may put off the guilt and punishment of their fathers sins, even by putting
off the sins themselves. But we must know withal, that sins are never
thoroughly put off, until sinfulness be put off, even the root it self of
sin. But when this sinfulness is put off, then is there a dividing and
partition between the Son and the Father, the knife of Circumcision having
cut off that, by which the sin of the Fathers was derived to the Children.
For in Regeneration, which puts off the old man and the body of sin, we
are cut off from the stock of the first Adam, and graffed into the second
Adam, and from thence our pedigree is reckoned from the second, into whom we
are ingraffed, and not from the first, from whom we are cut off. We are then
beheld in him, in whom God is well pleased, and not in him, in whom God is
offended. Yea in stead of the guilt of the sins of our Fathers, the
righteousness of Christ Jesus descends upon us; and we are so far from the
guilt of those whose corruption we have put off, that we are clothed with the
righteousness of Him whom we have put on. In the very conception of Christ
Jesus, the Holy Ghost stopped or cut off this stream of Corruption, that it
should not descend upon him; and that not descending, neither did the guilt of
old sins descend upon him. But what he had in his Birth, we have in our
New Birth, when we are Newborn of him: For then is the guilt of old sins cut
off, the sinfulness being cut off by which it streamed down upon us. Heb. 10.
17.
And thus do we come to the New Covenant, whereby the Laws of God being
written in our hearts, not only the sins of our Forefathers, but our own
sins, are put away; for God forgiueth all iniquities, and remembers sins
no more. And indeed to this very Covenant does God call us in those places of
Scripture, where he teaches us this way of putting off the sins of our
Fathers. For though he begins in the Law, yet he ends in the Gospel: And we
know that the Gospel is generally, though secretly, intimated in the Law, Gal.
3. 24.
which was a Schoolmaster to Christ. But here samewhat openly we are called
to the Gospel and New Covenant. There are two places wherein God answers the
Jews that had set up a Proverb against his Justice. Ier. 31. 29.
The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, Ezekiel. 18.
and the childrens teeth are set on edge. As if they should say, We are
righteous, and have not eaten the sower grapes of unrighteousness, but only
by our Fathers eating, the teeth of us their children must be set on edge.
Surely a terrible tax and accusation of the Equality and Justice of Gods
ways, That righteous Children should be punished for the sins of
unrighteous Parents. Hear the Force of their Argument, standing upon this
Assumption, That they were righteous: God ioynes Issue with them just in that
point, and tells them plainly, that if they be righteous, they shall not dye,
but live. And because the Jews by reason of the veil on their eyes, still
groped for a Legal Righteousness, Romans 10* 3.
and (as S. Paul says) being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, go about to
establish their own (that is, a Legal) Righteousness; God knowing their
meaning, talks with them in their own language, and accepts their challenge,
in their Legal terms. Compare Ezekiel. 18. 5. 6. 7. 8 9. 19. with Leuit. 18. 4.
5. and Gal. 3. 10. 12.
Therefore he uses the very words of the Law when he answers them; setting
forth to them a Legal Righteousness, and with the very Legal condition, Do
this, and thou shall live. But at length, because he knew that the Law made
nothing perfect, because it was weak, and did not powerfully change the heart,
by the change and renewing whereof, sin with sinfulness, may only be put
off, he remoues their eyes from the Law to the Gospel. And therefore in
Ezekiel, he calls upon them for a new heart, and a new spirit, without which
all their legal Righteousness can never put off the sins of their fathers.
And in Jeremy, Ier. 31. 31. etc.
God plainly tells them how this new Heart is to be gotten, even by the grace
of the new Covenant, whereby the laws of God are written in our hearts; and
the heart being changed by this grace, by a blotting out of sinfulness, and
writing of holiness, the guilt of sins passed, both ancient and modern, are
all blotted out alalso; for GOD forgiueth their iniquities, and does no more
remember their sins; for justification is given together with sanctification,
and where sanctification is not present, justification is absent*

Wherefore, since God has made known to us this sound and sufficient remedy,
against the sins of our fathers, let us take it heartily, and put away the
sins and sinfulness of our fathers by putting on Christ Jesus, in the new and
second birth. Romans 8. 1.
For, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: but in stead
of the guilt descending from our fathers, Romans 6.
the righteousness of Christ Jesus shall descend upon us; for by the obedience
of this one, many shall be made righteous. For as sin abounds, so grace
superaboundeth; the breadth of Mercy exceeds the depth of Justice: for as
Instice goes down to the third and fourth generation of them that hate God, so
Mercy spreades it self abroad upon thousands of them that love God and keep
his Commandments. The righteousness of one, if we be one with that one,
shall be more auailable to our Justification, than the sins of many from
whose sinfulness we are divided, shall be powerful unto condemnation.

16. But while we are speaking of the sins to be put off, A sin of our
Ancestors made ours, and made worse: the name of it is Gluttony.
there presents it self to us another sin, which also has been the sin
of this Nation, and withal we may take notice that it was a sin of Sodom.
This sin in the Scripture goes under the name of Fullness of bread, and in
our Language is plainly called Gluttony. And this sin has been so proper to
this Nation, that one puts Voraces, for an Epithete of Angli, and another when
he will say he is full even to the brim, expresses it thus, Si saoul comme un
Anglois; He is glutted like an English man. It may be some men out of natural
Philosophy, will gather an excuse, that the cold Climates have need of more
food, because the heat being stricken in, and so by union made stronger,
expects more fuel to feed it, and to draw it away from feeding on that
stock of natural humidity, which is the lamp of life. But this only pleads
for such a measure, which preserves life; but we speak of a measure that
oppresses life: A filthy, and unreasonable, and unmeasurable measure,
proceeding of a filthy cause, and going on in a brutish way, to a dangerous
end. The root of this sin which we speak of, is Concupiscence, and this
Concupiscence having conceived, infects both us and our meat, and does so
turn our table into a snare, that it changes wholesome meat into poison, even
into the poison both of body and soul. No reason in the world uses meat
beyond strength; for even that allowance which is for delight, if it go a
degree beyond strength, and pass on to a degree of weakness by oppressing us,
it is fallen into a degree of sin. Therefore the Wise man, when wisely he
judges of eating, Eccles. 10. 17.
he describes that to be the right use and limite of eating, when eating is
for strength. And indeed that fullness to which the lust of eating being
followed does lead, is a fullness, by which the strength of the body is so
far from increasing, that it is diminished thereby. Life and strength, like
the light of a Lamp, are not fed, but quenched, when that which should feed
them does oppress and drown them. And in that case food is turned to an end,
clean contrary to that end for which it was made, being made by us an
instrument of death, whereas it was made by GOD to be a nourishment of life.
Yea it hurts the soul also; for, besides the indisposition of the Body, by
which it is unfit to serve the soul, and besides the thick clouds and
vapors, which ascend from fullness, and cast a mist about the soul, there is
a certain secret poison, that by fullness is instilled into the soul. This
God foresaw, and therefore he forewarned his people, to fore-arm them against
it. He saw such a mischief coming by fullness, and therefore he calls to
them, with a Beware; When thou shall have eaten, Deuteronomy. 6. 11. 12.
and be full, Beware lest thou forget the Lord. Yea he saw that
notwithstanding these forewarnings, it would be so; And therefore in that song
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 31. 28. 29.
which he was commanded to speak unto Israel, to testify against them,
concerning the evils that would be committed by them, and should draw evils
upon them; He foretells this evil, as the root of them; He made him ride on
the high Deuteronomy. 32. 13, etc.
places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields, and he
made him to suck honey out of the Rock, and oil out of the flinty Rock,
Butter of Kine, ande. and thou did drink the pure blood of the Grape. But
Iesurun waxed fat, and kicked, etc. Then he forsook God which made him, and
lightly esteemed the God of his salvation. Therefore the wise man prays only
for convenient food; foreseeing this fearful effect of fullness, which he
thus expresses, Lest I be full and deny thee. Prou. 30. 9.
O wretched and most unreasonable consequence, from most gracious premises. It
is God that gives us the food, by which we deny him. He gives food to us, and
we by the venom of fullness in the use of this gift, do so blind our own
eyes, that we see not the Giver. Yea then we see him least, when we feel him
most. The gift should lead thee to the acknowledgement of the Giver, yea to
bless him, for the good Land, Deuteronomy. 8. 10.
and for the good of the land, which he has given thee. But in stead of
blessing him for his gifts, thou denyest him, yea by the gifts themselves thou
deniest him. Yet if there were no God, then should thou have had no gifts by
which to deny him; but now because there is a God, there are gifts given to
thee, and even because he is, therefore thou denyest him. A senseless and a
horrible wickedness, even a monster of wickedness, the very sight whereof,
should be able to fright us away from it. But what should be the reason of
this unreasonable vice? Surely this I think may be the cause of it: The lust
of Man which Satan brought in with the first eating, is that law of the
members and wisdom of the flesh, which is enmity to God. For this lust is that
which sets the natural man, altogether to boast of his Psa. 10. 3. 4*
hearts desire, and to put God out of his thoughts. Now when this lust is at
the highest, then is the enmity with God at the highest, and then is God most
shut out of the thoughts of Man. But when the body is stuffed with fullness,
then is lust at the highest. For in our eating there are two that eat at once.
The body does eat, and lust does eat. And there are two stomachs, one of the
body, and a second of lust: and this latter stomach holds out, many times
after the former has done. And this fullness by which this latter stomach is
filled, after the fullness of the first, is that which causes the mischief
whereof we complain. For from it arises that height of lust, which despises
and denies God: yet to this end and mark does lust aim in eating, even to
feed it self up to that height, which denies God. And for this very reason,
is moderation exceeding necessary, that we suffer not lust to carry us on to
that fullness, which denies and forgets God. Yea fasting is exceeding
profitable, and a true medicine against lust; for as lust carries us by
fullness* out of the sight of God; so fasting brings us back again toward
him, even to a clear sight of him. Wherefore it were good that either of them
were in more use, as well for their particular and proper uses, and benefits,
as also because being contrary to the old vices of our Predecessors, we put off
the guilt of old sins, in putting on contrary virtues.

But because we have not done this voluntarily, it has been done upon many
by necessity, and poverty has enforced an abstinence, where grace could not
persuade it. Yet is there one other Cure; but it is as bad as the Disease, yea
it is so far from a cure, that it does add other diseases to it. And whereas
this vice did formerly march under the colors of a virtue, called
Hospitality, now it marches under the colors of Pride and Prodigality. So
are three vices brought together, to offend God by his own blessings the more
fully; but let men know that they are but a threefold Cord, to draw on
judgments the more unavoidably. Excess it self is bad enough, and there is
no need to bestow much money to buy a vice; yet to buy this vice some sell
their estates, or at least strain beyond them: and when they have done so,
they are proud of it, even of buying one vice with another. Thus excess,
bought with prodigality, brings forth pride, and sin is heaped upon sin,
as dish is heaped upon dish. For such is now the Architecture of excess* that
there are lofty buildings reared up of superfluous dishes, that what was made
for the stomach, may be put into the eye. And so whereas ancient gluttony did
usually intend most to please the lust of the flesh, this is fitted now to
satisfy the lust of the eye; and not that only, but also the pride of life.
And thus are all those things brought together, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. etc.
which are of the world, and not of the Father, though it be said withal,
They that love these things of the world, have not the love of the Father. Yea
though the world shall pass away, and the lusts thereof, and they only that
do the will of the Father, shall abide for ever. For meats cannot make men
Everlasting, but there must be an end, and perchance the sooner for abusing
them, and then there must come an account, even for the abuse of them. But as
these offend in an excess of quantity, so others offend in an excess of
quality, and put as much sin into a little room, as others do into a great.
A great sum of money is contracted into a single dish, and there is an
ambition, to make up a great excess, in as little a form as they may. Thus
the shapes of vices are altered, but vices are retained, and there must be new
fashions in sins, as in clothes. Surely the Nature of these times, does not
call for these studies, and without study, this Art of Excess cannot mount to
this Height. When God calls for poverty, we should not meet him with
prodigality; when he calls for humility, we should not meet him with
pride; and when he calls for fasting, we should not meet him with excess of
Riot. But let us fear the Consequences of such incongruities, and let this
fear teach us to avoid them. Surely the Judgment which God himself has
denounced against them is fearful; there wants nothing but faith to believe it,
and then it will appear as fearful as it is. In that day did the Lord of
Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, Esaias 22. 12.
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: And behold, joy and
gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine:
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. And it was revealed in
mine ears by the Lord of Hosts: Surely this iniquity shall not be purged
from you till ye dye. But to those that tremble at the word of God, and
conform themselves to his will, as in all things, so in the right use of his
Creatures; the Scripture offers more grace. For the Grace of God which
brings salvation, Tit. 2. 11.
has appeared, and teaches us, That those who deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, living godly, righteously, and soberly in this present world, they may
comfortably look for the blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. For verily there is a reward for the
righteous, Psalm. 58. 11
verily there is a God that judges the earth.

17 But to what purpose Not only particular sins, but a general root of
wickedness is among us.
do I seek to cut off the branches of particular sins by the sword of the
Spirit, as long as there remains among us a Root of gall and wormwood, that
can bring forth all sins at once? For if we cure sins one by one, and while
one is curing many spring forth, the disease ouergroweth the cure. Yea, even
that very sin which we seek to cure, after a little while will break forth
again, because the Root of it is still alive. This Root of Bitterness, is a
natural profaneness, even a contempt of God, and the Truth of Religion. I
say the truth of Religion; for there may be an eye cast toward Religion, out
of custom, or for company, or for some remaining impressions of the first
Creation, that may make men to fear there is a God. But to love Religion in
the true shape of it, and because it is true, this is it that I find far
banished by this Root of Profaneness. And though I much lament it, yet I do
not greatly wonder at it: for I see a Cause of it, and therein I see, that
while men are nothing but men, this will be their fashion. For Religion, in the
Truth of it, must needs be Spiritual: Ioh. 4.
for it is the worship of him who is a Spirit, and therefore cannot be pleased
by any worship, but of Spirit and Truth. Now if Religion be Spiritual, how
can it be, but it must needs be contemned, yea, hated by men that are carnal?
For, the carnal mind is enmity against God; Romans 8. 7.
and the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh;
and these are contrary the one to the other. And from this Contrariety arises
that Enmity; and from that Enmity arises* Persecution, even from the beginning
unto the end of the world. For this two fold seed of the flesh and the spirit
having the foundations of it laid in Paradise, the Enmity then also was enacted
between them. And as then Call. 4. 29.
(I mean as soon as men were borne) he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted him that was borne after the spirit: so is it now. Now does the
flesh despise and oppose spiritual worship, and spiritual worshippers: which
opposition, so far as it does prevail, so far does the general root of
sin prevail, and the sins springing from that root. And because the Devil
is the Prince of this Enmity, he fitteth weapons for this war, wherewith the
sons of the flesh may fight his battles against the sons of the spirit. And
of all the weapons which he has provided in these last Ages, I think he never
invented any Engine made of words, more serviceable to him, than one which of
late he has brought into fashion. For it is a sharpe-pointed word, directed
to run into the very eye of true Religion; it is a Canon mounted to batter
the very Kingedome of Christ, to lay wast all holiness of life, the fruit and
effect of that Kingedome; and this word is then shot off, when a Saint is
called a Puritan. K. James, in his Preface to Ba^^ Doron.
And though King JAMES (a King higher than the Kings of the earth in Learning
and Judgment,) tied the property of this word to Anabaptists and their
Sectaries, it is now diuerted to Saints, even to those that do not walk in
the broad way of common, and sociable vices, and especially if they go
somewhat higher than civil and natural Righteousness. If the spirit do but
show it self in some expression of a clearer light, or more heavenly virtue,
than the darkness of the flesh comprehends, it is to be beaten down, and
quenched with the Title of Puritaisme. Yet Christ plainly calls his
Disciples to excellent things; Mat. 5. 20. (...). 16 3. New Tran*
and David calls the Saints, by the Title of Excellent: yea, and for this
very Reason in them is all his delight, because they are Excellent: and for
this very Reason does the man of flesh hate and persecute them. And indeed in
this very Excellence, wherein the spiritual man exceedes the carnal and
natural man, stands the glory of Gods Kingdom of Grace. For when men do
those works which the carnal and natural men do not savor, and therefore
do them not, then are men's eyes turned away from the men that do them, to God
the Author of them; and so seeing their good works to shine with a light
divine and supernatural, they glorify the Father in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16.
which is the chief and first worker of them. But against this glory, and
against the power by which this glory is attained, and against the kingdom
which stands in this power, and against the spirit which sets up this
kingdom in the hearts of the Saints, does the evil spirit make war; and as
by all other mischievous means, so by this malicious word of Puritanisme. And
no wonder, Ambr. in 2 Cor. 13. 14.
for it is this spirit of Christ, that is the maine destroyer of the kingdom
of the evil spirit; and therefore against him is his greatest malice, and most
fierce opposition. He cares not though there be thousands in a Nation, that
abstain from some particular vices, or do some carnal works of civil
Righteousness; for his kingdom yet may stand, and these together: But if the
Spirit of God come once to set up a kingdom of grace in men's hearts, this
kingdom is set up with power, and this powerful kingdom of the spirit he
cannot endure, because he knows, that by it the lesser power of his kingdom
must needs go to wrack. And then he bestirs himself, and all his policies,
to quench the smoking flax of this powerful Grace, which yet shall never be
quenched, until it come unto victory. It is not the meaning of the Author to
encourage any enthusiast or hypocritical fanaticke spirits, who incur the
censure of this name, and from whom carnal men take occasion to revile and
reproach the saints of God. See his Medit: 73. 7.


18 But to come to some Remedies: Let the Devil and his Instruments know,
Remedies against this root of wickedness.
that in this, as in many other things, Malice does outrun their wit, and so
is not led by it, but leads it: For if the Devil could get this spirit of
Grace to forsake the earth, the fire would soon consume and end it; Iud. 6. 7.
And when the Elements are melted, and consumed with that fire, there comes
presently another fire unto which the Devil is reserved in everlasting chains
under darkness. And if the wicked ones, his instruments, could root out of a
Nation, those who are truly spiritual, surely they drive thence the very
Chariots and Horsemen thereof; and they were then fit for nothing but for an
utter destruction. It is no other piece of policy, than if the Sodomites
should make have to turn out Lot and his Family, that Fire and Brimstone may
make haste to destroy them. Secondly let them know, that they know not that
whereof they affirm; they censure that which they do not understand. For there
may be a holiness, which themselves know not; there may be a holy Ghost,
though they see or feel him not, and that holy Ghost may reveal that truth,
give that power and heat of Holiness and Devotion, which flesh and blood does
not reveal and give unto them. And if there may be such things, what folly is
this, to speak of that which they know not, yea what madness to condemn it
being unknown? Sure I am, they do not know, that there are no such things,
and therefore they do not know, that they do wisely in censuring such things,
which may be for ought they know; and if they be, they are certainly
excellent, and most unworthy of contempt. Wherefore let men take heed, that
they cast not upon themselves, the title of folly or madness, when they call a
Saint a Puritan. Thirdly, they give men occasion to call them Brownists, I
mean those that think them to be of any Religion. For these men that thus
cast contempt upon pureness and holiness, cast contempt on the Liturgy and
prayers of our Church. For there we find these excellent and godly Petitions,
That our lives hereafter may be pure and holy: Yea for the King himself, That
God-will preserve him in holinese and pureness of life. Now to revile this,
which the prayers of our Church pray for, is to revile the prayers of our
Church; and I think he that does it, has a favor if he be taken for a
Brownist. Fourthly, to destroy and batter this grace of the Spirit, is the only
way to leave no good works among us, and so to bring the very name of Reformed
religion into infamy. For the works which were brought forth by the errors and
motives of the flesh in the darkness of Popery, we have sought to remove. And
now striving to set a new root and principle of good works, even Grace the
true root and fountain of them, this the Devil by these words of malice and
contempt, does seek to root up and destroy. So that this is the way to leave
no root at all of good works. But far better were it to cherish the true
and kindly root of them, that so good trees may plentifully bring forth the
fruit of good Works. Yea it were to be wished, that it might be so watered,
that it bring forth those great good works of buying-in Church livings, and
building of Churches. For the first many hungry souls do cry, complaining
with the Eunuch; Act. 8, 31.
How can I understand, except some man guide me? And some that complain not,
are in worse case than the other; for they lie speechless and more than
halfe-dead, not feeling their own misery, the Levites passing by them, and
leaving them in it. And indeed there is little outward encouragement to draw
them in, or at least to persuade their abiding, where there is scarce a little
chamber, with a bed, 2 King. 4.
a table, a stool and a candlestick, to receive them being come. And this
while the people perish for want of knowledge, and being without a teaching
Priest, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
they are not far from being without God, as it seems by the Prophet. For
the second, I acknowledge that the true religion has both built and repaired
Churches: Neither is this chief City without examples. But yet it were good
the root of this fruit were somewhat more watered: For if these fruits did
abound, a Church would not stand open to the rain, so long after a fire, and
perchance those stones would be put into their right places, which now by
many, no doubt, are turned into stones of stumbling and offense; For even to
remove an offense did Christ cause Peter to cast in an Angle, and to fetch
money from a fish. And surely if some would but cast an Angle into their
superfluities, they might take up such a piece of money, as would save such an
offense. If it were to satisfy or serve the flesh, and for outward glory, we
see how easily great sums are expended, and huge buildings are raised. And I
think scarce any age of our Ancestors, has equalled ours. But when we do so
much for our selves, and so easily, so little and so hardly for God, does not
this show, that the root of profaneness, and contempt of God is too much
watered, and the root of Grace too much starued and pined? But let us fear
this building of our own houses with the contempt of God and his houses; for
he has blasted it with a Judgment, and his own mouth has told it us.
Haggai. 1.
Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai the Prophet, saying: Is it time for
you, O ye, to dwell in your sieled houses, and this house lie waste? Now
therefore says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways. And again, Consider
your ways. You looked for much, and lo it came to little, and when you
brought it home, I did blow upon it: why, says the Lord of Hosts? Because of
mine house that is waste, and ye run every man to his own house. Wherefore
that the Church spiritual, which is the house of God, and the Church material,
which is the house of the hosue of God, may be edified and built up, yea that
all good fruits, even all good works may prosper and increase; let not the
root of profaneness starve and keep down the root of holiness: for he
that thus wageth war against good works, by killing the root of them, puts
away from himself the name of a Christian, and puts on the title of a
Libertine. Fourthly, it is a thing most fearful, and followed with infinite
misery: For they that fight against the grace of the spirit, fight against the
spirit whose grace it is. So when the Prophets were resisted by the Jews in
whom Gods spirit instructed, and spoke, S. Steven says, Nehem. 9. 20. 30. Act.
7.
Ye do always resist the holy Ghost. And S. Peter most plainly; The spirit
of glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
and of God rests upon you, which on their part is evil spoken of, but on
your part he is glorified. Behold a fearful thing, with which Gamaliel
affrighted the hard-hearted, and stiff-necked Jews: Act. 5. 39.
Lest ye be found to fight against God: For when the pot will fight with the
Potter, we know, it can expect no end, but breaking in pieces: Psalm. 2. 9.
Thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like
a Potters vessel. Wherefore kiss the son lest he be angry, and ye perish
from the way. Kiss the spirit of the Son, by which spirit he kisseth the
souls of those that love him, and are loved of him. This is the way to
eternal happiness and salvation. But if in stead of kissing, you kick
against his Spirit, be ye sure ye shall perish from the way of salvation.
For holiness is the way to happiness; and if we resist the spirit by which
men are sanctified, ye put from you the Author of that holiness, by which we
walk to happiness. It is a prayer of our Church, That our life may be pure
and holy, so that at the last we may come to Gods eternal joy. Wherefore if
pureness and holiness be the way to eternal joy, why do thou hate and
stop up the way, that leads to eternal joy? Surely if thou stop up this way
to thy self and others, there remains no other way for thee, but that broad
way which leads to eternal destruction. Behold the end of Gods enemies;
wherefore fear ye also, Lest ye be found fighters against God: and
remember, that when you call Saints Puritanes, you are Gods enemies, and the
titles which follow that, are children of wrath, and sons of perdition.

But, though it be a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. 7.
yet to you that are troubled, rest shall be with the rest of the Saints, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven. And in the mean time follow the
example of the same Lord Jesus: pity their ignorance, and out of that pity
pray for them, Luke 23. 34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. If a man distracted do
rail on thee, thou art more sorry for him, than for thy self: Do the like in
a case not unlike. Do according to thy own knowledge, and not according to
his ignorance. Secondly, know the Devils aim in it, and then thou art safe.
His aim is to take thy holiness from thee, and to quench the spirit, or some
fruits of the spirit. Be thou most careful to keep, what he is most
careful to take away; for be thou sure, that is a most precious Jewel which
thy greatest enemy seeks most to take from thee. Thy enemy plainly tells
thee the worth of it, by his endeauours to steal it: Wherefore let his malice
be a very motive to keep that pureness and holiness which his malice sets
at so high a price. Thirdly, understand the devils language, and thou may be
very well pleased: for in the Devils language a saint is a Puritan. Wherefore
know, that when for so me good work, he calls thee Puritan, understand, that
in his language he calls thee Saint: See More Medit.
wherefore let this turn to thee for a testimonial, that even thy enemies being
Judges, thou art such a one as is truly honorable here in earth, and shall
eternally be honored hereafter in heaven. Matt. 5. 1.
For, blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

As for other sins, wherewith this Land is pressed down, I wish they were so
invisible, that men should need to look into books to find them. It may not
be doubted, but where such a bitter root of profaneness and irreligion
prevails so strongly, the cursed fruits of it are too plentiful. But men
bend not their minds to that counsel of God, Hag. 1.
Consider your ways. Yea, the tree of knowledge of good and evil, has so
infected men's judgments with a carnal wisdom, that they look only for good
and evil in outward and carnal things. If those things go well, all is well.
And even for this very cause, does God punish us in outward things, that by the
evils which we regard, we may be brought to take notice of the evils which
we regard not. For though the carnal man do not see sin to be evil, but
only thinks that to be evil which he feels, yet that evil which he sees
not, is the cause of the evil which he feels. For there is an evil way of
sin, which draws on the evils of judgment; Jonah. 3. 10
and as they come together, so they go together: For when man turns from the
evil way by repentance, God turns from* the evil which he said he would do,
and does it not. But of these evils of sin I have often spoken, and brought
them before men's eyes: but I pray God to anoint our eyes with that eye-salue
of his spirit, by which spiritual things are seen and discerned, that rightly
seeing our sins and rightly judging them, we may escape the judgments of
God. All should advance this repentance. And first be Magitrate.


19. From the sins to be repented of; we pass to the persons that ought to
be principal Agents or Aduancers of Repentance. Oil of Sc. Sect. 8. and 9.
It has been formerly noted, that it belongs to all, and among al, chiefly
to the chiefest, by whom this duty may be best communicated to all. And so
notice was first taken of the Magistrate, as being first in Eminence.

And indeed the supreme Magistrate, ouerspreading all his people with a
general Authority, most fitly enioyneth, and spreads out a general
humiliation. Therefore we read that Kings were the Ordainers of general Fasts;
and Fasts being by them made general, have produced general Blessings. And
therefore is the Fast it self a great benefit, bestowed by the Prince on his
Subjects; it being a general Summons to Repentance and Humiliation, whereby the
Evils and Miseries which lie upon the people may be taken away and turned
into Blessings. Yea, what greater benefit can there be, than to bestow that
greatest and highest Remedy? which is able to cure a people, though sick at
heart; yea, when the usual Remedies are sick themselves, it is able to cure
them: and from thenceforth themselves being cured, they are able to cure us.
And here I cannot but extol the favor of God to this Nation, and the
goodness of our gracious King to his Subjects, who in the straights and
sufferings of this people, gave them this chief and soueraign Remedy. A gift,
how ever carnal men may esteem it, of principal value, and highest
Consequence to a Nation laboring in an Agony, under the Judgments of God. For
as the greatest Tyranny is expressed in that Character of Jeroboam, He made
Israel to sin; 1. King. 15. 30.
since he that made Israel to sin, 2. King. 17. 22. 23.
made Israel to perish: so is it the greatest Mercy and Goodness of a Prince to
draw the people from sin, by calling them to Repentance. For being turned
from sin, the perishing which attends sin is also turned away. By this
means did the King of Nineueh more good to his Subjects, than all his
Treasures, all his policies, and all the power of a City of three days
journey, could have done for them. For when God who is a spirit, comes to fight
with a Nation, those carnal weapons are too gross wherewith to fight against a
spirit; but spiritual weapons can only serve the turn in a spiritual
warfare. But we need not to travel far, either to ancient times or foreign
places, to show the benefits and blessings, which a King procures to his
people by calling them unto public Humiliation: for even these late acts of
Humiliation which have been performed by the Decree of our Sovereign, have
been followed with immediate blessings, even blessings that follow them so
close, that they do more than point at their Causes; See more particular
observation of these blessings. Sect. 22.
for they do touch them, and go hand in hand with them. Yea these blessings
were affixed to them, as the Seals of the most High; whereby they were approved
that are past, and others are invited for the time to come. And as the public
Command of Humiliation, sent forth by the Magistrate, does make way for a
Blessing upon his people: so also does his particular Repentance and Prayer.
For even the particular virtues of a Prince are general benefits. For as when
a Prince does some great sin, God may break in by that sin, upon the sins
of the people: so the Repentance and Prayer of a Prince, may stand in the
breach, and divert the Judgments either broken in, or ready to break in upon
the people. There is a president of both in King David: for upon the occasion
of his sin in numbering the people, the plague brake in upon Israel. And
again, by his humiliation and prayer, God stayed the plague from breaking in
upon Judah and Jerusalem. And indeed this Story teaches Princes, by the
example of a King according to the heart of the King of kings, 2. Sam. 24. 17.
in public Judgments, especially to look to their own sins, and to say
with David, It is I that have sinned, but these sheep what have they done? As
on the other side it teaches the people especially to look on their own
sins, since we see by this example, that the sins of the people may be the
occasions of the sins of the Prince, and of those judgments that follow
them. And thus the precious ointment of saving Health, beginning to be powered
on the head, may drop down even to the skirts of his garments: and by the
favor of God, it may be truly said of the Anointed of the Lord; Lam. 4. 20.
Under his shadow we shall live.

20 A second aduancer of humiliation and repentance, A second aduancer of
Repentance is the Minister.
is the Minister; and he should advance it both in public and particular, by
his function, and by his life. And surely there are many that do both, and are
like John Baptist, who was both a burning and a shining light. Inwardly burning
with that heavenly fire, wherewith the spirit baptizeth; from that fire shines
forth the light, both of doctrine and life. And for these we owe great thanks
to the Lord of the Harvest, that has sent forth such laborers into his
harvest. For these also with Moses, Psalm. 106. 23.
stand in the breach, and keep out the Judgments of God, and that with
violence. For there is no small might in a true Prophet of God to defend a
Nation from the Judgments of God: for if a Prophet and a King may be believed
when they speak of such Prophets, 2. King. 2. 12.
Elisha says it of Eliiah, 2. King. 13. 14.
and Ioash says the same of Elisha. So that the increase of these, are both a
sign and cause of safety to a Nation: and the diminishing of these, a sign
and cause of ruin and desolation. For what were those times when there was no
peace to him that went out, 2. Chro. 15.
nor to him that came in, but when Israel was without a teaching Priest?
Wherefore to those Elders that doubly build, by life and doctrine, there
belongs justly double honor; and indeed by their twofold building, there
arises a twofold safety, both to Church and Commonwealth. And as it is a
pleasant and just thing, that to the skillful builders of this twofold work
there should be double honor; so it is a pleasant and good sight, to see those
that have this double honor, to do this twofold work. And first for the
public; It was very comely to see the foremost is honor, to march in the
head of the troop in the late humiliation, which was a holy war against the
judgments of God. A right reverend Father and a reverend Deane dividing the
day, and the works of the day, both prayer and preaching, give encouragement to
the exercises of the day. And I hope that more places than one are not without
patterns of spiritual Captains, that did lead forth their soldiers into
this spiritual warfare. For it is a hopeful and comfortable thing, when there
is a zeal and feruency in this work of Reconciliation, and if it be taken to
heart as a thing in earnest, and especially by the Priesthood. For when God
stirs up the Priests to weep between the Porch and the Altar, and to say:
Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach, Joel. 2. 17.
18.
he hears that which is spoken by his own stirring and motion: And so it
follows; Then will the LORD be jealous for his Land, and pity his people.
But if any man withdraw himself, the sick soul of an afflicted Church or
Commonwealth, can have no pleasure in him, nor profit by him. He that
withdrawes himself from saving his flock by public endeavors, (even in these
works of Humiliation) and in his personal sanctity, this man seems to be a
trespasser, by destroying that which he ought to have built. And for the late
solemnities, it is a grief and loss, if any able man, should out of coldness
of zeal, or love of ease, perform the service of those days, with that which
cost him nothing. Even the obdurate Jews, when they saw Paul and Barnabas in
the Sinagogue, they called upon them for a word of exhortation. I deny not the
Scriptures which allow the public reading of the Scriptures, neither do I
detract from the worth and value of that which Authorie sets forth, derived
from Scripture; But withal, I know, that when Christ ascended up on high, he
gave gifts unto men, and the gifts which he gave, were given for the
edification of the Church: And I do not know, yea I believe not, that it was
the intent of men of higher place and authority, by their pains, and industry,
to exclude the endeavors and industry, of those of lower place, or that they
did labor, that these might take their case. An able Minister resident on his
flock, can apply the present work of humiliation, to the sins and sicknesses
of his flock, which in every flock, being somewhat different, it is impossible
so to comprehend them all in general exhortations, that the particular
shepherd, may not yet have something left to say, that may particularly
concern the flock, whereof God has made him ouerseer. Surely if preaching in
season and out of season be enjoined, this time must needs be one of them, and
I take it, in season. For this day, should be a day of zeal, of contending
and striving with God; a day wherein the hearts of men should be torn and
broken, that from broken hearts, there may ascend unto God the sweet and
acceptable sacrifice of Invocation and Prayer. Now the zeal of the Minister,
expressed both in his labor for the Word, and in the Word for which he
labors, provoke and enkindleth the zeal of his people. And the word of God
being applied to the root of those very sins, wherewith a flock is ouergrowne,
it is like a plough to turn up those sins by the roots, and to break up
the fallow ground wherein they lay, and so to make broken hearts, which only
can offer up that acceptable sacrifice.

And now for private practice of holiness, and edifiing by conversation
without the word, I wish there were no cause for God to say, I have a few
things against thee. Reu. 2. 14. 20.
And I wish they were so few, that few words needed to be said. But if they be
not so few, though speaking may be offensive, yet silence is more dangerous.
Wounds indeed do pain when they are touched by the Healer, but they kill if
they be not touched. And there is no comparison between the offense that may
be taken by opening a sore in the cure of it, and that which the sore gives,
when it opens it self to the world by visible corruption. And then there is on
this side also an odds and advantage of mortal danger. For we know that
whereof it is said, it cannot long stand without, which is ruinous within. But
if not of this time, yet let me speak of S. Paul's time. Phil. 3. 18.
There were some in that time, of whom he spoke weeping: And surely if there
be such at this time, he that speaks duly, cannot speak without mourning.
For is it not a lamentable thing to hear a good fellow, complain of good
fellowship, as if he were put down in his own profession? But I am afraid
of Gath and Ashkelon: Only I wish, that such were so known, that they might
not be known, and that this Nail may be so fastened by the masters of the
assemblies, that if the children hold their peace, the stones do not speak.

But to the Adversary I say, What is the chafe to the wheare? She which is
called barren, and seems to them to have no husband, because her husband is in
heaven, has borne more children, than she that has an husband on earth.
Psalm. 68. 11.
God gave the Word, and great was the assembly of Preachers. Preachers, Deuteronomy.
33. 9.
that have observed thy word, and kept thy Covenant; That teach Jacob thy
judgments, and Israel thy law.

And let these holy Levites, and Ministers of the living God, never leave
calling on the Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, until by his mercy
they do bind the hands of his Justice, so that Justice it self be enforced
to ask leave of them to punish, and to say, Let me alone. Exodus 32. 10.
Thus did Moses that excellent Leuite, prevail upon God for the Israelites,
when they had committed that horrible sin of Idolatry in the golden Calfe.
For upon the prayer of Moses, challenging God for his free goodness, by which
he freely began to be good unto them; for his Names sake which should be
dishonored among the Egyptians; for his Oaths sake, made to their fathers, to
be merciful to them; Verse. 14.
The Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto them. And so did
another Leuite, even blessed Samuel; for when Israel had sinned, and was
therefore in fear of the Philistims, 1 Sum. 7. 8. 9.
Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him. And the power
of such prayers is so preualent, that God himself makes it the sign of a
desperate estate, when a Nation is come to that point, Ier. 15. 1.
that Moses and Samuel will not be heard. Wherefore for Sions sake let them not
hold their peace, yea for their own sakes also: for besides their own
interest in the common good, or evil, it is a sin in them not to pray for
the people; therefore Samuel says, 1 Samuel 12. 23.
God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you.

20. But because the same Samuel, Thirdly, the people must repent, if the
people will be saved. ver. 24. 25.
who accounts it a sin not to pray for the people, yet has little hope of
his prayers except the people repent; he adds, Only fear the Lord, and
serve him in truth with all your heart: but if ye shall still do wickedly,
ye shall be consumed. For though prayers of Prophets and Priests be powerful
with God to draw down his mercy, yet there is no usual course of mercy to be
expected by a sinful and impenitent Nation. We read and hear, that though
God show a great mercy, even mercy unto thousands, yet it is on them that love
him, Luke 1. 50.
and keep his commandments: And the mercy of God, is upon them that fear him
from generation to generation. Therefore before Samuel undertakes to offer
sacrifice and prayer for Israel, he speaks unto Israel, to put away their
sins, to prepare their hearts unto the Lord, and to serve him only: And when
they had done so, and with fasting acknowledged their sins, 1 Samuel 7. 3. etc.
then Samuel prayed, and the prayer of Samuel was heard, and the Lord sent them
a deliverance from heaven. Wherefore let not the people think to cast all on
the Ministers, and imagine that good men in the Ministry, will serve to save
bad men in the Laity. But let them strive to be such by repentance and
holiness, that the prayers of the Ministry may be heard for their
preservation. For otherwise by their sins they bind the hands of the
Ministers, which they desire should be lifted up for them, yea they cause God
both to stop his own ears, and the mouths of the Ministers. For when they
love to wander, and refrain not their feet from evil, then comes forth that
fearful command; Ier. 7. 16.
Pray not for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither
make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. And for their own prayer,
that will not be heard, though it come with fasting; which also is, and has
been otherwise an aduancer of undeniable prayer: Ier. 14. 11. 12.
When they fast I will not hear their cry.

Wherefore it concerns the people by turning from their sins, to make
themselves capable of the prayers of their Ministers, and not to urge them to
speak, by entreaties, and to stop their mouths by sins. Let every
particular man search his particular sins, according to directions already
given; and especially when he feels any grief, or sees any terror, let them
feel and behold it as a spur to repentance. So shall lesser judgments keep
off the greater; it being a great mercy of God to chastise with rods, to save
punishing with Scorpions, and a great wisdom in man, to make a right use of
this mercy. Wherefore let the Land mourn for their sins, that it mourn not
for an utter desolation. All the families together, Zach. 12. 12 and 13. 1.
and every family apart, and every man apart: And then in that day there shall
be a fountain opened for sin and uncleanness, to wash them away, and the
judgments that follow them.

But howsoever the multitude do, Number. 11. 4.
who most commonly are like the old mixed multitude, rather given to murmuring
when their lusts are unsatisfied, than to turning unto him that smites them;
Esaias 9. 13.
let the mourners that are marked, Ezekiel. 9. 4.
do the office for which they are marked. If they reply, that they are few,
and their fewness does discourage them: it may be answered, The fewer they
are, the more they should mourn, to supply that mourning which is wanting in
others; yea to mourn for that want. Again, thou may be the man that may
make up the ten, the twenty, or thirty, even that set number which may save a
Sodom, a sinful City, or Kingdom: yea sometimes one man may stand in a gap,
and be the repairer of a breach. Amos Amos 7.
was a man subject to infirmities as we are, and he was but one, yet a
Judgment being denounced when he said, O Lord, forgive I beseech thee, by whom
shall Jacob arise, for he is small? Then, the Lord repented for this, It shall
not be, says the Lord. Lastly, though thou seem to thy self to be alone, and
with Elias thou know no more, yet with Elias thou may be deceived, 1.
King 1. 6 10. 18.
and there may be seven thousand which thou know not, that have not bowed
their knee to Baal; and thy mourning, joined to the mourning of that remnant
which the Lord has left, Esaias 1. 9.
may save us from being like unto Sodom and Gomorrha. Howsoever, do thy part;
let the Soldier of Christ be found in his place, even when judgments are
coming: If thou save not all, thou shall be sure to save thy self; perchance
temporally, Ier. 1. 19. and 39. 18.
without doubt eternally.

And now to sum up all, I wish that both Magistrate, Minister and people may
go so thoroughly with the truth of repentance, that sins and sinfulness being
put off, the judgments that cleave unto them may also be put off. And because
this is not done but by putting on the spirit of Christ Jesus, by the power
whereof the kingdom of Satan is put down, and the kingdom of Christ erected;
I pray that we may come to this point of putting on the spirit of Christ
Jesus. All the rest is but the form of godliness, but in the spirit of Christ
is the life of godliness: and howsoever men may flatter themselves, they are not
Christians except they be one spirit with Christ Jesus. For CHRIST being
called Romans 8. 9.
Christ because he is anointed 1. Cor. 6. 17
above his fellows with the Psalm. 45. 7.
spirit without measure, Cant. 1. 3.
we are truly to be called Christians by being anointed with the same
spirit according to our measure. But no anointing, no true Christianity. But
if this ointment dwell in us, 1. Ioh. 2. 27.
then have we Christ Jesus, and with him all the promises of God; 2. Cor. 1.
20 21.
for in Christ Jesus all the promises of God are Yea and Amen. Psalm. 78. 49.
Then have we power to wrestle and overthrow the principalities and powers
which are often the Inflicters of the judgments of God, and continually the
Tempters, provoking us to those sins, for which judgments are inflicted. For
it is the Spirit of Christ only that settles a Church, and makes it a pillar of
Truth, unremovable by Satan. And most commonly where a Church is thus
settled, the Nation is also settled which contains such a Church; and the
Devil is not suffered to prevail against the later, because of the former.
But when a Church grows spiritually cold, and turns from the life and heart
of godliness to an outside of profession, then God grows cold to us in love;
but in wrath he grows hot against us. If a Nation turn from the spirit to
the flesh, though they be as great as the giants in the old world, and as the
Anakims in the new; yet they are but great pieces of flesh, and an ouerflowing
flood will destroy the one, and a destroying sword will cut off the other. When
the days of persecution were ended, we received the word with joy in the holy
Ghost; we did then run well, who does let us from running so still? Yea then
God mightily prospered us, and made his own word good unto us, 2. Chro. 15. 2.
The Lord is with you, while ye be with him. Why then should we not be still
with him, as at first, that he as at first may still be with us? Those that are
of God, the word and wisdom of God should move them; for that says to them,
Ier. 6. 16.
Inquire the old way, and, Remember from whence thou art fallen, Reu. 2. 5.
and repent. And those that are of the world the wisdom of the world should
move; for thus says their Oracle. It is more clear than the day, Disc. upon
Liuy lib. 3. cap. 1.
that such bodies (of Commonwealths etc.) do not endure except they be
renewed; and the manner whereby to renew them, is to bring them back to their
beginnings. And then coming to Religion, whereof he discourses under the name
of Sects, he says, It is manifest that such renewings are necessary, even by
experiments in our Religion. And indeed by his own Rule, if Religion decay, a
Kingdom and Commonwealth will decay: therefore he advises, lib. 1. c. 12.
He that will maintain a Kingdom in his entirenesse, must above all take care,
that Religion do not decay, and by little and little come to be neglected.

Thus should Religion be revived, and mainetained in ancient vigor by all. By
those that know it truly, because of the goodness which is in it. By those
that know it not in the inside, but only some outward goood effects of it,
because it is good for themselves, if the good of the Kingdom wherein they
live, be their good.

21 The great remedy of Repentance and Conversion being taken down into the
hearts and souls of us, Upon the foundation of Repentance sure hope of mercy
is builded.
I would not doubt, Act. 27. 22.
but we should see Paul standing forth again, and hear him saying: I exhort
you to be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of any man's life among
you. And I speak it not without ground; for God himself has given us some
earnests of this safety. For as the same Paul gave this for the reason of his
Encouragement; There stood by me this night the Angel of God: so may I say for
a ground of our Comfort; Not only the Angel of God, but the Lord of the Angels
has stood by us in the night of our sufferings and chastisements; and by a
manifest grant of our petitions upon humiliation, has given us good proof
that more humiliation may obtain more safety and deliverance. Upon a little
humiliation, for a little space grace has bin showed from the Lord our God,
Ezra. 9. 8.
to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place,
that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving. The first
Fast was followed with miraculous success. Never a greater pestilence in our
greatest City, recorded in these later ages: and I think never so great a
pestilence, so soon and so clean swept away. Yea, though the City were not
long after thronged with a double meeting, so that it should be thought, that
the chambers of death were filled with the living; yet death being commanded to
sheath his sword, could not touch life, though fallen into the arms of it. So
death by Gods mercy was turned to us, Genesis 31. 29.
as Laban toward Jacob; though it had a hurtful power, it had no power to hurt
us. But when the greatest Pestilence has thus the speediest end, it is a very
wonder, and plainly shows a hand above Nature. And what hand do we find to
be the cause of extraordinary changes, but Dextera excelsi, the right hand of
the Highest? And if we look below, by what lower means the right hand of the
most High has been moved to make these changes, even to repent of the evil,
Jonah. 3.
which he said he would do, Joel. 2.
and did it not, we find that Humiliation with Fasting is a principal
means. Wherefore this way being taken by us, and this effect following it,
what can we think but that by this way, Gods mercy came unto us?

A second blessing following a second Fast, was the stay and turning away of a
Famine; And this also was strange and extraordinary, even by a strange and
extraordinary change. For the Famine was posting apace toward us, yea it flew
on the wings of the clouds, which dropped down death and destruction, by
destroying the fruits of the earth. Yet in the very speed of this black
Horse, the Fast gave it a stop, and the word of God set that day for a bound to
it; And concerning that day, a command came to the clouds, Thus far shall
ye go, and here shall ye stay your destroying waters. For we know, that
this very day was the end of that judgment. Now when we see a Judgment stop
in such a day, what shall we think, but that the work of that day, was the
stop of the judgment? For otherwise, that day wherein we were relieved had no
more virtue, than the days wherein we were punished. Besides, by both rule
and pattern in the Scriptures, we find, that this effect by such causes may
be produced. The Scripture says, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
If we judge our selves, we shall not be judged. God was ready to judge us
with a Famine, which is a Fast of necessity; We underwent a voluntary Famine
by a voluntary Fast: So the Famine meeting with a Famine, went no farther, but
dyed in it. The business which it should have done, was done, and the end
being attained, that which moved to the end, rested. And it is not without
pattern, that spiritual works, have bounded the judgments of God with a
day. Yea God himself does call us to set a Mark on that day; and by that, on
others that are like it. When the Jews for the neglect of a work that tended
to Gods glory, were punished with poverty and scarsitie; yet in that very day
wherein they began that work which God required, there was a change of curses
into blessings: whereupon God calls upon them; Consider from this day, Hag. 2.
18.
and upward; from this day will I bless you.

Thus by the good hand of God upon us, there has been a change and
deliverance from two of the great scourges, wherewith God professes that he
scourges the sinful Nations of the earth. Ezekiel. 14.
And if in two evils he have delivered us, why may we not hope, that he will
deliver us in the third? If he have delivered us from the Bear and the Lion,
why may we not hope that he will deliver us from a third, though it be as
big as Goliath? It is a sure sign, that Gods ear is yet open to us; and
while his ears are open, there is hope for a Nation: only let us come to make
sure this hope to us, by making sure and right steps unto it. A first should
be, praise and thanksgiving, for these great saluations which we have
already received. It has been showed before, that by thankfulness for old
benefits God is moved to give new, and that where he reapeth plentifully, he
will plentifully sow. Therefore we must be thankful for the former, it we
will hope, upon sure grounds, to receive the latter; and we must give
thankfulness for blessings past, as a pledge and pawn unto God, that he
shall not lose his due thanks and praise for benefits to come. And that our
thankfulness may be hearty, it must proceed from the love of God; for the
true taste of Gods goodness in blessings, cannot but much move us to love him
whose sweetness we taste. Therefore the Psalmist says, Psalm. 116. 1.
I love the Lord, because he has heard me. And surely true love will bring
forth true obedience. Christ who is truth, has said; If a man love me, he
will keep my words. Ioh. 14. 23.
And indeed obedience is the best thankfulness. It is better than the
sacrifice of praisein the calves of the lips; But both together are best: For,
who so offers praise, honors me, and to him that orders his
conversation aright, Psalm. 50. 23.
will I show the salvation of God. Wherefore our Liturgy does make an entire
thanksgiving, for a deliverance from the Pestilence, when it offers the souls
and bodies delivered, to be a living sacrifice unto God, and withal praises
and magnifieth Gods mercies in the midst of the Congregation.

A second step to a sure hope, is perseverance and constancy, in the use of
those means by which we attained these blessings already received. The same
means to which Gods ear has been open, it will still be open; yea being
now opened already, it is much easier to keep it open, than if it were shut,
to open it. Wherefore this door of mercy being open, let us by pressing into
it, not only keep it open, but open it wider, until all mercies be obtained,
that may heal our miseries. And as repentance and invocation, should by every
one particularly, and continually be set on work, to move God to continue and
perfect his good work of mercy in us, and upon us, so it is humbly and
heartily to be desired, that the same public means, and manner of
humiliation may not long be intermitted, until God make his face to shine on
this Nation, in a full deliverance, from general troubles, dangers and
straites: For why should we leave to seek God by those means, wherein God
does not leave to hear us? And why should we leave to use medicines, as long
as there remain diseases? God has showed us the way how to be heard and
healed. Yea he has assured us of healing this way, by the earnests of health
which this way he has sent unto us: And shall sickness give over the
Physician, before the Physician give it over? shall Need be weary of asking
and receiving, before Bounty is weary of hearing and giving? O let us not shut
up Gods mercies against our selves, before God do shut them up against us, but
while the oil of mercy is running, let us by humiliation, repentance and
invocation enlarge our vessels, and open our mouths wide, that he may fill
them. If God had denied us, the example of the Canaanitish woman would have
invited us to seeking, whose faith was commended, and rewarded with a miracle,
for importunity after rough denyalls. But now God has granted and heard us,
were it not a great neglect of Gods goodness, and our own happiness, not to
go on in speaking? For as it is very fit to be said when the Lord speaks,
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; so it is fit to be said, when the Lord
hears, Speak servant, for the Lord hears. Genesis 18.
Thus did Abraham, continue praying for Sodom, because God continued hearing,
and never left, until he brought the conditions of Sodoms deliverance to be
so easy, that for ten righteous all Sodom might have been spared. And
surely if our perseverance in humiliation and prayer shall not stop, it may
work the like effect, and so our hope may be sure. Romans 5.
For experience says the Apostle, breeds hope, and such hope as does not make
ashamed. And if hope be the fruit of experience, surely we had experience
that God hears our prayers, and why then shall we not also have hope that
he will hear the like prayers hereafter? The Apostle that teaches us this
fruit of experience in his doctrine, teaches it also by his practice. For
when he has had experience of Gods goodness, he infers that trust upon
it, which is the ground of things hoped for: Who delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver: 1. Cor. 1. 10.
And now behold his confidence and hope: In whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us.

22 Neither may our present lowness, Our lowness or the lownes of the Church,
may not destroy our hope if (...)yned to (...)pen(...)nce.
or the lowness of those that have reformed Religion, and purged it from
Idolatry, take away the hope of Recovery: For lowness is the very way to
exaltation, and Weakness to Strength. We see here that before St. Paul came
to this experience of Gods deliverance, from whence he gathers sure hope for
deliverance to come, he received in himself the sentence of death. So that a
pressing above measure, and such a pressing as makes an impression of the
sentence of death, is the way to deliverance. And there are diverse reasons why
it should be so. First on Gods side: God himself professes, 2. Cor. 12. 9.
My strength is made perfect in weakness. So that weakness is a fit subject
whereon God uses to glorify his strength: therefore weakness may encourage
men, if they be like-minded to St. Paul; for hereupon he says, I will most
gladly glory in my infirmities: for when I am weak, then am I strong. He is so
far from being discouraged, that he is encouraged by his weakness, because
weakness drawing to it the power of God, becomes stronger than the strength
of men without God. He that first brought light out of darkness, and in
Christ Jesus has brought life out of death, he goes on commonly to all his
great Works in a way of contraries; that one contrary arising out of another,
all the honor of the work may be wholly reserved to God, and all eyes turned
wholly to him: for there is nothing on earth to look on for a Cause, but a
contrary; and that even common Reason will tell plainly, cannot produce his
contrary. And this course of God is so usual, that he has Titles affixed to
him, expressing it: God who raised the dead, and, God who brought light out of
darkeness, and, God who comfort the Abject. Again, the Lowness of Gods
children gives God all the glory in the destruction of their enemies. So as God
was glorified in raising up their Lowness, so is he also glorified while by
their Lowness he takes down the Height and Pride of the enemy. For the
weakness of those who overcome, gives away the glory of ouercomming from
themselves unto God, who by weakness ouercometh power. This God plainly
shows to be a way by which he works out his glory, in that story of
Gideon: For as long as Gideons army had in it the strength of a multitude, the
multitude was a hinderance to this glory. For so the victory might have been
taken from God, and given to men, because they were many. Therefore he finds
fault with his army, as being unfit for his glory, while there was any such
number in it, as might possibly take away the glory of the victory from God,
to it self. Therefore he says, The people that are with thee are too many for
me to give the Midianites into their hands, Judge. 7.
lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying: Mine own hand has saved me.
Wherefore God pares his army, and makes it fit for his glory, by many
diminutions; never leaving until he brought it to so few hundreds, that there
was left no ground of glorying in it self, but that he who glories, must
needs glory in the Lord. The Israelites were kept down by the Egyptians in
most cruel slavery and bondage: for they made the Israelites to serve with
rigor, Exodus 7. 13. and 2. 23.
so that they sighed and cried by reason of their bondage. And when they did
but speak for liberty, their burdens were increased, and that so heavily,
that they were in mere despair and deadness of heart; so that when Moses
told them of freedom, they hearkened not unto Moses for Exodus 6. 9.
anguish of Spirit and for cruel bondage. But for this hopeless and
distressed Nation, which had no help nor hope in it self, did God glorify
his power upon the pride of Pharaoh, and the strength of Egypt: So that for the
victory which God alone gains upon the Egyptians for Israel, but without out
Israel, Iethro duly glorifies him: Exodus 18. 11.
Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods: for in the thing wherein
they dealt proudly, he was above them. God that takes down the proud, when
there is no help in man to bring them down, gets to himself the glory of
their abasing. It were infinite and endless to produce the patterns and
presidents of this kind of working, by which God works out his glory. When
Kingdoms and Empires are at the greatest, then GOD takes them down commonly,
by low and contemptible means. And so even at the height of the Roman Empire,
that Empire was taken down by the Northren people, whom they in contempt did
account and call Barbarians. And if it please him, so can he take down the
present pride of the Roman Empire: which I especially place in that man of
sin, who is the veriest Emperor of Rome; surmounting the other in his own
opinion, and in the opinion of his Disciples, as much as the Sun excels the
Moon in glory. And therefore most blasphemously this title is ascribed to
him, The King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. But let us remember, that God
himself says, All the Tyees of the Forest shall know, Ezekiel. 17. 24.
that I the Lord have brought down the high Tree, have exalted the low Tree,
have dried up the green Tree, and have made the dry Tree to flourish, I the
Lord have spoken, and have done it. Wherefore let Israel trust and hope in the
Lord, even hope against hope, that though they be humbled even to the earth,
and Pharaoh mount up with his pride to heaven, and against heaven, saying, who
is the Lord? yet the Lord will bring Israel out of Egypt, and will triumph over
Egypt and Pharaoh with a mighty power, and outstretched arm: So shall Israel
say; Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power, thy right hand, O
Lord, Exodus 15. 6. (...).
has dashed in pieces the Enemy. And in the greatness of thine excellency
thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee. Yea much people in Heaven
shall say: Alleluia, Salvation and Glory and Honor and Power Reu. 19. 1. 2.
unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his judgments: for he has
judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and
has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. And surely great glory must
needs arise unto God both from heaven and earth, when God by his Church, being
low and little, judges the great Whore. Little and weak things when they
produce great effects, it plainly appears that they have borrowed power from
elsewhere: and from whom can the creature borrow power, but of the Creator, the
fountain of power? whose weakness, that is, whose least power being added to
the creature, 1. Cor. 1. 25
is stronger than men, even than all the strength of men. God and three hundred
are able to overcome an Host, Judge. 6. and 7.
that are like Grasshoppers for multitude: yea God and Israel, only by walking
about a town, and fighting with no other weapons but Trumpets of Rams horns,
can make the strength of Jericho to fall before them. God and a woman, even
Deborah, can judge Israel, and deliver them from a King that has nine hundred
chariots of Iron. But when by weakness God overcomes strength, it cannot
be the strength of weakness that overcomes, but the strength of God.
Therefore all glorying here also is excluded from man, and referred unto God.
And accordingly Deborah rightly gives God the glory, saying; Judge. 5. 13.
The Lord made me have dominion over the Mighty.

Secondly, God suffers his Church to be low and weak, before he exalt it, in
regard of Man. And first we may take notice, that in the lowness of the Church
God has an eye, and leuells as it were at the very enemies of the Church;
which are indeed his own enemies. For by the lowness and weakness of the
Church, Judge. 4. 7.
he draws out these enemies, unto a full and final overthrow. He
encourages and hardneth them to a full adventure in a war against God, that
God may fully be avenged of them, and fully triumph over them. The Lord
knows, that the distressed estate of the Church, does engage their enemies in
great and full prosecutions of them, that so coming forth with their whole
forces to overthrow the Church, their whole forces may be overthrown. The
Lord himself shows us this his dispensation; For he professes, that
therefore he brought Israel into straites, between the Mountains and the Red
Sea, because Pharaoh will say, Exodus 14.
they are entangled in the Land, the wilderness has shut them in. And I will
harden Pharaohs heart (says the Lord) that he shall follow after them, and I
will be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host. When the men of Israel
have once been smitten by the men of Ai, and do the second time flee before
them, Josh. 8. 5. 6. 7.
They will come out after us (says Joshua) till we have drawn, (or pulled)
them from the City: Then shall ye rise up from the Ambush, and seize upon the
City, for the Lord your God has delivered it into your hand. By this bait of
infirmity, does God draw his enemies to open their mouths to swallow the
Church, but then the hook of Omnipotence that lies hid under it, takes and
kills them. And even now in the distress of Gods Army we see that done
which John saw before would be done; I saw the Beast, Reu. 19. 19. 20.
and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies gathered together, to make war
against him that sat on the horse, and against his army. And why should we not
hope to see that event, which John also saw following this gathering together?
And the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet. A second regard has
God to men in this lowness of the Church, and that is a regard to the Church
it self. For when God does prepare a glorious victory for his Church, his
Church must be duly prepared for the receiving of this victory. And this
lowness does diversely prepare her. First, it calls her to the life of faith;
to live by faith, and not by sight. For when visible things fail her, then is
she forced to run by faith to things invisible: when that fails her which she
sees, then she cleares up the eye of faith, that she may have some evidence of
things not seen. Heb. 11.
So St. Paul says of the widow, 1. Tim. 5* 5.
that being desolate she trusts in God. And as soon as Iehosaphat has said:
We have no might against this great company that comes against us, neither
know we what to do: it presently follows, 2. Chro. 20. 12.
But our eyes are on thee. 2. Cor. 1.
And St. Paul having received the sentence of death, trusts in God that
raises the dead. Thus when the outward eye sees no help in the creature, the
inward eye of faith is awaked to look only on the Creator. And indeed nothing
but faith is fit to receive a miraculous Mercy. When God makes bare his Arm
in some great and wonderful deliverance, he will have his people by faith to
look up to this arm, and wholly to depend on it. Therefore Christ Jesus, when
he is ready to bestow a miraculous healing, he usually calls for faith to
receive it. And even now by the distress of the Church, does God call the
Church to this faith. And no question if by this faith we be duly prepared, for
the great work of Gods mercy in the deliverance of the Church, we shall hear
that gracious answer which the faithful used to receive: Go in peace, thy
Faith has saved thee. Lastly, by the weakness of the Church God calls the
Church to Repentance, and so prepares her for victory. He calls her by the
fire of affliction from drosfe to purity, from wantonness to the grace of God,
from the form of godliness to the power thereof. There grows much dross of
Carnalitie about a Church in the time of ease, and men turn the grace of God
into wantonness. There is wanton living, and wanton preaching, and wanton
hearing. Men play with Religion, and are not in earnest when they are about
religious things. Yea, when they have formally and falsely done religious
things, they fall heartily to things of the world; the false profession of true
Religion, being not much unlike the profession of a false worship; the
consequence whereof is this, Exodus 32. 6.
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. But is such a
Church fit for a glorious and miraculous deliverance? Can we expect that God
should make bare his arm to save a Luxurious, a Gluttonous, a Drunken
Congregation: No, it must be purged from these, and made white, before God will
deliver it, and crown it with victory. Therefore by this Esa. 27. 9.
affliction shall the Iiniquitie of Jacob be purged; and this is all the
fruit, to take away their sin. The Church is scoured and purged by
affliction, and being purged then may she hear, verse. ^.
Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain
according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? For the Judgment
that begins with the house of God but as a fiery trial, 1. Pet. 4. 12. 17.
shall end with the sinners and unrighteous like a consuming fire. When the
first appears more pure and glorious, the second shall not appear at all.
Wherefore if we by our Corrections, the Church of France by her late
Chastisements, and Germany by her present Scourgings, would turn to him that
smites them, by turning from their sins to his righteousness, surely, Psalm.
112.
to the righteous light should arise in the midst of darkness. Esa 32. 17
For the work of Righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of Righteousness
quietness and assurance for ever. Esa. 33. 1.
And then withal follows a Woe to thee that spoylest, and thou wast not
spoiled; when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled. Let God then
have of his Church the end of his chastisements, even true, spiritual and
sincere holiness, and then the chastisements of his Church will end. But then
will he begin with the enemies of his Church: he will awake as a Giant
refreshed with wine. Psalm. 2. 5.
He shall speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure:
Esa. 41. 12.
Thou shall seek them, and thou shall not find them, even them that contended
with thee: They that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of
naught. And thus while the Church by her lowness is brought to purity,
purity brings her to victory.

FINIS.

