The Sum of the acts and decrees made by diverse Byshopes of Rome.

IN this little Treatyle here following you may behold most Christen rea^r
(as in a glass most clear and bright) ye very vysnomy, Image, Figure, Shape, and
fassio^, of our Popyshe popettes which has named them selue Popes (which ye
truth to say are Bishops of Rome) how and in what thing their great labors
and pains co^systeth Only in making of laws to stabilyshe their own
auctoryties, And in setting up long Matyns and Masses, with Diriges and other
patrynges, That at no time there should be any place given that Gods word
should be preached to the comfort of them that are derelye bought with the
blood of our merciful savior Christ. These are the mysty aungelles of Satan
(yt Paul warns us of (which transfygureth them selves in to the symilitude
and Image of the aungelles of light. Here in may thou also behold now that
all Ceremonies that at this day is used in the church, Are the Institucions and
ordinances of Men, and therefore not to be esteemed of no such valor, that
Gods word should give place to let these dom paterynges be ministered. But
that all these ought to give place and clearly to be put away, when gods
word comes to be lively and clearly preached, which the Lord of Glory
grant to be, Amen

In the year of our lord god.C.x
EVaristus Bishop of Rome ordey^^d that if a Bishop were accused by the comen
people, it should not be received. Item that a Bishop when he preaches, should
have.viii. Deacons to wayght upon him.

In the year of our Lord god.C.xix.
Alexander bishop of Rome ordained that they should be accursed that did let
any yt were sent from ye See apostolical And yt a lay man should not sewe none
of the Clergy at the te^porall law upon pain of excommunication. Item yt
ones a day the Priest should sacrifyce the body of Christ. etc. Item he added
to ye Sacrifyce and memory, of the passion of Christ (Qui pridie quod
paterecur. etc.) to be said unto these words (This is my body. etc.) Item he
ordained that water should be myngled with ye wine, and that it should be
vnleuioned bread that was occupied in ye oblation and not leuende bred as was
before. Also he ordained holy water to be made to fere dyuels a way with al.

In the year of our lord.C.xxix.
Syxtus bishop of Rome, ordained yt no profane creature or lay man should lay
hondes on holy things. Also that ye corporas clothe should be of fine lynyn.
And that the Mass should be celebrate upon the auter, and that in it should be
said thryse Sanctus.

In the year of our lord.C.xxxix.
Tellesphorus bishop of Rome, ordained the.xl. Days before Ester called lent
to be fasted. Also yt a Priest upon Cristmas day might consecrate thryse, or
thry masses. Also that Gloria in exelsis should be song in the mass.

In the year of our lord.C.xl.
Higinius Bishop of Rome ordained that Solemn churches should be hallowed
without sacrifice or without a mass. And yt the material things of the church
should not be turned in Prophayne uses. And yt a infant shule be presented at
Baptyme or confirmacion, or Bishopynge be one man or one woman.

In the year of our lord.C.xliiii.
Pius Bishop of Rome Ordained Easter day to be celebrate upon the sunday. Also
the pain that prestes should have if they neglected or let pass any part of
the Celebration. Also that none should swear nether by the here nor head of god.
Also maidens before. xxv. year of age and after the.xii. day should not be
consecrated into religion. And yt is sacrilege rashely to cause the profettes
of the church to be minished nor the religious me^ to be put out of favor.

In the Iere of our lord.C.lxvi.
Sater Bishop of Rome ordained ye a preeste should not say mass or sacrifyce
except ii. Folks at the least were present. And that nu^nes should not coche
the corporas clothe the Chalyce nor the kyuerynge of the chalys. And that
Nu^nes shall not Sacrifice in the time of service. Item that a blessing Priest
be present, at the time of matrymony, Item that a maid be given to her
husband solempni of her father or mother or other friends. Item yt a unlawful
oath is to be broken. Item ye upon Mawndy, thuesday men should receive the
sacrament.

In the year of our lord.C.lxivii.
Eleuterius bishop of Rome ordened yt no meat should be forsaken thorown a
supersticious name. That no man should be purdowne from their, dygnyte. But if
they be first accused and then convicted. He that is gyltye and absent shall
not be condemned though his acccusor call upon him. Under this bishop ye
Brytaynes received the faith of Christ.

In the year of our lord.C.lxxxxii.
Victor bishop of Rome ordained that Ester day should be Celebrate on the sunday
after the.xiiii day of the moon of the.i. Month. Also yt every man of
necessite required might be baptized when he please. And that those yt would
not be reco^syled from their old malice, they should be excommunicate from the
service of god.

In the year of our lord.CC.iii.
Seuerinus ordained yt the sacrament should be consecrate in a chalyce of Glass
and not of tree, as a fore. Also that Christian people should rescyue the
sacrament on Ester day at ye laest. And yt prestes should be with the Bishop when
he says mass

In the year of our lord.CC.xii.
Calixtus ordained, that the ymbryng days should be fasted that whete, wine
and oil might be increase. And that those which should take orders should
abstain from wives for ever, Item that a bishop should not be consecrated but
if he were lawfully chose. That prestes should not be accused by defamed
persons. That accusars of clarckes, if they be suspecte enemies, they shall not
be admitted in the court or law. Also that the hurters of pylgryms should be
accursed.

In the year of our lord.CC.lii.
Fabian ordained the holy oil should be reuyued every year. And yt the old
should be bre^t on mau^dy thursday. That christian people should receive the
sacrament thryse a year. Also that no man should look to ye prestes living but
should harken to his doctrine and those things that he mynystrythe. In that
clerks that are gylte should be punyshed by the law of the church. Item that
those yt reproves wrongfully and clark, should be a cursed. That no man should
take a wife within.v. degree of blood.

In the year of our lord.CC.lv.
Cornelius ordained yt no man should constrayne a priest to swear but in a
matter Of the faith. That those which are put unto their others, by the order
of the law should be fasting.

In the year of our lord.CC.lxi.
Stephanus ordained ye clerks should not were the vestamentes of the church
but in the ministracion of holy things. Item those yt take away ye goods of
the church shall be condemned as me^slayers. Those that have left the faith,
and are penyte^t shall not be baptized again.

In the year of our lord.CC.lxiiii.
Sixtus ordained yt a priest should sacrifyse upon a hallowed altar and he gave
unto saint Laurence the treasure of the church to dystrybute.

In the year of our lord.CC.lxxiii.
Helix ordained holy days yearly in remembrance of martyrs. He renewed
consecracio^s and halowynges of chyrches that prestes should not say mass but
in holy place only.

In the year of our lord.CC.lxxvii.
EVticianus ordained that those yt geld themselves, and those yt are buggerers
and abbates yt presume to defyle virgyns should be exco^municat. That new
fruits should be blessed upon ye auter Ite^ yt a marter should be beryed in a
cope.

In the year of our lord.CC.lxxxv.
Catus ordained that they should assend by vii. distynet orders to be a bishop.
Ite^ yt no lay man nether heretycke nor vnbaptysed man shall call a clarck to ye
law.

In the year of our lord.CC.lxxxxvii.
Marcellinus for fear of pain committed Idolatrye and afterward did penance
and ye time there was xvii.M.i.xxx. dais marterd by Dyoclesyan the Emperor.

In the year of our lord.CCC.vi.
Marcellus was ye first that gave tytles to paryshes and dyoces in Rome.

In the year of our lord.CCC.xi.
Eusebius ardeyned yt those that takyth away any thing praynyng to ye church
shall restore.x. times asmoche again, Ite^ that prestes should not be accused
but of men of great grauyte. The workers of witchcraft and defamed persons shall
not be received as witnesses. Also a woman yt is spoused to her husband may
depart from him and go into Religion.

In the year of our lord.CCC.xiii.
Melacides ye last marter from Peter ordained yt no man should fast on sunday or
thursdaye. That no man should be condemned of suspicion before the deed be
proved. That a clarck should abstain from seculer business.

In the year of our lord.CCC.xvii.
Syluester Ordained yt the holy oil should be consecrated by a bishop. And ye
children being baptized should be confyrmed by a bishop. Item yt prestes should
a noynt syk folks. Item yt wensday friday and saturday should be fasted. Item
yt prestes may not be called of a lay man into no law. Item yt a pressed should
not be aturne in ye temporal law. Ite^ yt prestes should were no sylk in
clothes. Ite^ yt he shall have no dyed corporas cloth. Also he was ye first yt
caused a deacon to put a cope on him in time of mass and a fanon on his left
hand

In the year of our lord.CCC.xxxviii.
Marcus ordained yt the creed should be long a loft after ye gospel. That a
clark should not be brought to the temporal law.

In the year of our lord.CCC.lxxiii.
Damasus ordained that the confite or should be said at ye beginning of ye
mass. Also he caused first ye division of ye quere ye one should sing on verse
on ye one side and ye other on ye other side. And yt gloria patti should be
song at the end of every psalm. Also yt those ye brek his canon law should
be counted as blasphemers of ye spirit. He gave autorite to.s. Ieromes
wrytynges He ordained ye gospel and pistle to be red in ye mass He wryt ye
lives of his predecessors and many laws. In his time ye counsel of
Constantinople was

In the year of our lord.CCC.xC.
Siricius ordained yt orders should be given diverse times of the year. And yt
Prystes should be made by the bysshoppes only. And yt prystes should not dwell with
no women, But they were nigh kynne to them. Also yt no man Maryinge a wydowe
should not be priest.

In the year of our lord.CCCC.v.
Anastasius, ordained yt men should stand up at ye readyng of the gospel and
here it in remembrance. Item that those yt lacked any of their members, or
parts of their bodies should not be made prystes.

Also he ordained first the Order of saynct Hierome.

In the year of our lord iiii.C.viii.
Innocentius ordained ye Saterdayes should be fasted. A church ons hallowed should
not be hallowed again. Item that a statute made of the clargy without the
consent of the bishop should be as void. Item that it shall be counted Simonye
to them that sold Prebendes, dignityes or of holy Oil. Ite^ on Solemn
feasts those that are Christen people should before that they receive the
sacrament give each other a kiss of peace.

In the year of our lord.iiii.C.xxiiii.
Sozinus ordained yt the paschall taper should be hallowed in every paryshe on
Ester even. Item that clerks should not drink in tauernes. Item yt pre^tyses
should not take orders.

In the year of our lord.iiii.C.xxxiii.
Bonefacius ordained yt no man should be made a priest before.xxx. year and that
ye servant that ran away from his master should not be received to a pryste.

In the year of our lord.iiii.C.xliii.
Leo ordained that in baptyme and co^fyrmacyon we should have one god father
Item yt in septuagesime and quadragesyme and aduente, Alleluya should not be
song nor gloria in excelsis. He ordained hanc igitur to be said, in the cano^
of the mass Item yt a Bishop of Via^ called Mamarcus instituted the Latony to
be song.

In the year of our lord.iiii.C.lxiii.
Hilarious ordained yt byshopes should not chose the^ successors This bishop
gathered al ye decrees of his predecessors into one book and publyshed the^ to
all ye world.

In the year of our lord.v.C.xxv.
John ye.i. ordained yt the Emperors should be subjects unto ye byshopes and
not to bear rule over the^. In yt time the holiness of Bn^d^e was i^ ye
exstemacio^ which ordained the Relion of monks. Which thenseforth was divided
in many housholdes.

In the year of our lord.v.C.xxxii.
Bonyface ye.ii. ordained that the lay people should here their divine service
in a several place from the clergy.

In the year of our lord.v.C.lvi.
Pelagius.i. ordained yt prestes should say their canonical hours daily. And
that i^ the time of lent they should not celebrate before they had said ye last
hour. And yt there shall not be admitted i^ the spiritual court no lybell of
accusation on less the party accused be present. Also yt seismatykes and
heretics should be oppressed with the seculer power.

In the year of our lord.v.C.xCii.
Gregory ye great wrote first himself in his letter i^ these words seruus
seruerum yt is the servant of al servants. In ye sinode of ye.xxiiii.
fathers he confyrmed openly.iiii. general cou^celles. He brought into the
church ornaments and syngyng. He ordained that the mass should begin with a
verse of ye spalter. And that kyrieleyson should be repeted.ix. times. He
ordained Alleluya to be said also ye offertorye he ordained and in ye canon of
ye mass to be said. Deus q nr^os. etc. and after ye cano^ of ye d^ical oracio^
to be said over ye host. at ye hours he ordained Deus i^ adiutoriu^ to be
said with gloria pr^i. And yt the last will of the^ yt died should be kept and
ratified. And yt the.iiii. days before the first sunday intent should be
fasted, Also yt me^ married to ii. wives and vserers should not be admitted to be
prestes. Ite^ yt me^ leuing their wives with consent yt their wives ought the^ to
enter i^to religion, And also weme^ leui^g their husband with consent their
husbands ought also to enter i^to religion. Also yt their shall not be ii.
metropolita^s i^ one proue^ce, This man commands to prechers yt they should
use descressio^ both i^ speking and in keeping of sile^s. And he belded.vi.
monasteries our of ye ground of his own cost And he maid his own house a
Religious house And like him shall ye skan^ find any.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.v.
Sabinus ordained yt the hours of ye day should be made known unto ye church
by ye distinction of ye ryngi^g of belles And yt thee should la^pes continually
burn i^ ye church.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.vii.
Boniface ye.iii. ordained yt the corporas cloth at ye co^secratio^ should
belayde abroad by ye pressed and that none should be elected i^ ye place of the
deed bishop, But ye.iii. day after his death, And yt nether for favor nor for no
money. And yt the election should be made both of ye clargy and lay people, and
yt it should be ratyfyed by chassent of ye bishop. This man by ye consent of
Focas obtained against ye patriarch of co^sta^tinople That ye see of Peter
should be the head of the church.

In the year of our Lord.vi.C.viii.
Boniface ye.iiii. he dedicated ye te^pyl of Gybel and of ye gentyles unto our
lady and al saints. He made his fathers house a monastery, and the lands of
his auncetry he gave unto the use of the Monks. And than gave unto them
auctorite to preach, to baptyse and to absoyle.

In the year of our Lord.vi.C.xv.
Theodatus ye.i. ordained yt no man should mary that Maid that his father had
be^ god father to. This man loved ye clargye and pore people ardently.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.xviii.
Boniface the.v. ordained that those the came to the church for socor, should
not be taken from them with violence. And that those ye committed Sacrilege
should in every place be co^uicted and accursed. And ye testamentes made by ye
Princes should by all manner of ways stand in full strength.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.xxiii.
Honorius ye.i. ordained yt the names of ye excomu^icat should be openly
denou^sed, this man did restore many churches and church yerdes. And he
appointed laws to ye sarase^s.

In ye year of our lord.vi.C.xxxviii.
John^ the.iiii. ordained that any invaded or took away the gods of the church
He should restore.iiii. fold.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.xl.
Theodorus Ordained the halowynge of wax as Sozinus writyth of him, and bylded
up.ii. Celles in Rome.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.xlvi.
Martyne ye.i. ordained yt they should not have no long here. And yt ye man and
his wife should be blessed before they lay together. And yt the bishop every
year should make creme and send it to euer^ parish of ye dioces.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.liii.
Egenius the.ii. ordained that the Bishop should have prysons, to ponyshe ye of
fenders of the Clarge. Also that ye prestes howses should be bylded nere ye
church.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.lvi.
Vitilianus made ye order of ye churches He ordained song and added to ye
organs.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.lxv.
Theodarus ye.ii. bylded churches. He ordained many suffrages to put away many
wonders yt hapened i^ those days.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.lxxi.
Donus ye.i. ordained ye clergy into diverse degrees. He made ye church of
Raue^na to be obedient unto ye church of Rome.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.lxxx.
Agatho in counsel of.ii.C.lxxxix. byshopes vnied and accorded ye latyns and
the greeks in ye Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and manner of sacrifices. He
condemned for an he re^ke Marcharius ye bishop of Antioche This was the.vi.
general counsel.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.lxxxiiii.
Leo ye.ii. ordained Baptyme to be done in urgent necessite. He ordained ye Pax
to be borne about to the people being present a Mass. Also that the eleccion
of ye clergy of Raue^na which made himself Equal with Rome should not be in
strength but if ye bishop of Rome, did a prove in This man ordained the
psalmody, and he brought ye hymmes i^to aswere tewne.

In the year of our lord.vi.C.lxxxv.
Benedicte ye.ii. a man of most hye holiness, whose holiness moved Co^sta^tyne
to make him to be ye very vyear of Christ in earth, who^ ye clargy and the
people of Rome did make bishop, by ye autorite of ye common hawse without any
co^fyrmacio^ of ye prince.

In ye year our Lord. vi.C.lxxxvi.
John^ ye.v. was consecrated of.iii. byshopes and so made a decre that the same
manner of consecracion should be observed of his successors.

In ye year of our lord.vi.C.lxxxviii.
Sergius ye.i. ordained Agnus dei to be said of ye priest in ye Mass before ye
breakyng of ye host, which peees of ye host He declared ye signification i^ a
certain cano^. This man brought ye church of Aquila to his duty, which did
little allow ye.v. counsel.

In ye year of our lord.vii.C.i.
John^ the.vi. redeemed many yt were in captivity, and garnyshed ye church. And
in time was Bid and Heymo.

In the year of our Lord.vii.C.iiii.
John^ ye.vii. garnyshed many churches with pycrueres and Images of saints.

In the year of our lord.vii.C.vi.
Sizimus having the gowte both in hands and feet, dyed suddenly.

In the year of our lord.vii.C.vii.
Constantyne ye.i. ordained yt the Images of saynctes which we rased out by
Philyp in the tempyll of Sophye should again be painted in the porche of saint
Peter, And he ordyned that ye name of thy Heretyke Emperor should not be
received another in open nor pryuate wrytinges nether in Brass, Silver or lead,

In the year of our lord.vii.C.xiiii.
Gregory ye.ii. converted ye germaynes to ye faith by his diligence. He
exco^mu^icated Leo ye Emperor to be an heretic. Here payred ye churches and
the walls of ye City.

In the year of our lord.vii.C.xxxi.
Gregory ye.iii. ordained the Images of saynctes to be worshypped. And them to
be Excommunicated yt did violate them. This man with a counsel of a. M
Byshopes, and with thassent of the clargye, and also of the people did depryue
Leo both of his Impery and also of the company of good me^ Because Leo had
rased out of ye chuches the forsayde Images and broke the^ down. He decked ye
churches and restored monasteries. And he added to the Canon of the mass these
words (Quoru^ hodie solemnitas. etc.) But they do not use those words now in
ye Secrets of the mass.

In the year of our lord.vii.C.xlii.
Sacharias ordained ye men of ye clarge should were no seculer habytes.

In the year of our lord.vii.C.lxviii.
Steven ye.iii. ordained yt no man should be made a bishop except he were wtin
orders before. And yt images which were taken away by ye counsel of
Co^stantyne: should be restored to the church again-

In the year of our Lord.viii.C.xvii.
Pascalis the.i. ordained that no seculer man should presume to take a benefice.

In the year of our lord.viii.C.xxvii.
Gregory the forth ordained the feeste of all Halowes.

In the year of our lord.viii.C.xliii.
Sergius the.ii. (which was called the mouth of a Swyne) for ye unclean sou^de
of his voice. He took to him this name Sergius, And of this man al other
byshopes of Rome has taken occasion to change their name. This man ordained
that all saints and holy me^ should be buried Sou^teously with Tombs and
shrines.

In the year of our lord.viii.C.xlvi.
Leo the.iiii. ordained yt a bishop should not be accused with less tha^.lxxii.
witnesses

In the year of our Lord.viii.C.liiii.
John^ the.viii. a woman (as they say) very well learned. She showed herself
outwardly to be a man, And she being great with child was delivered in
profession in the rogation days, and straight way she dyed: and her child
with her.

In the year of our lord.viii.C.lvi.
Benedicte the.iii. ordained yt the clarge should sing Dirige for their
superiors and again the superiors to sing diri^ge for the clargye.

In the year of our lord.ix.C.xiiii.
Anastasius the third affyrmed the order of the Rule of Benet,

In the year of our lord.ix.C.xCv.
Gregory the fyfte ordained that only ye Germaynes should chose the Emperor
for he was a Saxon borne.

In ye year of our lord.ix.C.lxxxxviii.
Syluester the second was made bishop of Rome by Dyuelyshe congeringe and He
asked the devil how long he should live and he showed him so long as he came
not to Jerusalem. And Syluester saying mass in a chapel of ye holy cross
called Jerusalem, did perseaue his last day was come, and than he showed how
he was made bishop by congeracion.

In the year of our lord.M.ii.
John^ the.xix. ordained all Sollen day to be next after all halon day.

In the year of our lord.M.xlviii.
Damasius the second poysond Clement the second, and straight without any
election took upon him to be in the Se of Rome

In the year of our lord.M.lxiii
Gregorye the seuenthe Ordained that Monks should eat no flesh.

In the year of our lord.M.lxxxviii.
Urban the second ordained that Clerks should say our Lady matyns every day
and that her service should be on the Saturday and yt no prestes son should
have no office in the church.

In the year of our lord.M.c.xcix.
Innocentius the third ordained that they that take their rightes should be
confessed, every year ons at the lest at Ester

In the year of our lord.M.CC.xvi.
Honorius the third did confyrme the orders of Dominike and Fransis.

In the year of our Lord.M.cc.xxvii.
Gregory ye.ix. made Dominike and Francis and one of his kynsme^ Antony and
Elizabeth saints, He set fourth also the Decritalles co^pyled by one
Raimundus.

In the year of our lord.M.iiC.xliii.
Innocencius the fourth ordained that the Natyuite of our lady should be kept.
viii. days, and that Cardynalles when they ride on horsbacke should were a red
hat. He gave religeous men privileges and wrote the rule of saint Clare.

In the year of our lord.M.iiC.lvi.
Alexander the fourth Ordained that seculer power to require of no Church
nether of man of the church any taskes or deem, and that lay men should not
dyspute of faith. He made Clare a Saint, and gave lycens to the Hermytes to
dwell in the Cytyes.

In the year of our lord.M.cc.lxii.
Vrbanus the fourth ordained the rest of corpus Christ: the wh^che Tomas of
Aquyne did make and compyle.

In the year of our lord.M cc.lxxxvi.
Honorius the forth approved the order of white freers, the which at that
time was not approved by any counsel and changed there uttermost black cope
into white.

In the year of our lord.M.cc.xcv.
Bonifacius the Eight ordained permutacions of Benefytes, And the manner of
dysgrading of clerks. And that clerks should have wives, and they to kept
their gowns and heddes to be shaven as was before, and they to have al
privileges as they has before, and he made all the clargy free from all manner
of Exactyons of the Temporalte. And he ordained the disgradynge of clerks, and
perpetual prisonment.

In the year of our Lord.M.ccc.xvii.
John^ the.xxiii. Did declare the Order of the Graye freers, and made Thomas
Aquyne, and Thomas the bishop of Herten Saynctes:

In the year of our lord.M.ccc.lxxx.
Vrbanus the.vi. Made on one day. xxix. Cardinals, And he made Visitacion of
our lady holy day.

In the year of our lord.M.iiii.xlviii,
Nycholas the fyfte made among diverse other Bernardyne a Saint.

In the year of our lord.M.iiii.c.lvi.
Calixtus did ordeyne the feast ye transfiguracion of our lord, And he made
Vincent a Saint.

In the year of our lord.cccc.C.lix.
Pius the second made Katherine a saint.

In the year of our lord.M.cccc.lxv.
Paul the second ordained that they yt did allyenat, or withdraw any thing
from ye church should be excommunicated.

In the year of our lord.M.cccc.lxxii.
Sixtus the fourth ordained the feestes of ye Conception and presentation of
our lady and the feasts of Anne Fransis, and Iosephe, And brought back the
year of Iubilee to the year of, xxv: And he did make Bonauenture a Saint.

In ye year of our lord.M.cccc.lxxxvi
Innocentius the.viii. made Heliopolde a Saint.

FINIS.
The lord of glory) has sent his ministers to plage the best, with her
adhere^tes which has her mark, and upon al them which worshypped her image
that she nor her children should no more shed the blood of the children of
salvation with her great burdyns of traditions.

Apo. xvi.
Translated out of latin into English, And Imprynted in ye house of Thomas
gybson.


