THE ART OF HAPPINESS.

Consisting of three parts, whereof The first searches out the happiness of
man. The second, particularly discouers and approues it. The third, shows the
means to attain and increase it.



BY FRANCIS ROVS.

Summa Philosophia est, quae exquirit summum Bonum.

Man's chiefest wisdom is, To find out his chief and sovereign Good.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for John Parker, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Ball. 1619.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED FATHER, Sr. ANTHONY ROVS of Halton in Cornwall, Knight.
SIR,
IF the Author and the work be considered, it is no hard matter to find, to
whom the Author should first of all offer his work. A son cannot present his
labors more fitly then to a Father, especially when they bring with them so
excellent a thing as Blessedness. And although I know you have been an
ancient Trauailer in the path of Felicity, so that the commendation of your
posterity shall be to follow your steps, yet I am assured, it cannot but be
a comfort to you, to see some increase from above, where your careful education
has planted and watered below; in which you have far exceeded the usual
providence of Fathers, that ordinarily looks no farther then the body, pride,
and earth. I confess, the outward shows of this world had so far
transported me, that I was very unlikely to have made this kind of Matter the
maine business of my Time, but I took ship to go to Tarsus, even to foreign
Countries, and in mine own began the study of the Law, until a storm from
heaven chased me away to the study of Eternity, wherein I have found so much
comfort and assistance from above, that the encouragement thereof is to me in
stead of a voice speaking in mine ear; This is the way, walk in it: And in
this way I desire to walk as steadfastly, as bodily infirmity, and the
necessary distractions of this life will permit, until my Time shall be no
more, that so I may pass immediately from the contemplation of Felicity, unto
the fruition. This felicity I likewise wish unto you with most humble and
hearty prayer, and that this work following may give some (though small)
advancement to it, that so you may reap a little, where you have sown much.

From my house in Laurake, April 29. Your son in all duty and observance.
FRANCIS ROVS.

TO MAN.
HAVING cast mine eyes on the frame of this World, and somewhat particularly
considered the works which are wrought under the Sun; I beheld Man, placed as
the top and chief of the Creatures, and I saw in Man the sparks of an
excellent soul, which might seem to justify this his preeminence: but
withal having searched the depth and breadth of the life of Man, to see what
great actions this Eminent thing produced, or what extraordinary happiness he
enjoys suitable to his excellence; I find generally, that this Head of the
World does usually spend himself in base works of Vanity, Labor, and
Wickedness; and is himself spent away by Misery, Sickness and Death. His
actions are either no actions at all, but idle, foolish, and superfluous
recreations; or mere labors for his own body, that he may be to morrow,
not better, but the same that he was to day; or that he may better his estate
by making himself worse, even by the loss or diminution of his own
goodness; and yet at last, this estate which he has bought with himself,
will turn him out most unkindly and unthankfully from possessing it. And as
for Man's happiness, most commonly he sends it before him, by proposing high
and remote objects to his desires; which either he never ouertakes, or if he
do, it does often vanish into Nothing, as being made of mere Imagination; or
if it will needs seem something being attained, yet it is at last digested
into perfect Nothing, when that and the Owner thereof, are both devoured by the
wide mouth of Death, that eats up all the thoughts and works of perishing
Mankind. But before Man arriues to this point of dissolution, by which he
comes to be rid of his vain happiness; misery, sickness, and mutual
vexation (Man to Man being a continual Hangman and Tormentor) by smarting and
still-returning stripes, most often cut his little happiness to lesser pieces,
and overcome the slight and slender sweetness thereof, with the inter-mingled
gall of solid and substantial grief.

Now this being the state of Things, what is all that we see, and to what
purpose is it? Are we here met together to play the Wretches and Fools? Is
this our appointed task to labor for Vanity? and to be imaginarily pleased,
and really tormented? or to take great care and pains to come to Nothing? Is
this the fruit of this huge mass of Creatures, and of glorious Man, the
principal of them? Surely, if we should lie down in this opinion, we might
also lie down in amazement, wondering what we make here, and why Man was
created unto so great folly and misery. We might rightly cry out, that in
regard of this World, the day of Death is better then the day of Birth, and
that not to be at all, is better then them both. But here we may not rest,
for then all the Creatures, which we see, would rise up against us like so many
Adversaries, and Objections. For it were a great injury to the Creator, to see
and acknow ledge (which acknowledgment is extorted even from mere natural
men) a great wisdom in the Matter and Form of the Creatures, and not to
acknowledge a great wisdom likewise in the End of the Creatures; that he
which made every thing so orderly in his parts, should make a confusion in the
whole; and that he who has made so excellent things for Man, should make Man
for baseness, vanity, and misery. Therefore I thought it most likely and
safe, to believe that the Creator had not failed in his Creation, but that the
Creature had erred from the course and scope of his Creation, and that Man by
some fault of his own, was gone out of the way, both in regard of employment
and happiness; which two, in all probability, should be found in one path, it
being most agreeable to wisdom, that a Creature should then be in the best
and happyest case, when he does the work appointed him by his Creator. Then
also it seemed necessary to inquire what was that right way, from which Man
had strayed; even to search what was the true end of Man's actions, and the true
scope of his desires; his duty and his felicity.

What I have met with, in this search, I have here discovered; and because
there are three sorts of men, which especially do err in the matter of
happiness, for these especially have I fitted the parts of this Discourse. One
sort of these are they, That come blind into the world, and so go out,
neither knowing, nor caring, nor asking, what they have to do here, nor what
is chiefly good for them while they be here, nor whether there be any other
place for them when they depart hence. These for the most part do what they
see done, or what their own lusts will have done, and so having spent their
time according to Custom and Concupiscence, they live to no purpose, and die
to no end, for ought they know. A second sort is of them, That think there is
a happiness, and a way to it; and which is more, they think they have it; yet
all the while they go without it, even for this reason, because they think
they have it. For, not having it, by their belief that they have it, they
cease from seeking, and so from finding of that which may only be found by
seeking. A third sort is, of such as think it enough to come within the reach
of happiness, but care not much to fasten it or to increase it, but please
themselves in looking on it, or only in a little taste of it. It is good to be
happy, they think, but it is not good to be too happy, and therefore they will
gladly traffic some superstuous happi nesse, for a little folly and vanity.
To all these (which are almost all) are the chief parts of this Treatise
directed, as Nails to drive out Nails, even rules of Light and Bliss, to
drive out the usual and received rules of darkness and misery; and to stand
fast in their room. Of these and the like directions let wretched and ignorant
mankind lay hold, as upon Boords and Masts in this great shipwreck of Nature.
Let them by such helps lift up their heads above the element of Baseness and
Vanity, wherein the sons of corrupted and degenerate Nature, like Fishes do
swim and live, and die. And let them mount up into that higher Region, wherein
only true and very Men are to be found, the rest being but the resemblances
of Men, and in substance the true Companions of brute and unreasonable
Creatures.

A Seeker of Happiness for himself and thee, F. Rovs.

THE ART OF HAPPINESS. The first Part. Which is a search of Man's Happiness.
CHAP. I. That the Seeker of Happiness must propose an End, and it must be the
best End.
Whosoever will better and advance himself (which is naturally every man's
desire) he must find out and propose to himself an End which is good; and
toward this End must so strive, that he may continually draw nearer to it,
until he have attained it; and he must grow in the degrees of enjoying, when
he has attained. He that proposes no Mark, nor main End to himself, can
never increase himself, but is a man lost, and comes to nothing; such a one is
like a ship that aymeth at no harbor, and therefore cannot make any voyage of
advantage. He that proposes an End, yet such a one as is but transitorily or
narrowly good, he can receive but a transitory and narrow advancement. He that
proposes for an End, a seeming good, but a real evil, may by attayning,
puff up his imagination, but shall substantially lessen and ruin himself.
But he that sets before him a Mark and End truly and perfectly good, by
attayning it, shall make himself truly and perfectly happy, and the more happy
in degrees, as in more degrees he does enjoy it. But, amidst the infinite
changes of things seemingly good, how shall man find out that one thing which
is truly and perfectly good? It is indeed an impression of Man's nature, to
seek for good, but the corruption of the same nature is such, that it makes
every thing seem good to it self, which it self (though falsely) apprehends
to be good. And so hence it comes, that many men run an unsatisfied course,
through diverse changes of things seemingly good, and most men choose the less
good for the better good; yea, the most evil for the most good. But he that
will seriously inquire for true happiness, must in his inquiry lay aside* his
body and the doctrines thereof; and he must retire into his innermost, and
most secret closet of Light and Reason, and there ask of his Soul assured
truths and resolutions, concerning his chief and sovereign Good. Yea, because
the darkness of a heavy and sensual body, since the fall, subject to
corruption, has much dimmed the light of the Soul; she has need to return
to that uppermost Light, by which at first she was kindled, thence to receive a
second inlightning, that by an addition of the highest Light, she may find
out her highest and chiefest happiness. The souls thus rectified, labor, and
in some measure attain to behold things in their truth, as also to see the
difference of things confounded or misordered by the ignorance of corruption,
and to place each thing in his due rank, and consequently the chief and
sovereign good, far above all; as indeed to the eye of wisdom it shines in
a notable and manifest supereminence. And as she gives due acknowledgment to
this good, being discovered, so she calls aloud to the will and affections to
strive toward it, being known and acknowledged, she advises them to set up
their rest upon it, to adventure al for it, and never to leave laboring,
until the soul and happiness be joined together.

CHAP. II. How that must be conditioned which is the end and happiness of Man.
NOw if with such wise Searchers of felicity we shall make the like enquiry,
examining all things in their weight and worth; we must needs meet in one
Truth, Truth being but one, even a common Center, in which all rectified
understandings meet. The more wise a man is, the more possession has he of
this truth; and therefore whosoever can challenge to himself to be the wisest
of Men, he must also be the largest discouerer of happiness, and with him
especially shall other wisdoms meet, even of necessity.

Now that we firmly ground our discovery, let us first inquire what
conditions that thing must have which shall be the happiness of Man. That which
shall make Man happy, must first be able to bestow on Man an absence of
misery: for Happiness and Misery cannot dwell together in one subject.
Again, it must give a man a real possession and enjoying of the chiefest
good, and that in perpetuity and euerlastingnesse. Man must possess the
soueraign Good; for he can never be happy by inioying imperfection, but that
only which is perfectly good, can make a man perfectly happy. He must also
enjoy this sovereign Good in a perpetuity, else the fear of losing
happiness, must needs lose part of it before it be lost; and if not so, yet he
cannot be termed happy, who shall have a time when he shall be without
happiness. And surely, if we find a sovereign Good which is everlasting, it
will bestow it self on us in it own nature, even everlastingly. Lastly, the
beatificall object of Man, must be the most agreeable object of his most
excellent part. Now, Man's chiefest part is a lightsome, reasonable, and
understanding spirit. Therefore that from which can issue unto Man the greatest
joy, must be a most wise, reasonable, and lightsome spirit; likeness,
agreeableness, and harmony, being the foundations of pleasure; and
consequently, the most excellent Like, pouring into his inferior Like, the
most conformable, natural, and kindly joys; from which arises an inioying,
even in perfection, contentment, and rest. Having thus found out some
conditions of Man's sovereign good, let us now seek out that thing which
bears these conditions: to this purpose let us search the length and breadth,
the height and depth of Essences and Beings, which if we draw into a sum, we
shall find to be no other, then the Creature and the Creator, God and the
World. Let us therefore inquire, which of these is qualified with the abilities
of perfect felicity.

CHAP. III. Whether the World, or part of it, be Man's happiness. And first, of
Honor.
IF we would begin with the World, and first ask of it, whether it be able
to give us happiness; surely, it preuents our asking most commonly, and
teaches us by blows, and not by words, that it is our misery rather then our
happiness: even a great treasury of imperfections, infirmities, griefs,
cares, oppressions, wickedness, transitorinesse, and vanity. There is in it
no fit object for the soul, no full and stable happiness for the body. The
best things in it that concern Man, are of a goodness mixed or vncontinuing.
It is full of confusion; all things coming alike to all, and not the best to
the best. Folly sits very often in judgment upon Wisdom, or which is worse
then Folly, Wickedness; and Wisdom, and Righteousness are as often
condemned: yea, Wickedness has the reward of Righteousness. To conclude, all
things are full of change, the World still changes her owners, and one
generation drives out another. Even these with whom the World makes most
dalliance, the same World turns out of favor and being; as many Princes do
their Favorites. But if generalities, by reason of their hugeness, may not
easily enter into the narrow capacities of men: Let us examine some chief
particulars and Masterpieces of the world, and so try whether any part can
be better then the whole; or whether any part can be free from that Law under
which the whole is concluded. And surely, if the best parts of the world being
examined, be found to be vanity, and their ashes nothing; the inferior parts
must, if it were possible, be an extremer kind of nothing. And though many
Volumes handling these things, have almost prevented these latter ages of any
new matter, truth in the same thing, being still the same; yet, because truth
is infinite in latitude and largeness, and all mankind is not an equal match
to the breadth thereof: Let every man search for more truths, and if he cannot
find them, he may do well yet to ratify and confirm the old. And first, let
us look upon Honor, a chief flower of this worlds flight and false
happiness, and we shall find it has justly been discovered to borrow
valuation from opinion, and opinion it self is of all other a most
groundless, mutable, vain, and witless thing. It is the thought of a dark
and blind multitude, which catches at things like mad Dogs, suddenly, rashly,
and vnconsiderately; not staying for reason, or at most, only for a show of
reason. But if thy honor have a better ground thy own merit, and the
estimation of wise and good men, I confess, it is then a sweet ointment which
pleases and delights the judgment, but does not fill and satisfy it. It is
not food strong enough for the soul of a wiseman, nor for the body of a
hungry man: the mind of man still reaches beyond it, and cries, it is far
from being the true rest of the soul. How many sick men, how many sad, yea
but wisely severe men have looked upon it, and examined it when they had it,
and became merry or angry, that they found no more in it! But I need not much
trouble my self with examining this kind of honor; for the World little
troubles it self with seeking or finding it. But that which chiefly pleases
them, is a vizzard of honor, which makes them honorable to the eyes and
opinions of men, no wiser nor better then themselves. But if Fools ride on
horseback with this kind of honor, and Princes for wisdom go on foot
without it; What mad good thing is this, which sets up folly above wisdom? Of
this I need to say the less: for the very Huntsmen of this honor have bitterly
complained on it; they say, it leads them into many pits and down falls, over
many myres and dangerous precipices; the mind has many strong counter buffes
and affronts, the conscience is forced to make wide steps for it, and to leap
over many blocks of stumbling and offense. Again, they complain that it keeps
the heart from rest and inioying; being attained, it is dug at by Envy, and
makes this often appear, that it has clymed for ruin. Finally, one degree of
honor attained, is but a degree, not a bound of the desires; and a farther
honor desired and not attained, takes away the savor of whatsoever honor is
already gotten. Hence it plainly appears, that there is in it little
substance or solid satisfaction, since that pleases most, which we have not,
that little, and left which we have.

CHAP. IIII. Of pleasures and riches, that they are not Man's happiness.
But if neglecting honor, we look on pleasures, to find happiness in them;
How do pleasures die in inioying? Their end deuoureth their beginning: their
backside is more loathsome then their face is pleasant. They that are past, have
not satisfide; they that are to come, will be but the same, and shall not
satisfy. There is nothing left of the former, neither shall there be of the
latter, but all are bounded within one and the same vanity. Again, pleasures
never stand still, but while they be, they be lessening and going to nothing.
Therefore of laughter it may be said, Thou art mad, and of pleasure, What is
it that thou do? And surely, if we could obtain a continued course of
pleasures, through the race of a whole life, yet this only or chiefly concerns
the body, but the soul has no object the whiles to give her any full pleasure
or delight. As the body tastes not spiritual joys, so the soul tastes not
bodily pleasures. Yea carnal pleasures have this venom ordinarily in them,
that their height grows, or continues, by the diminishing or suppression of
the reasonable soul; and commonly the excellent soul is used but as a slave
to supply the lusts of the body with base satisfaction, whiles her self goes
away without any wages of pleasure or advantage; yea, she groans under the
burden of so vile a bondage; then especially sinking, suffering, and retyring,
when the body enioyes his chiefest pleasures. But if sober toward pleasures,
we yet stand in reverence of profit, after which the greatest part of the
world runs a whoring; let us turn our eyes from Multitude unto Truth, which
usually by Multitude is most forsaken. There is a sure saying, that a competent
portion, fit to defend us from hunger and nakedness (that is, a measure able
to serve and satisfy our natural uses) has attained the fullness of the
substantial goodness thereof. We are trauayling through this world to death; if
we have enough to bear our necessary charges by the way, how is not
superfluity rather a burden then a comfort to a trauayler? whatsoever is
beyond our use, we can but behold with our eyes, or put a vain confidence in
it, which often has deceived those that trusted in it; for even that which
they have put their trust in, has been the same thing that has betrayed them.
Therefore it is fit that care and fear (as commonly they do) should accompany
Abundance, as well as Pride and Confidence. And if so, then what a motley and
minggled happiness arises from a doubtful and careful superfluity? And
surely, very commonly and very justly the owners of this excess, are called
miserable. For, besides that it often delivers them up into the hands of
misery, it makes them most wretched in themselves, because most wretched to
themselves. There is a beastly kindred between the heart of man and money, and
this kindred begets such a love, that the heart will go near to starve it
self before it will part from its most beloved object. Yea, money begets the
love of money, and stirs up the affection in such a vehemency toward it, that
pos session does inflame the desire, and not satisfy it. Now what can give
rest to such a miserable Soul? when obtaining, which in other things gives
some (though short) satisfaction, yet to this man it gives new appetite,
farther motion, and a longer business? yet this abundance thus brought forth by
the Mid-wiferie of torment and perplexity, many times flies away like an Eagle
by the following generations, Folly or Luxury; and this certainly is a great
vanity and wretchedness of riches, that they are so often left to a foolish
son, who is less kin to a true wise man, then an honest stranger; that
sometimes they are left to a son, that is no son, and sometimes left, and
there is not a second to enjoy them. Howsoever, left they must be, even all
things wherein thou have showed thy self wise and industrious, and that to some
who labored not in them, to some whom thou know not, after two or three
generations; and therefore know not, whether they shall be wise or foolish,
whether they shall perform thy purposes and desires with thy substance; yea,
whether they shall turn it into the price of a Whore or a Dog, which both
are an abomination in the sight of Wisdom. But if riches might escape all
this succeeding misery; yet is not the present possessor of them happy. The
common misery of man lays claim to all, and will not be bought out by
Riches. Therefore the Rich man shall meet with crosses, and losses, in friends
or estate; he shall be sick in mind, and sick in body, yea fullness it self
shall make him sick in both. And if he might escape all this, yet riches,
which are the Servants of his body, cannot make his soul happy, which is better
then the body: for far be it from the soul to find her happiness in her
servants servant; especially such a fugitive vagabond and uncertain servant.
These massy and gross riches are too course an object, for a pure and
spiritual Essence; they carry no likeness or proportion unto it, and
therefore can give the soul no addition of her natural pleasure or profit,
much less of her perfect happiness, wherein she must have a part, so far
greater then the body, as she is more excellent then it.

CHAP. V. Of Knowledge.
BUT some moral Wizzard will tell me, that Knowledge has some high
privilege above Misery, and such a one as can give Happiness to this (in
spite of it) unhappy life. Indeed, knowledge is a dim light, which is better
then very darkness. It has an excellency, as dawning above night, but though
it be better, it is not that chief good which can make us happy. It may
indeed be used as an instrument for the discovery of happiness, though
seldom it be put to that use. But in it self neither in any thing created
shall it ever be able to discover it. Yea rather it shall find in it self and
in all things of this world, many imperfections, and faylings of those just
conditions, absolutely necessary to be found in Man's soueraign good. Our
knowledge is but of a short reach; the things beyond it, are infinitely more
then the things on this side of it. Therefore when knowledge is come to a
supposed perfection, a special quality of it is, to know it self to be
imperfect: even those things which are within the compass of it, it searches
by piece-meale, part after part, as one that reads a great Volume in the dark
with a Glowworm; which shows him but letter after letter: so a great deal of
trouble goes to a very little profit. Hence are our Sciences, but many littles
pieced together while the great body of truth and wisdom stands beyond our
sight; and by the incomprehensiblenesse thereof accuses our knowledge, even to
it self, of weakness, as the glory of the Sun does our eyes, by dazeling
them. And this magnified little knowledge which we have, what extraordinary
va^tage does it bring unto Man? Surely, it often bestows vexation on the
owners of it, and by increasing, increases sorrow; for to the greatest
knowledge, the vanity and misery of man does present it self in a most full
appearance; yea, great knowledges usually take up aforehand evils to come, and
make them present. Hence it is that many learned Philosophers have vexed their
lives with the consideration of their deaths, which many ignorant and sturdy
Clowns without premeditation have undertaken, with more ease, as missing the
troubles of anticipation; and have dispatched with less business and
wrestling, as being hoodwinked with a blind contentment, to do as their
fathers have done before them. For this cause also some of our greatest knowers
have winked against knowledge, and have desired that ignorance should coozen
them of their griefs, to which knowledge would continually and lowdly awake
them. Surely, when the knowledge of man has discovered throughout this frame
of the world, an excellent wisdom and order, when it sees that there is an
excellent beauty in the face of Goodness, yea, some excellence in knowledge
it self; how, must not this needs torment the heart of the knower, while the
same knowledge sees also the actions of mankind to run so madly and
confusedly, whiles it sees Justice, or at least Power, treading upon the face
of goodness, and exalting wickedness, while it sees an vndistinguishing
chance to come unto all; and finally, while knowledge sees knowledge despised,
and yet not able to help it self, not any of those evils which it sees.
Certainly these things are a vexation of mind to the men of knowledge, and
make them loathe the works that are wrought under the Sun, even to hate life
it self. And as this misery comes of knowledge being gotten, so even the
getting of knowledge is it self a misery; for usually it is acquired by two
means. The one is a vehement and continual labor of the mind, which takes
up one half of the life, to instruct the other half; yea, many times
knowledge is a funeral garment, all the life in working, and worn but the last
journey to the grave. A second means, is an extraordinary instrument of the
soul, which is called the dry beam; by which the soul sees most clearly
and swiftly, and will dicourse out of a present apprehension, as soundly as
some will do by much study and premeditation: but we must know that in this
case, the window of the soul is usually enlarged by the flaw of the body, and
the body and mind do often suffer some indisposition, when these beams of
the soul are ouer-actiue. Hence may we truly guess, that such greatness of
wit has commonly to accompany it some touch of madness or sickness. And
now, that we may give a conclusion to the poor knowledge of man, as before it
was convinced to be a spy for grief, while it beholds the confusion, misery,
and vanity of this world: so may we truly say, that it can never be an
Intelligencer of happiness, while it suruaies the beauty and glory of this
world, and sends us news of them alone. For among the varieties of this worlds
best and most excellent parts, knowledge can never find any object worthy of
the soul of man; nothing that may give it the true happiness of a soul, nor
any thing that may lift up man above misery, there to give him a rest of
safety and perpetuity, yea, much rather it sees the soul made a drudge to
the body, and trudging in the errands of corruption, wickedness and vanity;
and if sometimes she delight her self in her own light, that light is but as
the shooting of a star, for man eft-soones falls down into his old station of
grosnesse and misery. And though sometimes it gives a man some ease in lesser
evils and troubles, yet is knowledge it self usually astonished with sudden
encounters, even in little matters, and commonly ouerborne with mighty
tempests of greatly-sensible evils. Therefore we may conclude, that knowledge
rather shows man that he is ill, then makes him to be well, and it seems
that some great knowledge has subjected man to an irresistable revolution of
misery, from which all lesser knowledges can never free him, without the help
of the greater.

CHAP. VI. The universal vanity of the World.
But if in all this, I had said nothing, but that still in spite of all that
has been said, these and the like masterpieces of the world, would of force
bestow some happiness on Man, yet herein I cannot choose but to say something;
that is, when deadly sickness, either casual or natural, comes upon us;
When the grinders are weak, the keepers tremble, and the lookers out by the
windows, yea by the windows of the soul, grow dark; What can honor, riches,
pleasures or knowledge then confer unto Man thus buried in himself, and
incapable of any outward comfort? upon this consideration, that old Man did
wisely, who refused the pleasures of the Court, being invited to them; because
his ear did no longer taste the sweetness of Music, nor his palate did any
longer relish the sauourinesse of meat. The gates of Man are shut up, by
which the trade between the Soul and the World, does pass to and fro, and
therefore Man cannot traffic any longer with his old customers of this outward
and visible world. But now the dregs of life are come to the spending, wherein
thou shall confess that there is nothing but labor and sorrow. And if yet I
had in this said Nothing, because some Philosophers invented a way to prevent
this misery, by ridding themselves of themselves, yet this must needs be
something, that Death, the thaw of all cold and frozen comforts, dissolueth
both thee and all thy imaginary felicities into nothing, even into that which
such felicities do nothing concern. Surely, whatsoever titles thou have
inioyed, whatsoever pleasures thou have tasted, whatsoever riches thou have
possessed, whatsoever plots or inventions thou have co^triued or conceived,
Death cuts them wholly from thee, or thee from them; there is no more relation
between you, neither do they any longer concern thee. Therefore in regard of
all outward things, has there been a just out-crie: What remains to Man of
all his works under the Sun? The dust of Man has no feeling nor knowledge of
the things of this life; neither those things which have been nor those which
are. Death has digested all man's works and concernments into vanity; whether
he has been poor or rich, wise or foolish, sad or merry. Yea, death is
most terrible to them commonly, who have most sought a happiness in the things
of this life, and seems to be revenged on them for this their folly and
error. Therefore are the miserable and wretched most familiar with Death, and
take most pleasure in it, for which reason they may seem to be happyer then
the others. For, if present ease and pleasure sweeten all former grief and
bitterness, but present grief and bitterness does give a distaste to al
former pleasures; then these to whom ease and pleasure are present in the last
place, have a recompense and counterpoise to their sorrows: and they to whom
grief and vexation are last of all present, feel an extinguishment of their
former pleasures: and hence it seems the miserable go hence in some degree of
happiness, the voluptuous in a great degree of wretchedness. Howsoever, be
what thou will, O worldling, do what thou will, thou shall go into emptiness
and vanity thou and thy thoughts shall perish, and (...) remaynes of thee in
the world, shall be of an equal condition to that mould wherein it is enclosed;
and the world shall conserve thy dust no more then it does thy fellowdust,
which lies next unto thee.

CHAP. VII. What remaynes of necessity to be the happiness of Man.
NOw, the world being thus shut up and bounded with vanity, there remaynes
only that highest Essence, the Cause and Fountain of all things, in whom Man
may seek his happiness, Man is enforced to clime up above this world of
vanity, to reach his true felicity. His soul must set up the ladder of
contemplation, and thereon she must ascend up to her Maker, to seek in him a
remedy of her misery, an object of blessedness, of perpetuity. And surely,
whither can she more fitly repair, then to the Source of her being, there to
receive a reparation of herill being, and an eternity of well being? For he
that made Man, is in all probability most able to amend Man when he is mard,
yea, there is none, but he, can do it. Again, God being the Father of Spirits,
what can more rejoice them then their Father and Fountain, by continual
supplies of life and joy? Now, that God is a most blessed Spirit the true
beatificall object of Spirits blessed, his supremitie in Excellence, wisdom,
and power, do strongly persuade: and first for excellence, even in our vulgar
estimation, gross things are base things, and purity is accounted
excellency. Glass is preferred before Clay, and Cristall before Glass, and
the Diamond before Cristall. Among Men, the heavy and earthly minds are most
contemned, and they that are of the quickest and sharpest spirits, are held
most noble and generous: If then we will frame any conception of a transcendent
and uppermost excellency; we must also conceive a most absolute purity.
Therefore if God be most excellent, he is also most pure. Now what is to be
thought more pure then a glorious, single, vn-compounded Essence, such as a
Spirit is, and that Spirit most, which is the Cause, and Fountain, and Father
of Spirits? And no less does a spiritual Essence fit best with wisdom; For
wisdom being a most pure and piercing thing, which by the sharpness and
subtlety thereof can pierce into the most hidden and secret profundities, what
Essence fitteth wisdom better, then a pure, subtle, and piercing Essence,
such as is that of a Spirit? Wisdom is a light, and we find the higher any
thing is sublimated, and refined, and as it were unbodied, the more capable it
is of light. So Earth, which is a lump of darkness, by fire lifted up and
clarified into the pureness of Glass, becomes especially capable of light.
And surely, if we search but a little depth into wisdom: it will appear to our
understandings to be the child, conceiuement, and issue of a Spirit; even of a
clear, pure, and single essence, which in their models our own souls do
represent unto us, and teach by pattern. Thirdly, in regard of Power, as the
Creator of all things must excel al things in power; so Power has his
residence most fitly and especially in a Spirit. Accordingly we see in daily
experience, that the heavy and massy things are moved and commanded by things
vn-corporeall and unseen. The huge Sea is moved to and fro in her Tides, by an
invisible and vnbodily Power. There is no hand that touches it, no arm that
holds it back, or thrusts it forward. In living things, even those that
live but a growing life, the massy part is moved in growing by a power
unvisible and vnperceiuable. In Beasts, the purest and most incorporeall part
of them is that which moves, increases, and directs their grosnesse and
greatness. The Wind is a thing invisible and of a great thinness and
subtlety. Yet in Earthquakes it tears Rocks asunder, and remoues Mountains;
in Tempests it brings the Sea upon the Land, and equals Towers with their own
foundations. Surely, Power is then most pure and absolute, when it is least
clogged with weight; and massines does lode it, rather then increase it. And as
it is of it self clear and vncorporeall, so it cannot but proceed from a
clear, and pure Essence, things ever proceeding from their like: and what
purer then a Spirit? And to shut up all in an experimental conclusion: We find
in our selves an excellent essence, intelligent, vn-corporeall, invisible,
vn-touchable, (which are the expressions of a Spirit) whereby many great works
are performed, and thereby give evident testimonies thereof. If therefore there
be such an essence in us, we may imagine the Creator to be purer then his
work, and therefore he must be more spiritual than we, or more then
spiritual, but cannot be less. But be that granted which we seek, that God
is a Spirit, most wise, most powerful, that can both free us from misery, and
give us the true and natural happiness of Spirits; What avails it us that
God is able to do it, except it be done? There must be a communication of
this ability unto Man else Man only knows where he might be happy, but
knows not that he shall be happy. And without this knowledge, the life of Man
is but a continual fear and bondage. Wherefore it concerns us to make a new
suruay of all Nations and all Doctrines of happiness, inquiring among them,
whether any of them can tell us the glad tidings of a communion and intercourse
between God and Man. Let us diligently examine the universal Teachers of
knowledges, and ask whether there has been any act of the Creator, performed
for the reparation of miserable mankind, and the deliverance of him from this
prison of wretchedness and vanity, into the glorious liberty of blessed
Spirits. For my part (as every man is bounded with his own knowledge) I have
heard or read of one alone; and that is so fully medicinable to Man's misery,
so fully sufficient to give Man perfect felicity; That this is the very
doctrine of happiness, or else Man must still remain a sensual, wretched, and
unprofitable creature, which to say, were a blasphemy against the wisdom of
creation. In this doctrine is God discovered to be the repayrer of his own
fallen creature. And the remedy is every way equal, yea, preualent to the
disease, so that it well becomes the highest God to be the Author thereof.
And though the manner of it be not fetched from man's vainglorious
imaginations, nor grounded upon Nature (GOD being able equally to be an
immediate Father of Man's reparation, as of his creation of grace as of nature)
yet contains this doctrine no unreasonable contrarieties, or repugnances, but
only things high above common reason, such as well befit a Deity, higher by
far then his own creature. And notwithstanding this height, yet they that
duly converse in this doctrine, and by meditation enter into the mystery
thereof, they, I say, shall find an excellent harmony and correspondence
between it and Man's present estate, and between all the parts of it self. For
the sore of Man is so justly covered with an answerable plaster: That it must
needs be confessed, that he who framed the remedy, must be he alone that
knows the secrets of the heart, even the depth and root of our malady.
Philosophy has endeavored to cure the Gangrene of Man's corruption, by cutting
off the very parts corrupted, which must be upon the matter, by cutting off
Man from himself, as indeed some have done, by leaving him as a mere trunk
without feeling, and without affection. But this doctrine leaves the parts
whole, but mainly opposes the corruption, it leaves man to be as much a man as
he was, but only it so purges him, that he is not so much evil, nor so much
miserable as he was; yea, that at length he shall be neither evil nor
miserable. And this is so strongly sealed into the heart of Man, that it leaves
an evident proof of a divine power, accompanying and justifying it. For none
but the Creator can pierce into the heart of man, and bind his will and
affections, even against his will and affections, with such powerful and
mighty chains, that neither the wit of Man, which has been fruitful in
inventions of torment, nor the power of Emperors, which has ruined mighty
Kingdoms, could change or alter them.

Concerning this Art of Arts, what I have received, I purpose to deliver to
others, through his help, who is the Author thereof: and surely, this
knowledge is only worthy of a man; other knowledges, except they serve this,
they are but weariness and vanity: for man is as miserable, and sometimes
more, when he has gotten their perfections, as when he entered into their
beginnings. And becauseit gives a great light to Man's reparation, to know how
he came to have need of it, and because it concerns the glory of the
Creator, to show that at first he created not misery and corruption: Therefore
most fitly does this Doctrine begin with the first estate of man, and the
loss thereof, even a created perfection, and a purchased corruption; A
learning, which all Philosophy could never reach. For she is the child of man,
and therefore cannot tell the beginning of her own Father. For man was before
she was, yea man was lost, before she was found: and so she which was since
corruption, cannot tell how that corruption came which was before her, much
less can she speak of that perfection which was again before this
corruption. But the truth is, bad she finds us, and not knowing the cause, she
can never find the cure; and therefore as she found us, so she leaves us
miserable.

THE ART OF HAPPINESS. The second Part. Which particularly sets forth the
happiness of Man, and the restoring of it when it was lost.
CHAP. I. Of the Creator and the Creation, and the purpose of the Creator in
the Creation.
THe Creator is the beginning of all things, and therefore must he needs be
without beginning. For from the things which have their beginning of him, him
self cannot take beginning, neither can he be his own beginning, for that
were to say, he was before he was. But God is an eternal Essence, that by
himself vpholdeth himself, and all things else. For all other things have no
being of their own, but they borrow their being from him; and in him is their
foundation: and for this cause may he alone rightly, because alone originally,
say, I am. And as he is the fountain and beginning from which all things flow,
so is he the end to which all things return; either by their own wills
conformed to his will, or by the ouer-ruling of his power, which subdueth the
unwilling to his will. And thus must it needs be; for the Creator is his own
end in his Creation, and does all things for himself. If we allow not a
Creator, we confess no Author of the things we see; but either we make them
Eternal, which is to make meaner gods, and to deny the more excellent, or we
frame some imagination of our own to be their beginning which shall never fit
with them so well, as a wise, powerful, and eternal Spirit; and lastly, we
rob man's soul of a true rest and happiness. For if the Spirit of man had not
some sovereign Spirit, to give it eternal Bliss, then were miserable man
shut up unto this present life, as unto his sovereign good, into which a wise
and good man would never reenter, if he were once well discharged of it. Let us
then seek a GOD higher then these visible things, and a happiness higher then
these miserable things; and let us not reason with the brutish Sensualists; He
is not a God whom we cannot see with our eyes; but let us say with the Souls
enlightened; He is fittest to be a God, whose pureness does excel the gross
capacity of bodily senses. For the purer the Essence is, the more fit to be a
God, and the more pure, the more invisible to a gross and carnal sight. Let
us therefore believe the Creator to be a most clear, lightsome, and glorious
Spirit, and to be seen only by Spirits and bodies, sublimated into a
spiritual kind of being.

This glorious and eternal Spirit, manifests himself to our apprehensions
in three Persons, the print and impression of each person being found in every
creature, and there being an absolute necessity, that every one of the three
should concur in all Creation. The first, in order of Consideration, though
there be no first in order of Time, is the great and infinite Mind or
Understanding, which begets a great Wisdom, Thought, or Word; even the first
and radical Light, the almighty Begetter of the second Light; and this person
is called GOD the Father. The second, is the begotten and second Light; even
the Wisdom and Conceiuement of the mind or understanding; an Image and issue
thereof, and this person is called GOD the Son. The third, is the Virtue and
Power, which breaths or flows from the God head, whereby GOD loves and
inioyeth himself, and puts in execution whatsoever he will have done for
himself, and this person is called GOD the holy Ghost. These three are one
God, and do so necessarily join in every Creation, that without any one of
them nothing can be created. For how can there be any Creation, but that the
Mind or Father must beget a wise purpose, by Wisdom his Son, and what he
has purposed and proiected by the Son, he must effect by the power of the
holy Ghost?

Accordingly, this God, who is the end of himself for himself intended, and
brought forth a Creation. To himself he would have glory, and to his Creature
happiness; yea, this happiness of the Creature, should be by the glory of the
Creator: so in the glorifying of God, should Men and Angels be glorified. But
on the contrary, they that would not give glory to God, should not have
happiness to themselves; yet, though unwillingly, shall they glorify him by
serving his Justice in misery, who would not serve his Goodness in felicity.
To effect this in six days, God made this great mass of Creatures, called the
World, which he fitted for the service of Man, and Man for the service of his
GOD. Now, as this great Frame came from this one God, so the infinite
disagreeings of several parts reconciled to an Unity, point to some great
unity as the Cause of this reconciliation, which can deserve to be called by
no other name, then by a supreme and sovereign Name, and such a Name is God.
Again, the infinite diversity of Forms, and that large heap of Matter,
neither of which were before, and of which it is alike easy to the Creator,
to make Matter as Forms, direct our eyes to some great Wisdom and Power, which
could both invent and produce them. Yea more nearly, the drops and streams of
wisdom powered into the Creatures in their several instincts, and into Man
with his soul plainly confess, that there is some Spring of infinite wisdom
from which these Riuolets might flow, and some infinite power which could
actuate them into the Creatures. And if so, then necessarily must we also
allow some pure and infinite Essence, wherein this infinite. Wisdom and Power
might dwell, which purity chiefly excels in a Spirit, and to such a Spirit
can agree no other, but the highest Name of God. Thus the things sealed,
bearing the Image of the seal, teach us the seal; even these visible
Creatures, bearing the impression of the Deity, represent to us the same
Deity, as their Cause and Beginning, and in their dumb language they preach
unto us their original.

The world thus trimmed up with the variety of innumerable things, both for
use and ornament, as a royal Palace for some great Prince, man (though now a
contemptible and wretched thing) was then thought a fit Owner and Commander of
so glorious a Creation. And this not without order; for though by his body, he
was of kin to the Earth, yet his soul was of kin to the Deity; being a Spirit
breathed into man by the Father of Spirits. So Glory and Humility were
married together in man at his first Creation; the issues whereof should still
be continued; even apprehensions of an excellent soul, to keep us from
sinking into the baseness of sensuality and earthinesse; and considerations
of a clay body, to stay us from mounting up in pride, and ascending into the
place of the most High.

And now even at the first beginning, God did make man know both what was the
baseness of man, and what was the happiness of man: he showed man that his
service was the business of man, yea, he showed him how he would be served.
For God planted in man a reasonable soul, in which was written an Image and
counter-pawne of the Deity, although not equal in degrees, yet like in
resemblance. Now, the reason of this soul could find, that a Creator creates
things for himself, and by whom things are, they are also for him. Therefore
man having his being from God, he is to return his being unto God. And if Man
would know the manner how to please and serve God; this very manner of his
creation will teach him. For the Creator was a Spirit himself, and he gave to
man a Spirit resembling him both in substance and faculty. The substance was
spiritual, and the faculty, an understanding and will. In the understanding
was a light, which could show unto man the will of God; and inform Man what
was right in Gods understanding. So was it a created revelation of the Law of
God, the sparks and pieces whereof serve at this day, both to inform and
accuse the natural man. Now upon the understanding thus informed, the will was
ready to attend; and upon the will, the affections, yea all the members, to
execute and perform the will of God certified to them by the understanding.
Now there being such an aptness and ability of conformity between God and
Man, and all things being delighted with harmony and conformity, especially
that purest Essence which is vanity it self; surely, it cannot be imagined,
but the chiefest pleasure and service most acceptable to the Creator, was, when
these lower and lesser spirits did carry themselves, and the bodies which they
ruled in a perpetual consent and conformity to that great Spirit which made
them. And as Man's workma^ship did thus show him his work, so did it also his
happiness. Toward the discovery hereof, let us set down these rules. First,
the most excellent happiness of Man must be the happiness of Man's most
excellent part. Secondly, Man's chiefest part being a Spirit, the object of his
happiness must be a Spirit; Spirits enjoying Spirits, as Bodies do Bodies, and
chiefly the chiefest. Thirdly, this chiefest Spirit is not to be found among
the Creatures, but must only be the Creator; for the Creator must needs
exceed all the Spirits that issue from him, as the highest cause does his
inferior effects. And to this also conspireth this conception even of humane
reason, that in him must be the chiefest exaltation of Man's being, from whom
the being it self did first proceed. Yet neither does our merciful Father
leave this Truth without a witness, but by that great and reverend mystery of
the Sabbath, he tells us outwardly, what before he inwardly taught us; even
that God is our blessedness, and that holiness is the way to him. For God is
said to have created the world in six days, and to have rested, blessed, and
hallowed the seventh. Now God needed not six days to create a world, which he
can equally do in a moment. Neither needed he to rest the seventh day, for any
weariness gotten by Creation. But these things are of an higher meaning, and
include Doctrines more excellent, and so more agreeable to the nature and
dignity of God. God chose to make his work distinctly in six several days,
and in every day distinctly considered the work which that day he had made
and upon this distinct and several consideration, he pronounced this sentence
upon each days work, that the work of that day was good. Yet he says only
that it was good; he says not that it was goodness: it was good enough in
his kind for service, but not for happiness. But the seventh day he cease,
both from Creation and this consideration of the good Creatures; and
with-draweth himself into himself; He returns from without, to the
enjoying of himself and his own rest; and to the contemplation of this rest
inioyed; and there only he finds and pronounces to be perfect holiness,
and perfect blessedness. To make this known unto Man, God takes this Seventh
day, wherein he retired to his rest, and imprints on it the qualities of his
rest, holiness and blessedness; that the holiness and blessedness of that
day might be a pattern to us of the holiness and blessedness, which is in
God: that we reading therein the blessedness of God, might set our whole
hearts and desires thereon; and reading therein the holiness of God, might fit
our selves by holiness to his Holiness; which, as it is inseparable from
happiness in God, so must it be also in all that will see Good; for nothing
contrary or unlike to God, may approach unto him. Thus the Seventh day, crowned
by the employment of that day; and the other six days left unblessed, by the
works of those days, by a manifest difference point unto us, that the end and
happiness of Man, are not to be sought in the works of the six days, but in
the blessed Holiness and holy Blessedness of the Seventh. And to the same
truth the order of Creation does likewise inuit us. For, all Creatures being
first made; Man was made after Creatures, and so set before them as their end,
to whom they should look, and whom they should serve. But Man being thus
placed as the end of the Creatures, in this great mystery of the Sabbath,
solemnized after Man's creation, God and his blessed Rest is set before Man, as
the end and happiness of Man. So as Man is set before the face of the
Creatures, so is God in the Sabbath set before the face of Man. The Creatures
should look to Man, and Man should look to God; Man must turn his back to
the Creatures, and his face toward God. The Creatures must serve and follow
Man, and Man must serve and follow God. And when God is served in holiness,
then shall he be inioyed in happiness; when God is proposed as the end of Man's
being, then shall God be inioyed as the end of Man's desire.

CHAP. II. How Man fell from happiness into misery.
MAN being thus created; with his duty and happiness written in him, and set
before him; his business was by walking in the duty, to walk toward the
happiness. To do this, he was to look unto God as the rule of his obedience (of
whom also that little Image, which he carried about him, was a representation)
and upon the same God as the consummation of his felicity. In sum, he was to
walk with God unto God; and having pleased God in this world, he was to enjoy
the pleasures at the right hand of God in the world above. And now, as Man was
to see in God, both what was good to be done, and what was good to be desired,
so also was he to see by God what was the evil to be left undone, and the
evil to be lothed in regard of suffering. For, the same rule which shows us
rightnes, serves also to find out crookedness. And accordingly as the Will of
GOD was the rule of that which was good and righteous, and the goodness of God
was Man's good and happiness; so on the contrary, what was against Gods will,
was the evil of unrighteousness, or what was separated from Gods goodness,
or had an influence contrary to it, was the evil of misery. Thus was Man set
with his countenance toward God, to behold him as the highest mark and aim to
whom he should fit his actions and affections. Yea, God and Man looked each on
other; God to Man, for the service of love: Man to God, for holiness and
happiness.

And now, because this most wise Creator knew, that a Creature, like a stream,
must have continuance from the same spring, from which it took beginning, and
that the same hand must support him from falling, which made him able to stand;
he gave unto Man a Tree of Life; a most divine Sacrament; by the partaking
whereof, he might have truly eaten of that Word of God, by whom Man was first
made, and who only is Life, and is even now the Tree of Life in the Paradise
which is above. In this Word is the Life and Light of Men, and by the partaking
of Him, Man may continue in the Life and Light received from Him. And if ADAM
would have eaten of this Tree, he might have been established in the state of
righteousness and happiness.

But that it might be in the choice of Man to choose Life or Death, there was
also set before him a Tree of death, a Tree to which was annexed this curse,
That at what time soever Man eats thereof, he shall die the death. And great
reason there was, that the Eater thereof should die, for it had a quality
powered into it, or annexed unto it, to overthrow all that the Tree of Life
would have preserved. It carried with it a spiritual drunkenesse, that would so
captiuate the understanding, and turn about the will and affections, that they
should not look to God, as the rule of good and evil, to be done or undone;
nor to the same God, as the rule of that good and evil, which is happiness and
misery.

But this new fruit will teach Man to know good and evil, after a new fashion.
For from the venom thereof there issues a blind lust and concupiscence, which
blotteth out the Image of God in the soul, by which we once looked unto God.
And this lust sits it self as God in this Temple of God. When this fruit is
eaten, the understanding, will, and affections, are to be managed by lust; yea,
even the whole soul and body of man, and that must be good or evil which
lust approoueth or disliketh. God must be no longer the happiness of man,
neither the absence or opposition of God, the misery of man; God must be no
longer the pattern of Man's obedience, neither shall man care to walk with God
unto God, nor to decline from the evil of suffering, by declining from the
evil of doing. But lust that bestrideth the soul and body, frames up new
happiness and new misery, even new good and evil, to which the actions of
Man must be wholly leuelled, even to avoid the evil, and to obtain the good.
And this must be done with such authority, that the preciseness of the former
course, which fitted all actions to the rule of righteousness, being trodden
under foot, as carrying with it a scrupulous baseness; these actions shall
now only, and seriously be^e judged Good or Evil, which are apprehended and
proposed by Lust. Let the things supposed good by this fleshly wisdom, be
never so empty of goodness; yea the certain means of misery, yet if this
knowledge know them to be good, and persuade the will and affections to embrace
them as good, Man must mightily employ himself for the attayning of them.
Accordingly, if this new knowledge tell us that worshipping of stocks, murder,
yea misery it self is good, we are bound to believe it, yea to run over
the whole Country, and sometimes out of the Country, for the attayning and
execution of such apprehensions of Good and Evil. Neither does this hold only
in some men of extrauagant humors, but it appears since the eating of this
fruit, to be a general fruit of that eating. For generally mankind is in
bondage to this sensual wisdom, and generally the lives of men are framed
and leuelled thereby, and commonly in the course of every natural man, we shall
find some one thing especially proposed as his chief good and happiness; the
contrary whereof is his chief evil and misery; neither of which are such, as
they be esteemed. Yea, the sway of this knowledge is so mighty, that in many
plain and evident causes of good and evil, the poor ruins of reason, even
the broken remnants of Gods Image in the soul, are put out of countenance, and
are ashamed to give up their verdict; wherefore, many times, by men of
understanding, for fear or flattery, evil is called good, and good, evil.
There are honorable Miseries, which Reason plainly sees to be miseries, yet
in the Court it is ashamed to call them so. There are also glorious Murders,
which Reason knows to be very butcheries, yet among the lusty sons of this
lustful wisdom, it is ashamed to say so. There is a supposall of a God head,
or divine power, to dwell in a piece of wood or metal, and this, Reason sees
to be vanity, yet in some countries, Kings bow to such imaginations, and the
Subjects must do the same; else for want of bowing, they shall be brought to
breaking. As in these, so in infinite other things appears man's mistaking of
good and evil, even the good of righteousness and happiness; and the evil
of wickedness and misery yea, in those very instincts, which are left as the
principal guides of natural men, and by which their state is continued and
preserved (and if such had not been left, mankind being yielded up to the
guiding of his natural corruption, must needs have decayed and destroyed it
self) even these instincts are exceedingly tainted by this knowledge of good
and evil. Natural instinct tells Man, that by Woman, succession is preserved,
and natural help maintained, and that she that is thine, is thy self; Lust
comes in with his doctrines often, and says, Love one that thou have not, for
the good of variety, and it is evil and fulsome to love but one, though she
be thine own flesh. Natural instinct tells us, it is good to love our
children, and best, the best. Lust comes in many times and tells us, It is good
to love them better then our selves; to wrong our selves and others, to
increase them, and sometimes to love that child best that deserves worst. Yea,
sometimes on the contrary it tells us, that it is foolish and evil to debar
our selves from any excess or vanity, for their sakes, and then the
carelessness is as bad as the care was before. Natural instinct tells us,
there must be an order among men for their preservation, that some must be the
heads and keepers of this order Hence arises the necessity of Kings and
States. Fleshly wisdom comes in, and tells many Kings, they must rule men for
their own pleasures, and to satisfy their own sensual desires. And the same
wisdom tells many Subjects, Why should ye be subject to one of your kind?
and if so, why not others to you, as well as you to others? Thus is the new
knowledge of good and evil, like a Byas to the soul, and makes it run awry,
both in regard of probitie and felicity. And surely, the Philosophers troubled
themselves much with the discovery of such a disease, but neither knew whence
it came, nor how to rid it away. Indeed they plodded for remedies, and to that
purpose wrote of the ends of good and evil, and framed their Distinctions of
seeming good and evil, and true good and evil. One of these prophets cries
out, There is no evil, but what thou think to be evil; and another says,
Every man's lust is his guide; and another, Every man's lust is his god. But
while they groped in the dark, the day star is risen upon us, and has
discovered to us, by the light thereof, the true root of Man's corruption, and
how they first went out of the right path of the true knowledge of good and
evil, into the infinite bypaths of a knowledge deceived, and deceiving.

Thus these two trees of Life and Death, being subject to the choice of man,
this choice and power of Free Will, which in it self is an excellent
privilege, yet to a solitary and vnsupported creature, it easily becomes a
door unto misery. For while man is left to Free Will, he is left to himself,
and himself is but a Creature, and a Creature may be circumuented by another
Creature, that exceeds it both in cunning and power. This knew well those
fallen and corrupted Creatures, the evil and depraved angels, who being
subtle, and powerful in knowledge, and withal malicious against happiness,
because themselves were miserable, employed their cunning and power, to the
seducing of inferior man; inferior, because a Spirit clothed and vayled with
Dust.

The way which they chose, was by conference; wherein they made use of a
visible Creature; and the ground of their conference was, to bring Man into
jealousy of God. Their drift was to persuade Man, that the Tree which was
forbidden to Man, was denied out of an envy of man's preferment; for there was
in that Tree (say they) such a supereminent knowledge, that it could equal Man
with God, and make Man to become a god unto himself. And lest fear should be
an hinderance to credulity, the death which was threatened to follow, was
utterly denied. Miserable man besieged with so strong a temptation! for what
resistance has Man against such a temptation, but a firm belief in the words
of his Creator? and the same temptation brings the Creator into suspicion;
that his Word may be thought rather to forbid preferment, then sin and
misery.

Accordingly, GOD is vnbeleeued; the Tempter is trusted; the hand is reached
out; and the fruit of misery is devoured. The eating is most wicked, and the
digestion most wretched; Lust as the juice of this fruit, enters into the
soul and body of Man; it obtains a conquest over the parts and powers of the
Eaters; and taynteth them with a fleshly wisdom and a sensual knowledge Man
is become as a god, by being become a rule of good and evil to himself. His
happiness and misery must be taught him by his own heart, and his lust shall
be the Oracle and Guide of his life. And now the eyes of Man are opened; but
by a knowledge of apparances, not of truths; and accordingly, Nakedness, which
was the state of perfection, is censured as shameful; whereas Nakedness,
while Man was pure and glorious, was also glorious; for it did plainly and
manifestly set forth Man's purity and glory. But the new shame, for which
Nakedness is now blamed, is the shame of the new Lust; which was not caused by
Nakedness, but only discovered; Nakedness excellently became glory, for glory
is the more glorious by being manifest and evident; but shame becomes shameful
by it, and publishes it self thereby to its own disgrace. But this is the
fault of shameful Lust, to come into Nakedness, which is the habit of glory;
and not (as Man foolishly in his new wisdom complained) the fault of
Nakedness, to discover the shame of Lust; which by wrongful intrusion entered
into it, and showed it self shameful by that, which was appointed to show
forth Man's perfection in glory. And as in this, so in Man's whole course does
this erroneous knowledge prevail; and no marvel; for the body was first
guided by the soul, and the soul by the Image of God, yea by God himself:
But now this lustful knowledge guides the body, and the body, for the most
part, tuneth and guides the soul. Thus the Image of God, in Man, is reuersed
and defaced. He answers not, he looks not any longer to God; he neither
loves him, neither is loved of him. Man is become a stranger to God, and God
to Man; and hence it comes, that there is at this day such a multitude of
foolish children, that know not their own Father and Creator.

Man being thus cut off from God his end, and become his own God and end; he
is abased, deformed, and wholly overthrown by his new preferment: He left his
true end and happiness, when he would not bound himself within the
happiness of a Creature; but striving after the happiness of a Creator, he
lost both what he would have, and what before he might have. And now God and
the Law of God being taken out of Man's heart, and a false god with a new law
placed in their stead; what shall become of such a wicked and corrupted thing?
Can a Creator quietly see himself robbed of his creature? Can he without
indignation and jealousy behold an Idol set up in his room? or can he
contentedly look on Pollution, sitting on the face of that soul, wherein
before with pleasure he beheld his own resemblance? No; but much rather it is
fit, that a Creature thus running away from his Maker, should be branded with a
curse for a Vagabond; that the new pride and godhead of the flesh should be
battered and abased; that this wry and false estate of Man should have no long
continuance, but that this stolen and corrupt happiness should soon be
dissolved by real misery. Accordingly, God calls his sinful Creatures to an
account, and having convicted them by a confession of their own, extorted from
them, by necessary and infallible consequences of transgression, on the Woman
he imposes a yoke of subjection, even to be subject to the Husband, whom she
tempted to sin. He also fastneth unto her such an heavy pain of
childbirth, that to this day it witnesses of it self, that it is the stroke
of an offended Deity. Surely, as the bitter fruit of Lust, it punishes the
fault of his own root; and it is most justly tied to the Generation, to which
Man's fall had before tied Pollution. But neither may the Man pass away safe
with his new purchase of false happiness, but the swelling of his pride must
be pricked and vented. Though the Woman gave him the fruit, it was not the
giving, but the eating that defiled him. Therefore to Man is the earth cursed,
that it shall not traffike her fruit, but for the sweat of his brows. The new
godhead is taken down; for it must either starve or labor; and he, who might
have been served by a voluntary contribution of the Creatures, and might have
been next unto God over them; now by stepping up into Gods place, is cast into
a slavery unto the Creatures, and his life is a continual seeking of them.
This great Earth has a great curse of barrenness, or a barren fruitfulnes of
thorns and briars: yea, from the little Earth, which is man, shall spring the
thorns of cares, the briars of fears and sorrows, which prick and tear,
and torment the heart that bears them. The brute Creatures being freed from
their natural allegiance, shall henceforth yield unto Man an obedience forced
or artificial. The enmity of the wicked angels shall continually persecute
the mankind, which they have deceived. And finally, Man being driven from the
divine Sacrament of the Tree of Life, his body shall be subject to infirmity
and diseases, and at last by death shall melt into dust, from whence it was
taken; and his soul now darkened with Concupiscence, shall be driven into the
darkness of the absence and wrath of God, which is the second and most fearful
death. Thus is vengeance taken on disobedience; thus is the new pride crushed
and taken down; the false gods being turned into most miserable men, and true
misery being applied as a corrosiue to false felicity. Man shall not much
enjoy his iniquity, for it is either turned into bitterness or vanity; it
shall not please or it shall not last; but the misery following it, shall last
for ever. Man is wholly deceived by the Tempter. God, who is lost, is Man's true
happiness; and the outward and worldly objects, which Lust turns into Idols
and false gods in the heart of Man, are by God turned into cursednes. And this
curse is so fastened, that if Man go about to repair it, himself shall be
swallowed of it, and become a prey to that which he would have destroyed. For
Man is taken and enclosed with the wrath of the Almighty, as a wild Bull in a
net or toil; and wrestling cannot free him, it may more entangle him.

And now assemble your selves together, all ye Philosophers and Wizzards, and
behold Man thus dressed up in corruption and misery, and heal him, if you
have any Medicine equivalent to his Disease. The truth is, you have taken great
pains to make something of this wretched Nothing, called Man: you would feign
have restored him to the use of reason, the ancient Image of his Maker. You
would have fitted an happiness for him, as Virtue, Pleasure, or some such
fantasy and imagination. And that Man might the more heartily apply himself
to your devised happiness, and sovereign good, by obscure gropings, you have
discovered in Man, a deceitful knowledge of good and evil, and from this you
would have freed him, by showing him what was truly good and truly evil. But
the whiles ye are all miserable comforters, and all Phisicians of no value.
Man is really cursed, and he cannot be verbally healed. Be your words never so
sweet and sententious, yet Man is still corrupt, and cursed in his very ground
work and foundation: you have no fit expiation for a guilt of so high a
nature; neither have ye an expurgation of so foul a corruption. Indeed, your
charms may with their plesantnes bring man's corruption into short slumbers,
but it awaketh est-soones, and rages as before, yea it never cease a
continual opposition or auersion, from and against the Creator. Surely, the
root of this corruption lies fastened in the grounds of Nature, and Philosophy
cannot pull it up, but it must only be cured by the hand of the first Creator.
Therefore behold your folly; you put restoratiues, (and those not true but
fained) into the mouth of a dead man, and then ye set him on his feet, to see
whether he will stand or walk. But, lo, he is not raised above his wretched
being; in spite of your Spells, he falls down into his true Station of
vanity, misery, and death. The hand of a Giant has bound him, and the voice
of a child can never loose him.

CHAP. III. How Man is restored to happiness.
WHat shall then be done for this unhappy and wretched thing? we find no Balm
on earth, nor phisike among the sons of men. Misery has seized on this
world; and misery is far from being able to cure misery, neither may it be
both a disease and a medicine. What remains then, but that our eyes are
enforced to lift up themselves above the world, to seek a Savior, where they
found a Creator. The goodness and power of him which created, are only able
to restore; but how can thou expect goodness, O rebellious Man, of a God for
saken, disobeyed, and provoked to wrath? yea, if thou could hope against
hope, yet how may thou conceive that the decree of GODS Justice, concerning
thy death, shall be fulfilled, and yet death by thee should be avoided? Shall
God be true, then how can thou not die? Shall thou not die, then how is Gods
sentence to be fulfilled, which has pronounced that thou shall die? Surely,
thou could not think a remedy to be likely or possible: and therefore at
this day thy sons reject it, and put that out of their belief, which is out
of their imagination and invention. But God who is goodness, to a vessel of
deserved wrath, gave free and voluntary mercy. And God who is wisdom, to
Man blind-folded in misery, gave an unknown and unsearchable remedy. It was
beyond the hope of Man, it is above his reach, and so it well becomes it to be.
For far be it from Man with his shallow reach, to sound the bottom of the
incomprehensible Deity. Let him first understand the Creatures which are daily
before him, and stand as beams in his eye, and mockers of his poor and simple
understanding. These ride in triumph, as having conquered the wits of Man; and
still they dare them to come out of their dens of instincts, intelligences, and
hidden qualities, to encounter them, before they lift up weapons against their
Almighty Creator. But the whiles, let sober minds wonder rather that GOD
would give a remedy, then that he could give it; rather let them admire, that
his goodness would bestow his gifts on Traitors and Runnagates; and not that his
wisdom could devise what his goodness would have devised. When Man was dust,
this dust knew not how it might be made man. And when Man is corrupted, this
corrupt Man cannot conceive how he should be restored: yet let him with a
little cleerenesse behold this mystery of restoring, and he shall find it
exceeding suitable to every part of Man's misery; he shall find it agreeable
to a true Justice, a deep Wisdom, an infinite Power, a free Mercy, and an
exact Holiness.

This recovery of Man was thus bestowed on him; when none could save us; yea,
none could see how to be saved, God that made us, stretched out his hand to
save us, and in the curse of the Serpent bestowed blessedness on Man. In one
sentence GOD overthrew our Ouerthrower, and by his overthrow raised us. The
outward Serpent was doomed to eat, and walk on the dust whereof Man was; and
the inward Serpent to compass this world of dust wherein Man is, yea to nibble
and bite at the dust which is Man. But from this Man of dust, shall arise a
Son of glory, who shall crush the Serpent upon the head, and dissolve all
the works of the Devil. The Serpent may walk on this earth as a Prince of the
world; he may compass his Dominion to and fro; his malice may feed on the
souls and bodies of men, by tempting them to sins, and deuouting them with
persecutions; but at last this Eater shall become meat, even the food and
fuel of Justice; for, the Son of Man shall take him and bind him, and cast
him into utter darkness: And those men whom he would have devoured, but God
will have preserved, shall stand with the Son of Man to judge him; and being
delivered from him, shall jointly deliver him to eternal torment. Thus is there
a twofold Kingdom set up in this world; a Kingdom of darkness, of sin,
and of misery; and a Kingdom of light, of holiness, and of happiness: and
the King of the one, is the chief of evil spirits; and the King of the other,
is the chief of men, even the chief Son of Man. But how can the Son of
Man satisfy for Man, the infinite wrath, of God, for all mankind? How shall
he give stabilitie to mankind, which being once made pure, has once also
fallen? Finally, how shall this Son overcome the Dragon, who has already
overcome the Father of this Son? Surely, even for these works, is there
provided an all-sufficient means. The Man, who shall do this, God will join to
himself, and so whatsoever wants in the Manhood, shall be supplied by the
Godhead; the Treasury of power and perfection. The Word which made Man,
joins with Man to new make him. Man fell, standing by himself; but the
Godhead now does stably support him, and leads him by God unto God. And
because of this Union with an infinite Essence, the actions and passions of the
Manhood so united, are of an infinite value; able to satisfy for an infinite
number of sinners and sins, able to satisfy an infinite justice, able to
procure an infinite love. And as by the Godhead only the Manhood could
perform this, so by the Manhood the Godhead would perform it. For when Man
joined to God does overthrow him, who ouer-threw Man standing without God, then
the difference plainly appears between a creature alone, and a creature
joined to the Creator. Besides, by Man the end of Man is performed, even a
perfect and true obedience. Again, the Justice of God offended by Man, by Man
is satisfied, and that Word of Justice. When then eatest, thou shall dye.
Finally, by this means, Man becomes a Father of mankind in the state of
happiness, as Man was the father of mankind in the state of misery. And now
let the Greek by his Philosophical wisdom, scorn and contemn the
meannesse of a suffering Savior, and let the Jews with their ambition of
outward pomp, count a man of sorrow and humility too base a thing to set up a
Kingdom of glory; but the whiles the truly wise are forced to know and
confess, that there is most glory and power, where power works by
infirmity It becomes weak man, to seek for power to strengthen and abet him;
but it becomes best the Almighty to seek weakness, for the better
manifestation of his power. For God will have his glory evident and whole,
which is neither evident nor whole, by joining any thing that may share glory
with him, but that only which puts away all glory from it self unto God. It
is a piece of man's foolish wisdom, to adorn the Creator with the glory of
the Creature, but it is Gods most true and highest wisdom, to give light unto
darkness, power to weakness, glory to baseness. It is the glory of the Sun
to give light to the dark and vn-shining body of the Moon, but it were a
foolish glory for the Sun to borrow those inferior and bestowed beams of
the Moon, to deck himself withal in his progress. Let men therefore take
heed that they be not so wise, as to amend the most unmatchable pattern of a
Savior and Redeemer, since if they do so, their wisdom must needs be folly;
for they shall find that their amending will make worse, and they shall diminish
Gods honor, by the same means by which they think to increase it. But be it
the joy of our hearts, fixed and unremovable, that God has given us so full
and perfect a means of restoring us to our duty and felicity, and of freeing
us from corruption and misery. Turn we back our faces from our selves and
all things visible, and look we up unto God, leading us by God unto God, and
that by the service of Man united unto God. In this Man-God is the remedy of
all whereof we can complain, and the supply of all that we can desire. So is
he a Refuge from misery, a Fountain of goodness, the Way to felicity, yea
Felicity it self. The Manhood united to the Godhead, is the Door of
happiness, and the Godhead united to the Manhood, is Happiness it self. The
life which in Paradise might have been received from the Tree of Life, is now
to be received from that Manhood which is the Bread of Life: And he, in whom
is the Sabbath, will now lead us unto the Sabbath, which is in himself.

CHAP. IIII. The particular fitness of Man's restoring: How it freeth him from
misery, and in all points possesses him of happiness.
IT has appeared, how Man exchanged that which was his true felicity, but
seemed not to be so, for that which seemed to be true felicity, but was
indeed true misery. Now let us see again, how he can exchange his misery for
felicity, or rather, how God does it for him. For God-in-Man, our blessed
Restorer, has done all things that may be required, for exchanging
wretchedness into blessedness, and whatsoever God has done, is most fit, yea
necessary for such an exchange.

To find the perfectness of our restoration in some measure, let us consider
the misery which we have gotten, and the excellence and happiness which we
have lost. In our misery we may with chiefest sorrow behold a root of sin,
an issue of corruption, which being ugly it self, begets also many sins ugly
like it self, and so altogether they provoke the wrath and detestation of a
pure GOD; whereon attend all plagues temporal and eternal. Man is the slave of
Wickedness, and Wickedness is the slave of Justice: Wickedness commands Man to
offend, and Justice commands Wickedness to be punished. Here is the
foundation of diseases, famines, pestilence heartbreaking cares, and sorrows,
the temporal death of the body, and the thousand times more fearful eternal
death both of body and soul. For, Man being become a Nurserie of wickedness,
wickedness becomes the fuel of wretchedness. And as all these real and
positive distresses afflict most miserable Man: so has he certain priuations
and absences of that excellence and happiness, wherein and whereunto he was
created. He has lost the ability of doing the duty of his Creation: he has
lost the end and glory of that duty; For he has lost obedience to God, and
he has lost the Crown of that obedience, eternal fruition of God his
sovereign felicity. And now, when the sore of mankind was grown to this
vastness, that the whole world could not fit it with an equal plaster, GOD,
who only made Nature, and can only restore parts of Nature, which are cut off
and destroyed, by his own right hand and holy arm, got himself the victory
over our misery. God does put himself into the recovery of mankind: and if
God be on our side, Who can be against us? for he that will be against us,
must needs be a Creature; and therefore inferior to him who made all things.
God being united to Man, has in himself an infinite storehouse of
blessedness, infinitely exceeding our misery, and whatsoever he will bless,
shall be blessed. This blessedness God imparts unto Man, either by turning
bitterness into sweetness, evil into good, or by taking away the bitter
evil, and putting the good sweetness in the stead thereof. And first, toward
the perfecting of this cure, God in our Savior strikes at the root of our
misery. Sin is the foundation of misery; our being against God, who is
holiness, sets God, who is also happiness, against us, and after this we
need not to look for any farther cause of wretchedness. Neither is it a
sufficient cure to heal us of our old guilt of sins past, because we still
incur a new by running into new sins, because sin by lust has dominion
over us. Therefore the chains of this slavery unto sin must be broken a
sunder, as well as the guilt of former sins purged; Man being cleared from
obligation unto punishment, must also be freed from obedience and obligation
unto that which obliges unto punishment. This therefore our Savior
undertakes, and by a most precious Death and Passion satisfies the Justice of
GOD offended with our sins; and after in a glorious Resurrection ray seth
himself to a new life free from sin (which took away his former life) and
this free life, by the spirit of liberty, he bestows on his members,
thereby discharging them from the slavery of sin; and consequently, of
death, the effect of sin. And that the Justice of God might not yet
complain, that though the breaches of the Law were satisfied, yet the
obedience unto the Law was not fulfilled (which was a yoke imposed on mankind
by the Justice of God in the Creation.) Therefore he who freeth us from the
guilt of sin, and from the slavery of sin, performs also for us a
righteousness, perfect without sin; that so the Law might claim nothing of
Man, which by Man was not acquitted. And this Righteousness as he performed
through his whole life, so in that one action of his Passion, he fulfilled a
whole and entire Righteousness, even the length and breadth of the Law, while
for the love of God and Man (which is the substance of the Law) he laid down
his life; even for the glory of God, and the felicity of Man. Neither let the
large communicablenes of this his absolute satisfying and bounding of the Law,
and Justice of God, be questioned, much less censured by Man's foolish
knowledge of good and evil; for he who made this satisfaction, is equivalent,
yea infinitely preualent to all mankind; his person is of more dignity then
all our persons, and as an ordinary King, is more worth then a thousand of his
subjects; so this King of Kings is more worth then all the thousands of us his
Creatures. And as his Person by reason of the Deity, is of such excellence, so
are also his actions, even of greater worth then if mankind had joined in the
performance of them. For according to the worth of the person, is the worth of
the action: Now the person of Christ must surmount all creatures in dignity,
for the worth of all Creatures flows from the worth of Christ, and the worth
that gives worth, must needs be more then the worth given. But if it be
confessed that there is in Christ a sufficient worthiness, but there remains
a doubt how this may be given to another; It is answered, that union makes a
community, and the things of persons united, are common to both by being one.
If a King marry the daughter of a mean person, yet by the union of marriage,
his royalty is communicated to her, by which, though before a beggar, she
must of force become a Queen.

And now, Man being freed from the burden of the Law, and from the sin and
sinfulness which did sting us by the Law, the punishments which did before
attend upon sin, either altogether fall away, or cease to be punishments.
Eternal death is a thing that cannot be made good, no more then Darkness can
be made Light while it is Darkness, and therefore from the justified and
sanctified is that wholly taken away. But sorrow, sickness, temporal death,
and al other outward evils, may cease to be evils, yea they may be turned into
benefits, and indeed are so by the excellence of him that dwelt in us. But yet
our Restorer cease not, in a mere delivery of us from positive evils, but
he goes farther in his bounty, and restores to us a certain ability of
performing our duty, and right of beholding our Creator; yea, a stabilitiein
both, which is more then formerly was given to Man. As he freeth us from Death,
so he gives us life; as he freeth us from being disobedient to God, so he
gives us an obedience pleasing to God, as he pays for our defacing of Gods
Image, so he restores again to us the Image it self; and finally, as he
takes from us the wrath and terrors of God, so he gives us the pleasures and
happiness which are in the presence of God for evermore. And all these
benefits does our Savior give by one instrument or conueyance, and by one
action. The means by which he bestows and imparts his benefits, is his
Spirit, and the action, is Regeneration. The Spirit of God, is the breath and
virtue of the Highest, which co^municates life and power to those whom he
unites to himself, even as the Tree sends sap into the graffe, which it
strives to adopt after a sort, and knit unto it self. By this Spirit is the
unity and community between Christ and his members really performed, forby
this Spirit Christ lives in his members, and CHRIST'S members live in him,
Christ partaketh their miseries, and takes them on himself, and Christ's
members partake his Excellence, and all the benefits of his being a Savior.
This Union is the knot of blessedness, it is the very graffing into the Tree
of Life; that which our first Parents lost both by eating and not eating,
hereby is recovered and given to us: for by this Union we are one with God, and
GOD is one with us, which is the bond of perfection: the action in which the
Spirit of God enters uniting, is Regeneration, or a new-making, by which, Man
of sinful and corrupt, is made holy, and according to the Image of his Maker:
and from a slave of sin, he is made an obedient son of God. And now as we
beheld Man before in his misery, let us behold Man restored to felicity. What
evil can we find that is not taken away? at least from being evil? What
good can we think of, that is not supplied in a greater degree then our
thoughts can comprehend? And if this be not the true remedy of our misery,
and our true exaltation to happiness, we are all lost: for the world can show
us no better; After a supply of obedience to the Law, and Justice of God, there
is also a Sacrifice and satisfaction for the disobedience against the Law. The
greatest misery of eternal death is utterly taken away. The evils of life are
turned from punishments into exercises of the Spirit dwelling in us, or into
chastisements of the corruption yet remaining with us; so are they benefits and
no longer evils. For the Spirit which is our life, grows by exercise, as
bodily strength does by bodily labor; and the sadness of the heart many times
chasteneth profitably the remaining corruption of the flesh, as frost does the
weeds. As for corporal death, which is commonly feared as the greatest evil,
it is turned into the greatest benefit. For it is a door, both to go out of
this life of wretchedness, and to go into a life of happiness; whereof the one
is darkesome, full of Serpents, and hanted with spirits; and the other glorious
in light, full of shining Angels, and glorified Saints in Eternal blessedness.
As a door in a partition between two rooms, so is death between two lives; it
no sooner lets us out of the one, but it lets us into the other; so that we do
not so much go out of life, as go into Life; for that only deserves the name
of life, which is full of happiness, and that in perpetuity; and not that,
which is filled with miseries, and whose special commendation is brevity.
Therefore let it be far from us, from henceforth to call that evil, which
delivers us from misery into felicity. Moreover, whereas we were in a
continual slavery unto corruption, even to that false knowledge of good and
evil; by which also we were obedient slaves unto the Devil, the master and
teacher of this knowledge; Now that authority and command of corrupt and
fleshly wisdom, is broken down; foolishness, sin, and the Serpent have no
longer dominion over us, neither are we at the direction of Lust, to know and
to do only what it teaches and approves. Evils being thus altered and taken
away from Man, we may also behold Man placed in his duty, which first, and
still is his way to happiness. Accordingly, one and the same Spirit breaths
holiness, and breaths life; and in the same seed, whereby the Image of God
isrenewed, the life of God is communicated, and by one new birth we are sons;
that is, comfortable to God, and Heirs of God. Thus are we most blessedly
changed; our miseries are cast behind our backs, we are placed in the path of
duty, and therein we walk on to happiness, which stands as a mark before
us: and here let us settle our foot, let us fasten our steps in this path
chalked out by the Spirit, for the Spirit will both defend us in this way, and
at last bring us to the ways end, which is eternal felicity. In this path of
the Spirit is perpetual safety and protection, the Serpent cannot bite us,
and if he do bite, his venom is turned into a medicine, so that he does
rather heal, then poison. For the Spirit is more good, then any thing is
evil, it will sanctify and bless whatsoever befalls us, and the malice of
evils inflicted on us, is cured and made wholesome by the soueraign Spirit
which dwells in us. But perchance it will be asked, Why these seeming evils
be not wholly taken away, as well as altered, it being better to the judgment
of Man, that there were nothing bitter, then that there should be a
bitterness, though recompensed with sweetness. Again, it may be asked, why
the remnant of corruption is so grent in Man, that it leads Man captive often
to do that which he would not, and the power of the Spirit is in so small a
degree, that he cannot do that which he would. To these and the like
questions, if the will of the Restorer were brought for an answer, it might
stand for an answer sufficient. For it being Gods mere mercy to restore us,
who can require him to show undeserved mercy in any other manner or degree,
then himself shall please? But yet we have other reasons given; one is, that
this place of our present being, having been overthrown and made accursed by
the fall of man, God lets it alone, and suffers it to run on in the course of
misery, purposing to blot it out wholly by a last fire, and reserving
perfection for the life to come. Another, that the wretchedness of Man fallen
being continually felt, may be a continual document and reacher of the
weakness of Man, without God, of the odiousness of sin in the sight of God,
and the pointing of a finger to turn our eyes from this wretched world, to the
happiness which is above. For, present grief is a sharp spur to the heart
of Man, and prouokes him to run hastily from these remnants of misery, unto
perfect felicity. Again, misery sweetneth joy, and the sorrows of this life
shall, like a dark veil, give a luster to the glory of the next. As for the
strong remnant of corruption, and the small portion of grace (which is the
second question) we must know, that both by it, and by the remnants of
misery, God is mightily glorified, and Man's glory in the presence of GOD
greatly increased. For Gods glory must needs be great, when by a little seed
of the Spirit, he manageth, steereth, and guides Man through a mass of
corruption, and a throng of outward evils, into a Port of blessedness. The
lesser the means, and the greater the opposition, the more is the glory of him
who by little means does overcome a great opposition: yea, it is greater
glory to God, to turn evils into good by ouer-mastering them, then wholly to
take them away. And for our part, our glory shall be increased, because we
have served Gods glory in a bitter conflict and a difficult combat. The more
is the present labor, the more shall be the future joy; the hardness of the
Victory shall increase the glory of the triumph; and opposition it self
shall become our advancement. Accordingly, the greatest seekers (which commonly
are the greatest finders) of happiness, are usually placed in the forefront of
the battle against the thickest press of remaining evils, and the push of
most fierce and fiery temptations. And surely, while they suffer present evils
for future glory, while they fight fearful conflicts against remaining
corruption, and the king thereof, that they may not impair their future joys,
as thereby they preserve and increase these joys, so be they Heralds and
Proclaymers of the exceeding happiness of the presence of God, they are the
witnesses of God to the world, that this world is nothing comparable to the
next, and that neither the miseries nor felicities of it, are any way equal to
that transcendent joy which is to come. Finally, when corruption ouer-masters
us, the sufficience of Gods grace does relieve us, forgiveness supplying or
covering the defects of infirmity.

But yet Man is not quiet; he is not in good liking with this kind of
happiness; for he complayneth it is thin and ayrie, and his fleshly palate has
more savor in the taste of flesh, then in the taste of a spiritual
happiness. Again, he says, it is long in coming, and a Man may be weary
with looking for it, before it comes. To the first, I grant indeed, that the
fleshly taste rellisheth not spiritual joys, but yet are they not therefore
the worse, but the better. For, the grosnesse of the one, and the purity of
the other, are the causes of this dislike. So does the stomach of the country
Swain despise the delicate and nice diet of the finer Dames, not that he can
find any ill in it, but because it is too slight to satisfy his gross and
mighty appetite. This was truly patterned in the Israelites, whose strong
stomakes desired the Onions and Melons of Egypt, but lothed the pure and
excellent Bread of heaven. Therefore this must be the rule in this matter;
every appetite pleases it self most in an object, fitting and proportionable
to it self, and it is not the excellency of the object, but the
agreeableness, that makes it delightful. According to this is that of the
Poet; the Lioness hunteth the Wolf, the Wolf seeks the Kid, and the Kid
delights in the green grass. Wherefore I expect not, that gross flesh
should find extraordinary comfort, in a most pure and spiritual glory. But a
spiritual Man only rellisheth spiritual things, because they are only
agreeable to such a man. Accordingly, as far as a man is spiritual, so far
takes he comfort in a spiritual happiness, which indeed is here but in
part, so that we do but look as through some crany into the glory of Heaven,
and we do love this glory, but with a part of our affection; yet in some
Saints has it been so fervent, that they have sent challenges to Death, in
strong desires to be dissolved, and would have built Tabernacles in this
spiritual blessedness. But when the Spirit of God, in the great Day, shall have
fully purged our souls and bodies with that divine fire, and refined our
grosnesse, corruption, and dross; then, to us made fully spiritual, shall the
most high and sovereign Spirit be the chief and sovereign good; for, Man
being made spiritual, shall delight in Spirits, and chiefly in the chiefest.
And then these gross pleasures, desired now by gross lusts, shall be loathsome
and contemptible, as too base for so pure and divine Essences. Wherefore, if
we would take pleasure in things of excellence, we must strive to raise our
selves to their excellent degree, we must lift our selves up to a nature
proportionable unto them. And by such an indenour, we shall purchase a higher
station, and a higher happiness; whereas otherwise we lie down basely in our
own dregs, and complain like Owls of the glory of the Sun, when the fault
is in our own eyes: wherefore, let this be the most commendable ambition, of
a truly-noble and generous Spirit, to advance his mind to a purity and
excellence, proportionable to a supereminent object and happiness. And be it
reputed the quality of a base, worthless, and muddie thing, to bring down
happiness to his low, groueling, and gross desires, and when he cannot do
so, to accuse it.

To the second, Who is troubled so much with the delay of payment, and the
deferring of Happiness; for an answer, I would ask him, how long he would
willingly stay to be Heir of a Crown? Here, if I may speak for him, I
think he would confess that he would be contented, if he might have it
but seven years before his death. Now I will desire him to stay but seven
years more, and then he shall have this Crown, that far excels the other.
And to comfort him in this ods of expectation, I can tell him, that those who
have known, and (now) worn both these Crowns, have made a far greater ods
between them, then a few years patience, preferring a day in the Courts of
heaven, before a thousand in the Courts of Princes. But that we may come
lower, do not we see it an ordinary thing, that a man continues thirty
years in a course of learning, that he may be a learned man, but thirty
years more, perchance not twenty, not ten. And not much otherwise the Lawyer
and Merchant fret out one half of their time in Education, Labors, and
Adventures, that they may be rich; the other half, yea peradventure a very
short part of their time remaining. And wilt not thou spend so much more time
gladly and willingly, in expectation of an infinite Glory which no time can
end, nor measure can limit? Surely, an endless and incomparable happiness, is
well worthy of a short life's patience and expectation, especially when the same
life is so often worn out in expectation oftemporall and uncertain things.
But indeed we deceive our selves in this matter, for this is not our disease,
that we cannot stay, but that we do not verily see and believe that, which
being believed, would easily give us a patient willingness to stay: if we
believed that there were such an unmatchable felicity prepared for us, we
might indeed somewhat eagerly long to beat it, but withal, the assured hope
of it would support us joyfully in the deferring of it. For most true is that
which is spoken of hope, Hope makes not ashamed; that is, it suffers not to be
disheartened, to be confounded, but it keeps up the heart from sinking, and
makes it bear up in troubles present, by the expectation of joys to come. And
this common experience shows us in worldly actions and sufferings; for hope
has borne out mankind, through pains almost intolerable, unto comforts
steadfastly seen and apprehended by it. Wherefore do not make a fault of the
futurenesse of thy happiness; but find and amend the true fault of thy
belief and hope. Yet neither are we altogether thrust upon hope, but even in
this life have we some fruition of this happiness, and the privileges
thereof. For (as before) even here have we a crany opened, by which some
beams of the divine Glory shine into our hearts, and give us a glimpse of
that, whereof hereafter we shall have a full inioying. They that have had but
such flashes of happiness, have been ravished up in heavenly trances far
above the world, and have as much despised the world, as the world has
despised these joys. They have cried out, as men that have taken possession of
true rest and felicity; let us here build up our Tabernacles. Surely, as there
is nothing more comfortable to the bodily sight, then beholding the Sun
shining in his glory: so nothing can be more comfortable to the sight of the
soul, then to behold the Sun of the Sun, even that high and purest Light,
which shines upon the Sun and all other things that shine, but especially on
Spirits, himself being a Spirit. Again, the very substance of the Spirit in
us, is a kind of heavenly oil, which makes glad, not so much the face as the
very heart of Man. It has in it a taste and relish of the Deity, and
therefore above all other, this is the true oil of gladness. The heart
anointed herewith, as it finds a light to guide it, and a virtue moving it to
good, and freeing it from the slavery of sin, so also it feels in it self
a blessed rest, an heavenly Sabbath, a joy glorious and unspeakable, an
harmony and peace with God, which passes all understanding. Hence come those
vehement pangs and expressions of love and joy, uttered by the Spouse of
Christ, and penned by the wisest of men, which flesh knows not how to
understand but by the flesh; but the spiritual Man that discerns all things,
fully discerns and rellisheth them as spiritual truths. From the sound of
this harmony come those dancings and exultations of many of the sons of God,
who for this joy of heart have danced before him, who has filled them with
joy. But then flesh and blood, seeing only the dance, and not hearing the
music, mocketh and despises the effect, whereof it sees not the cause. But
the Beholder of hearts, knows these motions of the heart, to be chiefly
reasonable, and therefore principally allows them. And indeed, how should they
not be approved, since this joy is from the best, and this joy is in the best,
and therefore must needs be the very best joy. It is a joy beyond the reach of
mortal power, yea beyond the reach of infernal power, a joy which no man, nay
nothing can take from us. It is a board in shipwreck, a refuge in trouble, a
retyring place from the powers of darkness. Besides these blessings we have
another blessing, the Author of these, and all other, even an union with God,
who is blessedness. This blessedness is spiritual, seen and felt by the
spiritual; It is seen by the eye of the soul, while it beholds a godly
Nature, even the seed of God, powered into the heart of Man, otherwise wholly
polluted with the lust of Generation. It is felt chiefly in the will and
affections, while in them a filial love, joy, and fear is perceived toward
God; who before was regarded as a stranger, but now as a father; who now is the
end and rule of our conversation, but before was put far below the
satisfaction of Lust and Concupiscence. And from this union and the feeling of
this union, proceeds both that strength of Christians, that the gates of Hell
cannot prevail against them, and that strong confidence, that if God kill
them, yet they will trust in him: And why? they are assured that God is with
them: and then they are also as much assured, that if God be with them,
nothing can be against them, except it be to be conquered by them. For he
that is in us, is stronger then he or all they that be in the world: to this
union with God, we may add another union with the sons of God. The first was
the union of a Father and a Child, and this is a union of Brethren, for it is
a spiritual Brotherhood. Every son of God has all Gods sons to his
brethren. And as many brethren, so many friends, so many lovers, so many
helpers. So many that rejoice in his comforts, so many that bewail his
troubles, so many to encourage him standing, so many to raise him being fallen,
so many to advise him in doubts, so many to relieve him in necessities. In
sum, the true children of God ever were, and still are of one heart and mind,
loving and beloved; They account themselves as one, and therefore no part of
this unity can lack, what the other part thereof inioyeth. He that is a son,
has in him this love, and he that has not this love in him, is not a son;
for he must needs love his spiritual kindred, who is spiritually begotten.
He must needs love them, because of Unity, because of Uniformity, because
of Purity, and because the Spirit which begets him, is the Spirit of Love. And
as we have an interest in our brethren, so have we in their prayers: they still
commend us to God, and many times when our own deadness of heart does slack
the hand of GOD toward us, their feruency does cause his countenance to shine
favorably on us. Finally, if the name of friendship be sweet, if love on
earth be a chief comfort; and again, if the friendship and love of good men,
of men wise in the chiefest wisdom, of men true and single in heart, be the
eminence of this eminent comfort; then have we all this in the Saints and
sons of God. For these are our friends unto the death, yea after death; their
love is more equal and stable then the love of Women. For goodness, they are
the salt of the world, and without them the world is unsavory; for wisdom,
they have that chief wisdom, which is to know and obtain the sovereign
Good; and for truth, they have that sincerity of heart, which may give rest to
the heart that puts confidence in them. Wherefore, if it be a special addition
in matches, to match into a good family, let us know, that in our marriage with
our Savior, we match into the best family in the world; the family of Saints,
even a household of Love, of Faith, of Holiness, and of Happiness.

Besides, by our union with Christ, we have a new right in the Creatures. We
were disinherited by the fault of our first Parents, and no part of our Fathers
goods belonged unto us: so the use of Gods Creatures was a very robbery of God;
for it carried a mere absurdity, that they whose lives were a continual
enmity against God, should preserve the same wicked lives by the benefits of
GOD. Therefore the despisers of God, have no title in regard of God, to the
Creatures of God. And though in regard of men they may seem to have a
property in them (it being not in the judgment of men to define, who is not,
and shall not be the Child of God) yet hereafter, by the judgment of God,
which shall make hidden things manifest, it shall plainly appear, that this
property was not by right, but by usurpation, and by the long suffering of a
most patient God. And then shall they be cast into prison, until they have paid
the utmost farthing, for their unlawful use of the blessings of GOD. I must
confess they have these benefits, and that in the greatest abundance, but it
is no otherwise then a prodigal borrower has heaps of money lent, or rather
as a thief has bags of treasure stolen. The repayment of the borrower, makes
the remembrance of the heaps loathsome unto him, because the more they were,
the greater is the burden and account. The arraignment of the Thief makes him
to curse the hugeness of his bags, for the greater the theft, the harder the
pardon, and the more strict his sentence. Therefore, as in the things of this
world there has been an honest, wise, and safe Proverb, that a little of a
man's own, is better then a great deal of another man's: so in the Words of God
we shall find a holier, wiser, and safer Proverb, that a little thing to the
Righteous, yields more steadfast and undoubtful contentment, then the greatest
revenues of the wicked can yield to their unfaithful and ungrounded
consciences. And no marvel, for they take the goods without the leave of the
Owner, and transport them to the service of his Enemies, fleshly lusts, and an
adversary angel; and what shall the Lord of these things do, when he
comes to judgment? He must needs render vengeance in flaming fire, to
these that have robbed him of his Creatures, and of the service and glory due
by them. But they that are one with Christ, are one with him who is true Heir
of all things. Al things were made by him, and therefore all things are his
own, and by our marriage with him we have a right in his goods. Therefore
truly may we say, If Christ be ours, all things be ours; for he whose all
things are, is ours. And by his own reason, if he give us the greatest gift,
which is himself, he cannot withold from us the lesser, which is, his
Creatures.

Besides these, there is also a continual eye of Fatherly providence, that
watches over us. The Redeemer of Israel is the Watchman of Israel, and the
Watchman of Israel does not slumber or sleep, but at all times beholds all
his flock. As the Sun seems directly to behold and look on every man that
looks up to the Sun; so, and much more does the eye of GODS providence
settle it self fully on every one that is indeed a Man, even a Man of God,
which with the eye of his soul still looks up unto his God. And then by his
providence God does hedge him about in safety, for he sees his dangers, to
prevent them, and his necessities to relieve them. The same providence sends
sometimes good Angels to guard him, and when he wanders, it sends buffetting
Angels, to beat him home into the path of happiness; and through the diverse
exercises of humiliation and exaltation, it keeps him in one steadie course to
his sovereign Good. Surely, it is an especial comfort to an heavenly
Soldier, to perform his service in the sight of his Prince; whose eye
incourageth him, fighting valiantly, whose power reseueth him being oppressed,
and whose bounty scores up all his adventures and sufferings unto a final
reward. And this reward is of such a glory, that the highest degree of
suffering, is not worthy of the least and lowest degree of this Glory.

Lastly, (though it be hard to give a taste of Gods blessing in this life) the
Spirit of Christ, besides the light of direction and clarification, besides the
Oil of gladness, besides that highest and supremest Union, it gives also to
the members of Christ, a Testimonial and Patent of their salvation and
happiness. The light of direction sometimes grows dim; the light of glory,
and the vanishing brightness are often extinguished; the savor of the
ointment for which the Virgin-Spouse does love her Lord Christ Jesus, sometimes
is drawn up into heaven, and the feeling of that Divine Union is for a time
wholly lost. But though heaven and earth do pass, yet one word of God cannot
pass. Now the Word of Gods Spirit, is the Word of God; for God speaks to us
by his Spirit. If therefore that Spirit has given thee his testimony, that
thou art the son of God; if it have showed thee thy Regeneration, and caused
thee to behold the true Image of God thy Father in thee; from henceforth thou
may fear and serve God without fear; even without the fear of total and
final desertion. The seed of this Regeneration, is like the Father of it; an
immortal God, and an immortal Seed: therefore it cannot die, if once it has
had life in thee. Then though the windows of thy Soul be shut up, that no
light can shine into thee; though the voice of joy and gladness be not heard;
yea though thy own corruption stand up before thine eyes, like a Wall or Mount
of separation between thee and thy God; yea, though the terrors of God do
seem to fight against thee: yet believe thou the Word of the Lord, which he
has spoken to thee by his Spirit; for his record is true, and he must be
believed under hope, against hope. The Spirit which establishes us, has
warranted our stabilitie, and this Spirit is the Spirit of Truth, and what is
once Truth, is still Truth, and must stiffly be retained, against all contrary
probabilities and apparances. Therefore are we and may we be always bold,
amidst tribulations and afflictions, amidst terrors without, and terrors
within: for the seal of God remains upon us inviolable, and the Lord, who
knows who are his, has told us that we are his. Now that we may have the
comfort of this Testimony, let us often examine our selves, and search our
hearts, to see whether they resemble God, or not; and let us lay up in our
memories, yea in memorialls, and records, the witnessings of the Spirit to our
Spirits, against the day of Exercise and Trial.

Thus we see, that even in this Life, we are not left comfortless, but we
have both Comforts and a Comforter. Yet we still say that our chief Comfort
is in the next Life; yea, the next Life is the chief Comfort of this Life, to
those whose eyes see things invisible, and make future things present.
Wherefore amidst the comforts of this life, let our eyes and hearts be
especially fixed on that, because comforts in this life are but baytings and
encouragements in our way unto Happiness, but are not themselves our ways end.

THE ART OF HAPPINESS. The third Part. Wherein is showed, how Man hyeth hold on
happiness, retayneth, and increases it; and finally, is put into the full
fruition of it.
CHAP. I. How Man fastneth himself unto happiness.
WE have seen what is our Sovereign Good, and we have seen how this
sovereign Good imparts it self unto Man; now it concerns us to search, by
what means Man may apply this sovereign Good to himself, or rather himself
to it. In vain to us it is that there is an happiness; In vain it is that
there is an hand stretched out, to deliver this happiness to us, if we have
not also a hand to receive it. For if there be an happiness, and an offered
happiness, if we receive it not, if we have no property in it, we continue
in misery, even in the sight of happiness. We are not happy, except
happiness be ours; and not the being, but the communication of happiness
makes us happy. And even for this communication and application, is there an
instrument given us by him who is our happiness: he that has given a mouth to
the body, to receive the food of the body, has given a mouth to the soul, to
receive the food of the soul. Yea, he has taught us how to open this mouth
wide, that it may admit and receive a great fullness of happiness. But if in
stead of telling thee how this is done, I should ask thee, what thou would
do for that which is better then all things; How can thou return any other
answer, but this, That thou would give all things, for that which is better
then all things? For, even at that rate thou shall be a gayner. And if thy
mind be like this answer, thou art in a good preparation for the receipt of
blessedness, thou drawest near unto it, and that thou may not fail, receive
these directions following. The soul of Man has two especial parts or
powers, the Understanding and the Will. The understanding is appointed to be
the guide of the will, and upon the will moved by the understanding, should the
affections, and all the members attend, yea all things that are ours. Now, if
thou will receive and apply happiness offered in that God and Man, our most
blessed Restorer; first, thy understanding must be opened by knowledge; for it
must know and acknowledge God in Christ to be that which he is, even the
bliss of mankind, and the means to that bliss. As he is God, so he is
Blessedness: as he is Man united to God, so is he a Mediator between
Blessedness and Man. This thou must know, and thou must know that this thy
knowledge of him is true and right. For, CHRIST being thus known, the eye of
the soul is turned from all other shows and means of happiness; and the
same is fixed only on the only Lord and Savior. Being thus settled in the
full assurance of understanding, thou have performed a good part of thy
promise, for thou have given thy understanding, even a chief part of thy
soul, wholly to CHRIST. And if further thou desire a sign, to know whether
thou have done this truly and really; this may serve for a sign unto thee; If
the knowledge of any thing for happiness, or the means to happiness, besides
God in Christ, be unto th^^ as dross and filth, and ^^^lishnesse. But (...)
understanding must proceed to work upon thy will, and it must move the will
to open it self wide unto happiness, and being open, to suck, cleave, and
fasten it self by an ardent love, rest, and settlement unto happiness,
certainly discovered in Christ by the understanding. And indeed in Spirits,
either uncorrupted or rectified, this is a natural course; For in such the
understanding having assuredly descryed the sovereign Good, the will presently
moves it self to it being deseryed, and draws with it all the parts and
powers subject unto it. And as for all other offers of fained happiness it
gives them this answer; Whither shall I go for this is he that has the words
of eternal Life and Blessedness? Wherefore that the whole promise be performed,
and that all may be given for happiness, let the will follow the
understanding, and wholly and immovably will and love this Treasure of
felicity, discovered in Christ Jesus; for saking, selling, and abandoning all
things for it; I say, let the will stick to Christ alone by a fervent love and
desire, as unto the alone happiness, and let the same will stick to Christ
alone by a strong trust and confidence, as the alone Mediator of happi nesse;
And finally, with an earnest hunger and thirst, let it surrender up it self,
and all things subject to it, unto his saving or imparting of blessedness, which
he does by the Spirit. For thus far must the will proceed in working, and
then only comes the crown of the work. For it is not enough barely to know
that God is happiness, nor to put thy trust in no other but the Son, for the
imparting of this happiness, but thou must also surrender up thy self wholly
to the Holy Ghost, by whom the Father powers and seals blessedness into us
through Christ his Son. When therefore we have proposed and settled the
Deity for our happiness, and have yielded our selves up to the three Persons
of the same Deity united to the Humanity, for the conferring of happiness (I
mean to God the Father, redeeming us by the Son, and regenerating us by the
holy Ghost) then has the understanding and will wrought home, even to the
entertaynement of blessedness: and thus knowing God in Christ, even to the
welcomming of the Spirit, resting on him, resigning our selves to him, we
suck happiness from him, who is both the Fountain and the Conduit of
happiness. Having done this, I know not how to inioyne thee more, though
happiness be infinitely more worth: for how can Man give more then all? And how
can he receive more then all salvation, and a whole Savior? But if thou do
not this, thou art short of that which thou art able to do: And Mercy that
accepts the utmost of thy little power, will not accept a voluntary defect and
scantnesse. Now this great dependence, fixing, and surrender of the whole soul
to the whole Savior, is that blessed affiance, trust, and belief. Famous in
holy wisdom for knitting souls unto the same Savior. Which as it has been
approved, because it is the highest, fullest, and mightiest endeavor of the
soul; so also it is justified by the fitness it has of receiving, and by the
fitness and proportionablenes it has with Christ's manner of entering. It is
fit to receive, for the eye of the soul being fixed in Christ, stands as an
open window, ready to receive him who enters by a lightsome and illuminating
Spirit. The eye of the Spouse thus in lightened, reflects the light to him which
sent it, and with spiritual glances, shootes the arrows of love into the
heart of her beloved; so that he confesses, Thou have wounded my heart with
one of thine eyes. And no otherwise the will wholly willing, desiring, and
gasping after Christ, is a door wide opened to receive the same Christ,
entering into us by a quickening and sanctifying Spirit. Yea, the Will has in it
a power to hold and knit what it has received, even by a knot of unity. So
the heart of JONATHAN was knit unto DAVID; and the Spouse of Christ is knit
unto Christ, and runs after him as one tied unto him, and drawn by the cords
of this unity. And surely, the soul thus knitting it self unto Christ Christ
also knitteth himself unto the soul, and this is the knot of happiness. Then
begins that Song of joy, I am my Wel-beloueds, and my Wel-beloued is mine. To
confirm this, we have also diverse promises, which have told us, that he who
gives happiness, will enter with the gift of happiness into this posture and
station of the soul. GOD himself has promised the Seekers to find, and the
Hungry to be filled, and the Sellers of all for the Treasure of happiness, to
be the Buyers of that Treasure, for which they sold all. He tells the
Understanding, that to know God and his Son Christ, is Life eternal; and
that in the knowledge of God, is Man's chiefest glorying, and therefore by the
knowledge of God, is man's chiefest happiness. He tells the Will and
Affections; I will be found of them that seek me, even of them that seek me
with their whole heart. He that cleaves to God by a strong and vehement love,
shall dwell in his holy Mountain; He that comes to Christ (that is, upon the
feet of the soul, which can be no other then these two, the Understanding
and Will) shall never thirst. Let us therefore go out of our selves, as out of
tabernacles of misery, and leave a large and open room for him to enter, who
is the fullness of infinite felicity.

Next, if we consider Christ's manner of entering; Christ enters into us,
killing and giving life: killing our old nature, and begetting in us a new.
These works are chiefly and fundamentally wrought in the understanding and
will. But if the understanding know not Christ to be happiness, it will not
stand still to have the filme of natural blindness taken from it, neither to
have an unknown light and wisdom (contrary to the old nature) infused into
it. If the will be not wholly devoted to Christ as to the sovereign Good, and
do not trust in him alone, as the only giver of this sovereign Good, it will
never suffer the fleshly nature, which has so much delighted it, to be cut off
and slain by the sword of the Spirit; nor a new inclination to be inspired
into it, by which it shall be subject to Laws and Commandments; and things
future and unseen, shall be wholly preferred before things present and visible.
But if Christ be known, willed, and trusted as our chiefest good, and the way
unto it, then let him enter circumcising, cutting, and slaying; Our heart is
only on our happiness: He may do what he will, so we may obtain that
blessed object of our understandings and wills. Again, our union with Christ
is by a spiritual marriage. Now let us consider how such a marriage may most
fitly be made. Surely, we must first know him to be the fairest of men, to be
anointed with the beatificall oil of gladness and happiness, above all his
fellows; and then forgetting our fathers house, even all the pleasures of the
old ADAM, we must wholly fasten our hearts on him, and wholly cleave unto him,
resolving to be his alone, and to put our selves wholly under his shadow and
protection, and then the King will have pleasure in our beauty; Yea, he will
love us, and come and dwell with us; If Christ be the light of our eyes, and
the joy of our hearts, If his love be pleasanter then Wine, even all earthly
Comforts; If it be he alone whom our soul loves, If we take delight, and
sit down under his shadow, Cant. 2. 3. Then will he set us as Signets upon
his hand; and as seals upon his heart; he will bring us into the marriage
Chamber, and call us his Love, his Dove, and his Spouse: Love shall be his
Banner over us: this fruit shall be sweet to our mouth, and we shall be no
longer two; but one flesh and one Spirit. Now if this great affiance which
works dedication, resignation, and so an application of the Soul, yea of the
whole Man unto Christ, be the Key of our hearts, which opens those
everlasting Doors, that the King of glory may enter in; let us take heed that
this Key be put home into the lock, that our hearts be fully opened unto him;
otherwise as much of our hearts as is shut unto him, so much of happiness is
shut out of us. Let us be careful that this Key of Faith be not stayed and
stopped within our understandings; but let it proceed to our wills and
affections, and make way to the bottom of our hearts, that Christ may enter
just as far, even to the bottom. For as far as this Faith enters, so far
Christ follows. And as far as Christ enters, happiness follows. Therefore
let not thy faith leave entering, until it has made made room enough for
Christ to take up his full rest in thee. It seems that the understanding is
but the Porch, but the Will attended with the Affections, is the chief room
of Christ's rest and residence. When the will is so seasoned by Faith that it
hates all felicities, but God, but wills and desires him as the only
felicity, when the will toward the attaynment of this felicity depends,
trusts, and leans on no other means but Christ Jesus, but on Christ it
rests fully as the only Mediator of happiness; and when the will toward the
attaynment of Christ, and the virtues of his mediation yields it self up to
no other humane invention, but fully and wholly surrenders it self to the holy
Ghost, regenerating and newbegetting, then is Christ sealed in thy heart, he
is come into thee, and his feet tread on the very bottom of thy soul. Thou
have taken up thy rest in him, and he has taken up his rest in thee; and this
is the inward Sabbath of this life, and an earnest and beginning of the
eternal Sabbath. Accordingly, he calls out unto Man; My son, give me thy
heart, for in the hearts of men is the Throne of his Kingdom, and except he
reign in our hearts, we cannot reign in his glory. Thy knowledge of God in
Christ must not be dead, but effectual and working; and the work thereof
must be the kindling of a seruent love, dependence and affiance in thy will and
affections. Thy will again must work by this dependence and love, and the
work thereof must be a dedication, and resignation of all unto God, in Christ,
taking possession of thee by the Spirit. Till thou come to this point, thou
art short of happiness; For this is the Center of descending to the Spirit of
Christ, and in the very ground of the heart does the Spirit only fasten his
roots. Wherefore give the inmost of thy heart to the Spirit of blessedness, and
know, that in giving, thou do rather receive then give. For thy gift is but
the gift of a sinful heart, and that which belongs to it and serves it: But
thy receipt is the receipt of the Spirit of Life, and Joy eternal. Wherefore it
concerns thee, not to be niggardly to thy own soul; for, as much of thy soul
as thou keep, so much of it thou losest; and as much as thou give, so much
do thou crown with happiness. Thou may perchance think it enough to
believe he is thine, but if thou have no better warrant then such a thought,
he may not be thine. For thou beleeuest that he is thine too soon, if thou
beleeuest it, before this work of faith has in some measure wrought home upon
thee. It is not a rash presumption, nor a bare thought, that can snatch at
Christ and make him thine, it must cost thee thy self before thou* have him.
The getting of Christ is by the way of traffike, thou must not think wholly to
gain upon him; but as much as we would have him to be ours, so much must we
strive to yield our selves to be his CHRIST'S Kingdom is a Kingdom of power,
and he will enter into thee as a King of power; and it is not a bare
imagination that makes way for this Kingdom, but an affiance of the heart,
which actually and effectually surrenders us up to his Scepter and Rule.
Therefore the best way is, hereby to get him first into thee, and after to
believe he is thine. Many have lost Christ, because not having him, they
thought they had him. For they sought not him whom they thought they had, and
so lost him, who is found by seeking. But on the other side, if thou have felt
the depth of this faith, though in a narrow breadth, know that Christ is thine,
for whom thou have ceased to be thine own. As much as thou have gone out of
thy self to possess him, so much has he entered into thee to posesse thee; so
much as thou leauest to Christ, and yeeldest thy self to the renew ing of his
Spirit, so much do thou knit Christ unto thee, and so much thou drawest, yea
suckest his Spirit into the innermost part of thy soul. He who is Goodness
it self and dyed for us, when we were sinners, cannot restrain his Spirit
from us; when with a full trust we have cast our selves wholly upon him, and
with a whole resignation have given up our selves fully unto him. He who is
Love, cannot resist love; but he is overcome and taken, by the fervor of our
hungry and thirsty souls, and gives us to drink freely of the waters of
Life. Christ is the Phisician of our souls, and to be cured by him, we must
deal with him as with a Phisician. Now to be cured by a Phisician, it is not
enough only to believe that the Phisician can cure us, nor that he will cure
us, but this confidence in the Phisician must work in us a willingness and
resolution, to take and admit his receipts by which he may cure us. Even so it
is between Christ and our sick souls; it is not enough barely to think that
Christ can cure us, or that he will cure us, but our belief must open the
mouth of our souls, to receive his medicines given us in the Cup of salvation.
This Cup of salvation is the Spirit by which he communicates to us his
Redemption, his Holiness, his Eternity. Therefore must we so believe, that we
receive Christ; for such only as receive him, have the prerogative to be the
sons of God: so must we believe, that we be baptized with the holy Ghost;
for those only who are so baptized, shall be saved. And if we thus believe,
he who never sent away any uncured of their corporal infirmities, that sought
him here on earth, surely, he will not deny his saving health to any
believing soul, that thus heartily thirsts after him, sitting in heaven. For,
the spiritual physic was Christ's truest and most proper profession, and the
cure of bodies, was especially to draw our faith thereby to behold, believe,
and receive his cure of souls. Therefore especially, ye sick souls, be of
good comfort, for you the Master calls especially. But when ye come to him,
remember that ye desire to be cured of the whole spiritual malady; even of
sin and of sinfulness; of the corruption of sin, as well as of the guilt and
misery that follow it: For Christ will enter into none to cure the death of
sin, but withal he will give death unto sin; neither will he by his Spirit
give any one the Life of glory, to whom by the same Spirit, he does not first
give the life of Piety.

CHAP. II. How a Man may get this faculty which unites Man to God.
But Man is brutish and sensual, both in understanding and will; and so it is
impossible for him, while he is such, to discern a spiritual happiness, and
the means of attayning it; and much more hard it is to esteem and love the
one or other. He believes that which he sees, and he loves that which he
tastes and feels, but his gross palate does not relish this celestial and
vnpalpable happiness. Therefore Man must be lifted up above this low estate of
sensual and carnal knowledge; and to effect this, there needs a second hand
of the first Creator. If the bodily sight be extinguished, He which made the
first sight, can only make a new, and when the eye of the soul is so far put
out, that it sees not him that made it, He that made it, only can give it a
new sight, whereby himself may be seen. Wherefore if thou which read thus
far, yet beleeuest not what thou read, I wonder not, for I know what thou
art: I look not that blindness should see, or carnalitie should savor
spiritual joys. Thou art bounded with thy own flesh, which is thy Horizon
and limit of discerning. Thy candle cannot see through the thick Lantern of
thy body, to perceive the mystery of the blessedness of Spirits, nor the
glory that is above the veil of this visible heaven.

But perchance thou will ask; If the opening of the eyes be from God alone, to
what purpose shall advice begiuen to thee, in a matter that lies not in thee,
and which is not effected by advice, but by supernatural operation? To this I
answer, That although the power that must inlighten thee, does descend from
above, yet usually it does communicate it self unto us by the service of
certain means, left with us here below. Again, when grace does first breathe
upon us, it works by degrees; which degrees being by some neglected, or
misconstrued, it has bred unto them a greater difficulty and hardness of
travail in the new birth; but being perceived and duly entertained, they
turn into Testimonials unto us, yea to encouragements unto farther degrees of
grace. But if thou ask me again, how thou shall like or use the means, when
thou neither see nor likest the happiness intended by the means: To this I
must reply, That without God, thou can not so much as love the means, yet as
a natural man thou may consider these things following: first, If thou
look into the best sort of heavenly Philosophers, thou shall see among them
Men wise and understanding, just and righteous, inioying both wealth and
honor; and if thou talk with those Men, they will tell thee seriously, that
they most certainly see and feel an estate of happiness; and that they came
to the sight of such an estate, by frequenting the means left with us here on
earth. Secondly, if thou will search some special works of men, thou shall
find Writers of undeniable worthiness, who by Miracles, Prophesies, Oracles,
Success, and Victory against oppositions, have proved the verity of
Christian learning; it being impossible that a Doctrine, mainly contrary to
flesh and blood, should be advanced so much among men, whose very frame is
flesh and blood, without the maintenance of an Omnipotent LORD. Thirdly, do
but consider what this Doctrine, which is the instrument and means of Life,
proposes to thee and requires of thee. It proposes to thee an eternal
felicity, it requires of thee Piety and Purity, things of themselves
desirable and excellent. But thou will say, that this purity will cost thee
dear; for it is sure to cost thee all thy sinful pleasures, and may cost thee
much pain, yea thy life it self. But to this I may answer, That though it
may cost thee something, yet upon the matter it loses thee nothing; for
whatsoever pleasures of sin thou can enjoy, being inioyed, they dye, and
come to nothing: yea life it self comes at last to nothing, and that for
nothing: so the condition required of thee, is only this, That what shall be
nothing, if it be, may be nothing, by not being; and to encourage thee herein,
thou have for advantage an adventure for Eternity. In sum, thou art
required, at the most, but to lose that which will be lost, for an happiness,
which may and shall be found for ever. Yea for these gross pleasures, even in
this life, thou shall have joys unspeakable. Howsoever, whether thou receive
the means of happiness, or refuse it, certain it is, that to all those that
receive the Life of blessedness, the Doctrine of God, left unto us in writing,
and unfolded by his servants properly, deputed to this office, is the usual
conueyance of this life. God alone invented and conceived the remedy of Man's
misery, and a way from misery unto felicity. The same God who only knew it,
could only tell it, and only by telling, can men know and believe it, and only
by knowing and believing, can men strive toward it, and so finally attain it.
So we see that men must know and believe happiness to obtain it, and happiness
must be taught, if they will know and believe it; and to teach this
happiness, there needs a word of Revelation; and to reueile this, GOD
himself must speak unto us, who alone was the Founder and Knower of this
mystery. Therefore must we esteem this Word highly, as a great second Mercy,
by which the first great Mercy is de liuered to us. Before this Doctrine, our
happiness was locked up in Gods unsearchable purpose: but by this Doctrine,
happiness is reached out to us, and issues from the heart of God into the
heart of Man. Wherefore let us be far from accounting it a vain Word, for it
is our life, and the length of our days, and by it we receive eternal Life
from the Ancient of days. For, while it is taught unto us without, the Virtue
and Spirit of God enters into us within, and makes us capable of that
happiness which is taught unto us.

Now, the degrees by which this Spirit usually works upon us, are these.
First, it causes us somewhat to discern, and allow the truth of this Word.
And next, it moves a desire of more knowledge, and of a greater taste of the
Word of Life; which is also made known to God in Prayer. And at length, the
heart is moved with so seruent a love unto it, that it desires to be wholly
sauoured, salted, and seasoned therewith, that the natural Man may no longer
live in the heart, but that CHRIST'S Kingdom may be set up therein. And so the
Word, or CHRIST in and by the Word, becomes the Treasure of the heart, and
therefore from thenceforth, the heart is ever thinking on his treasure, it
thirsts after it, it seeks it with eye and ear.

But that thou may not be discouraged in thy first beginnings, thou must also
know, in what manner and order the Doctrine and Art of felicity does present
it, self unto thee. It will first offer to thy knowledge and meditation, the
lamentable face of humane misery, so that thy flesh perchance will fear to
go on, half despairing, how thou can ever come through so great misery
unto felicity. But fear not; the beginning and the end are contrary. Thy
natural estate is indeed very miserable; And this Doctrine does not make it
to be so; but shows it to be so. The corruption of nature made thee
miserable, and hid thy misery from thee, and so made thee contentedly to
continue in misery. But this Doctrine shows thee thy misery, that by
showing it, it may cure it. It shows thee indeed the ugly face of thy
misery, but not to this end only, to terrify thee; but that by terrifying,
it may make thee run a-pace from misery to felicity. Wherefore take
courage, and come with me, profitably to behold the countenance of misery;
which (as heretofore has been mentioned) presents it self in a double
aspect; the misery of corruption, and the misery of punishment inflicted on
this corruption; To discover thy corruption, thou shall find a strict and
severe Law, the Counter-pane whereof is placed in thine own heart, and when
thou comparest thy actions with this Law, thou can not choose but say thou
art a Creature, fallen from the duty of thy Creation, for ill do thy actions
become him, whom the Creator has appointed to be his servant, and the Lord of
the World. Now if thy deeds be so unrighteous in the sight of thy Maker, how
must not that highest Lord be displeased exceedingly with these lower Lords,
when he sees his perfection and Justice crossed and contraryed, with their
imperfection and injustice? when he sees his Creatures hired by so many
inestimable benefits, only to do him the service of Righteousness (which is a
thing of it self to be loved) to renounce their allegiance, yea to rebel
against their Creator with a course of opposition, and to love wickedness,
more then a bountiful God commanding Righteousness? Surely, the wrath of the
Almighty must needs smoke against such Traitors, and rebellious Runnagates:
And if the Lion rore, how shall not the Beasts of the Forests be afraid?
Hence therefore the misery of our corruption, leads us to the consideration
of the misery of punishment. And that there is such a connection between sin
and punishment, reason, experience, and Gods own Word do teach us. Reason
tells us, that he who has brought this great frame to an unity consisting of
disagreeing parts, by proportion, weight, and measure, is himself a God of
Wisdom, Order, and Proportion: And if he be such, he must needs expect
that Creatures of Reason, and Understanding, should also observe Order, Justice
and Righteousness. For to say the truth, as by this harmony the Word was
founded, so by the same is it still preserved. But if these Creatures which
have in them a power of resembling, and pleasing their Maker, cross him with a
cross of contrary actions, it must needs be expected, that the Lord being
crossed by his servants in disobedience, must also cross them in punishment,
and being mightily enraged, he will return the malice of their own works on
their own heads. Now we know as the person is, so is his wrath, and as the
wrath is, so is the punishment: An infinite person, an infinite Wrath, and an
infinite punishment. The very instincts of decayed Nature, have inspired the
acknowledgement hereof into the terrifyed hearts of guilty and selfe-accusing
Heathens, who not knowing God but by the knowledge of nature, yet because of
their wicked lives, upon the hearing of thunder and tempests, have feared and
shunned the fury of an Omnipotent Justice. But now I shall little need to tell
thee, what experience has already taught thee. For I doubt not, but to most
that consider the life of Man, it has appeared that the main course of humane
life, is a connection or succession of unrighteousness and wretchedness. Man
lives as out of the sight of his Maker, and Man lives as out of the
cherishing and fostering of his Maker, being generally thrust out unto a war
against brambles and briars, against the barrenness and staruednesse of a
cursed earth, which he must resist and overcome with the sweat of his brows.
Yea, each man eats other men, though not with the teeth of the body, yet with
the jaws of a fraudulent ouer-reaching and violent soul. And yet there are
further miseries waiting upon Mischief: for besides visible and palpable
examples of sudden justice, executed, and sent from heaven upon diverse eminent
and outrageous crimes, we see in general, that this sinful life at the best,
is but wise vanity, pleasant vanity, or glorious vanity; and at the worst,
vexation of spirit, vexation of body, loss of goods, and loss of friends.
Yea, Man is but a piece of reasonable misery; He has reason to foresee
misery, and so to take it to his heart: when reason cannot prevent it, reason
to foresee death, but not to avoid it. For as sure as wickedness is present,
so sure shall death be present; for death and sin, we see daily, are in every
Man inseperable. Now the combining of sin and misery in this bodily life (for
this life concerns the body most, and the soul least, and so does the misery
of this life) points our expectation to another life; even that there shall be
a pursuit of punishment after sin, in that life which is most proper to the
soul, and that then the bodily miseries of this life shall be seconded with
spiritual torments. But if we leave these darker characters of reason and
experience, and come to divine Revelations: there we may read running the
fall and misery of Man. And these before are described out of the same holy
Writings, but here again they must be considered by the Learner of the doctrine
of happiness, that by the full search and tenting of his misery, his misery
may be cured.

Briefly therefore, to speak what has been spoken; he shall find in Gods
Word, that wickedness and sin is the transgression of the Law; that the Law
being transgressed and offended, is the ministry of death: That this death is
both of soul and body, in an eternal darkness and absence from God, who is
Light, yea in an eternal suffering of the fire of the wrath of God. For Gods
wrath is a Worm and a Fire, ever feeding on the tormented souls and bodies of
disobedient, wicked, and sinful men. And now when thou have found thy self a
sinner, and find also the terror and wrath of God against sinners, I know
thou can not choose, but think thy self awhile the child of death, and thy
estate fearful. Thou will cry, Woe is me, a man of sorrow, and, Wretched man
that I am, and call thy body a body of death. But as I told thee before, this
terror is but thy way, and not thy ways end. It is but thy entrance into
happiness, yea it is thy advancement unto happiness. For the burden of thy
misery will move thee to seek for one to ease and refresh thee. The bitterness
of thy wretchedness will make thee more comfortably to relish the sweetness
of a Savior; and the fearfulness of the Valley of death, will make thee more
steadfastly to list up thy eyes to the Hill of God, from whence comes thy
salvation. And surely, this fruit of Humility does God expect before he will
exalt. He will have us confess our misery to be fearful, and desperate in
it self, he will have us to feel it to be a burden intolerable; we must
tell him in words and deeds, that we are weary and ouer-heauy laden, and then
is it for his glory, to help confessed-incurable, and desperate misery. And
to this end may we reasonably believe, that the fullness of time appointed for
the coming of our Savior in the flesh, was so long in fulfilling, and that
during the space between the Promise and exhibiting of a Savior, there was so
spare and rare, and secret notices given of him; even that there might be a
manifest and confessed need of him; before he should be generally and
manifestly offered and showed.

The whole World left to the state of nature, must be odiously and
vnsufferably corrupted; the Nation of the jews taken out as the top of
mankind, and a chief part to convince the whole, lifted up, propped, and
supported by a clear reueiled Law, by Statutes, Ordinances, and Ceremonies,
and these again enforced by Prophets, Miracles, and Signs, I say, this Nation
must be laden with iniquity, and wholly defiled from the crown of the head
to the sole of the foot, and so both among Jews and Gentiles, there must be
none that works righteousness, no, not one, and then is the fullness and
fitness of time for the coming, and publishing of a Savior.

Being thus humbled in our selves, and made both needy and thirsty of
salvation, then will God open our eyes, as he did the eyes of despairing AGAR,
that we shall see a spring of waters of eternal Life. Christ Jesus with the
beams of his saving health, will shine in upon our understandings, and show
them his beauty, and upon our wills through our understandings to comfort,
ravish, and draw them, and this will be do, just at that time when we
feelingly complain and find, that we are in the state of darkness, and in
the shadow of death. And now, Christ Jesus entering into our souls with free
mercy and grace, to heal and refresh them, our souls in faith and feruency
claspe the will and affections about him, and lay fast hold on the Lord of
glory and blessedness. And then the soul kisseth him with the kisses of her
mouth, and as she needs him most before she found him, so she loves him best
after she has found him. This is the path of Faith: walk therein, and live
for ever.

CHAP. III. That we should strive to increase our happiness, and by what
means.
BEing knit unto hap pinesse by the knot of a most high and blessed Union,
wrought by that Faith in Christ, which surrenders us up to the sanctification
of the Spirit, what remaynes but that we strive to preserve and increase our
selves therein? It is no less wisdom to keep then to get; yea it is more
folly negligently to lose a thing gotten, and the labor by which it was
gotten, then having taken no pains for it, nor having tasted the sweetness of
it, to have been altogether without it. And though the renewing Spirit be
strong in apprehension, and where it once takes root, it will not wholly quit
the ground, yea we must know that the retchlesnesse and hard heartedness of
Man, by shutting up the heart against the dew of heaven, and by cherishing the
weeds of natural corruption, may so much grieve and afflict him, that the
seed of grace and glory, sown in us, may be much withered and pined. For the
Spirit which is within us, as it holds us, so it looks to be held by us; as
it quickens us, so it looks to be quickened and inflamed by us; And on the
other side, it grieves, it pines, it dries, it dies (to our feeling, though
not in it self) when it wants comforting, encouraging, cherishing. And the
Spirit being thus quenched within us, the spiritual trading for happiness
decays, and so our loss of heavenly joys does daily increase, yea the
comforts of God in our way to happiness do still abate, and we are often left
in a temporal hell, even in horror of mind, and vexation of conscience, which
is the night of the soul, Wisd. 17.14. Far be it therefore from us, to kill
that which gives us life, to quench that which is the Light of our darkness,
to pull back our hand from this hand of God, which offers to lead us to
eternal Life. But let it be the most earnest endeavor of our hearts and souls,
to comfort and cherish this heavenly Seed, wherein lies wrapped our everlasting
glory and happiness. Let us be merciful to our selves, by being kind to it;
for thou can not sow to this Spirit, but thou must sow also to thy own
glory; for the Spirit is a most sure Rewarder of all the service done unto it.
And to whom it has been an Author of sowing in labor, to them it will also
be a Giver of a most blessed harvest in glory: yea, according to the measure
of sowing, shall be the measure of reaping. Wherefore let us not be content,
only to get this glorifying Spirit, nor having gotten it, only to keep it, but
let us in an insatiable covetousness, ever be increasing it, ever be getting
upon it. How can a Man be full enough of happiness? How can thou stint thy
seeking, since there is no stine of an infinite felicity? and such is that
which thou seek. Surely, if thou ever did taste thy Sovereign Good, thou
can not but over hunger and thirst after him, thou can not but cry out,
Evermore give me this water of life. Let thy worldly covetousness reach thee
the manner of a spiritual covetousness. That tells thee, that goods are good,
and thou can not have too much of that which is good Now the Spirit tells
thee, that God is goodness it self, and the sum of all things that are
good. Wherefore thou should be still hungry, still thirsty, after the
living God; never having enough of that happiness, whereof there is still some
degree beyond that which thou have.

Wherefore fastening one foot, that thou slide not back in the path of
happiness, advance the other, and so march on steadfastly to the Congregation
of the firstborn, to the spirits of just and perfect Men, to the Mediator of
the new Alliance and Covenant, and to the happy presence of the living God. Thy
path is in the Spirit; walk in the Spirit, and thou walk toward God; walk
fervently in the Spirit, let it in flame thee, and be inflamed by thee; and
thou walk swistly toward God; and the more this fire of Grace is kindled in
thee, the more shall thy shining be, when thou art a Star in glory. For the
same Spirit which is the seed of Sanctification, is also the seed of
Glorification: the first it brings forth in this life, the other in the next.
As certainly as it shows the first, so certainly will it bestow the latter,
and the latter in the degree of the former. For according to the power of the
quickening Spirit within us, shall be the power and excellence of the Spirit
raising us, and according to the power of the Spirits sanctifying, is the power
of the Spirits quickening: Sanctifying and quickening being knit together, and so
prospering together in the prosperity of one and the same Spirit. Therefore to
increase our glory, we must strive to increase our holiness; and by holiness
and other helps advancing, and supporting holiness to in crease, comfort and
cherish the Spirit, by which both holiness and glory may be increased.

Now to know what these helps are, we must seek in the Oracles of God, whose
office and main purpose is to shine as a Light to mankind, that stands in
the dark place of a clouded and corrupted soul, and to guide their feet into
the way of Peace and Rest. This sure Word of GOD, was given by GOD unto Man, to
direct Man unto God; And to effect this, it has a power to make the children
of men, the sons of God; Yea it has a power to nourish this spiritual and
heavenly sonship, and so bestows a gift of growth, as well as a gift of life:
for it causes the sons and heirs of God to grow unto their perfect stature
of Grace and Glory. The great Spirit of God, which powers that portion of the
Spirit into us, wherein lies our sanctification and sealing, powered also in the
Prophets, Seers, and Apostles, the Word and Counsel of God. So the Spirit
within us, and the Word without us, are near of kin; they have one Father,
even the Spirit, which is God and being brethren, they must needs cherish,
love, and strengthen each other. Yea the Spirit of GOD which best knows, how
the Spirit issuing from him, may be cherished, has by that Word, of purpose
showed us sundry means, by which that which he has given us, may be
increased. And God expects, that we which were dead and are now raised to life
by him, though in our deadness we could not move toward him, yet being
quickened, we should by employments and exercise stir up the life bestowed on
us, kindling it by those helps which his Word ministers unto us. So behold, O
Man, a double mercy; one, that the endeavors of the Saints may increase their
glory; another, that means, helps, and directions are given for the
advancement and execution of such endeavors. We must not be still like
Embrious, and children in their first conception, to have the nourishment of
life, sent in o us without our knowledge and will; but being now at least babes
in Christ, we must desire and suck the sincere Milk of the Word, that we
may grow thereby; or, being strong men, we must desire and digest the solid
meat, by which we may grow from strength to strength; we must by manly
exercises seek to fortify the power of Christ in us, and we must work
toward the increase of our spiritual estate, by heavenly traffike and
merchandise, that the talents of grace being increased, may increase the
talents of glory.

But now perchance it will be demanded what these helps are, by which the Man
of GOD may enlarge his stature, and grow up to his head Christ Jesus. For
satisfaction to which demand, I would point him to the Word of God, which is
the Treasure of the perfect knowledge of this Art of felicity; but yet to
give some stay to hungry souls, that presently desire the prosperity of the
Spirit, and will not be delayed, I may name some of the chiefest, though
likewise I may leave others unnamed, to stir them up somewhat to seek for
their own provision. And here, as the first means of increasing the Spirit, I
will name the increasing of those means, by which the Spirit was first
received; we must strive to increase that faith and affiance, by which we
cleaving unto Christ, Christ claue unto us. For the more we cleave unto
Christ, the more Christ cleaves unto us; the more we comprehend him, the more
he does comprehend us by a larger and fuller possession of us. Faith increased,
increases our capacity of Christ Jesus, and as we are enlarged in our own
bowels by faith, so does Christ enlarge himself within us by his Spirit. To
this end let us remember what has been formerly set forth, as the means of
breeding faith, and in those means let us be the more conversant, as we
would be the more plentiful in faith, and more ingraffed in the object of
faith, Christ Jesus. Briefly, let us fervently and continually pray with the
Disciples, unto the Author and Finisher of our faith, Lord, increase our faith:
Let us be frequently conversant with Christ Jesus, and often behold him lively
described in the Word, in the Sacraments, by hearing, by seeing, by receiving,
by meditation. The more Christ is looked on, the more trust, and the more love,
and so the more Union. We cannot look on the fairest of Men, but we shall be
ravished with his love; for, he kindles our affections as coals of fire, and
as a vehement flame. And surely, if we look into his Word, and into the
seals of his Word, we cannot choose (if we be spiritual) but we must
plainly look on Christ himself. For the Word of Christ is the Image of
Christ; he has stamped on it his own likeness, and therein we may see him
borne, living, teaching, dying, and rising again. Therein may we behold his
graces and gifts, his excellency and dignity, his love unto Men, and his
labors for Men. The Sacraments also Christ has imprinted with his own
resemblance; and they are the characters and representations of Christ. So in
them may we see Christ redeeming by passion, and washing by regeneration,
feeding and quickening by vivification, yea performing his part of the whole
Covenant of Life. And CHRIST being thus discerned, what dull heart will not
rise up toward him in a stronger affiance, in a more fiery love? Wherefore
walking along with the staff of Prayer in our hands, let us still be tasting
of these restoratiues of Faith, that so faith being cherished, may cherish the
Spirit, and the Spirit being cherished, may cherish our life eternal.

CHAP. IIII. Other helps of retayning and increasing happiness. The first is,
quick obedience.
AN especial furtherance and nourisher of the Spirit, is a ready and prompt
obedience to the motions of the same Spirit. The business of our life is
indeed no other, but an attendance on the Spirit, in whom lies our duty and
happiness, and al other businesses that are not subordinate to this business,
are inordinate. Wherefore to the holy lusts of this living and moving Spirit,
must our continual care be attentive, that when it moves us, we may be moved
by it, and that the commands thereof be answered by a speedy obedience. For
the Spirit is the issue of the God of power, and is it self a power proceeding
from that great power: now power rejoices in action, yea these second powers
grow more powerful by action. In natural things we see that motion makes a
thing more apt to move, and by how much more the strength of Man is exercised,
the more able and mighty it grows. No otherwise does the Spirit in us. It
grows mighty by a free and prosperous exercise of his might: It grows more
vigorous and active by doing, and by moving it is more ready to move. If it be
well followed in a combat with a Bear, ^^en a terrible and ugly temptation,
it will after lead us on to the conquest of a Lion, even of some reigning
wickedness, and at last will bring us to triumph over a Giant, even the prince
of wickedness. And as it will lead us to the increase of the ruin of vice,
so it will also lead us to the increase of virtue, and finally, to increase
the reward of virtue in eternal felicity. For as it is the natural and
kindly desire of the Spirit to bear fruit, so is it likewise his desire to
bear more fruit, and by obtaining this desire, it goes on to a farther desire,
and so to a farther obtaining, if our following be proportionable to his
leading. When the Spirit moves us to a good work, by fulfilling it, we have
a double profit. One is, the reward of that work in glory; the other is, the
increase of the Spirit by working; who being increased, will increase more
works unto more glory. On the other side, by neglecting and disobaying the
Spirit when it moves, we have a double loss; the first, a loss of the good
work, and the reward pertaining to it; a second is an impouerishing,
discouragement, and weakening of the Spirit, against another like occasion: for
it must needs move weaker the next time to that work, to which before it has
moved in vain. Now far be it from us to stop and shorten our own
perfection; even the perfection of holiness and happiness; which two are
inseparable, and one the measure of the other. Let it be far from us to abate
our felicity, by lesning our obedience; yea far be it from us, to grieve and
stop that Spirit, which demands of us, but an excellent and necessary duty,
which is holiness, and that with a condition annexed of the most excellent
thing which is happiness. Surely, we discomfort our Comforter, we go into a
spiritual consumption, we dead our life, we grudge our selves the increase of
felicity, when we resist or neglect the sacred instincts and blessed
influences of this sovereign Spirit. Whereas on the other side, by a ready
obedience we inflame the Spirit, we add fuel to this heavenly fire, we give
that thing food and nourishment, which gives food and nourishment to our life
Eternal. For the motion of the Spirit tends to this, that we would do good to
our selves, by doing good to it, and that by sowing unto it in a speedy and
large obedience, we may reap a more full and large harvest of glory.
Wherefore let us be careful to accept every proffer of the Spirit, as that
wherein is an united gift of grace and glory. If the Spirit would exercise it
self in the practice of some virtue, let our members, as ready servants,
run to the execution thereof. If the Spirit stir us up to a strong
resolution, to make a straighter covenant with our God, and to draw nearer unto
him by an increased service, let us make room in our heart for the settlement
of this pillar, and let us give way until this nail be driven up to the
head. If the Spirit lust for a vacation from the world, and complain that it
is oppressed with an heap of earthly employments, let us ease it of weight, and
take from it that which surchargeth; yea let us give it full and steady times
of respiration and breathing, that it may converse with his Fountain, and
suck new streams of refreshing from that abundant and euerslowing Spring. If
the Spirit desire to war with the flesh, and particularly with some especial
infirmity, let us come willingly to the fight, and help the Lord in his
battles; even this Spirit of God against the enemies of God and our
felicity; and if we serve him in the fight, we shall triumph with him for the
victory. Finally, if the Spirit long to cherish it self with the food of the
Word, or the precious and last Banquet of our dying Redeemer, let us be
careful to feed the hunger thereof with the food of God in due season. So
shall we increase the life of our life; and by the growth of the Spirit, we
shall grow more gracious here in the sight of our Creator, and we shall grow
more glorious hereafter by the increased sight of the same Creator.

CHAP. V. Another furtherance of the Spirit, is watchfulness.
AS Obedience does cheer, and as it were, make joyful the Spirit within us,
so Obedience it self is supported by Watchfulnes. Therefore (though in a second
and removed degree) is Watchfulness a help to the Spirit, and so an Increaser
of our felicity. For a Christian consisting of a double nature, one
spiritual, and another carnal, and twofold motions proceeding from this
twofold nature, and each adverse, yea hurtful to the other, herein must
Watchfulness help us, that the motions of the nature of corruption and
misery, be quickly apprehended and suppressed; and that the motions of the
Nature of blessedness and grace be soon espied and furthered. Else on the one
side, the egg of Concupiscence being grown to a Cockatrice, before it be
seen, may kill; and on the otherside, the excellent desires and pregnancies of
the Spirit, which would have brought forth the fruit of glory, may come to
abortion by a barren, miserable, and inglorious neglect. Beyond these also has
Watchfulness a profitable employment: for it ought to stand as upon the top of
a Tower, to epsy a far off as well as near at hand; even to descry the
remote occasions of such motions, and to sound the Bell to the soul, that she
shut out the Messengers of the enemies of her peace, and lovingly admit the
friends of her happiness. We are safest from evil, when evil is kept a good
distance from us; and evil is kept at a good distance, when we epsy the
occasions of evil a far off and avoid them. Many times the occasion is
admitted with a hope of not admitting the evil; but commonly the evil throngs
in close after the occasion, and approaching near unto us, it ouer-comes us at
handie blows, whom it could not at the Pikes point. It is far easier to kill
sin in the occasion, then in it self; and to grant the occasion, and to deny
the sin, is almost as bad Logike in practice, as to grant the former
Propositions, and to deny the Conclusion, is in reasoning. Therefore let us
keep the eye of our soul broadwaking, that we lie not like waste ground,
vn-hedged and vn-kept, and so become the prey and food of every wandering Beast,
even of every beastly affection. Let us also stand watching in the door of our
Tent, with the Father of the faithful, that when Angels descend unto us, even
the graces of God through Jesus Christ our Mediator, we may be ready to
entertayne them; feeding them with the slain concupiscences of our brutish
flesh, and the kisses of our hearts, which are more comfortable then wine.

To add intention and earnestness to our watchfulness against sin, three
things must be considered. First, the presentnesse of the evil; for our flesh
is like Gunpowder, it presently takes fire, it breaks out suddenly upon us,
and there is no way to be before it, but by watchfulness. For when a man
meets an occasion of Anger, of Lust, or of some other passion, if he be out
of his watching, his house is by temptation set on fire about his ears, before
he sees that he was tempted. But the watchful man is still in his spirit,
and so is still before the temptation; yea the temptation comes still before
him, and not behind him, even in his sight, and under his view. Therefore he
forewarnes his own soul, and so forewarnes her to prevent the harm which
approaches toward her. Watchfulness tells the Soul, here comes a temptation
of Wrath: there a temptation of Covetousness, and another way a temptation of
Lust: and then the soul knows her business, which is, to walk in the Spirit,
and not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh: but the heedlesse man; he has
raged, he has lusted, he has coueted, before he thought he did so; and as a
bird only by being taken, takes too late a knowledge of the snare; so the
vnwatchfull man does first fall into some odious extremity, and then by the
feeling of his fall, knows to no purpose that he is fallen, and that such a
temptation was the cause of his fall; whereas watchfulnes by foreseeing the
temptation, would have kept him from falling. And when a Man is fallen into
sin, then as much goodness as there is in such an one, so much sorrow there
is in him also; whereas a little care before would have saved both the sin and
the sorrow. The soul may be kept clean with less pain, then she may be
cleansed being defiled; for now she must be washed with tears, and hardly
rubbed with the rough hand of sorrow, before our Savior will come near to
wash away the guilt by his passion. Now that thy Watching may be sure to
prevent temptation, as soon as thou watchest bodily, watch also spiritually,
and let thy watching be more early then Temptation. Know that thou awakest
among Philistiens, therefore shake thy self up, and stir up the gift of God
which is in thee, and so put on the Armor of God, that thou may stand in
the evil day. Put thy very first thought in order, for the further our
thoughts run astray with DINAH, the more danger of rauishment, and the harder
is their recovery. But the heart being set in tune like a clock in the
morning, it will go the truer all the day after. Wherefore set thy heart
betimes in the way of GODS Commandments, commit it to the Spirit to be guided
in this way; for the Spirit is the fiery Chariot, that carries our souls
through the way of Piety, to the Country of Felicity. But having thus set
forth in thy way, still keep close to thy Guide, that thou continue in thy
way: for, he that keeps his way, keeps his life, and he that keeps his
Guide, keeps his way; but he that for saketh his Guide, hazzardeth the loss
both of way and life. Surely, if the heart running astray from the Spirit, be
suffered to take a full taste of natural things, it will hardly in a long time
relish spiritual things, and therefore it is best both to season the heart,
first with spiritual things, and after to watch that it do not carnally (that
is ouer-greedily) devour carnal things.

Yea beyond this, thou must even watch thy watching, that it be not stolen
from thee; for the crafty Serpent will often cast before thee some pleasant or
cumbersome temptation, to rob thee of thy watching, if it be not watched. For
security which is so easy to Man, is also a chief ease to Satan; For by it
the gates of the soul stand always open to him, and he may go and come
whenever he lists. On the other side, watching is something painful to a
man, and contrary to Satan, and therefore man will the sooner be persuaded to
forgo it, and Satan will be ready still to persuade him. But let such know,
who complain of the hardness of this, and other divine exercises, that
custom makes hard things easy, and assured happiness makes hard things
pleasant. Let them believe that the wages shall infinitely ouermatch the work,
and it is enough. If they believe this, they will throng violently into heaven,
and no pains shall stop them; if they believe not this, they are no Scholars
for the School of happiness; for, belief is the ground of this learning;
their portion must be a sensual, brutish, vanishing, and dying life.

A second reason of watchfulness is, the affinity and kindred between our
flesh and the world. There was an old contract made between them in Man's fall,
and the world still continues the suit, though we be new married to the Spirit:
there are certain cart-ropes of sin, which were once fast tied between the
flesh and the world, which as the good Spirit has out off by the knife of
Circumcision, so the wicked spirit seeks to knit again by conversation; for
well knows Satan, that if the flesh draw the world into the heart, himself
also rides in upon the world. For this is one of PHARAOHS Chariots, which still
pursues the Israelites; the Flesh is in stead of the lusty and proud horses,
the World is the chariot, and the Devil is the Rider; and this Triplicitie
sighteth against the Trinity in us. Let us therefore be ever wary, lest some
tricks of the old love pass unespied: let us be careful that the corrupt
flesh nibble not too long, yea not at all on the world; for it will grow
hungry by eating; and the taste will be so pleasant, that it will not be
contented until it eat with greediness, and then woe be unto us, for we have
received deeply the love of the world, which as much as it is, so much it
excludes the love of God, and so much it bittereth the sweetness of the
Spirit: yea, even in the lawful love of lawful things, let our watchfulnes
continue, for such have betrayed many souls; and while that which is lawful,
has been too carelessly admitted, or too carefully sought; a thing lawful in
matter, has been used in a fleshly manner, and so things lawful have been
carnally and vn-lawfully enjoyed. The flesh hangs so fast on us, that it will
hang fast on our actions, if we shake it not speedily from our hands as PAVL
did the Viper. To do this, let us still mistrust the old alliance, and let
this mistrust breed watchfulness, and let our watchfulness still keep us in
a right fashion and standing toward the things of the world. Let the soul
behold the world as a thing from which she is divorced, as a thing made to be
her servant and slave; finally, as a thing folded up in the state of perishing
and vanity. Accordingly, let her look soberly, chastely, and coldly upon it:
let her use it as a servant, not as a Companion, much less as a Master; yea
let her use it, as if she used it not; even as one ready not to use it, when
happiness shall call her from the world; or when vanity, loss, and decay
shall call for the world from her.

A third reason of watchfulness is, the watchfulnes of our Adversary; even
that crooked Serpent, who is the Prince of darkness, and the enemy of Man's
happiness. This is the roaring Lion, who still seeks whom he may devour;
and of this kind are specially, careless and secure men, for such he is sure
may most easily be devoured. This is the envious man, that sows tares among
the wheat, while the good man sleeps; even in the sleeping time of our
security, he watches most for a mischievous and malicious seedtime. Neither
let any man marvel, that this keeper of the dungeon of infelicitie, is so
vigilant and careful to fill his prison: for Envy as a main disease having
thoroughly seized him, this gnawing malady gives him no ease but in the ruin
and destruction of others; and the only comfort of his wretchedness is, to
get good store of company to be wretched with him. Neither need we to go
far for an example and pattern of the same thing; for very violent is the
same sickness among men, and in them is also a communication of the same
serpentine nature: for they can excellently repine at superiority, and there
is no greater quarrel among many then this, that one does excel and go
before another. And if it be so powerful in men, we may allow it to be more
powerful in mere Spirits; for the greater is the eminence of their nature,
the greater is the eminence of the corruption of that nature; according to the
rule, the corruption of the best is worst. But let us make a medicine of this
Scorpion; and this we shall do, if the same Envy, which keeps him waking, to
devour, be a remembrance to us to keep our selves waking, that we be not
devoured. Is not our own preservation as sweet to us, as our destruction is to
him? If our envious neighbor promise to watch us a good turn, we will watch
our selves that we may have no need of his good turn; but this spiteful
Serpent from the beginning is sealed under a covenant of continual enmity;
and shall not his malice be a spur in our sides, and a thorn in our breasts
to keep us waking? therefore give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to
thine eyelids, while thou art in a life of combat; but still believe (for it
is plain enough to be believed) that a watching Angel is too hard for a
secure and sleeping man. Indeed it is true, he is too hard for us in our best
watching, did not a higher Watchman keep us, who neither slumbers nor
sleeps. The watchful eye of that greatest Spirit, is our Preserver against
the watchful, cursed, inferior spirit; but this withal we must know, that
God loves to watch over them, that watch over them selves; his watching is an
example to us, not a discouragement; he will have us to do what we can for
our selves, and then what we endeavor to do and cannot, he will do for us:
the Mariners must stay in PAVLS ship to do their endeavors, else those could
not be safe, whom God did mean to save. He has given us souls, and these
souls he has enlightened and sanctified, that we might discern and foresee
Satan's policies; this gift of his he will have us to make use of, and not to
look to have that done by him, which he has given us power to do our
selves. But if we take away our own watching, we provoke GOD also to take
away his; for if we be not worth our own watchfulness, much less are we
worth his. And then if we be wholly forsaken both of God and our selves, woe to
him that is thus alone, he is one of those that are fittest to be devoured.
Evil and mortal concupiscences enter in by swarms into such a soul, and al
good thoughts are presently carried away, as seed by the Fowls of the air.
The Vine of our soul dressed with the blood of Christ, and watered with the
Spirit, is abandoned to the wildest Bore of this worlds wide Forest. But on
the other side, you cannot anger this Destroyer worse, then to spy his nets
and his traps; and if he see you make a custom of marking and shunning them,
it is great ods, but he will remove his engines. His first plot was, to cast us
into a drunken darkness, that he might handle us, being blind, at his will
and pleasure. And this darkness is the Devils pale at this day, by which he
incloseth the sons of darkness, even natural men, that they are taken at
his pleasure. Yea such men vvonder, when they see the sons of light,
watchful in their ways, and they hold them to be but scrupulous fellows, to
watch against one whom they neither see nor fear. But indeed, the less he is
seen, the more he is to be feared; for he does far more hurt to them that
see him not, then he can do to them that see him. Therefore the children of
wisdom lighten their eyes with the Spirit and Word of God, and by these
Lamps, through the night of their own nature, they epsy the snares of Satan
and avoid them. For this double-vnited Light, is the thread that must lead us
through this Maze of temptations, unto the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. If we abide in this Light, we are out of the jurisdiction of the kingdom
of darkness; we are escaped into the protection of the Father of Light, and
in this light of his, we walk into his own primitive Light. But being
translated into this Kingdom of Light, let us not then make our selves secure,
but still stand upon our watch: for sleeping becomes the night and not the
light. And as we have before received some incitements to watch our enemies,
so now let us consider some motives which may encourage us to watch and welcome
our friends, even the Messengers of grace, which are sent to lead us into the
Eternal habitations. To this end, let us first weigh who it is, even how great
is that Prince which visits us by such messages of grace; it is even the King
of glory that knocks at our souls gates, by the fresh supplies of his Spirit:
Majesty vouch safeth to visit Misery, and Omnipotence sends strength to
Infirmity; what remains then, but that the everlasting Doors of our souls
presently open themselves wide, that the King of glory may readily enter in? We
must open large windows in our hearts, that the Sun of righteousness may power
in a large light and heat, when he visits us in the mornings of grace. But
far be it from us, to be far from home, when God comes to see us. Far be it
from us, to let him pass as a stranger that lodges not for a night. And
surely, if he be unregarded, and vnwelcommed, how can he choose but scorn us
being neglected, whom he might justly have despised being sought? we are
sinful and miserable creatures: and God might well have lothed us, and left us
in our blood; but now he that might have lothed, loves and visits; and shall
we dare to neglect the most great and holy One, that comes to us, most
wretched and impure, for our own felicity? let us rather with watchful souls
epsy, and with humble and devout affections entertain these heavenly Guests,
the issues and sparks of the Deity: Let us wonder at our own happiness,
that our lowliness should be regarded by the Almighty: finally, let us yield
up to him the whole room of this Tabernacle of ours, that he may fully rule
and reign in us; for in his reigning in us, is included our reigning with him.

For a second motive let us consider, what it is that this great God sends to
us. Surely, it is the sap of the Tree of Life, a juice of Eternity, a food of
life everlasting. When his Spirit comes into us, it is a Light to our
darkness, a Purifier of our pollution, a conueyance of our Redem ption, a
celestial Fire to warm the benumbed coldness of our spiritual blood, a seed
of living and perpetual felicity. It offers to guide us, it offers to
sanctify us, it offers us justification, it offers us zeal, it offers us
eternal Glory. These are presents well becoming such a Giver; of infinite
worth, as he is in finite; and the least is of more worth then he is that
shall receive them. So the greatest gives us gifts greater then our selves;
and what remains but that we be enlarged in our affection, thereby to enlarge
our capacity of them, and if it were possible to equal those gifts with love
and welcome, which our own persons do not? Let us with a watchful care, with
a seruent love, with hungry and thirsty souls, receive the bounty of
heaven; still remembering, that free mercy is the Ladder, by which these
blessings descend upon us; by which mercy alone, God becomes so familiar with
Man, as to visit him. And as God is free to be merciful, so he is free to be
angry, if his mercy be contemned. And if once the Ladder of mercy be taken
up into heaven, then shall we see a great Gulf of distance and separation
between GOD and Man. Man is far unable and unfit to approach to the same God
being angry, whom with a confident boldness he might entreat and behold
being merciful. The way is cut off between GOD and Man, by changing mercy
into fury, and he is become admirable in severity, who before was wonderful
in familiarity. Therefore to day let us hear his voice; in the present time,
without delay, without stay, or let. Let us not put him off unto to morrow,
lest we be a generation that grieves him, and so may not enter into his rest.
But if our Well-beloved put in his hand by the door, let us be affectioned to
him, yea let us rise and open to our Well-beloved: and that we may be ready to
perform this, though we sleep, yet let our hearts wake. Amidst the dreams
of worldly pleasure, and profit, which are all but vanity, let our hearts
watch for the graces of Eternity. Let us give heed to that One kind of things
which is only necessary, and let our hearts be only in earnest, when they
regard the things of soliditie, permanence, and perpetuity. Does the Spirit
cast forth his beams to inlighten the Temple of the Spirit? let Watchfulness
be ready to see this Light; and by this Light things otherwise invisible and
inutterable: for surely, a soul thus enlightened, will see more then seven Men
on a Watch-towre. Does the Spirit stir up in thee a desire of meditation, and
a motion to go aside into heaven, by the raptures of contemplation? watch,
apprehend, and follow; and let Watchfulness deliver thee over to obedience.
Have thou motions unto Prayer? unto spiritual Joy? unto feeding on the Word,
or the seals of the Word? attend and obey, and let him that has an ear,
harken what the Spirit says unto the Church. For thus shall watchfulnes become
a true factor and servant of obedience. The Spirit speaks, Watchfulness
hears, Obedience performs, and the Spirit prospers.

CHAP. VI. Of Prayer.
AN inseparable companion of watchfulness, and an especial advancement of
spiritual prosperity, is Prayer: for among all the furtherances of the
Spirit, Prayer goes directly to the fountain of the Spirit, and seeks the
gift of the Giver himself. And indeed, whither should our endeavors most
address themselves, but where is most of that which we seek? and who should
exceed him in bounty, who exceedes all in that which may be given, yea in
that goodness which is the cause of giving? Wherefore since God alone has the
true abundance of Spirit, yea since he has promised by his Son to give the
Holy Ghost (Luke 11. 13.) to them that ask, why do we not haste to this
eternal and bottomless Spring of the waters of Life, where we may fill our
selves freely by asking? Grace is a chief gift of the chiefest Giver: To be
admitted into the presence of the chiefest Giver, is a great privilege; but
being admitted, to obtain also a chief gift, is a high prerogative. Why do
thou not then make great use of this thy great privilege? yea, why do thou
not at once purchase to thy self spiritual honor, and spiritual profit,
which both in prayer are together bestowed? For if thou art one of those, whom
God graceth by hearing, thou art also one of those to whom God will give the
grace of his Spirit for thy speaking. And surely, as Prayer is honorable and
profitable, so it is pleasant and comfortable; for we may term it a little
salvation, since the soul in Prayer, clearing her self by Faith from fleshly
darkness, looks directly to the face of God, the vision of whom is our
perfect beatitude: if light be pleasant, it is far more pleasant to behold the
Father of light: which, though it be but by the glimpses of faith, yet so
much as it is, so much happiness it is. The soul, for the time, is in heaven,
and beholds God; yea beholds God, beholding her with a gracious
countenance, through our elder Brother Christ Jesus. We see in natural
things, how joyfully the youngones run to their dammes, yea, children with
earnestness apply themselves to the breasts of their mothers. Surely, Man has
but one true and very Father, but one true Cause and Creator; and how joyfully
should Man run to this his Original, how earnestly should he suck from God by
prayer, the nourishment and increase of that spiritual life, which himself
has begotten in us? Therefore draw near unto God by prayer, and that
continually and earnestly. Let thy prayer be continual, because there is in
GOD continual abundance to be prayed for: yea, because GOD knows the
excellency of his gift, and that it is worth long seeking, and therefore if he
use long delay in the grant of thy Petition, thereby he teaches thee the
worth of his gift, and demands of thee a large price of earnest and continual
prayer. Surely, we make no ill bargain, if with the Prayers of a whole
temporal life, we obtain that which is to be inioyed by a life Eternal.
Therefore be not weary of continuance in seeking, for whiles thereby thou
acknowledgest the great worth of that which thou seek, and thine own great
need of the bounty and supply of thy Creator, God that takes pleasure in this
acknowledgement of thy prayers, will grant what pleasing and acceptable prayers
do request of him. And indeed, where can thou in thy wants better bestow
thy thoughts, and whither would thou turn them from God; since our help
stands only in the Name of the Lord, and there is none but God that hears
and grants prayers? In GOD alone is the Sabbath and rest of our souls,
battered with necessities, cares, and temptations. And therefore God invited us
by his Apostle to take cares and sorrows out of our own hearts, and to lay
them in his hands; for he cares for us himself. Surely, if with the King of
Judah, before the Arc of Gods presence we unfold the letters of defiance,
which the infernal enemy sends us in his fiery temptations; if with the same
King being near unto death, especial the death spiritual, we morn before
God as Doves, and lift up our eyes to him on high, no doubt but he that
dwells on high will send down his Angels of deliverance, to rebuke Satan,
and to chase him away into the deep; and will also send the Spirit of life, to
add life unto our decaying life. And though prayers of length and continuance,
do not work merely by their length, yet are they powerful by another
means. For God being a Spirit, has professed himself to be pleased by the
service of the Spirit, and the more service of the Spirit, the more GOD is
pleased. So while in the length and continuance of Prayer, much of the Spirit
is powered out, there is much acceptance of the same with God, who is greatly
delighted with spiritual sacrifices. And as much Spirit in continued prayer is
powerful with GOD, so much Spirit vented and darted forth, even in one
petition, is forcible with the same God. God suffers himself to be overcome by
the feruencie of the Spirit, whether by degrees uttering it self, or all at
once. SOLOMON in a long Prayer, and the Publican in a short, were both heard;
the Publican shooting forth the whole strength of his soul in one petition,
which SOLOMON dispersed into many. But in the length of our prayers, let us
remember this, that the Spirit is the wingednes of Prayer, by which it pierces
the heavens; and it is no longer prayer but babbling, when some measure of the
Spirit does not express it self therein. Now we know that we pray in the
Spirit, so long as by the light thereof we behold God in Christ to whom we
pray; and the fitness and necessity of the things for which we pray, and by
the feruencie thereof we earnestly desire and thirst after the things we pray
for. I must needs confess, that sometimes the Spirit of prayer and
supplication does hide and withdraw it self, so that we cannot perfectly
fulfill all these parts, but then let us lament our own dullness, and pray, or
at least groan some groan of the Spirit, for the Spirit of prayer; let us be
earnest with God that he will open our lips, that our mouth may speak to his
praise, and we shall seldom depart without a blessing. And if God yet delays
us (for he seldom finally denies us) let us cast up short eiaculations,
desiring God to accept our desires to pray, and to give us those things which
he knows to be best; (which our hearts do implicitly pray for, though not
openly) and finally, to forgive us our dullness, and to hear Christ Jesus
praying for us. But in the shortness of prayer, let us take heed that we do
it not out of idleness, or neglect of God, as if God were not worthy of more
labor, or prayer were a thing of little profit or value; but let such short
Petitions be vented forth, either by reason of impotency in prayer, or upon a
fullness of the heart, by reason of some incident meditation, or because of our
shame and confusion of face, for some loathsome sin; when with the Publican we
be ashamed to lift up our eyes to heaven, and to enter into a sudden
familiarity with God, being so newly polluted, and having so lately offended
him; and then it may be in stead of prayer with PETER, to weep bitterly (for
GOD hears the voice of PETER'S tears as well as of ABELS blood) and anon to
cast forth, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner. I know GOD forgiueth at once,
yet the comfort of that which he does at once, must we receive by degrees,
and we must not too suddenly leap out from the sorrow for sin, into the
comfort of Gods promises; but with MIRIAM we must for a certain time (and
that proportionably greater or less, according to the measure of the sin) I
say, we must bear the shame of offending so high a Majesty, and by
undergoing some burden and punishment of sorrow, acknowledge the weight of
sin, make sin loathsome to us, and feel it burdensome and intolerable; and
being armed to this point, that voice of Christ is then both sweetest and
fittest to be heard; Come unto me, ye heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
DAVID having his pardon pronounced by the Prophet, yet after he cease not to
feel the lothsomnes of his sin, and in the 51. Psalm prays, that his sin
may be pardoned, and his iniquity purged; that which was at once done in
heaven he desires with time to feel more sealed and imparted to him on earth.
Lastly, such may use short prayer, to whom bodily infirmity allows not the
bent of long meditation; of such, GOD requires according to that they have, and
not according to that they have not, and to them a short Petition may be
accepted for a long Prayer, yea a sigh of the Spirit, may be like a Diamond of
great value, though it lie in a little room. But ordinarily let us think it
best to imitate the ancient Saints, who have worshipped God in a continuing and
combined form of prayer, the patterns whereof are often to be found in the
Word of life. And as our prayers must be continual, so still let us strive to
make them earnest, seruent, and vehement; that it may still appear unto God,
that we have an earnest desire to be heard. Otherwise, coldness in asking,
may well deserve coldness in granting, and since giving is more then asking,
that which does not merit the lesser, how may we think it should procure the
greater? Again, God himself, by the Parable of the unjust Judge, like SAMSON
has showed us how he may be bound, for he has taught us, that importunity
is a way to overcome him. Earnest prayer uses violence toward him, and
thereby, we that are weakness, are too hard for him who is infinite power. But
how comes this to pass, that we who have no strength but from GOD, should
overcome him, from whom we have our strength? surely, if we look nearly unto
it, we shall find that prayer persuades God to overcome himself. It moves his
own goodness to overcome his own power, so that we feel only the effects
of power mastered and conquered with goodness. Therefore is God by prayer, as it
were, troubled and stopped in some actions, outwardly proposed to have been
effected. So LOT holds the Angels hand from destroying of Zoar, a town of
the sinful Plain, and to her growth equally liable for wickedness to fire
and brimstone. And MOSES hinders and does not let GOD alone, when in his fury
he would destroy Israel, but diuerteth the plague denounced against them.
Goodness cannot deny the importunity of beloued-ones: The bad whereof is in an
earthly father, whose bowels are turned within him, if he cannot give what his
hungry child does crave of him. But the root here of is God, who is
goodness it self, in whom is the Fountain of that drop which we call good
Nature in Men. The same God who is goodness, is also love, and loves his
Children far more tenderly then earthly fathers; and love works upon the
will to make it willing, to communicate to the beloved the fruits and effects
of goodness. The same God is also Almighty, so that whatsoever streams of
goodness, the will moved by love would particularly distribute, the
Almightinesse of GOD is able to fulfill and accomplish. Wherefore in confidence
of the great goodness, the love and the power of God; let us boldly,
hopefully, yet humbly repair unto him, believing that a power so mastered with
goodness and love, cannot deny a vehement and importunate prayer. But if we
fail of obtaining, it is certainly some impediment on our own side; so that
either we have asked in an ill manner, or for an ill matter, or to an ill end,
or else we have limited the most High, telling him how and when we will have our
request. But if we ask for good things in a good manner, to a good end,
submitting the conditions and seasons to that infinite Wisdom, to whom to
submit is man's chiefest wisdom, then let us be assured that we are in the
way of hearing, let us fasten our foot in that way, and resolve never to turn
from it, though checked with the woman of Canaan, and deferred with JOB. This
way ends assuredly in granting, and thou shall either have the same thing thou
crauest, or a better. For as all Gods actions to his children are for their
good and advantage, so are also his deferrings and denyals. And this the daily
experience of the Saints can testify, who have found that they were then heard
when they thought themselves most neglected. The vision and message of the
most High (as that of DANIEL) was botimes sent forth, though the time of
accomplishme^t was appointed to be later. GOD will not break the Covenant of
Prayer; but would raise thy faith to that high pitch; even to believe that God
is good to Israel, even when thou feel the smart of thine own misery, and
see the prosperity of the wicked; or he would raise thy patience to such a
degree, that though GOD should kill thee, yet thou would submit thy self to
his mighty hand; or he would humble, chastize, and nurture thee, that he
might do thee good in thy latter end. Therefore stand thou strong in the path of
prayer, and therein especially hunger and thirst after Righteousness, even
spiritual graces, for therewith thou shall surely be filled. But if with the
stubborn King of Israel, being grieved, thou say, It is the Lord, Why should I
seek him any more? thou turnest thy self out of the way of obtaining, thou
forsakest him who is the only giver of every good and perfect gift, thou
changest him who only hears and grants prayers, for miserable helpers, who
without him (like IEROBOAMS politic Calves) through a wise foolishnes, shall
become their Masters destruction.

Now that our prayer may yet have a farther increase of force, and so a fuller
preuayling, let our prayers partly consist of praise. Let the remembrance of
benefits past, accompany the Petition of benefits to come, let us pray that
Gods Name may be hallowed, when we pray that his Kingdom may come more into
us. In the Law of Nature, thankfulness for one benefit, inuiteth another, and
much more with the Father of Grace and Nature, do thanks for a less degree of
Grace, persuade for a greater. Praise and glory to God, is the end and fruit
of Gods gifts, and where God reapeth this fruit abundantly, there will he
abundantly sow the seed of this fruit. For if Christ called his Father an
Husbandman, we may boldly say he is a good Husbandman; and therefore he will
not commit that ill husbandry, to sow little that he may reap little, when
he sees that by much sowing he may reap much. GOD will not be wanting to his
own glory, by sowing small grace, where by much grace he might reap much
glory. That this was agreeable to the heart of God, well knew that holy Man,
who was according to GODS heart, and therefore continually he mixeth his
prayers with praises; yea sometime he plainly discovers the secrets of this
skill; as when he says: Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people
praise thee, then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God, even our
God, shall give us his blessing. Examples confirm this instruction. NOAH gave
a sacrifice of praise for his delivery from the flood, and God being praised
for that one deliverance, perpetuateth his benefit, and promises an
everlasting deliverance to the earth from any more floods. When SALOMONS
Levites, Singers, and Priests, made one sound in praising the Lord, the glory
of the Lord filled the house of God. When the Singers of IEHOSAPHAT praised the
Lord, because his mercy indureth for ever; God laid ambushments against the
children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, and they slew one another. What do
these things show, but that prayer is sharpened with praise, and it enters more
powerfully into the acceptance of the Highest? They teach us plainly, that God
willingly opens his ear to receive his due praises, and into his ears so
opened, the adjoined Petitions have more speedy admittance. Surely, God well
accepts his own glory; he accepts his glorifier; and with his person, his
prayers. But as far on the other side, does unthankfulness shut up the
bounty of God, and make it fast against our selves; God will not long give
benefits, whereof himself may have no benefit; but if there be gifts like
benefits, bestowed on the unthankful; let it be thought that these seeming
benefits are very curses; even gifts given in wrath, as Quails, and a King
unto Israel. For how can a Creator continue his bounty, when he sees his
Creature does only make use of him, that he sorues his own turn upon him,
and makes himself the end of God, and not God the end of himself? Therefore
euenholy HEZEKIAH, while he is more careful to show the glory of his
Treasures to the Heathen Ambassadors, then to give glory to God for his
health, by which he inioyed them, the treasures must be carried away to the
same Babylon, whose Ambassadors he had intertayned with the sight of them. The
heart of man being filled with blessings, must not be lifted up within it
self, but it must be lifted up with praise and thankfulness to the Author
of those blessings. Therefore having received some Talents of grace, let us
return unto God some other Talents of glory; and then to us by whom he
receives advantage, shall more be given: but if otherwise, that which we
have, shall be taken away. God has put al things in order to himself, and
upon this order the God of order rayneth his blessings. If then we will be
under his blessings, we must be under this order; we must look toward him,
glorifying and praising, if we will have him look toward us, blessing and
sanctifying. Therefore in sum, Let us pray continually, and fervently, and in all things give thanks, which is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward us. If
we conclude our Psalm 33. with Prayer, Let thy mercy and grace be multiplied
upon us, as we trust in thee, let us begin it with thankfulness; Rejoice in
the Lord, O ye righteous: for it becomes upright men to be thankful. For,
if thus, Psalm. 66. we call to him with our mouth, and also exalt him with our
tongue, God will hear us, and will consider our prayer, we shall again
praise God, who does not put back our prayer, nor his mercy from us.

CHAP. VII. Of Meditation.
ANother special preservative and restauratiue of the Spirit, is Meditation.
Hereby the beams of the heavenly Spirit are contracted into a point upon the
soul, as the beams of the Sun by a Cristall, whereby the light and heat of
grace are increased and multiplied into a spiritual Fire. The soul goes in
from the flesh into the Spirit, and bathing and anointing her self in that
Oil of gladness, she sharpneth her sight, and quickneth her might, and becomes
much abler to see into heaven, to see into her self, and to see and judge the
things on earth. Hereby she grows in the knowledge and acquaintance of her
soueraign Good; hereby she takes out Lessons of a comfortable departing out of
this world of vanity, unto her City of blessedness; and hereby she judges
best of her own fitness, for that happy voyage. And having judged her self in
Meditation, by the same, she studies to increase that which is right in her,
through the remembrance of profitable motives and documents, heard, read, or
conceived, and she indeuoureth to cast away all that presses down, and
whatsoever sin hinders by cleaving on too fast. If we would speak of the
subject of Meditation, we might name all that is: for all things have in them
some profitable doctrine, and are Teachers of the glory of their Creator. But
if we ask for the chiefest Matter, and that which is most aduantageable to the
Citizens of the New Jerusalem, which is our present business: Then let the
soul fly up from this place of misery, and take up her rest in her only
Rest. Let her thoughts be on her happiness, and the way unto it, and let that
be her chief meditation, which is her chief concernment. And that she may
draw nearer unto happiness, by the wings of an inflamed affection: Let her
consider the beauty of the highest Essence; let her think upon a glory,
creating and uncreated; let her think on the Light of that Light, which
darkneth and shaddoweth the Sun, and when she has thus thought, let her
know, the glory and happiness which she shall enjoy, is more beyond her
highest imagination, then imagination can be beyond any thing which is seen.
Let us also consider what God has been, and is to us, as well as what he is
in himself: and to this end, let us cast our inward eye on the great love of
him, who is both our Fountain and Felicity, our Beginning and End. Let us
consider how great things this infinite love has done for us, from how great a
misery he has translated us, to make us partakers and intoyers of himself,
and by the greatness of the effects, let us guess at the infiniteness of the
Cause. There is nothing greater then Himself, and this greatest Himself, has
he given to Man, by a wonderful and mysterious Incarnation. He has also
given the Blood and Life of this incarnate Deity, to ransom us the slaves and
bondmen of guilt and punishment, from eternal death. He has given us also his
most pure and sacred Spirit, to purge the most lothsom corruption of our
lustful generation. He has given us infinite blessings of this life; and all
these, that we might serve him in holiness, without the fear of our enemies,
and hereafter may enjoy him in that Kingdom, wherein we shall triumph over
these enemies. But having waighed (though the weak balances of our
understandings be far unable to bear and contain the exceeding weight of)
this infinite love of God, then let us consider, how we ought to answer this
love with love, and his mercies by thankfulness and obedience. And when we have
found out our duty, then let us examine our performance; even whether the
goodness of God has had a perfect working upon us, and has brought forth
fruits answerable to it, and whether we have sufficiently yielded up our selves
unto God, in his blessed work of making us blessed. And herein let us rippe up
our souls, even the very bowels of our consciences, and let us tent the
bottom of our hearts, to feel what is sound and what unsound in them, that
the sound parts may be cherished, and the unsound healed. If we see any spark
of the Spirit, let us kindle it into a fire, and let the infiniteness of that
love which is our pattern, draw us on by imitation, to a continual enlargement
of our love, and of the fruit of love, obedience. If by Meditation we taste the
sweetness of God in the Spirit dwelling in us: Let us thirst afresh for the
living GOD: who the more he is thirsted after, the more he gives of the waters
of Life. So shall thirst increase that which satisfies thirst, and the
satisfying of the thirst shall increase our thirst, that so the satisfaction
may still increase. The River of Regeneration, points us to the Ocean of
Regeneration, even the Spirit within us, unto the great Spirit above us. From
him it confesses that it comes, to him it desires to return, that so it may
come larger from him, then it returned to him. But if by the inquest of our
meditation we find, that some rebellious and aspiring sin has assayed and
undertaken the conquest and death of the Spirit: And on the other side, we
find the Spirit grieved, yea fainting and gasping for life: Let the soul and
all the powers thereof rise up in arms, for the suppressing of the body of
death, and for the rescuing of life Eternal. Not a common fire, but the fire
of Hell has feized; not upon our common houses, but upon the Temples of the
holy Ghost; what haste or care can be great enough to rescue such invaluable
habitations, from so abominable a desolation? Let us run therefore, and that
speedily, into the water of Baptism, to quench the fiery darts of Satan; let
us steep our souls therein, until the flame of sin be extinguished, our
souls washed clean, restored to their former beauty, yea made fairer then
before. For even by sins may the Spirit take occasion to increase grace, though
not by the nature of sins, but by the sovereignty of that Spirit, which
powerful above all things, turns all things to his own advantage; of sins
makes a plaster against sin, and by falls makes us more safe from falling.
The mighty Spirit of God is as powerful as over: when with AARONS rod we be
changed into serpents, God can turn us again into rods bearing blossoms and
fruit. But that we fail not in this precious Art which turns Scorpions into
medicines, and judgment in to mercy: Let us observe the true rules of just
proceeding. And first, sitting down in the Court of Meditation; let the sin
which has laid violent hands on the Spirit, be brought before our
consideration, even in the ugliness thereof. Let it appear just as it is,
ragged, putrifide, and loathsome, without the covering of Fig-leaues, even of
partial and deceitful pretenses. Now that we may the more carefully view and
judge our sin; let us remember that this Judgment is the Judgment of God,
and not of Man: we sit as in Gods place to judge our selves, that God may not
have need to sit himself in judgment upon us. For if we do not judge our
selves well, God will come himself to judge us better; he will by his
punishments set our sins in order before us; and his punishments will be
double; One for the sins which we have committed; another for the partial
and corrupt judgment of the same sins. Wherefore without showing mercy on
these Cananites, which show cruelty to us, by being thorns in our sides
pricking us unto death; let us take our sins and strip them stark naked,
that every part and circumstance of them may appear. Having done this, let us
in one sight, even in a view of comparison, at once behold the pureness and
holiness of our Maker expressed in his Law, joining therewith the infinite
love which has powered it self out upon us in his inestimable benefits: And
even then let us also look on our deformed sins, so contrary to his purity,
and on our selves offending by those sins, against so great a Goodness. And
when we thus have seen so pure and so gracious a Creator, and withal behold
so impure, ungrateful, and rebellious creatures, how can the soul choose but
fly into her own face, to tear herself in pieces, for disobeying the voice,
and crossing the goodness of a most pure and bountiful God? The sin being
compared to the Law, will appear crooked and full of deformity, it will be
called foolishnes, and filthiness, because it transgresses the Law of the
highest wisdom and purity.

In sum, the Soul in zeal, indignation, and revenge will pronounce judgment
against her self and her accomplice the body; she will pronounce the body
worthy of smart and punishment eternal, and in testimony that she believes
what she says, she will perchance chastise him with mourning, fasting, and
aspetity; which also may be profitable to this end; that the sinful body
tasting some degree of his own deseruings, may loath that sin which deserved
to feel without end and measure, the punishment which she for a season only,
and in measure inflicteth on it: And on her self will she likewise power
forth judgment; That she who was made to the Image of God, and should have
guided her self and the body according to that Image, for forsaking her
function, has deserved to lose both the Image of God, and the sight of God for
evermore. She judges her self worthy to pass from the darkness of sin, unto
the darkness of punishment and eternal horror. And in testimony hereof, she
sets the Understanding, Will, and Affections against themselves, to accuse,
upbraid, and loathe their own filthiness; so that the soul which has doomed
her self to deserve eternal trouble, ratifies her sentence on her self, by a
selfe-vexation. But is this the end of Judgment, that souls may thereby
despair and dye? No surely: But this humiliation and Prostration is the foot
of the valley, which they must descend into, that will ascend to the height of
the Mountain of God: We are the sons of death, and to us is appointed a
space to abide in the valley of death; That is our natural, and first walk,
and in it must we do the homage of our natural condition, before we may
comfortably look up to the bills from whence comes our salvation.

In sum, God will have our misery, and consequently our need of a Savior
acknowledged, before a Savior shall be imparted.

But having condemned our selves and our sins, even to the pit of hell, and
being as sick of sorrow, as we are of sin, then may we hopefully go to the
Physician of our souls, who came into the world only to cure the sick, and to
give them only Light, who sit in darkness, and the shadow of death.

Behold, thou selfe-iudgeing and selfe-condemning Soul, thou have prevented
the Judge of the world, thou have done upon thy self, his work of Justice,
and have left him nothing to do but this work of Mercy. Accordingly he
offers thee the waters of Baptism, which are the waters of Life: Wash and be
clean. And that thou may know how to wash unto cleanness, know and
consider the diverse conditions of thy filthiness, and the diverse operations of
this Water proportionable to that diverse condition; that so to thy several
kind of defiling, thou may fit a several kind of washing. In thy sin thou
have contracted thy old contrariety unto God, thou have brought back the
flesh upon the soul, thou have for the time healed up the cut of Circumcision,
and art become one with thy flesh, from which by Regeneration thou were
divorced. So by touching this Pitch, is there come upon thy soul a spot of thy
old corruption; and to this is added the guilt of a sin which has proceeded
from this corruption. So art thou in a double disease; thou art defiled by the
touch of thy flesh, and thou are arrested and seized by guilt, the fruit of
Sin, the fruit of the flesh. Thou art filthy, and thou art guilty. Now in
the water of Baptism there is also a double virtue, fitted for thy double
misery. There is one that washes away thy guilt; And another that washes
away thy corruption; one that washes away the fruit of the flesh, and another
that washes away the flesh it self: One of these is the blood of Christ, the
other is the Spirit of Christ; one is Justification, the other is
Sanctification. And these two CHRIST has inseparably conjoined, because he
will have them inseparable; for he imports his justifying blood, by a
sanctifying Spirit. Whom Christ cleanses, he will throghly cleanse, not taking
away the guilt, and leaving the corruption; nor taking away the corruption, and
leaving the guilt; but at once clearing both corruption and guilt, by
sanctification and justification. Wherefore when we come to be washed by
Christ, and have recourse to his waters of Purification (whose clensing was
applied mainly and generally to the whole body of sin, in Baptism, if
accompanied with Regeneration; but the virtue thereof is also particularly to
be applied through our whole life; to the particular sinful fruits of that
body of sin) we must beware of three faults; The one, that we beg not the
water of Justification, and leave unasked the water of Sanctification; that we
seek not forgiveness only, but also amendment: For if we will have but one,
we shall have neither; this gift of Christ being always double, or not at al:
but thou must (upon better reason) say, as that Disciple of Christ said, Not my
feet only, but my head also; so say thou, Not the defiled feet of the guilt of
my sins, but the polluted head and root of those sins; so shall thou be
wholly clean. The healing and closing flesh, must be new ripped from the soul,
by the sword of the Spirit, even by holy Conversion, Repentance, and Amendment;
the face of the soul must be washed with the Oil of the Spirit, to take away
the spots and blemishes received by the pitchy touch of sin; and then the
blood of CHRIST will take from us the guilt of sins, being formerly
abandoned, forsaken, and thrust out of doors by the Spirit. A second fault is,
a vehement desire and endeavor, and performance of this part and duty of
sanctification, without the comfortable hope and confidence of instification.
This infirmity is most usually found in broken and afflicted souls, who most
vehemently desire renewing and reformation, yet dare not to lay hold on
justifying and absoluing. These are contrary to the former offenders; for they
presently lay hold on Christ for mercy, but neglect the holiness, without
which no man shall see GOD; and these striving mainly for holiness, by doubt
go about to put from them that right in Christ's blood, which belongs chiefly
to such as they are, even to the humble and meek, to them that hunger and
thirst for Righteousness. A third fault is, the misordering and misapplying of
these Waters: such is the washing away of guilt, by the water of
Sanctification, and of corruption by the water of Justification. For though
they be both joined together, and do not at all divide themselves; yet being
joined, they are not confounded; neither does the one properly perform the
work of the other. Christ's Blood iustifies, Christ's Spirit sanctifies; the
Justification is not without Sanctification; neither is the Sanctification
without Justification; yet Justification is not Sanctification, neither is
Sanctification Justification: the Justice of God is satisfied with blood, and
his holiness is pleased with pureness in the inward parts, and in these two
thus distinguished, lies the Tenor of the new Covenant. For, thus we find it
described, He will take away our sins, and he will give us new hearts. But
after we have sinned, the renewing of our hearts is not a purgation of our
guilt, but of our corruption: the purgation of our guilt being wrought by the
blood of Christ, though imparted and sealed to our spirits by the same Spirit,
by which we are renewed; yea even the same time: now, because in this change
and renewing of our minds, the Spirit enters into us with fresh grace, by
which entry the virtue of Christ's satisfaction enters also, and offers it
self to comfort and heal up our consciences, with assurance of forgiveness
(all Christ's benefits being reached to us by one only Spirit) therefore many
times is Repentance said to be the cause of forgiveness: not (as some
otherwise Venerable, have anciently misse-conceiued) that the grace of
Repentance is a sacrifice for sin, or that Contrition and Conversion by
themselves, can satisfy for the guilt of sin, but because in the grace of
Repentance the Spirit enters, bringing also with him the grace of CHRIST'S
Justification. In sum, by the admitting of CHRIST'S Spirit renewing, we
receive Christ, acquitting and renewing us as the point of the Needle of the
Spirit, by which the Spirit pierces it self into our hearts, bringing the
pardon of sins repented into our souls, and the same sent from God for his
Christ's sake, but imparted, sealed, and ratified by the Spirit.

This washing thus fully and duly performed, and the Spirit restored to his
former dominion, he commonly fortifies himself, by the remembrance of his late
loss, and he strives to take deeper root, because his weaker roots were
before so much moved and shaken. He keeps a more careful watch against the
enemy, and (with a kind of malice) especially against that sin that before
had foiled him. He sucks harder from hence-foorth by more fervent desires, at
the great Spirit, whose Ocean supplyeth him, and fills the Creekes of all
empty, dry, and thirsty souls: and thus is sin turned into a medicine
against sin, and grace prospers by her losses.

To this large and weighty kind of Meditation, which asks both length and
strength of Intention, and requires the soul to be at leisure for it, we may
add a lesser and a shorter sort, as it were in a portable and manual form to
carry still about us for our continual use, to which we may have continual
recourse, amidst the continual distractions of this troublesome and toylesome
life. This is to be still in the hand of a Christian, as a Level in the hand of
a Builder, that he may square out his actions and conuersations rightly
thereby. The most profitable fashion of this portable Meditation, is, when in
few words it comprehends the sum of our business and duty, whereof there
are patterns to be found in the holy Scriptures; or if we list, we may fit
the words our selves, so we fetch the matter from thence. A good one shall we
find in the Epistle to TITUS: The Grace of God has appeared, which teaches us
to deny ungodly lusts, and to live godly, righteously, and soberly in this
present world. And in the second to the Corinthians: Whether ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God; and that of the
Royal Preacher: Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole
of Man. If this be practiced by us, we shall find this double benefit
thereby: First, if we be in the beginning of an ill action, like a Rule, it
will presently show us the crookedness of it, and point us to the right way
from whence we have straied: and if it have been too long deferred, so that
the sin is past before it was called for, then will it be a Seer unto thee,
to tell thee thy sin, and to deliver thee over to the larger meditation of
Repentance. Secondly, if thou art in a good and right action, it stands by thee
to abet and encourage thee, thou art in the path of Gods protection, in the way
where the Angels guard and watch; Go on valiantly and fear not, what man, nor
evil angels can do unto thee. Thus shall the soul continue her flight
toward heaven, if ever among she anoint her feathers with this Oil of the
Spirit. For in this respect she is not unlike those flying fishes, whose wings
by flying grow dry, and by being dry, lose their flying, so that still they
must have recourse to the Sea, by the moisture thereof still to make good their
flight. So the soul, flying through this world unto heaven, her wings, even
her cogitations, purposes, and conceptions will grow dry by earthly
conversation, and therefore must be new oyled with grace, if they will carry
her thoroughly to her iourneys end. The cares and temptations of this life,
quickly dry up the heavenly Unction, and so the soul is in danger to fall, if
she do not often moisten her self in the Rivers of Oil, which flow from the
eternal Spirit: and thither does this short Meditation direct us.

Lastly, we may adioyne hereunto, incident and occasional Meditations; which
will be very useful upon the receiving of extraordinary blessings, or the
suffering of unwonted chastizements. It is fit we should search out Gods
meaning (as near as we may) by the light of his Word, when he speaks to us
in his favors and frowns. His blessings should be esteemed, like so many
bands of obedience, and thou should acknowledge both in heart and actions,
that each of them calls to thee for more Love, more Thankefulnes, more
Holiness. Yea, thou art by them led unto Humility; for when thou look on
Gods blessings, and thy sinful self at once, thou must needs cry out; I am
less then the least of thy blessings; and what is man, that the Lord regards
and visits him? yea, the bounty of God leads thee to Repentance, and God
is often to us a pattern of ouercomming evil with good, even our sins, with
his Mercies. He dresseth and manureth many times a fruitless Tree, that he
may receive fruit from it. Therefore be thou amended by his benefits, and
increase thy fruit; otherwise blessings made unfruitful, are the fore-ru^ners
of cursings; and dressing, if to no purpose, is the way to digging up and
casting into the fire. Likewise, let the chastizements of God be entertained by
Meditation, unto thy profit and advancement. They would have thee either to
examine thy self of some neglected sin, or they would have thee repent even
for thy secret sins (for though thou know nothing by thy self, yet art thou
not thereby acquitted;) or they would have thee humble thy proud heart under the
mighty hand of God, or they would spur thee to a speedier and more active
Zeal, or they would teach thee the skill of that excellent virtue Patience,
and instruct thee to love God afflicting, and to trust in him slaying. Some of
these are commonly the purposes and ends of affliction: and if thou take
occasion by chastizements, to put them all in execution, thou shall be the
surer to hit the right one, and so to be a gainer by thy sufferings.

But (before we leave this subject) if we would know which is generally the
best and fittest habitude of Man for the receiving of profit by the larger and
more leisurable kind of Meditation: Surely it is when the body least burdeneth
the soul, especially, when she is least clogged with the gross vapors of
fullness and repletion. It is truly said by the Wiseman, That the corruptible
body weighs down the soul: and therefore as truly it may be said, That
the body rarefied and lessened by abstinence, lighteneth the soul, when the
eyes or ears, which see and hear the soul, are stopped up by thick
exhalations, the soul cannot tell the dull body what the Spirit of God does tell
it. But since spiritual things are spiritually discerned, surely then are
spiritual things best discerned, when the body is most spirit-like, and least
bodily. When the Lantern of the flesh is pared and thinned by Abstinence,
then the Light of the soul shines most clearly through it. Saint PAVL spoke
of the Man that saw Revelations unutterable, that whether he were in the body,
or out of the body he knew not: so if we will see Revelations (otherwise
inconceiuable) we must strive to go out of the body so far by abstinence,
as we may with preserving the body. For certain it is, That the soul
enlightened by Grace, if it were not for the cloud of the body, would shine
out to us in many notable and excellent Truths; and therefore he takes the
true course to meet them, that goes a little out of his body toward them.
And, surely such souls so walking toward God, by going out of the flesh into
the Spirit, GOD has often met with heavenly Visions, whereas others shutting
up their windows by continual fulness, have lost great Revelations; To DANIEL
fasting, GABRIEL appeared; to PETER fasting, the Sheet was let down from
Heaven; and to CORNELIUS fasting, even to the ninth hour, an Angel was sent
from God. And surely this latter kind of fasting seems most profitable for
Meditation; even the fast of the Morning, rather then of the Evening. For in
the Morning after rest the Spirits are freshest, and most capable both of Light
and Action; they are most lightsome and most active for Meditation. And as
fasting kindles the bright flame of Meditation: so the true and kindly fire of
Meditation sends up to Heaven the smoke and incense of Prayer. For fasting is
an excellent Preparatiue to Meditation, and Meditation to PRAYER. Without
abstinence, Meditation lesseneth her Light; without Meditation, Prayer
lesseneth her might: but Meditation joined to Abstinence, mounteth the higher;
and Prayer mounted on Meditation, pierces the swifter, and reaches the nearer
to Heaven. Again, as by Abstinence we are made the fitter to meditate, and by
Meditation made the fitter to pray: so by Prayer we get a greater fitness and
ability both for Abstinence and Meditation. Such Prayer blesleth the means, by
which it is begotten, by going to the Father of blessings, and it is of a great
power with GOD; even so powerful, that some kind of Devils go not out but by
it. Let us therefore often abstain, that we may often meditate; and when we
have dwelt awhile in Meditation, let us go forth into Prayer. For Prayer thus
inflamed by Meditation, is as the Sacrifice of Israel, kindled by the fire of
Heaven; and such a Sacrifice is indeed only acceptable. Without fire it is no
Sacrifice: for every sacrifice must be salted with fire, with strange fire (as
of superstition or the flesh) it is worse then no Sacrifice; and therefore it
must even be the heavenly fire of Grace, which makes the Sacrifices acceptable;
and this is most fitly kindled by Meditation. And thus if we kindle the fire
of Grace by the Bellows of Meditation, this fire that now guides, moves, and
comfort our souls in the Pilgrimage of this life, shall in the next life
break out into a flame of Glory, wherein we shall be inthroned like the Sun,
shining before the lesser Stars in brightness, as we have here excelled them
in Holiness.

CHAP. VIII. Of Association.
AS every strong thing is made stronger by the combination of a like thing unto
it; and as the heat is the more increased, by the meeting of diverse things that
have heat: So is also the Spirit increased in us, by the fellowship of them
that have the Spirit. When spiritual Men ioyn their spiritual strength
together, they will, like DAVID'S valiant men, break more strongly through the
Hosts of the Philistians temptations, objections, and afflictions, and fetch
away more safely and soundly the Waters of Grace from the Fountain of Life.
This Association of Saints is that Bed of SOLOMON, wherein two lying together,
have heat: but he lies in the Bed of woe, that lies alone. When two strings
of diverse Instruments are set to one Tune, if one of them be moved, the other
leapeth, and danceth: And how can it be, but that when two men tuned by one
Spirit, do meet, the Spirit of the one must needs rejoice and be lively, when
it hears the voice of the Spirit in the other? JOHN BAPTIST being sanctified
with Grace in his Mothers womb, even in that womb springs for joy, at the
voice of that Virgin, who was entitled, Full of Grace. Yea, ELIZABETH her self
falls into an heavenly Trance; and rising above her self, she is filled with
the Holy Ghost, and prophesies the blessedness of the Virgins Son. Surely,
there is not a more pleasant and comfortable thing then Harmony: for it is
indeed the ground of all pleasure: Now the chiefest Harmony is of the chiefest
things, and these are, Spirits: The highest of this kind, is in the highest
Spirit, even of himself, with himself. The second, between the highest and
the lower: And the third, between the lower themselves. From this last
Harmony does arise both joy and encouragement; our Spirit first is cheered,
then encouraged, and so aduan ced in the way of Holiness. The Saints of God,
either by their gracious words, or holy Examples, stir up the gifts of God in
us; they either add something to our Zeal, or something to our knowledge:
yea, if they be inferior to us in both, yet by instructing and provoking them,
we many times instruct and provoke our selves. Surely there issues oft-times
from the meanest something which may better the best, either immediately, or by
the consequence of some Meditations, awaked by conference. Even in the
communication of the Spirit, the Spirit increases, and our Talent, by lending,
multiplyeth in the most profitable and commendable Usury. For the Spirit is so
excellently good, that it desires to have his goodness communicated, yea, it
will reward thee that give it abroad, by increasing thy ability of giving.
So art thou made a great gainer, for it is doubly multiplied to thee; as it is
the Bread of Life for thy eating; and as it is the Seed of Life for thy sowing;
the more thou sowest, the more may thou eat, and the more may thou sow.

Wherefore let us not, as some do, forsake the fellowship and communion of
Saints; Let us not make the Spirit in us both dumb and deaf by separation and
division; for such it is when it cannot hear, nor speak the language of
heaven. Let us not deprive our selves of the great benefits of spiritual
traffike and commerce; thereby knitting up and stopping the prosperity,
growth, and enlargement of the Spirit. Let us not bind our selves to our own
infirmities, falls and wants, for lack of opening and communicating our
estates; for many have fallen and never risen again, because they have gone
alone, neglecting the company of such who could have given them the hand, to
raise them from their falls. We are all Brethren and Countrymen, and withal
Pilgrims in a strange Country; How glad should Brethren and Countrymen be to
meet in a strange Land? especially in the Land of enemies, such as this World
is. For this World shunneth us, it hates us; our persons and our courses are
odious, because contrary to them. How should their strangeness and malice
increase our mutual love and conversation? How much more need have we to
counsel and confer each with other, since we live as it were in a siege of
temptations and persecutions? And if the wisdom of Religion cannot persuade
us, let the patterns of Nature, which are the books of the Ignorant, teach us;
let the herds of Beasts, and the swarms of Bees, and the flights of Doves
instruct thee, to believe that things of one kind preserve and cherish one
another by mutual society. But if for all this, we will needs be strangers
one to another, differing and dissenting among our selves. Let us be sure that
we then rip that love from our selves which is the badge of the Family of God;
we lose the comfort of love, which is one of the greatest in our way to
happiness; we separate those whom God has knit together; we lose good
instructions and good examples; and finally, we weaken our selves by division,
and make the scattered Army of God, a prey unto their pursuing enemies. Let us
much rather, with the Prince and Prophet, rejoice in them which excel in
virtue. Let our delight be in the Saints on earth, and let the sons of God
love their Brethren, begotten by the same Father. Let us confirm and provoke
one another to good works. Let us associate our selves to them, who by word or
deed can supply our spiritual defects; from whose speech we may learn what
we know not, and by whose exhortation we may be moved to perform that,
which we know and do not; and by whose examples we may have virtues
patterned unto us, and showed to be possible, yea easy to the resolute man of
God. But nevertheless, in this Christian good fellowship do not pull out thy
own eyes, that thou may love all alike that carry the title of Christians.
Think not all them to be Israel, that put on the name of Israel. Where thou
see no contrary cause, there let charity carry away thy affection, but in a
degree, according to the degree of virtue. Yea, though thou see falls and
slips, if acknowledged and recovered, restore such a one with the Spirit of
meekness, lest thou have need also to be restored by him. But if thou see
one covering a continual Covetousness, Pride, Malice, Oppression, and such
other sins, with a long and thick cloak of Religion, let thy company to
such a one be a conversation of reproof, and the doctrine of SIMON PETER to
SIMON MAGVS, or let it be no company at all. These are they, for whom chiefly
the Name of God is ill spoken of among our Heathen Christians. These be they,
that set Religion to the basest and lowest service, even to the attendance and
supportation of sin, which of all things else it most hates and detesteth.
These be they, that make Religion to be most dangerous and hurtful to those
who have most Religion, if withal they have not the wisdom to discern
Spirits. These be they, that use the Word of God, to advance and prosper their
own wickedness, and consequently, their own damnation, and certainly their
damnation sleeps not, but every Sermon which they hear, increases their
heap of wrath, against the Day of wrath.

Now as we should generally apply our selves unto the society of the Saints,
so should we strive to bring Saints into the places of nearest use and
society. For goodness being so near us, will continually be doing good unto
us. Whereas on the contrary, gracelesnesse by the continuance of conversation,
will be still infecting quenching, and killing of grace. Ancient examples of
wretched Memory, have confirmed this at large; the greatest and the broadest
miseries having been brought on mankind, by the mischief of such infectious
society. There was but one man at the first, and in him was all mankind; and
in him all mankind fell into destruction, by his believing a seduced wife, and
their both associating and believing a seducing Serpent. Yea there is before us
but one great World, and by the conversation of the daughters of men with the
sons of God, this world was both corrupted and drowned. After that deluge
there was but one Nation chosen by God, as a pattern and Masterpiece of the
World, in which God, by miracles and precepts, mounted and improued mankind to
his utmost height, to see what Man could do toward his own happiness and
salvation, and this chief Nation, yea the chiefest one of that Nation became
abominably sinful by conuersing with sinners. And can a part think to stand,
where the whole has fallen? Or can our weakness think to overcome that enemy,
before whom such strength and wisdom lies vanquished and subdued? It cannot be
expected. Our vain and groundless presumptions may puff us up with an
opinion of conquering, but that very presumption is the main thing, that by
such persuasions leads us to be conquered; and by telling us of Victory, it
leads us on valiantly to be beaten. And let us assuredly believe this, that if
there be the like profane marrying, and the like taking in marriage, as there
was in the days of NOE; the like eating and drinking, even such wicked and
heathenish good fellowship; the world that now is, will be as ripe for Fire,
as it was then for Water; it will have as much need of burning, as it had then
of drowning. But let the wise of heart hasten this day rather by their prayers,
then their sins; and to prevent sin, let them walk as sons of Light, with
the children of Light, and have no fellowship with the works, or workers of
darkness.

I know right well, that the fewness of those, who enter into the straight
gate, does impose upon us a difficulty of fitting our selves round with the
society of Saints. I know also, that the necessities of this life, do
forcibly carry us into the companies of profane and godless men. Yet let us
remember to strive still for the best, to account the evil as thorns in our
sides, and let us find willingly a trouble and vexation in their company; but
never satisfaction, rest, and contentment. Let our hearts be to the Saints
still, even to the seed of the Woman's seed, and let there ever be a horror in
us, and reluctation against the seed of the Serpent. Let us do our endeavor
continually to unwind our selves from the wicked, and from the need of their
society. And let us take heed, that we do not too easily despair of
accommodating our uses and occasions by some of those sanctified few,
especially in that place of nearest Union, which requires but one; and that one
in the Lord: GOD has promised the seekers to find, and that he will withhold
no grace, nor blessing from them, which seek blessings for his Glory.

To conclude, converse also with the dead; hear and read their Actions and
Sayings; thou shall find that the dead will quicken the dead, as the dead
Prophet did the dead Soldier. The spirit of the dead will enter into thy dead
heart, when thou considerest their excellent Actions and heavenly Meditations;
The zealous heat of their spirits remains yet in their words and actions,
and by these will enter into thee, to raise thee vpto the same degree of
feruence in the Spirit. The first Love was the best Love, and the first lovers
were the best lovers. The Apostles that were nearest to Christ, were nearest to
him in Love; and those that succeeded the Apostles in time, succeeded them best
in Love: for then did the Kingdom of Heaven suffer greatest violence. I know
that God is still mighty in his Saints, but I know also, that in these first
times the fire of Love was more generally vehement; for then they did even dote
upon Martyrdom, and by their forwardness of suffering, daunted many times the
fury of their Persecutors. But on the other side, it has been foretold, that
in these last Times, Love shall wax cold, and men shall love pleasures more
then God: whereupon the World shall be consummate. Therefore let our cold Love
warm it self by the communion of their hot Love, and let no man so much
condemn the Fathers for Errors, as admire and imitate them for Zeal. Let us
be followers of them that followed so vehemently after Christ, yea, of all such
which since their days and even at this day, have been followers of those
followers of Christ. Thus compassed with a cloud of witnesses, the testimonies
of their love will powerfully persuade us, to cast away all that presses down,
and the sin which hangs so fast on, and to run more actiuely and swiftly
in the race of Piety and Glory which is set before us.

CHAP. IX. Of Humility.
TO increase in the Spirit, and so to grow in happiness, we must carry about
us a perpetual Humility. For Humility is the Forerunner of Grace, and it
never goes before, but Grace follows after. This excellent Virtue casts out
the old ADAM, and makes room for the New; it puts away the fullness by which
we are full of our selves, and so makes place for Christ, that we may be full
of his Spirit. Man (as before) has gotten a Godhead into him, he is filled
and puffed up with his knowledge of good and evil, even with a selfe-happines,
which keeps out the true Happiness. God will not have any gods but himself,
neither will he allow Man to have two Felicities, but he imposes a necessity
on him to love the one, and hate the other, to lose the one, and to gain the
other. Therefore as much as we retain of this corrupt felicity, so much do
we abate of true Happiness; and the room that is given to the one, is denied
to the other. And surely too true it is, that even after our Regeneration,
there abides a great remnant of our proud corruption. It is of kin to the
Serpent which persuaded it; when the head of it is broken in pieces, the tail
will still be moving. And in what degree this corruption remains, in that
degree is grace abated; but in what degree this swelling evil is abated, in
the same degree is Grace increased. Therefore if we be much proud, we are much
graceless, if we be much humble, we be much gracious. Wherefore let us take up
Humility, which as a Corrosiue will fret away the proud flesh, and make way
for the prosperity of the lively and quickening Spirit. Toward this, let us
consider that the Natural Man, being stuffed up with himself, and not regarding
any thing beyond the Lust and Law of his own heart, sits down in himself,
and takes up his rest, Sabbath, and felicity in his own imagination. But
while God is unregarded and unsought, he also as little regards these
vnregarders; yea he beholds the proud a-far-off. He knows the weight and
end of their swelling, that it is Nothing, that ere long it shall come to
Nothing; and that at last these swellers must come before him as a Judge, who
refused him here for a Savior, and happiness. On the other side, the
spiritual Man plainly sees, that this imaginary happiness of pride, is true
misery: since Man, the more he stands upon himself without God, the more
weakly and wretchedly he stands; and the fuller Man is of himself, the fuller
is he of Corruption, Vanity, and Misery. Therefore desires he to go out of
himself into God, and to unlade himself of himself, that he may be filled
with God; he purges his heart of the tree of false knowledge, that he may
satiate it with the Tree of Life. And Humility having thus fulfilled her
Work, then enters Grace into the Soul so swept and trimmed; for the same God
who resists the Proud, gives Grace to the humble. God will be a welcome, and
not a fulsome Guest: he loves not to come when there is no need of him, he
desires not to thrust unnecessary Happiness upon Men sufficiently happy. But
the hungry souls he fills with good things, he guides the meek and
humble, in his ways, and the poor in Spirit are allowed only to receive the
Gospel. These have set open their doors to the King of Glory; they have
forgotten their Fathers house, even their natural condition, and therefore the
LORD has pleasure in their beauty. His Light takes pleasure, yea, gets Glory
in coming into confessed Darkness; his Grace is delighted, and magnified, by
pardoning and sanctifying an acknowledged corruption, and his blessedness
rejoices in blessing apparent and desperate misery. Wherefore let us strive
for a practical skill of this profitable humility; that by not loving our
selves, we may love our souls best; and by the greatest emptiness, we may
purchase the most true and happy fullness. To this end let us ever be pricking
the tumors of our nature, that we die not of a spiritual Timpany. Let us
strive to make our selves nothing, that he which made all things of nothing,
may make something of us. Let us willingly walk down into the Vale of
humility, from whence God calls for all whom he exalts up to his holy
Mountain. And for the furtherance of this holy virtue, let watchfulnes
undertake, as a special part of this task, to mark the first swellings of
the heart, that they may be abated, as soon as lifted up. Let no degree be
allowed to that, which so much as it is; so much evil, so much loss it is; so
much have we offended God, and so much have we abated his Grace. But still
let us be paring and fretting off the proud flesh, with meditations of our own
natural misery; and miserable condition, with the asperitie of the exercises
of Humiliation, and with fervent and violent Prayer sent up to the Giver of
perfect gifts. Let us entreat him, that he will discover unto us, our selves,
and himself; our own vileness, and his Glory; that so we may rightly glory
in Gods true Glory, and not (like Fools) in our own shame. In our
Meditations let us fasten our eyes on the wickedness of Man, and the
wretchedness deservedly annexed to it. In our wicked corruption, let us first
see our own blindness, and bring our darkness into the light. There shall we
see, that we see little or nothing; yea, in the main matters of our life, such
as are our beginning and end; whence we come, and whither we go, we are
naturally blind. Therefore our life is but a thing at random, without knowing
what it does, and wherefore it is. And if we have gotten a little knowledge,
then let us behold our filthiness: How do we defile our selves in the things
which we know? how weak are our resolutions of Piety and Virtue? they are
like a Mist or the Morning dew, blown away and dried up with every blast of
Temptation: So that they seem to be set up only for shows; and to stand no
longer then nothing touches them. But the motions of our concupiscence are
strong, and continual. The flesh of Man is powerful upon the Soul, and in
Man that opinion is verified, that the Earth runs round, and the Heaven stands
still: For there breaths up from the defiled body, even the Earth of Man, a
continual, and mighty Venom, which by perpetual motion changes the aspect
and influence of the heavenly Soul, as it self lifts. But the whiles it
fastneth and nayleth the Soul, that she cannot stir about her own business
of Immortality, but she must wholly fix and employ her self in a careful
study, how to execute fitly the lusts of this beastly dust. And if at any time
the Soul lothing the filth and mire wherewith she has sullied her self,
even to ugliness, lay down a plot for repentance, even for the clean washing
of her face; how soon does the old dirt of sin spowt into her visage again;
so that her business in this life, if it be a life of penitence, seems to be
nothing, but a washing of that which is fouled, and a fouling of that which was
washed? and if we turn our eyes from this filthiness unto the bordering
wretchedness, we shall find our selves subject to a thousand infirmities:
Misery and Vanity have both liuerie and seisin in us, and we are their
Tenants for term of life. One trouble calls to another, as the waves of the
Sea; and miseries, like Beacons, give notice one to the other, until the whole
life of man be set on fire. The sound of the old is but newly gone out of our
ears, but there is a new which presently sounds as ill as the old. It is the
very kind of man to be miserable while he breaths; as it is the kind of
sparks to fly upward. And if a man strive to cure his present misery with
present mirth, commonly the misery of such is not taken away but changed, and
of temporal made eternal. The rich Man that was every day gorgeously arrayed,
and every day fared deliciously, ended his luxury in misery, and his
judgment is, Thou have taken thy pleasure, therefore art thou now tormented.
The cure of our misery must be by vulneraric potions, not by outward
playsters, by the blood and Spirit of Christ inwardly received, not by the
natural Balm of Gilead, even the pleasures of this world. The things of this
world are, to serve and cherish us in our way to happiness, not to be taken as
our happiness, or the absolute cure of our misery. For if so used, they cure
our misery, but with a greater misery, and by making us happy, they make us
lose a greater happiness. Thus must man be content to see himself of
himself, wretched and miserable. He must needs cry out, What is Man, that he
is so regarded? And Man is of a short continuance, and his life is full of
trouble; and surely, Man is altogether vanity. He must also complain of his
filthiness; our righteousness is as a filthy cloth, and if we should wash
our selves, our clothes would defile us. In iniquitic have we been begotten,
and conceived in sin: And who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness?
Thus lothing and condemning our selves, and being weary of our selves, Christ
JESUS stands with open arms, ready to receive such weary and laden souls, and
to refresh them. He will refresh us with the River of the City of God, even
with fresh streams of grace: and the holy Oil shall drop down from the head
of our high Priest unto us who are the skirts, even the humblest parts of his
garment: And then shall we be filled with the sweet savor of Holiness, and
life Eternal.

CHAP. X. Of Patience.
LAstly, for the preservation and advancement of the estate of Happiness, we
have great need and use of Patience. Our need of patience is absolute, because
the Saints of God are here with the rest, in a world of misery, and beyond the
rest in a world of enmity. Every hour there is a likelihood of some trouble
and temptation; and every trouble without patience (which is the Ward of the
soul) breaks in upon the soul, and carries her away into tumultuous,
enormous, and unreasonable perturbations. But on the other side, Patience
raileth in the soul amidst the prease of temporal evils, and keeps her in a
continual quietness and repose, and consequently in an ability of judgment,
discretion, and direction; and this is a first and chief use and benefit of
Patience. For does not that greatly advantage us, and the graces bestowed on
us, which makes us Owners and Masters of our selves and them? By Patience we
can, with the Centurion, call for this servant, and he comes; and send that
Soldier, and he goes. We can make use of our understandings, and by our
understandings, of those very evils, which are the subjects of our patience. We
can make use of our wills and affections, to will and love God; to will and
love that which GOD wills and loves; yea to will and love the very troubles and
encumbrances, which urge and press us. Hence come those excellent voices;
Though God kill me, yet will I trust in him: and, Before I was chastized, I
went astray, but now do I keep thy Laws: and, Blessed is the man that
bears the yoke in his youth. He sits solitary and is quiet, because God
has laid it on him. By Patience we can make use of our memories, to call to
mind the mercies of God in old time; how our Fathers trusted in him, and were
delivered; yea how often God has been our helper, and therefore we need not
to fear what man can do against us. Hereby we may also call to mind, those
wise and holy Precepts and counsels, which every wise and holy man does
prepare, and lay up for times of trouble and temptation. For it is fit that in
calmes we should provide for storms; we should in the quiet times of life sit
down, and according to our Saviors most prudent advice, cast up our
reckonings, what the forces of our enemies be, what kind of fighting they use,
how their wounds may be prevented, and how cured, if suffered for want of
prevention. He that has performed this act of consideration, he fitteth
himself with spiritual armor, proper to each kind of conflict. As soon as
he sees the trouble, he chooses out a fit shaft to pierce and encounter it;
when he sees the blow coming, he knows the Ward that must defend it. And all
this is put in execution by the benefit of patience. For the impatient lies
open to al blows; his wits are confounded, and when he should hold up his
shield, he strikes with his sword, and when he should take an arrow from the
quiver of the Spirit, he catches at a club proffered to him by the flesh. To
such a one all things are confused, he is besides himself, and therefore
knows not the choice of actions. Again, by patience we have the use of
Charity, a principal and Mother-grace: For hereby even in the midst of
persecutions, we can pray for our Persecutors, and say, Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do; and, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.
This quality of ouer-comming evil with good, and likewise the help of
patience toward the performance of it, must we believe to be a chief
preferment to a Christian in this race unto glory. For certainly it is so
near a resemblance of the perfection of God, that God exceedingly delights
in the doers thereof, and takes special notice of such; as those who are
lifted up above the dregs of humane corruption, into a high participation of a
divine and godly Nature. They are good out of an inward goodness, and not
because they look on good and pleasant objects. For whatsoever their object
is, they are still good, and account the excellency of goodness, and the
favor it has with God, to be sufficient causes of goodness though in the
world they see nothing but evil, which of it self deserves only evil. And
that this must needs procure a great love and blessing from God, does appear
by the effects it works in creatures infinitely inferior to God, yea impure
and depraved. For, even SAVL himself, whom the Devil drove to the hunting of
DAVID, as a Partrich in the Mountains; this SAVLS evil and wicked rage,
melts away with the beams of DAVID'S shining and glorious goodness; and
being preserved by him, whom he sought to slay, he is so overcome and changed
by that goodness of DAVID, that he is enforced to bless him as a son, whom
he had taken such pains to slay as an enemy. And if a cursed man can do
this, how shall he bless, that is the Father of blessings? Surely, let our
souls firmly dwell in this Truth, that those actions which are most perfectly
referred to God, and have no end but God, are most fully rewarded of God; and
as much as any outward thing does share in the end, so much do we lose of our
reward, and so much of our reward must we look of that End which did set us
on work. Now where evil is offered, goodness cannot well propose any end, but
God, in bestowing it self for evil. By patience also, we make room for
Faith, and like a good child it cherishes the parent that begat it: for,
while patience keeps the house of Man in quietness, the unruly and tumultuous
affections being suppressed and stilled, the soul is at leisure to look
abroad with the eye of Faith; even to look within the veil, and there to
see and comfort her self in eternal joys, presently possessed by Hope, which
as an Anchor both sure and steadfast, is there already vnmoouably fastened. By
Patience also, have we time and place for the excellent instrument of Prayer,
to fulfill her work of piercing the heavens, and presenting our necessities
and griefs to the Throne of Grace. And commonly the prayer of the patient
returns with this comfortable answer: In a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I heard thee: for, the patient abiding of the meek shall not
perish for ever. And that we may yet be a little more in love with this
beautifying and beautiful patience, let us look her somewhat steadfastly on
the face, and particularly desery her excellent proportion. If thus we do, we
shall find, that patience is placed by God in the heart of man against
troubles; as the cliffes against the waves of the Sea; for, by patience God
says to the floods of persecutions and vexations, Hitherto shall ye come and
no farther, and here shall ye stay your proud waves. It is the hedge of GODS
Vineyard, even of the blessed Spirits of the Saints, which has fenced them in
the bloudiest times, against the wildest Bores, even the fiercest Tyrants. The
body might be broken by torments, but this brazen wall of the soul could
never be battered; it is a kind of metal that is fitted of purpose to endure
the fire, even a fiery trial, and to be made brighter thereby. This she does,
and how can she do otherwise? for she is borne of heavenly Ancestors, and
fetches her original from the Highest. The power of the most Mighty does
sustain her, and how can it be but she must then be mighty and powerful? For
Patience fetches her strength and life from Hope, Hope from Faith, Faith from
Christ, Christ from God. If it were not for Hope, the heart would break with
impatience; if it were not for Faith, Hope would dye and starve, as being
without a root; if it were not for Christ, Faith would perish for want of an
object. And without the Godhead, the Manhood of Christ were not a sufficient
foundation of Faith. But now the Godhead supporteth and inableth the Manhood
of Christ by a mighty Union; Faith groundeth an immovable foundation upon
Christ, being God and Man; Hope violently lays hold on the joys truly
discovered by Faith, and Patience takes just courage and comfort from Hope,
because Hope tells her she must wait but a little, and the promises shall
certainly be received. And as Patience by this means powerfully supporteth,
and sustayneth the Soul, and the graces infused into her, so is she also an
excellent means for the increase of the same graces. Patience is the calm of
the Soul; and as it is best sowing of visible Grain in a time of calm, so in
the calm of the Soul, is it best sowing of the Invisible seed of the Word and
Spirit. Then can we most truly say, My heart is ready, and, Speak, Lord, for
thy Servant is at leisure to hear thee and then with Marie; are we most fit
for that thing which is necessary, when by Patience we have excluded the many
things that are troublesome. The Spirit delights in a meek and quiet Spirit,
it comes in the still wind, and not in the storm and tempest. Accordingly
experience teaches us, that the Patient have ever received spiritual
consolations: and even this experience is a consolation to Patience. For this
experience, that the love of God is shed abroad into the hearts of the patient,
so affects the patient, that they be not ashamed. And if we would rather
believe Examples, then Positions, Let us examine the Stories of JOB, and DAVID,
and let us remember what end God made with them. The latter end of the patient,
has recompensed his beginning; his patient sowing in tears, has brought
forth the carrying of sheues with joy. God will be suffered, loved, and
trusted, even when he afflicts, and chastizeth; he will have the Soul to
repose her Happiness in him, while the body feels temporal misery. And if
he be still trusted, and loved, if the heart still cleaves unto him, then
he comes at length, with a large measure of comfort, he performs indeed,
what he has spoken in his Word: Whosoever trusts in the Lord, Mercy shall
compass him. It is no great glory to GOD, nor excellency in Man to trust in
GOD, when with THOMAS we feel and handle the favors of God. The body may
have a share in this kind of trust: But the sight of things invisible is the
highest pitch of the Soul; this commends Man unto God, yea, it glorifies God
unto Man; for it brings down certain news, that there is Grace and Mercy
with God, when the body utterly denies it, because it feels the strokes of
seeming Wrath and Punishment. And in this testimony delivered and received,
GOD exceedingly delights; even to be trusted under hope against hope, and
he abundantly recompenseth it, as in ABRAHAM, so in the sons of ABRAHAM.
Another advantage of Grace by the mediation of Patience, is this, that the
patient afflicted, and he only, uses afflictions, as incentiues to spiritual
feruencie, and being by troubles driven out the flesh, and the comforts
thereof, he goes more mightily and wholly into the Spirit. He quitteth the
battered and polluted tabernacle of his loathsome flesh, and he enters into
the secret of the Highest, where, by his Spirit GOD himself resideth. There
does he warm himself by the heavenly flames, he blows and kindles them,
seeking by all means, that as sufferings abound, so consolations may also
abound, and that temporal sorrow be at least counterpoyzed by spiritual
joys. So through Patience, troubles drive us nearer to Christ, and sharpen our
stomakes to suck more earnestly and eagerly the nourishment of Life Eternal.
But on the other side, besides the loss of advantages, a multitude of evils
rusheth in upon the Soul unfenced by Patience. Surely she is a continual
prey to every trouble, she is never owner of her self, but like a light and
vnballasted vessel, she is at the command of every wave, of every wind. As
continual as the misery of Man is, so continual is the distemper of Men
impatient; and as often as troubles do happen, so often be they lifted up from
the hindges of their souls, and removed into the habitations of their blind
and uncomfortable flesh. Such a one is clean besides himself, even besides
his Soul; which is the reason that he can neither advise, nor comfort
himself. For the understanding which should direct, is as a Candle put out, or
covered with a Bushel; the will and affections, which by the succors of
Reason should support and strengthen, are drawn away from lending their service
to Reason, and so to Man, and are become slaves of Passion and Perturbation.
And so it comes to pass, that in such cases, a man's own will and affections,
which should sustain and cherish him, do distract and tear him to pieces.
And commonly it falls out with the impatient, that to the evil of affliction
(which might have been turned to good) he adds two evils more of his own;
evil actions, and evil passions; committing foolish things, and doing cruel
things, against his own Soul and Heart. And these two are commonly the greater
kind of evils, and which the enmity of Grace most intends, and therefore by
us especially should be prevented. Satan in spoiling the Flocks, in destroying
the Children, in tormenting the body of holy JOB, did not so much aim to make
him poor, childlesse, and full of pain; as to make him desperate, and
rebellious against his Creator and Savior by impatience. His greatest Malice
is against our greatest Happiness; he knows we are still blessed, while God
is one with us, though we be poor, naked, and full of sores as LAZARUS, who in
this life tormented, yet was after exalted to ABRAHAM'S bosom: He values our
chief Felicity, at a higher and a truer rate, then many of us do, and he
values temporal things at a lower rate, then many of us do; Therefore he
will indifferently take or give temporal things, to diminish our eternal
joys; he will assay either by proffers, or by plagues, to draw us from our
sovereign Good: And we more foolishly, and ignorantly, are ready to forsake
eternal felicity, whenever Satan will hire us with temporal commodity, or
beat us from it with momentanie afflictions. But it becomes us not to be
ignorant of Satan's policies; where Satan's eye is most settled to hurt us, let
our eye be there most fixed for our preservation. Toward this, let us thus
far join with Satan, yea learn of him, if we knew it not before, that the
union and agreement of our Soul with God, is the union of felicity; and
therefore whatsoever we lose, let us not part from that. If Satan rob us of a
bag of Silver, let us not call after him, and bid him take a bag of Gold
also. If he afflict us outwardly, yet surrender not to him thy inward and
everlasting Happiness. He is a Prince in this World, and so can do great
things in the World. He can persecute, he can exalt, he can torment. But he is
a slave us concerning the other World, which is called the Kingdom of Heaven.
He cannot reach to this Kingdom which is in the Soul, where GOD is the King.
Therefore by the things of this life, on which he has power, he reaches to
the things of the next life, on which he has no power, that by his own, he
may prevail on that which is Gods. But we on the other side, as we know the
Devils purpose, so let us know his bounds, and then we shall be safe. Let us
know that he can only stretch his power to temporal and outward things, and no
further; and the inward things he must get by surrender, or else he cannot
conquer them. Wherefore be careful to keep him at his true distance; if
Satan have leave to winnow thee outwardly; yet pray to thy Mediator, that he
pray, that thy faith fail not: if he cause thy outward man to perish, be
thou careful that thy inward man be renewed daily; and take heed that thou
give not more to him, then he has already; especially give not thy eternity
for his vanity, neither give him an usurped power over the Kingdom of Heaven,
to which he is a base slave, and by which he shall be judged. Cast not to him
thy soul after thy body, nor thy soul and body after thy goods; if the
Prince of this World will have the things of the World, yield to this Prince,
what must needs be given to this Prince: but the things of GOD, give only to
GOD; the things of Grace and Glory, reserve for the Author of Grace, and the
King of Glory. For want of this restraint and limitation of Satan's power, have
many Saints of God lost the possession of their souls, and in those times of
ecstasy, have undertaken doleful actions and executions, which have grieved
and pined the Spirit within them, and have made work for a long-after-sorrow,
and vexation of soul. Surely NABALS churlishness entered too far into DAVID'S
spirit, and the injury of the Thessalonians, too much delivered away the soul
of THEODOSIUS into fury, and the questions of the High Priests Servants, stole
away too much of PETER'S Courage and Resolution. These holy men, sometimes by
their frailty, gave too much way, and yielded too great advantage to Satan: But
some there be, who are perfect in Satan's art of impatience, and therefore are
his highest and greatest scholars. Let the Devil throw but one cross to
them, they will take their souls, and throw them to the Devils head; for they
break out either into some cursed rage, or into the rage of cursing, or into
some cursed action. Such a one is the Devils Water-spaniell, he goes and brings
what the Devil sends for; and if he bid him bring his own soul, he carries
it many times to him in his own mouth, even in a mouth of Reuiling, Revenge,
Curses, and Execrations. But let us rather consider, that Mankind stands
between two Spirits, the Spirit of Light, and the Spirit of Darkness, and each
of them has a several door into Man's heart, to possess and inhabit it. The
Spirit of Blessedness comes in by the door of the Spirit, and this is opened
unto him by the Key of Patience; The spirit of Hell enters by the door of the
flesh, and this is unlocked to him by impatience. Now troubles and afflictions
knock at both these doors, they knock at the door of the Spirit, calling to
us to open to the Lord of Life, with the Key of Patience; who is now coming by
afflictions, to nurture, and to instruct us, even to increase us in the fruits
of Righteousness. But afflictions knock likewise at the door of the flesh,
and by the feeling of smart, persuade Impatience to open to the prince of
darkness, since so grief may be eased, and it seems a vain thing to please
and serve an afflicting and chastizing God. But take heed thou open not the
door of Death, to admit the Prince of Death, but by Patience admit the King of
Glory, and give him the possession of thy soul; for his stripes are healers,
his chastizements are restoratiues, and his strokes are the strokes of a
Father. So shall thou prosper in grace, by afflictions, through the good
husbandry of Patience, and on the other side thou shall prevent all Satan's
mischievous purposes, even all the evils that usually do issue from a
tottered, disioynted, and abandoned spirit. Now that thou may provide for thy
self such a strong Patience, which may be a Coat of proof to the soul; thy
Patience must be tempred and steeled with Resolution. This Resolution is the
Armor of thy Armor; even the keeper of thy Patience, which is the keeper of
thy soul and the Graces bestowed upon it. For hereby we are constantly
prepared to endure all the crosses and troubles of this transitory race of
misery: And this Resolution to be good, must also issue from faith, that sees
GOD our felicity, who otherwise is invisible, and from hope, by which future
blessedness, though absent, yet assured, yields us comfort above all vanishing
miseries. Thus the Soldier of God, warfaring against the Enemies of his
heavenly Country, stands invincible against the gates of Hell, and himself
being wounded or slain, yet his Patience, and consequently his soul, is safe
and alive. But if thou have not this Resolution still ready at hand, thou art
impatient, as soon as thou feel a blow, and thou must needs run away; for
thou did never resolve to fight. Thou have not made thy co^putation what the
Kingdom of Heaven will cost thee, or at least when thou saw the reckoning,
thou did not resolve to be at the charge: Therefore thou art not for the
Army of Christ; for all his Soldiers have resolved to sell all, to take up his
Cross, and to follow him, in the way of suffering, unto the Crown of Glory.

To conclude, that we may yet be more secured, that neither our Patience nor
Resolution fail us in the day of trial; Let us know by whose strength we may
stand, and in that strength, let us especially seek strength. We may do well,
to open the Eye of Faith, to behold the joys of Heaven which are eternal: for
Christ on the cross beheld this Glory, and therefore endured the Cross, and
no doubt, the same joys, seen with the same sight, may work the same
Resolution. We may do well to apply the Oil of hope to the sores and wounds,
made by troubles and temptations; we may do well to behold the love of GOD,
which we cannot think, intends to punish or torment, but to amend and exalt,
and we may do well to look upon the print of Gods seal in our hearts, by
which that love is assured to us. Yet when we have done all this, it is the
power of God that makes all this profitable to us. If GOD draw in his breath,
we shall be troubled in the midst of our Contemplations, and Resolutions, we
shall after many protestations deny him with PETER; all these helps will help
us no more then the Law did the Jews, without the strong Helper. For even
Christ himself, by the power of God, endured the wrath of God, and by being
GOD, despised the shame imposed for the sins of men. The Glory proposed
comforted him, but by the Comforter; and the Spirit which he had, not by
measure, did above measure quicken him with the sight of those joys. Wherefore
let us especially by earnest Prayer, resort to our chief and only strength,
without whom no man shall be strong in his own strength. Let us seek of God
that power, by which PAVL being strengthened, was able to do all things, Let
us put our trust in God alone, and with DAVID call him our Rock, our
Fortress, our Shield, and our strength. We are but Dwarfes to Satan; and he
that is in the World, is far greater then we. But if God be in us, he is
far greater then he that is in the World; and he can make our weakness to
exceed Satan's strength. Therefore disclayming the keeping of our selves, let us
commit our selves to GOD, trusting that he will keep to the end, what we have
committed unto him. Let us draw near unto GOD, and to the power of his right
hand; let us take up our rest under the shadow of his wings. In his Name, and
not in our own, may we boast all the day long, for it is his right hand that
will get himself the victory in us. If thus we seek the Lord, he will be
found of us; if we ascribe power to the Lord, the power of God will descend to
those that glorify his power; if we trust in the God of Battles, of weak we
shall be made strong, as the faithful have been in the days of old. And if
we can once say, The Lord girdeth me with strength to the battle, we may
also say, Those that rise against us, shall thou subdue under us. Let
Principalities and Powers muster up things present, and things to come, height,
and depth, life and death, yet in all these shall we be more then Conquerours,
through him that loves and sustaineth us. Our Patience and our Resolution are
grounded upon the Rock of Omnipotence; though the winds blow, and the floods
beat, they shall stand for they are grounded on a Rock, and while Patience
stands, the Soul flourishes; where God sees Patience, he sees also that
the works are more at last, then at the first; for that, and that alone, is a
good and fruitful ground, which brings forth fruit with Patience.

CHAP. XI. Of the final possession and, fruition of Happiness.
THis World, though of it self, it be unto Man, but Misery, or Vanity, yet by
the Mercy of the Creator, it is made unto Man a Nursery unto Happiness. For
the Creator having lost his Creation, recovered it by Redemption. And by this
Redemption, the World, which otherwise is but troublesome and transitory, yet
it serves to fit us for Joy and Eternity: yea, the troubles and transitories
themselves are employed to do much of it: For the troubles of this life beat
us on to ward future bliss, and the transitorinesse delivers us up to
euerlastingnesse. In this life is the Bride trimmed and dressed; here is she
decked for the Day of her Gladness, and here being made glorious within, she
goes hence to be made perfectly glorious, both within and without; having
glorified God by an inward Purity, she goes to be glorified by God, in a
shining Eternity. But what tongue of Man can express the Glory of this
felicity, which the Heart of Man cannot conceive? The Tongue must receive it
from the Heart, and the Heart it self does not receive it. The Tongue is more
narrow then the Heart, and the Heart is infinitely too narrow for the receipt of
these Joys; so how narrow must be Man's relation of this Happiness, which
must issue from that which is narrower, then that which is infinitely narrower
then Happiness? And how can it be otherwise? for this Marriage is between
the Creature and the Creator. And how can the Creature comprehend the
Creator, especially, since we have here only a little glimpse of Faith,
whereby to behold him? Again, it is a spiritual Marriage, and we are here
more carnal then spiritual; so the tabernacle of corruptible flesh, does much
cloud and darken the Spirit, in the view of incorruptible joys. Yet are we
not left here wholly ignorant of that, which here we cannot wholly know; but
he who is our Happiness, has showed some sparkles of that which he is, and
has delivered it to us, in this World of ignorance, by some palpable
expressions, fitting rather to our dull capacity, then to his supernatural
Excellency. Too much light darkens and dazles a weak sight: and therefore the
full appearance of felicity, is reserved for a perfect and most absolute
Pureness, and Claritie. In the mean time let us firmly lay hold on those
revealed Truths which GOD has set apart unto us, for our allotted portion of
Light, in this dark place, until we come unto the perfect Day. Among them we
find this most certainly proclaimed, That as there went out at first a Word of
Creation, so shall there go out a Word of Dissolution, and therewith also a
Word of Resurrection. The mighty voice of the Lord of Heaven, shall make
Heaven and Earth to shake, the Elements to melt with fire, and the World to be
dissolved. The face of this Visible frame shall be wiped away, it shall be rolled
up as a Scrol: And all the false happinesses of Man shall pass away into
nothing. But the All-seeing Providence of the Almighty Creator, who numbreth
the hairs of our heads, and the sands of the Sea (for without his appointed
number they could not have the quantity or number which they have) knows all
Mankind both dead and alive, yea, every part of every scattered Man; and
calls up all Men, as he does the Stars in their turns, Arise, ye Mortals,
from Death and Mortality, and come unto Judgment. The Earth is but a Ball in
the hand of God, whereof every Mote or Atome was placed by his Wisdom; and
the WISDOM that made all, cannot but know all that it has made; yea, the
thing made, cannot go out of the reach of the Maker: for it must be by a
Power given from the Maker, that it is able to do those actions, by which it
strives, or seems to avoid his Maker. And this Power can be disposed, but at
the will or permission of the Giver, and so it is still subject to his reach
and comprehension. Accordingly, God, the Infinite cause of all these finite
things, fully searches and comprehends his own Creation, yea, every change
and variety thereof, neither can any thing in the World escape his knowledge,
whose knowledge is the very Fountain of all those changes which would seem to
escape it. Wherefore if we will allow a Wisdom wise enough to create, we must
also allow a Wisdom wise enough to know, and to master in knowledge the things
created. And if we allow a Power able to create without matter, we should much
more allow the same Power to be able to renew of something, what was first
created of nothing. Be this therefore the assurance of the blessed; that the
Trumpe shall blow, and the dead shall rise, and that the sruit of this Creation
shall return to the hand that first did plant it. As God is the beginning of
his Works, so is he the end of them; all things that went from him with Power,
must return to him with Glory; and the Seed-time of Creation, must be answered
with the Harvest of a final Judgment. God has not made the World to no
purpose, neither has he cast out from him so great a Creation, as a thing
contemned and neglected. He has not been wise in an excellent Creation to no
end; he has not set Man here as a wild beast of the Forest, only to run after
his lusts, neither seeing his Maker, nor seen of him. The Soul of Man had in
it the power of a reasonable service; it could see, and know, and please his
Creator. And Nature has truly discovered, that GOD makes nothing for nothing.
Therefore the Soul with her Subject the Body, must come and stand at the Bar
of Judgment, to be tried by her works, whether in the Body she has pleased
him that formed her. And though many vagabond souls have run from their Maker,
and have endeavored to put themselves out of his service and command; yet he
will not lose his property in them; they may fly from his Obedience, but never
from his Power, Justice, and Vengeance; they shall be forced to serve him, who
is the end of all his Creatures, by the sufferings of Justice, who would not
serve him in the Righteousness of Mercy. Accordingly in this great Day of
Trial, their appearance shall be in the ugliness of Gods defaced Image; their
blind, foul and leprous souls shall appear in a perfect, and naked
deformednesse; and their many sins shall come again to visit them, and shall
stand before them, as so many unnatural accusers of them that begat them. The
pleasure that once encouraged to the commission of them, shall now be stripped
from them, and sins shall then appear only sinful, filthy, and detestable.
And so by them, sinners being loathsome to the God of purest Eyes, they shall be
carried from the Eyes whom they offend; yea, the Eyes of Mercy and Glory
shall be shut up from them. But on the contrary side, the Eyes of Wrath and
Justice shall sparkle out fire against them, and this fire shall seize and feed
on their Sinfulnes; for sin unto Justice, is as fuel unto fire. Burn it
shall for ever, in a tormenting, but not a consuming flame; It shall have the
agony and vexation, but not the consumption and abolition of fire; for the
torment must be like the wrath; the wrath of an eternal God, and the torment
of an eternal fire. Thus blind and dark toward the God of Comfort, and the
Comforts of God, they shall be open-sighted toward their own Guilt, Horror,
and Amazement. Their guilt shall beget fear, and their fear amazement, by
reason of desperation, and hopelesnesse of release. What depth of vexation, or
rather, how bottomless a horror it is when the Soul cannot see beyond
torments, but is whole ly swallowed up of anguish by the contemplation of an
immortal misery? These are they, whose portion is the Creature, and whose
Happiness is in this Life. And as they lived without God in this World, yea,
against God, so shall they live without GOD in the next World, and God will be
against them. He who might have been their felicity, but was neglected,
shall now, because neglected, become their misery; their Habitation shall be
the blackness of darkness, and their business shall be eternal anguish,
vexation, and gnashing of teeth.

But the blessed sons and servants of the Highest God, who have set their
rest on their Creator, and have made him the end of their being, and the
means to the end, even a God to rule, a Savior to redeem, and a happiness
to bless; these arise with the Image of God in their foreheads; God sees his
face, in the face of their souls, and their works also testify the same for
them. These are clothed with pure White, the Righteousness of Christ, and the
Righteousness of the Spirit; with the first, the Justice of GOD is satisfied;
with the last, the Mercy of God is pleased; and by the last, the first is
adjudged to them. They have fed, clothed and visited Christ, in his hungry,
naked, and imprisoned members; these works are the fruits of Love, and Love is
the fruit of Sanctification, and Sanctification is an inseparable companion,
condition, and witness of Justification. So by the works of Love, they are
proved and approved to be the sons of God, who is Love; and if sons, then
also heirs; and if heirs, they shall for ever dwell in the house of Glory,
even in the presence of God. Their right to eternal Glory, is by inheritance,
even by being heirs annexed with Christ; but their admittance into their
right, is by the Evidences, and Testimonies of the works of Holiness. For it
is a true Rule, That none but the pure in heart, can see God, and again, None
can be pure in heart, but he must first be new begotten by God, even a son
and heir of GOD. And now to these is sounded forth that most blessed voice,
which opens the door of eternal Felicity, a voice that consummateth that
Supremest Marriage, wherein Man is matched to the highest Essence, the chiefest
Bliss: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.
In this Kingdom, the ragged and filthy garment of the body of sin, the
diseased infirmities of this sinful body, the tears of oppression, yea, all
grief is wiped away. And in stead of these, Man is infinitely purified,
sublimated, and so* fitted for the presence of the highest Being. In the
Purity of Holiness, he is pure without blemish; washed from guilt, by the
blood of the Lamb, and from corruption, by the holy Ghost, yea, there is a new
Light, as a new Eye planted in the understanding, exceedingly quickened and
enlarged to a spacious view of Truth, and Glory. Likewise, new Virtue
anoynteth and bedeweth the Will, steeping and seasoning it in a Divine Nature,
by which it excellently agrees in harmony with the will of God, and is holy
as he is holy. In the purity of Substance, the Soul shall be highly
clarified, until it be capeable of the uppermost and chiefest Light. And the
body shall be lifted up into a proportion with the Soul; for the body shall
then be a spiritual Body: even a Body like a Soul; even so pure shall they
both be, that they shall admit into themselves the beams of the Fountain of
Light, until they be filled with Light and Glory. God will be their Sun,
and he will shine into them as into Crystal, and in his Light they shall
have the fullness of Light. Then shall the Knowledge of Man ascend into
Perfection, far above these poor, pieced, and patched knowledges, which we
call Arts and Sciences. Even the highest Degree of knowledge, which in this
mistie time of Ignorance and Imperfection, justly holds the highest degree of
Eminence, shall then be the bottom and lownes of this new knowledge; and then
shall it be known that this kind of Learning is of use, much like to that of a
Lantern. It may do us service in this Night of Man's fall and corruption, but
in the Orient brightness of the Kingdom of Glory, the new light by
surmounting it, shall make it vselesse, yea, darken and discountenance it. For
whereas now we do but flutter about the branches, and extremities of Wisdom,
then shall we behold Wisdom in the root: The Glory and Fabrike of the
Creature, shall be seen in the Original, even in the Creator; in whom it was
first made within, before it was made without. In him shall we read the
Resolution of all profitable vnknowntruths; and his Wisdom shall be a most
perfect Oracle, instructing all glorified and blessed Souls. And with this
Wisdom shall we also behold an infinite Treasure of Power and Almightinesse.
The right Hand, and holy Arm of the Omnipotent God shall be revealed unto us,
and then shall we wonder at this Power alone, and not at the mighty Wonders
which this Power has done: for then shall we plainly see, that such Power might
well work such Wonders. And while we view and consider this Power, the Power
of GOD will point us to the love of God. For so mean a thing as Man, may well
be amazed at so infinite Power and Majesty; but that at once with the power
there appears an infinite Love; which tells the Soul, that though Power not
matched with Love, be a Terror; yet tempred with love, it is the very Safety,
Rest, and Bliss of Souls beloved: For as much power as there is in God, so
much is God able to bless those, whom he loves; and as much love as there is
in GOD, so much willing is he to bless those, whom by his Power he is so
much able to bless. Thus from Gods Wisdom, his Power, his Love, and his
Light, issue continual objects, and spectacles of Joy. Yet is not this all of
that, which cannot all be expressed: For this whiles there flows from the
Deity, into the Heart of Man, a most pleasant stream of the gladding Spirit,
wherein is the extremest power and virtue of rejoicing. This is the new Wine of
the Kingdom of Heaven, which makes the Soul drunken with high comforts,
raptures, and ecstasies: which inward comforts meeting and clasping with outward
joys, fill up a Man with an excess of Joy and Happiness, that he shall be
even swallowed up and ouer-rauished with Joy. And yet their Happiness stinteth
not; for there is an addition of a most delectable and soule-pleasing Harmony.
Harmony is a chief pleasure, and the most excellent Harmony is the chiefest
of this chief pleasure; and the most excellent Harmony is the chiefest of
this chief Pleasure; and the Harmony of the most excellent Essences, is the
most excellent Harmony; and the most excellent Essences, are Spirits; and the
Harmony of Spirits is in the Kingdom of glory. This Music of Spirits
exceedingly exceeds the Music of mortal voices; yea, that chief Music of
hearts, which between men is called Friendship, and between Man and Wife, is
called Marriage-Loue, is but a counterfeit resemblance, and carries but some
small rellishes of that Divine and Celestial Harmony. For in the Quire of
Heaven, the Saints and Angels, even the blessed Spirits, agree in a perfect
Unison of Truth and Love. Their understandings think one thing: their hearts,
even their wills, love themselves and their companions with one love; They
delight themselves each in other, and especially all in God. For as there is
between themselves a perfect consent, so there is also a true agreement between
these Spirits, and the chiefest Spirit, which is the very top of pleasure and
delight. What perfection can be higher then that of the highest Creator? And
how can a Creature be more perfect, then when he is consorted, and tuned to
this highest perfection? God speaks to the hearts of these blessed Souls,
and the hearts of these blessed Souls, think and utter thoughts agreeable to
the heart of GOD. God, that saw his Works of Creation that they were good, and
pleased himself in their goodness; Now beholds his work of Blessing and
Glorification, and rejoices in the rest and joy which he has given to his
Beloved. The glorified Souls behold and admire the Goodness and Mercy of
God, that gave not only the works of the six days, but the rest of the
Seventh to rebellious dust, and sinful ashes. In the infinite Love of God,
their love still steepeth and drowneth it self; and the more it sees the Love
of God, the more it loves God; and the more it loves God, the more it is
beloved. And out of the feeling of this surpassing Love of God, break out
those Songs of Joy, and Voices of Exultation, Glory, and Honor and Praise be
to him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. And,
Halleluiah; For the Kingdom of the Lord God Almighty is come. And, Let us be
glad, and rejoice and give Glory to God, for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come, his Wife is ready, and she is arrayed in pure and shining Silk. And yet
this felicity is not all; but that it may be as long as it is large, and as
infinite in continuance, as it is in extent, there issues from the Deity, into
the glorified Souls, the sap and nourishment of an eternal Life. The Tree of
Life nourishes eternally the branches of the same Tree; Death is swallowed up
into victory, and it self dies by the Word which is Life. But the Souls
partakers of God, from him who is Eternal, do suck Eternity, and so become
that Kingdom, whereof there is no end. And yet this is not all of that
inexpressible Felicity, but the greatest and chiefest is yet left in silence:
for that must needs be greatest which cannot enter into the heart of Man. But
let the transcendence of that which is unknown, be a double spur unto us in
this Race of Happiness; one, because it is transcendent, another, because
unknown. Let the Eminence provoke our Ambitions, and the Secrecy our
Curiosities. Let us desire and strive earnestly to enter into that, which now
by reason of wonderful excellence cannot enter into us. Let us endeavor
carefully to walk in the light of Grace, which will bring us to the full
Revelation of the yet inaccessible light of Glory; where Happiness shall at
once be fully known, and fully enjoyed.

In the mean time, it may be sufficient for me to discover, That the Souls
seated in Beatitude, pass their time, which shall never be past, in the very
top of Bliss and Delectation: They laugh at sorrows past, and are secure for
infinite joys to come. God is theirs, and they are Gods, and in this Unity is
the fullness of Felicity.

FINIS.

