LECTVRES UPON THE FIRST AND SECOND EPISTLES OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS:

Preached by that faithful servant of God M. ROBERT ROLLOCK, some-tyme
Minister of the Euangell of Jesus Christ, and Rector of the College in
EDINBVRGH.



EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT CHARTERIS Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. An. Dom. M. D. C. VI. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Majestatis.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL THEIR MOST LOVING FRIEND IN THE LORD, MASTER WILLIAM
SCOT OF ELY, grace in this life and everlasting glory in the life to come.
ALL knowledge, and all sciences invented by the wise men of this world without
the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, by whom remission of sins is obtained to the
miserable soul, are but vain and unprofitable. The Apostle reckoning, out his
prerogatives, Philip. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
which were many, counts them all in respect of the excellency and knowledge
of Christ Jesus to be but loss and dung: Even so it is with all sciences, if
they be severed from the knowledge of Jesus Christ in the Gospel. For, what
auailes it a man to know the height of the Heavens, the courses of the
Stars, the breadth of the earth, if in the mean-tyme his conscience accuse
him for his sins to be unworthy both of Heaven and earth? What auailes it a
man to seek by Physic to prolong afraile temporal life to the body, if his
conscience tell him in the mean-tyme that his soul shall perish for ever? What
auailes it a man to brag of the knowledge of the Law, if his conscience accuse
him to be most unjust and worthy of eternal damnation. In these and such like
things the wise men of this world do glory, and yet they make not the soul
the better. The knowledge of Jesus Christ in the Gospel is the only knowledge
that preserues the soul, and makes it to live for ever, Ioh. 5. 39
as our Savior says, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal life, Ioh. 17. 3
and they are they which testify of me. And again, This is life eternal
that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. Then this science is to be sought, praised, and preferred to all others
in all respects Look how highly PAVL commends it: 1. Cor. 2. 6. 7. 8. 9.
Wespeake, says he, vvisdome, among them that are perfect: Not the vvisdome of
this world, neither of the Princes of this world, which come to naught: But
we speak the vvisdome of God in a mystery, even the hid vvisdome, which God
had determined before the world unto our glory: Which none of the Princes of
this World has known: for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory: But as it is written, the things which eye has
not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, are which God
has prepared for them that love him: But God has reueiled the^ unto us by his
Spirit. Other sciences were invented by men: but God himself is the Author of
this science, he reueiled it. Other sciences are all invented in time, but this
science is before all time, from all eternity: other sciences handles things
corruptible and changeable the knoweledge whereof albeit it be pleasant and
profitable for this present life, yet it cannot reform the soul to eternal
life: for all their virtue is but the couerture of vice, but this science
settes out and reueiles to a broken hearted sinner a favorable and reconciled
God in Jesus, who is advantage both in life and death, and in whom the heigh
and wonderful things of God, and all things that the soul of man can require
for grace or glory, pertaining either to this or to that other life, Col. 2. 3.
9 10.
is contained: For in him are hid all the treasures of vvisdome and knowledge,
in him dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily. Now this precious
treasure the Lord hes committed to earthen vessels, he hes set in his service
base and contemptible persons to carry the message of reconciliation, and to
proclaim to weary and laden sinners the glade tidings of salvation, he sendes
out simple men to manure his husbandry: he sends them out as soldiers to that
spiritual warfare with weapons that are not carnal, 2. Cor. 10 4. 5.
but mighty through God, to cast down holds, to cast down imaginations,
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and to
bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Whom for the
message they carry, the Gospel they preach, the word of life they offer, that
hid treasure that is committed to them, the Lord craves we should have in
singular account, honor and love. And indeed if we had the sight of the
fearcenesse of that eternal wrath of God for sin, it could not be possible
but we would say, O how bevvtifull are the feet of them which bring glade
tydinges of peace, Romans 18. 15.
and bring glade tydinges of good things! We cannot honor, love and highly
esteem of the Master, and respect the Gospel, if we hate and contemn the
servant and messenger. And if we love our parents, of whom we have nothing but
misery, who hes conceived us in sin, nurirished and trained us up in sin, and
who by nature makes us aires of wrath and hell (for that which is borne of the
flesh is flesh.) Ioh. 3. 6.
O how excedinglie should we love these whom God makes instruments of our
regeneration to beget us to God, to make us his sons, and to translate us
from darkness to light from misery to felicity, from death to life, from
hell to heaven. And yet this unworthy world never duly accounts of them, but
of all men they hate most malitiouslie the true servants of Jesus Christ. And
to pass by other ages and Countries, the Lord of the harvest stryuing against
our ingratitude hes sent out from time to time into this Land sundry painful
laborers and faithful preachers of the Gospel, who preased in all respects
to approve themselves to God, to a good conscience, and to the consciences of
so many as believed, of whom the world was not worthy.

Among the rest whom God did bewtifie with singular graces, the Lord in the
person of M. ROBERT ROLLOCK, that faithful and reverent servant of Jesus
Christ, gave us no sober token of his love. For we cannot tell if upon any
almest in this Land the Lord bestowed greater abundance and variety of graces
of his Spirit, if in any there was a more spiritual and heavenly soul, if
any spared themselves less and undertook greater pains that they might be
found faithful and finishe their course with joye, if any preased more to
approve themselves to God and a good conscience then he. O what and how many
gifts and graces were in the person of that man! in conceiving he was quick,
in judgment solid, he uttered the Word with great liberty, he preached with
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and power: in opening up of the text
and raising grounds of doctrine he had a special grace, in teaching he was
clear and sententious, in conuincing, powerful: in exhorting earnest and
pithie: in correcting vehement: who for graces being in account and honored
was more humble? (and rara virtw humilitas honorata) who being provoked was
less vindictine? who preased more to keep the chair of Verity clean from
corrupt passions, that the word of God might have free passage and be
glorified? Who sought the world less? Who esteemed less of these earthly
things: For he behaved himself as a faithful servant of God, not seeking
himself, but Jesus Christ, as a pilgrim here, yea and crucified to the
world: for knowing that here he had no continuing city, he sought for one to
come he had his conversation in heaven, from whence he looked for Jesus Christ
his Savior to come. And having lived such an holy life to the glory of God,
there followed a most sweet and comfortable death in Jesus, whom he counted
always to be his advantage. Revel. ^word 13.
And blessed are they that dies in Jesus, for they rest from their labors, and
their works follovv them. O how great a wound did the church receive by the
losing of such a member! Experience teaches us this day when there is such
distraction of hearts in the Church what inlack we have of this man, whose
labors in the like days and cases the Lord while he lived blessed
wonderfully. His life preached his death preached to the world: Many one who
heard him found in experience that he ran not unsent: For he labored not in
vain, 1. Tim. 3. 2. etc.
but the grace of God was powerful in him, and by him to many. Finally, he as
a viue exemplar represented to us such qualities and conditions as the Spirit
of God requires to be in a Bishop of Jesus Christ. Tu^. 7. 8
Put why insist we to speak to you, Sir, of this man who was well known almost
to all, but most interely to you: Neither was he steadable to the faithful
that heard him by his vine voice only in his life preaching, but also his
works yet teaches the posterity. For his learned and judicious writtings left
behind him in latin hes acquired to him a famous name and reverend account
among the learned in sundry nations, who profess that thereby no small
edification redounds to the Church of God. And therefore, seeing that God did
accompany his form of teaching so powerfully with his spirit and made it so
profitable, we have thought meet to set out these his Lectures upon the two
Epistles to the Thessalonians, that not only the simple may be instructed
thereby but also the teachers may know and imitate his gracious form of
teaching: as likewise, because the other Sermons that were before imprinted hes
been received with great lyking by the humble and such as desire to be edified,

Now, Sir, whereas others in such cases uses to say that they were aduising as
doubtsome to whose patronage they should recommend their work, we herein are
relieved of this care: we need no deliberation: for to whom in all respects can
it belong but to you? First in respect of that inteere and exceeding love and
familiarity that was between you and the Author hereof. For from once by his
preaching the Lord wroght in your heart, all who knew M. ROLLOCK knew also how
ye loved him, delyted in his company and conference, set your self in all
things to pleasure him, what testimonies of true love and unfeigned kindness
ye would have uttered to him, how freely for the love of Jesus ye would have
communicate to him temporal things, (if that man, who was so well content
with that he had, could have suffered you, and had not stayed the course of
your liberality.) Also when that last messenger and forerunner of death did
sease upon his frail and weakened body, few are ignorant how careful ye were
for his greater ease to have him transported to your own house: How liberally
ye and your bedfellow (whose praise ought not nor shall not be buried in
oblivion) bestowed on him all things necessare and commodious, how chearefully
ye received and entertained for his cause all them that came to visit him, and
what great benefit ye counted the Lord bestowed on you in that he offered the
occasion, which long ye wished to show your liberality in temporal things
toward such a rate vessel of mercy and faithful servant of Jesus from whom
he had received so many spiritual things. Again who is ignorant, what
affection and kyndnesse ye have uttered and daily vtters toward his relict
and posthume for his cause yea and toward all these who loved him in Christ.
Next, to pass by that M. ROLLOCK in testimony of his love dedicate to you his
commentare in Latin on the second of these Epistles, as also that in his
Testament he ordained that all his books which he left to be printed after his
decease should be dedicate to you, and come out under your name and patrocinie,
that whosoever got commodity thereof, next after God, might give the honor
and thanks unto you, after a special sort this work requyres your patronage.
For through your care, moyen and expenses these Lectnres were collected and
gathered from the hands of these who wraite them from his mouth, by your moyen
and procurement they were reuised, corrected, and made apt for the printing by
your means they now see the light, which they had never seen, but had been
buried in darkness, if the Lord had not made you an instrument to publishe
them. Last, if that the pains which has been taine in reuising, correcting
and making them apt for the printing might yield any right to make choice of a
patron to this work, we would not, nor could not offer it to any, but to you,
Sir, not only because of the undeserved love and kyndnesse ye utter daily
toward us, yea and toward all the servants of Christ, both publikly and
privily as they themselves do testify, but also in respect ye were the Author
to move us to undertake such traueiles. Indeeed such a propine is far
inferior either to your deserts or our desire: and therefore we present it,
not so much thinking thereby to discharge and satisfy the debt, as to
acknowledge our obligation to you, and to be a testimony of our thankfulness.

For these causes, Sir, we desire you to receive this work in your patronage
and protection, to defend it from the speeches of such as hes not learned yet
to speak well of any person or their works. For we are not ignorant how much
and often they who set forth other men's works use to be subject to the sharp
censure of men, and how little thanks commonly, either they get, or may look
for of many, so that few would be found to take travail in them, except they
were rather moved through the love of the glory of God, and edification of his
Church, then through any thankfulness they may expect at men's hands. Last, Sir,
weary not in well-doing, go forward to do good unto the Saints for Christ's
sake, and experience shall give you a proof of the Lords love and blessing
upon your body, soul, and actions in this life, his Saints shall love you,
his servants shall pray for you that ye may find mercy in that great day, and
when ye have run out your course, when your journay shall be ended, when ye
have foughten out the battle, the Lord shall then gather you to his Saints
and crown you with glory. Now the God of al consolation, Lord of Lords, and
King of kings, bless you with all benefits spiritual and temporal, direct you
by his sprit, and preserve you long to the glory of his Name, and to he well
of his Church, that your pilgrimage being ended ye may with joy rest from your
labors in Jesus, in whose countenance is sacietie of joys, and at whose right
hand are pleasures for ever more, AMEN. Edinburgh the 16. of June. 1606.

Yours in the Lord H. C. W. A.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
WE offer unto thee, Christian Reader, these Lectures of that most reverent and
faithful servant of Jesus Christ M. ROBERT ROLLOCK, upon the two Epistles of
the Apostle Paul to the Thessalonians. We have taine painos and traueile that
thou might find profit and edification. For not only have we conferred
sundry coppies gotten from the hands of them who vvrote them from his mouth,
but also we have conferred them with the Latin Commentary written by the
Author himself, that thou might have fully, so far as was possible,
both his own phrase and matter. In conferring of the Copies we omitted
repetitions, cleared things obscure, and filled out imperfite sentences, that
in nothing thou might find inlack. If thou doubt, either of the style or
matter, or if any would move thee to conceive any eye-list or misliking of
this work (as we are not ignorant how ready many are oft-tymes, upon small
or rather no ground, before they have either seen or read, in such cases to
give out sentence) we pray thee show us this favor to superceede thy
judgment until thou have red and considered, then may thou pronounce with
the better vvarrand. If thou read with an heart indifferent and desirous to be
edified, we trust thou shall find thou have not lost thy labors. And if thou
return glory to God, and get grace to thy own soul, which were the
chief ends of our traueiles, we will think we have gotten a sufficient
recompense and obtained our desires.

Farewell.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.
THESSALONICA was a chief City of Macedonia, rich, populous, and puissant,
builded by Philip the father of Alexander the great, King of Macedonia, after
the victory he had gotten over Thessalia invaded by him at unawares. For
returning home victorious he builded a City and named it Thessalonica, that it
might be a perpetual memorial of that great and excellent victory he had
obtained. Paul (as ye may read Act. 16. and 17. chapters) in his peregrination
together with Sylas (who in this Epistle is named Syl^a^^^) the sixteenth year
after his conversion, being called by a vision to preach the Gospel in
Macedonia came first to Philippi, and next passing through Amphipolis and
Apollonia came to this City Thessalonica, and entering in the Synagogue of
the Jews three Sabbath days disputed with them, proving by the Scriptures
that it behooved the Messiah to suffer and rise again from the dead, and
therefore that Christ whom he preached was the true Messiah and Redeemer of the
world. At the which preaching of Paul, sundry of the Jews that dwelt at
Thessalonica believed and joined company with Paul and Sylas together with a
great multitude of the Grecians, and many of the chief women of the City.
But the Jews that believed not, moved with inuy, raised a great persecution
against Paul, whereby he was forced to flee to Berea: where he preached the
Gospel with better success: For the Jews of that Synagogue received the word
with all readiness, and tried his doctrine by the Scriptures, so that many of
them, and likewise many men and women among the Grecians were converted. Yet
the obstinate Jews there also moving persecution against him, he is brought to
the brethren to Athens, where he waited for Sylas and Timotheus, who returned
unto him when he was in Corinth in Achaia Act. 18. 5. Therefore it was reported
to him that the brethren that believed at Thessalonica were heavily persecuted by
the obstinate Jews: whereupon the Apostle was moved with an earnest desire to
come to them, but he was hundred by Satan. 1. Thessa. 2. 18. Therefore tarying
himself at Athens he sent Timothy to them (1. Thessa. 3. 2.) to comfort them
in their trouble, and confirm them in the truth. Timothy returning and
bringing good tydinges to him of the great grace of God that he found with
them, because he could not come himself; the more to comfort, confirm and
encouradge them to continue in the truth, he writes unto them this Epistle,
which by the judgment of learned men is thought to be the first this Apostle
wrote.

There are four parts of this Epistle: The first part is the Salutation.
chapter. 1. verse 1. The second is a Congratulation and rejoicing with them for
the graces that by Timothies report he understood to be in them, wherein he
insisles very largely, even from the 2. verse of the first chapter unto the
fourth chapter. Yet oft-tymes he breaks o^^ this Congratulation by occasion
casting in sund^y purposes needful to be entreated. First, he falls out in a
discourse of himself, and the success the Lord gave him in his (...) toward
them, and his sincerity in his ministry, he remooues from himself all
suspicion of vnsinceritie, either by decease, by vncleannessen or by guyle,
together with the fountains from whence it proceeds, as flattery, avarice,
ambition, and (...) his in^eere affection toward them, from the beginning of
the second chapter to the 12. verse. Next he excuses himself that he came not
to them, from the 17. verse of the second chapter, to the last part of the
verse of the third chapter, where he falls out in an exhortation to them to
suffer afflictions patiently unto the 5. verse of the third chapters, there be
brings a new reason to excuse his not coming to them unto the 9 verse of the
third chapter: then returning to the congratulation in the end of the third
chapter he concludes it with a pr^^er for the Thessalonians. The third part of
the Epistle is anexhortation to holiness of life* He exhorts first generally
to sanctification, in the first three verse. of the 4. chap. Then he commes more
particularly to the parts of sanctification, and insistes (...) them to the 23
verse of the last chapter. In this part of the Epistle the Apostle to comfort
the Thessalonians who sorrowed above measure for the departure of their
friends, by the way falls out in a discourse of the estate of the faithful
departed this life, of the coming of the Lord of the rising again of the
dead, of the time of the Lords coming, from the 13. verse of the fourth
chapter to the 6 verse of the fifth chapter. The fourth part of the Epistle is
the Conclusion, containing a prayer for them, a promise of sanctification made
to them, with some other purposes, from the 23. verse of the fifth chapter to
the end of the Epistle.

MASTER ROLLOCKS LECTVRES UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
THE FIRST LECTVRE.
THESSA. CHAP. 1. Verse. 1. 2. 3. 1. Paul and Siluanus, and Timotheus, unto the
Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ: Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.

We give God thanks alvvayes for you all, making mention of you in our prayers,

3. Without ceasing, remembering your effectual faith, and diligent love, and
the patience of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God, even
our Father.


WE purpose (well-beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ) by the grace of God, as his
Spirit shall assist us, to expone this Epistle, which is the first Paul does
write to the Thessalonians: Which furnishes to us doctrine serving for
understanding, instruction, admonition, consolation, etc. Then to come to the
purpose shortly: We shall speak something of these Thessalonians to whom he
wrytes; of the Argument of this Epistle, and the purpose of the Apostle in it.
The Thessalonians were those, who inhabited a town called Thessalonica, which
(as the History ^eares) was a chief town in the Country of Macedonia,
sounded and builded by Philip King of Macedonia, after the victory he had
gotten over Thessalia; for returning home victorious he builded at town, and
named it Thessalonica, to be a perpetual memory of that excellent victory he
had obtained. But to leave this: Paul (as ye may read, in the 17. Chap. of the
Acts of the Apost.) in his peregrination together with Sylas, who is here
named Siluanus, comes to this town in Macedonia, called Thessalonica, and
entering into the Synagogue of the Jews, three Saboth days preached unto them,
and all his preaching tended to this, to prove that it behooved the Messiah when
he should come in the World, first to suffer, then to rise again in glory:
Upon this he subsumes that that Jesus whom he preached, had suffered, had risen
up in glory; And therefore he concludes, that Jesus, and no other, to be the
Messiah and Redeemer of the World. At Paul's preaching, sundry of the Jews
who dwelt in Thessalonica were converted: a great multitude also of the
Grecians who abode there, and of the chief women of the town, not a few: Yet,
notwithstanding of all this, sedition is moved against the Apostle, and that by
certain obstinate Jews, who would not be converted: so he is compelled to
flee out of Thessalonica, fleeing he comes to Beroea, where he gets better
entertainment, and conuertes sundry: Occasion of the Epistle.
Yet persecution ryses, and he is led to Athens, where he abiding, word comes
to him, that the Brethren who were converted at Thessalonica, were heavily
troubled, and persecuted by the obstinate Jews there. Upon this the Apostle
sends Timothy to them, to confirm them, and comfort them in their trouble.
Timothy returning, and reporting the grace of God he saw there, Paul would
have gone to Thessalonica, but as he says, Satan withstoode him, and
therefore he takes purpose to write this Epistle unto them, which should be in
steed of his presence. This is the occasion of the writing of this Epistle.

Then to come to the Epistle it self, Parts of the Epistle.
and to speak of the parts thereof. First, there is a salutation: after the
salutation, he has a congratulation, and rejoysing with them, for the graces
he understood to be in them, by the report of Timothy. He continewes his
congratulation a long time, almost to the end of the second chapter. Then he
comes to his exhortation, and exhorts them (notwithstanding of al trouble) to
preseuere constantly to the end. This he does in the third chapter: In the
fourth and fifth chapters he comes to the matter; and as before he had exhorted
them to perseverance: so he exhorts them to godliness and holiness of life,
such as becomes them, who have received the Lord Jesus. This is the substance
of the Epistle.

Now in this chapter: First, we have the salutation, then the congratulation,
and rejoysing for the graces of God in them; which continewes all this chapter,
and the most part of the next chapter. Now to come to the salutation, wherein
the Apostle salutes the Thessalonians: I will speak shortly of it, because it
is a common form used by the Apostle in his Epistles, and has been often
exponed. The persons from whom this salutation comes, are Paul an Apostle,
Siluanus and Timotheus, two Evangelists: They who are saluted, are the
Thessalonians, that is, the Church of God, that was made up of the
Thessalonians, who were inhabitants of this town of Thessalonica* The
blessings, or good things that are wished from Paul and the rest, to the Church
at Thessalonica, are grace, and peace: the Author of this grace and peace, from
whom, as from the fountain, Paul with the rest of his associates, wishes
these things to the Thessalonians, is the Father first: the Son our Lord
Jesus next. The cause wherefore grace and peace is wished from the Father and
the Son to the Thessalonians, is, because the Thessalonians stood in that
blessed conjunction with the Father, and the Son, and therefore it is said in
the text, To the Church of Thessalonica, which is in God the Father, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ, that is to say, which is in that holy society, and
conjunction with the Father and the Son.

Now to mark something of the salutation. Note.
This form of salutation that is used in this place, and in other places, by
this and other Apostles: al these general salutations used by godly men, unto
godly men; what are they? they are testimonies of that good mind, and
good will, that the godly bears to the godly: They are more too; they are
means and powerful instruments ordained by God, whereby the grace of God, the
mercy of God in Christ, is conuoyed from God, and Christ to them, to whom the
salutation is directed. There are many means, whereby grace is conuoyed from
God to man, amongst all the rest, these salutations are means ordained by God,
to that end. Brethren, it is no small matter to wish well to a man or woman,
if thou have a godly heart when thou wishes well to a godly person, of
necessity the affection of thy heart and mouth must be effectual.

The to go fordward. Grace and Peace, is wished. But from whom? From God the
Father, and from the Son Jesus Christ. The Son must not be forgote here,
because all grace is given in him by the Father; in such sort, that if any man
will seek grace without Christ, he shall never get it. Therefore he who would
have grace, let him seek it at God, through Christ: that he may receive it of
that fullness that is in the Son. The Jew that will seek to the Father
without the Son, shall never see grace.

Whom to is this grace and peace wished? to the Church at Thessalonica.
Wherefore? Mark this ground. Because this Church is ingraft in the Father and
in the Son by faith. Then first I see here: there is no grace, but from the
Father and the son: and therefore there no wishing of grace to man or woman,
but from the Father and the son, who are the fontaine of all grace. Again I
see grace, mercy and peace pertaines to none, but to so many as are in this
happy conjunction with the Father and the Son. Art thou in the Father? Art
thou in the son, ingraft in him by a lively faith? Then grace pertaines to
thee: mercy and peace pertaines to thee. Art thou out of him, and not ingraft
in him by faith? Let men wish welfare and peace to thee as they will, no grace,
mercy nor peace pertaines to thee. By grace and peace is understood whatsoever
blessings of God that follows on that conjunction and union that is with God
the Father, and the Son Jesus Christ; As for exemple: Remission of sins,
Justification before the Tribunal of God, Regeneration and clensing of this
foull nature, peace, joy in the holy Ghost, and life everlasting: all flows
from this conjunction: and therefore it must follow, that to him who is out of
this conjunction with the Father and the Son, there is no remission of
sins: if thou be not united to the Father and the Son by faith; no
salvation, no regeneration, no life everlasting, no peace for thee: all thy
peace is false peace, and thou shall curse the time that ever thou had that
peace. Then it must follow that this form of salutation, pertaines not to the
Jew this day, who is out of this conjunction, neither I, nor no man can say to
the Jew this day, Peace and grace to thee from God the Father and from Christ
Jesus his Son: neither pertaines it to the Turk or Pagane, who are out of
this union with God and Christ by faith. More then this, it will not be the
name of any thing that will do the turn: there are many that taks upon them
the name of a christian, and so will seem to be in the union with the Father
and the Son, that in heart have no conjunction with them: But I say to thee,
it will not be the outward conjunction with them, in the name of a Christian,
it will not be the wishing of good days and good euenings that will do thee
good, except thou find thy heart bound up in that blessed union with the Father
and the Son Jesus Christ.

Mark an other thing. Learn here a form of an effectual and pithie
salutation that the godly should use: first, when the godly salutes, as Paul,
Siluanus and Timothy, when they wish any thing to thee, what wish they? Not
any thing thou deserves, if thou were never so holy, but free grace, without
any merit, as Paul here does: then again, they wish it from them that hes
this grace in their hands, from the Father and the Son. And last, they wish
it to them who stands in the union and conjunction with the Father and the
Son: for this union will draw down the drops of grace from the Heaven, from
Jesus that is full of all grace. Therefore Brethren, these salutations of the
Heathen and Gentiles, and of prophaine men now, are nothing worth; they were
never of valor: I will not give a penny for Cicero his salutem dicit; nor
Plato his (...), because in wishing well, they knew not what they wished, they
called it welfare, well doing: they knew not grace, nor the free mercy of God:
they knew not God, the fountain of all grace, nor Christ his Son, from whom
all grace flows: they knew not a Church, nor the conjunction of the body, or
the members with the head: so their salutations were of no value. Even so it is
this day with prophaine men, who knows not God, nor Christ nor the Church, nor
knows not his conjunction, their salutations are not worthy a stray; all
their good days and good euenings are dear of right noght, for their
salutations are only prophaine words, and when they are blessing with their
mouths, they are cursing in their hearts.

Now, brethren, to go fordward to the next part, which contains this
congratulation and rejoysing together with the Thessalonians, for those graces
of God which were bestowed on them Ye se the words: We give God alvvayes thanks
for you, making mention of you in our prayers. In this congratulation he
rejoyses together with them, for the graces the Lord has shown on them: in
rejoysing for the graces shown on them he forgets not God the geuer of all
grace, but in rejoysing with them, he glorifies God and thanks him for them,
and so acknowledges all the graces that were in the Thessalonians, to flow out
of this fountain, he acknowledges their faith, their charity, their hope, not
to come of themselves, but to be of God: and therefore in rejoysing with them,
he geues God the glory of all the graces that was in them. Why should we not
congratulate and rejoise for the graces of God we se in others? we are bound to
do it. Thou art oblisht to rejoise with him that rejoyses for the graces of
God given him, as if they were given to thy self. Paul says, Rejoice with
them that reioyses: mourn with them that mournes. Romans 12. 15. We are bound
when we see the grace of God in any people or nation, to commend it in them:
for it is said trewlie, when grace or vertew is commended, it grows. But
look that thy rejoysing, thy commendation of men for the grace thou sees in
them, be to the end that thou may glorify God, who is the Author and fountain
of all the grace, look that in commending of men, if it were all the Monarchs
in the earth, on pain of thy life thou forget not God. Look first up to the
geuer, and then to him who has received: say not, Sir, or my Lord, I commend
you for your good wit, and governance, I commend you for your manhood and
wisdom. The flattering Gentiles that knew not God says so: but thou who art a
Christian speak not so to any man: but say, I give thanks to God who is the
fountain of all grace, for the grace he hes given to thee: thou have no good
grace no wisdom, no manhood, etc. but that which God the Author of grace hes
given thee: as ever thou would see the glory of that God, who ever thou be
have thy eye first of al, in all thy speaking and doing on the glory of that
God. I confess there are many impediments casten in betwixt thy eyes and the
glory of God, but strive to get a sight of that glory, or else thou shall
never be partaker of that glory. Thou may have a shadow of glory in the world
for a while, but as the must before the Sun vanishes away, so shall thou and
thy glory vanish away, to thy everlasting confusion, if thou strive not to
have the glory of God before thy eyes. Then hes thou any good graces in thy
self? give God the glory: What have thou, that thou have not received?. 1.
Cor. 4. 7. Give him the glory and praise of all: if it were eating and
drinking at thy dinner: look that thou eat to his glory, and drink to his
glory 1. Cor. 10. 31. And say in the meane-tyme, I do not this so much to
feed this mortal body, as I do it to glorify thy Majesty. When thou
lives, live to him: deying, die to him; consecrate thy life and death to him.
Fie on us that can not learn to give the glory of all to our Redeemer. As for
me, brethren, I crave nothing more, nor that the glory of God may shine
before my eyes in my vocation, that when I speak or think, all may be to his
glory, that in the end I may have this assurance that I shall be glorified
with him for ever. But yet to stick to the words: He says not; I give
thanks, but we give thanks, I, and Siluanus and Timotheus give thanks: He
says not for an handful or a certain number of you, but for you all. He
says not for a time, but alvvayes. Mark all these words: He says, we all,
and that for all, we thank ever. It is a large thanking, and it testifies
that the graces shovvne on the Thessalonians were large. When the graces of
God are shovvne on me, on thee, or on any people, thy heart must not be
narrovv, but it must be enlarged, and thy mouth must be oppenned vvyde to
praise and magnify God the geuer of all. Or else I assure thee, when his
grace is large, if thy heart be narrovv, and thy mouth be oppenned but a
little, the Lord shall draw in his hand and diminish his grace to thee. So is
seen of it in Edinburgh this day, the graces of god on thee o Edinburgh were
large, but thy heart was narrow, and thy mouh was not oppened wide. Therefore
the Lord is pinching his graces; if it so continue, woe will be to thee. Go
this grace of the Ministry away, and the Lord close men's mouths and let them
not speak to thee, all thy grace is gone; and I think the Lord is beginning to
pinche his graces on us, for that glorious Gospel which was preached with
great liberty, and was so powerful in the land, hes lost the power: and the
number of the godly of the land is contracted, for the one depends upon the
other: therefore cry, that the Lord may make his grace abound, and that he
would continue with us the light of his Euangell.

Now to the next words. He joins with thankes-geuing, prayer: Prayer joined
with tha^ks-geuing.
Making mention of you in our prayers: It is not aneugh to thank God for the
grace that either we, or others have received, but also thou must pray: Cry for
grace and continuance of grace; for I assure thee, if with thankes-geuing
there be not prayer for continuance, the grace received shall decay. Amongst
all the rest of the means the Lord hes appointed for continuance of grace,
earnest prayer to God is an especial mean. So as thou would have thy self
standing in grace, pray ever for grace, for there is no moment, but we are
ready to fall away, except the Lord hold us up. The mean to entertain grace,
is, earnest prayer. The Lord hold us up and let us not fall: but if the mean
be not used, fall shall we, though all the world had said the contrair.

It is to be marked farther. He says, in our prayers. As he would say, in our
daily prayers we are accustomed to pray to God; in our daily prayers we
forget you not, but we remember you. Mark this, Brethren. He is not meet to
pray for others, that can not pray for himself, nor hes no acquaintance nor
access to God. Who can solist for any man, when he hes no access to him whom
he folists? Can thou pray for me to my God, and thou have no access to him?
He who will pray for others, must be well acquainted with God, and have a
daily access to him. And how svveete a thing is it to have familiar access
to him? for all the joy of the world is not comparable to that joy, which the
soul finds when it is exercised with the Lord familiarlie: for when thy
heart is with him, no doubt he is with thee. Alas, beastly man, fie on thee
that ever thou was borne, and thou have not that svveete sense of joy that
flows from the meditation on the Lord: will thou let thy soul be ever stupide
and senseless? vvilt thou never be a Citizen of Heaven, expecting for the
glorious coming of Christ, but ay ly as a sow, muzling and grountling upon
the earth? vvilt thou never look up with thy eyes to Heaven? vvilt thou ay be
looking down? If thou do so thou shall fall down at last to that everlasting
damnation. The Lord raise us up, for heavy are we: we are dead lumps ay tending
downward and can get no rising up: the Lord raise up our souls therefore to
heaven.

Now follows the cause wherefore he rejoyses with them, in the next verse.
Without ceasing, remembering your effectual faith. That is one, and diligent
love; that is two: the third is, and the patience of your hope in the Lord
Jesus Christ, in the sight of God, even, our Father. Here, brethren, not to
escape the words, I see, first, an incessant and perfect remembrance of the
graces, God hes given his people, as Faith, Charity and Patience. I see, then,
in the example of Paul, Siluanus and Timotheus, that, in the memory and heart
of the godly, the graces of God showen, either on themselves, or others, makes
a deep impression; when they see the graces of God, they take a deep
apprehension of them. In the wicked it is otherwise: let God rain down graces
from Heaven on them selves and others also, as they come, so they go, they
remember never a good turn done to them. Now, on this remembrance follows
prayer, they remember with joy, ever praying, remembering by night, ever
praying, remembering by day, ever praying, at lest, in the heart, if not
outwardly in words. Mark it: a man that would pray well to God, must be of a
good remembrance: would thou pray well? remember well: Prepare thee to pray,
by remembrance of the blessings of God and pray then. What matter have thou of
prayer, when thou remembers not his blessings? So, all tends to this; that,
thou be careful to remember the blessings of God: and as thou remembers, say,
Lord, I thank thee for that blessing. I tell thee, the losing of remembrance
of the grace of God, shown to thee and others, hes lost many graces to thee:
if thou remember not the graces bygone, and be not thankful for them, the
grace of God will grow narrow, and become barren and turn away from thee.

Now to come to the end shortly, let us touch the cause of this joy; first
here are three graces of god that comes to the Thessalonians, Causes of thanks
giving faith, hope and charity
wherefore Paul thanks God in their behalf, to wit faith, charity and hope.
I see these three graces recounted by the Apostle in other places: in the 1. to
the Cor. cha. 13. 13. And now says he, abyds three things, faith, hope and
charity, but the cheifest of of those is charity, because when the rest go
away, it abides in the life to come: in these three stands the perfection of the
life of a christian man, in faith toward God and the Lord Jesus: begin at them
in this life, begin at God and Christ his Son, and be joined to him by faith:
then come on to love toward thy neighbor, love thy neighbor: woe to thee
that loves not thy neighbor: thou loves not God if thou love not thy
neighbor. And because our life is not here, but it is hid up with God in
Christ, thou must await for thy life in him, and so comes in hope, hope for thy
life in him: these three must conuoy and accompany thee here, till thou possess
that life. So faith is the beginning of grace, faith joins thee with God
through Christ, with a sweet conjunction, whereby all flows out of him to thee,
for as we said in the beginning, no blessing but in that conjunction with him.
Faith brings forth charity, the bud of faith is charity; and there is such a
sure bond between faith and charity, that the one can not be without the
other. If thou say, thou have faith to God, and have not love to the Church,
and the rest of the members of the body, thou art a liar. Now the end of all
grace in this life, is hope; hope of salvation and glory, grace in this life
ends in hope: it begins at faith, grows in love, and ends in hope; and that is
the last degree, it goes no farther: for as to salvation, thou can not get it
here; the farthest thou can reach to, is to hope, reaching up to heaven,
expecting that glory that is appointed to thee there. The Apostle recounting
the armor of a christian man. 1. These. 5. 8. ends in hope, he begins at faith,
and the^ to love, and ends at hope: and speaking of the graces we have in the
Gospel, as temperance, righteousness and godliness; Tit. 2. 13. He subjoines:
Avvaiting for that hope and appearing of that glory of that great God, and of
our Savior Jesus Christ. Where ye see he puts on hope as it were a crown on
the rest of the graces: hope, I say, is the last of all the graces in this
earth, and we can go no farther, but in that life to come farewell hope: for we
shall get the full sight and fruition of all the graces that now we look for:
my eyes shall se my Sa^iour the Lord Jesus Christ. So there the grace of graces
in the other life, sight: for we live heerby faith, and not by sight, but then
we shall get that full sight of glory, for we shall se him as he is. 1. Ioh.
3. 2.

Yet to stick to the words: he sets out these virtues and graces, not simply,
but, he descriues some one way, some another way: and so, he calls it not
faith, but, effectual faith, or, vvorking faith: he says not, love simply;
but, a diligent and laboring love: and he calls it not hope simply, but, the
patience of your hope: a patient hope, Faith vvorking
a vvorking faith, a laborious love. Now, let us consider the exercises of
every one of them. Faith hes her excerise, in vvorking: what works she?
working out the filth of nature: (fie on the foull nature of men and women): so,
that, the exercise of faith in Jesus, is in cleansing the foull heart and
every corner of it. And therefore, in the chap. 15. verse. 9. of the Acts,
faith is said to purge the heart: for, by faith, Jesus dwelles in the heart,
and Christ can not be idle, he will be exercised, and he purges out the foull
stink of nature that lies hid in every corner of the heart. He that is not
exercised in cleansing of his heart vtters evidently, that, he never had
faith, say what he will. This is the work of faith.

Now, Charity is laborious.
to come to Charity. Faith is exercised inwardly, in the heart, Charity is
exercised outwardly, in the hand, and can not be idle: laboring, not for her
self, but, for me and thee, and those, that are about her, and he who hes
charity, or, he should not do good to his neighbor, he will rather want his
hand: fie on them, who will not work with their hands, to help others. This
land is full of idle men, and so, it can not be without judgment, thowsands
going idle, in all parts, and how can charity be kept, without labor? if
thou were a Lord, put to thy hand, and call to God, for to sanctify thy
labor, it is vanity to sit idle, put to thy hand and do good to thy self,
or, some others, or, else, sore shall that count be, that thou shall make.

Now, come to hope. What is sho doing? She is bound under the Cross, lying in
patience, looking for that glorious revelation of God: Hope patient.
I tell thee, either be exercised in suffering for the glorious appearance of
Jesus christ or else thou shall lose hope: for as concerning hope she must be a
sufferer; for it is said, It behooved us through many tribulations to enter in
the kingdom of God. Act. 14. 22. So thy hope that awaits for the kingdom of
God, must be endewed with patience, otherwise, if it be not joined with
patience, to endure tribulation, that the Lord shall lay on thee thou and thy
hope shall both ^all. And therefore when thou think on hope, join ever the
companion thereof, pati^nce to it. (...) Romans 8. 25. with hope joins patience.
Heb. 6. 15. Abraham avvaited patiently: and thereafter enjoyed the promise:
hope on, endure all, with the power of God, thou shall enjoy all, and preuail:
for hope never made man to be ashamed, hope in God for salvation, for he has
promised. and is able to perform: and hope makes not ashamed. Romans 5. 5. Then
to take up this matter, I see all the graces of God are quick; a dead grace is
naught, all are lively, either exercised in one exercise or other: Faith is
working, Charity is laborious, Hope is suffering, each one hes their own
exercise and therefore let not an idle body that is not exercised in
sanctifying of the heart by faith, of the hand by charity, that refuses
suffering in hope, let him not think he hes these graces of God. Thou that
have no work, no faith, no laboring, no charity, thou that can not bear
patiently, and who at every thing coming to thee art ready to dispare, thou
that can not ly under the cross, thou hes no hope. And therefore as thou would
find grace in the life to come, look that thou be exercised in this life, for
if thou be not exercised here, thou shall enter in that damnation, where there
shall be no end of thy labor: and thou that will be exercised in faith,
charity, and hope, assure thee in the life to come, thou shall not be pyned
with work, thou shall cease from thy labor, and the tears shall be wyped
from thy eyes, all pain and anguish shall be put away. Look then how ye will
spend a moment, to eschew an eternity, if thou pass thy time idle, and do no
good here, neither to thy self, nor to thy neighbor, thy labor shall endure
everlastingly. Thou who wilt not spend a moment in labor, look not to
obtain rest for ever.

In the end of the verse he places, and grounds this patient hope on Jesus
Christ; there is her ground and foundation. Look the words. And the patience
of your hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God the Father. The
faith and hope being begun on Jesus, Hope gru^ded on Christ.
a ground immovable, all the world can not shake it. He sets to her
witness God the Father: He must be witness, and must stand looking into the
heart, to see what sincerity is in the heart. So beside the patience wherewith
hope must be indewed, she must be enarmed to dree out this destiny, she can
not sustain trouble, except she be grounded. The ground is the Lord Jesus,
immovable for ever: who is able to shake him? If my hope be set on Jesus, I
defye all the world: shake me as thou will, no more nor thou is able to move
him out of his place, no more art thou able to move my hope out of my heart.
There is the foundation she must have. Yet more, she must have a witness, and
he who hopes must hope before the Father: for the Father sees all, and there
is no sincerity but in the Spirit of God; and thou who wilt hope, consider God
is before thee looking into thine heart, and have him ever before thy eyes:
otherwise, thou shall do nothing in thy life-tyme sincerely, but all thy
cogitations, motions, and actions of thy hand are all in hypocrisy. Therefore
when thou do any thing do it sincerely, and say, My God is looking on me:
and therefore Lord prepare my heart to do it sincerely: let me not seek no
approbation of men, but let me seek the approbation of thee my God. It is a
misery to se men in the world, they will steal from God as it were to a
backside, because they can not abide his eye: every man takes counsel, at it
were, to hate God, and he flies from God, because his pleasure is in
hypocrisy: and thou vain man likes never to do any thing in sincerity, but
would, as it were, ^yle thy own eyes and Gods eyes, and the eyes of all the
world with thy counterfaite falsehood: therefore as thou would be approved in
conscience, flee not from the sight of God, but crave his presence, that light
may come from him and lighten thee, that in that light thou may walk and
study to be acceptable to God, with whom thou must be and bid all this world
farewell. Woe to them that studies not to be approved of God, and gettes not
that approbation in their consciences. To this God the Father, with the Son and
the holy Spirit, be all praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE SECOND LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
THESSA. CHAP. 1. verse. 4. 5. 6. 4. Knovving, beloved brethren, that ye are the
elect of God.

5. For our Gospel was not unto you in word only, but also in power, and
in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know after what manner we
were among you for your sakes.

6. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, and received the word in
much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost.


THE last day, Brethren, we spoke of the first part of this Epistle, written to
the Thessalonians, to wit, the salutation that the Apostle, with Siluanus and
Timotheus directs to them. We entered in the second part, which continewes the
congratulation, wherein he rejoyses together with them, for the graces of God
bestowed on them: giving God the glory of all, making him the chief Author of
all grace: Namely, for their faith which is employed in clensing and purifying
their hearts, for their love and charity, which was employed in laboring with
painfulness for their brethren and neighbors, to their profit and well: and
last, for their hope, which was employed in suffering, and taking things
patiently, grounded on the Lord Jesus Christ; having God the Father for an
witness of her sincerity. This far for the matter going before.

Now follows in the fourth verse, an other cause of this thankes-geuing to
God, and of this rejoysing: a more effectual cause nor any that was named yet:
their eternal election before all worlds. All the graces told before were in
time, but, as for this election, it is before all time, from all eterni^e: Upon
this, as upon a foundation, all grace that is received by us in time is
grounded, as ye would ground an house upon an fondation: None gets faith,
but those that are chosen of God from all eternity: None true love, but those
whom God loves from all eternity: None hope of life, but those who are chosen
of God from all eternity: So all grace given in time, is grounded on this
ground of election that was before all time. But to come to the words: Knovving
(says the Apost.) brethren beloved of God, your election. He styles them
brethren first, then he calls them beloved of God (for, I like that reading
best.) The second is the cause of the first. Because they are beloved of God,
therefore they are Brethren to him, to Timothy, and to Siluanus: Mark this.
Note.
Whom God loves and upon whom he powers forth his grace, as he did on these
Thessalonians, we are bound to love them, to power out our affections upon
them, to call them Brethren in Jesus Christ, to speak kindly and lovingly to
them: for, the graces of God we see in men, hes force to conciliate the love of
men; so that, men when they see them in others are bound of dewtie to love
them. If thou see the grace of God in any man; thou art bound to love the man
for the grace, as thou would utter thou love God, the geuer of the grace. The
love thou carries to a man for the graces of God thou sees in him, vtters the
love thou carries to God the geuer. Then we should learn to crave grace, to
utter holy affections to them to whom the Lord has given his graces, and
that, for the graces God has bestowed on them.

But to go forward. The next thing here that Paul vtters, is a knowledge of
their election. Knovving your election, says he. This is a far sight. Then
it is true, brethren, the godly who are able through the Spirit of
discretion, to take up the grace of God in others, they have a great insight,
yea even to the eternal election, and predestination to that life and glory,
whereunto they are appointed, and they will utter an wonderful assurance
thereof. (For the word signifies, Knovving perfitelie your election) Indeed a
man will have a greater certainty of his own election, then of the election of
any other, because the warrant of his own election is within him in his own
heart; Tokens of election.
his heart is stamped therewith: he finds the seal thereof in his own
conscience: as for the election of others, it is only outward, as in his
actions and behavior: by the eye of the godly, by the words of the godly and
the works of the godly, and such like things the visible tokens of the mercy
of God in men is showen: and so the Lord makes by some outward tokens their
election from all eternity to appear.

There are two things, whereof it is very hard to judge upon, and to utter
assurance of: the first is the eternal election of others: the other is, the
perseverance of others in grace to the end: the one bygone from all eternity,
the other to come to the end. It is very hard to judge of these two, in other
men especially: Yet I see the Apostle takes on him to judge of both, and he
vtters an assurance of both. Ye see in this place, he knows the election of
the Thessalonians. In the Epistle to the Philippians 1. 6. he is persuaded,
that he who had begun with them (which is God) would perfect the work he had
begun, to the coming of Christ, that is, that they should persevere in the
grace they had received unto the end. The ground of all was, because of the
grace of God he saw in time of the Thessalolians and Philippians: therefore he
knows perfitelie the Thessalonians is elected, and is assured the Philippians
will persevere and stand in grace. So all tends to this, the grace of God
bestowed on any (if we saw but a spark of grace in them) should ever move us
to judge charitablie, that those persons are the elect of God, and will stand
and persevere in grace to the end. Away then with hard judgments of men.

More then this (Brethren) ye see the Thessalonians are elected: yet he prays
for them, Making mention (says he) of you in our prayers. Election no
impediment to prayer.
And for this same cause; knowing that ye are elected. Mark this. The election
of God, that sure ground and foundation of life and salvation, prejudges not
prayer. Therefore, say not, I am elected, my salvation can not fail, saved
must I be^ therefore, what needs me to pray my self, or cause any other pray
for me? No, by the contrair, say, I am elected, therefore, I will pray: ye are
the elect, therefore, I will pray for you: that is Paul reason. For, as
salvation, and life is predestinate and appointed by God, so are the means of
salvation appointed by God, which thou must use, if ever thou would attain
to life, notwithstanding of thy election. And among all the rest of the means,
Prayer is one: thou who art chosen to life, prayers is a mean to thee, to be
used before thou come to life: Pray must thou, and others must pray for thee,
or else, thou was never chosen to life. There was never man chosen to life from
all eternity; but the Lord appointed that he should use prayer; also God
ordained that he should live in holiness, and work good works, which is
an other mean must be used. Ephesians. 2. 10. For, if prayer be not used, if he
live not holy, if he live without love, without charity and good works,
if he continevve so to the end, he shall find that he was never chosen.

Now in the next verse, he falls to and proves their election: he vtters not
this assurance of their election without good warrands. There are two
arguments in the text. The first is, from that vertew and power he found in
himself, while he preached to them. The other is, from the effectualnesse and
force of his Ministry in them. The first is in Paul himself, the second in
the Thessalonians: the first is contained in these words. For, says he, our
Gospel, that is the Euangell preached to you, the Gospel of God: (there is no
Preacher but he may take it and call it his Gospel, and except thou be saved
by it, as it is the Gospel ministered by the Preacher, thou shall never get
salvation: Will thou go to God immediately, and not hear of them, but
contemn them thou shall never be saved. It is Paul and Peter's Gospel, and the
Gospel of the preachers of it, ere it serve to thy well (this by the way.)
This Gospel stood not in bare language and words only, but also in power.
As he would say: when I preached to you, I uttered the Gospel in liberty and
power, and therefore upon the graces and power I found in my self in uttering
the Gospel to you, I gather, they to whom I preached are chosen of God. Then
brethren: when the Lord sends out men to preach in power, it is never in
vain; but it is a sure argument amongst them to whom they are ent, there are
some chosen of God to life everlasting: and the man who finds himself sent out
with power to preach the Gospel, he may say certainly, there is some I
preach to chosen. Who will send out a reaper except there be some harvest to be
reaped? Will the Lord send out a man instructed with power to any place, except
there be some to be win to him there. The Lord says Matthew. 9. 37. 38. The
harvest is great, it is coming to maturitie, but the laborers are few:
therefore pray the Lord of the harvest to send out reapers. And euerbefore any
man be sent out to preach, the men to whom he is sent are ripe to be
instructed, so that he is sent out to gather them in to the barn-yarde. And by
the contrair, when God takes away graces, and draws away power from preachers,
when he lets them utter nothing but dead and empty talk without power, or
when he closes men's mouths to speak, it is a token that the number of the
chosen is growing narrow, and the Church is begun to be barren. Well, go this
Ministry away, and if this power be taken away from us to an other part, there
was never a surer argument of the drawing in of the godly in a narrow bounds
then this is, and that the remanent are left only as miserable catiffes
appointed to damnation. What auailes this life and all that we have, if we miss
that glory to come. In all our proceedings, look what serves for the life to
come; for all our lives will away, our life is not here: this death temporal
is not death; this life temporal is not life, but death eternal is death, and
life eternal is life.

But to come to the words, and mark them. For our Gospel says he, was not
unto you in words only, but in power. Then it is not preaching in words
only that works salvation. I see there are two sorts of preachings: some
preachings in words only, as these Orators who preached to the Corinthians
for inuy of Paul, had nothing but words. There he says. When I come I will
cognosce these men, not in their words, but in their power (if they have
any) for the Kingdom of God stands not in words, but in power of the
Spirit. 1. Corinthians. 4. 19. 20. There is an other preaching of the Gospel, not
in words only, but with vvisdome and power. Theefore seeing this
difference is in preaching, that some preachinges are in words only, and
some preachings in words with power, I must confess the cause wherefore
there is only words without power given to the teachers, is often times not
only in the people themselves, although they be wicked, but in the preacher
that vtters nothing but words without power, to work into the hearts of the
hearers. Therefore he that speaks in the name of the Lord, look that he have
power, and ask power of God, that his words may be effectual in the hearts of
the hearers to salvation, or else let him hold him silent. Either seek that
power of God may be joined with words, or else close thy mouth, and speak not
one word in the name of the Lord.

This power is not gotten lightly, look to the grounds of this power: Paul
sets them down here. In the holy Spirit, there is one, and in full assurance,
there is an other. The first, the preaching of the Spirit: 2. grounds of
power in preaching
the second, a full assurance that is in the heart of man that speaks to the
hearers. Look that he have assurance in his own heart, that remission which
he preaches to others is gotteu to himself. Is he promising life to the
people? look that he have assurance that that life is in him. The first and
chief ground of all power is the holy Spirit of Christ: if the Spirit of
Christ speak not, but only the spirit of man, the humane power in the
teacher, there shall be no power, no vertew in that word to edify. And
therefore Paul 1. Cor. chap. 2. verse. 13. when he hes spoken of the mystery of
Christ, which the wisdom of the world could not comprehend, he subjoynes,
The which we speak not with speeches, and words, which the vvisdome of
man teaches, but with words, which the holy Spirit teaches us, joining
spiritual words with spiritual matters. By the which words he means
plainly, that except the Spirit of Christ be the principal speaker of a
spiritual matter, be the matter never so true of it self, it shall have no
power, yea farther in the 1. cha. v. 17. he says, the preaching of Christ,
with the wisdom of words and humane eloquence makes the cross of Christ
ineffectual. 1. Cor. 2. 5. he says, that faith stands not in the wisdom of
me^ and therefore, who ever teaches in the name of christ, let him beg
earnestly that that holy Spirit may be in the heart, to tune the heart; may
be in the tongue, to tune the tongue, that the matter and words that he vtters
may both be of the holy Spirit. It is a dangerous thing to a man to speak in
the name of the Lord, except first he pray and say, I am going to this place,
Lord give me matter, give me words, and let not the speech be so much my
speech, as the speech of thy Spirit in my heart. If the Spirit be in thy
heart, he will speak, but if he be out of thy heart, it will be the voice of a
man only. No, nothing will convert men, but that which comes of the Spirit. A
natural ear may take pleasure to hear a natural thing, a natural heart to
speak of a natural matter: but a spiritual ear and heart will take pleasure in
a spiritual matter, which comes from the heart of a spiritual man.

Now to come to the second ground of this power: It is the full assurance of
grace and mercy, that he preaches by his own feeling, he speaks nothing but of
faith and particular assurance: a general assurance is naught; for before I
preach the grace of Christ, I must seek my warrant in my heart, that that
grace, righteousness and life I teach, is settled in my mind, and upon this
assurance I must speak to others; and if the speaker (albeit the grace were
never so good) have not in his heart an assurance of that grace, all his words
will be unsavory words. So he must strive always to participate of that grace
he teaches to you, either in teaching, or before. David says I believed and
therefore I spoke. Psalm. 116. 10. And Paul says, We believe to rise again, and
to be joined to Christ, and therefore we speak. 2. Cor. 4. 13. As he would
say, I am speaking to you of the rising of the body, but all this comes of an
assurance in my heart, that this body of mine shall be dissolved, and at that
last day shall live, and be glorified: and upon this assurance of mine, I
preach to you this resurrection. All tends to this: He who speaks of God to
us would be a man, that in his own heart hes a full assurance of grace: and
above all men, a Minister that stands up and speaks to others, should have
this assurance, and should seek all vvarrandes of his own salvation. And of
the assurance of his heart, he should speak and say: Because I have felt
remison of sins in Christ Jesus, and life in him, therefore I may assure you of
them in him, if ye earnestly by faith seek them. So look that none that is
faithles, on pain of his life stand up to utter one word in the name of Jesus,
to offer life, or remission of sins* his speaking is but like the clattering
of a Parocket, his heart is dead, and his head only sounds. The Apostle
says, Because I am assured in my heart of this, therefore I spoke with a great
liberty Then there are the two grounds: first, the holy Spirit: secoundlie,
the assurance; if these two be of necessity the word must be profitable: and
though a man can not get the full measure of these two; well is he that can sigh
and say, Lord give me an assurance in my heart, ere ever I utter it to others.

In the end of the verse, he takes them to be witnesses of his doing, manner of
speaking, and power they savv in his preaching. As ye know after what manner
I was among you for your sake. As ye know: then they knew the power. So
brethren, there will be no Congregation of the Lord that will be so senseless
and dead, but there will be some that will have that Spirit of discretion in
them, know who speaks with power, and who not. Every man in the Congregation
will not have it; but certainly in all congregations there will be some that
will know empty words, and discern them. And therefore let every man that
speaks in the name of the Lord, speak so, that he may take the people to whom
this discretion is given to be witness of the power, and the Spirit
wherewith he preached.

Now all this is for their cause, all the graces Paul had, was for their cause,
All grace is given to me^ for the Church.
they were not for himself: Matter, word, power, spirit, all was for their
cause, what ever grace any member gets, all is gotten and given for the whole
body: the grace that the eye of the body gets, the grace the hand gets, all
is for upholding the body and if the Lord had had no other regard, but of the
hand only, he would not have given it the grace to grip. So is it in the
body of Christ: for if he had not had an other respect to Paul, but for
himself only, he had never received these graces. So James, Peter, John,
etc. all their graces are for the well of the Church. The Apostle. 1. Cor. 3.
21. says, All is yours, whither it be Paul, Apollos or C^phas, al is yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Then the man that has gotten the
Spirit, and excels above his neighbors in graces, look that in pride he
contemn not the least menber of the body; the eye must not lightly the
foot, for if it look to the skies and let the foot stumble, it shall perish
it self: so who hes gotten great graces, let him take them, and lay all down
at the feet of the Church, and distribute them to the well of the Church, and
say, I got them all for your cause. The Apostle having gotten a revelation and
assurance, he says, God gave it for the Church. So when thou have gotten any
grace, give it out to the Church in humility, whither the gift be spiritual
or temporal, or else it had been better thou had never received it: yea, let
a King bestow all his graces upon the Church, for his calling is for the
Church, and except there were a Church, there should not be a King: woe to them
that know not this end, that all Kingdoms and policies stands for the well
of the Church. Daniel told Nabuchadnezar an heathen King, that his Kingdom
was for the standing of the Church. The Lord oppen the eyes of men, to se that
they do their duty in their vocation, that at that last day they may be found
to be members of that body.

To go forward, the Apostle gathers the election of the Thessalonians: first,
from that power he had to utter the word, and that for their cause: secondly,
by the effectualnes and powerful working of this God within them. Brethren, if
the power that God hes given the preacher, for uttering of his Gospel for
their well, be an argument to them of their salvation, how much more must the
effectual working of the Gospel be an argument of their well? Join these two
together, the powerful preaching of the Spirit and the working thereof, these
two makes the assurance of the election of the hearers. And by the contrair if
there be nothing but speaking without power, and no effectualnesse in the
heart, it will not be the speaker that will avail, it will be ineffectuall to
them to their salvation. So thou must find the effectual working of the
Spirit in thee, which must be thy warrant. But to come to the words. And ye
are become followers of us, and of the Lord, and received the word in great
affliction, and with joy of the holy Ghost. These are the words: ye se this
effectualnesse in the Thessalonians stands in imitation and following, not so
much of him, as of the Lord, of whom he was a follower. Well to be short: the
effectualnesse of the Gospel in the hearer ye fe consists in the imitation of
the speaker, when the hearer imitates in life the preacher; and above all,
imitates in life and conversation the Lord Jesus Christ, and follows Pastors
as they follow the Lord only, and no otherwise. If then the effectualnesse
of the Gospel in the people, stands to imitate thee, look thou that there be
matter of imitation of thee, look how thy mouth speaks, look thou speak as
Christ speaks, otherwise speak not, except thou may say as Paul says, when he
hes preached to the people, ye are followers of me, I am made a guide to you
going before, ye are followers: at the least, if they will not follow thee, look
that thy life be good, though they should run away, go thou forward in the way of
life. Preaching will not do the turn, if thou be not a light going before the
people, all thy words shall do no good, and thou shall never be partaker of
that glory thou speaks of.

Then mark again. Wherein stands this imitation? And received, says he, the
word with great affliction. There the imitation of the Preacher, not only in
receiving the word delivered by him, not only by following him in doing, but
chiefly by following him in suffering affliction. Is he afflicted for the
delyuering of it? thou that receives it follow him in affliction. I remember
Paul in the second Epist. to Timothy. Cha. 3. v. 10. 11. 12. where he lays
down many things in himself to be followed, but chiefly his doctrine, manner
of living, his purpose, his life, lenity, patience: then he says, my
persecution and affliction in Christ. Now he sticks on this last, and he
specially bound Timothy to that, and he says in general (as it were to every
godly man) All that is vvilling to live godly in Christ, shall suffer
affliction, and thou must be one of that number, Timothy. Brethren, we will be
all content to follow in doing the Pastor. Hes he faith? we will follow his
faith: hes he any other thing in him? we follow him in it: but when it comes to
the cross, then we will leave him; we will let him alone: no, if it were
Christ himself going out of Jerusalem to Golgatha where he suffered, we will let
him go all alone and will abide in Jerusalem. It is vain to think that
affliction only pertaines to the speaker, and not to the hearers. The Apostle
says, having received the word of God with great affliction. No, affliction is
the inseperable companion of the Gospel in this life: hears thou and receives
thou the word, make thee for affliction. And so Paul to Timothy makes
affliction the necessare companion of the Gospel. 2. Timoth,. 1. 8. It bydes
with thee here on the earth with a cross on the back of it, for thou shall
not brook it without a cross. Therefore marvel not at this affliction, for
it is a marvel that the Gospel should have remainde so long without
affliction in Scotland, and all this affliction in Scotland is nothing in
respect of other parts where affliction is. And therefore if we brook this
Gospel, look for greater afflictions, then these; for who hes striuen yet to
the blood, for the liberty of the Gospel?

Now in the last words, with the affliction he joins the holy Spirit, An^^oy
says he, of the holy Spirit. Ye received the Gospel with affliction, and
with affliction ye received joy of the holy Spirit. Joy of the holy Spirit
joined with affliction.
Look how surely affliction is the companion of the Gospel; as surely is
the joy of the Spirit the companion of affliction, and this is most sure, that
the affliction of the Gospel is most joyful. above all other things in the
world. A man that suffers as an evil doer, a man that suffers for theft, a
murderer that suffers for murder, an adulterer for adultery, he hes no joye
in suffering, he is ashamed and hangs down his head, because the querrell for
which he suffers bringes an evil conscience: theft bringes an evil
conscience, murder bringes an evil conscience, adultery brings an evil
conscience, and therefore he hes no joy in suffering. It is true, a man that is
to be execute for his his evil deeds, in his execution will rejoice, but
mark the ground. It is it not the evil cause that bringes that joy, but it is
the assurance of the remission of sins in Christ that bringes the joy: the
evil turn bringes ever an horror of conscience: but when one suffers for
Christ and the Gospels sake, there is joye and comfort: and they that hes
suffered for Christ's sake, in suffering have greater joy in the spirit, nor
ever they had in the fullness of their pleasures in the world. Peter in his
first Epist. 1. 8. says, In the midst of their suffering they suffered joyfully:
when there is a good conscience, when men suffer for Jesus sake, there was
never joye comparable to that joy, it is such a joye as will swalow up al
pain and terror. Experience of this we have in many godly Martyrs: not that
affliction brings joy with it, for it is natural to the affliction to work
sorrow and grief, but it is the good conscience that makes joye, and the good
conscience comes of the good cause. When the conscience says, Thou art
suffering for Christ that suffered for thee, and be assured after suffering
thou shall be glorified, o the joye that that man shall find! The Lord gives
every man joye that suffers any thing less or more for Christ: the furnisher
of the joye is the Spirit, who will not suffer any person to bear any
thing for Christ, but he will give comfort and joy therein. Brethren, ye hear
it commonly said, It is the cause or the querrell, and not the pain that
makes the martyr: the pain and the torment, were they never so grievous will
not make a man a martyr: the ground is the good cause and quarrel that they
suffer for, the Gospel and Christ. But I say farther, if there be no more nor
the cause or the querrell, that makes not martyrdom, if when thou art
suffering for Jesus sake, thou have no joy, no patience, no faith and
tolerance, no joye in the holy Spirit, and rejoice more in suffering and
bonds, nor he that goes free, it is no martyrdom. Join me joye and the good
cause with patience in torment all three together, these make a Martyr. Peter
sets down the rules of suffering, saying. Let no man suffer as a murderer, as
a thief, as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters. Then he
subjoynes, If any man suffer as a christian for a good cause, let him not be
ashamed therein, but let him glorify God. 1. Epist. 4. 15. 16. As in the I.
Cha V. 8. he says, They have in suffering for a good cause a joy ^^speakable
and glorious: So here he forbids them to be ashamed in suffering, but to
rejoice and glorify God who hes called them to that honor: for this is the
highest honor of all, to suffer for Christ as the Apostles did. Mark all
these grounds: These examples and rules commending suffering, are not set down
in vain: and let none think to be a christian and to be exeemed from
suffering. Away with them who will say, they will preach and receive the word
gladly in calmnes, but they will have nothing to do with suffering: but I say,
if thou prepare thee not for suffering after so long a calmnesse of the
Gospel, the end shall prove that thou shall curse the time that ever thou
heard the Gospel. Therefore in purpose let us prepare our selves to suffer,
that nothing come to us unawares: and let us say when we rise, here I am
ready, if it please thee, o Lord, to lay any thing on me for the Gospel ere
evening, Lord give me grace not to be ashamed; but to suffer in joy, my life is
not here, but my life must be laid down. And well is him can be this way
prepared and looks for greater affliction: for no doubt, after so great
calmnesse, affliction must follow, and all our suffering is but childrens play
yet. The Lord prepare us for it, and make us ready when he pleases to visit
us. To this God be all praise for ever.

Amen.
THE THRIDE LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 1. verse. 7. 8. 9. 7 So that ye were as ensamples to all that
believe in Macedonia and Achaia.

8 For from you sounded out the word of the Lord, not in Macedonia and in
Achaia only: but your faith also which is tovvarde God, spread abroad in all
quarters, that we need not to speak any thing.

9 For they themselves show of us what manner of entering in we had unto you,
and how ye turned to God from idols,


IN this part of this Epistle, which presently we have in hand: ye have heard
(brethren) the Apostle rejoyses together with the Thessalonians, for those
graces of God, which he understood and knew to be in them, giving God thanks
therefore, rendering him the whole glory thereof. The graces were, as ye heard,
namely first, their effectual faith: secondly, their laborious love and
charity: thirdly, their patient hope. Then he comes to the ground of all these
graces, their election which was from all eternity, uttering an assurance of
their election and of the choosing of them before the world was made. The
grounds of his assurance of their eternal election were two: the first in
himself: the second in the Thessalonians: the ground in himself, was that
grace of God, that liberty, that power which he had in preaching Christ when
he came among them, which assured him, the Lord had his chosen amongst the^.
The ground in them was a fair meeting, receiving the word, and that with
affliction; as he delivered the word with affliction so they were followers of
him, and received the word with great affliction, but yet with joy also; for as
affliction accompanies the word, so the joy of the holy Ghost accompanies the
affliction. This shortly for that which ye have heard already.

Now to come to the text we have red. In the first verse thereof the Apostle
amplifies the grace that God had given to them in receiving the word with great
affliction: yea (says he) ye have received the word with such affliction that
ye were examples to all that believed in Macedonia, that is, in the country
round about you: (for Thessalonica where they dwelt, it was chief City in
Macedonia,) and not only were ye examples to them in Macedonia, but to them
in Achaia, that is in the country next adjacent to Macedonia: so that even as
the Thessalonians in patience and grace followed Paul, who was the teacher of
grace to them: so the Thessalonians wants not their own followers: all those
that believed in Macedonia and Achaia follows them as examples of faith,
patience, and al graces. Mark it, Paul goes before them in good example, they
again go before all the Macedonians and those of Achaia in their good example.
Then ye see examples of life hes great force, Examples are forcible.
either to well doing or evil doing: for well doing and evil doing in this world
come for the most part by example and imitation following others: a good man
will follow a good man, a well doer will follow a well doer, a thief will follow a
thief, and a murderer will follow a murderer: they that are inclinde to
harlotrie and filthiness will follow them that exercise harlotrie and filthiness:
so they that intend to have grace will follow them that are gracious, they who
do long and thirst for heaven will follow them whom they think to be going to
heaven: they that will run to wickedness will run to hell after them that run
before them thereto: so that our well and woe stands greatly in imitation of
others: and therefore, he who walks let him take head to every foote-step,
especially he that is in any high rowme, in the sight of the people, let him
take good head to his walking, and to every foot he sets down, how he goes,
where he goes, what he is doing: for certainly, he shall not go alone: walks
he well? he shall have followers: walks he evil? he shall have followers:
falls he in the mire? more shall fall with him: breaks he his neck? some shall
follow him who shall break their necks with him: stands he upright? more shall
follow him and stand upright. Therefore the Apostle doubles over the precept,
Walk vviselie, walk circumspectly. Ephesians. 5. 15. 17. Colloss. 4. 5. Each
foot thou sets to the earth, look where thou sets it, and look who follows
thee. And Christ says. Matthew. 18. 7. Woe be to that man by whom offense
comes, that is, that walks not warelie but runs himself to destruction, and
draws men and women thereto. This is a world wherein men had need to take head
to their walking: God grant that they who are in high rowmes, may take head to
their walking, for they that goes before others may save many, if they walk
well; and may lose many by their walking and going in wickedness, if they
walk evil.

Farther mark. Who are these that follows the Thessalonians? or to whom are
they patterns of grace and patience in suffering? The Macedonians, the Contrie
about them: and beside that, the Achaians, they of the nighbour Country: for
Achaia is next to Macedonia. And who were these? They that believed in Christ
before the Thessalonians were called: they who were called first, followed them
who were called to grace last. Mark then, the Thessalonians who were called
last, outranne in the course of grace the rest of the Macedonians and Achaians,
and left them behind them, albeit they broke off before them. It is to be
noted: We are all running in one course and we are all in one rinke, running
toward the mark: for in the time of our life there is none sitting: thou
deceaues thy self that says thou have a stablisht mansion here, all must be
on foot, and all must be running, and we must run to the place where our
mansion is, to the But of our glorious resurrection and life everlasting: if
thou sit still, thou shall stink, rotte and perish: but if thou run, and
run on while thou come to the But, thou shall, be safe in the end, and shall
receive the Crown and price of immortal glory. Now in this course and rinke
of christianity, it falls out so, that they that start last, shall out-runne
them that start and break off a good space of time before them; and overcome
them in faith, patience, affliction, and joy. Ye se this plainly in this
example of the Thessalonians with the rest the Macedonians, and them of Achaia.
So that is most true which Jesus said, The last is first and the first is last.
Math. 20. 16. There is a great alteration: the last outrunning them who brake
off first: they that broke off first are made last. and ly behind, and is
ouercomde in grace. The Jews entered in this rinke long before, yea many
hundredth years ere the Gentiles thought of any rink, or to come to heaven: but
so soon as the Gentiles come in and breaks off in the rinke they did outrun
the Jews, and left them behind them as far as they might look to them: they
were speedy in the beginning. After Jesus came in the world and the Apostles
were teaching, it is wonder to think how speedy they were: So this has
been often times seen that in the Church of God, they who were called last hes
ouercomde them who were called first. And I think that nation of France has
ouercomde all the Churches in Europe, in suffering a continual and frequent
affliction: think not they are behind us in our course, no: they are far
before us. And as to our nation in this part of affliction that Paul speaks
of, I think it is behind all nations. Alas, what have we suffered? our time
is yet abiding us. The Lord prepare us thereto: and I think it is coming on;
yea, it is a wonder we should have heard the word so long without affliction.

Yet to the words, he calls them examples, patterns going before others. He
says not ye were a pattern singularly, (the words hes a great force) but ye
were patterns: meaning, that so many heads of men and women, as there were of
the Thessalonians, they were as many patterns, every person was a pattern; a
pattern in grace, in faith, in patience and suffering. Many alled (...)
So that ye may mark, when Jesus come in the world, when the Apostles went out
to the Nations, to draw the Nations to Christ, to convert them, the Harvest was
great, the world was full of chosen vessels: when Jesus came the world was full
of men and women to be safe: there was never so many before his coming, and I
wot not if ever there was so many since: and that was it that Christ meaned
when he said, The harvest is great but the laborer: are fevv: Therefore pray ye
the Lord of the harvest to send out laborer^ to his Wyne-yarde. Matthew. 9. 37.
It is a wounder to hear how hastily at one preaching so many thovvsandes
were converted. Read the Acts of the Apostles, the second and third chapters,
ye will vvonder at the zeal, love, patience and joye of them. Brethren, this
was the beginning and infancy of the Church, but since that number hes begun
to be drawn in narrow bounds, and in process of time these Thessalonians who
are now so praised by the Apostle, they are so drawn in, that we hear it not
told that Christ is professed among them. So it was in the beginning here
amongst us after the reformation, when papistrie was put away: it was a
vvonder to see how men and women did thring in, and were glad to endure great
labor, and suffer afflictions for the Religion. So, no question but that
reformation fell when the Lord had many ripe to be called in this land. But I
will speak my opinion, I think in these days the number of the faithful be
drawn in, and (except the Lord say it) they shall grow fewer, and piece and
piece they shall go away. Now when all the elect shall be gathered in to the
last person, then the Lord Jesus shall come and put an end to this world: and
I trow it shall not be long to it. To return: So many Thessalonians, as many
patterns of grace to Macedonia and Achaia. I ask a question ere I leave this.
Received the Macedonians and Achaians any hurt by this superiority and
prefement the Thessalonians had over them, they were casten behind, the
Thessalonians before, were the Macedonians hurt thereby? No: the grace that God
gives to a man, if he use it rightly, never hurts another man but furthers him:
over comes he me in this grace? I am nothing impared in that, because he is a
pattern to me, whom I should follovv in that grace: runs he before me? he
should vvalken me up to follow and run after: for this is one mean among
all the rest of the means the Lord uses to dravv us forvvard in the course of
grace: for we are slow in running, and every one of us by nature is inclyned
to sluggishnes, and ay looking over our shoulder to stay our course, as Lots
wife did. Therefore the Lord hes appointed this mean to draw thee forward, he
will set out one behind thee, long after thee, and will cause him to come by
thy ear with all speedines, and run out before he, to provoke thee to
emulatio^: so thou sholdest say, This man began after me, I was in faith before
him, he hes outrunne me, it is shame to me: and so thou should take thee to thy
foot and run: otherwise thou have no part with the runners in this rinke. So
did he with the Jews: they were all lingering at the coming of Christ, the
Gentiles comes out after them, and runs by them, that they might be provoked
to follow: so that both Jew and Gentile might run on together to that But,
which is Christ. Romans 11.

Now to the next verse: The words are plain. He makes this more clear, to
wit, That they were examples to them of Macedonia and Achaia. And he says, For
from you sounded out the word of the Lord, not in Macedonia and Achaia only.
Even as, at the beginning this blessed Gospel sounded out from Zion (for they
that preached it came from Zion, which is Jerusalem) and spread it abroad
through the whole world. So from the Thessalonians the word sounded out, and
spread to Macedonia and Achaia. Who were these that sounded the word to
Macedonia? Now certainly it appears well, even traveling men, so journers,
passingers, merchants, traffiquers, that had traveling in Macedonia (as men
that would go out of Edinburgh to other parts of this Realm) and so from
Macedonia to Achaia. These men as they so journed they so journed not with
close mouths, but they ever sounded as Heralds and Trumpettars sounding, and
where ever they found occasion, they spoke of Christ, and of that grace which
was in him, to them that knevv him not. So that they had conference ever of
spiritual things. Then ye who travels from town to town, and from Country to
Country, ye have your lesson here, ye should not travel with a close mouth,
and all your speech should not be of marchandice and traffic; but of some
grace ye have gotten at home, disperse and speak of it. Ye think of duty ye
should seek your advantage and marchandice: the Lord hes bound your consciences
as it were with bonds to speak and oppen the grace of god, and going to places
where there is fredome to speak the Lord bids you speak, he bids you be lamps
and lights to blind people, where ever ye resort: for besides all other means,
the Lord hes appointed this as a mean to win souls to Christ, that ye who
travails and have heard of grace should communicate that grace, and have
conference thereof to all persons where ye come, that you may win your
poor brother and sister that have not heard of it. Alas, our consciences may
accuse us very sore for the neglect of our duty herein: And I trow, because
when men are abroad travailing, they travail with close mouths, never
speaking of the grace they got at home, the Lord hes begun to close the
mouths of the preachers of grace in this Town here.

He goes forward in the next part of the verse and he amplifies this grace of
the Thessalonians: Not only hes the word sou^ded to Macedonia, but he
says, your faith also which is toward God, is spread abroad in all
quarters. So that the Apostle travailed to no part but the brute of their faith
met him: The brute of a man will go farther nor his voice vvil be heard. Thou
then should take head to thy name and fame, and travail to get a a good
fame: for I tell thee, as thy presence is either good or bad to them that see
thee, and with whom thou art conversant, so is thy fame to them that see thee
not. If thou die bearing the name of a good man, thy name does good to the
posterity: but if thou die an evil man, thy evil name destroys many. Woe
to them therefore that leaves an evil name behind them, especially if they
be in high places: and amongst all the rest of the means God uses to enlarge
Christ's Kingdom with, and to bring men to Heaven, as the presence of a man and
his voice is one mean, so the name and fame of the grace of God in a man, is an
other mean. Take head to thy name and fame; for either it shall turn to thy
consolation or to thy damnation, accordingly as thou live: and thou making
men to follow thy evil example in doing, shall aggredge thy judgment: look
how little a thing will do much evil: we should then walk warelie, this life
will away, blessed is he that can make his name to serve to the glorifying of
God. Thou Scotland had a glorious name in many Countries: Scotlands glorious
name.
the rose-garland of Scotland was the purity of the Gospel of Christ taught
therein; and go it away, the Kings honor shall pass, and I fear grace also
shall go away. The Lord oppen men's eyes to see this, and let us not lose
this name which we have in the mouths of good men in other countries.

Now the last words of this verse. That we need not to speak any thing.
As he would say: the fame of your faith spread so abroad, that where ever I
come, it met me, so that my mouth was closed, that I needed not to speak of
your graces. The Apostle when he had converted any people he ever commended
them to the people he went to, and told of their graces, as the Acts bears.
Now coming to other Countries, after the converting of the Thessalonians,
before he could speak one word of them, the brute of them met him so the
Thessalonians did hold in that part of his travail. It is most true, the
people may disburdeene the Pastor of many things: for every one of them
should edify an other, as he preaches and and edifyes in publict: if every
one of them would edify others in private conference, they vvoulde relieve him
of a great burdene. The end of his whole travails is to edify, and if every
one of you edify others, ye relieve him of a great part of his burdene. His
office is to build up the house of the Lord, and every one of you is bound
to take a stone in your arms to lay upon the building, and every one in their
own vocation is bound to help up the building of the house of the Lord by
conference communication, and such other means. But, alas, how is this
practiced in this nation? they burdene the builder, not only to build, but
also to build without an helper, for none there is that builds with him, The
bloody murderer, will come in with a foul slander, and will beat down all
that the builder hes builded in the hearts of many: the foull adulterer with a
foull slander, and he will beat down that which the builder hes builded: the
blasphemer with a foull mouth, and he will beat down that which is builded.
This is the fashion of Scotland in building the house of the Lord. Woe to thee
adulterer, murderer, blasphemer, etc. thou art a destroier of the house of
God, and shall be challenged in that great day therefore.

Now he make, (...) more plain in the next verse. I neded not to speak any
thing: for ere^ open my mouth, he or she comes to tell me that thing, I should
have spoke, and so he brings in their narration which spoke of his labor in
converting the Thessalonians. For they themselves show unto us, what manner
of entering we had unto you, and how yeturned to God from Idols. Ere they
spoke of you Thessalonians, they spoke of my self, what manner of entering I
had amongst you, with powerful preaching and liberty, as I have told you
before. There is his part. So that where ever the Countrymen amongst whom he
was, spoke to him of the Thessalonians, and of the grace they received by his
preaching, they spoke to him of him self, of the grace God had given them by
him. The commendation of grace, Commendation of the people and pastor (...).
patience and charity in the people, should not be without commendation of the
Pastor, whom God hes employed as his instrument to their well. This
commendation ye se begins at Paul, they speak of the grace of God in him ere
they speak of the Theslalonians. And in that great day when the true praise
shall be, the people shall not be glorified without the Pastor. If he hes had
care in winning of you to Christ he shall be crowned standing by you. Paul says
A Crown of righteousnesse^^ as laid up for him. 2. Tim 4. 8. and in this same
Epist. to the These. 2. 19. What is my hope, my joy my Crovv^ ye are my glory
and my joy. Meaning they could not be glorified without him, and his glory and
joy consisted in their glory. All this tells us in that great day what glory
and honor the faithful Ministers of Christ shall have, for they shall shine
as stars: bide a little while, it is not long to. If thou be an instrument to
make the people faithful, if they get a crown, thou shall get a crown also.
This for his own part.

Then he comes on to their part. And as concerning you, where ever I
traveled, they show me the manner of your conversion, and how ye turned from
Idols, to serve the true God. So the thing that was reported to the Apostle of
the Thessalonians, is their turning. Brethren, the first effect that is
required in a man or woman in this world, is to turn them round about, to
turn their face where their back was, to turn them off the course they were
on, they are in an evil course, running to destruction, and their eye is on
Hell. There is the first effect of the Gospel, Connersi^ the first effects of
the Gospel
to turn them about; to take their eye off the Devil, and set it on God: thy
heart, thy soul and thy affection that is set on the Devil, must be turned
about within thy breast, and set on God, and if this turning be not wroght in
thee by the Gospel, look not for grace, remission of sins and life
everlasting. Art thou a murderer, and have thy heart set on bloodshed? at the
hearing of the Gospel, if thy heart be not turned, thy sin shall never be
taken away. He who is new comde from murder, he will come in and hold up
his ear to the Gospel, and hear of remission of sins and life everlasting
through Christ, and he will take all to him, and in the mean time he will have
his foull heart stuffed with murder and revenge. Away with thee o fool: it is
impossible to get pardon and remission of sins, when thy heart remains yet
unturned from sin: thou have no part in Jesus, I debar thee from him. Trowest
thou to get remission and life when thy heart bydes unturned, lying still in
that stinking filth? In a word, thou shall get no effect of the Gospel
except thy heart be turned to God. So as thou vvoulde have life after this
life, look thy heart be turned away from sin, and turned to God. So then
there is the first effect that the Gospel works, Parts of conversion.
Repentance and turning. Wherein stands it? Look to the words: it stands
first in this point, in leaving off Idols: if thou be an Idolater, turn thy
back on an Idol. Thou makes an Idol to thee of thy foull affection, as
murder, theft, adultery, when thou obeyes them: turn thy back on these
Idols. Many thinks to come to God in an instant with his Idol in his arms,
they will present to God prayers, with the Idol in their bosoms, as Rachell
would come down from Padan-Aram and vvorshippe God, but she kept her Idol.
No, be not deceived, if thou leave not the Idol behind thee, (vvhither it be
an Idol in deed, or a foull affection that thou set up in the rovvme of
God) I discharge thee of the Connention of the Sanctes of God, for thou scorns
him, and one day he shall be avenged on thee for it. Turn thee therefore from
that wicked Idol or else bide away.

Now follows the second part of the conversion. It is not eneugh to turn
from an Idol (a false dead stock, which is nothing but the invention of thy
own brain. Paul to the Corinthians cal^es it nothing. 1. Corinthians. 10. 19.)
but thou must turn to the true God. Turn thee from Satan to God. Alas,
filthy creature, whom to will thou turn thee if thou will not turn thee to
thy own Redeemer? The lesson is. It is not eneugh to turn from an Idol,
except thou turn to the true God of glory, the living God. Brethren many men
hes been deceyed with this. Amongst the Nations there were many who would
scorn Jupiter, condemn Apollo, as Diogenes, but they turned not to God, but
turned to plain Atheiseme. So there are many in these days who will mock all
the vanities of the Mass, and yet for all this, they will abide Atheists, and
all Religion will be alyke to them. Is he amongst the Papists? he will scorn
them: amongst the Protestants? he will scorn them also? This is an evil sort
of men. Except thou be of mind to ^mbra^^, the true God; hold thee with thy
Idol, be a Papist still; an Athei^t is most wicked and most dangerous, for the
scorns all men* He is worse then an Idolater, and he can not eschew a
judgment. For, the Histories records that God oft-tymes hes punished even the
very cont^mners of the idols, that is, such as preased to blot out of their
hearts all sense of the Godhoode.

Learn here in these words, that miserable estate that men lay into before
their conversion The Thessalonians what were they before Paul came among them?
dead in sin, dead in lusts, without any sight of God or salvation. I shall
tell you how all men's sons, (even the Kings sons) are borne, (so that we
have no cause to glory in our selves:) When he is borne first, and comes out
of his Mothers womb, the back of him is to God, and his face to the Devil,
and the burning eye of God is upon him. No infant, what estate so ever he
be, is borne otherwise, his face is to Hell, his back on God his Redeemer, and
thee seed of hatred, with the gall of bitterness against God in his heart,
and if he remain in nature, there is no day he lives, but there is in his
heart some augmentation of the hatred of God. Now in the mean time the ear of
him is ay pulde, the light of reasone begins not so soon in him, but the
conscience will round in his ear, there is a God that created this world, and
often he will look over his shoulder to get a blenk of that God his Creator, and
seeing him, feign would he be quite of that Creator, and of that sight of God
that reason chalenges his soul with: (look to this our nature, fie on them
that begins to extol this nature in their doctrine) yet he can not be quite of
the sight of God, and he finds that nature pushes him to seek a God. And then
he says: seeing I can not be quite of God, I shall make to my self a God,
and then he will change the glory of the true God in the Image of a
foure-footed beast, etc. Rom 1. 23. Then the Lord seeing this malitiousnesse in
the heart of man, who sees a God and will not see him; he puts out his eyes,
and geues him over to a reprobate sense and mind without all judgment: the
Lord makes him both blind and wod as a blind body running like as he were
mad, and waits not what way: for he that is an Idolater, is by nature a wod
wavering body, and all his race in that broad way, adultery, murder, and all
other vices, and ^unne where he will, Hell is the end of his running.

Look then to this nature that we are borne in, it is worse nor I or the
tongue of any man can express. Then how is this matter remedied? when the
blind man is running on in his fury, there ryses a noise that follows him:
see the mercy of God! what manner of noise is this? It is the voice of the
Law, crying, o miserable body, Manner of conversion.
thou art condemned, Hell is thy lotte and portion, and this begins to awalk
him (a terrible walking.) Now if God let him alone in this manner, desperation
would be his, end. But, if it pleases God to have mercy on that cati^^e: there
follows an other sweet voice, (alas, no other thing see I in Scotland but
damnation if the Gospel be removed.) This cry is out of the Gospel with (...)
the Baptist: Sinner repent thee, turn thee to the Lord Christ and thou shall
^inde mercy. The voice of the Euangell.
There is the cry of the Gospel, Thy sin shall be forgeuen thee, thou shall
be safe. D^eth he hear this? if the Lord be powerful unto him, he will turn
himself immediately about, and look with his face to that God and Christ with
such a joy and mourning that no tongue can express it. A joy begins in the
conversion, because of Gods presence assuring him of the remission of all his
sins: a sorrovve begins because of the offending of God in time bypast. So
I cry this day, Believe in God miserable men, and ye shall find mercy. And
if the idolaters in our North-countrie were here, I would cry to them, Fie on
thee idolater, that have run on so long in devilish ways, turn you from
your idolatry and wicked nature to the verity of the Gospel of Christ, and
you shall be saved: but if you turn not, damnation shall overtake you, and
thou shall be casten in utter darkness where there shall be nothing but
weeping and gnashing of teeth. The Lord save out of their wicked and
detestable company all them that in their heart longes to see the most
comfortable countenance of their blessed Savior Jesus Christ: and the Lord
concur by his heavenly Spirit with the Gospel that is preached, that we
may be all in time converted thereby, and see God in Christ, and serve him in
this life, that at last we may have the full sight of his face for ever.

AMEN.
THE FOVRTH LEC. TVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 1. verse. 9. 10. To serve the living and true God. 10 And to
look for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus,
which delyuereth us from the wrath to come.


1. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 1. 2. 1. For ye your selves know, brethren, that
our entrance in unto you was not in vain.

2. But even after we had suffered before, and were shamefullie entreated at
Philippi (as ye know) we were bold in our God, to speak unto you the
Gospel of God with much stryuing.


THE purpose we have in hand, brethren, is that rejoysing of the Apostle Paul,
together with the Thessalonians, whom he had converted to Christ, for these
graces of God which Paul understood to be in them: namely, their faith, their
love, their hope, their election eternal, of the which he was assured, and that
by sundry arguments and tokens. Now the last day we entered into a narration,
which the Apostle shows was made to him in the Countries in the which he
travailed, both far and near concerning the Thessalonians and first of all
concerning himself, what manner of entry he had unto them, with what
liberty, with what affliction, and as concerning them, how they were
converted and turned by his preaching from the Idols, false Gods which they
worshipped before, unto God. This much already.

Now in this text we have the uses and ends of their conversion and turning to
the true and living God: There are two of them: the first is, that they should
serve the living and true God: The second is, that they should look for his
son, whom he, meaning the father, had raised from the death, even Jesus,
who delyuereth us from the vvraith to come. The ends of conversion.
Now to come to the first end, and to mark every word: Ye are converted,
saves he, from idols to God: and to what end? to serve the living and true
God, whereas before ye served but dead and false Gods, being miserable slaves:
ye are turned and converted from these false Gods to employ that service on the
living and true God.

Then brethren, to mark shortly the lessons, for the Text is plain. Our
conversion and turning to God, is not that we should stand up idle before him
or play the vvanton in his eyes: but it is to be humbled before him, to honor
him, and to consecrate our whole life, (if we did live ten thousand years) to
his service. Many men, when for the fashion they have turned from Idolatry
to God and to the Gospel, where he is present, employ their whole life (as ye
see by experience) to displease and dishonor God in his face. In the light of
the Gospel he will come out and play the murderer: in the face of Christ
in the Gospel she will play the harlote, the third will oppress, the
fourth will steal, the fifth will spew out blasphemy. Now why would thou
not do this when thou did serve idols? the less judgment should have
fallen upon thee to have done these things in the face of an Idol that savve
thee not, nor in the face of God who sees thee. O hypocrite, it had been
better for thee thou had never been converted to the Gospel, nor had
never heard the sound of the Gospel, nor when thou hear it to contemn God
by thy life therein. Fie on thee, go back again to idolatry, except thou
behave thy self comely standing before the face of that Majesty of God.
Brethren, it is the thing I have been thinking on: This Gospel shall serve
to the greater condemnation of the multitude of people in this world, and that
for the contempt thereof: fie that such villainy should be daily and hourelie
committed in the sight of God, in so great a light of the Gospel.

He joins some properties to this God, and calls him the living and true God,
and that to put a difference between him and Idols: an Idol is dead, the
Papists idol is dead and the Papist turns the living God in an idol. An
idol is dead, without life, breath, feeling, motion or s^irring, without, all
kind of quicknes: God true and living.
our God is living, an idol is but a false and sordged thing, a thing that a
vain head will invent: fie on the (...) of an idol: but our God is the true
God, God in very deed, and in the end will be found the only true God.
There are ^vvo properties that are given to him: Mark the use of them: They
are reasones moving the Thessalonians to serve him: He is living, why should
they not serve him? he is the true God, why should they not serve him? The life
that is in God, the verity that is in him is more then matter to move all
mankind to honor him. Man cannot be honored, but by others nor himself:
take men away from a man, no honor to that man. It is not so with God, for, if
all the creatures of the earth were turned to nothing, the honor and glory of
that God stands sure and absolutely perfect. Then, if notwithstanding of the
honor in him, of the life in him, of the truth in him, which all are matter
of all service to be given to him, thou will not be moved to honor God, he is
but an Idol to thee, an idol without life to thee, without sense or feeling,
without hearing seeing, without all providence and care in governing these
things in heaven and earth: thou that serves and honor him not in this life
thou makes him an idol. If you thought he had an eye to see the inward of thy
heart, an ear to hear what thou art speaking in thy secret chamber, if thou
thought he had a providence over this world, for all the world thou would not
do as thou do. The adulterer the oppressor if they had a conscience that God
saw them and marked their doings, for all the world they would not do so as
they do: but because thou makes an idol of him, thinking him neither to see
nor know any thing: therefore thou playest the wanton: think not but this
shall be laid to thy charge, Thou was an adulterer, a murderer, an oppressor:
think not that this shall be the chief crime thou shall be accused for, that
thou art an adulte^er, murderer, an oppressor: no, no, but the Lord shall
say, catiffe, thou made an Idol of me in thy adultery, and closed me in
Heaven, without life, sense or understanding, or providence to take care of the
things of the world, catiffe, thy damnation is for this, thou dishonored me in
the profession of my name.

Yet there is more in these words. He lets them se that greater advauntage
they had in serving God, nor ever they had before: before they served dead and
false things, now says he, ye serve not a dead and false thing, but a living
and true God. There is great vauntage here: Brethren, there are many sorts of
slaueries in this world: but to be addicted to an Idol, or a false God, to
fall down before a stock or stone, Slavery of Idolaters.
of all slaueries this is the greatest: it is true, it is a slavery to be
subject to a tyrannous man in this world, to his foull affections, to abide
all things he will injoine thee, but in the mean time, while as thou serves
the living and true God, thou art a free man, and thou have a singular comfort
and consolation in thy heart: and if any will call the a slave, care not for
that, for thou art a free man to God. 1 Cor. 7. 21. but, albeit he were a King,
and had all the world under his dominion, if he be a slave to a false fained
God, an Idol, of all slaves he is the greatest slave: for not to know the
true God is the greatest slavery that is: for there is no consolation but in
God: if thou had all the liberty in the world, thy soul is in slavery, if
thou serve not the living and true God. I will not call a Nation a free Nation,
a King a free King, if they serve not that living God. Will I call a Kingdom a
free Kingdom that is subject to a miserable slavery of Idolatry? Woe to that
slavery: and thou Scotland, if thou lose the service of the living God, of all
slaves thou shall be the greatest, because so shamefullie thou have lost it.
David in the 16. Psalm. verse. 4. tells of the misery of the Idolaters, and of
the liberty of them who serves Jehovah. As for the Idolaters says he, They
multiple sorrovv upon sorrovv to themselves: then he rejoyses in his own
felicity: who serves the living God Jehovah? the Lord, says he, is the
portion of my inheritance. Therefore ere thou lose the service of this true
God, and Christ his Son, lose thy life, and all that thou have in this world.
This is the only liberty to serve the living and true God.

Now follows the second end of their conversion, which is to look for the
Son and his coming; the first was, to serve the Father of this life; the
second is to awaite for the coming of the Son. Mark every word. It is not
eneugh, brethren, to serve the Father, the living and true God, in faith, in
love, in all service that pertaines to him in this life, except thy eye through
hope reach out beyond this life in the mean time of thy service. Hope of life
to come.
Thou art here now serving him, look that thy eye reach out beyond this
life, to see and to hope for an other life. There are many in wealth, in
honor, in ease, in health of body in this world, that would make a
Covenant with God, and say, Lord, Let me dwell still to serve thee here, and
it were for ever, and I oblishe me never to look for more at thy hand: give me
this life, and wealth and pleasure thereof, I shall serve thee to let me live
here for ever, and I shall bind my self never to crave more of thee: alas, I
trow there be many of this sort. Fie on it, this can not be rooted out of the
hearts of the most godly, even as if either God had gotten glory
sufficiently, or we could get perfect happiness in this life. Alas, if our
hope were only in this life, and our blessedness reached not out beyond
this life, of all men the christian man were most miserable. I had rather choose
to be a Turk nor a Christian, except my hope reach out beyond this life, and
all the pleasure and service I can do to God in it. If thou prease to be a true
christian, think not with thy self, I shall drive over this life quietly, and
shall stand fast in all trouble, but thou must bide tossing and toyling,
otherwise thou can not be a christian: for through many tribulations thou must
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Act. 14. 22. The^ ye who would serve God,
serve him as pilgrims in a strange country far from him: what ever thou be
doing here in his service walking in thy godly exercise, in the mean time let
thy heart be with Christ: let thy heart be where thy life is hid up with Christ.
Paul gives an example of this in his own person saying, I live here as a
Citizen of Heaven. Philip. 3. 20. A Citizen in the heaven is a pilgrim on the
earth. And therefore he subjoynes, living as a pilgrim here, and a Citizen of
Heaven, I hope for my salvation in Christ. A pilgrim hes ever his eye out of
this world. The second Epistle to the Corinthians. Chap. 5. verse. 7. 8. he
shows that in this life he walked in faith and confidence, but says he, I
choose rather to flit and remove out of the body, and to dvvell with my Lord
Jesus. Fie on thee, that is so nailde through head and heart to this world, that
thou hes ever thy heart and sight here. Certainly I am of this mind, that
the thing that every one of us should most care for, should be to steal away
piece and piece from this earth. Lowse thy heart piece and piece, and free thee
from this woeful life.

Now this hope and looking is for the Son: something pertaines to the Father,
thou must serve the living and true God: something pertaines to the Son, thou
must look for him from Heaven. Think not to honor the Father without the
Son. The Jew is vain that thinks to honor the Father without the Son, No,
it will not be: serve the Father, but honor the Son also, or else the Father
shall accept no honor at thy hand. Ioh. 5. 23. For all the honor of the
Fathers is in the Son. But mark the special honor that is given to the
Son in this life. The Son is honored in faith in this life, in believing
that he is already come in the world, that he is come in our nature and
suffered the death for our sins: that he died* was buried, rose again from the
death, thou honors him in believing this. But this is the special point of
this honor, to hope that he shall come again: as he come once, so look that
he shall come again. But brethren, neither hes his glory yet appeared, as it
is in deed, and shall appear: neither yet your grace appears as it shall when
he shall come again. And therefore the special service we can do, is to
await for his coming, ad to glory under that hope. No, believe thou in the
Father as thou will, if thou hope not for that glorious returning of the Son,
thou honors him not. This is all to stir us up by hope, to look for an
other life: for all these things; King and Kingdom will away, and they who
hoped for him in this life, shall shine in glory with him in that life
eternal.

Fromwhence shall we hope that he comes? where shall we cast our eye (if we look
for a man to come from one part, our eye will ever be on that part where from
he should come, whither it be East or West, South or North) Where then should
we cast our eye? Neither to the East, West, South nor North, nor to any part of
this earth, but cast thy eye upward to Heaven, Jesus is in Heaven, and he shall
come from Heaven, he is not in the earth: and therefore ye see in him that
hopes, as the heart breaks upward, so will the eye look upward, the hand, the
head will be raised upward: as Christ says, lift up your heads. Luke 21. 28.
so his behavior will tell thee from whence Christ shall come. And again thy
behavior will tell that thou have no hope when thou tends altogether
downwards, thy face ever toward the earth, and thy heart moyling in the earth:
when any man sees al thy care and mind only upon the earth he may say, this
body hes no hope, he looks not for the returning of the son of God.

Then follows Whom he raised from the death, meaning the son of God: the
Father raised him. I will not insist, but so far only as the text will
bear me. Believe that Jesus is raised from the dead, and that he is in heaven;
believe the thing done and past, and then hope that he shall come again: first
be a believer, and then hope: he that hopes for a thing to come must be a
believer of the thing by gone. Fasten thy belief on the things bygone, that
Christ died, was buried, and rose up by the power of God, and ascended to the
heaven; believing all these things by gone, hope shall take hold on things to
come; but if thou believe not these things bygone, thou shall never hope that
Christ shall come again to thy delivery. All these things bygone go before
the thing to come: he hes told all the articles of the belief, ere he come to
this coming of Christ again; therefore thou must believe these things bygone
ere thou hope for Christ's coming. Then he brings in a description of the son
of God; from his name, a Savior* from his office, a deliverer: a savior must be
a deliverer, his name bears his office, for Jesus must be a savior of men.
There are two things joined together, Christ's coming and our eternal
delivery: when he came first in the world, he began with delivery, and by his
death redeemed us; when he shall come again he will make an end of our
delivery and there shall be no more sin, death, Our delivery dependes on
Christ's coming.
trouble or sorrow. So al our delivery depends so on christ's coming, that if
he return not we shall never be fully delivered: and by the contrair, Jesus
returning, of necessity thou must get a full deliverance. They that look for
delivery (there is the order of hope) their hope is ever first in the coming
of Christ, upon the which their deliverance dependes, then in the second
rowme, they look for their deliverance. They are fools that look first to be
delivered, that is a backward order: therefore say, I hope Jesus shall come
again, and then say, I hope to be delivered: and ye see in the Revelation the
cry of him who looks for salvation, is Come Lord Jesus. Revel. 22. 20. The
meaning is, When we desire Christ to come, we desire the performance of our
deliverance: when we desire Doomes-day, we desire the perfection of our
eternal delivery, and it will not be until that day: if thou be found in
Jesus thy deliverance shall then come in the full accomplishment thereof.

Now, from what should he deliver us? From the vvraith to come. Christ
deliueres us from the wrath to come.
That is, from all pain and vexation. All the terrors, and hell that shall
follow on the wrath of that great God that shall be revealed in that great day
(for, that effectual wrath of God shall strike in that great day) are called
the wrath to come. No doubt the Apostle by this word would stir up our
minds to look for a greater wrath, then ever was seen in this world: there
was never since the first day to the last, such a wrath of God seen in the
world, as shall be seen in that last day. The Lords wrath hes been uttered
often times in great measure since the beginning, as in that great deludge, in
the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha with fire and brimstone, in the particulare
destruction of many people and sundry nations: but all is nothing to that
great wrath, all is but play, in respect of that last wrath. And therefore,
they are fools, who measures the greatness of the wrath of God, by the selie
momentaneall afflictions, that is laid on men and women in this earth. Some
thinks, God can not power a greater wrath, nor when he casts a man in great
sickness, when he causes one to be rugged in sunder one part from an other,
when he causes one to be burnt with fire: and foolish wretches will say, What
can God do more to me? Know thou not, that, there is an everlasting wrath
in God? or ever it light on thee, it shall make each member shake in sunder, and
when thou sees it coming down on thee, thou shall cry, Mountains and Hills
fall down on me, and cover me from the wrath of the Lamb Revel. 6. 16.
Again, mercy is not, to be measured, by the mercy we get here: it is a
blasphemy, to think, that God hes no greater mercy to shovv on thee, nor he
shows here. So the greatest affliction that can fall on us here, is nothing in
respect of that last wrath. Therefore, that last day is called 2. Romans verse. 5.
the day of wrath. There was no day before called the day of wrath. Now,
brethren, as the greatest wrath shall be powered out that day: so, the greatest
mercy shall be shown to the godly that day. And they, who shall be found
under the covert of the wings of this Jesus the Savior, wrath shall pass by
them: but, they, who shall not be found under his wings, the wrath shall
tumble on them. Alas, if we could consider this. Learn to seek Jesus in time.
The way to find Jesus a couerture in that day, it must not be to begin then,
thou will not get him then, if thou got him not before: think not to cry,
then, Jesus cover me: but, the way to make Christ a couertour to thee must be
in this life: believe in him here, believe, that, he came into the world to
relieve thee from this great wrath that day: believe, that, he died for thee,
rose again for thee and hope, that, he shall come again to that eternal
deliverance. Miss not this hope. Paul to Timothy 2. Epist. 4. 8. speaking of
that crown of righteousness he shall receive, he communicates that crown with
others: but, who are they? they, that hopes for his coming. If thou, in some
measure, hunger not and thirst not for his coming in this life, look not to
be covered by him hereafter: groan therefore, and thirst for Jesus, in some
measure, that he may keep thee in that great day from the fearce wrath of God.
Consider this, the world binds up men's eyes, that, they should not see
Christ's coming, and it makes us, never to desire, to hear, nor, know of an
other life, or, of Christ's coming. Therefore, take up this necessity, and let
all this life be a preparation to a better life, and in all thy exercise in this
life, say, Lord, I am exercisde here, in this vocation, or, that vocation at
thy command: but, Lord, for all this bussines, I am a pilgrim here, my life is
not in this world, and my heart and eye is beyond this world with thee. The
Lord give us grace, to have this hope: woe to that soul, that must depart,
and hes no hope of a better life.

Now I will go forward in the Chapter following. Wherein first the Apostle sets
out a discourse of himself, and of his own Ministry, and the success the
Lord gave him in his Ministry toward the Thessalonians. This he tells in the
two first verse^ of this chapter. Parts of the second Chap.
Then he comes to the recounting of the graces of God wrought in them by his
ministry, to the 17. verse. Then until the end of the chapter he tells the
great sorrow he had that he could not win to the^, and shows the impediments,
Satan vvithstoode him. These are the three parts of the chapter. To come to
the first part, he says For ye your selves know, brethren, that our entrance
in unto you was not in vain. When I came to Macedonia to vvin a number of
souls that God had there my entry was not in vain, without effect or power:
the reasone is in the next verse followinge. For says he, we were boulde
in our GOD, to speak unto you the Gospel of God, with great stryuing. The
power of God was perceived in my preaching, and all my liberty in preaching
of the gospel was of God. He aggreadges this his liberty by telling of the
stays and impediments he got ere he came to them: he suffered many
afflictions, and was evil entertained at Philippi, and coming to them he was
not free of affliction, but all his preaching was with fighting and daily
battle: there is the meaning of these verses.

To come then shortly to the lessons. First Ise the people that hes been
grounded and edified in faith by the ministry of the Pastor, and by the grace
and power of God, they should not forget the graces of God they got by him; and
ere they should forget, the Pastor him self is bound by the example of Paul,
for to stand up and to bring them in remembrance of the grace: not for his own
praise, but for the glory of God, who hes given thee grace, that the grace of
God be not obscured, but that his glory may shine. I will lay you a ground in
the first Epistle Corinth. 2. 4. 5. Your faith is builded upon the power of
God, that is given to the Ministry: To the Ministry? yea to the Ministry, to
the Ministry man, or else thou shall never have a ground of faith. The Apostle
says, that your faith stands not in the vvisdome of men, but upon the power
of God. And therefore, brethren Faith stands upon that same very ground the
power of God given to the Ministry. Thy eye should be drawn back to see the
ground whereupon thy faith has been grounded: if thou forget to look of it,
Pastors should draw thy (...) about, and let thee see that thy faith was
grounded on the power of the word in the Ministry, I challenge your experience
how often ye remember the power of God in the ministry, whither ye rejoice or
not: saying, well is me, I have not my faith grounded upon the wisdom of man,
but upon the power of God; seek it for the fondation of your faith, that it be
firm and sure: for if thou have not a sure foundation to ground thy faith on,
it shall fall. And that thou may find it. I counsel thee that thou neglect not
the Pastor: for if thou forget the Pastor and his ministry, thou shall not
come to the fondation of thy faith. I put it out of question, the power of Gods
word by his ministry is a ground where upon your faith is grounded. If this
ministry go away, faith, salvation, and all graces in this land will decay.

The second thing whereon stands this power, is in the second verse. It stands
in a liberty, boldness and freedom, in vttring the Gospel, and speaking of
Christ. So, brethren, where liberty, where boldness in preaching the Gospel is,
there is effectualnes in it, and the man who hes this boldness, is a fectfull
man, and his entry shall never be in vain. If the Lord give thee liberty, if
all the world had said the contrair, the effect shall not be in vain, and
where the Lord geues not this liberty, all the preaching is fectlesse and
without fruit. I shall say nothing but that which Paul says: where there is
no liberty in the speaking of Jesus, of his mercy and grace, no freedom of
mouth etc. there is nothing but a dead Gospel Where there is no liberty in
using all the parts of the ministry, in rebuking, admonishing and comforting,
there is nothing but a dead Gospel. (I mean ever of a liberty grounded on
God, not on man's vain affections) where this liberte is not there is nothing
but a dead ministry. I believe this nation be come already to the hight of
this liberty, not of the mouth only, but of the heart. And I think the Lord is
binding up the hearts of men that they are not loused with that liberty, if it
were but in preaching the Gospel, as they were. Lord be merciful to us. I
believe this work be drawing to an end: ye have keped it long: and blessed
shall they be that dies in the light. And so when I look a far off, I pity
the posterity, which appearantly shall be dep^iued of that liberty; al for our
ingratitude, we had a grace, and liberty which we contemned. So God in justice
is drawing it away.

Next mark again. In God, says he, not in man. That is we used that liberty
which God gave us. The liberty of the affection of man is nothing worth. Look
then what ever be spoken by the Minister, it be warranded by the word of God.
And look again, that it rise of the inward motions of the Spirit in the
heart. If a man speak of his own private affection (o Lord if he should not
have a well sanctified affection that speaks in the name of the Lord) it is
better to him not to speak, he indangers himself and hes much to make account
of. But if thou have warrands in the word, break out with it with liberty: for
it is as great danger to thee to conceal it when thou have a warrant, as it is
to speak it of thy own affection. And without question the Lord will control
them that will control thy liberty here. The Lord give eyes to men that they
may see what danger they incur by controlling the liberty of the word in
the Church. There is his moderation in teaching.

Now one thing more. All this power is in the beginning in his entrance to
them. The Apostle is now afflicted in Macedonia, when he comes to Theslalonica,
all his preaching is but a battle: and last shamefully is he put away, and
goes to Ber^^a. What shall I say of this? If Paul had had no more but the
spirit of a man, he would not have immediately gone to Thessalonica, and there
teached: and being in Thessalonica he would not have uttered any thing that
would have displeased them: No, but he does otherwise: the power of God never
so well appears in men as under affliction, for when man is weakest God is
strongest in them. My strength, says the Lord, (...) shovven in infirmity. 2.
Cor. 12. 9. And in the fourth chapter of the same Epistle verse. 7. he shows,
the Lord hes put a treasure in earthen veshels, that the excellency of his
power may be known. Then he falls out in a probation of this power: My
body is daily slain where ever I go, there is nothing but affliction. But
says he: by this I know, the life of Jesus is manifest in me. He hes not a
better token to know the life of Jesus, nor by affliction: and none can know
the life of Jesus so well as in the last agony of death. Other countries hes
experimented this power of God that appears in affliction better then we have
done. Scotland hes no manifestation thereof in respect of other Churches. Well
brethren, our time is coming fast on. The Lord of Heaven that is strongest
when man weakest, give us strength and courage to abide that time and hold us
up in our infirmities, that he may be glorified in our affliction. To this God,
the Father, Son and the holy Spirit, be honor and praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE FIFTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 3. 4* 5. 6. 7. 3 For our exhortation was not by
deceit, nor by uncleanness, nor by guile.

4 But as we were allowed of God, that the Gospel should be committed unto
us, so we speak, not as they that please men, but God, ^v^o tries the hearts.

5 Neither did we ever use stattering words, as ye know, nor colored
covetousness, God is record.

6 Neither soght we praise of men, neither of you, nor of others.

7 When we might have been chargeable, as the Apostles of Christ: but we were
gentle among you, even as a nource cherishes her children.


BRETHREN the purpose we have in hand, and hes had these days bygone is the
rejoysing of the Apostle together with the Thessalonians, for the graces of God
bestowed on the^. The Apost. falls out in a narration concerning himself and
the manner of his entry among the Thessalonians, setting out the grace of God
that was with him, when he entered in among them to this end, to let them
see the ground whereupon their faith was builded was not fair words, but
that effectual grace of God that was hid up in the (...). The last day we
shevve the Apostle proponed his manner of his entry among them, it was not in
vain, it was not fectlesse, but fectfull, and when he come and entered
amongst them, he come with a liberty and boldness, uttering the Gospel of
Christ, and a liberty not grounded on man, or on his own affection, but on
the power of God. This boldness he amplifies in respect of the afflictions
which before he had suffered at Philippi, and in respect of that suffering he
had, while he preached that word of the Gospel with liberty among them.

Now to come to this text we have in hand. The Apostle in the third verse of
this chapt. answers to that which might have been thought and objected by the
Thessalonians (for he meets the thought of the heart) Thou says thy entry
among us was with liberty and boldness, but look with what sincerity thou
entered among us: it is not eneugh to preach with boldness and liberty, but
there must be sincerity, look that thy preaching hes not been with deceat to
deceive us, with vnclea^nes, with guile. If any of these three things have
concurred with thy preacing and exhorting, al thy liberty in preaching and
exhorting auails not. The Apostle answers (mark every word) for our
exhortation was not by deceit, nor by uncleanness, nor by guile. Look to the
words. Our exhortation, our doctrine or preaching (for by a special part of
the doctrine, which is exhortation he understands the whole, and that because
all doctrine ends in exhorting. Exhortation is the conclusion of all doctrine)
exhortation, says he, was not with deceat, with uncleanness, nor with guile,
that is to say, was not with any kind of fainednes, neither in substance of
doctrine, which is called deceat (false doctrine deceiues.) Neither in
affection, in uttering the Gospel, which is called uncleanness, neither in
the manner of delyuerie, which here is called guile. In a word our exhortation
was void of all sort of vnsinceritie: no part was simulate. Mark the lesson
on this verse. Ye see here this meeting the Apostle makes to the very thought
of the heart, and to the opinion they might have conceived, that he was not
sincere in doctrine, vtters plainly that there is oft-tymes a very opinion
and suspicion in the hearts of the hearers, that there is vnsinceritie in the
teacher, in delyuering the doctrine, and this will make such a doubt in the
heart, that it will hinder edification and faith. And therefore the teacher had
much need to take head to himself in teaching, to his affection, and to
eschew all sort of uncleanness, if it were but in his thought and affections:
before he speak he should strive to get a sanctified heart, and in word let
him meet the very thought and suspicion of the people, to remove all blame of
vnsinceritie in preaching and uttering the Gospel, that edification and faith
may increase. His end in preaching is faith, that the people may believe and be
edified: Let him therefore put away all occasions that may stay the edification
of the people, that the work and building may go up and faith may grow.

Then secondly ye se, there are sundry sorts of vnsinceritie: A man may be
insincere in teaching many ways: he may teach, and yet teach false doctrine:
he may be insincere in his heart in teaching: he may be vasincere in
delyuering, and thereby deceive thee. And there is none of these ways, but
they will stay edification, if the people take a suspicion, if it were of an
vnsinceritie of the heart, it will stay the work. And therefore, in all manner
of way the teacher should strive to be sincere in uttering the Gospel: that if
there be any stop, it may be in him that hears, and not in him who teaches:
for if the preachers strive not for his part to sincerity, and the people for
their part to sincerity in hearing, it will be a great stay to the work.

Now into the next verse, when he hes removed from him the opinion of all kind
of vnsinceritie, and hes purged himself thereof, either in doctrine, affection,
or in manner of delyuerie: He sets down the contrair, to wit, the sincerity
he used in doctrine. The sincerity he used was this, that he spoke: how spoke
he? Not as they do who are set to please men, but to please God. There is the
sincerity in speaking: he had not men before his eyes, he respected not the
pleasure of men: but in speaking and preaching his God was before his eye, and
his heart was set to please God. Sincerity in preaching and hearing is to be
measured by the end that thou respects in doing thereof: for if God and his
glory be not before thy eyes, as the Butte whereat thou shootes, albeit that
which thou do and speak had never so fair a face, yet al is insincere
and unclean. The thing I mark here specially is, a Pastor that stryues to
be sincere in speaking and preaching must set himself to please some in his
speaking: but here a caveat to be kept, in the person whom thou studies to
please, either by doing, or by speaking: this is all the weight of the matter;
if thy heart be set in speaking, preaching and doing, to please men and to
satisfy the humors of men first of all: if that be the butte thou shootes at,
because this man likes of this speaking therefore I will speak this: if this
speaking please this woman, therefore I will speak this. If that be the end of
thy speaking, all thy speaking is vnceritie and flattery: if thou seek to
pleasure any creature, if it were the Angels, let be a man, all thy pleasant
talk is but vain talk and flattery. I deny not but men may be pleasured to,
Romans 12. 18. but look that thy butte be not to please men, of what estate so
ever they be, but only to please God. First please God, and in God please
them, and then thou can not go wrong. If men and women (what rank so ever they
be of) can not be pleased in God, and will not let God have the first place,
then please thou God, and anger all the world. If thou studies to please any
person only in God in speaking and doing, there can be nothing there but
sincerity. A sure rule, a man can never fail in setting his heart to please
God, in thought, word and deed. The Lord give us upright hearts to study to
please our God, and then all creatures only in him.

Now he lays down a good ground, why in his preaching he stryued to please his
God, it was not without a good cause: and the ground is, God pleased him first,
and why should he not endeavor himself to do all things to please him again,
and render him the like duty. But as we, says he, were allowed of God in
such sort, that the Gospel should be committed unto us, so we speak. That
is, that he hes placed us in this calling, made us Apostles who were unworthy
bodies: of one who was unable of such a calling, hes made us able: as it hes
pleased him so to please me, and as he hes allowed of me, who was altogether
unworthy, my speaking shall be to please him. There was never a Minister that
ever received grace for that calling at the hands of men, neither at king nor
subject, but only at Gods hand: and therefore let him study to please, not
men, but God, who geues him al graces: and if men can not be pleased in God,
let him not study to please the^. Now to speak of this allowance, there is a
difference between the allowance of men, when they allow of men, and God when
he allows of men: man allows of man, because he sees some good qualities in
him, which qualities he never gave him, for God gave him them. But when God
allows of man, he allows not for any good thing he sees in him, to move him
to allow of him, but all the allowing of God is of fre grace, all is according
to the good pleasure of his will: Gods allowance of free grace.
he allows not of man because he is able to do good, but because God allows
of him, therefore he is made meet and able to do good: when God choised thee
before all eternity to glory, what saw he in thee? The Apostle says. He
predestinate us in himself. Ephesians. 1. 5. Of his own fre love he called us to
grace. Before he called us to grace, what saw he in us to move him to make us
partakers of his grace? He saw matter of hell and damnation in us. And therefore
his allowance of us was not for any grace was in us: if he had allowed of us
conform to that which was in us, he would have shot us with his hand to hell
for ever. So when he calls one to be a Minister and teacher of the Gospel,
allows he of him because he hes a grace before hand? No, the best Minister
that is chosen he hes no more grace by nature to this holy function, nor the
vildest sinner in the world. So it is the allowance of God himself that makes
man meet to that office: so this allowance of God was in himself: no matter
thereof in Paul, matter contrary to grace was in him, he was a blasphemer. 1.
Tim. 1. 12. Paul had never been an Apostle, but an impe of the Devil, if God
had not allowed of him first. The note is, Gods free love binds us to plese him.
the undeserved love of God, when he allows of us, when he calls us to faith,
or places us in any calling (if it were a King in his calling,) either in
Church or common-wel binds and oblishes us to spend our lives in that
calling, that God may be pleased. If ever thing bound thee, this undeserved
lyking God had of thee, who first lyked thee when thou was full of ^inne,
binds thee to set thy heart to please God: for thy blessedness, joy and
felicity is to please him: and he that studies not to please him, knew never
what joy was. Alas, if we could apprehend our own misery before Gods
allowance of us: (We are not placed so soon in any calling, but immediately we
conceate with our selves, that God hes seen in us something worthy of it,)
and then again, if we could apprehend that free mercy of God, after the sight
of our own unworthiness, then we would set our hearts to pleasure him. For,
never apprehending our misery and Gods mercy and free calling, we set our
selves in our calling to please men and our own foull affections. The Lord
waken us, for appearantlie the time of trial draws near: we have been
unthankful for the undeserved graces of God bestowed on us. Therefore he is
begun to draw them from us, and lets us follow our own affections.

Now next, In what thing strives Paul to please God? what was his calling? He
says, The Gospel was committed to me. That is his calling. Therefore, say
he, so we speak. Look what is every man's calling? Every man in a faithful
discharge of his own calling is bound to please God. He says not, God
allowed of me, therefore I please him in playing the part of a king or
magistrate: but he hes called me to be a minister, therefore I will please him in
speaking. Then let every man set his heart to please God in his own calling.
So there are two things we should respect in serving God: First do all to
please him; Secondly, in the calling he has placed thee into chiefly study
to please him. Keep these two, and then thou shall be acceptable unto him.

In the end of the verse he subjoynes, But God who approoueth our hearts*
These words contain an assurance that Paul had in his heart, that in
speaking and discharging of his calling he pleased God. God within me had his
secreete allowance, God in my heart as he allowed of me first, ere I had grace,
and placed me in the Ministry, so now when he has given me grace to please
him, he allows of me There are two sorts of Gods allowing. The first is when
God allows of any man before he have any grace, 2. sorts of Gods allowing.
and by his allowance makes him able to do good: the second is, when he
allows of him in the work he hes given him by his grace. The first allowance
moves a man to serve his God and to do all things in his calling: the second
allowance is a warrant to him that he hes done well. Always the lesson is. If
thou set thy self to please God thou shall never want a witness of thy
doings, thou shall never want a secreete testimony within thy self, (albeit
all the world should close their mouth, and never speak to thee) thou do
well: set thou thy self to serve God, he shall round in thy ear and tell
thee of thy weldoing, and give thee a secreete joye. By the contrair, do
thou evil? art thou an harlote? set thou thy self to displease God, who
hes given thee all things? thou shall get a bitter witness in thy heart,
saying, false villain, thy pleasure is in displeasing God; o catiffe, thou art
adjudged to condemnation. John 1. Epist. 3. 20. says, If thy heart condemn
thee, God is greater then thy heart, much more will he condemn thee: take head
to thy conscience; if thy conscience tell thee thou do well, the Lord
approues thy doing: otherwise, if thy conscience tells thee thou does evil,
the Lord disallowes thee.

Now as he hes removed from him before, all sorts of insincere doing, and
took to him sincerity in speaking, to please God in all things who gave him
his allowance: he goes deeper in the verse following, and he remoues from him
the soull vices, out of the which springs the vnsinceritie in dealing. The
first is called flattering words: the second avarice: the third, ambition,
insatiable greed of honor and estimation. Fou^taines, of vnsinceritie.
He remoues all these three, which are as as many fountains, wherefrom
vnsinceritie springs. It is not my purpose to insist largely on these vices.
Only I shall speak as accords to this place. The first then is flattery,
Flattery.
for no man used he any flattering words in preaching. Mark the lesson. When
a Preacher is inclyned to flatter and fletche on earth, either King, Queen,
Council, or subject, man or woman, he is not sincere in his calling. There is
none of us in no degree, but we may be, yea, and would be flattered. The
Apostle is speaking here of flattery, not of Kings, or Princes, but of the
flattering of the Thessalonians, Neither did we use flattering words, says
he. But my lesson is, Where any Minister is set to flatter and fletche on the
earth, that man ere all be done, will fall out in false doctrine, he will frame
himself so to the affection of them whom he would flatter that he will be
insincere in doctrine. Why? The fountain of flattery is the foull crooked
affection of man or woman: and so, if the vain man will apply himself to the
crooked affection of man, the doctrine shall be crooked: ere he fail in
flattery, he shall fall out in false doctrine. The heart of them who speaks
in the name of the Lord Jesus, must be set only on God, and not upon any man
on earth, Well, the Apostle takes them to be witnesses of this, and says, As
ye know. It easy to know a flatterer, his words will bewray him, he will
commonly call God to witness, but not men. Men should behave themselves so,
that they take not ay God only, but also good men to be witnesses to their
doings: Paul here takes not God, but the people of Thessalonica to be
witness, saying, ye know. It is true, brethren, albeit the words will bewray
the flatterer; yet such is the blindness of man, who with self-love is set to
pleasure his foull affection, that if a man would never so plainly flatter him
in his face, yet often times he can not perceive the flattery, and he beleues
this fained flatterer to be his greatest friend. The Lord keep us from such
flatterers, and lighten our eyes us grace that we may discern them.

The next verse. The second vice is avarice, and he calls it the pretense of
auarie; Avarice.
your books turns it, nor colored covetousness. Avarice in any man is
dangerous, but chiefly in a Minister; it will make him to do much evil: for
if his heart be set on avarice, and that be his end and purpose to vvin the
world, he will in the end fall out in corrupt doctrine: for the rule of his
teaching being his own belly and gain, ere he fail to get his purpose, he
will teach false doctrine. It may be there be some men in this land whose
hearts are so set on this sort of avarice, that they would say mass, ere they
should want their gain. After that this vice of avarice reign in any man,
it will misguide him maruellouslie, he will leave nothing undone to get his
filthy heart satisfied: in any estate in the world an auaritious heart works
much mischief. In the next words he takes God to be witness, and says, God is
my record Avarice is not sodanely perceived, because it comes in with so fair
a color, the color of godliness, the fairest color that is, and the sight of
man is so short that it can not look in to the corners of the heart full of
guile. But the Lord hes an eye that can look through thy body in to thy
heart, and he can tell thee whether avarice be in thee or not. And therefore
Paul takes God to be witness that his heart was clean of avarice. Then
learn; there is nothing so hid in man but he will get a witness thereof; if man
can not be witness, God who sees all things, he shall be witness to thee, and
in that great day he will reveal all, and discover the secreetes of all
hearts: thou shall not want a witness: think nor, when thou art sinning,
thou shall ay lurk still in sin; no, the Lord at last will take thee out and
make thee a spectacle to the world.

The last vice here is ambition. Ambition.
Neither says he, sought I the praise of men, I sought no honor, neither of
you, nor of others; and so, I am free of all kind of ambition. To speak this
by the way: It is not eneugh to be free of any sin in any respect, at
this time only, in this place only, in the sight of some only; but, he
that would be free of any vice, as ambition, let him in all respects be free
of it; in respect of all persons, all times, all places: for, otherwise, he is
an hypocrite and he will begyle men. So, we should study to please God in all
ways, in respect of all places and persons, and as if there were in the
world no more but thy self allone, thou should do as he commanded thee. The
lessone is, It is dangerous for any man to be ambitious; but, in him that
teaches the Gospel in the name of the Lord, whose calling should be, to seek
the Lord and his glory, ambition is most dangerous: if this man be ambitious,
if the thing he seeks by his preaching, be his honor and estimation, if his
heart be inclyned that way, in the end, if occasion serve, he will prove an
evil man; he will be a papist, an heretic, and so forth. It is a most sure
thing, he that is given to ambition will apply all his actions to obtain
honor, because he serves that sin as a slave. I confess, there are none
free of vice, we are all borne in sin, (except the Lord Jesus) and naturally
we are inclyned to al vice, to avarice to ambition, we would all be Kings, and
rulers etc. no, none of us is free thereof: but, blessed is that soul that
gets a piece of mortification, that his sins reign not over him, as
lords; for, if sin reign over thee, thou shall be compelled to serve thy
appetite. We are all foull, as well ministers as people, but, the Lord keep us
from ambition reigning in us and tyrannizing over us. For, then, there is no
vice nor mischeefein ths world that can be devised, but we shall be compelled
to commit it, and all, to serve that foull sin; and a Minister in his calling
of all men ought to have the greatest care to flee this ambition. Alas, the
reigning of these sins what they have wroght in this age, experience hes
told: this black darkness and this corruption that is in the kingdom of
Antichrist hes risen on flattery, avarice and ambition: among all the Princes
on earth, who ouercomes this Antichrist in avarice? who ouercomes him in
ambition? who goes before him in flattery? Miserable experience shows well
eneugh, that these vices hes brought in all heresies, and darkness, and these are
three roots to all other vices.

Now in the words following, he amplifies that which he hes spoken of the sins
of avarice and ambition. He says I soght not goods, nor honor of you, nor no
others: he amplifies it In deed I might have been chargeable to you. I might
have soght goods of you, being the Apostle of Christ: my calling might have
made me chargeable to you, to have taken goods and honor or you: but I did it
not. Brethren this is a marvelous thing. Men hes this sentence in their mouth.
ministers right to temporal things.
The Minister of God hes no right nor title to these things which other men
enjoyes. But I say to thee, he hes a title to the riches and goods of this
world, to his own share of the honor of this world in his calling. Yea, Paul
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, 9. 11. says, If we have sovve unto
you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we reap your carnal things? If
or hers with you be partakers of this power, are not we rather? Which words
importes a greater right we have nor other men hes. If ye be addebted in any of
these things to any man, much more to him that ministers spiritual things. And
Paul charges Philemon verse. 19. not with a common pleasure or goods: but with a
debt of himself: a Minister hes a right in a man to his life if he be
faithful. But that ye should not think this marvelous, the things, as Paul
says, that are given by the Minister, are things spiritual: he ministers to
thee that spiritual life, and woe is to that man that gettes not this
spiritual life: and thou may say, cursed be the hour that ever I was born in,
though thou were the Monarch of the whole earth, if thou get not this spiritual
life, the life of God, the life of Christ. Then he says, as by Ironia: is it a
fair matter to thee to minister to them temporal things? this world thinks
they get overmuch if they get a drink of cold water, or an aiker of land: but
would to God men had an eye to see what these spiritual things means. There
is no sense of heavenly things amongst the most part of men now in those
days. Yet again the special commendation a Minister can have, is even for
Christ's sake, and for the Gospels sake, to renounce some part of this right he
hes to worldly things, ere the Gospel should be slandered. And therefore
Paul says, we have not used our right, but we suffer all things, that in no
manner of way the Gospel should be stayed, and so the course of man's
salvation left off. Mark it, If any man for the Gospels sake let a piece of
his right pass, (as well an other man as a Minister) that the Gospel may be
furthered, and the course of man's salvation go forvvard, it is well done. The
Apostle says, Why suffer ye not wrong rather nor before heathen magistrates
ye should cause the Gospel to be slandered? 1. Corinthians. 6. 7. Well is he
that can let some part of these worldly goods go, that the Gospel may
increase: he shall receive a fair recompense, and he shall get a part of that
heavenly inheritance with Christ his Savior.

Now to end: In the last verse we red he sets down a virtue contrary to
avarice and ambition; leaving avarice, leaving ambition, what follovved? he
says, But we were gentle among you, even as a nource cherishes her
children. So the virtue that Paul used contrary to these two vices, is
pleasantnes: this pleasantnes, understand what it is, it is a gentleness in all
manner of dealing, in behavior submitting him self to them, for the winning
of them, submitting him self to al kind of travel and pain; as the pain
the nource takes for the child, to be a servant to them that he might win
them, not respecting the honor and care of the world, but only upon such
affection as the mother hes to her child; and so he takes a similitude from a
mother toward her infant: there is no business nor care the mother will leave
undone for the infant, nor respecting her hyre or gain, but upon an inteere
affection to the infant. Then learn shortly; A pastor must be like a mother:
Paul Gall. chapter 4. verse 19. compares him self to a mother travailing in
birth, until Christ be reformed in them; O my little children, with whom I
travail in birth, while Christ be reformed in you. Now he co^pares the
pastor to a nource taking pains to nourish them when they are borne upon a
motherlie affection, without either respect to goods or honor; and he compares
the people, who by the pastor are fed in Christ, and nourished by the sincere
milk of the word to infants. As a young infant craves no other nourishment but
milk; no more should thou crave to be nourished with any other food but the
sinceere milk of the word: and as the infant would die, except he be fed with
milk: so all they that refuses to be nourished with this sincere milk of the
word, if they continue, die shall they. Thou Lord, Lord, or Barron,
Husbandman, die shall thou, if thou be not nourished with this sincere milk
of the word. If it be so between the people and the Pastor, Affection of the
Pastor to the flock.
as between the child and the mother: the Pastors lesson is. Look what tender
affection the mother hes to her birth, to cherishe it, to take pains and
travail, to wake and watch over it, and all upon a motherly affection, without
respect of honor or gain: the like should thy affection be toward thy
flock, and on pain of thy life look thou seek them, and not theirs. The
Mother seeks the well of her child, and not his goods, nor honor: so seek
thou the well of thy flock, and not their goods, nor honor, and let thy
affection be motherlie: and when thou sees the motherlie affection of the
mother to the child, say, The Lord give me such an affection to my people as
this mother hes to her child, and let my honor and gain be to get them
nourished. The honor of a Minister is in Heaven, and not in earth, his gain
is in Heaven. So Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 219. What is our hope, or joy, or
crown of rejoicing? are not even you it in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming to glorify his elect. To this Christ with the Father and
the holy Spirit, be glory and honor for ever.

AMEN.
THE SIXTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 8 Thus being affectioned tovvard
you, our good will was to have dealt unto you not the Gospel of God only,
but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.

9 For ye remember, brethren, our labor and travail: for we labored day and
night, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, and preached unto
you the Gospel of God.

10 Ye are vvitnesses and God also, how bolilie and justly and vnblameablie
we behaved our selves among you that believe.

11 As ye know how that we exhorted you, and comforted, and besoght every
one of you (as a father his children)

12 That ye vvoulde walk vvorthie of God, who has called you unto his
kingdom and glory.


THE Apostle (ye remember brethren) leaving off for a time the purpose that was
in hand, to wit, that rejoysing he had with them, for the graces of God was
in them. In the second chapter he falls out to a discourse concerning
himself, making mention of his manner of entry among them, how it was not in
vain. For when he entered among them, he entered with liberty, although that
he had suffered immediately before at Philippi, notwithstanding of the
battle he had in the mean time while he preached to them. Thereafter ye
heard the last day, he removed from him self all suspicion of insincere
dealing in preaching the Gospel, chalenging to him self sincerity in
preaching. Seeing in preaching and speaking he had not man before his eyes, but
God; not content only to remove from him vnsinceritie in (...), he discends to
the fountains of vnsinceritie and unclean dealing; which are three: namely,
flattery, avarice, (...), and these three roots of insincere and unclean
dealing in the (...), he remoues from him: he flattered them not he was not
greedy of their goods, he was not greedy of honor. Albert, says he, I
might have been chargeable to you, as the Apostle of Christ ye were addebted
to me both of your goods and honor, yet I would have none of them, but I lived
in the midst of you, vnburdensome, submit^ing my self to all fash^ie and
pains for your sakes, as a mother nourishing her child, will undertake all
pains for the child: so did I for you.

Now in the first words of this text we have red, that which he spoke of the
nource cherishing her child, he applies to him self. Th^^ says he, (...)
tovvard^ you. The word is in the first language, I was desirous of you, I had
a longing desire of you; such desire as a mother hes to her infant: she can not
suffer her infant to be out of her sight, to be absent from her, incontinent
she grie^es for it, she is not well while thee have it in her sight. The same
affection, (says the Apostle) I bear toward you, I love you, I can
searcelie want your presence: for being absent from you, I have a continual
care of you. There is the meaning of the words in the which ye see that love,
that motherlie affection to call it so the Apostle bare to this Church of
Thessalonica. The first grace in the Pastor, is to love his flock: this is the
ground of all the rest, if he want it all the rest is dear of the having, if
he had all the learning and eloquence and vt^^^ance of men and Angels, all is
nothing if there be not love and affection in his heart to his flock Paul 2
Cor. 6. recounting our many marks of the Apostle which he bare, amongst the
rest in the 6. verse of that chapter, he account^ vnfamed love to be one: for
nombring those marks, he declares what spiritual love he bare to the
Corinthians, saying in the 11. verse. O (...), my mouth is open to you, our
heart is made large, so that if it were possible, I would take you in my
heart, ye dvvell not narrovvlie in me, but ye dvve^l (...) in your own
bovvelles. I love you, but ye love not me so entirely as I do you. In the 11.
chapter of that Epistle verse 28. stryuing with the ^alse Apostles, he shows
what carfulness he had of the Church. Beside, says he, (...), I have the
care for (...) of the world. (...) but I am afflicted, I understand there are
none afflicted, but I am afflicted with him. (...) It is vvonderfull to know
what affection he bare to the Church of Christ. Ye who reads his works
will vvonder that there could be such an affection in his heart to the Church
of God. Well brethren, all grace (...) love: all the blessings of God in
Christ (...) of God. (...) John 3. 16. The giving and death of Christ and all
the blessings in Christ came or the love of God to us (...) Christ. All (...)
and duty of men, that man can do to (...) of the love of the heart,
otherwise it^, all a van^^hing (...), not a thing in deed, but a vain s^o^e,
albeit it be never so glistring in the eyes of men: if thou would give all that
thou have to the poor, i^ it come not of love and affection of the heart, all
is lost all i^ for noght.

Now in the word^ following, to the end of the tenth verse, the Apostle bring^
in (...) arguments, testifying his in^re affection he had to them: Love must
not stand in words, but it must be v^tered in testimonies so that the world may
see it in very deed. The work will let men see the heart, albeit it be God who
is the (...) sear^her of the heart. Men will not be so blind, but in the hand
they (...) hand be closed thy ha^^ is closed (...) testifying his love and
affection is a good-wil^ he have to them: such a good will that he was (...) to
imparte and de^^ie to them, (...) precio^s (...) and all because of the love he
bare to them (...) (...) here the first argument of the (...) (...) and
liberal (...) (...). A (...) who love (...) (...), he will give them (...)
comparision. A mother who loves her child, she will not be sparing to him, but
liberal: so a Pastor that has any tender affection to his flock, will not
be sparing, but liberal and free to them. When the heart of man is open with
the affection of love, it will open the hand also, and if he be niggard-handed
sparing on his flock those graces God hes given him, it is a sure argument
there is no love in his heart.

But come to the good things whereof the Apostle was liberal. The first thing
was the Gospel of God, a precious thing, the glorious Gospel of the blessed
Lord. That is the thing that is concredite to him, and it is the food of the
soul of man: so that his liberality begins at the food of the soul, he
must be liberal of the food of the soul of men, which is concredite to him,
to give it to his flock. The mother begins to nourish her child with the
milk of her own breast, her own substance. So the Pastor must begin at the
food of the soul, he must begin at the sincere milk of the word, without the
which there is no growing, and if they be not fed with this milk of the word
first, they shall never come to the grouth and stature of man, but shall be like
dwarsses: and we so long as we dwell here are only infants in heavenly
things; and all our thinking of heaven is but infancy; all our speaking
thereof, the blabling of infancy. So we must be fed with that milk or else we
shall never come to the stature of men, and perfection of heavenly things. The
Apostle counts this but a small thing, to deal the gospel of God (albeit it be
precious) in respect of the other thing, his soul he had to deal to them. 1.
Cor. 9. 16. He says, if I preach not the Gospel, I have not vvherin to
reicice, and vvoe is to me if I preach not the Gospel, He who will not be
liberal in preaching of the Gospel, which coast him not a penny, it will be
long ere he give his life for his flock* if they were in Hell he would never
redeem them with his (...) Then the next thing whereof he is liberal, it is
his (...) the liberality of a loving Pastor will end in (...) It will begiane
at the preaching of the (...) his life which is more: if it be (...) This is
the affection of (...) to her child, she (...) for (...) affection, he (...)
for his flock. This is counted a greater thing not the other, to die for the
flock, greater not to deal the Gospel. Not that Paul's soul was more
precious then the Gospel of God: no, the Gospel of God was more precious then
the souls of Paul, Peter, and of all the Apostles, and of all the men in the
world: but he counts it greater, because it was an harder thing to him to do:
it was an easier thing to him to preach the Gospel, nor to give his life for
them. Yet brethren, albeit it was an easier thing to a man to preach the
Gospel, nor to give his life, things will fall out so, that all the bygone
preaching shall be in vain, except in the end thou seal up thy bygone
preaching with thy blood, if God call thee thereunto, the Gospel shall not
have that sweet smell except it have the perfume or thy blood. The Apostle to
the Philipp. 2. 17. says that the would rejoice If he were offered up upon
the perfume of their faith. When the Lord thinks it expedient, he must lay
down his soul, and with his blood he must perfume the Gospel he hes
preached, otherwise he hes lost all his travel and his life to; and it is
better to suffer then to lose all his travail, and in the end his life. This
time is yet to come to us, the Lord knovves how near it is. The Lord give
us grace that we lose not our time bygone, but that we may lay down our
life for the Gospel, if that need require.

In the end of the verse he turns again to the ground of his liberal
dealling. This my liberality is not for any liberality of yours toward me,
nor for any respect of commodity I will get at your hands. This my liberality
is set only upon loving affection. So that he declares the cause thereof to
be love. It is necessare to the people to be persuaded of the love of the
Pastor, otherwise except they be assured of his love, albeit he should utter
the fairest doctrine that is, there will be no edifying. And so I see Paul ay
seeks to show them of his love, that they might be edified. Particular gain
will make a man preach: There are sundry Ministers who will be diligent to
preach for game; but when it comes to life giving they fail there. Worldly
gain will never cause him be liberal of his life, only love makes a man
liberal of his life. And therefore Paul says, It was only for love, and
not for gain, because ye were dear unto us. He who hes not this love, he
may well flatter men a while, but the end that ^rye he had no true love. The
Lord give men, especially the Ministry this affection, that in the end they
may prove to be true Pastors: for if they have not this love, the end shall
try they have been hyrelings. The Lord give every man grace to trye-vvell,
what reaca^esle and resolution he hes to suffer, for there is no day that the
Minister ryses but he is bound to take this resolution in his heart, to render
his blonde up for Christ: And therefore albeit he die not, yet let him be dead
in the resolution of his heart, and say, Lord (...) I am ready to die for thy
word, if it please thee so to call me. This is the first argument whereby he
shows his love toward the Thessalonians.

In the next verse he says, For ye remember, brethren, our labor (...). I
will not only talk to you of my goodvvill, but I will call to remembrance,
what labor and travail, with what anguishe and gi^se I have suffered for your
cause. The words are very weighty in their own language, and specially
the second, the words signifies such travail as a man takes on him, Labor
(...) the relefe of the flock an argument of love.
after he is vvearied with travail, when he takes on him travail again.
This is great labor. He labors while he was wearied and then he labors
again to get rest. He uses this word in sundry places. Alvvayes mark. To
testify the inward affection of the heart, the Pastor bears to the flock: it
is not eneugh to profess a good will, that he had a purpose to have used
liberal dealing with them, and to say, I will deal liberally with you:
that is only words: but with the words, the flock must have an experience
thereof, an experience of bygone love and of a good deed, and there is nothing
better to testify the affection, then the labor and travail the Pastor
suffers for the flock. Charity is laborious and painful chap. 1. verse. 2. a
man who loves an other he will undertake pains for him: His love will not be
in word, but in action, he will run for him, he will ride for him night and
day. If a Pastor love his flock, he with travail day and night for it: and it
is a vvonder to see what pains love will endure. Ye know this all well
eneugh. Farther the word is to be marked. Ye remember. He charges them with a
remembrance, and if they will forget it, he will not let them forget it. The
people should remember of the pains of the pastor, thou art bound to remember
upon the care and providence of God for thee, thou should remember the Pastors
pains: for if the Lord had not taken care on thee, he would never have raised
up the Pastor, to take such a care on thee: and this is one of the ordinare
means God uses to provide for his people, by raising of Pastors to take pains
on them, and if thou remembers not on the man's pains, thou remembers not on
the Lords providence. The remembrance of the Lords providence, and pains of
the Pastor for thee go together, and thou who lightlies the pains of the man,
thou lightlies Gods providence: contemning the one, thou contemnes the other;
remembering the one, thou remembers the other. Men ^ill say, they remember on
the Lords providence, and yet they speak nothing of the instrument God hes
sent to win them. No, he can not be thankful to God that forgets his
Minister.

Now in the words following, he makes plain the labor and pain that he
bestowed on them. First, says he, I preached unto you the Gospel of God.
There is a part of my labor: Preaching is a special labor: what matter were
it if there had been no more but preaching. I vvroght and labored with my
own hands, not in the day onele, but in the night also: day and night I
labored. Paul was a craftsman, and had a handie-craft: he was a weuer of Tents
and Pauilions: and upon that came familiarity between him and A^utla, and
P^^still^, who were of that same trade, and he did dwell with them. Act. 18. 3.
Besides this he was a gentleman, and for other sciences he was well brought up,
brought up in the laws at the feet of Gamahell, who was a chief lawyer, (and
yet for all this he was a craftsman,) an Hebrew of the trybe of Beniaemin, of a
good estimation, he that got that benefit to be a citizen of Rome, he was a
gentleman. Well, a gen^lema^ nowadayes thinks it shame to put his son to any
craft: but perchance the next day he will be hanged for theft, or murder, if
he have not a craft to sustain him. Fie on this idle nation, and thou Scotland
bears the gree of idleness and loytering. Wherefore was all this laboring?
Because, says he, I should not be chargeable unto you. Brethren, an end of
his working was for his sustentation: an other end was, that the Gospel
should not be s^^ndered. We see he was sparing of these Thessalonians, and yet
he preached carefully to them, and al to this end, that the Gospel should not
be slandered, he wroght with his own hands, albeit they were debt-bound to him.
Mark here, the thing in the world all men should chiefly seek, is that the
Gospel of Christ should have the own progress, without any stop or stay. And
above al things a Pastor who is the instrument of this progress, is bound that
by no mean he be the stay of the Gospel given to win souls to the kingdom
of Jesus: left that which he is building up with the one hand, be not casle
down with the other, as many do: they build on Sunday by their teach^ng, and
all the week they cast down by their evil life: they destroy more by their
life and manner of living, nor they build by their preaching. The least offense
in the world will hinder the course of the Gospel; because of the infirmity of
men and women, for they will start at a stray. There was never a stumbling
horse comparable in stumbling to the heart of man: considering that so little a
thing will cause men take offense at the Gospel, and leap farther back nor
they came forward. (We clim up to Heaven very softly and slowly: but if we
run to Hell, we shall fall down in an hour more then we did climme in a
year.) Therefore we are all bound to flee all kind of offense and slander.
Look that thou offend not, offend not the infirm to cause them go aback,
neither in the word of thy mouth, nor in any action with hand or foot, or by
the vvinke of thy eye to say the progress of the Gospel And of al men the
Pastor is bound to walk most warelie. Paul renounces his own right to flee
this occasion of offense. The Thessalonians were bound to give him temporal
things, who ministered to them spiritual things: but giving over his right,
he labored night and day with his hands for his sustentation. Every man in
their own degree is bound to suffer all extremity, ere they be a stay to the
Gospel; but cheeflie the Minister. For Paul in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians chap. 9. verse. 23. says, If for the Gospel they absteene not
from their own right, they shall not be partakers of the Gospel.

Farther ye may perceive in the person of Paul and his example, who was in such
need as he? Albeit he was the Apostle of Christ, he was pinched in his belly.
2. Corinthians. chap. 11. verse 27. I have, says he, been often in hunger, often in
thirst* often in nakedness, often in fasting, and Philippians chapter 4. verse. 12.
I have learned to be hungry. Then we see by the example of Paul, God will
let them whom he loves best often times want their necessities. Measure not the
grace of God by his outvvarde dealing with his, he will let his own be as
hungry, as naked as any other. And again learn in the example of Paul, the
remedy how a man that wants shall supply his want. Paul vvanted, what
refuge had he? He biddes thee not go steal, nor reaue from them that have.
Labor remedy of want.
Thou who art able to work, he biddes thee not go beg: have thou hands?
can thou delue man? can thou keep ^heepe: have thou learned any craft?
labor with thy hands as Paul did. Rather ere thou beg go to the vyldest
labor in the world. Idle raskals in this country, their labor all the day is
crying, and begging. Alas, it is a shame when a stranger sets his foot in
Scotland to see this great misorder, and that shameless begging. Then there is
the remedy, labor. O but thou will say, I am a gentle man, a Lords son, a
gentle-mans son; it is shame to me to put my hand to work: fyle thy hands, or
perchance thou will be hanged if thou were a lords son, go to the vyldest
exercise that is, ere thou be idle, thou glorifies God in thy doing and
laboring: but in idleness, thou glorifies not God: if thou be going at the
pleugh, thou glorifies God. Eat thy bread with the sweat of thy brows,
otherwise it shall not do thee good: thou who lies on other men's labors, thou
eats and drinks their blood. Would to God this matter could be mended, as well
as it is lamented: alas that there is no remedy for idleness. Now when he
labors, wherefore labors he? for himself onelie' no brethren: even to
relieve the Thessalonians, that he should not be burden some to them Paul
says, Ephesians. 4. 28. He that steals let him steal no more. (Alas, it is over
long to live one day in theft,) but go and work with his hands, not to
himself only, but also to help others. There are none that are bound to
labor, but they are bound for the sustenance of others Thy labor is nothing
worth if thou keep all to thy self, and put it all in thy own belly. Now ye
have heard two of the arguments whereby he testifies his love he bare to them.

The third argument whereby he testifies that love and affection he bare to
them, is not from this or that particulare, but from his whole life and
conversation: (...) an argument of (...).
ye are vvitnesses how I lived among gou. sholilie to my God, justly to my
neighbor) and then how unblameable, which follows on the other two: he who
is holy to God and just to his neighbor, there is no blame in him. A man that
loves, be he pastor, or be what he will, he will show his love in going before
others in a godly life and conversation. In his life and conversation he will
be an example to others, and he lives not without witness in the world: when
thou go out the way, the eyes of many are upon thee; go thou out like a
murderer? many follow thee, go thou out like a thief, an harlote^ a
number follows thee, and shall break their necks on thee. Again, a loving
pastor will manifest his love especially in going out before his flock in an
holy life: and these that have not an holy life I will not say they have
love: I will not say that the murderer has love, no not to his own wife and
children* and he is but a stumbling block to all them that look on him. An
harlote hes no love, she is but a stumbling block, and would have all the world
to follow her: these are destroyers of the building that should be builded on
Christ: woe to the destroyer of the Church of Christ. This is to be marked:
thou will not live without vvitnesses in the world, live as well as thou will.
Paul had vvitnesses of his life and manner of conversation, God was witness and
men were witnesses: ye are vvitnesses and God (...) witness. There are two
things in a man's conversation; the one within, the inward sincerity of the
heart; an other without, the outward behauior and doing. Therefore he must have
two witnesses The heart none can see but God, and therefore he is witness to
it: the outward actions men may be witnesses to them. The whole actions of man
are seen by God and man: God sees within, men sees without: both these
witnesses are requisit^ for if you have not the approbation of God al thy
approbatio^ of men serves for nothing: who can allow when God dislikes? So thou
who can not nor dare not say, Lord be witness to my sincere heart, thou have
no witness of God. Again it is needful that the consciences of men among
whom we live in this world, should give us a testimony of a good life: and
if thou laikes the testimony of men, thou laikes an approbation thou should
have: and Paul ever seeks the approbation of men and appeals their
consciences. The word in the end of the verse is to be marked. Among you that
believe. That is, you that are faithful: he takes the approbation of the
faithful. It is faith that decernes, it is the eye of faith that sees good and
evil, and not the eye of the body. The faithless man, if he were never so
quick, can not take up holiness, if he be faithless, he can not decerne
between the holy and unholy. This will be his discretion: the best man he
will judge him worst, and the worst man he will judge him best. And therefore
with Paul let no man take him to the approbation of wicked men: but let him
rejoice when wicked men speak evil of him: but take him to the approbat on of
good men. The approbation of an unsanctified body is of no valor. The true
approbation is only of God, and of these who hes faith to take up the truth
of good and evil.

Now the last argument that testifies of this love, it is in such things as
concerns his calling; namely, in exhorting, comforting, Faithful. (...)
beseeching. There are three named, under the which three are comprehended the
whole duties of the Pastor, as the other duty was in doing, so, this is in
speaking: and not only must the Pastor speak priuatlie, but openly; and not
only openly, but priuatlie. Well then a loving Pastor will not be dumb: a
dumb Pastor is nothing worth: but as Paul makes the comparison, he must be as
a father teaching his sons standing in the midst of them, exhorting,
comforting, rebuking them; so must a Pastor stand in the midst of his flock, to
exhort, comfort and rebuke them: love must be in dealing with discretion, and
all men must not be dealt with alike, all men must not be exhorted, because all
lies not back in the way: they who are sluggish must be exhorted: all must not
be comforted, there is some over proud and have need of a reprofe, they only
who mou^nes are to be comforted. In a word (that which is spoken to Tim thie 2.
Epist ^. ^5) there must be a right cutting of the word, a Pastor must be a
cutter and caruer, and according to his discretion, he must give to every man.
Now I find this, and ye see it, he takes God to be witness, and the people
among whom he dwelt, saying, ye know, ye are witnesses to me: Learn it. The
flock amongst whom the Pastor hes been, shall be witnesses to him in that great
day, either to allow of him and his doing* or to disalow: to absolve or to
condemn. If he hes discharged a faithful duty in his life, his flock will
stand up before God and Christ and justify him in their presence in that day:
if he hes been unfaithful, they shall make a complaint of him, that he was an
unfaithful Pastor who hes not done his duty in his vocation. Therefore let
every man take head how he behaueth himself with any people, for either they
shall be condemners. or absoluers of him.

Now he exhorts them. To what thing? To walk. Not to ly down, and sleep, but
to get up on foot and walk in this world, because this life is but a
pilgrimage, and a sleeping pilgrim is nothing worth. If thou go not on, thou
shall never come to thy journeyes end. How should they walk? Not every way:
for, it were better for men to be sitting or sleeping then to be walking wrong.
Walk vvorthie of God. There is a kind of comeliness in going on the way: a
man may go on the way in a comely manner, or else he may go on the way in
an uncomely manner. Rule of vvalking.
What is the rule of this comeliness? Walk vvorthie of God who hes called
you to his Kingdom. In a word, the rule is, this glorious calling of God to
be a Christian man and to be partaker of his kingdom. He who is called to be
a christian man or woman, is also called to the Kingdom of God and Christ.
Brethren, every man's life should be measured according to his calling, and as
his calling is, so should he walk, and that calling should be a measure of his
life. The king should walk in Majesty, to command: the people in love and
humility, to obey: the Minister in uprightness, to teach: the people in
holiness to walk before him: a merchant, a man of law, each one of them is
bound in their manner of living, according to the rule of their calling. So,
they that have their calling to be christians, should have their walking
according to their calling. Is thy calling to be a christian? Live not as a
Pagane then, but as a christian. Thou will say, thou art called to be a
christian, and then thou will be in the mean time a murderer, an harlote, a
thief: Is that thy walking in thy calling? No, this christian calling is to a
Kingdom and glory. There are none who are called to be a christian, but they
are called to a glory and Kingdom: they are translated from the power of
darkness, to the society of Christ. Therefore, seeing, their calling is to a
kingdom, they should walk like Kings sons: we are all made by our calling
the sons and daughters of God, adopted in Christ and heirs of that glory
that God dwells in. Then, walk worthy of God and glory. As our kingdom is
above, flee and mount above this earth, in some measure, so far, as the
heaviness of this corruption will fuffer: lift up thy self, sin holds thee
down, cast off sin and preasse upward: that life that is in God must be gotten
above, in Christ: otherwise, if our hearts be not lifted up to that kingdom and
glory, if our conversation in some measure be not answerable to our calling,
we are unworthy of that calling, and we have never been effectually called:
thou was called by the ear only, thou heard the Gospel, thy heart never
received the Gospel, nor saw this Kingdom and glory that thou was called to.
These wicked lives of men shows us, that, they were never effectually called.
So as thou would be a citizen of that heavenly kingdom, and partaker of
that glorious calling, live an holy life, that, after this life, thou may
be a king, and reign with God for ever in Heaven. To this God the Father, Son
and the holy Ghost, be all praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE SEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 13. 14. 13 For this cause also thank we God
without ceasing, that when ye received of us the word of the preaching of
God, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in deed the word of
God, which also works you that believe.

14 For brethren, ye are become followers of the Churches of God, which in
Judea are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of
your countrymen, even as they have of the Jews.


THE Apostle (ye remember brethren) in the beginning of the second chapter, he
digresses and he falls out in a discourse concerning himself, his entering
among them, what it was, his sincerity and uprightness in his whole dealing.
This he does in the second chapter unto the 13. verse. In which verse he
returns to his principal purpose, that he had rejoysing together with them,
for the graces of God bestowed on them through his ministry. This rejoysing,
as he show you in the beginning, it stands in a thanks-geuing to God, who is
the geuer of all grace: for without him no matter of rejoysing, all matter of
rejoysing is in him, who is the geuer of all grace and mercy to us. The
occasion of his returning to the principal purpose is this: In the verse
immediately going before he hes spoken of his evvne carfulness in teaching
them all manner of way, (...), and teaching them that they walk worthy of
God, that had called them to his kingdom and glory.

Now in this xiij. verse he thanks God for that meeting again he found in
them. He teached, he instructed exhorted, and comforted: the effect; They
believed, they (...), they heard and received the thing he spoke, they embraced
it* not as the word of man, but as the word of God, as it was in very
deed. It was not ineffectuall in them, but as they embraced it, so it wrought
in so many as believed: it was powerful and made in them a wonderful
alteration; and (...) the operation thereof it show the self to be the word
of God. The meaning of the text is plain. And therefore let us come to some
observations. Ye see here first of all great matter of thanksgiving to God,
Grace in (...) and people d^uble matter of thanks^guing.
when this sweet harmony is between the pastor and the people, when as he
teaches and instructs them lovingly and faithfully, they receive that word he
delivers to them and thereto they conform their life and conversation. There is
a sweet meetting: and if ever there was matter of thanksgiving in this world
here is matter; in the faithfulness of the pastor and in the faith of the
people meetting that faithful discharge of the Pastor in his office. It is
true, when the pastor finds the grace of God in him self allone, albeit he
find no meeting in the people, he hes matter of thanksgiving to God: for
how so ever it be, if that he do play the part of a faithful pastor, he is
a sweet smell to God, as well in them that perish as in them that shall be
saved by the word. 2. Cor. 2. 15. If ye meet him not he will be safe, if that
he discharge a faithful dewtie; but your blood shall be upon you own
heads: So he has matte through the grace he has received, to rejoice in God.
But (brethren) when grace meets grace, when the faith of the people does meet
the faithfulness of the pastor, when he is not only a svveete smell to God,
but he is the savor of life to life to the people; there is the double matter
of rejoicing and thanksgiving to God: double grace and meetinge of grace crave
double rejoysinge and thanksgiving to God for the mercy double bestovved
upon them. If any man had ever any grace, Paul had it; yet the man is never
satisfied in his own person, except he find grace in those to whom he
uttered grace meeting his grace, and except he find his ministry powerful
to them whom he teaches: for otherwise he counts all his labor and running to
be in vain. Therefore all teachers should strive to find the power of the
word in the people; for wherefore are Ministers sent in the world? but to see
that that word be effectual in the people to win them to God: and in very
deed he may rejoice when he sees the salvation of the people wrought by his
teachinge. This in general.

Now to come to the words. Their faith is set down in sundry degrees; and
mark them: the first degree is hearing; they hear the word of the Apostle; 4.
degries of says
there is the first grace in the people meetting the pastor, when they give
their presence and hear him patiently. It is of the grace of God that a man
or woman can sit and hear the word of God: and it appears that it is the
grace of God; ye see many in Scotland that gets never the grace to hear, no
preaching, 1. Hearing of the word.
no hearing in many parts of the land: miserable are they without preaching,
without hearing No question what ever other causes be of the lack of preaching
and hearing, it is a just judgment of God on the people: and woe be to them
that draws away the moyen of preaching and hearing from the people: miserable
shall their end be. For, I see not, how salvation shall be, without preaching
and hearing. There are many again, that albeit occasion of hearing be offered
to them, and the teacher be at hand, yet they will not come to hear, they may
hear and will not hear. Some will come to sit down, but if any thing touch
their affection, they will hear with impatience: all this shows you, hearing
is of grace. First, to get the occasion of hearing, is, grace: next, to hear
patiently, to hear sin and vice rebuked in all estates of men and women it
is a grace; for, some, in hearing their sin rebuked, they hear impatiently
with grudging, and as soon as they remove and go out, that impatience breaks
out in bitter words, As, when Steue^ in the 7. chap. Acts ver. 57. 58. is
speaking to that Council of the Jews that were conueened; as soon as he
speaks against them, they put their fingers in their ears, and rus^ing on him
stone him to death. The 19. chapt. Acts verse 33. when Alexander stands up
among the Ephesians, certain people being conueened together, when he begins
to speak to them of the way of God against Demetrius, they cry out all with
one shoute immediately, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. The 22. chapter Acts
verse 23. when Paul makes a discourse of his own life and comes to this,
that, he was called to be a teacher to the Gentiles, they rent their clothes
and cast dust up in the air. All this tells us the fury and rage of the
heart, against God, against Christ and his word. And by the contrair; it is a
special grace of God, that men and women gets, when they can sit still and
hear the word of God patiently. There is the first degree.

The second degree of their faith and meeting of the Apostle, is receiving of
the word. That is to say, a receiving and approving of the word of God, 2.
general allowance.
to be true and good, even, a general allowance thereof. When this man will say
within himself, this is true that is spoken. Many gets not this grace: for,
many when they hear, suppose they lend their ear to the word, in their
mind they disalovv that which is spoken: and albeit thy mouth be close, yet
the mind will be making contradiction The natural man says the Apostle. 1.
Cor. 2. 14. when he hears of heavenly things, he understands them not: yea,
more, he thinks them all but foolishness. Set up a natural man, he will
scorn all that is spoken of Christ and of spiritual things, and will laugh at
them in his own heart. When Paul came to Athens Act. 17. verse. 18. and entered
among those high headed Philosophers, and begouth to speak of the way of God.
They met him again with scorning, and they said, What means this bablor? they
thought all that he spoke babbling. There are many of them in Scotland, who
thinks, when a man speaks of Christ, that, all is but babbling. Then, it is a
grace of God, to give an allowance to that which is spoken.

There is farther here. 3. (...) heart.
The third degree of grace, is, embracing the word in the heart. There are many
that can hear, that is a grace: when they have heard will give a general
allowance, that, all is good, all is true; there is the second grace, but, in
the mean time, they will shoot it all out of their heart: they will say, it
is true and good, but, what is that to me? they never emembrace it in their
own heart. Simon Magus (as it is told, Acts 8. 21. allowed of that which was
spoken, and it is said, he had faith; in the mean time, no application in his
own heart, for, shortly after he uttered that gall of bitterness which was
in his heart and he would have bought the graces of the holy spirit: and
therefore, Peter meets him, and wishes, that, he should perish and his money
to. There are many of this sort, who will be content to hear and allow it
to, and say. The Minister hes said well this day, all is true: yea but what
have thou reported, and what have thou applied to thy heart? Thou heard to thy
condemnation, except thou apply some thing to thy self of that grace thou did
hear.

Yet there is a fourth degree; to receive it as God word, Not only to hear,
allow, embrace; but to receive it as the word of God. Albeit, Paul spoke it, 4.
Receiving of the word, as the word of God.
yet, they looked up, above Paul, and took it out of his hand, not as his
word, but as the word of God: that is a greater grace. There are many that
rest to much upon the man that teaches, and set their hearts on the mouth of
him that speaks more nor on God that gives the speaker the grace. Many will
hear this written word, allow it, embrace it, but they make it to them the
word of man, rather nor the word of God; because they count the Scripture to
be authentic, not because God did speak it, but because the Church says it,
as the Papists do say, this day. So they make the New and old Testament to be
the word of men. The Lord keep us from such an error: for it is not possible
to build faith upon that ground. I appeal thy conscience that say this, if
ever thou did find that constant faith in thy heart: faith can not rest,
except it have an assurance, that, the word is from God and not from men: how
many in this country fail in this? There are many that receive and embrace
it, not with that reverence they should: when they hear it spoken they give no
reverence nor obedience thereto, more nor it were the word of man, for when
they go out, they are as wanton in wickedness as ever they were before. This
testifies their want of due reverence, If this were settled in the hearts of
men, that, the word that is spoken were the word of God, and that it is not the
man that speaks it, but Gods Spirit in the man^ they would receive it, embrace
it, and obey it with greater reverence. O, the obedience he would give to that
word. There is naturally such a reverence of God in the heart, that when they
are assured it is of God, they will reverence it.

Now brethren, ye see in all these degrees nothing but faith. All is expressed
in faith: ye see the beginning of it, the progress of it, the ending where it
rests. It begins at the outward senses: It begins at the ear. Faith is by
hearing. Romans 10. 17. Then it goes next, to the mind, which allows and
approues it. It sticks not there, but it goes down to the heart; and there in
very deed is the right sait of faith: there is the proper loding of faith.
Look, that, thy faith be not in thy head and ear only (there are many hes it
so, and it goes away with the wind) Look, that it go to the mind, and be
not content with that, but see, that, it go down to thy heart. This faith, ye,
see, then, it exercises the whole soul of man: it exercises both the
reasonable powers and the affections. Take head to it. The thing whereinto this
faith is exercised, is the word of God. Faith in the ear is exercised about
the word, faith in the mind is exercised about the word, faith in the heart is
exercised about the word of God. The word of God should fill the whole head,
mind and heart. This is it that the Apostle to the Coloss. says. chap. 3, 16.
Let the word of God dvvell in you plenteouslie: not sparingly, but
powerfullie. And certainly think on, I tell you, if thou strive not, so long
as thou art here, to be filled with the word of God, look not after this life
for his presence: if thou preasse not, in some measure, in this life, to have
thy soul filled with him: look not, that, God shall be a father to thee in
the life to come. Alas, we can not get that fullness and our souls so well
exercised as we should have by the word: but if we strive to this, our
willingness is acceptable to God. Where there is a desire to think and
meditate of it, and to repent that thou can not have that desire thereof as
thou would, it repares that want we have of that fullness.

There is yet one thing here to be marked. The special ground of his
thanksgiving, is, for the embracing of this word, not as the word of men, but
as the word of God. Wherein ye see, it is a rare thing and a special blessing
of God, when a man is not offended with that good word of God. What care I
for him, some will say oft-tymes, I will hear the word of God, and receive
it, but this companion who teaches, hes offended me, I will not hear him.
Again, he is of so mean graces, he can not speak two words right, he is
babbling. Well thou art stumbling: and thou will break thy neck if thou do
so: for thou must not thank that the word of God hangs on the mouth of man, but
the mouth of man does hang on the word of God. This is the fault, we measure
ever the word of God by the instrument, and counts ay of the word of God, as of
the word of man that speaks it and preaches it. 2. Cor. 10. 7. Enter in
comparison, The (...) God and the (...) of man are contrary.
and I will let you see, Gods doing is far from man's doing, and man's doing is
contrair to Gods doing. There is the wisdom of God. It hes pleased him from
the beginning to put his power in the weakest creature, in the silliest and
basest to look to the hes not chosen the wise in the world, the potent and
noble, to put his power in them, when it pleased him to utter his omnipotent
power. When he uttered his power against Pharao, he puts his power in frogs, in
lyce, in flees, and he is avenged on proud Pharac, by those vylde things. All
this is, and was, that his power should be seen, that men should not think,
this is the power of a frogge, louce or flee: but is the power of the great God
that made all things. And when he means to destroy Goliath, he will not have
the army of the Israelites, nor Saul^ slaying him, but he will have silly
David slaying him, without armor, with a sling only. All this was that the
world might see, it was not David's power, but Gods that slew Goliath. So, the
richest treasure that God hes in Heaven, which is Christ Jesus in the word, he
puts it in vylde veshelles, the Ministers thereof. The unsearchable riches of
Christ, the power and justice of God in Christ, and all the glory of God in
Christ, he takes it and puts it not in veshelles of silver, and gold: no, but
in a veshell of earth. 2. Corinthians. 4. 7. and all this is, that, the world
should not esteem the treasure according to the veshell. Therefore, the Lord
will put in a veshell of claye the treasure that is Heaven in Christ. Now will
ye see man's famous wisdom. When he hears the word coming out of this base
and infirm man, he says, the veshell is nothing worth, it is made of clay, it
serves for no purpose; a silly fellow, from whence came he? therefore this
word that is in his mouth, it can not be the word of God: would ever he have
put so precious a thing in so vylde a veshell? O rebellious man, that is ever
contrary to God in all things, and specially in the Gospel! Experience
teaches us of the enimitie, that the wicked men in this Realm caries in their
heart against God and his Ministers: they will not let God be wise in his
wisdom he hes in his Ministry, but they will be wiser. Well, fight on, his
wisdom will win the field, and thou will lose it to thy everlasting
destruction.

Now to go forward. He casts in a parenthesis, saying, As it is in deed, the
word of God. Ye esteemed it not as the word of men, but of God, as it is in
deed: Receive it as ye please, account it Gods word, or man's, as ye please,
it is and shall abide Gods word; and thy mouth in the end shall be shut up,
so, that thou shall not utter one word if thou account any otherwise of it.
So what ever be the opinion of men in the world, and their speeches, their
saying, or gainesaying alters nothing: The instrument neither adds, nor
diminishes the glory of the word
The word of Jesus abydes, and shall abide the true word, and shall retain
the own authority and glory: thy words will never be able to make any
change. No, brethren, the mouth of man for as infirm and graceless as it is,
will not be able to impare a jot of the glory of that God: and by the
contrair, put it in the mouth of never so glorious a creature, if it were in the
mouth of an Angel, nothing will be added to the glory of it: it is powerful
in the self, the creature will not be able to make any alteration. In deed, it
will honor the mouth, when it is put in the mouth of a man it will make him
honorable, but he can not honor it, if he were never so noble or eloquent.
Set up a king to preach, trow ye he will honor the Gospel? no, but he shall
get honor by the preaching of it. No, if it were all the Angels of Heaven that
would preach this glorious Gospel they can not give it honor, but they are
honored by it. And when the Angels came and cried to men this word of God,
they got a singular honor. Paul to the Galat. chap. 4. verse. 14. says, ye
received me as an Angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus. Wherefore was this? for
Paul's own presence? no, but for the word of God in his mouth, which made him
to be accounted as an Angel of God. Never man shall be able to ad any honor
to the word, or diminishe the honor thereof. Now blessed is he who gets this
grace to deliver this word with an earnest zeal, to glorify God and Christ by
preaching thereof.

Now in the end of the verse. He thinks it not eneugh to call it the word of
God, but he gives a proof of it. The word of God vvher ever it be, P^^er of
the word.
will ever prove it self to be the word of God: it can not be idle, it must
be quick and effectual in the hearer, it must work lively, it will pearce
like a two edged svvord, and therefore, it is said: which also works in
you that believe. Howbeit it was uttered by an infirm man, yet, the
weakness of the person hinderes not the powerful operation of the word.
It will not be the mouth of the speaker that will hold back power from the
word of God. But when the Lord puts his word in his mouth, and says, I will
put my word in thy mouth, go thy way, if all the world had said the contrare,
that word shall be powerful. Well is that man in whose mouth this word is put:
and well is that people that hes a man in whose mouth the Lord hes put his
word, the basnesse and infirmity of the man, will not be able to hinder the
power thereof. If the Lord once put his word in his mouth (it is so
vvonderfull a thing.) Set up eloquent Dememosthenes, divine Plato, facunde
Cicero, etc. who were like as many wonders in the world: let them come in
with their eloquence, they shall not have such operation in the hearts of men,
as a silly fellow, and simple of speech shall have, when he speaks the
word in the name of the Lord. And if there was ever a work in the world
marvelous, that work which the Minister by the Spirit, and word of God
works, is most marvelous. For, to regenerate a man, who was once dead, it is
not a man's tongue, his eloquence, his instancie that can do it, but only
that powerful, and blessed word of God: that all glory and praise of his
powerful operation may be given to his Majesty.

Mark a word farther. He says, not that works in every one of you: but he
says, in you who believes. In the 1. chap. Romans verse. 16. The Gospel is
called the power of God to salvation, to them that believes. In the first to
the Corinthians chap. 1 verse. 24. It is the power and vvisdome of God to them
that hes that effectual calling, and hes gotten the heart oppinned to take
head, and drink in the word, only in these is the word of God effectual
to salvation. Brethren, it is true, it is offered with power to the
unbelievers, as well as to the believers, but this is the difference. If thou
have not an heart and hand to take it when it is offered to thee with power,
thou shall never receive its thou wantst power to receive it, but there is
power in the word very sufficient unto salvation. Alas, how many hear the
word with their heart so hardened, that the word strikes on their heart as an
hammer on the studdie. The hardness of thy heart beats it back again, so, that
it is not powerful to thee. My counsel is, except thou preasse to have thy
heart mollified, and crauest at God to mollify it, hear not the word, or I Will
assure thee, the more thou hear, the more thou vvilt be hardened. Many make
a show of hearing: the Lord and the Lord will come and sit in their daskes
and hear the word, and will come forth without any profit, because their
hearts were not attentive to hear. Jest not with the word, it shall either
save thee or slay thee, and in the day of damnation thou shall curse the time,
that thou ever did hear the word of Christ, if thou find it not powerful
in thee. Come, in a mind to renew thy sinful life, or, else, bide away: come
to be humbled under this word and reverence it, if that thou were a King, or
else bide away, unless thou would heap on thy self an intolerable
damnation.

Now brethren, I shall end shortly in the next verse. He thinks it not eneugh
to set down this in general, what the word of God wroght in them that
believed, but he comes to the particulare. It will not be the general word
will do thee good but a particulare. The special effect is, It made them to be
followers. It is good to follow them that go the right way: they were
followers of the Church that was in Judea, followers of the Jews that were
converted and believed in Christ. The word conformed the Thessalonians to the
christian Church of the Jews. All this was by the power of the word of God in
the mouths of men. Look not for an Angel from heaven to speak to thee, nor
for a sound from heaven: but look for it out of the mouth of men. We weary
fast of this ministry; what ministry will we have next? will ye have
Papist^^e again? will ye have Angels? No, if ye contemn this ministry, if
this ministry be put out of the land, thou shall never find any ministry
powerful to salvation. Then I mark: this is the power of the word of God, a
conformity and like affection in sundry persons: to make me like thee, the
word powerful to make co^formity
and thee like me, the godly like other: this is the power of Gods word, to
cause a church follow one an other, to join man with man, to draw in a bloody
wolf to the sheepfold of the Lord Jesus and to make him a silly lamb: He
that now was raging to draw him to Christ and to cause him sit down, and join
himself to Gods people in holiness and godliness. This is a marvelous effect
that the word hes. It is not the proper effect of the word, to cut men from
good men, but to make a conformity to join good me^ with good me^, and draw
al together to the church. The Lord, the great Pastor, he joins all the
members of the body together, and all to make a whole body to the head christ.
In a word, it is the force of Gods word, to work our felicity and
blessedness, and I assure thee, thou who art a contemner of the word of Jesus,
thou shall never be happy, neither in this life, nor in the life come. All
stands first in a conjunction with Christ the head, and then, with the members.
Step out of the society of the church as you will (what is the church to thee)
I denounce the terrible judgment of God against thee, if thou seek not to have
that conjunction and society of the church of God, thou shall never get a
portion in Jesus: there is thy doom, if thou repent not. This conformity is
not al wroght at once: but, the word of God, by the power thereof, will bring
one first in, then, an other man, then, the third man: then, one Church;
secondly, an other church; thridlie, the third church; and so, draw them al
together. So, that they who comes last, have no disadvantage, they both have
that same word to draw them in that the first had and then also they have
examples before them, drawing them in. It is good to have an advantage beside
the word, to draw thee in. Brethren, we that are now in the world we have this
last vauntage, we have these patterns: look how many have been called, they
are as many vauntages and patterns to draw us to God. And look that thou
hear not of a godly man, but preasse to follovv him, and say, God make me
like him: for, among the rest of the means God hes ordained to win souls,
the setting up of patterns before men is one mean. This nature of ours is
backward, (For, we are all borne naturally Woolfes and Tigers) so, that, it
makes us that we break away so fast from the sheepe-^old of Christ, that we
have great need of many means to draw us in: And therefore, the Lord
some-tymes uses, by the word, and some-tymes by the examples of others to draw
us in to Christ Jesus.

Yet again this conformity that is set down would be marked. The conformity is
in suffering, ye are followers of the church in Judea: in what? in suffering
alike with them: the same persecution they suffered, ye suffer: yea, more; he
amplifies their sufferinges, in that they did suffer of such like persecutores
as the Church of Judea did: even of their own countrie-men: the Jews it was
that persecuted the Jews who were converted: it is the Thessalonians that
persecutes you that are in Thessalonica. This is the persecution. Conformity
in suffering.
Then, learn. The conformity that ought to be among men and women in the
world, stands not in doing only, to make others do well, as he does well:
As one Church lives holilie, so, to cause one an other live holily: but, it
must be a conformity in suffering also, that, as one man suffered, so, an other
should suffer: as one Church suffered, so an other Church should suffer: it
will not only be active, in doing, but, passive, in suffering. There is a fair
effect, conformity in suffering. Brethren, men often times are ready eneugh to
follow others in doing, but, they are loath to suffer: all godly men would be
like other godly men in doing: I see not a godly person, but, I would be like
him: and one Church would be like an other godly Church, in doing. But, if I
see a godly man suffer before me, I will hold aback and shrink to follow him.
If thou see one martyred before thee, thou will leave him and not take part of
his burden. There is not a flourishing Church in Europe, but this would be like
it: but it hes no desire to be like that Church in France, that hes been so
long under affliction, and can not get up the head of it. It is in deed an hard
matter to the word of God, to work doing good in the heart of man: but, a
harder matter, to work patience and suffering of affliction: but, if the word
be not effectual, as well to work suffering, as doing; I can not say, it hes
that force and power in us that it should have. And therefore, albeit thou be
not as yet at suffering; yet, prepare thee for suffering: resolve not thy self
for doing alone every day, but, for suffering also whatsoever cross the Lord
will lay on thy back. And let this be part of thy prayer: Lord strengthen me in
suffering. For, as thou would reign with him, so thou must take a resolution
to suffer with him. Who will not suffer, let him never look to be an heir of
Heaven. It is now due time to learn to be prepared for suffering for Christ's
cause. The Lord give us grace that we may suffer patiently, that he may be
glorified in our suffering. To this God be glory and praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE EIGHT LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 15. 16. 15 Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their
own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and God they please not, and are
contrary to all me^.

16 And forbid us to preach unto the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to
fulfill their sins alvvaies: for the wrath of God is come on them, to the
utmost.


IN this rejoysing of the Apostle Paull together with the Thessalonians, for
the graces of God that were bestowed upon them, ye have heard brethren. the
Apost. thanked God instantly for that meeting he found in them when he
preached to to them, exhorted, comforted and besought them to walk as worthy
of that God that had called them to his kingdom and glory. Their meeting was:
they heard him, and not only they heard him, but they received the thing they
heard, and not only received it, but in heart embraced it and laid it up as
a treasure and the seed of life and immortality: they embraced it, not as the
word of man, but as the word of God, as it is indeed: and not only embraced
they it as the word of God but in life and conversation uttered it: it was
effectual in their life He proved this, because they were followers of the
Church in Judea, converted to Jesus Christ. The special thing wherein they
followed them was, that even as these Churches were troubled by their own
Country the Jews: even so they that were converted at Thessalonica were
troubled, not by forrainers but by their o^ne Citizens.

Not to repeat any thing we spak the last day, but to go to the text red. In
this text the Apostle having spoken of these Jews malicious and obstinate
doing, whereby they ever impeaded the progress of the Gospel of Christ and
hindered man's salvation, scattring themselves among the Gentiles, through all the
^^^mane Provinces: and when any of the Apostles came, stirring up
insurrection, and not suffering the Gospel to have place, so far as they
might stop it. Therefore he digresses here and agg^eages the sin of these
malicious Jews, making up a dittay against them, and thereafter he gives out
the doom, and pronounces the sentence of wraith and condemnation against them.
And therefore to return, and to oppen up every sentence. They have slain,
says he, the Lord Jesus. There is the first point of their dittay. These men
the Jews, that trouble the Church of Christ in Judea, are they that have
slain the Lord Jesus himself. They have in their extreme persecution slain
and crucified to the death the Lord of glory. 1. Cor. 2. 8. That is, they have
dispatched him, not after a common manner, but after a most cruel and
shameful manner, by a cruel, sore and shameful death. Whom have they slain?
the Lord of glory: and honorable personage, all the glory of God, is, and
dwells in him as it were. Who is this by name? It is Jesus, the Savior of the
world: every word aggreages their fault. There is the first point of their
dittay. The first crime laid to their charge, is the crucifying of the Lord
Jesus Christ, this is the thing he begins at: there are mo points of dittay
laid against them, but he begins at this, the persecution of the Lord
himself* Persecution begins not at the body, nor at the members of the
body, Persecution begins at the head of the Church.
nor at the servants; but it begins at the head, the Lord Jesus him self, if
not in action and in deed, yet in intention; in the malice and hatred of the
heart. The Prophets in deed were slain and persecuted in action, and died
before the Lord Jesus came in the world: but these same men that slew the
Prophets with their hand, ere they slew the Prophets they slew the Lord of the
Prophets, the Lord Jesus in their hearts: because that all the Prophets that
were slain were his servants sent before him that was to come.

Now to come forward. The second thing is, They slew the Lord Jesus, they slew
the Lord of glory, that in his slaughter, so far as in them lies, the world
should be slain: for they that vvoulde slay Jesus would slay all men, so
far as lies in them, and they slay him after a most cruel and shameful
manner. The greater grace the greater the persecution.
Brethren, this is the ingyne and nature of persecutors: the worthier the
personage be who is persecuted, the greater grace of God be in him, the greater
glory and innocence be in him, the greater will be the extremity of their
persecution. None of the Prophets of old were so extremely persecuted as the
Lord Jesus was; neither yet the Apostles that followed him were so persecuted
as he was: and all because of the greatness of the glory of his personage. If
ye will search the ground of this, it must, no question, come of great
blindness, for if men savv well the grace and the glory of God that is in the
persons of them that are persecuted, for all the world they durst not
persecute them. And therefore he says in the 1. Corinthians. 2. chap. 8. verse, If
they had known they had not crucified the Lord of glory. No if the glory of
the Church were seen, wicked men durst not stir her. There is yet a greater
and an higher ground; The malice of the heart comes in and blindes and puts
out the eye of the mind, Ephesians. 4. 18. Through ignorance says Paul, that comes
through the hardness of the heart, for this is the nature of the hardness of the
heart to hate the light and to delight in darkness, which is enemy to the light
of God: All our pleasure is in darkness by nature, and so it is carried against
the light, and the first thing it does it puts out the light of the mind yea
even the very natural light, and so when the heart is blinded it caries him
against all light, and chiefly against the light of God and the Lord of light
him self. And this is the work of this fa^e nature of man so highly
accounted of by the Philosophers. Seek therefore to shut out of thy heart
this maliciousnes that blindes it, or else thou shall be blind fold thrown
down to hell.

The thride thing to be marked here is. When he is laying out this persecution
before the Thessalonians he is comforting the^ that were afflicted. Have they
not slain your Lord? etc. what vvounder is it howbeit they persecute you?
Brethren, all the affliction is not laid upon one man, howbeit he get his
burdene heavy enough. Comfort through Christ's persecution
The Lord hes measured to every one his own part: and he who is afflicted
should look over his shulder and see who hes been afflicted before him, and
scarcely shall he see a godly man but with his burdene on his back, all is
not laid on him alone. But above all let the person that is afflicted first
set his eye on the Lord Jesus. Let him look over to Golgotha where Christ is
hanging on the Cross, and in Christ let him look to two things: first to
the glory and worthiness of that personage who sufferes: next, to the
extremity and ignominy of that passion: look to these two things in him, and
then look down to thy self, and look what thou art first, not a Lord, if
thou were a King, but a servant (all the Kings on the earth are but servants in
respect of him:) then go to the affliction thou suffers, and thou shall find
thou suffers not the thousand part of the affliction he suffered for thee, there
is great inequality between thee and him, and then begin to reason. The
servant is not greater nor his Lord, the disciple is not greater nor his
Master. The Lord Jesus is my Lord I am not but a servant: yet the Lord Jesus
my Lord suffers and in such great extremity; then may I not be content to
suffer the thousand part of his suffering? Of this comes contentment of heart,
and patience to suffer for the Lord. For except thy eye be set upon that
personage of Jesus Christ, it is not possible for thee to suffer with joy the
simplest cross that is for the Lords sake.

The next point of their dittay, they have slain their own Prophets.
Persecution of the Prophets.
This they did ere they slew the Lord; albeit it be set in the second rovv^^e.
They have slain: whom? Prophets, vvorthie men. Whose Prophets? not
strangers, but men of then own nation, Jews as they were, their own
Prophets sent by God to them, to teach and prophecy to them, to bring them to
the way of life: yet they have run upon them, and have slain them, all
aggreages their fact. Ye will ask, was these Jews that slew the Prophets
the same that slew the Lord Jesus, they were not in the Prophets days, they
came long after? I answer, he understands the whole body of that people,
fathers and children, which makes up a body. The fathers slew the Prophets,
Therefore Steven. says Act. 7. 52. Which of them is he whom your fathers have
not persecuted? Then he comes to the children: and as for you that are
children, ye have betrayed and slain the just one. This is it that Christ
says in the 23. chap. of Matt. verse. 32. Full (...) out that or follow out
that, that your fathers have left undone slay me and my Apostles. Yet there may
be an other answer made to this. It may be that he will lay to the charge of
them that slew the Lord Jesus, the slaughter of the Prophets, as though they
had slain them with their own hands. Posterity guilty through their fathers.
For ye must understand that the children that come after their Fathers, are
inuolued in the whole guiltiness that their fathers were in before them. Was
he a murderer? thou art guilty of murder: were thy Grandfather and his
father murderers? thou art inuolued in the same guiltiness: and except thou
by grace be transplanted out of the rotten stock of thy forefathers in Jesus,
thou shall die for that murder of thy fathers. All the sins of thy
progenitors shall be hung about thy neck if thou be not exeemed and ^lanted in
Jesus Christ. Yea that sin of Adam for eating of the fruit shall be laid to
thy charge, and thou shall pay for it, if thou be not transplanted out of
rotten Adam, and ingraft in Jesus Christ, the second Adam. Romans 5. 14. Not
only is this natural corruption drawn to children through propagation, but
the children are inuolued in the guiltiness of the very action of the
progenitors. All serves to this; to make fathers to be way and to take head
to their actions, that they slay not themselves allone, but the multitude of
their posterity, as Adam slew us all. Yet there is an other ground and answer
to this. These Jews that slew the Lord Jesus, are counted to have slain the
Prophets before them. The ground and cause is this (I would that all murthereis
did hear this:) Slayest thou an innocent man such as Abel? the whole innocent
blood that was shed since the beginning lights upon thee, thou art guilty of
it. And therefore Christ Matt. 23. 36. lays to the Jews charge the whole
innocent blood shed since Abell unto Zacharias that was slain between the
temple and the altar. Therefore murderer take head, thou shall drown in blood,
for by thy act thou give approbauen to al those murderers that were from the
beginning. Thou make it a pastime to dip thy hand in innocent blood: but woe
to thee if thou be not washed in the blood of christ. This for the answer to
the question. Now mark, brethren. When he speaks of the slaughter of the Lord
Jesus committed by these Jews, he forgets not the old Prophets: and with the
Lords he joines his servants, neither forgets he the Apostles, Both the
persecution and the persecutors are recent in Gods memory.
and us also have they persecuted: al are put in one catalogue, the old
Prophets, the Lord Jesus, the Apostles and Martyrs that were slain. And who
does this? It is not so much Paul as the holy Spirit that does it: which is
a token that all the martyrdomes that have been, is, and to be; was not, is
not, nor shall not be forgot of the Lord: they are all in recent memory. And
suppose there were not a book of Martyrs written in the earth, yet there is
a book in Heaven written, and all the Martyrs from the beginning are
registrate in it: and that book shall be laid oppen before man and Angels: ye
shall see them, not in pictures but in face. And again, he remembers the Jews
who did it: so as there is a book of Martyrs in heaven, so is there a book
of persecuters, wherein all their names are written, and in that great day the
book shall be laid oppen, and shall be presented to their eyes, to their
rebuke, shame and eternal confusion. So the Lord hes all in remembrance, the
Lord hes a recent memory: a thousand years are but like a day to him, and a
day as a thousand years: albeit we will forget all, yet all is recent in his
memory. And this is very comfortable to the afflicted, and it is terrible to
the persecutors. Woe is that man that has not his sins forgote and pardoned
of the Lord. There is not one tear of the sufferer but it is put up in his
bottle. This for the second point of their dittay.

Let us now come to the third point. The Jews were not content with the
slaying of the Prophets and of the Lord Jesus himself, but when he is away
they persecute his Apostles. A wonderful thing that this people can not hold up
their hand: the fathers slay the Prophets, the children slay the Lord, and then
the Apostles. Ere I go forvvard mark this: iniquity, in^^ietie and
ungodliness, when once it enters in any family or clan, in any race of men in
the world, how hard a thing it is to get it out again. Often times when the
fathers begin with it, it follows on so upon the whole race of them, that it
makes an end of them and their race both Beginnest thou that art a father? thy
son and thy whole posterity will follow, while in end the judgment of God
light and destroy all together. Is the father a murderer and slew he one? the
son will double it: and so forth of other vices: and then the Lord throws
down the house and cuttes off all the generation. And the Lord did so with
these Jews, It is said in the second command, that the Lord visites the th^^d
and fourth generation of them that hate him. What is the gro^nde of this?
because the iniquity of the fathers is driven to the children to the third and
fourth generation. Therefore the vengeance of God lights on all. Ye fathers
therefore take head to your selves, and purge you from iniquity: for if ye be
careless of your selves, the vengeance of God shall be on you and your
children both. The example of the Jews might be a spectacle to all the world;
the very iniquity proceeding from the fathers to the sons, till all were
cutted off, might now suffice to exhort all fathers to leave sin, as they
would not be destroyed and their whole race after them. Mark an other thing
here. There is nothing that can not content this people: there is no kind of
message that can please them. First the Lord sends Prophets to them: then he
s^ids his Son (as it is said in the parable) that they might reverence him
Matt. 21. 37. Last he sends the Apostles his servants, and they are as rigorous
against them, as they could: so no sort of message could content them. (...)
Act. 7. 51. lays down the ground of this. Persecuters malice ever against the
light of the spirit.
(...) So there is the ground: because all come with the light of the holy
Spirit, therefore they persecuted all. The malice of a persecuter, is ever
against the light of the Spirit of God. So let every man be sure, so long as
the Spirit of light is, there must ever be persecution. Had I an other man
(will the prophaine man say) I would hear him. No, if thou have this hatred of
the light of the spirit in thy heart, if Paul should come and preach thou
would persecute him: yea if Christ him self should come in proper person,
thou would persecute him: take therefore head not so much to the preacher as
to thine own heart: if thou have the love of the light, the preacher can not
be disliked by thee, and by the contrair if thou have not the love of the
light, thou will persecute all that come to thee. This for the third point of
their dittay.

Now comes on the fourth part of their dittay. God ^hey please (...). This
follows the other three. The slaying of the Lord: the slaying of his Prophets,
and the persecuting of his Apostles. They that slew the Lord, and his
Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles: How could they please God that was the
sender of them? And so in these words he takes off the cover of their faces.
For these malicious Jews when they were doing all this evil, they boasted of
themselves they pleased God, and they were his people saying. We are the Church
and all these are enemies to God. Paul pulles off this cover, and he shows
that they in doing of this, were nothing but enemies to God Ye know in these
days men will come in and say, It is we that are the true Church, it is we who
are serving God aright and in the mean time they will be persecuting burning
^ormenting the children of God? But what are they? will ye have them
deciphered? they are enemies to God: the Pope is the Antichrist, and this shall
be ratified in that great day. But to let them alone there are many amongst our
selves, who will ay be doing evil, and are enemies to God: for thou that art
an enemy to his servants, thou pleases not God: for here is a ground, There
is no glorifying of the Lord, but in his ministry. Contemn thou this
ministry by little and little in end thou shall be an enemy to God, if thou
had sworn the contrair. If thou severe the glory of God and this ministry,
and be a contemner of it, thou shall never be glorified of God. Ye have heard
four points of their dittay.

Now to come to the fifth. They are contrai^ to all men; Jew and Gentile. This
is a consequent of the first three: slayers of the Lord, and of his Prophets,
persecuters of the Apostles and pastors, they are enemies to the salvation of
all mankind: (...) what they will; enemies to the servants of God, to the
ministry (...) which salvation is wrought, and without it thou shall never
obtain salvation, nor see the face of God) they are enemies to all mankindes
salvation.

Come to the last point of their dittay. They forbid us to speak to the
Gentiles: they are enemies to the salvation of the Gentiles that by our
ministry should be won to God and to his Church: the porple-wall is broken
down that did hold out the Gentiles before, yet they will hold the^ out of the
fold. There are sundry sorts of Jews that hindered the salvation of men:
there is one sort of them that would not suffer Christ to be preached to the
Gentiles at all, but ever raised up sedition to impead that work. Of these ye
may read in the 13. of the Acts. There was another sort of the Jews that
suffered the Gospel to be preached to the Gentiles, but added to it
circumcision and the law of Moses: of whom read Act. 15. The first sort is
worst. Now the Apostle here means chiefly of this first sort; who, as the
Lord himself says, would neither enter them selves into the kingdom of
heaven, nor suffer others to enter. For this is a sure thing, even as a man
that hes gotten his own heart enlightened by the love of the truth, would have
that light to be imparted to all the world and wishes from his heart that all
were partakers of it, as Paul wished to Agrippa. and the rest that heard him,
that they were like unto him saving his bonds. Acts 26. 29. Well had they
been, though they had been chainde, to have had the light of Jesus: yet he puts
to these words, for reverence cause saving these bands.) Even so, a man who
hes the hatred of the truth and light, he would have all the world blinded as
he is, he would have all mouths closed as his mouth is closed, that never man
should name Christ to the world: He would have all eyes put out, that never a
man might see one jote. In a word he that is in Heaven translated out of this
darkness of nature, he would have all in Heaven with him. And by the
contrair: He that is yet in darkness, and so in Hell, he would have all with
him. So look what condition the man is of he would have all like to him.
Therefore I will never think well of men that impeades the progress of the
Gospel of Christ: they argue what is within them: for were this love of the
light within their hearts, for all this world would they not hinder the
progress of the Gospel Alas, ye shall find this over true in the end: woe,
woe, to them that hinders the planting of the Gospel. Alas, if there were this
love of the light in their hearts, there would not be so many churches
unplanted, and so many souls fuffred to perish.

Now I draw to an end. When he hes set down these six points of their dittay,
whereof the least is worthy damnation: for what judgment must light on the
slayers of the Lord, of the Prophets and Apostles? He sets down the end of all,
that ever they should I fill out their sins. As though he said, they are ever
exercised this way to this end that the measure of their sins should be filled
out* and then the judgment should overtake them, This is the end of the
counsel of God. They had an other end. But to make this plain. all things
fall out to man by measure whole the fulness come.
All things that fall as it were out of Heaven out of the counsel of God
upon men* fall in a measure, and in a quantity. The grace of God in Jesus
Christ is giuon in a measure to every one. Ephes^ 4. 7. The afflictions of the
godly is given in a measure, and piece and piece this measure is filled out,
until it come to the heap, and then the affliction shall cease. The filling
of them did begin at the creation, and Abell felt them first, and ever since
the measure of them hes been incressing until it came to Jesus; and he took
an heavier weight of affliction upon him nor ever was before him. Yet the
measure of the afflictions of the Church is not filled out. In comes the
Apostles and they get their part: after them comes the Pastores, and they get
their part: and enerie person that is in Christ gets his part, and so every
one hes his own burdene. So long as the world shall stand this measure shall
be in filling out: when it shall be full the world shall fail, and the pillars
of it shall be cutted, and an end shall be put to all tears. Revel. 21. 4.
This measure is long in filling. It did begin soon, it must be (...) out,
says (...). 1. Epist. 5. 9. So every one hes his own part. Likewise, some
go by a measure and since the beginning this measure hes been in filling:
every age hes casten to their their own part. It is not one age that has
^^lled up the measure of sin; but every generation hes casten to the own
part to fill up sin: and in this age every one is bearing their arme-fall
and burdene of sin: he with murder, the with harlotrie, and he with
oppression and persecution, and he comes in with blasphemy: yet the cup is not
full, and the measure of sin shall not be filled up so long as the world
does stand. When the father dies, the son will live to fill out this
measure: he makes his testament, yet the sin is not filled up, but the thing he
could not do himself, he bids his son do it, and he will say to his son:
Son I could not get this man slain, nor this evil deed nor that evil deed
overtaken, if I had lived, I should have done this or that: do thou therefore
that I could not do. So do the Jews, and therefore the Lord says, Fill out
the measure of your fathers sins, Matt. 23. 32. Now when this measure is
full, the world shall take an end and all shall fall down, but vvoe is the
sinner, and well is the godly: for the sinner shall be destroyed for ever,
and the afflicted body shall find salvation. Take head. There are none that
know when this measure shall be filled out, but he who in his unsearchable
counsel hes appointed this measure of sin, that is God: I know it not, thou
know it not, and therefore it is over presiumptuous a thing, when thou
see a man i^ sin to say, this man has filled the measure of sin: for it
may be the Lord will let him hue to commit greater sin. And in deed it is a
vvonder to consider the patience of God in suffering of sin, and so it is
called the ri^hes of the ^enignitie of God. Romans 2. 4. And this should learn
us patience to sit still and abide Gods leisure, and glorify him. Farther this
would be marked here: there are sundry measures of sin: one of all the
wicked that ever was, is, or shall be to the end: an other is of any certain
nation or county, as of the Jews here: the third is of the particulare
person whereof Paul speaks. Act. 3. 10. And in like manner we may consider
the same measure of grace. There is now the dittay.

Will ye hear the doom? the wrath of God is come on them to the utmost. As
he would say the wrath of God ouertooke them long since. It holds on, and
shall hold on. until it bring them to a miserable end. There is the doom and
judgment. It is set down as a cause of the filling up of their sin,
Proportion between vvraith and sin.
because the wrath of God leaves them not. When once Gods wrath begins to light
on a body, that body will never do a good turn, but sin on still, until
in end the wrath light on him and bea^e ^ut all his b^aines. And again, when
once God begins to look on a creature with a favorable eye, that creature
will be exercised in well doing: for it is the merciful face of God that
makes the man to do well. And for this cause it is said that God hated Esau,
and therefore he never did a good turn: and again he loved Jacob, and
therefore he did all to pleasure his God. All serves to this end, that men and
women should seek to stand in the favor of God: seek tokens of his love.
And on the other part seek to be free of the wrath of God: for if it possess
thee, thou shall do nothing but sin under it, and as thou sinnest, vvraith
after vvraith shall follovv on thee, until it come to an height, and then it
shall be heaped on thee, to thy everlasting destruction: when thou art crying
peace, peace, the wrath of God will come on, tumbling on thee as a Mountain:
as was seen on these Jews forty years after this. Now to end. The Lord
give us ever grace, to seek to be under his favorable countenance, and that
the countenance of his terrible vvraith may be turned from us, that that we
may study to please him in our life and conversation through Jesus Christ. To
whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be al praise, honor and
glory, for ever and ever.

AMEN.
THE NINTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 17. 18. 19* 20. 17 Forasmuch brethrer, as we were
keept from you (...), concerning ^ight, but not in the heart, we enforced the
more to see your face with great desire.

18 Therefore we would have come unto you (I Paul, at least once or tvvyse)
but Satan hindered us.

19 For what is our hope or joy, or stovvne of reioy forgiune not (...) you it
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming.

20 Yes, ye are our glory and joy.


THESE days bygone (brethren) we have insisted upon this rejoysing of the
Apostle together with the Thessalonians, for the graces of God he understood
to be in them: and so we have alie^die ended his part of the Epistle, which
^^ands in a ^^ngratulation. Now in this text presenlie red, the Apostle
excuses himself to the Thessalonians, because he came not to them to vis^e
them after that time that first he planted the Gospel among them For they
might have said to the Apostle. Well, thou professest a great love toward us
and give us a good (...), and vtterst a great (...) us and the graces we
(...) of God; yet then (...) the Gospel. (...) confirm the work begun. This
(...) of us, notwithstanding of all pres^^^ inword. The Apastle answers this,
and gives two excuses. The first is, from that earnest desire he had to visit
them: the second is from that purpose he took after the desire to come to them
and visit them; yea, for that purpose he made once or twice to come: for once
or twyse he was on his journey, and was impeaded by Satan. In the end of the
chapter, he gives a reason of that desire and purpose he took to come to them.
Because, says he, Ye are my hope, my joy, and the coovvne of my glorying, in
the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming. And therefore, why
should not I desire and take purpose to visit you? There is the sum of this
present text.

Now to return and pass through every verse, and expone it, as God shall give
the grace. His first excuse is, that earnest desire he had to see them In the
beginning of the 17. verse, he gives the reason thereof. Because on a sudden
he was rest from them, otherwise then he expected and the more sodanlie he was
rest from them the greater was his desire to see them and to visit them. Of
this parting and seuering of the Apostle from the Thessalonians, after that he
had been with them a certain space of time ye may read Act. 17. The obstinate
Jews, seeing that Christ and his Gospel was received of the Thessalonians,
and the Lord blessed Paul's travels among them, by the instigation of the Devil
stirred up such a vehement sedition, that Paul is compelled to slay to Beroea.
The word he uses here hes a great pith. It signifies not only to be severed,
but it signifies to be made an orphanne, a puple destitute of father and
mother, and spoiled of his parents: and therefore the seuering of him, was as
the spoiling of an orphane or puple from the father whom he loved best in the
world. The text is easy, and the observations fall out as easy. Ye may se
first the delight and pleasure the godly have to dwell with other to have a
mutual presence one of an other, that every one may receive of other
consolation in Jesus Christ. Romans 1. 11. 12. especially a Pastor, or a
Minister when he see the Lord hes blessed his labors among any people or
congregation, his pleasure is to abide with that people, his delight is in the
presence of that people, and when he is severed from that people, it is as sore
to him, as to a child, or young one, when he is severed from the parents, and
spoiled of the presence of father and mother. Again we may note. The Devil
the enemy of man's salvation muyes nothing more then the mutual society of
the godly: and especiailie above all other societies, he inuyes the presence
of a faithful Pastor with his people: for he knows that by this ministry
salvation is wrought. Now would to God men and women knew as well this
ministry as he does. He knows this ministry of salvation is so necestarie
that if thou conten^ne it thou shall never be safe, thou shall never see the
face of God. I have given this doom ofttymes. Therefore he invying man's
salvation, his whole indeuore is to severe him that is the Pastor (...) his
people: knowing that he being severed, the people shall be a pray to him. This
is his oulde craft, and no novelty. Now the Devil is ever like himself, he
can raise seditions and trmults, and that to severe the ministry, that caries
the message of salvation before the people, that they being severed, the people
may be a pray to him.

Now the word used here is to be marked. He says, he was severed in the
moment of an hour. Meaning he was severed upon a sodantie, far from their and
his expectation, suddenly he and they were severed: well, an evil turn is soon
done, and in the twinkling of an eye a break will be made: evil, is soon
done, but not so soon mended. Paul could not come so soon to them again, as
he was put from them, and when he is aback, the Devil holds him aback; and
when he would have c^mde to them, he did cast in impedime^ts. Yet albeit he
severed Paul in body, his heart abode with the Thessalonians: they possessed his
heart, the enemy could not get it severed from them. Then there are two sorts
of profences of men with me^; as there are two sorts of absence of men from one
in body, an other in spirit: a man's heart will be where his body is not: and
by the contrare, the body will be present (...) he heart (...) not. It is
easy to severe the godly in body (...) Devil will easily do that. It is
easy to him: to severe (...) of the ungodly (for there is no true con^^ction
but in Christ (...) the hearts of the godly, it is not easy (...) The bond
that joins them is not natural, (...) it comes not of (...) of the Spirit of
God, who (...) member with an other member. As it is an hard matter to break
that bond that joins the members with the head, which is faith: so it is an
hard matter to break that bond that joins the member with the member, that
is love and charity, which joins us together. Who shall severe us from the
love of Corist. Romans 8. 35. A natural bond is soon cutted: but no hammering
will break the bond of Christ. Therefore seek not to stand in nature, but
seek to stand in Christ by his Spirit, that will hold us together, until
that society that never shall be dissolved in our head the Lord Jesus Christ
be accomplished.

In the end of the verse comes in his desire. I enforced my self to see your
face, not content of this presence of my heart that is with you: Satan cannot
^^uder the (...) desires of the godly.
There is an other vauntage. The enemy for all his inuy, yet he could not get
his heart away, and when the body was severed, yet he could not get the desire
of the Apostle to have a bodily presence severed from them. In deed if he
could have gotten the desire and langor away, he had gotten a great victory:
but as the heart abode with them; so his desire was to have a bodily presence,
to see them face to face. And brethren, trow ye that the desire that the godly
hes to be with other be in vain, or can be in vain? no, the desire of flesh
and blood will be vain: and that which it will desire most, it will not
artaine to it. But if the Spirit of Jesus work a desire, it shall be
effectual, either one time or other. Desire thou to see Jesus and his face?
(for thou feast it not yet) desire thou to see that glorious presence? thou
with thy eyes shall see it certainly. Desires thou to be of the society of
the faithful? thou shall be with them. There is not, nor there was never a
godly man, whose presence thou thirstest for, but if not in this life, yet in
the life to come thou shall see him. There was never a godly man of old but
thou shall see him* and have his society which shall ind^re for ever. All
comes to this. The desire of the godly shall never be vain. There is not a
surer argument of life everlasting then is an earnest desire of it. Blessed are
they (...) thirst, for they shall be filled. Matt. 5. 6.

To come to the next verse. In it is contained the second part of his excuse:
he had not only a desire, but he says, (...) purpose and was vvilling. That
is, I entered in a deliberation and set my self to come unto you. Yet more, I
addressed my self to the journey and never stayed while Satan hindered me:
Satan stays well doing.
There is the meaning shortly. In well doing brethren, in doing that of duty
we are bound to do, it is not enough to desire to do it, but thou must enter
in deliberation and purpose and lay a conclusion with thy self, I will do it.
Yet it is not enough to purpose, but as thou take purpose go to the action:
begin to do well, go forward in well doing ay while thou getst a stay. Many
do vvishe well and would well, but do no more: he or she will wish well,
and feign would have all well, and in the mean time they sit still. This is a
token thy desire was not ardent: thou that wilt not enter in action and be ay
going forward while thou getst a stay, thou had never an he rtlie desire to
do well. He says, I would once or twice have come unto you. First he entered
into journey and he got a stay: then he entered again, and yet he got an
impediment: he leaves not off at the first. Mark this. We must not leave off to
do well for one stay or impediment: yea not for two, nor for three, nor for
four, if it be a good turn that is in hand: but we must ever go forward that
we may be excused both before God and man: and this is the excuse of the
Apostle, he could do no more. Paul says The days are evil. Ephesians. 5. 16.
that is, there are many impediments casten in to him that would do well in
in this life. It is the godly man that gets greatest hinderance, but the
wicked will ay forward and will prosper: but if thou be a godly man, if thou
be in thy journey, thou shall not go one mile but thou shall get a stay: what
at then? should all these impedime^ts stay us from doing good? No, the Apostle
gives the an other counsel, Redeem the time. Play the part of a good
merchant, that will redeem his vauntage with the pains and travel of his
body. Buy the time by well doing, and give thy life for it, and thou shall
lose nothing. Thou that can lose thy life in well doing, shall get a better
life for it.

He lays the fault on Satan, Satan hindered us. How was this? appeared he to
him; and in his own person c^mde opposition to him? How he impeaded him it is
not expressed: appearantlie as he stirred up the Jews to cast him out, so he
stirred them up now to beset the way. It may be he enraged their hartshighly
against him, or else that he rased a storm in the air. Well what ever be the
instrument or mean, we may see when we are stayed from well doing, Satan is
ever the author, and that by permission of God, for without his permission he
can do nothing) he is the^ the author and stayer of well doing. Therefore what
ever impediment thou getst, take thee ever to the chief doer. Ephesians. 6. 12. It
is not with (...), he and blood we have to d^e. (how be it they be
instruments) but (...) with (...) and (...), that is, the Devil. And therefore
he gives counsel, not to take thee to thy co^slet and steel-bonnet, wherewith
thou armest thy self against a man: but that thou should take thee to that
spiritual armor, Faith, Hope and the word of God, and set thy self, not to
resist this man or that man, but the common enemy of man's salvation who would
slay thy soul. Trowest thou this be the resisting to resist man? No, the
Devil is laughing in his sleue when thou do that, that is the hie way to
go on his course. As he forced these men to do wrong to Paul: so thou, if
thou go to be revenged on man that is the instrument, thou give place to the
Devil to do his work. Last mark: when once he severed Paul from them, look
how busily he holds him aback. When he is preassing to go to them, he cast
in a stay. And again when he is preassing to make forward, he castes in an
other stay, when once he gets godly men sundered from other there will be cast
in many hinders to stay them from meeting again. And this testifies, that all
our blessedness is a society and conjunction, first with our head Christ, and
secondly with the members of his body. Our blesse^^es in communion with the
sanctes.
Look not for life and blessedness, if there be not a communion with the
Sancts. Now the Devil knows this, and therefore the chief thing he sets
himself on, is to rent a sunder this communion, and who ever would break this
union, and hes a pleasure in division, take him to be an imp of the Devil: for
it is a work of the Devil, to severe them that should be joined, as it is the
work of God to join them together.

Now let us go to the last part of this text, containing a weighty reason:
first of his desire, and next of his purpose to come to them. These are the
words, For what is our h^pe joy? what is crown of my glorying? There is
the question and demand. The answer of it is, Are not ye in the presence of
our Lord Jesus at his coming? Then he doubles it: yea, says he, ye are my
joy and my glory; and so he ends. Where a man's hope is, there is the thing
he hopes and looks for: where his joye and crown and glory is, there he
would be: that is to say, where his bless^^^, is there would he be. No^ Paul
would say. Ye Thessalonians are my hope my joy, my crown of the which I glory,
and therefore I would be with you. There is the force of the argument. Now the
style of the language would be marked: for the same Spirit that dytes the
matter dytes the style; and spiritual matter craves a Spiritual style, 1.
Cor. 2. 13. The holy spirit of Jesus must be the speaker as well as the dyter.
His language ryses up by degree by degree, the lowest degree is in the word,
hope; the next degree is in the word joy: the last and hiest degree is in the
word, crown: whereby is meaned a most high and excellent glory. This
learnes us this lesson. Heaven would have an high style, that crown would have
an hie style, the grace of Jesus Christ would have an hie style when it is
spoken of. And brethren, if Heaven be in the heart, as it is in the mouth, and
if glory be in the heart as it is in the mouth and if the Crown of glory be
in the heart as it is in the mouth, the mouth will ever be ready to speak of
grace, of joye and of glory in a glorious style: for it is true, Of the
abound^nce of the heart, the mouth speaks. And I would demand of you, what
is the occasion that men do speak so couldlie and carelessly of the Lord of
glory, and so baselie of so glorious things, as of heaven and of the joye
thereinto? Alas, the occasion is the want of sense in the heart the heart is
not filled with such things, and therefore an empty heart, an empty mouth:
if thy hear be full of vanity, thy mouth will be full of vanity and euanish
in painting out of vanity: for look as thou art disposed in heart, in like
manner shall thou be disposed in mouth. Therefore seek to have thy heart
furnished fully with the Spirit of Jesus. No man, (says the Apostle) can
call Jesus Lord, but by the Spirit. 1. Epist. Corin. (...). 12. 3.

Ye more. Speaking of this joye, he passes up by degrees. The lowest is hope:
then he comes to an higher, my ^oy: then the highest is (...) on their glory.
The greatest glory in the earth is a crown, and when a man is crowned in the
earth, he can be no higher. But there is the difference. The crown in the
earth is corruptible, but the crown of heaven is incorruptible. It is of this
crown of heaven he speaks. Yet not these three degrees: for I mark this
passing up by degrees in sundry (...) parts: for when the Apostle begi^^nes to
speak of Jesus, he can be satisfy himself in words and (...) Praying i^
God, (...) ye may (...), says he, what is the^ hope of his calling, there
is the first step: he stands not there, he goes up to see, what the (...) his
glory: what glory? of his (...) (...) among his saints: this is the second
degree: (yet he stands not there:) and what is that excellent greatness of his
power, according to the efficacy of his strong strength. There he stands.
Brethren, these are not words, but this rising up tells us, the hight of the
glory of heaven is wonderful: and that thou may attain to it, thou must
rise to it by degrees: that is, thou must pass from sense to sense, from grace
to grace, from light to light, from oye to joye, from glory to glory, as the
Apostle speaks 2. Corinthians. 3. 18. So long as thou live thou must find this
climming of thy heart sensibly, that thou growest in joye, and that thou have
more joye this year then before: and so strive continually, until thou come to
the point, ever striving for perfection in this life, which shall be complete
when we shall see our Lord Jesus Christ. Now he calls it the crown of
glorying, that is, that makes him to glory in God who crowns him. Brethren,
when the heart is filled with glory in Jesus christ, the mouth shall not be
dumb, but it shall oppin and utter that passing joy, and the person shall
ever glory in him, who hes set that crown on him. O that infinite glory and
rejoysing that shall be in that glorious Majesty! now we tire, searcelie are
we begun to glory in him, but the heart begins as soon to tire, but then
there shall be no tyring nor wearying, the voice shall never cease, but glory
in that Creator for ever and ever. Bide in patience while ye attain unto this
glory, and in all troubles let the hope of this glory comfort thee. Romans 5.
2. For there is nothing that abydes but this glory. col.
Now if hope made us to rejoice, how much more, present sight, present joy, and
the crown put on our heads will make us to rejoice, and with gladness and
loud voice to praise him who ^^es crowned us for ever.

In the latter end of the verse, he makes an answer to his own demand, are not
ye, says he, etc. He calls the Church ^is^oy, and his crown: not that
properly his blessedness was in them, for, only Jesus Christ is called our
hope, our joy, our glory and crown. Only Jesus Christ is our life, only
Christ is our solace, he hes no companion: but he calls them his hope and joy
in an other sense Because they were the mean and matter whereby he attained to
the joy, solace and crown, which is in Jesus Christ. It is then an improper
fashion of speaking: for the people in whom our ministry is effectual to
salvation is the mean whereby we shall be glorified in the Heaven. Mark this
speaking of the matter of his joy. He speaks not of his Apostleship, and says
not, it is the mean of my joy: but he says, the blessing given me in my
Apostleship in saving you, is the mean of my joy. Faithful discharge of a
calling a matter of joy.
The matter of thy joy in the life to come, and of thy crown wherewith thou
shall be crowned in Heaven, it is not so much a calling: if it were the calling
of a King, it will not be that that will make thee be crowned in Heaven: no, it
must be the faithful discharge of thy calling toward them with whom thou have
ado. Art thou a King? the faithful discharge of a King in keeping the people
in good order and peace will be the mean of thy crowning in heaven. Art thou a
pastor intending to win many souls to the kingdom of heaven? it shall be a
mean of thy crowning in that great day. When a crown shall be set on a kings
head, or a pastors head, it shall not be his calling that shall be the cause of
his crowning: he was an Emperor, therefore he must have a crown in heaven; it
will not follow, if there be no more: He was a pastor, therefore he must have
a crown in heaven: no, it shall be that blessing and fruit that God gave thee
in the faithful discharge in thy calling here, that shall be the mean of thy
crowning. And therefore let never flesh glory in any calling, if there be no
more, if the blessing of the Lord be not with thy calling, thou have cause of
mourning, and thou shall say in that day, woe to me, that ever I was a King, an
Emperor, a Pastor, if there be not a faithful discharge of thy calling the
greater damnation falls unto thee, the greater thy calling be.

Now to end: he is speaking of this reward that he was to receive at Christ's
coming, and he speaks not of these earthly stipends, how beit their be much
ado and strife for them in the land, if they were never so selie: he speaks
not of these goods or any thing that pertained to them, but the reward of his
Apostleship he speaks of, is, that he claims themselves. ye are my hope says
he, ye are my joy, even ye your selves. So, in one word, the reward of a
faithful Apostle shall not be the (...) of this earth, (for as niggard as men
are of it: no, it shall not be his man^e* his (...), two or three ^halders of
^^^uall, or an hndreth mark; rest all not be this, but it shall be the souls
of all them he did win here on earth: and the Lord shall say to him, take
them and let them be a matter of joy, of glory and honor for ever to thee.
Well, he will not wish ought of the dirt of the earth, but their own selves,
whom he will profess as the reward of his faithful calling to his
everlasting joy.

I go forward* before whom and in whose presence shall this joy and crown of
glorying be? He says, before the Lord Jesus Christ: it must be done in his
sight, he must be before, he must be the doer of all: it must be he that
shall take thee by the hand, and give thee to the Apostle and pastor, and say,
Take, man, there is the matter of thy glory and crown make it a matter to
thee of thy joy for ever. Brethren, there is no joy but in the face and
presence of Jesus: there is no light but that that comes from his face and
countenance. It is true, the pastor ministers light, but if in the mean time
the light of Jesus shine not in thy heart, all is but vain and lost labor.
And therefore, Paul 2. Cor. 4. 6. says, all this light must come from Jesus
Christ, and thou must hold up that heart of thine, that the light of Jesus may
shine in it. And he says also, as soon as the heart is turned, the va^le is
removed 2. Cor. 3. 16. and the face of the Lord illuminates thee. For what trow
you the light be, the joy be, the glory be that we shall receive: and in one
word, what trow you heaven be: All the light in heaven is nothing but as a
reflexe of that light that is in Jesus Christ: all the light and glory of heaven
is (...) like sparkles scattred from him, for all glory is in him. And
therefore, if ever thou look for joy and glory, address thy self for Ieses
Christ* and as thou would live, either here, or hence, (...) to his presence,
and think never thou art well, until you get (...) that presence. Let nothing
so bewitch thee, (...) of heart* until thou getst some light of Jesus Christ,
(...) is no life nor joye within him. I ask thy conscience, Did thou ever
feel that solid joy and life, but when thy heart was set on that countenance
of Jesus? Fool, thou may rejoice, like a dog or beast with a sensual
pleasure, but woe to thy joye and peace: there is no peace to the wicked; for
when thou art so passing thy time out of Jesus, the judgment shall suddenly
overtake thee: for there is no salvation out of Jesus.

When shall this be? At this coming. It is true we walk here in his
presence, and that joye that comes down from Heaven it comes through that
glorious body wherewith he is cled: but the sacietie of all shall not be,
until the eye see it, thy glory shall not be perfited while then. I tell you,
all the light we have now, the Apostle calls it the light of the Euangell of
the glory of God: it is his face that shines in a mirror, thou see him no
otherwise: but then this mirror shall be taine away, and the face of Jesus
shall be holden up in your sight. Brethren, while we are here, the light co^mes
from heaven* and over shadows and transformes the soul only, and that, not
fully, but in a part: but, when he shall come, he shall transform not the
soul only, but these vilde bodies, and make them conform to his glorious
body. Phil. 3. 21. And so, there must be a greater force in his own presence,
nor is in the mirror of the Gospel. And thou that take a pleasure to see
Jesus in the mirror of the Gospel, and to be ouershadowed with the light of
the Gospel, the face of Jesus shall shine on thee: and by the contrair, thou
that take no pleasure in the mirror of the Gospel, thou shall never attain
to the sight of Jesus. Will thou continue in hatred of the ministry of Jesus
Christ, thou shall never see the glorious countenance of Jesus.

In the end of this chapter, not being content to tell this once, he says it
again, yes, ye are my joy. This doubling proceeds of a persuasion that he had
of that glory: in a word, let a Minister be faithful to win many souls, to
pleasure God and Jesus Christ, who will recompense him so abundantly. The
glory is sure, the joy is sure, and if he find faithfulness, and a blessing
in his calling in this life: as the joye and glory is certain, so when he is
going out of this life, he may be sure, and may say with confidence, I shall
enter in my joy, and my soul and body shall be crowned with his crown of joy
and glory, and all in the presence of the Lord Jesus. To whom with the Father
and the holy Spirit be all praise.

AMEN.
THE TENTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 1 Wherefore since we could no longer
forbear, we though it good to remain at Athens alone.

2 And have sent Timothius our brother and minister of God, and our
labour-fellovve in the Gospel of Christ, to establishe you, and to comfort you
touching your faith.

3 That no man should be moved with these afflictions: for ye your selves
know, that we are appointed thereunto.

4 For verily when we were with you, we told you before that we should
suffer tribulations, even as it came to pass, and ye know it.


AFTER the salutation ye have heard (brethren) a congratulation and rejoising
of the Apostle with the Thessalonians, for the graces of God in Christ, that
were bestowed on them. Thereafter followed an excuse of the Apostle, wherefore
he came not to visie the Thessalonians: he excused himself, from that great
desire and purpose he had to visit them face to face. He entered in the journey
once, he was impeaded: he entered the second time, Satan impeaded him: he could
do no more. Now shortly to come this text. He follows out the same purpose,
and continewes his excuse, showing them the desire yet left him not, but albeit
he was impeaded in his own person to come to them, yet his desire was (...)
toward them. And therefore, that which he could not bring to pass in his own
person, he thought good to perform by another, by a dear brother, and fellow
laborer Timothy. Therefore he took purpose, being at Athens in Grecia, and
Timothy with him, to abide at Athens himself alone, and to send away Timothy
to them, and all to this end to establishe them in that word which they had
received: To exhort them that they should not be commoued or dashed with the
afflictions which ouertooke them and wherewith they were exercised. Upon this,
he salles out in an exhortation: exhorting them to bear patiently those
afflictions that fell upon them. The first argument to move them thereto is,
knowing well they were appointed thereto. God had ordained from all etern^^ie
those afflictions for them, a necessity was imposed upon them, and why should
they not then suffer and bear them patiently? The next argument wherewith he
comfortes them. There is nothing come to us (says he) but that wherewith ye
were forewarned. Therefore take it patiently. This is shortly the sum of
the text standing in these two parts: in a purpose he took (because of his
own not coming to them) to send Timothy to them, and in an exhortation to
bear affliction patiently.

Now to make every sentence. The na^^ation is very plain, and therefore it
farnishes plain doctrine (...) says the Apostle I thought it best (...) to
send him to you, so to remain al^ue at Athen; This is to be marked; this
earnest desire of the Apostle to do that which became him in vi^ying these
Thessalonians it les^ him not, notwithstanding or any opposition he got: S^han
did cast in stays to hinder him, he stayed him to come to Thessalonica: yet
Satan could not get the desire of his heart stayed, he desired (...) he is not
able to perform that which he desired so earnestly. (...).
It is a hard matter to put out of the heart of the godly an holy desire to
do well, to do that which they should do of (...): yea, it is an hard matter
to Satan himself to quench the holy desire of the heart of the godly, Paul
in the Romans 7. 18. where he sets out the battle he had between the Spirit
and the flesh, he confesses in plain words, that he could not get that thing
done that he would have done. In the mean time he says, To will is present
to me, that is say: I have in the mean time a good will to do well, albeit
I can not attain to the performance of well doing: the flesh in Paul stayed
the action and perseverance in well doing, but the flesh was notable to
quench the good-vvill he had to do well. And brethren, most certain it is,
where the desire abydes in the heart, when a willingness to do well
abydes, the battle is not lost, the Devil hes not gotten the victory, the
flesh hes not gotten the victory. Lose thou once the desire, and will of
well-doing: if there be in thee no repugnance to Satan, but his work goes
forward (...), the Devil then hes gotten the upper hand, the (...) is lost and
thou art gone: keep well therefore the desire in the heart to do well: how ever
thy hand and feet be bound, so that thou can not do with thy hand any good,
nor can not go with thy foot to do good: yet it this will of well doing
remain, the victory shall be thine in the end. It is most certain the desire
of the godly albeit it be impeaded for a time, yet in the end it shall be
victorious. Therefore the Lord himself promises them certain victory.
Blessed are they who hungers, and thrists for righteousnedsse. Matt. 5. 6.
(there is the desire) for they (...), (there is the victory) The heart that
desires grace, continewing in the desire, shall be filled with grace and
glory. This for the first.

The desire continevving with Paul, when he is not able to visie the
Thessalonians in his own person he takes him to the next best, and that
which he could not do by himself, he took purpose to do by Timothy,
which was his fellovv-labourers* Where there is an earnest desyro to do well
in the heart of any man, that thing he can not attain to at the first, he
assayes it over again, and if he can not get it done in his own person, he
preasses to do it in an other. As Paul assayed the first and second time in
his own person, and was tvvyse in the journey: when he is impeaded in his
own person, that he is not able to perform it himself, he purposes to do
it by others, and so he sends Timothy to perform that which he might not do
himself. Then ye may see: an earnest holy desire hes such a force that it
rests not, it must break out in some effect at one time or other, by one way or
other: it can not still remain in the heart; nor the Devil will not be able
to impead the action for ever. No, but an holy desire of good in the heart,
shall take effect once, in despite of all the world. Then mark. The great
necessity joined to every one of us, to do the thing we should do must not be
left off, for one, or two, or three, or four impediments: and when we are not
able in our own person to do it, then provide some other mean to do it:
for it may be the Devil will not be so busy to impead others, as he will be
to impead thy self: for it is certain the Devil is ever busy working, but
he was not so busy to stay Timothy, as he was to stay Paul.

Now in the next words, he says, he thought it best to abide solitare, all
alone at Athens, where he was for the time, (for from Thessalonica he went to
Beroea, and from Beroea to Athens, and there he abode) as he would say to the
Thessalonians: I took purpose to hurt my self for you, I forgot my self for
your profit and the care which I had of you, that ye should have good
company, I choosed to be alone my self among the infidels, without
fellow-helpers. The lesson is plain. Where there is love in the heart of the
Pastor to the church, or any person* he will be content to be solitare, without
good company, even in the midst of infidels, that that Church may have good
company: he will be content to be poor, that the Church may be rich: he will
be content to die, that the Church may live: he will wish to be an Anathema,
and accursed for his brethren, that the Lord may be glorified in the salvation
of his Church. No it is an unspeakable love, that a faithful Pastor hes, first
to the Lord Jesus, who hes sent him: and next to the Church, that is bought
with the blood of Jesus: he will forget himself to remember them, he will not
not only severe from good company for their cause, but he will forget his
own life to have them well.

Mark next. Ere he comes here to the sending of Timothy, to the
Thessalonians, he tells of the purpose he took. I thought it best to abide at
Athens mine alone. And upon this purpose, I entered in action and sent him. Ye
shall find this commonly in Paul, when he speaks of his doing, he speaks
ever of a purpose and decree going before, and then the action follovving. I
decreed to know nothing among you, but Christ and him crucified. 1. Cor. 2.
2. All well doing should proceed of a purpose of the mind: Purpose and
consultation should preceede action.
well doing would not come rashly to our hand, but as the Lord hes given a
man a mind to conclude and resolve: so well doing should come of the resolute
purpose of the mind: without the purpose of the mind in well doing, the
action hes not the full praise. God himself did nothing, but by purpose and
counsel preceding: He elected us of a purpose, before all eternity: in time
of purpose he calls us, of purpose he justifies us, and of purpose he
glorifies us. In a word, he does all things according to the purpose of his
will. Ye may read this in the first chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians. So
when God gives grace to any man, to do any thing: the first grace he gives,
is a willingness in the mind to do well. Grace begins at the heart and
mind, and not at the hand. Philipp. 2. 13. it is said, God is he, who gives
the inward will and purpose, that is first: and the performance, that is next.
Ere he give thee the performance of well doing, he gives thee the purpose of
the heart to do it. Therefore before thou put out thy hand to do well, look
thou have the purpose in thy heart, and then the vvell-doing is perfect:
otherwise not. Many will put out their hand to do some good thing, when the
heart will be fighting against the hand. Put both purpose in mind and action
in hand together to do well, or else hold altogether to thy self.

Now to the next verse. Having taken a purpose, he says: He sent Timothy.
Having taken purpose he goes to the action: he sends him. The lesson is easy.
After purpose is taken, then go to the action: advise thee well, and then stay
not, but go to, and execute thy purpose. There are many who are ay purposing
and consulting, but their purpose is ay fectlesse: and when they have taken
purpose, they stand still there, their purpose in nothing vvorth. It is very
true, even as the purpose to do well is of grace, it is not of man's self to
do it, it is God who gives the purpose: so the action of the hand is of God,
in such sort, that when thou have gotten grace to will well, thy hand shall be
bound hard and fast, that thou shall not be able to do it, except thou be
furnished with an other grace also. When God hes given thee the purpose, except
he also give thee the performance, thou shall never do it: for the Apostle
says, (...) God who gives the purpose and the doing well. Whereto speak ^
this? even to learn us, that ever in all our actions and life we continue in
begging of grace, beg good purpose by prayer: then stand not there, think
not thou have gotten all, there are many graces, beg the means to effectuate
it beg earnestly the (...). When thou have begged the purpose and gotten it,
begged the performance, and gotten it: beg the blessing to continue in it, or
else all shall fail. If grace (...) not multiplied, grace after grace, we
shall fall: when we have gotten the fast grace, we shall (...), the second
grace, we shall (...) yea, the third grace, we shall (...) except God up hold
(...) and the (...) graces, except we continue, the greater is our fall. And so
beg grace after grace, that we may be filled with his fulness in Christ, and
get the perfection of all.

(...) What man is this Timothy? He is set on^ in his own styles: he calls
him have our brother, from that common calling of all Christian men and women:
for in Christ we all are brethren and sisters a Minister must first be a
brother, before he be a Minister. Then secondly, he is set (...) that
particulare calling, and he is called, the Minister of (...) and what (...)
Paul. In what (...) Christ. There is a fair Ministry, a fair exercise he
is exercised in the service of God, in the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Then he sends this Timothy. Good me^ Could be depute to the performance of
God* actions.
Then what man is this Timothy that he puttes in his place to visie the The
(...), to confirm and establishe them in that faith? A good man, (...) man,
and a brother, and yet more then that, a Minister of God, and a (...) labouret
with Paul in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Then the lesson is. That which we
can not get done in our own person, we must do it by others, whether (...)
or in the Common wealth. But look that ever thy (...) whom thou appointest
to do that which thou should do in thy own person, be a godly man like
Timothy. M^ses when he could not overtake all the affairs of the people
himself, he chose out (at the desire of Iethro his father in law) good men to
do the turn: send not out a cyphere: appoint men that are able to do it, as
thou will be answerable to God. In the work of the Lord do nothing
negligentlie, but earnestly, having ever thy God before thy eyes. Woe to that
man, that does the work of the Lord negligentlie. Ierem. 48. 10. Let men
therefore take head to their own doings, and to those men whom they set under
them: that they be not ciphers, but meet to do the work of the Lord. Alas*
this is far from the form of this country. They think it eneugh here if they
put in any man to be a show in their offices, o if thou knew what count thou
must give to the Lord for thy doing, thou would do the work of the Lord
more carefully. Yet to insist on this commendation of Timothy. It is an high
commendation, and all tends to this, that he should be well accepted of the
Thessalonians, to whom he was directed, that so he might do them the more
good. Therefore the Apostle sent him adorned with this fair testimone. Good
me^ deserve good commendatio^.
Brethren, When we see good men in Church or commonweal, we should give them
their own commendation; why should not the Prince have his own commendation
in sight of the people without flattrie? why should not the Pastor have his
honor? but to this end Paul looked to, that they might be well accepted among
the people: the next end, that being honored among them, they may get
obedience. So every good man should have his own authority among the people
to do his good turns. The Lord grant that every man who hes office, may
have matter of recommendation within himself, that when he is praised he be
not flattered. The Lord grant that the Prince may have matter of his
commendation; and the Pastor matter of his commendation, to this end, that
their labors be not in vain.

Now to go forward with the words. Wherefore is this good man Timothy sent to
the Thessalonians? not to play him not to look about him: but to confirm the
Thessalonians in that faith in the which they were grounded by the Apostle. The
office of the Evangelist was to confirm men in that faith which was had down
by the Apostles, to watter that which the Apostles had planted. Paul planted,
Apollo vvattred, 1. Cor. 3. 6. So Timothy was sent to do his own office: his
own office was to confirm them who were grounded. Brethren, ye have heard
here before a great deal spoken of that singular faith which the
Thessalonians had: and read in the whole Epistles of Paul, ye shall not find
such a commendation given to any Church as to these Thessalonians: they were
examples to the whole Churches about them, as to Macedonia, Achaia, etc. the
word of them went abroad to all people: and yet Timothy must be sent to them
to establishe them. Mark it. There is none in this life so well grounded on
the faith of Jesus, Confirmation of faith necessary to all men on this life
but night and day they have need of confirmation: yea, even at the last
breathe, when thou art going out of this world, thou must crave a confirmation:
for there is no perfection in this life, nothing in this life but beginning of
grace. Let none think he stands, if he thinks so, he deceyues himself, and
the man who thinks he stands, he is readiest to fall. There is nothing here
but either to grow or decay, no standing. So we have need continually of a
confirmation: faith in Christ is set down to us, as a ground whereupon we are
established. Continually every hour and moment we crave a settling on that
ground: for why? the sea, of the own nature is not so subject to commotion
and slovving, as the heart of a man. When it is set down once in that faith
which is the foundation, leave it there, it shall return to the own nature
again. Then ye see, the sea, when it flows on a rock, immediately the jaw
returns back again in the sea: So, our heart set on Christ, except by grace
it be daily, hourlie, momentlie settled, it will return back again to the
own nature of it. There was never more vvindes nor storms on the sea, to
cause it rage, nor is daily, and hourelie brangling our faith, if it were
possible to beat thy faith off the grou^d-stone. Thou never see thing with
thy eye, but it is a blast of wind, to beat thee off thy ground: thou never
hearst thing, but it is a blast to beat thee off thy ground. Prosperity a
blast of wind to thee: adversity, a blast off wind to beat thee off thy
rock Christ Jesus: the scorning world is a wind to beat thee from Christ;
all ^^n^ations are as many winds to toss thee here and there that thou
settle not. Look then if we have need to be confirmed more and more in the
faith of Christ.

The next words tells the manner of the establishing of our faith. And to
comfort. The first word was borrowed: the next word makes it plain. The
manner is, seeing the heart of man is ay fleeting. Therefore we have sent to
comfort you touching your faith. The very same ministry which Paul had for
the time, Timothy for his time; the Pastors and Doctors hes this day: That
same ministry which consistes in instructing, exhorting, comforting,
admonishing, and rebuking them for their misdeedes: for all are included within
this word exhorting, and all these serves to confirm men in the faith of
Christ. Paul to the Ephesians, 4. 11. says, When the Lord Jesus ascended to
heaven, after that glorious resurrection, leaving this earth, he left behind
him some to be Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Doctors, to the
end we should not be ay children, fleeting, flowing, and carried away with
every light vvinde of doctrine. What means all this? That the use of the
ministry is to establishe the heart of man, to hold the heart, that the wind
of affliction and tentation blow it not away, and to settle it on Christ,
who is the ground-stone. Then, turn it over: take away the ministry, that
men vvoulde have so feign away (give men their teyndes, they would be content
never to hear a Minister) no stablitie shall be in the hearts of the people,
thy heart shall be blovvne away from Christ, and thou shall perish. Alas, we
have over great experience of this, and especially in this City of
Edinburgh, the Lord amend it. Count all things vanity, but to be established
in Christ. Alas, that we are so senseless of this. A vain heart vvaites not
what this word means, but a solid heart mournes for the want of the means
of the word.

Now to come to the next verse. The end of this establishing, confirming and
exhorting of these people by the ministry of Timothy is this, that none of
them should be commoued for the affliction, vvherevvith they were exercised
for the present: For, the Thessalonians at that time were afflicted by the
Jews, enemies to God and man. Then, the end is, that they should not be
commoued with the afflictions, that lay on them. It is easy to a man to stand
in a calm: but when wind blows it is hard to stand sure: It is easy to
profess Christ in calmnesse, but, when the blast of tentation strikes on thee,
then, it is much to stand and hold Christ. In tentations we must stand on
Christ, by faith.
We are not yet well acquainted with this. So all tends to this: Albeit the
waves of the sea dashed on them, they should stand fast in the faith of
Christ. Brethren, all this world is full of tentations: the devil blows, and
all his impes are ever blowing and raising a storm: it is a stormy world,
and all the thuds light on the silly creature. Alas, if we knevv the
stumbering estate we stand into: what tentations are to assail us; the winds
of tentation from the East, West, North and South, all meeting: adversity on
one side, prosperity on the other side, all meeting, to dravve thee from
Christ. What remedy can be sought of this woeful estate we stand in by nature?
if we stand not in grace, we shall curse the time, that ever we were borne
and lived in this world. The remedy is Stablishing. What remedy for a ship
when winds blovv? Stablishing. And how shall the heart be established? How is
the ship made sure? By casting the ankor in the sea: the ankor of the soul is
faith, and hope; thou must then cast it upon Christ. Cast it not down in the
sand, but, upward through the vaill, to Jesus the sure ground of it: and then,
all the winds, how beit they may shake thee, yet, they shall not severe thee
from him. Then where shall we get this ankor faith? Faith is by hearing, as is
said. Romans 10. 17. Thou must hold to thy ear, or else thou shall be blown
away. Hearing is by preaching. So all resolves in this same ministry, the
preaching of this glorious Gospel of the blessed God: let this ministry be
heard, and thou shall get faith: getting faith the ankor of the soul, thou
shall stand fast, and shall not be thrust from the Rock Christ. But, cast away
preaching, as ever a ship was tossed to and fro, until she perish, thou shall
be tossed, until thou perish everlastingly.

Now to go forward in the second part of the text, in which he exhorts them,
patiently to bear affliction. And so he falls from the last purpose and goes
to the former, patience in affliction. Sand fast be patient, taken in patience
what ever is laid on thee: the reason is^ because we are appointed to
affliction. As God hes appointed us in the vvoulde and ordained us for glory,
in the life to come; so, as certainly hes he appointed us to suffer in the
mean time, that, by ignominy and crosses we may pass to glory. Hear this,
and look the way to heaven; that by ignominy, tribulation, vexation and
affliction thou must come to heaven, our place of long rest. The Lord hes
ordained this; therefore, bear it patiently. There is the form of the argument:
learn then, It is of the will and decree of God from all eternity, that the
creature should suffer in this life, Gods vvil, that we suffer in this life,
should be reuere^ced.
in one mesure, or other. The^ again: the creature should have such reverence
to Gods will, that, when it thinks, that, it is the will of God it should
suffer, it make no whispering; but, stoup there. Paul Romans 9. 20. speaking of
the endured reprobate* anent the induration, reprobation and condemnation; He
teaches them, that the reprobates when they are told, it is Gods will that
they should go to Hell, their mouth should be shut up, that they querrell not
the Lord. And he says in anger, What art thou that vvhispers against God's
will the put stand up and speak to the potter that made it, and say, why
have thou made me a veshell of dishonow? No more should thou reprobate stand
up, and say to thy maker, why have thou made me a reprobate? o that reverence
we should have to that blessed will: and albeit the reprobates speaks now
against Gods will; yet, at last, in the end, their mouth shall be closde and they
shall not have one word to say against the will of God; but in Hell shall be
compelled to reverence that solid will of God. Now if the reprobate should
reverence this holy will of God. then who art chosen of God, and art afflicted
for thy own well (for it is for thy sanctification) and knowing well, that
there is a glorious prospect to thee therein, will thou not reverence Gods will?
will thou not reverence it under such a little burdene, the moment^neall
lightness of affliction, when the reprobate shall do it in such pain? All is
to this end. That, every only with patience under Gods hand, in affliction,
until the time come the Lord relieve them. Necessary of affliction.
Then, ye see here a great necessity of afflictions suffer must we. Paul
says, we are appointed to suffer, before al time. Peter says, we are called
to suffer in time. 1. Epist. 2. 21. So, when the Lord calls thee to glory, he
calls thee, by suffering and he says; Come to the torment and sword, and
sire, and so, by that way thou must euter in glory. Christ our head entered by
the cross to glory: so must thou. Well, then, knowing this necessity, what
should we do then? Make us for patience, and ay prepare us, in the morning, at
evening and at our meat and ay cry, The Lord prepare us for suffering: I am
going out, I know not what shall befall me before my coming in: Lord conduct
me in this miserable life, that I may reign with thee. I know there is
nothing but trouble in this life: in trouble Lord, comfort me and conduct me,
while I reign with thee, and rest from all troubles. This should be our daily
prayer. Alas, the vanities of this world so ouerrunnes our eyes, that we can
not see the tottering estate we are in. There is no ankoring but in Christ. The
Lord oppin our eyes to see this more and more.

Now one word on the next argument: the second argument is from the forewarning
of the Apostle. For the first time we were with you, we told you we
should all suffer. The Gospel can not be without affliction, for, affliction
is an inseperable companion thereof: and therefore, I told you before, that ye
might be patient. It is a common proverb, Once warned half armed: an evil
that is foreseen to come, ere it light, will hurt the less: when it comes not
to us contrair our expectation, we will take it in better part: but this evil
that lights on a man sudainlie contrair his expectation, o, it is a sore and
heavy trouble, and will make him to shake. When a man is crying peace, and
thinks all sure, then says the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. when the trouble
ouertakes him upon a sodainetie, what shall be his dolor? His dolor shall be
like to a vvomans travailing in childbirth, which is compared to the pain of
hell for the exceeding fierceness and sharpness. The Apostle knowing this,
where ever he came to preach the Gospel of Christ, with the Gospel he
preached affliction, and he did ever say, O people, prepare you for suffering;
think not but ye shall suffer: that being forewarned, they should not stoop
and let afliction pass over them. Affliction foretold more easily sustaind
No, he assures them, that, it behoues them, through many afflictions, to enter
in the kingdom of heaven. Act. 14. 22. Every one who lives godly shall
suffer. 2. Timoth. 3. 12. The Apostle so warnes them, that when the people are
warned, the affliction should not come unto them unarmed: but that, when they
see it, they should say, I looked ever for affliction: Now, welcome affliction.
He that is prepared for it, and knows perfitelie, affliction will follow the
gospel, he will tak it in his aims, and say, welcome affliction; and he will
receive it with such patience, as the tongue of man can not report, and where
patience is joined with affliction, it is but half affliction: but, a man who
lies sighting and waltring in trouble, o, that man hes double disease.
Therefore, brethren, since it is, that we must suffer, either in one measure,
or, other, let not the things of this world make us forget, that we are
appointed to suffer: but, when prosperity comes, let us say, this world will
decay: thou art mounted up this day, thou may be casten down the morn: thou
art whole this day, thou may be sick the morn; and so, I will not be deceived
with any thing, but, will prepair me for adversity. The Lord prepair us for
it, for Christ's sake. To this Christ, the Father and the holy Spirit, be all
praise and honor, now and ever.

THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 5. 6. 7. 8. 5 Even for this cause, when I could no
longer forheare, I sent him that I might know of your faith, lest the tempter
had tempted you in any sort, and that our labor had been in vain.

6 But now lately when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good
tidings of your faith and love, and that ye have good remembrance of us
alvvayes, desiring to see us, as we also do you.

7 Therefore brethren, we had consolation in you, in all our affliction and
necessity through your faith.

8 For now are we alive, if ye stand fast in the Lord.


IN the beginning of this chapter (Brethren) the Apostle Paul tells of the
purpose he did take to send Timothy to the Thessalonians, to establishe them
in the faith and to exhort them; and of the accomplishment of that purpose:
that as he took purpose to send Timothy to them, so he sent him. And this was
one of the Arguments whereby he excuses him self for that he did not come to
them himself, being impeaded by Satan. The next he could do was to send that
brother Timothy, who was a faithful man in the ministry of the Lord: and
therefore they should have him excused. Then thereafter ye heard he fell out in
a short exhortation, exhorting them to bear patiently those afflictions and
crosses that they suffer in this life. The first argument was from the
appointment of God: God had so appointed from all eternity that they should
suffer: therefore seeing that necessity was imposed on them, why should they
not bear the burden pauentlie? The second argument was from his fore warning of
them of the troubles for the Gospels sake. There is nothing come but that I did
forewarne you of; therefore when they are come what rests but that ye should
bear them patiently?

Now, leaving that which we spok the last day upon the text preceding, I come
to this present text. The Apostle in the fifth verse of this chapter returns
again to that which he spoke concerning Timothy and the sending of him to the
Thessalonians. In the next verse he hes a narratiue of Timothy his returning
again, and of that good report he made in his returning of the Thessalonians,
of their faith, love and remembrance they had of Paul. After that in the verse
following he shows what effect that report of Timothy wrought in him: it
brought to him joye and consolation, notwithstanding of all his affliction he
was in for the present. The reasone is given: because we live when ye stand in
the faith: your perseverance is our life; and therefore what marvel if we
rejoice in your faith? And thereafter he vtters that he can not thank God
eneugh for that grace they had gotten of God.

Now to come back again. The text contains a plain narratiue. Wherefore
says he, when I could no longer forbear, I sent Timothy to you. Of this we
spoke the last day in the beginning of the chapter: and therefore we go
forward. The end is set down wherefore he sent Timothy, to understand of your
faith. That is, of your perseueeing, of your abiding and of your standing in
that faith ye have received. This is an other end from that which was before.
Before he sent Timothy to establish and to comfort them: now he sends
Timothy to understand of their faith and perseverance. No matter albeit there
be sundry ends wherefore he sent Timothy; one for their cause, to establishe
them: an other for his own cause, that he him self might understand of their
per^euerance in faith, and might have joye in the report of their perseverance
therein. So ye see, the Apostle, brethren, is ever careful of this Church at
Thessalonica planted and begun by him there. So that in the beginning he was
careful to low the seed of the word amongst them, to convert them and
turn them to the faith of Christ. When he hes done this he leaves not off his
care; but that work he had begun he is careful that it be brought to some
perfection in Christ: So that he leaves behind him this lesson unto all
pastors and unto all that travail in that calling: The care of the Pastor
(...) his stock should be instant.
to have a continual care over the people that are committed to them; to have
a care of their perseverance and continuance in faith to the end. It is not
enengh to raise them up once, and to set them on their feet and thereafter to
pluck away his hand from them, and to let them stand as it were them allone:
but he must strive to hold them up; as he hes laid the foundation of faith,
so he must build upon that foundation continually, so far as lies in him,
while the building be ended. He is an evil workman that will lay the foundation
of an house and then leap away: he is an evil teacher that will found any
people on faith, and then goes away and leaves them Brethren, the beginning of
faith is by the (...) way this ministry there shall be no foundation on (...)
persseuerance in says is by this ministry; take it away, (...) once founded
shall fall down again (...) (...) preaching of the Gospel (...) of God from
the Congregations, and leave (...) your own reaching and meditation, though ye
be (...) shall ye: all your reading and meditation shall not hold you up for
that is the only mean whereby perseverance in faith is effectuate, and
without the which thou shall not persevere in faith, but shall fall, and the
last fall shall be worsle then the first.

The cause is subjoined in the next words wherefore he would understand of their
faith and their perseverance in faith, Lest says he, in any sort the tempter
had tempted you. As he would say, I know well eneugh the craft of the devil,
and if there be not a wattring after the planting, I know his temptation,
how busy he is to root out that which is planted: and therefore fearing he
had tempted you and drawn you from faith, I was very careful to understand
of your faith and perseverance therein. Then what should have fallen to me
through your falling by the temptation of the Enemy? I Paul who had grounded
you in the faith should have lost travail, and all my labor in planting you
in that faith should have been lost. This is the meaning of all. Then what
made Paul so careful of the standing and perseverance of the Thessalonians?
the tempter, the devil, Satan that never ceasses from tempting the faithful
made Paul so careful to understand of their perseverance in faith. Temptats ^n
of Satan should make the Pastor vvalkrife.
What should make a pastor careful and vvalkeryfe, to walk when others
sleep? There is a tempter in the world, and there is not a Church in the
world but there is a tempter in it, and there is no person in it but he hes a
tempter. Go where thou vvilt go thy tempter follows thee: sit, ly, rise, do
what thou will do thou shall not want thy tempter. So long as the devil is
in the world, so long there is necessity required of walkryfenesse: pastors
must be walkryfe, people must be walkeryfe, and every man and woman must be on
their gua^rd Walk says the Lord in the Gospel of sanct Matthew. 26. 41. lest
ye enter into temptation. There is a tempter at your ear that will tempt you:
be walkeryfe therefore, be sober and vvatch says Peter in his first Epist. 5.
8. Wherefore? For the enemy the devil is going about like a roaring lion
seeking whom be may denoure. Go thou where thou will, he is about thee: thy
eye begins not so soon to vvinke and lose the presence of the Lord, but as
soon his mouth is oppin to devour. A slipperie body, be he pastor, be he
any of the people, he knows not that there is a Devil, a tempter. Would all
this slumbring and fleshly security be trow ye, if men were persuaded that
there is a devil ready to devour* So when men sleep in sin, in murder, in
harlotrie, in theft, in blasphemy, in all the rest of those sins, they
testify that they know not there is a devil in the world. Alas, many never
know that there is a tempter while they be swallovved up and be in his grip
pes: many never know that there is an hell. Of all sorts of men in the world
a slipprie pastor, a careless man in the ministry is the vvorst, he loses
both him self and many others: a careless man in the ministry is unmeet
for that calling, away with him. And therefore the Lord would have us learn
that there is not one man he sends out, but besides all other properties given
him, he gives him this walkryfenes, this vigilancie for one property: and more
then this, the Lord will acquaint him with tentation, and let him see a
tempter going up and down: and will assure him in his heart that there is a
Devil going about with every man. Paul therefore speaking of the incestuous
man says, Comfort him, lest the tempter devour him. 2. Corinthians. 2. 10. and in
his own person 2. Cor. 12. 7. that the messi^ger of Satan was sent to
buffet him. The Lord will let the minister see in his own person there is a
tempter, that he may be the more careful of the people: as Christ himself was
subject to all tentations that he should pity them that are tempted.

Then to return. By your defection and falling away, what should I have lost?
He says, and that our labor had been in vain. Therefore labors he, that he
should not lose them. It is a pain to a man to take travel, to labor night
and day, and then in the end to lose all, and not to receive fruit of his
travel. It is a pain to a man to suffer for the Gospel, and then in the end
to lose all. Always I mark of this place. When any people makes defection
from the faith of Christ, not only the people them selves who makes
defection, but also the Pastor who travels among them, makes lose in their
defection. Paul professes in the Epistle to the Galathians, 4. 11. that he
feared his labor had been in vain, saying, I have feared concerning you, that
I have vvearied my self in vain. I fear my pains and travel toward you be
in vain: yea brethren, the carefullest and walkryfest man in the ministry
loses his pain and labor, when he attaines not to that end that he sets
before him, to wit, salvation of the people. Well then if a faithful Pastor
lose by the falling away or the people: what lose makes an vncarefull Pastor,
when through his default any people falls away to defection? Judge ye then,
what is his lose and damage: he loses not only the people, but himself: the
people perishes, and the blood of the people is craved at his hand, and so he
loses himself too. A faithful man in whose default the people falls not away
shall triumph, their fall shall not take away his triumph, and he shall be a
sweet smell in the sight of God: fall who will fall if it be not in his
default, he shall not lose his labors, his labors and pains shall ever
stand before God, as acceptable to him: but as so a careless body, by whose
defaulte any people or person is lost in the Church of God, there is no
triumph for him; neither in this life, nor in the life to come, if he repent
not; he shall be no sweet sm^ll in Christ to God, he is a stinking creature.
Therefore let every man that is in that charge study to walkrifenesse, that no
man perish through his default, and so he shall be a sweet smell to God, both
in them that are safe, and in them who perish. 2. Cor. 2* 14.

In the next verse we have the narratiue of Timothy. returning back again
from the Thessalonians to Paul who abode at Athens: he reported again to Paul
good nevves of the Thessalomans and their perseuera^ce, to his great joy and
consolation. But now lately, says he, when Timothy came from ye^ unto us,
and brought us good tidings of your faith and love, and that ye have good
remembrance of us alvvaies desiring to see us, as we desire to see you. Paul
was impeaded in his own person from going unto Thessalonica, but he sent
Timothies who is not impeaded, but goes forward, and does his turn among them:
he watters that which Paul had planted in Thessalonica. Timothy in sa^ene
returns back to Paul with good news, that all was well: Paul rejoyses
greatly in the report of Timothy, and in the mean time Paul remaning at
Athens, does his turn, and brings some to the faith of Christ there. Now
brethren, I ask, hes Satan gotten any vantage here by staying Paul, to go
to Thessalonica? Hes he hindered the Gospel? God over turns the enterprise of
Satan.
No the Gospel is furthered thereby: Paul abydes and does his turn at Athens:
Timothy goes and does his turn at Thessalonica, and filles Paul with good
tidings that he brought from Thessalonica. Learn Satan when he thinks to
hinder the progress of the Gospel most, he furthers it most. When he thinks
he is most against the Church, he is most with the Church: yea, if he should
have set himself of purpose to further the Gospel if he had taken counsel
thereto, when he impeaded Paul to go to Thessalonica, he could not have
devised a better way. This is vvonderfull, the Lord hes ever disappointed him,
and shall to the end: he who works light out of darkness ouerturnes and
vvhirles about so all his interpr^ses, that in despyte of the Devil, he makes
all the things, the Devil thought to do to the dishonor of God and hurt or
the Church, to serve to his glory and the well of his Church, I tell you in
one word, Satan never yet got the advantage of the Church nor of no godly
man no not in the sl^ughter of Abel, he never got it, nor shall get it: but
that whereby the wicked men thinks they get victory over the Church the
Lord turns about so that one day ye shall see, it shall be the profit and
honor of the Church.

To go to the words he says, after Timothies returning he brought him good
news. Of whom were they? of yo^ Thessalonians What were they? that ye were in a
good estate, floorishing, full of wealth, full of honor, all things going
well and prospering with you, all things succeeding to your hearts desire? were
these the news that Timothy told to Paul? no, no never one word or syllabe
of this: what were they then? He tells me good tidings of your faith, that ye
persevere in faith in Christ, that is the first. He tells me of your love and
that bond whereby ye are bound together in love: there is an other he tells me
of that special affection ye bear to me. The best nevves of any people
These are all his nevves. Why then (I as^^) what are the best nevves that can
be reported of any people Common weal and City? It is not of their
flourishing estate in this world, nor of their wealth and riches, nor of
their honor in this world al these things are transicprious all the honor of
this world will away, the riches of this world will away. The best nevves
of any people are when those things are reported of them that abydes for
ever. When faith and love is reported* which they will take to Heaven with
them: (...) in Jesus gripped in thy heart vvil go to Heaven with thee, love
will go to Heaven with thee. The best nevves that ever was told is the
Gospel of peace to the world in God the Father through Christ. Fyon thee that
receyues not these news. As this Gospel and Euangell is nothing but these
glad tidings of Gods mercy through Christ. So likewise the best news that can
come of any people is, that the people hes received the Gospel and that faith
in Christ. There is great matter of joye when we hear that grace, mercy and
peace is preached to any people: There was never such joy, if we knew what is
true joy, but alas we are lying on the earth, we have no sense of heavenly
things, our eye is ay on the earth, as though there were no grace nor glory,
but in this life.

But brethren to go to every word, and to speak of these things Timothy
reports to Paul. The first point of these tydinges is faith; he begins at
faith. Timothy says: Paul, the Thessalonians continewes still in that faith
of Christ, and embraces that Gospel of Christ, which thou taught them. There
is the first part of the news. Then ye see plainly here. the first part of
the good tydinges that can be reported of any people, is that they hold fast
the faith of Christ. and embrace the Gospel of Christ. There is the first and
best ^ydinges that can be reported of any people. And learn, He that hes not
and keeps not this faith, I say in a word there can be no good tale told of
him. If he had all the world, without this Gospel, it is all in vain,
because he hes no good property, and there is no blessing of God in him: That
which seems to be a blessing is a very curssing to him. The more honor and
riches he hes in this world, the mo are the maledictions of God, and all his
actiones, all his speakinges, or what ever he does or thinks, all is sin.
What ever flovves not from faith in Christ, is sin, if it were never so
glistering. Romans 14. 13. So then I hold this ground. Thou can not tell a
good tail of any man that embraces not Christ and his Gospel. They will
say, he is a stoutman, he is a rich man, the world goes well with him, but
all is curssing to him, except he have faith in Christ: faith blesses all, and
therefore no life to thee, except that thou have faith.

What is the next point of the tidings? Love. Faith begins and she goes
forvvard as the Queen of all grace. Next to her comes in love, she is next in
honor, and among all the rest of the graces that accompanies with faith, love
is the chiefest, Then in one word. The next point of good tydinges of any
people, is to be a loving people, a people that intertaines love and charity:
no oppression among them, but euere one is ready bent to help an other: such
kyndnesse, lenity and love, that the tongue of man can not express it. I tell
you (as I have said before) where these tidings can not be told, that a
people intertaines love and charity, it is impossible thou can tell a good
tail of them. Tell me he is not charitable: I will conclude, there is no grace
in that person. O but ye will say: yet he believes, and who hes been so
instant an hearer of the Gospel as he? but all is vanity; thy life shows
the contrare: for who loves not their nighbour, and says that they love God,
they lie says Ioha in his first Epistle 4. 20. For certainly love is an
inseperable companion of faith, as the shadovve is of the body, so that if
love be severed from it, thy faith is of no value. Where charity is not, there
is no true faith, and therefore be charitable, and love thy neighbor,
othervvvise thou have no good property.

The third point of the nevves, is, concerning Paul in special, that
remembrance they had of him in his absence, and of this rememberance a desire
to see him: and that because he had grounded them in that faith in Jesus
Christ, and that love to their neighbor. Brethren, as the first point of
good tydinges that can be reported of any, is the embracing of this Gospel
of Christ and Christ in the Gospel: So the last thing that can be reported,
is the embracing of the Ministers of this Gospel, the embracing of them in
their presence, the remembering of them, and the desyring of them in their
absence. These are Paul's own words. And I affirm if any people have no
lyking of the Minister of the Gospel, no man can tell one good word of good
tydinges of them. If Timothy could not have reported this far of the
Thessalonians concerning Paul that they had remembrance of him: but had said
that they remembered not of Paul; Trovvye that Paul would have counted of the
report of their faith and charity? No he would have said, they had no faith
nor charity: for where there is not a love to the Minister of the Gospel, no
faith nor love there. Many will say, I love the Gospel. I love my nighbour:
but when it comes to the ministry; then if there be any vile and contemptible
speaking it will be of them. My Lord or the lord will sit up and speak of that
calling with such disdain and despite that the verse Ethnic can not go beyond
him; and in scoffing will say, away with these fellows, wherefore serve they?
they hold the country in ado. Fyon thee, that ever thou sholdst take the name
of Christ in thy mouth, when thou so heatst his servants For it is impossible
where the love of Christ and the Gospel is to severe thee from the love of the
servants of Christ. Thou deceiuest thy self, thou never love the master when
thou heatst his servants: thou never love God, when thou heatst the faithful
Minister he sends to thee. Alas, among all the curses that procures heavy
judgment at Gods hand. this is one. the contempt of this ministry: God is (as
it were) wrestling with us in this great contempt to hold in this light but if
we continue, we shall lose this light, to our utter ruin: for God will not
wrestle ay with us. Take heed to this, and learn this lesson with Paul. As
ye would have a report of well doing, look that this report may be told of
you, that ye have a remembrance and desire of your faithful ministry,
otherwise all other reports is nothing worth. For where there can not be a
report of your lyking of the good Ministers, it can not be possible that a
good tale can be told of you.

The words in the end of the verse is to be marked. Desyring to see us as we
also do you. There is a meeting. Mark the word. There is a mutual duty
craved betvveene the Pastor and the stock, a mutual desire and remembrance
every one of other, a mutual lyking every one of others. Kyndneste will not
stand on the one part only. Now who should begin? one must begin Paul
begins he remembers of them before they remember of him, he desires their
presence, ere they desire his presence, he lykes of them ere they like of
(...). Speaking to the Corinthians: Epist. 6. 1^. he says, Our mouth hes (...)
opened unto (...), our heart (...) made large, (...) have not dwelled narrovvlie
in our bowels. Then he says. (...) to you (...) be children, desiring (...)
like recompense. And teiles them as he was the beginner to love them, he
desired a rendering of the like love to him. Gal. 4. 12. Be ye as I am, for I am
as ye are. I crave not first of you, but I shall begin with love to you:
render ye me the like. And certainly when the Pastor begins not love to the
flock, the people is not to be accused for not loving of their Pastor. So the
Pastor must begin; and when they follow him not, be it between them and
their God: and without question it will not go away without judgment.

Now to go to the effect of these things. Therefore brethren, says he, we
had co^s^lation (and to aggreadge this consolation he says) when he told me
these good tidings, my misery was great. I was lying at Athens miserable: but
when Timothy reported these good news to me, I was quickened in hearing of
your faith, perseverance, love among your selves, and toward us. So brethren,
these tidings are not without great joy, they minister comfort. Never one of
these things are told, but joy and comfort breaks up in the heart. Trow ye
that it was the good report that raised this consolation in the heart? No,
there was an higher ground. If Paul had not had an greater love to the
Thessalonians, all the good tidings that was reported by Timothy of them to
him, should not have wakned joy in his heart. It is true in deed, when we hear
of the grace of God to be in any other, there is matter of joy to us, we should
not hear so soon that the grace of God is in any man or woman, but we should
rejoice therein, even as it were in our selves. When thou hear of faith or
love in any man or woman, thou should rejoice: when thou hear of any
sinner that is penitent, and turns to God, rejoice when thou hear of any
love in any person, there is matter of joy, all is true. But brethren: Who
rejoices when it is reported that any grace is in any person? I answer. None
but the lover; he that loves that people or person will rejoice. As for others
that have no love to the person the more is told to them of the grace of God
in him, either spiritual or temporal, the more they inuy it. This is all our
nature. What is it that inuyes not? Paul says, Charity inuyes not 1. Cor. 13.
4. And understand this, he who loves, rejoyes when he hears of any others
well. Take me away love and charity no rejoysing in the heart of any man for
an others well. Alas, this inuy that is among men of the prosperity of an
other testifies there is no love. When thou hear the report of the graces of
thy nighbour, a^^mnyes it, and speaks evil of thy nighbour, thou vttest thou
have no love to God and thou depryuest day self of a great grace: for thou
depriuest thy self of that joy thou should have of the grace of God: thou
rejoysing, thou getst part of that grace, he that hes the grace gets not all
that grace his alone, but when thou rejoycest, thougetst a part of that grace.
By the contrare, if thou inuy, thou spoils thy self of that joy: the joy thou
shall have in Heaven shall not be of the grace thou shall have in thy self
only (and assure thee as thou shall have joy in Heaven thou must have joy in
earth) but it shall rise of the graces of god bestowed on others on the earth:
and thou shall not see a glorious member beside thee, but of sight of it thou
shall have such joy as no tongue can tell. So I beseech you as ye would rejoice
in Heaven, begin to joy, and learn in time to rejoice for the graces of God
bestowed on others here, and learn in time to love thy nighbour^o thou
licentious body learn to love, o contemner, learn to love, thou back byter,
learn to love, thou who would rejoice with a true joy, learn to love, or
thou shall never rejoice in Heaven. What trow ye `Paul is doing now when
Timothy is turned back to him, and makes this good report of this charity and
is rejoysing? I tell you, he is gathering up the fruits of his travel, taking
up his rent and stipend from the Thessalonians. Pastors stipend.
What is the reward of a faithful Pastor and his proper stipend? Is it this
little thing on the earth, his gleab and manse, two or three chalders of
victual? no. What then is the proper reward of the Pastor? It filles not the
hand, but the heart; not the mouth of this world, but the mouth of the soul
with joy. Fill out my joy (says Paul Philipp. 2. 2.) fill it out, I have not
gotten it all. What is that that fills the heart of the Pastor with joy? The
grace of God fills the heart with joy.
ye hear not that Timothy bringes any substance from the Thessalonians. But
the thing that filles Paul's heart, is the grace of God in the Thessalonians the
says of the Thessalonians, the love and good affection the Thessalonians bare
to him. That is the matter of his joy. Men stands on this earth, and is loath
to give one penny to an other, but to draw al in to them selves: but I say to
thee, if thou be one of Gods, and of his people, he shall get more of thee, nor
al thy heritage, nor all thy lands and riches in the world, if he be a
faithful Pastor he shall get more of thee: For thou shall have no grace, nor
faith, nor charity, but he shall get the glory of it: thou shall have no
glory in Heaven, but that glory shall redound to his glory: for that chief
Pastor of al Pastors hes communicate this to his Pastors, that all the graces
bestowed by him on the people shall redound to their glory. So he will have all
the travels bestowed on the people by his Pastor to redound the glory of his
Pastor. Paul says. 1. Thessa. 2. 19. What is our joy, or crown of (...)? are
not ye (Thessalonians) my glory and my joy? The Lord shall take you by the
hand, give you to me, and say: have there the man thou have win, take the
glory thereof to thee, and give me the whole glory of him, and of all: o the
shinning glory that Paul shall have in Heaven! o the shinning glory of these
men, who hes traveled on earth to get souls to God! they have a glorious
preferment, but it is not seen here, in that day ye shall see it clearlie.

Now he aggreadges that joy he received of that report, from the great trouble
he had in Athens: and says, we had consolation in all our affliction and
necessity. In Athens he was troubled by the Epicurian and Stoic Philosophers
(Alas, worldlie-wise men are not meet for the kingdom of God* he that would
be wise in God let him be a fool) So he is in trouble: Heaue^lie joy
svvalovves up worldly pain.
yet this consolation through the report of Timothy, swalowes up the trouble:
o that heavenly consolation and joy, how it will swalow up the displeasure and
heaviness of the soul! Albeit the soul were filled with sorrow, when this
heavenly joy comes in, it swalowes up that heaviness: it is true that this is
not without a battle, and a hard battle but in the end the spiritual joye
will get the victory. Therefore thou who art in heaviness, prease to get some
spark of that heavenly joy, prease to rejoice in Christ, grow in rejoicing in
God. Thou who would have any pain mitigate that is laid on thy body, if it
were sickness or death it self, if thou would have it made light, seek
that spiritual joy, for as it swalowes the dolor and displeasure of the heart,
so it swalowes up the pain of the body: trow ye tha^ the Martyrs could have
suffered so great pain as they did, if that the joy of the heart had not
swalowed up the half of the pain? No, if the joy had not impared the pain,
they would have curssed God and man, So let a man or woman who would have
their pain mitigate seek to get this joy. We see how sweetly they will
depart out of this life who hes that joy in Christ, and therefore differ not
till the last hour, thinking to get joy then, but in time when thou art
neither sick nor sore, in soul nor body, prepare thee to get a sense of that
joye that may be steadable in trouble: acquaint thee with heaven, as ever thou
would go to heaven. Away with the security of men who play the vvanton,
and will promise to them selves heaven, if they get but leave to ask mercy in
their last breath. Fie on them, they shall be deceived. It is true, Delay of
repentance dangerous.
the thief that hung at Christ's right hand got mercy; but the other thief
got none. Therefore repent and amend your lives in time: for where one gets
repentance at the last hour of their death, a thousand wants it.

Now ere I leave this mark. Certainly it appears that Paul loved the
Thessalonians well: for when he hears the report of these good news, he who
was in trouble is revived: and if he had not loved the Thessalonians exceeding
well he had not received such exceeding joye. Love is the occasion of joy.
Ye see, who loves a man well, when any good report is made of him he will
rejoice for it. O the great love of Paul in all parts! it may be a mirror to
all pastors. Would to God that such love or half love were in our hearts: we
are bound to a Congregation, and yet we can not love them as he did having
many Congregations: for he was minister as well at Corinthus, Galatia,
Ephesus etc. as Thessalonica. Never did any man love a son begotten of
himself more entirely nor Paul did all his Churches. Surely a Pastor should
love his flock so well, that he should give his life for them.

In the end of the verse he gives the reason wherefore he rejoiced, we live
(says he) if ye stand in the Lord. Joy comes of life; and natural life brings
natural joy: that heavenly life begun in this life brings joye unspeakable.
He reasones; Ye are n^y life: what wounder then that hearing of your standing
in the Lord, which is my life, I rejoice? Then if he be a loving Pastor, who
loves the soul of the people well. as Paul did, the grace that the people gets
of God it is a quickening grace to him, it is a viuifying of him, if he be in
dolor and distiesse it is a walkning of him. Therefore look what advantage
thou gettest through love. Art thou a pastor? thou shall get life. Art thou one
of the people? if thou love thou shall get life to: and thy love shall ever
report to thee a joye in thy greatest dolor. If thou be departing off this
life, and have been a faithful pastor, the report of the standing of thy
flock shall comfort thee: if thou be one of the people, thou shall ever have
comfort: for the grace of any member of the Church reported to thee shall bring
joy to thee. But the man who hes nothing but inuie can have no joye: he
knows not what this spiritual joye means. Therefore as thou would live in
joye and consolation strive to be loving, charitable and tender hearted to
every one in whom thou ^eest the graces of God: and so thou shall get
infinite matter of joy; thou shall get peace here and life everlasting
hereafter. The Lord for his great mercies sake bring us to this life through
Christ: To whom be all praise and honor for ever.

Amen.
THE TWELFTH LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 9. 10. 11. 12. 9 For what thanks can we recompense
to God again for you, for all the joy vvherevvith we rejoice for your sakes
before our God.

10 Night, day, praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might
accomplish that which is lacking i^ your faith.

11 Now God himself, even our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ guide our
journey unto you:

12 And the Lord increase you, and make you abound in love one tovvard an
other, and tovvard all men, as we do tovvard you,


IN the Text immediately going before, well-beloved in Christ, we heard of the
sending forth of Timothy to the Thessalonians, we heard of his returning, and
what tidings he brought: he reported to Paul of the Thessalonians, concerning
their faith and perseverance in faith, concerning their love; and particularly
of that remembrance they had of Paul, who had founded them in the faith of
Christ, in his absence desiring most earnestly to have his presence again.
Last ye heard what effect these tidings reported by Timothy wrought in Paul:
they wrought consolation and joy, notwithstanding all the afflictions and
misery he lay in in Athens for the present.

Now brethren, to come to the text we have in hand. In this text he does two
things: first he shows what thanksgiving he gave to God for them and for all
that joye he had conceived of the glad news he heard of them: he shows how
earnest and instant he was in prayer for them, craving day and night that he
might see them face to face, notwithstanding that report he heard of them by
Timothy. Then in the secound part of the text he falls out in a prayer
continewing to the end of the chapter, first beseeching God the Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ to direct his journey toward them: next desiring God to
increase them, and make them to abound in love every one toward an other, and
toward all men in the world: thridlie beseeching God that he would establish
their hearts before him in all holiness at the coming of Jesus Christ with
his Sancts. There is the effect of the text shortly. Now to return and to
speak of the first part: he shows his thanksgiving and prayer to God for
them. He says, For what thanks can we recompense to God again for you, for
all the joy vvherevvith we rejoice for your sakes before our God. I can not
get a heart (would he say) to thank my God for it, Joy in the heart burstes out
in thanksgiving.
as I should do. The text is very plain. So the doctrine is easy. First
here we see. when the heart of any man conceaues a spiritual joy for the
grace of God, either bestowed on him self, or upon others, it is not able to
contain that joy, but it must break out, and it must open the mouth to give
thanks and praise to the Lord: for of the ab^ndance of the heart, the mouth
must speak. If the heart (...), be it good or evil, the har^ must opened
mouth, and (...) must speak either good or evil. Then the second thing ^ be
marked in this text, is w^e^ the joy of the heart opens the mouth to utter
thanks, what ever be the (...) and mean of joy, the first thanks that are
given will not be given to it especially. (Paul here gives not the glory of
this joy to the Thessalonians) but the mouth will be opened to glorify the
author of all grace and joy, which is God: for without him there is no grace,
neither have we our selves any grace, neither hes any other any grace in him
self: Thanksgiving to God only.
and without God there is no joy; except he work the joy, there can be no joy
in the heart. Yea, albeit the grace be given, yet if he give not a new grace to
work joy in the heart for the grace, there can be no joy. And therefore the
mouth when it is opened, to praise and glorify, first of al it should be opened
to glorify him who is the giver of all: honor the instrument as the
instrument, honor the Minister as the Minister, but let the author and worker
of al have the glory and thanks. Then thridlie mark. In a manner he complains
that he can not get a mouth to thank God sufficiently for all that grace they
had received, and joy he had received and gotten through their graces. Mark
then, our thanking and glorifying of God for the grace received and joy
conceived in heart, it is not answerable in greatness to the grace, nor to the
joy received. For will ye compare these two together, the grace of God, and thy
thankfulness for it, the grace of God passes thy thankfulness, yea, the very joy
that we have in heart for the grace bestowed on us or others, will be greater
nor the thankfulness can be: and the tongue of man is not able to utter all
that joy conceived, nor to thank God sufficiently for it. Peter 1. Epist. 1.
8. he calls it a joy unspeakable: The joy the faithful heart will conceive,
is an unspeakable joy. So Paul of the sighs of the godly. Romans 8. 28. The mouth
of man is not so wide, nor so capable of grace as the heart is. I mean of the
regenerate man. If the spirit of Jesus dwell in the heart, all the tongues of
men and Angels, can not be able to tell nor express the thousand part of that
joy the heart will have in Gods grace for all that joy says he, what thanks
shall ^ give to God? As he would say, my mouth can not get words to utter thanks
to God the author for the graces received, and joy that is conceived there
through.

Now farther we have to learn in the words. He says, all this joy is before
God, All joy in the face of Jesus.
all the joy that the heart conceyues is in the sight of God and in his
presence, it is all in the sight of christ. No liberty says Paul, but when
the heart is turned to God, and laid oppin to him. 1. Cor. 3. 16. 17. No, no
light of the knowledge of the glory of God, but in the face of Jesus Christ.
2. Cor. 46. No sacretie of joy, but in his countenance, says Da^^d Psalm. 16.
11. And Peter in his 1. Epist. 7. 8. says, that believing in Jesus, and
keeping him in our presence, we rejoice with a joy vnspeak (...) and
glorious. So, no joye for thee, except thy eye be fixed in some measure on the
face of Jesus. Look not for it, turn thou thy back to him, and thy face from
him, no joy for thee, if thou were all the Monarchs in the earth: No, no joye,
peace, nor tranquillity of conscience but in the face of God. And therefore who
ever would have joy, and rejoice, and be glad in heart in this world, let him
cast an eye on Christ, and be humelie with him: for his face is joyful. And
what is all this joy we conceive in heart? but as little sparkles of the
plenitude and fullness of that heavenly joy in Christ, all proceeds as blenks
from it. Experience teaches us, that neither by day nor night can the soul
rejoice, but when it hes the presence of the living God, in the face of Christ:
for there is no sight of him but in Christ.

Now last I gather of all this: He can not thank the Lord eneugh for their
perseverance. Then all perseverance in faith and love comes of God if thanks
must be given to God for it, of necessity it must follow that God is the giver
of it: and therefore it is a vain tale to say that man's perseverance is in his
own hand: he has a free will, he may stand if he will, he may fall if he will.
All is vanity, all our standing is only in God: if he hold us in his hand
we shall stand: if he pull away his hand we shall fall: therefore seek at God
that we may stand and persevere; for without him we shall not stand one moment:
and every one who stands is bound to praise him, who is the author of all
perseverance. So brethren by Paul's example a Pastor when he sees his flock
persevere in the faith of Christ above all men he is bound to praise God.

Now to the next verse shortly. As he hes showen he thanked God for that grace
they have gotten, and the joy he had conceived of it, so he adds to, and
shows that as he thanked, he prayed and asked more. Prayed, how long* Night
and day, After what manner? Excedinglie with all feruen^^e. To whom pra^es lie?
to God the Father and his Son Christ. What prayed he? that he night see their
face. And to what end? ha^ he might accomplish that which is looking in their
faith. That is the effect of his prayer. So the Apostle would have prayer
continualie joy^ed with thanksgiving. And there is not so great matter of
thanksgiving for the grace which is received, and for the joy that ry^es of
the grace, Prayer should be joined with thanksgiving.
but yet there rests great need to seek more grace and more joy. So long as
we live here, there is ay a want and inla^k in the best liver in this world.
Faith is not perfect here. Reg^nerat: on and newnes of life is not perfect
here, no perfection in this life, and they who have come farthest toward that
glorious face of God; yet they are far from the mark. Albeit thou have run
before others, yet so long as thou live here thou art far from the mark: and
therefore night and day thou must ask grace and furtherance: and say, Lord
further me fill out the grace, it is not full yet Lord the thanksgiving is not
full, yea the faith is not perfect. Lord fill it out, Lord augment that
heavenly life in me.

Now, behold the manner of his prayer and his continuance of it. He says he
prayed night and day instantly After what manner? Not coldlie, but feruenthe,
with exceeding great earnestnes in praying. So ye see Paul hes been a man much
exercised in prayer partly for himself, partly for others. And certainly a
Minister in his calling should be much exercised in prayer, not for himself
only, but for the people he hes ado with, night and day* Prayer (...)
and not for the fashion, but with feruencie. Then note two properties in
prayer The first in respect of the time, Prayer would have a instantnesse and
continuance: (...) must not be one word and away: no but it must be (...) night
and day. Then again, Prayer would have an (...) Be instant in time: be fervent
and earnest (...) if it have not feruencie it is little we use it is (...) on
seem morning to evening (...) thy beeds without (...) in the heart, al is
vain. Then again feruencie without (...) is but a vain blast and will blaw
away. So if thou would pray to God, and vvo^ldst have him to hear thee (for
he of purpose holds back his eye to make thee instant and earnest) pray
earnestly and not for the fashion. And when thou come before that Majesty,
present thy self with an ardent desire of that that thou crauest: will thou
compeare before him, and not desire that thing thou crauest' so thou scornest
him.

Now the th^^d thing in this verse is, that he might see their face: and that
to this end, that he might fill out that which was inlacking in their faith.
It may be demanded, Could not their faith be supplied without Paul, that is,
without his ministry? was it not eneugh that Paul had once grounded them in
their faith, and revealed to them the counsel of God? No, mark this: No
increase, no growing in the faith of Jesus Christ without this ministry. In
plain words, contemnest thou it, thou shall never grow one inche in faith,
but thou shall go backward. It is true, it is God that gives thee the increase
and growth, Increase of faith only by the ministry.
1. Cor. 3. 7. but it is as true, he gives no growth in faith and grace, but by
the ministry. God gives the growth to the corn, but if the corn be not
wattred with rain which is the ordinary mean thereto, the corn will not
grow. So if thou be not continually wattred with this ministry, thou shall
not grow, (I say ordinarily and not extraordinarelie.) The Lord let us see
the miserable estate we are into through contempt of the ordinare mean that
the Lord hes appointed. Paul Ephesians. 4. 11. says When the Lord past up to
heaven, he gave some to be Apostles, some to be Prophets. etc. And how long is
it needful that this ministry should abide with thee? for a day, a month a
year, or twenty years? No, it is not eneugh but it must abide with thee ay
until thy breath go out, and until thou give up the last gasp: thou have ay
need of the gospel. Therefore the Apostle in that place he limits the time,
while ye come altogether to the unity of the faith, and unto the perfect man
in Christ. When come thou to that perfect man? Not so long as life is in thy
lip. So thou have need of the ministry so long as thou live. But in deed
when all thy senses go away, when speaking and hearing go away; then the
ministry leaves thee, and thou feellest a sense of these things that thou
heardst before: but if thou lay not to thine ear to hear in time, thou shall
never see them. Brethren, ye will wonder at this earnest desire he had to see
them: Might not the sending of Timothy, and writing of this Epistle satisfy
him? No, he thinks he can not do them that good that he would until he see
them and speak them, and that for this purpose to fill out then faith. Well
brethren, when once Satan gets a seuering of the pastor from the people it is
hard to get them together again. Do what Paul could do, he could not meet
with these Thessalonians: For he says, Satan held him away when he would have
been at them. Then ye see, the remedy against Satan to stay his course is
prayer, and instant prayer night and day. Presence of the Pastor very
powerful.
But to the purpose: There is much in the presence of him who hes the grace of
God in him, for augmenting the faith and grace of God in men: his message will
do much, but his presence will do more: the lyuelie voice of man will be more
effectual, nor the written word will be: his presence will edify more nor his
letter. And so it is no small matter to have the presence of a man that is
gracious Paul knew this well, and therefore he is so instant in praying to have
their presence. If the Lord hes chosen out a man to win souls, there is
nothing in that man, but it will edify* his tongue, his eye, his behavior,
his countenance, all will edify and further men to Christ.

Now in the second part of this text he falls out in a prayer. There are three
parts thereof. The first part is, that yet God the Father and the Lord Jesus
should direct his journey tovvard them, that he would give him that grace to
see them, and have that mutual presence. Then when he is speaking of the
prayer he used to God, look what fell out. Showing them he used to pray
instantly for them: in the mean time he leaves off this narratiue, and he
bursts out in prayer to God. There is a sudden change. Now take head. If that
earnestness and feruencie to pray be in the heart, the least occasion in the
world will walken it up, and make a man hold up his hands, and fall on his knees
immediately: The very name of ardent prayer will raise him up to prayer: for
as of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, so the words in the mouth
will walken the heart, if there be any spark of grace in it: and the heart
being walkned the mouth will fall out immediately to prayer. Look to thy heart
and mouth both. Look that thy heart be filled with God: look that godly
speeches be in thy mouth; for certainly as thou speak so thou vvalknest the
heart: speak well, a good affection will rise in thy heart: speak evil a foul
affection will rise in thy heart; and thy words shall be as bellows to blow up
thine own heart and the hearts of them that know the sin and uncleanness.

To the purpose; he prayed: to whom? To God the Father. To whom next? To Jesus
Christ the Lord. He gives them both their own styles. Christ hes bought us
with his blood, and so he is our Lord and we his seruanes: And the Apostle
says, For this cause is Christ risen again, that he should have, (...) over
all creatures. Romans 14. 9. Now brethren, mark their styles more narrowly and
shortly. God is a name of majesty, but Father is a name of love. Paul uses to
set down the majesty of God with love to cause us to embrace it. This style
the Lord, is a style of superiority and dominion. The style then that Paul
uses tells you what disposition was in his heart in praying: he spoke to a
Majesty, he spoke to a Lord: therefore reverence was in his heart. He spoke to
a loving father: Disposition of the heart in prayer.
therefore love and homelines was in his heart. This tells us what
disposition should be in our hearts is when we speak to God* In prayer thy
heart should be disposed with fear and reverence, with love and homelines.
Reverence and fear would not be allone, for then it were a servile fear. Love
and homelines would not be allone; for then thou would grow in contempt. So
join together homelines and fear, love and reverence, and then in exceeding
sweetness shall follow. And this was (...) fashion; and the fashion of all the
godly fathers, and this should be our fashion in prayer. Look the persons he
directs his prayer not to prays not to the father allone, nor to the Son
(...) allone: he prays God the Father, (...) Jesus Christ (...) Lord. What
shows this to us If there were no other place in the Scripture* yet this
declares ^^sufficientlie unto us, Jesus the mediator is equal with God the
father: else (...) had never prayed to him and joined him with that glorious
Majesty of the Father? Now to open this more plainly to you. The Father and
the Son are one in nature, essence and substance: next as they are one in
nature, Jesus eternal God.
so both their doing is but one: that that the father does the son does, and
that that the son does the father does also. In John he says, My Father
works to this day, and I work with him. John. 5. 17. Farther, the Father
works with the Son, when he is incarnate, cled with our nature: and Jesus
Christ, God and man, being in our nature works together with the Father; and
the Father gives us all the graces out of the fleshly hand of Christ the man:
all the goodness that flovves to thee, it flows through the veil of the
manhood of Christ. Look their thou severe not Christ and his Father; and look
that all thy duty thou do to them, be a common duty: beleeuest thou in
the one, believe in the other Ioh. 14. 1. Praiest thou to the one, pray to the
other: seruest thou and glorifies thou on^ glorify and serve both together:
honor ever the Father and the Son together; for if thou sever the Son from
the Father, or the nature of the man from the Son, Father nor Son shall do
thee no good. For when thou praiest to the Father, seuering him from Christ, as
the Jews do; or to Jesus, seuering him from our nature, thou drawest down a
plague in stead of a blessing. Then join all together in prayer. Pray to God
the Father, and the Son manifested in our nature, and look in unto God the
Father through the Son. Then he prays to the Father, and to the Son.

What seeks he? In the first part of his prayer he seeks, that his journey
should be directed to the. Thessalonians. Proverb. cha. 16. verse. 9. The heart
of man will dispone his own way, but God will direct his steps. Man will
say, I will bide here to morrow, and there other morrow, and he will be at
the fire side, and no thought of God who hes the journey in his hand. Man
dispones his ways, but God directs them. Without God, when thou have taken all
thy purposes, thou have not a foot to lift to do them: and if he give thee
leave to lift thy foot, without him, and not knovving him, thou shall not be
able to set down thy foot in the hie way; a curse shall be on thee, and thou
shall run and ride to destruction: and either thou shall go back, or else
go to this side, or that side, and not in the right way. Brethren, wait ye
not what ye have to do? When thou take any journey in hand, thou will not
come to the door so soon in the morning, but the Devil will meet thee* and
if Gods Angel do not conuoye thee, the Devil will conuoy thee. Alas, have
ye ado with flesh and blood only? will ye not look to him who is
working above? All this tells us, that we should hang on that holy will God,
which is the rule of all our doing. Paul says Romans 15. 32. I would be at
you, if by any mean the will of God will permit. Men uses this prophainnes^e
in speaking, as* James says 4. 13. 24. I will go to (...), and buy and sell,
etc. But he says to the, what art thou doing? have thou thy journey in thy
own hand? thy life is uncertain. I say farther then James. Suppose thou live,
what if he give thee not legs to travel with? and suppose he give thee
legs, what if he curse thy journey, and send Satan in the way? All this
learnes us to have God before us, and depend upon him: and to speak with
houes, ^f it please God, I will do this or that, Always I submit my self to
his holy will knovving that whether I go or bide, all shall be to my well
and comfort: Hang on God. for there is no prosperous succes, except thou strive
to have an heart lifted up to God in all thy doings. For all this world will
vanishe away, but to him who depends on God, what ever falls out al comes for
the best, This is the rule of the Apostle.

Now the second part of the Prayer is: Seeing he can not come to them as he
would, he prays to God the Father, and to the Son the Lord Jesus Christ;
that those things he could not get done by his prefence, the Lord will do them
in his absencer that is, That the Lord would make them abound in love and
charity, first among them selves, and then among all men. The example he
gives, is, even as I loved you. Then when thou can not get that which first
thou would have; leave not off to pray for the next best. There are many that
when they pray for any thing, and cannot get it, they leave off all praying.
No, but when thou can not get that first thing thou prayest for, pray for
the second; it may be, if thou get not the first, thou shall get the second:
and well is the soul that gets any piece of grace. So when one thing fails
thee, Love, the gift of god only.
seek an other, and never leave off suting. Then he prays for love and
charity. Alas for love and charity in this age: fare well love, thou have
gone away out of Scotland. There is a vain name of faith among us; he
believes, and she believes: but, love which is the true witness of faith is
gone. Fare well love. These are the latter days: all love is dead. But, to
the purpose. Ye see that he begges love from God to them. Then, it must
follow of necessity. As faith is the free gift only and grows not in our
foull stinking nature: so, love and charity is the gift of God, and grows not
in nature. Thy love by nature is a foull stinking self love, thou have that
rooted in thy heart, thou will hate God and all the world for that love: and if
thou ^akest a show of love to any who is conjoined to thee, all it for thy
self, and not for Christ. Thou will love thy wife and children, but, not for
Christ, but, for thy self. No sincerity in that love. The Papist will say,
God commands us to love: therefore it is in our own hand to love, or not to
love: Is this a fair argument? But, I reasone by the contraire, out of this
place. Paul begges love at God to them; therefore it follows well, love is the
gift of God only. For, if it were in nature, whereto should I ask it from
God? Mark one rule. It is a foolish thing to measure the command of God by
the strength of nature; and the strength of nature by the command of God, and
to reason, God hes bidden me do this, therefore, I have free will within my
self to do it; this reasoning will deceive thee. The Lord when he commands
thee who stands in that Covenant made with us in Christ; with the very
command, by his Spirit he works in thy heart above nature the same thing he
commands thee, he works that love that he commands thee. O the greatness of
this love of God. Say, Lord, do that thing in me thou bidst me do; bid me do
nothing, Lord, but that which thou vvorkest in me, for, I can do nothing
without thee. The Lord open men's eyes to see this.

The next thing is the measure of love, that he asks of God* He seeks not
love in a small measure, he seeks not little love, but abundant love. Seek
ever these spiritual gifts in as great measure as thou can, seek
abundance: for, thou can not seek so much with thy mouth, Measure of love.
nor conceive so much in thy heart, as the Lord is able to give thee. His hand
is larger nor thy heart, and so be greedy of those spiritual graces, and
never leave off to seek, or to beg, till thou findst thy heart running over
with grace; full of love, full of knowledge and light. Paul to the Coloss. 3.
16. prays that the Lord would fill them with knowledge: Look Ephesians. 3. 10.
20. Col. 1. 9. For, our perfection stands in abundance, our glory stands in
fullness, and our fullness goes forward degree by degree: There is nothing in
this life but a growing in faith, in knowledge, etc, we are never filled with
love, knowledge, etc. but we must grow piece and piece, until we see the Lord
face to face: and then we shall get saciety, then we shall be filled when God
(who is love himself) shall be all in all things. And therefore grow ever;
get a piece of grouth this day, another piece to morrovve, and so day by day
grow, until thy heart be filled with the grace of Christ. As thou increasest
in knowledge, so thou must increase in love: for, these must be joined
together, knowledge and love. Knowledge is in the mind, and love in the heart.
Ye see how pleasant it is to see the Sun, but the light of the mind whereby
we see the Sun of glory is more excellent; it is the light that comes from
the Lord. Then join thereto the love in the heart, these two should answer
other in proportion. Growest thou in knowledge of the way of Christ? look
thou grow in love to God and man: otherways, I say, thy knowledge shall not
avail thee; and the greater knowledge, without love grow therewith, the
greater damnation.

Now whom should they love? Love every one among your selves, love, next, all
men in the world. Love all mankind. Ye are Christians, love together
mutuallie. Be ye among the Heathen, love them too, who knows not Christ: love
the Domestickes of faith, but love the strangers too: love the members of the
body of Christ, but love them also, who are out with the body: but, in a
different manner. The words lets us see, the love of the domestic is mutual.
As thou love me, so I love thee: as the hand loves the foot, so, the foot
loves the hand. So among the members of Christ's body, there is a mutual love.
The band of love goes from my heart to thee, and comes again from thy heart to
me: but, it is otherways with the love that reaches out beyond the body to
strangers: it is but a single love going from my heart, and not returning again
from them. I love him, but he loves not me: I love the Jew, but he loves not
me: I love the Turk, but he loves not me; because he is not conjoined in a
body with me: we should love them to salvation. Then, learn, we should not be
narrovv hearted in love Say not, I love not him because he loves not me: if
Christ had done so, when thou was an enemy, it had not been well with thee.
He loved thee being his enemy. Love them then who hates thee, and them, who
would slay thee. I will not give a penny for thy love, if thou love them only
who loves thee. And this tells that thou art a member of the body, when thy
love reaches out with the body to others. As Christ loves his enemy, so,
thou, if thou be of Christ's body, will love thy enemy. Alas, the canker of
our nature against love. If thou strive not to love thy enemy and to get that
rancor of thy nature slain, slain shall thou be. Steuin when the Jews were
stoning him to death, says, Lord, let it not be laid to their charge. Act. 7.
60. Therefore, as thou would have thy soul safe, love thy enemy.

He lays down his own ensample: as I do you. He uses this commonly when he
bids them do any thing. I crave nothing but that ye should resemble me: I love
you, love ye others. There is a lesson Thou who vvilt bid any other do well,
do well thy self: vvilt thou bid me love? love then first, thy self, and
love all men. A Pastor who would teach his flock to love, let him shovv love
first in his life and actions himself: othervvaies, he shall not have grace in
his words: let him cast himself to be full of love, and then, his words
shall edify: Let him ever seek an hearty love to their salvation, and crave
love to them, at the hands of the Father, and Christ Jesus his Son. To whom
with the holy Spirit, be all praise, for now and for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XIII. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 13. 13 To make your hearts stable and unblameable in
holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all his Saints.


1. THESSA. CHAP. 4. verse. 1. 2. 3. 1 And furthermore we beseech you brethren,
and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and more, as ye have
received of us, how ye ought to walk and to please God.

2 For ye know what commandments we gave unto you by the Lord Jesus.

3 For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, and that ye should
abstain from for^ication.


IN the words going before, ye heard (brethren) the Apostle makes mention to
the Thessalonians, of that earnest prayer he used to God for them: that once it
would please God to grant him a prosperous journey to them. He fell out
immediately in a prayer. The prayer contains three parts: the first part is,
that God the Father and the Lord Jesus would direct his way toward them.
The second part is, that how ever it should fall out, whether he should come
to them or not, at Gods pleasure: yet that they should abound in love, every
one toward another, and not that only, but in love to all men: yea,
tovvarde their ver^e enemies.

Now shortly to come to our text. In the last verse of this chapter, ye have
the third head of his prayer: he beseeches God to give them holiness;
holiness in general, all kind of holiness. As he prayed before that they
might abound in love and charity, which is a part of holiness: So now he
prays they should have all sort of holiness. Thereafter in the chapter
following, he falls out in precepts of good manners, and holy life and
conversation, and this he follows out to the end of the Epistle: saving only
by the way he casts in one or two informations resolving them of certain
doubts: the first concerning the mourning for the dead: the second concerning
the day of Judgment and the coming of the Lord Jesus. Now to return. He
prays for holiness to them. And what should this holiness do? To make your
hearts (says he) stable and unblameable before God. And at what time?
especially at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. In what company should
they be established with holiness? They alone? No, but with all his Saints:
in that happy society of the Church of God and the Saints. There is the
effect shortly of this thirtienth verse. Then brethren mark. It is holiness,
not a fashion of holiness in outvvard behavior; Holiness stablishes our hearts
before God.
but within the heart of a man or woman, that makes them stand up in the
presence of God, that establishes them without fear, terror, or trembling
when they stand before the. Tribunal of a terrible Judge. Where there is no
holiness, no sincerity of heart in man, but an heart filled with foull
affections; full of uncleanness and filthiness, there the heart dare not
present the self before the face of God, for fear that wrath come out from
his angry face, and burn it up. The Apostle Heb. 12. 14. says, Without
holiness, no man shall see God; for if they see him, at shall be to their
destruction. When he looks (...) the heart, and finds not holiness and
cleanness there; his look shall destroy the heart, and he shall make it
tremble and shake at his presence. Brethren, many hes experience of an evil
conscience: uncleanness makes ever an evil conscience: and a man with an
evil conscience is not able to stand in the sight of God. There is not an
unclean body but he finds this in experience. They run ever to some hole
and cannot abide the holy sight of God: he is holy, thou unholy: he looks
through thee, thou can not abide his sight. Now it is true our compearance
before God and his Tribunal, shall stand in the righteous merits of Christ
Jesus, and except we be cled with that perfect righteousness of Christ, imputed
to us by faith, there is no slanding for us. Romans 5. 1. But it is as true, if
thou findst not again in some measure some holiness and cleanness inherent in
thy self; thou shall never stand before God: for where the righteousness of
Jesus is, where remission of sins is in any man, there of necessity must be
some measure of holiness and pureness of life in him also. If thou be
justified by the fre mercy of God in Christ, of necessity thou must be
sanctified and must have some spark of godliness in thy self: for those whom
he hes justified, he also hes sanctified. So when ever a man hes the justice of
Christ imputed unto him, of necessity he must have a share of this justice
inherent in himself: wants he a part of this holiness, brag as he will, he hes
no cleanness through the blood of Christ. James says, If thou have faith, let
me se it thy works. 2. 18. If any by grace be sanctified in Christ, let them
utter it in some measure in works: otherways they lie. So this holds sure. No
standing to us before God, except there be holiness in us.

Now the styles are to be marked in the text which are given to God; First he
is called God: then our Father. The name of God, a name of Majesty and of
great glory. The name of Father, a name of homeliness and louingnesse. Mark
it. If God were nothing else to us but God, that is to say, but an high
Majesty, full of all glory: if that Majesty dimmitted not himself to be a
loving Father to us through Jesus, there were no standing for us before him,
our heart durst never present the self before him. A sin is not able to
look upon God, as he is God only, in Majesty, Honor, Glory and Justice.
No, the whole Majesty's of the world dare not face him as he is God only. All
our compearing before him is, because, as he is God in Majesty and glory: so
in Christ he is become a loving Father to us: and if we receive not the
Spirit (that is called the Spirit of adoption, testifying to our spirit,
that he is become our Father in Jesus Christ, and we are adopted in Christ; and
therefore opens our mouths to cry Abba, Father) we would never have a face to
look to him, nor a mouth to speak to him. And so as he is become a Father to
us in Christ, so crave that thou may get that Spirit of adoption, that thy
mouth may be opened wide, with sweetness, to cry, Abba, Father Moreover, these
very styles learns us, how our hearts should be disposed when we come and stand
before him, even here in his congregation, and church, where his presence is.
(We are now in his sight and presence.) He is a God in Majesty; A Majesty
would have fear and reverence. So there is the first thing, stand before this
Majesty of God in fear and reverence. Then there must be more then this: he is
a Father, and therefore, thou should love him: so thou should both
reverence and love him together: If these two be together, they shall make thee
to be in good temper to stand before God.

Now come to the time when the heart shall be established. It is, at the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is true brethren, even in this life, before that
glorious appearing of Christ, we stand before God in holiness, and our hearts
are established before him without rebuke in a manner: and even now at this
present time, who ever they be who hes holiness in their hearts, they find,
in effect, their hearts standing in his presence; when they look to that face
of his Majesty shining in the Gospel, with the eye of faith, the heart is
established before the face of God, and God is pacified, and beholds them in
quietness. Let all men descend in their hearts, and if they have holiness, I
assure them they will have peace and quietness in the heart, when they think on
him, Then this is true. Even in this life before the great day, we stand before
him established in holiness: but it is as true, so long as we live in this
life, there is ever a piece of unquietness in the hearts of the most godly: and
there are none of us who can find so peaceable an heart before God, as we
should have. There is ever so long as we live here a piece of evil conscience
for sin. The cause is, because so long as we live he^r, we are but holy in a
part and that in a very sober part: sin leaves us never, and therefore the
prick in the conscience for sin leaves us never, And where this evil
conscience is, there must ever be a piece of fear and terror to stand before
that heavenly presence. But when the Lord shall come in that latter day,
which is called the day of judgment, when Christ shall appear in that great
day, the heart of the godly shall be established before him, without any fear
or terror. If thou be one of the chosen of God, thou shall stand before the
face of God, with an heart in peace, without any terror. (But o how great
shall the fear of the heart of the wicked men be?) the cause is, because thou
shall not so soon see the face of the Lord Jesus, that fair glorious face,
but as soon in the moment of thy resurrection, thou shall be transformed in a
perfect holiness, both in body and soul. And therefore the Apostle says.
Philip. 3. 21. When we shall see him, We shall be transformed, and this vile
body of ours, shall be made conformable to his glorious body, and when we
shall see him, we shall be made like him in glory and holiness, without any
spot or vvrinckle, or any part of deformity in body or soul. What then is
it, that puts this terror in our heart to stand before God? Only sin. So
when all sin shall be taken away, all fear shall be taken away. Then, seeing
there is no perfect quietness until we see him; why should not our desire be
to see him? wherefore should all this fear be of this latter day, seeing thou will never be established in heart, nor get thy full glory until his coming
at that day? thy blessedness shall be perfect there. I find in the Scripture
the perfection of all graces differred until that time. Ye shall find no
grace, Perfection of al graces differred til the ^utter day.
but the perfection thereof is remitted until that day. Paul in the same
Epistle. 2. chap. 19. verse. My joy is in the sight of God, and of Jesus Christ,
at his coming: He gets not perfection of joy, until he come. And therefore he
will not promise to the Thessalonians their joy until that day; no perfection
of grace, mercy and peace, until God put an end to sin, to death, and
wickedness. Look then if we should long for that latter day; we look here
and there for this thing and that thing; but who looks for that coming of the
Lord? Alas, if we knevv what grace and joy Christ's coming brought to us, we
would look for nothing so much, as for his coming. We are earthly, and
therefore all our looks are for earthly things: we are not spiritual, and
so we cannot look for that spiritual grace. The Lord prepare us to look for,
and desire that glorious coming. All these earthly things goes away; Heaven
only abydes. What foolishness is this, seeing we are subject to mortality,
that we should set our hearts on this world: our dwelling must not be here; but
in Heaven in endliesse joy. Seek it earnestly therefore.

Now in the end of this verse he tells us in what company, and with whom we
shall be established in holiness before God: thou shall not be holy thy self
alone: thou shall not be an a per se in holiness, do as thou will, either
shall thou be in a society, in a company with many more nor thou; All graces
in the society of the sants
or else thou shall never be holy, nor see the face of God. This is plain.
Either thou shall be in the Church, which is the communion of the Saints of
God, or else thou shall never see Gods presence. He will leap out of it at
this side, and he at that side; but if thou come not in again in that same
society (yea, and to the number of this church and of the Saints that
professes Christ this day in Scotland) thou shall never see Gods face. All
blessings, grace, mercy, and peace everlasting before God is in the company
of the Church, that profess the truth and purity of the Gospel of Christ:
not in the company of them, who will take the name of a Church, or that false
Church, the Roman Church. So let him who will stand with holiness in the
number of the Saints* severe from Babylon, or else he shall be partaker of the
judgment. So (brethren) to come again, ye shall not read in the Scripture of
any grace given to any man, but ye shall find that it is given to him as a
member of that body, as one of the Saints, in the society of the Saints. In
the first to the Ephesians verse 18. speaking of the riches of the glory of
the inheritance of Heaven; he says, thou shall never get it but among the
Saints. Then again he says, chap. 3. verse. 18. Who shall understand the love
and charity of God? None but they that are in the society of the Saints. No
light, mercy nor knowledge of God, but to them that stands knit up as members
in the body of Christ: ye see, cut off a member of the body and cast it away;
no sap can follow from the body to it: So, if thou be cut off from the number
of the Saints, who are the Church of God, thou shall never get any grace of
Christ.

Now to the next chapter. In the fourth and fifth chapters follows the last
part of this Epistle, containing the doctrine of manners, exhorting to holiness
of life, and godliness. But to the words. He says, And furthermore, As he
would say, all is not told: I will tell that which rests, which is the
doctrine of manners, precepts of godly life and conversation. When we have
teached all the year over; when we have told you the doctrine of
justification, sanctification, etc. so long as there is no speaking of a godly
life and conversation; and so long as we have not told you, how ye should lead
your life; there is ever something behind unspoken of. Never a full and
perfect preaching, where there is nothing spoken of a good or of an evil life
and conversation. For* there is such a necessity laid on men and women in this
world, that all serves for nothing, except they live a good and holy life: Thy
profession of love, righteousness, mercy, and all the rest is but vanity and
wind, if thy conversation toward thy neighbor be not aunswerable to thy
profession: it is a shame to thee to speak of Christ, of holiness, of
righteousness, of life everlasting, except thou live conform thereto. And
therefore, ye shall never read any Epistle of Paul, but ever when he hes
spoken of faith, justification, etc. then in the end he subjoynes precepts
charging us to live a godly life. And more then this; Trow ye, in the end, at
Christ's coming to judgment, that the pretense of faith or righteousness will
be sufficient to thy eternal salvation. No, but we must live holy: for, all the
blessings of God in Christ tends to this end that we may live holy: yea, this
is the end of election it self. Ephesians. 1. 4. Paul says. We are chosen from
all eternity that we should be holy. Then we should live soberlie and justly
with our neighbor. Tit. 2. 12. And therefore either cast away profession of
Christianity, and hear never a word of faith, righteousness, etc. or else
strive to live conform thereto. This in general.

Now to the words. I beseech and exhort you, and that in the Lord Jesus
Christ. What exhorts he? that they increase more and more in godly life and
conversation. As for the form of your going forward, I have told you the
form. how ye should walk in this world; walk conformable thereto. The
words would be well marked, I beseech and exhort you, says he, in the Lord
Jesus. He might have well said, I command you; as wrytting to Philemon verse. 8.
9. he says, When I might command thee, in the name of Jesus: yet, rather, for
loves sake, I pray thee. Love turns the command in a prayer. All doctrine that
comes from any person must come of love, or else it is dear of the hearing.
Now he shows his love, in speaking; for the words comes from the heart, and
so among all the rest of the ways, whereby he vtters the love he had in his
heart, this is one, when precept and command is turned over to requeesting.
When he may command he will not, but he turns it over and exhortes. Ye may
mark this very often in the Epistles of Paul. Now the words are dowbled: He is
not content to say, I beseech you: but he says also, I exhort you. There is no
word lost here. This doubling of the words testifies of the earnestness
that was in his heart to have this people going forvvard in this godly life:
and consequently of the necessity that lies on every one of us, to live
holy in this life. For, where there is no necessity, why should a man be
earnest? but seeing there is a necessity lying on all people, that either they
must live a godly life in this world, or else be damned, woe to that Pastor
that is no busy to stir up the people to live godly and holilie. As there
is a necessity in them to live holy; so, there is a necessity in him to
charge them to live holy. And therefore, blame not the Pastor to be busy,
either to pray, admonish, or otherways to correct, and to reprove sin.
For, he hes a necessity laid on him, under the pain of damnation, to pushe
you forvvard to Heaven. For the Lord Jesus sake, that is, as ever they vvoulde
look for mercy and grace at Jesus hand; as he would say, if ye live well, ye
shall find him to be a merciful God: otherways, if ye live evil, to be a
terrible judge to you. This is some severity against them. Sweetness and
sharpness must be joined together, thou must be moved to thy duty, partly
by sweetness, and partly by sharpness: therefore, with his request he joines
this so weghty an obtestation; and this is a common custom to this Apostle. 2.
Cor. 10. 1. More, this tells that howbeit a man use prayer and fair words
where he might command, yet, we should not abuse his lenity and patience; for,
if thou meet lenity and patience with disobedience, it shall bring on a
greater judgment: nor if he had used threatening and severity. The greater
lenity that a man uses to thee to win thee; if thou will not be win, the
greater shall be thy condemnation, and thou heapst on coals on thy own head.

Now what is this he exhorts them to? That they ever ease more and more. That
they go forward still on with instantnesse, until they come to the mark: for,
this course of holiness hes a fair end. Brethren, there is no standing for us
in this course of Christianity and holiness of life. When thou enterst once
in the way, stand not there. A man will begin and run on till evening, and
then set down his staff and rest him: but we must ay run, sleeping, waking,
eating, drinking, etc. ay forward: there is not an half hour granted thee,
no, not so much time as to look over thy shoulder to rest thee, but ay thou
ought to have thy eye on the mark. And when thou runnest, strive, not only to
ouerrunne them that runs with thee: but more, the words means, that thou
should ouerrunne thy own self; if thou runnest fast this day, run faster
to morrow, and ay prease to run forward, and when thou art lying on dead-bed,
run fastest then, and so shall thou find exceeding great comfort in thy
running. The Lord hes bidden thee run, and cries out of Heaven, Run as thou
would save thy self. What is the Pastors office? Paul when the Thessalonians
are running out before him, he cries, Run: ye are in the rinke, run
forward, excel your self, run out before your self until ye come to the
end of the rinke. This is the office of the Pastor, to cry behind you when ye
are running: and this shout of the Pastor behind the people, when they are in
the rinke, is so needful, that except he cry continually, Run out and excel,
they shall linger and ly down. That all the world may see the great necessity
we have, to have this ministry continually crying in our ^are, run, run.
Would to God we could let the necessity of this cry (to run) to sink in our
hearts that we might obey it. If ye would be safe, have pleasure in this cry,
and run on identlie, until ye come to the high prease of our calling.

Now follows the form and manner of this running forward until they come to
the end of their rinke. No other form but the form set down before, ye have
received of us how ye ought to walk, and please your God. Brethren, as there
is a running and an instant course craved of us, so we must run, not in every
sort* nor after every manner, but we must run with an ordor. There are rules
prescryued to us how we should run. Order in running.
The Apostle 1. Cor. chap. 9. verse 24. says, Run so that thou may get a
grip of the crown. To Timothy he says, ye who strives, and wrastles, and
runs, if ye strive not lavvfullie according to a good ordor, ye shall not
win. 2 Timothy 2. 5. So when we run, we must run according to good ordor,
not rashly, according to our own fantasy, but according to the good laws of
God. There is no well ruled life on earth, but that life that is ruled by the
rule of God. So we all running in this rinke, must be ruled by good laws. As
Paul besoght them to run and cries, grow more and more: even so he gives them
the Laws to run by. So as the Minister is bound to cry to men to run; so
the word of God is given to him to tell thee thou should run by this rule,
or that rule: the King by his rules, the counselor in his own calling by his
rules: what man that ever he be, except he run in his own calling according to
his rules he shall never attain to the mark. And if the Lord take away this
word that tells us the rule, whereby we should run, miserable shall we be.
This is plain. Take this word out of the land, all shall run wrong. Yet
there is one word here to be marked. He calls their going forward walking:
Borrowing the language from a man who is going a journey. Ye will see in the
word, many laws, many commands, many admonitions to put men forward in the
way, to go and run: but ye here no precept in the Scripture, to sit still,
eat, drink, and take thy pleasure, seeing thy life is short. So we learn, the
Lord bids us walk. The Lord hes not ordained us to rest here. Whatsoever
calling he hes given thee, he hes given thee a continual walking and
traveling therein, until thou come to the end of thy journey and then thou
shall rest: he is a foolish body, who will promise to himself rest here: if
thou rest before thy journey be complete, it shall be to thy utter destruction.
And therefore do as he hes bidden thee; albeit it be painful here, yet in
the end thou shall find rest.

Now in the next words he defines this (vvalking) and calls it to please God.
It is a pain to a man to walk all day, from morning to evening, and then to
find no rest, nor fruit of his labor at night: but, I say to thee, if thy
walking be not to please God, thou shall never get any fruit of thy walking: if
thy walking be not ever to please thy God, thou shall never get the right way,
thou shall go like a doting body, and be the farther from that glorious butt,
and in the end thou shall effectuat nothing, but in that great day thou shall
curse all thy labors and exercises; and thou shall say, Alas my labors are all
lost: I have wearied my self, and now I am no better. But if thy walking be to
please God, thou shall find a sweetness in thy labor, and joy in the end
thereof: And when that blessed day of resurrection shall come, thou shall say,
Blessed am I in my labors, that I wrought to please my God, for now I have
gotten the butt: I find the fruit of my labors. Paul says, 1. Cor. 9. 26. I
run, but not to an uncertainty. Learn never to run to an uncertainty,
but ever run to a butt; effectuat something by your doing. The only way to
make you run well, is to please God. A Minister, or any other in the world,
who would run right, must run to pleasure their God, and then they shall
find sweetness in their running. Now well is the soul that can endeuore the
self to pleasure God: for, there is no joy in the creature, but when it is set
to glorify God night and day in this world: for, to this end are we set in the
world. 1. Cor. 10. 31. and if we do this, he shall set us in the heavens to
glorify him.

Now in the next verse, he takes themselves to be witnesses that he had set
before them the precepts and laws, whereby they should walk in the journey.
Ye know what commandment we gave you by the Lord Jesus. It is an happy
thing to a Minister in his calling, when with a good conscience, he appeals the
consciences of the people, that he cried to them and said, o people I bade you
go, I prescriued you rules to go into, your blood be on your own head; I
have discharged a faithful duty to you. Brethren, what auailes it us if we
should ever preach the Gospel, if we be not saved thereby? And when we teach
you the Gospel, we also stir our selves forward to come to that butt Christ;
our own teaching is the mean whereby we are saved, as it is the mean whereby
ye are saved. Therefore, let all go forward together in the rinke.

Now, in the verse following, he begins to set down to them the rules of
walking and going forward. That which he had spoken by tongue, being at
Thessalonica, the same thing he puts in writ, by his pen. It is a foolish thing
to a man, to say, The Apostle spoke one thing, and wrote another. No, brethren,
Paul never spoke one sentence to confirm any people, but it is registrate to
us. It is blasphemy, to think, that, Paul and Peter, etc. wrote not that,
which they spoke: it is folly; for, there was no sentence they spoke
pertaining to our salvation, but it is written. Then, the rule is, The will of
God, which is your sanctification. That is, that ye be holy in your souls,
and the whole affections thereof; in your body, and all the members of your
body, and all the actions of your members. So, he draws the whole rules,
which are to be observed in this course and rinke, we have to Heaven and life
everlasting, to holiness and sanctification. Then, in one word, there is the
manner, how thou shall go forward to this butt. Be holy, be holy, thou must
be holy, holy in heart, hand, mouth, foot, in all the members of thy body:
separate thee from the world, which is full of sin, full of foull
affections, displeasing the eye of thy God, and put on holiness. Who ever they
be, that go forward in holiness, assuredly they shall come to the mark.
Live thou an holy life, what vocation that ever it be in, assure thee* thou
shall come to the prise of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Philipp. 3.
14. To turn it over again. Busy thy self as thou will, if that thy business
be not in holiness, thou art foolish, the faster thou runnest, thou art the
farther behind. Alas, how many are there, who busies them selves in
wickedness, and the more they weary themselves, the farther are they from
Heaven: Blessed are they, who can go forward to Heaven. Strive to holiness,
and say. Lord, I am on my journey, I cannot go forward, except I find an
holy heart, to think; an holy mouth, to speak; an holy hand, to touch:
Lord, sanctify them, that I run not in vain. The way to run holilie, is
to keep ever before thy eyes, God, that holy one, in the face of Jesus; and
to cry, O Lord, guide me in holiness: And I assure thee, if thou will strive
to live holilie, and cry to God, to guide thee in holiness, thou shall come to
that endless joy: But, if thou let God out of thy eye, thou shall perish.
Brethren, this life will away, and therefore, set your hearts to run to that
everlasting life.

Now, having set down the general, he deduces it in parts, and the first
part, he takes up, is cleanness of the body: as he would say, fyle not the
body with fornication; fyle thou thy body with fornication, thou shall not
think a clean thought, speak a clean word, or, do any clean deed.
Surely, all sins pollutes, and fyles: The sin, that comes from the heart,
if it were but an evil motion, it goes back again and leaves a foull blot
behind it: a rotten deed, leaves a blot behind it* a foull word in the
mouth, goes back, and leaves a foull blot in the heart: when thou have spoken a
word, thou art not quite thereof, but, it comes back again and fyles the
soul. It goes not from thee so lightly as thou trowest, no, it leaves ay a
foull blot behind it. So, this corruption grows daily. Brethren, I tell you,
all sins fylles the body: yet, of all sins, harlotrie especially fyles
the body. Look the comparison, the Apostle uses 1. Cor. 6. 18. The body of
an harlote, of all bodies is the foullest. Alas, such a fyling of the body and
soul, follows upon adultery, that it is wonderful to tell. Seeing,
therefore, special pollution of the body, follows on fornication. I beseech
you, (as ye would present your self before God in cleanness) abstain from
harlotrie: An harlot will travel long, ere he come to heaven, thy heart and
body must be sanctified, before thou come to Heaven. And so as thou would come
forward to Heaven, strive to keep a clean body and soul to God; and
specially, abstain from this vice of fornication. Lord keep us from it,
until we come to the end of our journey, that we may be presented clean before
christ. To whom with the Father, and holy Spirit, be honor and praise for
ever.

AMEN.
THE XIIII. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 4. verse. 3. 4. 5. 6. 3 For, this is the will of God, even*
your sanctification, and that ye should abstain from fornication.

4 That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor.

5 And not in the lust of concupiscence, even, as the Gentiles, which know
not God.

6 That no man oppress, o^, defraude his brother in any matter: for, the Lord
is auenger of all such things, as we also have told you before time, and
testified.


WE have in hand, Brethren, the third part of this Epistle, written by Paul,
to the Thessalonians. In this part, ye have heard, the Apostle exhortes them to
a godly life and conversation. This kind of doctrine he uses very often, in
the rest of his Epistles. The exhortation, ye heard, that was in the beginning
of this chapter, was, not only to live well, to walk in holiness, but,
also, it was, to excel more and more, to strive in that course of holiness,
even, to strive to overcome, not only others, that ran with them in the
rinke, but, also, to overcome themselves: if they ran fast this day, that,
they should run faster to morrow, and so, each day to increase and grow. It is
not eneugh, to run, not eu^ugh to strive, but we must run* and strive
lawfully, as he speaks to Timothy, 2. Timoth. 2. 5. There are certain rules
and laws, according to the which we must run in this present course. As
touching these rules according to the which we must run, the Apostle shows
to the Thessalonians, he hes prescryued them to them already, when he was
among them.

Now in the text we have presently red, he begins to call the laws to
remembrance again, and to repeat them to to them. (For what ever thing he
spoke by word being present, that same thing in effect he hes left behind
him, registrate in vvritte, and this day by Gods grace it is come in our
hands.) He draws the whole rules and laws to be kept in this course,
wherein we run to this butt of salvation and to Heaven, to be partakers of
that glory: First to a general law, which is, the law of sanctification and
holiness. For, this is the will of God (says he) even your sanctification.
Thereafter he commes to the special points of sanctification. The first is,
the abstaining from fornication. The next in the words red, is abstaining from
doing wrong to ourneighbour, either by violence, craft or deceit. Now to
speak of the first, as God shall give us grace, and to take up every word.
This is the will of God, says he, even your sanctification. Learn then
first. The whole laws and rules according to the which we should walk
and run in this rinke, wherein the Lord hes placed us in this life, are
resolved in a general, called the Law of holiness. The law of a sanctified
life; He or she, that in this course, or in this rinke will prease to be holy
in all the points of their life, shall run and strive (to speak with the
Apostle) lawfully: and running and striving lawfully, in the end they shall be
crowned. But they who in running toward the mark, stryues not to an
holiness of life, they run not lawfully; they keep no rule in their
running. They run and waits not how; they are miserable in their running. And
as they run unlawfully, so, they shall never be crowned with glory: they
shall run long ere they come to the mark and prise of that high calling to
be with God. Then in the course of this life, in this rinke which the Lord hes
placed unto run in, until we come to the mark of that glorious
resurrection, we must run holilie, keep in holy heart, an holy hand, keep
holy senses, keep an holy foot in running; in a word, we must be holy in
the whole powers of the soul, be holy in the whole members of the body,
sever all from the pollution of this world, dedicate all to God, and so, ye
shall come to the end of the rinke.

Now to go forward in the text. To move them to this sanctification, and to
embrace this rule of running forward to the mark. Gods vvil a sufficient
reason of our actions.
He says, For, this is the will of God. He gives no other reason but this: It
is the will of God to be so. Howbeit we hear no word of any other reason but
this: it is the will of God to do this work, or that work, it should suffice
us: we are so oblist to that Lord, and so bound to his obedience, that, if we
know of no other reason, wherefore we should do any thing, but only that it
is his will, we should obey it. And the man who understands it is the will of
God when he is doing any thing, and wilclose his eyes, lead captive his own
reason, subject his will to the will of his God, and go and follow on him, if
it were through Hell (if he bid thee go through Hell, go through it, close thy
eyes, follow on, howbeit thouknowest no out-sight) surely, that man shall get a
blessed ishue, he shall get a crown: never soul was disapointed that set
themselves to follow God. Who ever settes themselves against their affections
to serve God, they come at last to Heaven. By the contrary, when a man thinks
himself over wise, and will not follow on Gods will, except he see a fair
out-sight, and get great reasons wherefore he should do this, or that, and
thinks it not eneugh to say, it is Gods will; but will say, wherefore is it
Gods will? The Lord will let him follow his own will, and his will and reason
will lead him to destruction. There was never man whom the Lord gave over to
his own will but he ran to his own destruction.

Now to go forward. He comes next to the special points of this
sanctification. There are sundry sorts of holiness, therefore, he will lay it
down in parts, every part thereof in the own order. And the first part of
sanctification and holiness of life, First part of sanctification, absteening
from for^ication.
he makes it to be absteening from fornication, absteening from harlotrie. It
stands in keeping of an holy and clean body. In running on this course, in
the rinke that conuoyes to the last butt, and life everlasting, thou must keep
an holy person. But to mark the words more natrovvlie. First he recommendes
abstinence. He who runs in a rinke, and strives, says the Apostle 1. Corinthians. chap. 9. verse 25. that man he is continent in all things, he keeps
a good diet; ere he enter in the rinke he will diet himself and abstain
from many things which otherways he would use: So we who runs in this
rinke of Christianity to be partakers of that Crown; we must abstain, we
must not follow our appetites, we must not put our hand to every thing our
appetite biddes us, we must not yield to the lusts of the flesh, there must
be abstinence and diet. And therefore Paul in that same ninth chapter to the
Cor. verse 27. shows how he used himself in running, to be an ensample to
us. He says, He held his body at under, and redacted it in a servitude, and
vvoulde not let it be his master. Let thou thy body be thy master, I promise
thee thou shall never see the butt. But to come more specially. What
abstinence must it be? He names it from fornication. There are sundry sorts
of abstinence, which is required of them that runs in this rinke: but among
them all, this is a special, Abstain from harlotrie, and pollution of the
body with fornication. Among all the sins that defiles the body and the
members of the body of any man or woman, harlotrie is the cheifest sin,
and makes all unclean and polluted in Gods sight. The Apostle 1. Corinthians.
chap. 6. verse 18. says, All sins that a man committes, is out-vvith the
body, but he who commit: fornication, he sins against his own body; he
pollutes and defyles his body in a special manner. Brethren, the body of a
man which is not polluted with this filthiness, is a meet body to run in
this course: it is swift and ready to run in this course: but if the body
be de^yled with harlotrie, it is not swift and meet for the course Learn
it. Ye shall see for common, a good turn falls never out in the hands of an
harlote: There is nothing under the Sun, that a body polluted with
fornication can do holilie. As the person is unclean in Gods sight, so all
things he does are polluted, yea, that same very action that otherways is
good is sin in Gods sight. Come thou to the Church, and hear the
preaching, and if thou be an harlote, all is polluted in Gods sight. Deal all
that thou have to the poor; lie thou in harlotrie, all is sin. So in a
word, an harlot can do no good: and if he seem to do any good, it is
nothing but sin in Gods sight. Look then what estate an harlote is in.

Now to go forward to the next verse. He sets down the special remedy of
this sin and vice, whereby they may keep their body from this pollution.
Remedy of fornication.
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness
and honor. The first thing, that is required here, is a science, an habit in
doing: not a light fassion in doing; a doing, as it were, off hand: but, a
settled doing, of a settled grace in the heart: a craft to possess and to keep
the body in holiness and godliness. Thou that would keep thy body clean,
thou must have an habit and setlednesse. All things, we do in this life
should come of a constant habit in the soul, of an use and settled grace in
the heart to do well: For, as the thing a Craftis-man does is of his craft: the
thing a Wright does, is of the science of his craft: so, every one, that
would intend to do well must have an habit and a grace in the heart to do
well. And specially, he, that would keep his body in cleanness, look,
that, he have a craft of it: otherwise, it may be, he will not play the
harlote this night, or, that night, because he hes not the occasion, but, the
first occasion offered, he shall be an harlote. So, all resolves in this. The
best thing in this world to bannishe sin, is, to get an heart settled and
stablished with grace. Get an heart once stablished with grace, then, thou
shall not be moved, but, thou shall stand fast in all tentations, and thou
shall keep a solid course: Let the Devil, the world, and all the enemies
of thy salvation use all the tentations to dravv thee away, thou shall stand
immovable. And therefore, learn the craft of well doing, and get once the
habit in the heart, of well doing, and then, well doing shall come with such
facility to thee, that thou shall marvel thereat.

Then, to come to the next words, That every one of you should know how to
possess his vessel in holiness and honor. He says, every one. He exeemes
none, neither rich, nor, poor, high, nor, low, but he binds every one, of
what rank so ever he be of to the science of possessing the body with
cleanness and holiness. Mark it brethren. There are none privileged to be
an harlot: not a King, nor Queen, nor Earl, nor Countess, no none of no
estate hes this privilege, but all are bound to keep the body clean; and
they who will exeem themselves, and think their rank to be a privilege to
them, they shall exeeme themselves also from the rank of them who runs in
this rinke to Heaven. Thou go not so soon to be an harlote, but thou go
out of the right way, and thou shall never come to Heaven that way, run as
long as thou will. Now what should every one know? Every one should know to
possess his vessel that is, his body, not to be possessed of the body, but
to possess the body; will thou be possessed of the body, and be a slave to
it? and will thou let the foul affections of the body possess thee? thou
shall find woe in thy body for ever. Paul says, I hold my body at under,
and red^ct it in service, I will not let it be my Master. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Always
the thing that every one should know, is to possess. To speak of this
possession, it is a common saying: it is no less practick to possess a thing
after it be gotten, nor to acquire and conquesse it. Yea, I say, there is
greater practick to possess that well which is gotten, nor to get it. And
there are more in the world, that can find the way to get it, nor the way to
keep that which is gotten. But what thing is this they should know to
possess? There are many possessions in the world, but among all possessions
the cheef is, that a man possess holilie his body, which is a vessel to keep
the soul. So the first possession that ever one gettes in this world, is his
own body, and it is the longest possession that any man keeps: Thou shall be
pulled from thy heritage, lands, goods and riches; but as for thy body, albeit
for a time thou lay it down, yet thou shall take it up again* and thou shall
possess it for ever; and it shall either be an house to honor, or else to
dishonor to thee for ever. And so seeing this body is the first possession
and the longest we have, therefore we should be careful how we possess this
body. Be not so careful how thou keep and possessest thy land, as how thou
possessest thy body. There are over many that are so careful to possess
their lands, that they forget to possess their bodies; and yet their land
shall they leave behind them. So the cheifest thing thou should seek to
possess, is thy vessel thou cariest about with thee.

But, how should thou possess thy vessel? First, he shows after what manner
they should possess it, and then, after what manner they should not possess
it. The manner how to possess it is, with holiness and honor. Fie on thee,
thou will keep thy pot, or thy pan clean to thy meat, the vyllest vessel in
thy house, thou will keep it clean, Manner of possessing the vessel of the
body.
and will have it washen every day once; and yet, thou will not be careful to
keep clean that vessel, that keeps thy soul. And yet, more. It is not
en^ugh, to keep it clean, but, thou must keep it in honor. There are sundry
sort, of vessels in an house, some vessels to dishonor, and some, to honor.
They that are even to dishonor must be kept clean; but, they that are to
honor, must both be kept clean and in honor. Thy body, which is the
vessel of thy soul, should not be kept clean only, but, in honor also:
for, it is the vessel of a honorable soul: Yea, Paul says 1. Cor. 6. 19. It
is the dwelling of the holy Spirit: which is more, nor thy soul. Thy body is
dearer boght, nor all the vessels in this earth: it is boght with the precious
blood of Christ; fie on thee, who pollutes and defiles the body, which is boght
with so precious a blood. Ask some men and say to them; why defilest thou thy
body? He will answer, My body is my own. But, I say to thee, thy body is
not thy own, it is Christ's, he hes boght it with his precious blood; if it
be not Christ's, it is the Devils, and he shall possess it in the end. And
therefore, seeing, that body of thine is the Temple of the holy Spirit, boght
with the blood of Christ, keep it in holiness and honor: and if there were
no more to move thee, but because it is the vessel of the soul, thou should
keep it holy and clean: For, an harlots body, as a privy, stincks so in the
nose of the soul, that the soul shall say, Lord, if I were out of this
stinking body: O, how much more will it stincke in the nose of the Lord. And
whosoever keeps their bodies clean, all that they have is clean, their
heritage, their moueables and vnmoueables, all are clean and honorable; but
if thy body be polluted, thou art foull, all is foull: put thy finger to thy
meat, it fyles it; all that goes out of thy body is foull, stinking and
polluted, the very earth thou go on, thou fylest it with thy foull feet,
albeit they be finely decored, and it groans under thee, because thou art
heavy to it. The Lord let us see this* and give us grace to abstain from this
filthy vice harlotrie. Trowest thou thy vvhorishe eyes shall see that fair
glorious face of God? No, no: they shall not see it. Cry for the grace of
sanctification, and for the blood of Christ, that all may be cleansed, and thou
^n the end may win to the end of the rinke, even Christ, and live in him, and
be cleansed in him.

Now to the next verse, which contains the vvrong way of possessing thy
body. The words are. Not in the lust of concupiscence. There is the vvrong
way. Weigh the words. Not with the passion. The word passion signifies a
fiery flame, which breaks out of the body, inflamed with foull lusts, which
proceeds from the heart, and settes the body in a fire. The lust begins at
the heart, and breaks out through the whole members of the body, with
extreme passions, and the body so exercised, is a sick and suffering body:
the body of an harlote is the seek body that goes; it is brunt up with a
fire within. The thing that is enemy to the body is sickness, and passions.
And therefore, who ever would possess their body well, they must be careful
to keep the body from sickness and passions. Now among all the sicknesses
that can come to a man, the sickness of foull lust is the vvorst and most
consuming sickness: another sickness may well waste the moisture of the
body; but, if thou be sanctified, the Lord shall make it a mean to sanctify
thee: And often times there will not be a ^holier body, nor that body, that is
lying in sickness: but, this sickness of lust, not only vvastes the
substance of the body, and dryes it up; but, it destroys the holiness and
honor thou should have: it is an enemy to holiness. It is a sickness
that will never sanctify thy body, but, destroy it; and the longer thou ly
in that sickness, the fouller and vnholier art thou. This is the nature of the
sickness, thou shall not only be consumed in body with sickness, but, thou
shall lose thy holiness in thy soul. And this is a fore matter. A sick man
in another sickness will cry to the Lord, for comfort, but, in the sickness
of harlotrie, he will never have a voice to cry unto the Lord for mercy, if
he repent not. So abhor this sickness, above all other sicknesses. The Lord
makes all sicknesses and death to work to the best to his own, but this
sickness destroys the soul and the body altogether.

Now to move men to abhor this sickness: He bringes in the ensample of the
Gentiles, and he says, even as the Gentiles, who knevv not God. As he vvoulde
say, It is a shame to you to be like the Gentiles, among whom this foull vice
reign first. It is shame to you, who are called to this holiness, to be like
these foull Gentiles: Brethren, a body, who sees not God nor Christ, is a
prophaine blinded body. And he seeing a murderer, going before him in
murder; a thief in thiefrie, he will follovv and commit the like
wickedness: and so the blind following the blind, both falls in the pit
together. But he who hes gotten a sight of God, and a glance of the glorious
face of Jesus Christ, in whose face, the glory of that Majesty shinnes,
when he sees an harlote, he will be so far from following him, that he
will scarcely look to him, but he will abhor and detest him. For, in the
light of the face of God, that a man sees in the face of Jesus Christ, as in a
fair mirror, he will see the filthiness and foulness of sin. None knows
how great a sin the sin of filthiness and blasphemy, etc. is, but that
soul that looks in the glorious face of Jesus Christ. That mirror is so
fair and glancing, that, looking thereto, and in it seeing the foulness of
sin, he will be moved to hate and detest sin and darkness. And I say,
there are none who are truly illuminated with the light of God, but the more
they see Idolatry, harlotrie and sin, the more they deteste them. It will
never give me in my mind, that they who will go out of this land* and at the
first hand can find in their heart to embrace and to kiss Idols, were ever
truly illuminated with that glorious face of Christ; for they that hes seen
the glorious face of Jesus Christ, the more they see the vani^ies and filthe of
the Papistrie, the more they will despise it. Fie on thee that will jouke and
kneel to an Idol, thou never saw the face of Jesus Christ. Thou, who wilt
follow the harlot in (...) the murderer in murder, the drunkard in
drunkenness, the chief in thift, thou never saw the face of Christ. So, the
ground of all mischief, is this dark ignorance in the souls of men, they
know no more of God, nor the Gentiles did. Thou who wilt follow an harlot
knovves no more of God, nor a Pagane, or Heathen. Yet more I learn here. The
cheef vice that rang among the Gentiles, was the vice of lust. Read the
Histories and ye shall find it to be true. Look the 1. chap. Romans There the
Apostle speaks of the pollution of the body that rang among the Gentiles.
Fornication the fin of the gentiles.
Will ye look to murder, it reigns more in Scotland nor it did there;
oppression, falsehood, and such sins reigns more in Scotland nor ever they
did among the Gentiles. So the chief sin reigning among the Gentiles, was
the pollution of their bodies one with another. Now the ground of this, the
Apostle makes the ignorance of God: they saw not, nor knew not God, in Christ,
and therefore, each one run, and straue to pollution. Paul Ephesians chap. 4.
verse 18. 19 says. They had their minds darkened, as strangers from the life
of God; the light of God was not in them: the cause was through ignorance,
which was through hardness of heart: and when they had lost sense and lost
conscience too, then, they gave themselves to wantonness, and to commit all
kind of uncleanness, and that, with all greediness, A vvanton body is
greedy of filthiness, it will swallow up sin, and can never be
satisfied. In the 1. Romans he tells, the Gentiles were vvilfullie ignorant,
they would not know God, nor the light. Such was the maliciousness of their
heart, they put out their eyes and vvoulde not see him; they knevv him in
nature: the Sun, the Moon, the Heavens, all testifies, there is a God. Yet,
the Gentiles, for all that sight they would not know God: Therefore, the Lord
gave them up to a reprobat sense, to follow their own counsel and their foull
affections. So the Apostle tells us, that, the pollution of the body is the
plague and vengence of God, that follows on impiety; it is not only a sin,
but, a punishment that follows upon sin. When one will not know him, nor
hear him, the Lord commonly plague^ that body with the sin of pollution.
It is the plague wherewith the Lord plagues many of the Earls houses in
Scotland: It is the plague that eats up men, wife and children* and all things
that the great men of the land hes: because the Earl, the Lord, the Lord, the
Lady, they are prophaine, they will not hear God, nor know him. Therefore,
the Lord gives them over to pollution, to be a punishment to their body. The
Lord will a great deal more plague us, who have so great a light of God and
knowledge offered to us, if we contemn God and his precepts; seeing the
Gentiles had only that natural light, and was plagued for the contempt
thereof.

Now, to go forward shortly. He hes done with the first point of holiness that
concerns a man himself, and his own person in this rinke: which is to keep
an holy body, and specially from harlotrie: Then, the next is, keep thy
heart and hand from wrong. The first is concerning thy own self: the next is
concerning thy neighbor: Sec. part of sanctification, absteening from vvro^g.
He says, Let no m^^oppresse, overcome, ouerhaile, or, circumveen another man,
or, defraude his brother, in any matter. Why? The Lord is the auenger of all
such things. Then, ye see the first, It is not eneugh to him, that would run
in this rinke to Heaven, to be clean one way, but, he must be clean many
ways. There are many who beguyles themselves, they think, if one virtue be in
them, if they have one grace, that that one grace will vpset many vices and
sins. If he be a courteous Gentle man, and have a fair behavior a liberal
hand, he will think, what matter, although^ be an harlote in body, this
virtue will hide the vice, and I will be borne with? Who will bear with thee?
Men may well bear with thee, but, God will not bear with thee. Another man
will pride him in abstinence and temperatnesse in mouth, and otherways
abstaining from harlotrie also. In the mean time, he will be an oppressor and
deceauer; and he will think, that this one virtue of temperance will hide all
other vices. No, brethren, the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 6. verse 9. Beguyle not
your selves. He who suyes, the harlote shall never inherit the kingdom of God:
he says also, the greedy auaritious man shall never inherit the kingdom of
God. James says chap. 2. verse 10. He who sins in one of the commandments
is guilty of all. Count me all the precepts of the commandments over; keep
nine of them, break the tenth of them, be a murderer, or, an harlote; break
one, thou art guilty of all: and if thou repent not, thou shall die, as well,
as if thou had broken all. I tell you truly: if there be a foull affection,
or, a reigning sin, which hes dominion over the body, (as, for ensample, If
fornication reign in thee, if murder reign in thee) I cannot say thou have
any spark of Regeneration, or true sanctification; thou may play the
hypocrite, thou in whom harlotrie reigns, thou may counterfeit
liberality: but, I say, it is no true liberality; for if this vice of
harlotrie reign and rule in thee, thou art an hypocrite for in him who is
truly renewed there is no affection in the body, but in some measure it will
be renewed. The vice may be in thee, but look that it reign not in thee. No,
let no man think he hes any true grace, all are but shadows of grace, if
any sin reign in thee.

Now to mark every word shortly. Let no man oppress, or, circumveene his
brother, in any matter. He exceptes no man. The Earl, the Lord, the Lord,
believes his power be given him to ouerhaile, to oppressemen. No, no, if thou
runnest so, thou shall never win to Heaven. Thou think the Lord hes
strengthened thy hand to oppress the poor; no, not so, no man is exeemed,
look thou oppress none, or, else, renounce the name of Christ; for, thou
cannot be an oppressor and his member. The word signifies to climme up upon a
body and to tread him down. The second thing is, that, they should not
circumveene, not by deceit beguyle any man. The first is, that none do
violence. The next is, that none deceive. The one as evil as the other: and
we shall find as many destroyed by deceit, as by violence; and a fair clock
of justice casten over deceit. And in what thing should they not circumveene?
In any manner of dealling or, trafficking. The Lord, so long as it pleases him
that we remain in this world, hes appointed a mutual buying and selling,
otherwise, we could not live: and he hes ordained this buying and selling to
be so, that both the parties win, the buyer win, the seller-winne and he
who blocks aright, and deals within his neighbor; according to the word of
God aright, he will not be content to win himself alone, No, the
conscience of him will say, and must say, I understand, as I have made my own
vauntage, so should my brother make his vauntage also. But, alas, such is our
self love, that, we can never think, we get advantage, except our brother
get loss. Alas this sin is over much used in Scotland. The Lord amend it. The
Lord is the auenger of sin. And if in blocking thou seek not the advantage
of thy neighbor that blocks with thee with thy advantage, thy advantage shall
be a curse to thee, and thou shall curse the time that ever thou got that
advantage.

Whom should they not deceive? He says, a brother. Thou should not beguyle
any man, neither Turk nor Pagane, much more should thou beware to beguile a
Christian a brother, or sister: for, I assure thee, God will not see them
wrongde. The Lord that is thy master, he will repair the vvrong. He that is
made a brother to the first begotten of the Father, the Lord will not see that
brother vvrongde. The Apostle 1. Corinthians. chap. 6. verse 8. settes down that
matter as a great indignity, saying, Ye do injury, ye do hurt to your
brother* and them who hes given their names to Christ, ye shame your selves to
beguyle your brethren. But to open the matter more deeply. There are many
conjunctiones the Lord hes ordained to be among men, as of blood, affinity,
civil society, etc. and every one of these conjunctiones oblishes them to do
no wrong to that person, with whom they are conjoined. But, when this Christian
conjunction commes in, in our elder brother Christ, when we are all members of
one body, in one head Christ, not sundry bodies, as brethren on earth are;
this conjunction above all conjunctiones binds me and thee to deal truly in
any block we have with our brother. So, when thou art dealing with any
man, say this with thy self, he with whom I deal is my brother, and a
member of that body of Christ, and therefore, far be it from me, to deceive
him. Alas, if men could think on this, at their blocking, that they use to
deal with a brother in Christ, and member of that body, for all the world
they vvoulde not set themselves to beguile their brother. Many testifies, by
their deceit, they are not brethren in this body, for, if they were brethren
indeed, for all the world they vvoulde not deceive them. Now, there is here
another thing. I see among all conjunctiones that ever hes been in any
society* or, conjunction in this earth, the most powerful conjunction to keep
men together in one society, and mutual love and concord, is this spiritual
conjunction of us in the Lord: All the laws and conjunctions that ever hes
been in any commonwel, since the beginning, are not so powerful to keep men
in society, as this conjunction we have together in one head. Mark it. I tell
you, if men and women be not joined together in one head, by a spiritual
union, it may be there be a face of unity in the Country: but no society and
sincerity in love, except the Lord be the binder and conjoiner together, no
true conjunction. If Christ be not the conjoyner and the binder of the man with
the wife, the father with the son, no true conjunction. I will not say, that
that Roman and Grecian Common-well, that had no part in God through Jesus
Christ, had ever any true conjunction, or, sincerity in love. No sincerity in
concord, but, that, that is made up in Jesus the Lord: when we run all in,
to be members of one body, and he sitting and joining us altogether, as pieces
of that body, then, there will be a sweet conjunction Alas, ye see this
sweet harmony and unity is not among people; yea, alas, among them that
professes Christianity, greater outcasts, nor among Turks, The cause is,
there are many and over many, that call themselves Christians, and takes upon
them to be in the body, that hes no part in Jesus, and hes nothing ado with
him. It is shame, that, they should take this name upon them: for, it is true,
if thou were a true member of that body, thou would not severe thy self
from the rest of the body, by thy murder, oppression, deceit, etc. These
homicides and murderers does testify, men and women are not truly conjoined
in this body, but keeps the name of Christianity, without effect.

Now, he casts to one reason of these two things, saying, God is the an^^ger
of all such things. both of deceitfulusse and oppression. The reason is
terrible, and it tells us, God sees all, and teaches us, that in this rinke to
Heaven, if we be not hedged in with terrors yea the best of us, with terrors on
this side, and terrors on that side, we will run out of the way. And
therefore, as God hes appointed fair promises to exhort men to go forward:
saying Go forward, thou shall get a fair Crown: So, on the other part,
knowing fair promises will not do the turn, he threatens judgments, saying.
Go thou out of the way, my vengence shall overtake thee: yea, he does more,
nor this, and casts in greater terrors (he knows, that, words will not do
the turn) whiles he takes an harlote, as it were by the neck, and and in the
sight of the world, he will tear him in pieces, and let men see, that the
vengence of God follows on sin and will strike him with such a sudden death,
that men will fear to do the like. We see daily such experience of Gods
judgments: whiles he will take an oppressor, who hes oppressed men in this
world, and will tred on him with his feet, to terrify the world, and this is
his daily doing in this world. Now, taking this man, and that woman, now and
then punishing them, to let the world see, that, punishment is for sin, and
sin craves judgment: yea, and let them see, there is a day of judgment
coming, when he will tak soul and body and cast them into hell. For, these
temporal judgments, are but as many tokens, to tell us, there is a day
coming, when all odds shall be made even. When ye see a man plagued
temporallie, stand not there, but think on the last punishment, unless
repentance interueene. Ye will marvel when ye see a man running in
wickedness, that, the Lord in our sight, instantly strikes him not: No, know
ye not the patience of God? He is patient, and lets men run in wickedness,
until the cup be full, and then, he powers out his wraith and judgment on
them to the uttermost. The Lord keep us from his judgments and wraith, for
Christ his Sons sake. To whom, with the Father and the holy Spirit, be praise
and honor, for ever.

AMEN.
THE XV. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 4. verse. 6. 7. 8. 6 That no man oppress, or, defraude his
brother in any matter: for, the Lord is auenger of all such things, as we
also have told you before time, and testified.

7 For, God has not called us to uncleanness, but, unto holiness.

8 He therefore that despises these things, despises not man, but, God, who
has even given you his holy Spirit.


IN this part of this Epistle, after the salutation, and after that large
congratulation, wherein he rejoised for the grace the Lord had bestowed on the
Thessalonians, not after a common manner, but in great abundance. He sets
down precepts of manners, concerning an holy life, and a godly conversation
in this world, and he comprehendes them all, first in a general, and he
calls it sanctification, holiness in life and conversation, for whatsoever
duty appertains to us to be done in this life, the whole may be taken up
under this one word, sanctification, which stands in holiness in soul and
body. When he hes set down the general, he diuydes it in parts, and the
first part of sanctification, of holiness of life and conversation, he takes
it up to be in absteining from fornication, it respects a man, or woman in
their own person, that they keep the soul and body that God hes given them,
in holiness, unpolluted with filthiness. The second part concerns our
neighbor, that we do him no wrong: He is an unholy man that hurtes his
neighbor, that will vvrong him in any dealling or trafficking with him. He
is hurt two manner of ways: first, he is hurt by deceit, under color, by
fraud, beg^yling or circumvention He is secondly hurt by plain violence and
oppression. Both these two sorts of wrongs and injuries are unholy: He that
circumueenes his brother is unholy, he that oppresses his brother is unholy.
Now to persuade them to this sanctification, standing in these two parts,
he uses sundry arguments. The first argument ye heard of before, was from
the will of God. This is the will of God (says he) your sanctification. It is
the Lords will that ye be holy. It is not an hid will, but a revealed will
and often revealed, that ye be holy in your self, holy in respect of your
brethren, and holy all manner of way. Brethren, if there were not an
argument to move us to be holy, holy in respect of our selves, holy in
respect of our neighbor, this only reason, to understand it is Gods will we
so do, may be sufficient. For, albeit we know of no other reason, wherefore
we should be holy, but only that it is his will, it binds us to holiness.
For, this reverence tovvarde the Creator, and Redeemer of the world, should be
in every creature, that they understanding any thing to be agreeable to his
holy will, should stoup: knovving his will, they are bound to acquiesc^ and
rest there, seeking no farther, and to close their eyes at all their reasones;
howbeit the thing that is enjoined to them, should seem to be an
impossibility. The Apostle speaking of his will Roman. chap. 12. verse 2.
says, His will is ever good; it is good what ever he wills, it is
perfect, yea, it is the rule of all righteousness. So every one should reason
with themselves. Is it the will of God? Then it is most just. I will
follow and obey it, my reason shall not stay it, my reason is vvrong and out
of rule, his will is the rule of righteousness. I insist on this rather,
because I know how hard it is to make the will of man pliable, and to frame
it to Gods will: and what discrepance is betvveene the will of God, and the
will of man. So if thou give thy self over to thy own nature, there is
nothing God wills, but thou willest the contrare thereof. And therefore our
prayer should be continually to God, to conform our froward will to his will:
this should be our prayer continually, what ever come to us, be it
prosperity, or adversity: Lord do thy will, and give me not my own will; for,
if I get my own will, it will be my wreak; but, Lord, rule my will according to
thy will, for thy will is only the right will, and the preserver of my life,
and even now while we have time, we should cry, Lord, thy will be done: we are
thy creatures, Lord let thy will be done in us. And, I assure thee, if thou get
thy will conformable to his will, and be content with any thing he lays on
thee, life or death, certainly thou shall find comfort, and all shall come well
to thee.

The second argument taine from the vengence that falls on the transgressors.
He says, For the Lord is the auenger of al^ such things. He auenges the
deceit used by us, and the violence done against our neighbor. This second
argument follows well on the other; for, one of those two must be, either the
will of God must be done by us or else vengence must be for disobedience. If
the will of God move thee not to do that which he craves of thee, Punishment
for disobedience to gods will.
to live in holiness before him; let the fear of vengence and punishment move
thee. For, Brethren, the will of our God, is, in the self, a thing so holy
and inviolable, that there was never person yet, that disobeyed that will, from
old Adam to this hour, if it were but in a little thought of the heart, let be
a deed, in a motion of the soul, let be an action, but that disobedience and
transgression of that holy and inviolable will of God was punished either in
the persons self, or in the Mediator Jesus Christ. So inviolable a thing is the
just will of God, that the disobeence to it cannot escape punishment. God is
not like man, impossible it is that thy disobedience to him, (if it were but ^n
a motion of thy heart) should be unpunished, either in thy body or soul, or
else thou must have refuge to the Mediator, and it shall be punished in him.
For, if thou be in Christ, thy disobedidience is taine away in his obedience.
And therefore think it no childish play, to play with his will, if it were but
the least cogi^ation of the heart: Play with man as thou will, but one thought
against Gods will importes damnation, if thou had a thousand lives.

He adds that reason in the end of this verse, as we also (...) you before
time and testified. This was not the first time that he had told them of it of
before, and now he tells them again, to let them se the certainty of it. The
lord con^tant in denoun^^ng executing of his judgments.
Brethren, this hes a deeper ground. This constancy in den^oncing and
threatening judgment, that ye find in those who speaks in the name of the
Lord, (they will denounce once, twyse, and thryse that same judgment) tells
you, the Lord will be avenged on ungodliness. The ground is in God himself.
The Lord is constant in his vengence on impenitent sinners, he alters not,
howbeit he delay the vengence unto his appointed time, yet the vengence stands
fast: he is not like man. Man is changeable, he will brag the night, and say, I
will be avenged, to morrow all is away. Man is vain and inconstant, the Lord
is an unchangeable God, he will persevere with an unchangeable mind to
vengence. Of this it commes, that those whom he sendes to denounce vengence in
his name, will preach vengence to them this day, vengence the next day, and ay
will tell you, the Lord will be once avenged on you. The Lord will avenge thy
harlotrie, thy deceit, thy oppression, and ay constantly cry on. to let you
see, the judgments bides on the impenitent sinner, he will not change his
sentence for all the world: If God were changing, ye who speaks in his name
would change, and he would not have warrant in his conscience to speak
constantly: but, God being constant and unchangeable in his purpose, of
necessity the preacher must be constant, And it hes not been seen of before,
but the constancy in denouncing vengence by the servants of God against
impenitent people, hes ever been justified with a sensible judgment, and the
vengence they threatened constantly, it lighted. Now, brethren. we need not to
go far off for ensamples. This constancy in threatening hes been often used in
Edinburgh. This hes been often told you: if this be not amended, the famine,
the Pestilence shall overtake this City. Now judge ye this day, if the effect
justifies not our saying. It is folly to men to think, that one word of
threatening of judgment spoken by the true servants of God, will fall to the
ground: no it cannot be The Lord may well delay long, men and women may well
sleep long, but, when the artickle of time commes which the Lord hes appointed
for judgment, then follows the heavy judgment. And therefore we should judge
holilie of the truth that hes been spoken by the mouth of his servants, and
glorify God al manner of ways, count God to be true, and let all men be liars.

In the next verse, we have the third argument, to move them to holiness. The
argument is taken from their calling; For, God hes not called us to
uncleanness, but, to holiness. This calling is our christian calling, whereby
we are translated out of the kingdom of darkness, to the kingdom of Jesus
Christ: we are called out of Hell, to Heaven: from darkness, to light: we are
called to a kingdom and glory prepared for us. Now, he reasons from this their
calling. Our christian calling should move us to holiness.
This calling is not to uncleanness, to be an harlot, to be a deceiuer of thy
brother, to be an oppressor, but, thou art called to be an holy and a clean
person: thou was called out of the pollution of the world, and translated to
cleanness; therefore, thy calling is holy. Of all the callings in this earth,
the fairest calling is the calling of one to holiness. The calling to an
earthly kingdom is not so fair, as the calling of a man to holiness. This
Christian holiness, it permittes no so^t of uncleanness in this world, no,
not so much, as a foull thought: but, it craves of him, who is called to this
Christian vocation all kind of cleanness in the world. Learn ever to
distinguish between thy own person and this fair calling of Christianity. If
thou be unclean and filthy, it commes not of this Christian calling, but, of
thy own person. And therefore: let no man, when he sees a man, or, woman, that
keeps that name, and enjoyes that calling to be called a Christian (the
fairest name, that ever man got) to become an harlote, an oppressor, a
deceyuer, a murderer: lay not the fault on the holy calling, but, on the
foull person, that is unworthy of the calling, for, he is but a vile
creature, that is so called. That Christian calling permittes not such vile
sins: it is the vile person, that committes this sin. This hes been an
oulde custom. When men sees these men, who professes Christianity, fall in
sin, the mouths of the wo^ld are openned to blaspheme that vocation of
Christianity, and to say, Take up your Christian and holy man now, there is
your purity, that, ye do now profess; and so, the blame is ever more laid on
the calling, and not on the person. The Prophet says, Through you, my name is
reproached among the Gentiles. Esaias chap 25. verse 5. Take head to this. When
thou, who art called, committes any sin, wicked men will lay the fault on
the calling, and not on the person: And therefore, be careful, to keep holy
thy person, that thy person be not a slander to thy holy calling. I tell thee,
harlotrie is a great sin, indeed, that offendes God; but, the exponing of
this Christian calling, to be evil spoken of, is a greater sin, to thee, nor
harlotrie, murder, or, any other sin, that can be committed, and at that
day, it shall be sorer punished, nor any sin. There cannot be a greater
sin, nor to give wicked men occasion to speak evil of that holy calling.
And trow ye not, that this sin is the special cause of this judgment this
day? It is not so much thy murder, thy harlotrie, thy oppression, etc. as the
slandering of thy holy vocation and calling: And therefore hes Scotland most
justly procured the just judgment of God.

Another thing I see here: I perceive this Christian calling should be the
rule and square, whereby our actiones should be rewled. So, that, in no calling
under the Sun, we should do any thing, that is vnsetting, or, unseemly to
this Christian calling: but, all our actiones should be ruled conform to it.
A Christian King is bound to rule all his actiones, by the rule of this
Christian calling: a Christian subject should follow the rule of this christian
calling. Play the merchant, but, as a Christian man: play the part of a man of
law, but, in the mean time, forget not, thou art a Christian man, etc. Let al
thy actions in thy own craft be squared by this rule of thy Christian vocation.
There is a great advantage: when any man in any vocation behaues himself as a
Christian man, the labor is pleasant in the sight of God, and it is blessed.
If a Christian man seek the glory of God in his calling, then, he shall be
blessed in his actiones: but, when in doing any thing, the Christian calling is
forgot. and the Lord Jesus is not before the eye of a man, then, the action is
unholy, yea, howbeit otherwise it be lawful: if the doer, in doing, do not
with a Christian heart, respecting the glory of God and Jesus Christ and have
no regard of his calling in Jesus, it is unholy: and what ever is done,
without having Christ, and a respect to Gods glory in Christ, before thee, it
is unclean. What ever ye do, whither ye eat, or, drink do all to the
glory of God, otherwise, all is sin. Brethren, seeing we are called to a
kingdom, why should we do any thing, that is unworthy of so glorious a
calling? It would seem to some, that this Christian calling bound the hands
of men, that they cannot use their calling, with such liberty, as they would*
This is not a new calumny. I answer. This Christian calling binds thy hand
from doing any thing, that is unlawful, and against the will of God. It
closes thy hand, that thou do no vvrong. Thou who would be an harlot, it
binds thee, that thou be not an hatlo^e; so, the oppressor, it binds him,
that he oppress not, and in the day of Judgment, it will stand up, as a
witness against him, that he was not worthy of that calling. But, as to any
calling on earth, as, to be a King, to be a subject, it will not stay thee to
do thy exercise, but, gives liberty to thee to do and blesses thy doing and
squares all thy actiones to thee, and makes thee holy. This christian calling
never hindered a man to do any thing, that was lawful, but, lowsed his hands
to do all good things, and sanctified all his actiones. Therefore, the
Apostle 1. Cor. chap. 7 verse 20 says, Let every man, that is called, abide
in that vocation, he is called to. Is he a King? Let him bide still and be a
King, and do all the actions, that concerns a King, christianlie. Is he a
subject? Let him do all the actiones pertaining to a subject. Whereby he
means, that, this Christian calling stays no man in his lawful calling, but,
sanctifies it to him.

He says, we are called to sanctification, not to uncleanness, Ye see the end
of this calling is, to be holy and clean. All graces spiritual, and all
blessings of God in Jesus Christ, serves to this end, to make us holy. We
(says the Apostle) are chosen, that we should be holy. Ephesians 1. 4. The end of
our vocation, is cleanness and holiness. Holiness the end of all spiritual
graces.
Likewise, we are justified in the blood of Jesus. to this end, that we may be
holy, and renewed again, according to the Image of God, which we lost in the
fall of Adam. And therefore, the end of our clectiona^cere is holiness. What
means this preaching and hearing, but to make thee holy and clean. Our
justification, our sanctification, etc. serves all to this end, that we should
be renewed again to holiness. So, in one word: The happiness of man stands
cheeflie in holiness, if thou be happy, be clean and holy; for, we count
happiness to stand in the end. So, the man that is clean in soul and body,
that is the happy man. And by the contrare, the foull adulterer, an unhappy
body: a murderer, an unhappy body, etc. And where holiness is, I cannot
say, that, there wants a blessing. Art thou unholy in life, and will tell me
of election, that thou art chosen to life, before all eternity? I see no
warrant thou have, for it. If thou delight in wrong doing; I see no warrant, to
say, thou art happy, thou have only the bare name of a Christian. Art thou
unholy? What warrant have thou, to say, thou art called, thou art justified in
the blood of Christ? Vocation, Justification are to holiness. So, lackest thou
holiness? What token have thou of thy happiness? So, the end of all, of thy
election, of thy vocation, of thy justification, of thy sanctification, is
holiness: and according to this, try thy self, and judge of the things going
before: It is a vain thing to thee, to live like a dog in this world, and
then, to boast thy self of thy election, justification etc. Now, thou is as
far from Heaven, as a dog, except in one time, or, other, thou have a sense
of this holine^^ in thee.

He says not simply, we are called to sanctification. But he says, God hes
called us. There is a great motive to holiness: it is God, who called us. So,
there are two things in this verse, that should move us to holiness. The
first, our calling, which is to holiness: God the caller a great motive to
holiness.
the second, the caller. It is God, that calls us. The worthiness of such a
person, as hes called us, hes no small weight and moment, to move us. The
glorious God calls on us, and straynes himself to speak to us, with his own
mouth. If any King should call a man to any thing no doubt, the man would
think himself bound to obey, not only for the commodity, he would get, by
obeying that calling; but, also, because of the personage of him, that hes
called him. whom he is bound to obey: So, then, if it be a sin, not to obey a
glorious personage on the earth, when he calls: how great sin is it, not to
obey the Son of God, when he calls thee to holiness? Brethren, think of Gods
calling and of his person, who has called you, as you will, this is most sure,
When God calls thee to holiness, it is impossible, but, that calling must be
effectual in you, either one way, or, other; and that, in respect of the
caller. No, that glorious person cannot open his mouth in vain, for, Gods word
must take effect. No word ever came out of his mouth, but it hes the full
effect. When he calls thee to be holy, thou must be holy, and his word must
make thee holy: when he calls on thee being dead, to live again, his word must
work life in thee and quicken thee: or, else, when he calls on thee to be holy,
if he make thee not holy by his word, be assured, that word shall slay thee.
If thou answer him not calling on thee, in holiness of life and conversation,
thou shall perish in filthiness eternalie. And all ye, to whom this word sounds
daily, calling you to holiness: (for, all our preaching what is it, but, to
call men from wickedness and uncleanness, to holiness? the murderer, from his
murder; the adulterer, from adultery;) I say to thee, if this word calling
thee to holiness, be not effectual in thee, and draw thee not out of the vile
sin thou lies in, to holiness, certainly, it shall slay thee, and bring
damnation on thee: all this preaching shall bring on thee the heavy judgment
and vengeance of God. And ye all, who hears (...) this day, if your
consciences challenges you of any vice; I call you now by the word of God,
from that wickedness: and I pronounce, if ye come not out of this wickedness, in
respect of this word, that calls, and God, that is calling on you; his
vengeance shall sease upon you. And now, it is no time to thee to ly in
uncleanness, when the Pest is at the door: woe to thee dying therein being in
the puddle of uncleanness, but, well is thy soul, that turns to God, howbeit
thou die in the pest of the body.

Now follows another argument, to move us to holiness. He who will not be holy,
when God calls on him, disobeyes not man, but, God. As there are two things,
to move us to holiness, first our vocation to holiness; secoundlie, the
caller: so, there are two sins, that accompanies the disobedience of that
calling: one sin, against the holy calling; another sin, against the holy
God the caller. Contempt of God and the word, the greatest sin.
There is no sin by the self allone: One sin must ever have another with
it, and committing one sin, we sin many ways. Compare these two, the
sin against the calling, and the sin against the caller; by all appearance
the secound is the greatest. The greatest sin, that can be, is, to contemn
God. Thou that playest the harlote, thy sin is double: first by thy harlotrie
thou sinnest against thy calling thou was called to: and this is a great sin;
but the other is greater: Thou contemnest the voice of the high Majesty of God
that called thee. The oppressor sins by his oppression, but his sin is the
greater in that he contemnes his caller. And in the latter day ye shall find
by experience, the challenge shall not be so much against the adulterer, for
his adultery, as, for that, in sinning, he contemned the voice of God calling
him from adultery. This shall be a chief challenge and dirtlay, especially, of
christians, who hes heard this word and Gospel of God, that, they contemnd the
majesty of God, who called them by this word and Gospel. And surely all these
particular judgments of God, that falls on men and these particular
judgments on Scotland, and on Edinburgh this day, either the Pest or the
famine falls not so much for uncleanness and other sins, as for the contemp of
the Gospel, and God that calls thee by this base ministry. And therefore the
right cause of all these judgments, is the contempt of God calling us to
holiness: For we have not only sinned in committing of sin, but in
contemning God calling us from sin, and we have spitted, as it were in his face.
Put away the contempt of the word of God, if ye put it away, who wait but but
God will be merciful? If we contemn still, look for greater judgment. The
contempt of God and of this food of the soul offered by the base ministry,
hes caused this plague of famine and the Pest fall on this land. The Apostle
says, In resisting, ye resist not men, but God. There is no blessing in time
that God gives but he ministers it by men He will not come out of Heaven to
speak to thee but he will speak to thee by the ministry of selie simple men.
He tells thee of remission of sins, of justification, of sanctification: etc.
and if thou despise the ministry of base men, though thou were Monarch of all
the earth, thou shall never get remission of sins, sanctification nor
glorification. Now this is the thing that beguyles the world: When they look
to the vile ministry of men, they cannot see God in it. They look to the
selie man; they go no farther. Who speaks? A selie man speaks* Who calls
me? I heard a selie man, and so through the man be looks not up to heaven, to
se God speaking by, the minister. And from this flows the contempt: and
resisting man, thou resists God that is the principal worker. The word is then
contemned, when the man is contemned in speaking it. Resisting man, thou
resists God who sent the man. Can any man resist God, and not be plagued
therefore, if there be no repentance? So they who are called to the ministry,
let them care for nothing but to speak the word of God, and open their mouth
to glorify God: And if he be resisted, he is not resisted, but God who sent
him, is resisted. And at that last day it shall be seen it was not man thou
resisted, but God. Happy are they therefore who gettes a sight of this in
time, and that gives obedience to the word. Happy is the body that receives
this word, as the word of god, and not of man.

Now the last argument follows, Who, says he, hes given us his holy Spirit.
Look now what he hes done: He hes chosen us from all eternity to be holielie
and hes given us his Spirit, and al graces to this end to be holy. When the
Lord hes begun to call us to holiness, Spirit of god d^velling in us binds
to holiness.
if he stand there, and do no more, it will not do the turn: if he give us
over to our own nature and free will, and take away his Spirit when he hes
brought thee on a point of holiness and leave thee there, thou shall never
enter in Heaven. And therefore when he hes done all these things to thee, then
he will put into thy soul and body his Spirit of grace to cleanse the
foulness out of thy soul and body: to bring in holy motions, actions and
speeches; So that thou art made now (as Paul speaks 1. Corint. 6. 19.) the
Temple of the holy Spirit, and then that same glorious person the holy
Spirit, coming from the Father and the Son, will dwell within thee in soul
and body, as assuredly as we are within this Church presently; and thy soul
and body shall be as sure Temples of this Spirit, as this Church is to our
bodies. And is not this a great honor that in substance this glorious person
will dwell within us? So this learnes us, that all is of grace the beginnig of
grace, the midst of grace, the end of grace. Our predestination in God, our
vocation our justification and sanctification, all in God, our glorification in
God. Brethren the highest estate we can come to in this life is sanctification.
We pass from predestination to vocation, from vocation to justification, from
justification to sanctification, we cannot reach higher so long as we are
here. We may grow in this estate but we cannot come higher. As to
glorification, we get it in the life to come when we leave this life. All our
actiones here are impersite, and all mingled with the corruption of nature,
but hereafter all will be perfited. For when we leave this life, we go not
backward, Think not that body that sleeps in Christ, that he goes backward.
That body is predestinat, called sanctified here in some measure, after this
life passes a degree upward, and commes to glorification: for holiness in this
life, it passes up to glory: we are holy here, but glorious in the life to
come: We are not called to be glorified in this life, but to be sanctified:
when we end our life in Jesus Christ we pass up to a wonderful glory. Now
how comes this glory? Comes it on any thing we have done here in earth? Comes
it of our works or merits? No, as holiness in this life comes of the free
mercy of God in Christ; so the crown of glory in that life only comes of
the mercy of God in Christ. We shall be glorified in Heaven, but how? Through
the grace of God that he will give us in Christ. And as the crown of glory
shall be given us of free grace, so the standing in that estate of glory shall
endure for ever of grace. So all comes of grace. Perseverance of holiness in
this life, is only by the grace of God. All perseverance in glory in the life
to come of grace and mercy: nothing in earth nothing in Heaven, but free grace
in mercy. Wherefore is this the Lord will have nothing in Heaven nor earth, but
mercy? To this end, that all the glory of our salvation may be given to him:
and he that glories in it should glorify him. Grace, free mercy, only in
him. And let this be our song on earth, when we speak of the grace of God on
earth Glory to God, mercy to us only in God The Lord give us grace that we
may give al and the only praise of mercy and of glory in this life, and in
the life to come. To this God with the Son and the holy Spirit, be immortal
praise and glory forever.

AMEN.
THE XVI. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 4. verse. 9. 10. 11. 12. 9 But, as touching brotherly love,
ye need not that I write unto your for ye are taught of God, to love one
another.

10 Yea, and that thing verelie ye do unto all the brethren which are
throughout all Macedonia: but, we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more
and more.

11 And that ye study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you:

12 That ye may behave your selves honestly toward them, that are without,
and that nothing be lacking unto you.


THE Apostle, brethren, after he hes set down his general exhortation to
sanctification and holiness. This is the will of God, says he, even your
sanctification: that ye be holy in soul, holy in body, and holy in all
your actions, within and without. He discends and comes to the particulare
parts of this general exhortation. The first part of it respects a man or
woman in their own person, that they keep their person to God, as the vessel
of honor: keep it from fornication which is a sin that especially and in
the highest degree fyles the person of a man, both in body and soul, which
should be kept in holiness to God who made it. The next part of this
sanctification concerns our brother, our neighbor; that we do no wrong,
nor oppress him by violence; we circumvene him not by fraud and guile in
business concerning this life, but in all affairs we be as careful he have
advantage, as we are that our selves have advantage. When thou art only set
to make vantage to thy self by thy own self love, that advantage is wrong. We
heard the arguments the Apostle uses to move them to this: First, the will of
God. If the will of God will not move thee from harlotrie, from doing evil
unto thy neighbor, let the vengeance of God move thee, (for that is the second
argument,) and it shall overtake thee in the end, if thou continue therein.
Then he came to that holy and Christian calling, that should move us to live
holy. We are called to be holy; let us keep therefore our own person holy;
let us be holy to our brother; let us be holy in our hand, holy in our
faculties. Then he goes forward to another argument. He that will not be holy
when he is called by man, he says, it is not with man he hes ado, but with
God. It is God that bids thee keep thy body clean from harlotrie, thy hand
from wrong: Therefore thou disobeying, thou disobeyes not man, but God. What is
it to disobey me or him that speaks? It is that great God that thou rebellest
against, and in that great day thou shall be challenged as a rebel to that
great God. These arguments are all set down to this end, to move us to
holiness. Then at last in the end of the last verse, he castes to an argument
from the holy Spirit given us by God, to this end. Getst thou the holy
Spirit, to play the harlote? getst thou that holy Spirit, that glorious gift,
the third person of the glorious Trinity, dwelling in thee, as in a Temple, to
the effect thou should commit filthiness? No, as all things oblishes thee to
be holy so especially the holy Spirit of God dwelling within thee (craving
an holy Temple) craves holiness: otherwise with thy filthiness thou shall
disludge him and anger him, until at last he shall depart from thee, and then
that foull spirit of wickedness shall possess thee.

Now to come to the text. In the first part thereof he goes forward to another
particulare part of this sanctification, which is brotherly love. So the third
part of this sanctification stands in brotherly love, called beneficience and
liberality to thy brother: a grace and virtue craving an open hand, to bestow
on the necessity of thy brooher. So when he hes exhorted not to do wrong to
thy neighbor, not to oppress him by violence, or surprise him by deceit:
then he exhorts that thou be beneficial to him, liberal to him, to support
his want and necessity. He says then, But as concerning brotherly love
(bountifulnes toward thy brother) ye need not that I write unto yo^. The
reason of it is; What need have I who am a man to be over diligent in teaching
outwardly, when God is the inward teacher of you; and when he teaches this
point of doctrine in special, to love every one another? There is the substance
of the first words. Now to observe something on the words. Ye see it is not
eneugh not to do evil, but true sanctification craves that we do good also De^
(...) from evil, says David in his 34. Psalm. verse. 15. and do good. There
are two things: It is not eneugh not to do wrong to our neighbor or brother,
not to oppress him, not to beguile him; but true holiness craves that we
benefit him, we bestow on him a good deed, we supply his necessity, want
and poverty. All the parts of this which we call sanctification, holiness of
life, (that are as many graces of God in Christ) are so inseparably linked
together as the linkes of a chain are one in another; All the parts of
sanctification link it together.
that if any of them be a missing in any person* man or woman, and be not in
him in some measure, I cannot say that that person hes truly any part of
sanctification. As for exemple. Even this one grace of almous deeds, of
beneficence, showing our liberality on them that have need; if this be not in
some measure in any man or woman: Liberality.
if there be nothing in the person but gredines, avarice and a closed hand: who
can say that that person hes any true or solid grace of God. If one of these
vices reign in thee, as avarice, reigning in the highest degree, if thou be a
slave to it, who can say that any true grace is in thy soul? Thou may well
count thou have this grace or that grace, but I can not say that any grace of
that spirit reign within thy soul, make no account that there is any grace
within thee, if any sin reign in thee without controlement. Count not of thy
abstenance, thou will be abstinent in mouth, and then an auaritious man But
look that every grace of God in some measure be within thee, and that
sanctification go through thy whole soul and body. Peter in his sec. Epist.
and 1. chap. linkes together all the graces of God: amongst the rest, he
countes this brotherly love, he linkes this link among the rest to help faith
(for I assure thee faith will not stand it self alone.) Cast to, says he, to
faith virtue, to virtue science, and so forth, until ye come to this
brotherly love; Add to thy brotherly love charity, and so forth until all
graces be linked together. Paul 2. Corinthians. chap. 8. verse. 7. hes a special
regard to this grace, showing our liberality to our poor brethren: As ye
abound in all things, in faith, knowledge, (...) ^^oke says he, that ye
abound also in liberality, and doing of almous deeds And as in all the graces
of the holy Spirit in us there is a resemblance of the Image of Christ: So
ospeciallie in this grace of beneficence. Ye know, says Paul ^. Corinth: chap
8. verse 9. the bountifulness of the Lord, who when he was (...), was made
poor for our sa^es, that we might be made rich in his poverty. Now this is
the grace that is here recommended; and now I recommend it to you, for if it
was in any age craved, now certainly at this time, thou have more nor matter
to show thy well doing and almous deeds to the poor* Certainly charity
was never so cold, and men's hands were never so hard contracted and men
were never nearer to themselves, nor they are now. The latter days are near;
for the nearer the end of the world be, we are the nearer our selves; and the
nearer our selves the farther from God.

The Apostle when he exhorts them to this grace he comes not on so plainly,
but he uses an holy color, and kind of simulation: He exhorts them, and yet
he lets not on him he exhortes. And as it were obscurelie, and passing by he
gives them a watch-ward and wakens them up to be beneficial. To teach (...)
Ministers to be wise in speaking to the people. We should not leave off to
exhort any person in whom there is grace to do any duty: but, yet, we should
do it so discreetly, that, our exhortation (...) not so much an exhortation,
as a commendation. For the grace of God in any person should not be misknown,
but known and reverenced, both for his sake that is gi^er, and for his sake
that hes gotten it: both that God may be glorified in giving him that grace,
and the person may be stirred up to persevere in that grace. For, it is an old
proverb, Virtue being commended increasse. Ioh. 1. Epist. 2. 27. uses this same
wisdom. I need not, says he, teach you, the holy spirit hes taught you all
things, and in the mean time he is teaching them continually; yet when he is
teaching them, he says, he needed not to teach the^. So Paul when he is making
a commendation of the grace in them, he says, it is not needful to exhort you
to the grace, ye have a better teacher nor I, Teaching of the holy spirit.
God teaches you; therefore I need not to teach you: the Lord teaches you by
working in your hearts by his holy Spirit, what needs me to teach you by my pen?
Brethren. There are two sorts of teachers, God and man. Men teaches,
Philosophers in schools teaches, Ministers out of pulpets teaches, many sorts
of teachers. If man be the only teacher of grace and virtue to be embraced by
the auditor, and if Gods Spirit should not concur inwardly to instruct the
soul and heart, there would never be a good scholar in the school of christ;
none of you to the worlds end would get good by teaching. It may be men
teaching thee will inform thy mind, and make thee to understand what is
spoken: but man can never teach the heart, that is, to embrace that is spoken:
no it will pass man's power to reform the heart: if the holy spirit move thee
not to embrace that which is spoken, thou will never embrace it, for all that
man can say. As for example. I may stand up and lay out before you this whole
grace of liberality and beneficence, and paint it out in all the colors
thereof, and make you understand this whole virtue in all the parts: But when
it commes to the heart to be practiced in your life and conversation, if the
holy Spirit go not down to reform the heart, ye shall never be the better, but
the worse, for the knowledge shall but serve to aggreadge your condemnation.
Then be never content with the voice of men* but ever cry for the inward
doctor the Spirit of God from Heaven. And say, Lord come with this word, and
teach my heart, otherways, all is but wind, and shall be an aggreading of my
condemnation at the last day: It is thou Lord who is the only inward teacher,
and therefore except thou teach me, I shall not be taught. So except that holy
teacher be with us in teaching all is but lost time.

Now to come to the words. What is this the Lord craves of them? what teaches
the Lord them? that every one should love another. He teaches not only love,
but love that meets love; he will not teach thee only to love him, but him
to love thee again. This is mutual love. As he teaches thee to love me, so he
teaches me to love thee. love must be mutual.
Friendship stands not in the one side, but friendship must be conjoined to
friendship. There is no bond in that blessed body of Christ, except there be a
mutual bond: if I love thee never so well, if thou love not me, thou shall
never be in the body: For as the rest of the members of Christ loves thee, so
thou must love them again, or else thou have no fellowship in the body. Mark
the order which the Apostle uses in teaching. When he instructes men in any
grace (there are some fundamental graces that are so called, because they are
the grounds of al graces, to wit Faith, Hope and Charity: first Faith, then
Hope and Charity, then follows al other graces on them.) When God instructs a
man in any grace, he first lays down this fundamental grace, and teaches him
to love, then he buildes another grace upon it, and puts on liberality on it,
and biddes thee be beneficial: first he biddes him love, and then he biddes
him be beneficial. Therefore Paul 1. Corinthians. chap. 13. verse 3. Speaking of
that same grace of beneficence, says, If I should take all my substance and
deal it to the poor, if this liberality come not from the heart and proceed
not from love, it auailes nothing. Give all that thou vvilt give, if thou love
not the person thou guest it to, thou have lost thy thanks at Gods hands.
Therefore in teaching liberality, that thy beneficence may turn to thy self,
and do thee good, as it does to another man, he teaches thee love: For if my
gift redound not to my own well, woe is me. Then the way to get good of the
gift thou give, is to love him thou give it to. The Philosopher he teaches
the child virtue, but as for love he cannot work it. He will teach thee
liberality and descriue it to thee, but as for the heart he cannot instruct it.
It is the Lord that teaches this fundamental grace of Charity, without the
which, all thy doings are as an house builded without good ground.

In the next verse, he proves that they are all taught of God by their doings.
Yea, says he, and that thing verelie ye do to all the brethren, that are in
Macedonia. Ye are not speakers and braggers, but, doers; it is not speaking,
that will do the turn, but, doing beneficence must be in the hand and not in
the mouth. This age is full of talk, as ever any age was, and all our
goodness is only in our mouth and tongue, our faith in our mouth, our charity
in our mouth, our liberality in our mouth; little in heart, as little in hand,
nothing in action. Take head. All this testifies, for all the doctrine and
preaching of the grace of God in Christ, commonly God is not the teacher. God
when he teaches a man to be bountiful, as he lays the fundamental grace,
which is love, so he makes it bud forth in the hand, that is he draws it out
in action; he draws it not out in the tongue, to clatter of it, but he draws it
in the hand to do well with it: and there cannot be a surer argument that God
is the teacher of any grace, nor when we see the action of the hand conformed
to the profession. Count of them by their works. Have thou faith? the best
argument to know thy faith by, is thy work. James says chap. 2. verse 18.
Let me see thy faith, not in thy tongue, but in thy works. Would thou know
if a man hes a liberal heart? Look not to his tongue, but to his hand. So he
who is instructed by God in any grace, he is a doing man, a doe^, and not a
speaker.

Yet ere I leave the words, mark this. He says, to all the brethren. Love to
all the brethren, not to him, nor to her nor to one part, but all in whole
Macedonia, that is, the whole Country about you: As if the liberality of
Edinburgh were extended to whole Scotland, and to all the brethren in it. Mark
then the manner of Gods teaching. As he lays down the ground Charity and
builds there on beneficencie, and bringes the grace from the heart to the hand:
so he will not open one piece of the hand and shut it out to this body, or
that body only, and then draw it in again: but he opens out the hand wide to
all the brethren, and all the members of the body of Christ. Look all the
doctoures of Philosophy, when they discourse of this virtue of beneficence,
and liberality, they lay, do good to thy friends, and kins-men, advance
them: do good to them that do well to thee: thy enemy, meet him again,
with an evil turn: yea, with two evil turns for one. And this precept is
over well kept in Scotland. But God, when he and his ministers teaches, he
bids thee be beneficial to all men, show thy good deeds to all men yea to thy
enemies. Love thy enemies, show not only a good countenance to thy enemy,
albeit he love thee not, love him: and by so doing coals of wraith shall be on
his head. Commit the vengence to God, and he shall surely repay. Romans 12. 19.
Vengence is mine says the Lord, O would to God men could believe that, that
the Lord would take vengence on the oppressor, and on such as are set on evil
works: we shall see that vengence powered on them in that great day. The Lord
(ye heard is the auenger of harlotrie and wickedness: then let the Lord be the
only auenger. Yet there is a great difference in showing liberality. Respect
(says the Apostle) specially them, who are of the family of faith. Galat.
6. 10. There is a difference of love, as there are degrees of liberality, we
are not bound to love all men alyke, albeit we be bound to love all men, yet we
should love them best, who are members of that body with us in Christ. This
difference must be kept.

Now, when he hes left off to exhort them to beneficence. In the end of the
verse, he says, the least thing I can do, is to exhort you, to increase more
and more. This should learn us, that when we see the grace of God in any
person, we should not insist long to exhort them to that grace; for, when God
is teaching, few words may serve them, to stir them up to that grace: but,
they, whom the Lord teaches not by his Spirit, a thousand words will not teach
them. So, they, that would relieve the Minister of pains, let them seek
earnestly, that, God vvoulde be the inward teacher in the heart, and then thou
shall be taught. Now, Necessity of exhortation to perseverance.
brethren, albeit there be not a necessity to insist, to exhort men to the
grace, they see, in any person, yet, there is a necessity to exhort them to
perseverance in that grace. There are none so indewed with any grace, as, with
liberality, patience, love, yea, faith it self, the ground of all graces,
but, he hes need, every day to hear the voice of exhortation to go forward:
For none hes made such progress in the course of Christianity (for, we are
all in the rinke, running to the butt, Christ) when we have run all our
days, until we be gray haired, yet, we are far from the butt; and we are
ay falling back: and so, we have ay need of this voice crying after us. Run
on, thou art running, thou have ouercomde him, who ran with thee: strive to
ouerrun thy self: Ran thou fast the day? run faster to morrow: amend thy pace
every day. There are none of us, who stands so fast in grace, but, we may fall
back again: and therefore, we have need, continually to hear this
exhortation: And the Lord hes appointed his ministry to cry after men, who
are running in this rinke. And so if thou hear not the voice of his ministry
stirring thee up to run, if thou contemn the voice of the crier, look, how
fast thou ever ran forward, thou shall run as fast backward. So, there is no
better way to hold a man forward in this course of Christianity, and to cause
him grow in all grace, until he come to the end of the rinke, nor the crying
of this ministry, I denounce thee, contemn thou this ministry, thou shall
never come to the end of the rinke, to get inheritance in Heaven. Men will not
believe this, until they see it.

Now, Quietness commended.
in the last room, after he hes exhorted them, to abstein from fornication,
not to do wrong to their neighbor, to be beneficial, and to love their
brother, last, he exhorts them, to study to be quiet. The word is. Be ambitious
of quietness. As ever ye saw men ambitious of the honor of the world, be ye
ambitious of quietness: Among all the parts of uncleanness, and of the
vitiositie and foulness of this our nature, this is one, called curiosity,
over great business in other men's affairs, in the thing, that concerns not
us, nor, our calling: Even so, by the contrair, among all the properties of
holiness, this is one, To have a sober, content estate. For, these two are
opponned to other, a curious spirit and a quiet spirit: the one plain
contrair to the other, one is a vice; the other, a virtue. And as I said
before, They who hes not quietness, in some measure, in their souls, but, in
whom this curiosity reigns in highest degree, I cannot say, they have any
part of sanctification: For, there is such an inseperable bond of the graces of
the Spirit, that, where one is, in some measure all must be Glory never of
one, nor, of two, nor, of three graces, except thou find the whole graces, and
every one of them, in some measure, in thee.

Now, when he hes commended the grace it self, he comes to the effect of the
grace, Effects of quyetnes.
what auails any grace, without the effect? It is an unprofitable grace? And
the first effect of quietness, is, To every man, to do his own business.
To keep him within the bounds of his own business, and be exercised in his
own affairs, and not in the affairs of other men. So, the effect of quyetnes
is not to sit idle, but to be exercised in well doing: but, in doing, not that,
which perteins to another in their calling, but, that, which God hes appointed
thee, in thy calling: Be as busy as thou can in that, night and day. There
is a great difference between a quiet person and an idle person: a quiet
person is the best exercised person in the world; for, all his business is
within the bounds of his exercise, he is doing that, which the Lord hes
bidden him do (do thy labor, but, go not without the compass of thy
calling) and in the mean time, he is idle in other men's turns: But, as for an
idle man, I shall tell you his nature (no man can be altogether idle, but, he
must be ever exercised in something, so long as there is breathe in his mouth.)
An idle person does not a turn, that pertaines to his own calling, but, in
other men's calling he is ever busy, he is exercised in this thing and that
thing, that perteynes to another man, and in the mean time he is a vagabound,
without any shift. Paul speaking of these busy bodies. 2. Thessal. chap. 3.
verse 11. says, that, they do no labor, and yet, they are busy bodies,
exercised in other men's affairs, while as they are idle, in their own calling.

The second effect, is a particular kind of exercise; handie labor, vvorking
with a man's own hand, not with his servants hands. And therefore, the
word is, your own proper hands. This vvoulde seem over strait. It may be,
that, many will be content to be exercised in an honest and liberal action,
so, that, they may keep their hands clean: but, when it commes to an handy
work, and to put to their hands and file their fingers, to the bowing of the
back, and of the head, o, that is over strait, it is over sore, to a Genle-man,
to do that, it settes him not: He is a Lords Son, should he fyle his hands
with labor? But, Paul says, Labor with thy own hands, rather ere thou be
idle in this life, Put to thy hand to a spade, or, shouell and dig dykes. Ye
may read 2. Thessa. chap. 3. verse 8. of Paul. I will show you what he did
(appearantlie there hes been men in Thessalonica, like this country people,
who would not labor for their living) He says, Day and night, with pain and
trouble, with my own hands, I vvonne my living* beside my preaching, I won
my living with my own craft. In the might, when he left teaching, he made
tents, for his living. Now, this he speaks, to be an exemple to these idle
bodies at Thessalonica: and Paul, read of him, when ye will, he was a
Gentleman, a Roman, an Hebrew, a Pharisie, yea, one of the Apostles of Jesus,
which is greatest of all; yet, he labors with his own hands for ^as living.
In the Epistle, to the Ephesians. cha. 4. verse. 28. he says. He that s^all, let
him steal no more, (sinner, sin no moree: harlot, live in harlotrie no more;
alas, it is ouerlong to spend, if it were but an hour in offending God.) Then
if he, that stal, should steal no more, what should he do? Works, says he,
with his hands. I would, that, they, who cannot get other moyen to win their
living by, should labor with their hands, for their living, if it were in
the vylest office, that can be (for, all offices are sanctified, in Christ.)
What makes a thief, but idleness? if thou vvilt not work, thou must steal.
In the second Epist. Thessa chap. 3. verse 12. (If any people had need of this
admonition, this land had need thereof.) Paul says, work with your own
hands. Wherefore? That ye may eat your own bread, not another man's bread, but,
that thou may eat thy own bread, that thou have vvin with the sweat of
thy brows: whereby he would mean, that, they, who will not put to their
hands to work, but, walks up and down idle, (vvce to that morsel, they put
in their mouth) do reaue the meat out of the mouths of the poor laborers.

Now, to be short. He says, He denounced these things to them, before; and he
denounced them, in the name of Jesus, threatening a judgment, as ye may see, in
that place. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. 12. This is an Inhibition as strait, as any
Kings inhibition: He that will not work, let him not eat. I forbid him to
put the least morsel in his mouth: he that will not labor, I command, in Gods
name, that, he eat none. It is the will of God, that they, who will not
work, and may work, that, they should die for hunger. They who are strong
and may get labor, and will not work, there should be an inhibition laid on
them, not to eat: and they, who eat, if they eat not the bread conquest with
their own labor, their eating is cursed to them. It is not permitted to a
King, to eat bread, except he labor for it: (and surely, his labor is an
heavy labor) No, for all the warrands, Charters and securities, which thou
have of thy lands, be thou Earl, or, Lord, or Barron, except thou eat the
labor of thy own hands, thou eatest not lawfully, but, thy eating is
accursed. This Inhibition is not to beggars only, but to the greatest
dominators of the earth: for, it was injoined to Adam, Thou shall eat thy
bread with the sweat of thy brovve; and all Lords and great men were then
in the loins of Adam. Go keep sheep, or, nolt, or, dig dykes (if it
please God, thou have no other trade) and be ay doing something.

Now, Labor, both honest and profitable.
in the end, he adds two reasons, to cause them labor: the first, for
honesty; the other, for commodity. He is the honester man, that will put to
his hand to labor, and will sit down with gray bread conquest by his labor,
nor he, who eats all delicates, with idleness. When thou have labored and
win thy dinner, then, thou art an honest man: idleness is no honestier an idle
body I cannot count him honest. He that eats without labor (set him at the
table head) he hes no honesty. Now this honesty should be seen by them, that
are without, even the heathen. Brethren, we should be honest, if it were no
more, but only for our enemies cause, for regard of our holy profession. The
Enemy, the Pagane, looks upon thee, who art an idle body, and labors not,
and sees nothing, but a belly and a denourer of the creatures of God, and
then, will he not slander thy profession? Therefore, if it were but to save
this profession from the slanders of wicked men, labor continually: ere thou
should be idle, labor in any exercise. Yea, more, nor this. Labor is the
moyen, where by the Lord hes ordained thee, to win thy enemy; when he sees
thee labor and win thy living, with the sweat of thy brows: and by the
contrare; thy idleness holds others back, who would embrace the Gospel. Woe
to them, who are stumbling blocks, to hold men back, from Christ. As for the
profit the laborer gets (I not will insist in it) he who in his labor hes God
before his eyes, and labors, not so much to win his living thereby, as to
glorify God, according to the command of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. 31. Whither
ye eat, or, drink, what ever ye do, do all to the glory of God: (he who
works, let him not work, as an Ox, or, an Ass, but, to glorify God He who
in labor sets himself to glorify God, to be holy (be it, to (...) pottes,
to hold the pleugh to dig dykes) those men they shall never want the thing,
the Lord thinks may suffice them, at the least, they shall have co^^en^ment.
When they sit at dinner, they shall have greater contentation then they that
are fed with most dainty dishes. Therefore have ay God before thy eyes; labor
ay to God, and then thou shall have here in this life sufficient to serve thee,
and hereafter shall have heavenly riches in abundance. Therefore stand not,
be not idle in thy calling but labor: And how? ever to God and his glory, and
then thou shall not want: thou shall have plenty and sacietie of joy in that
full sight of the countenance of Christ: all this world will away. Then
blessed is that man who will set himself to serve God in his calling while he
is here: for when this world goes away, he shall obtain that glorious
kingdom that lastes for ever: not by him self, but only by Christ: for in
him only we and our labors are blessed. And therefore to him with the Father
and the holy Spirit, be all praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE XVII. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 4. verse. 13. 14. 15. 13 I vvoulde not brethren, have you
ignorant concerning them which are a sleep, that ye sorrovv not as others
which have no hope.

14 For we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen: even so them which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

15 For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which live,
and are remaining in the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which
sleep.


THese Thessalonians (brethen) to whom the Apostle writes, they were not
altogether ignorant of the estate of them who departed this life. No question,
they understood and knew the resurrection of the dead: for not knowinge that,
what could they know of Christianity? Yet as appears of this place by the
Apostle, it was not a settled knowledge in the heart they had: they knevv no so
as they should have done the resurrection of the body. And therefore when
their friends whom they loved well, departed, their dolor was excessive. When
they saw the godly who professed in the beginning, drawn to torments,
martyred and execute, they took displeasure out of measure: even as if they
who departed this life, had perished altogether, and should never have been
more. The Apostle understanding this, among other things he writes to them, he
casts in this doctrine of the estate of them that are departed; to the end they
should leave off that excessive sorrow and lamentation, and not lament as the
Gentiles who were without hope. Then to come shortly to the words and purpose
of the Apostle. He settes down this proposition, I would not brethren, have
you ignorant concerning them which are a sleep; the end wherefore he would
not have them ignorant, is, that they sorrovv not as others who hes no hope.

Now concerning the estate of those that are departed, he instructs them in
sundry heads of it: First, he tells them that they are but a sleep, that is
now their present estate in grave. Then he teaches them what shall follow; the
rising again; when that they have sleeped a time, as one after sleep awakes, so
shall they awake. Next he instructes them of the honor they shall have in the
resurrection when they shall meet the Lord of glory. Suppose they be dead
first, they shall not be last in meetting the Lord: yea they who shall be alive
at that day, shall not be first, but they who are departed, shall be in the
first rank to meet the Lord in the clouds. Of this he taks occasion to speak
of the Lords coming, and of the glory thereof; to this end that every one in
thinking upon these things should receive comfort. There is the sum of this
doctrine. I vvoulde not have you brethren ignorant as concerning those who are
at sleep. That is, I vvoulde not have you ignorant of their estate, what is
their estate while they lie in grave, what their estate shall be thereafter.
Of these and such things I would not have you ignorant. Now the lesson is
easy. There are none of us but in some measure we should know what is the
estate of them who are dead; what is their estate in the grave, what shall be
their estate after the grave. It appertains to every Christian to know the
estate of the dead in some measure, as well as it pertaines to them to know the
estate of the living not passing the revelation that the Lord hes made therein.
Dream not any estate to the dead, know no more of it nor it pleases God to
reveal, nor desire to know no more. The Papists passes in curiosity, and can
not be satisfied with the Lords revelation: but let us be content with the
revelation of the Lord until that great revelation come. Always it pertaines
to us in some measure to know the estate of the departed. Ignorance brings
sorrovv; and knowledge, joy.
Ignorance brings a great deal of sorrow with it. The effects of ignorance.
in things, we should know, are displeasure and sorrow. Knowledge of the
things, we should know, and especially of the estate of those departed this
life, brings joy and consolation. Ignorance made Jacob excessiuelie to mourn
for his son Joseph, without any cause, thinking he was dead, when he was
alive. Being fred from his ignorance, and knowing the estate of his son, and
that he was alive. he found joy and consolation. So light and knowledge brings
joy. The blind opinion of this dream of Purgatory that the Papists hes
invented, hes brought exceeding great displeasure to many. To think that the
soul lovvsed from the body should be tormented in Purgatory, ere it enter in
glory. But men being fred from this ignorance, and knowing assuredly that the
soul, immediately after it seueres from the body, passes to eternal joy, men
and women knovving this in the point of death* no question, they are
exceeding glad. Then brethren, to speak it again; Ignorance brings great
displeasure; knowledge bringes joy: when we know the estate of things as
they are indeed, then there is joy. Therefore the Apostle says, That ye (...)
not, as others who hes no hope. That is, as the Gentiles. An ignorant and
hopeless body who hes no hope of the resurrection, who knows nothing of the
resurrection; and therefore hopes not for it, his mourning and sorrow will be
excessive. This is the meaning of the Apostle. Ignorance bringes (...) in
death, it makes a man hopeless, not to hope for a life after this life, nor
for a resurrection to life, and being (...), what joy can he have? a body
dying without hope, no (...) if thou be not in hope when thou art dying. all
the world shall not make thee to rejoice. By the contrair, ye hear by the
Apostle, knowledge bringes hope; for hope is the effect of knowledge, and hope
bringes joy and comfort in the hour of death. None ever yet died in the hope
of that glorious resurrection, but in the hour of death, they rejoiced with
joy unspeakable. The joy that hope bringes, being grounded on knowledge, is
wonderful. It will not be contained in the heart but the mouth will open and
glory in the joy it apprehendes, through the hope of the resurrection in Jesus
Christ. The Apostle Romans chap. 5. verse 2. says, We rejoice under the hope of
the glory of God. I mean not, brethren, that, that knowledge that works hope,
and that hope that works joy, will take away from a man altogether all
displeasure, all heaviness, all mourning in the departure of our friends, and
them we love well. No, it will nor nor should not do that. There is no grace
of God in Jesus, that puts out any natural affection: none will take away
either natural joy, or displeasure: no, faith and hope will not do it, but it
makes that natural affection sanctified, and puts it in order: Our dolor,
which by nature is immoderate, it moderates: hope will bring with it a measure,
knoweledge will bring with it a measure, and faith which is the fountain of
all graces, will bring with it a measure. In a word, Faith, hope and knowledge,
will temper and mingle the affection of displeasure, which is bitter, with the
affection of joy, and make a sweet temperature in that body: so that the
body that hes knowledge and hope, when it is mourning fastest, it will have
greatest joy. Beware of your mourning, and look that it be never altogether
without some joy. Sobst thou? sighst thou vnspeakablie? Look, that thy ^ighs
be mingled with joy unspeakable. Will ye have my counsel? Let never joy be the
alone, but let ever joy be tempered with sorrow: Have not srrow the alone. but
let it (...) be mingled with some joy. So long as thou live, thou art
naturally inclined to sin, and sin procures sorrow. And therefore so long
as sin dwelles in thy body, let ever thy joy be tempered with sorrow, but let
never thy sorrow for sin be it alone, but tempered with some joy in the mercy
of God. This should be the estate of a christian: in laughing forget not sin,
but sorrow for it: be not vvanton under the burden of sin. Again, in mourning
let joy be for the mercy of Christ to us. The Apostle says 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
Rejoice ever: yea even when thou art mourning, for there is matter of eternal
joy offered in Christ: and therefore rejoice with a sanctified and with an
holy joye. This is the first lesson.

Then brethren, I gather on the words of the Apostle, As the Gentiles who
have no hope of resurrection; where there is no hope there is no comfort?
where a man's hope is bounded within the compass of this life, and reaches not
out beyond the same, there is no comfort: make him king of all the world, if
his hope be only on the kingdoms of this earth, if he hope not for that
heavenly kingdom, Want of hope does bring despair in death.
to be an inheritour there, he hes no joye nor comfort: I mean that solid
joye and comfort which the world never ministers to men. All the kingdoms in
the earth will never minister to thee solid joy, comfort and consolation. Now
brethren, this is the estate of the Gentiles. Paul Ephesians. 2. 12. speaking of
their estate, says; they lived in the world without God, aliants from the
Common-well of Israel, from the Church of God, strangers from the covenants of
promise, without hope and without God in the world; and so hopeless and
co^fortlesse. I can not say, that ever any Gentile that lived as a Gentile,
what ever was their rank on the earth, that ever they had any comfort: all
these Monarchs that lived without grace in the world, I can not say that in
the midst of their triumph and greatest glory they had any comfort; much less
in the hour of their death had they any comfort and joy: and when they saw
there was nothing but death, and all pleasure was away, then there was nothing
but sorrow, Hadrian the Emperor (I remember) who was one of the most glorious
Conquerours in the world, when he was on deathbed, he flatters with his own
soul, to see if she would have bidden within the body, saying, My little soul,
will thou bide within the body? thou waits not where thou art going to; without
hope he was, and therefore comfortless, and dies in despair. To let us see
there is none that deceasses without the hope of life, and of that glorious
resurrection, but they die all in dispare, from the King, to the beggar. Who
ever died since the beginning of the world, without Christ, and hope in him,
(yea before he was manifested in the world) but they deceassed in dispare: So,
as ye would die in joy strive to get Christ. It is a thing flesh and blood will
not give thee, and it is a greater wonder to see Christ, nor to see a man
through a rock; there are so many impediments to hinder his fight from (...).
Therefore we have to crave, that the sprit of Jesus would lighten the eye of the
mind in us above nature, to see him, and then we shall see him, and so have
comfort in death.

Now, to go forward in the words, and to come to the heads in particulare,
concerning them, that are departed. The first thing he instructs them in (I
take it up, when he says, Concerning them, that are asleep.) is, in respect
of their estate present, while as they lie in grave. Bodies of the godly
sleep in the grave
The bodies lying in the grave, says he, is not dead: Ye believe they be dead.
No, death is one thing and sleep is another. They are only sleeping; for, if
ye will speak of death, what it means properly: The death of the creature
properly, is, the euerlasing punishment and destruction of it for ever. And
they who dies, and are dead, they shall never live again; at the least, they
shall never have a sense of joy. So, the bodies of the godly are not dead,
but, sleeping, and lying in grave, and they have a very being: a man that is
sleeping, is a man, and hes a being: a body in the grave hes a being, and
bydes lying in the grave in substance, and shall abide continually: And if it
should be burnt in the fire, or, drowned in the vvatter, the dissolution of
the body in the grave shall not destroy the being thereof. The turning of it
in ashes, is no other thing (to speak of it properly) but, a fyning of it; as
the goulde is fined by the fire, and the dross burnt up, so, the body is
fined in the grave, and the dross of the body is but at up, that at the
latter day, the substance of the body being purified may rise, as gold
glistering, to be conjoined with the soul. The Apostle 1. Cor. 15. 53. 54. 55.
when he speaks of death, he says, that, the grave is not able to svvalovv the
body, but, that, mortality (which is sin and death in the body) may be
svvalovved up of immortality. So it is the mortality and dross of the body
that is burnt up, and not the substance, but the substance of the body is
cleansed and purified, that it may reign with the head Christ in glory for
ever. Now, to speak of this word sleeping. The Scripture when it speaks of
death calls it sleeping* And when Jesus speaks of Lazarus, he says, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, but, I go to wake him up. Ioh. 11. 11. And it is said of
Steven Act. chap. 7. verse 60. He sleeped. In the old Testament commonly there
is a word added to it, he sleeped with his Fathers, he was joined with his
Fathers. Now, to come to the purpose. There are two parts of man. A body, and
a soul. When it is said, that, a man sleeps, think not, that, his soul
sleeps, referring this word sleeping to the soul. Some vain men thinks that
the soul after the deceasing sleeps, until the coming of Christ. No, the
soul lives, and sleeps not; it lives and shall live, in dispyte of all the
world, either in pain, or, pleasure, for ever. The soul of the ungodly is
translated immediately after death to pain, and hes a wonderful sense of
pain, and a living in pain, a continual pain, anguish and torment. (If
there were no more, to testify this, but the parable of Lazarus, and the rich
Glutton it may suffice. It tells thee that the soul of the rich Glutton had in
Hell the own pain. Luc. 16. 19.) The soul of the godly again after death
lives in joy. And so Paul Philip: 1. verse 23. says, I would be dissolved,
and be with Christ. viz. living in soul. And 2. Cor. chap. 5. verse 8 I love
rather to remove out of the body, and to go to God, to dvvell with him. And
God is said to be the God of the living, that is to say, of the soales that
lives in glory. Matt. 22. 32. So the word of sleeping is not to be referred to
the soul, but to the bodies of men and women: for, as a body lies down in
his bed; so the body after dissolution is laid down in the grave, to sleep,
until the day of resurrection. There is no sleep that by nature is
everlasting and when a man hes sleeped, and is satisfied with sleep he must
waken: So, the body if it sleep in the grave, of necessity it must waken
again: If there were no more but this word sleeping it testifies that there
shall be a resurrection. Now understand farther, that the word sleeping in the
Scripture is referred to the bodies, both of the reprobat and elect: The body
of the reprobat is said to sleep: The body of the elect is said also to
sleep. So Daniell says, chap. 12. verse 2. Many of them that are a sleep in
the dust in the earth, some of them shall rise to life, some of them to shame
and ignominy. We are all sleeping, but, I see a diversity in resurrection:
the body of the elect shall rise, to everlasting glory, the body of the
wicked to eternal death and damnation. And yet, albeit this word be common to
both, yet, most properly, it is ascriued to the bodies of the godly: For, even
as a man sleeps, to this end, that he may rise up again more cheerfully, and be
more able to take in hand any handy-worke, and do his calling: So, it is the
body of the godly only, that sleeps, to rise more cheerfully to the actions
and doings of that life eternal. It is a wonderful change. It lies down a weak
and infirm body, it will rise again a strong body: it lies down in ignominy,
it will rise again a glorious body, and there was never a man so altered and
comforted by natural sleep, as the body of the elect shall be altered and
comforted by that sleep in the grave. As to the bodies of the wicked, woe to
them: if they ly down with sadness and weariness, their rising shall be with
far greater sadness and weariness. No, they shall think, it should be well
with them, if the Lord would let the body ay ly still there. It is a black
wakning. If they ly down with ignominy, they shall rise with greater
ignominy. So, to speak it properly, the body of the reprobate is not said to
sleep, as it is, to ly dead; for, the rising of it is but to death: death in
the grave, rising to death, and ay deing, and never making an end of death.
Now, this, for the understanding of this word sleeping. Then, I note shortly
of this first head, that, Paul instructs them in, concerning the souls
departed. That, the body, that lies in the grave. Sleeping of (...) body:
with out pain* comfortable.
It lies without the sense of torment, or, pain: if it were not more, but to
know that far of it, this knowledge ministers comfort, both in our own
death, and in the death of our friends: Indeed, if we saw our friends body
cast into the grave, and knew, that, there were torment and pain there: no
question it would bring great heaviness, and we would remember on our own
pain in the hour of our death, and it would bring sorrow to us. So it is a
benefit of God that the body lies in the grave without pain. And this is the
thing the Apostle will have them to know.

Now to come to the words of the next verse. For if, says he, we believe
that Jesus is dead, and is risen again: even so them who sleep in Jesus, God
will bring with him. There are the words. In one word then. The second
thing whereof he will not have them ignorant, is the estate of them who are
departed: After then lying in the grave, they shall rise, the body that lies
in the grave shall rise and wake again. Knowledge of the resurrection of the
body more comfortable.
It is confortable to know that the body lies without sense of pain in the
grave: but it is more comfortable to know that the body shall rise again,
and not only want the sense of pain, but shall have comfort in Christ, in
that glorious resurrection. The bodies of the godly shall not only want the
sense of pain, but shall have all pleasure and joy that the heart would with:
all their senses shall be filled with joy, the eye, the ear, all shall be
filled with God in who^e presence is only joy. Now the thing that fills the
sense with any joy in this earth are only creatures: The thing that makes the
(...) rejoice, is but the creatures that are object to it: The thing that mak^
the ear to rejoice, is but the sound and voices of the creatures: But, in the
resurrection, when God shall be al (...) these senses of our shall be filled
with God, the great Creator of al. He shall be, as it were, the object to the
eye, to the ear, to the teaching, (to speak it so, for your understanding) all
our senses shall be exercised with him. And as there is greater matter of joy in
the Creator, nor in the creatures; so, much more joy shall these senses of
ours, the eye, the ear, the tasting, etc. have of God the Creator of all. So
far as God passes the creatures, so far shall that heavenly joy pass the
earthly joy. So, this we should know, that, the dead in Christ shall have full
pleasure and perfect joy.

But, yet, ere we leave the words. He grounds this resurrection of our bodies
on two grounds. 2. grunds of the assurance of our resurrection.
The first it, faith in Christ (if, says he, we believe, that, Christ died
and raise again) But, faith in Christ, first crucified, and dead: It auailes
not, to believe in Christ, if thou believe not in him, as he is crucified and
dead: and this not eneugh to believe, that, he is crucified and dead, except
thou with a steadfast faith believe, that, he is crucified and dead for thy
sins. The Devil knovves, he was crucified, he savv him crucified, and no
doubt, he was present at the crucifying of him: (for, he was the burrior of
God, to him, at his crucifying) yet, the knowledge of Christ crucified does
him no good, but, evil, because he believes not, that, Christ died for his
sins; and he cannot believe, because he hes no faith. So, the first ground is
faith in Christ crucified, and that he died for thee. Yet, believe more. He
says, and rose again. Thou must believe (as ever thou would rise in the last
day) that, Christ was raised out of the grave, to the Heavens. And it is not
eneugh, to believe, that, he rose, (the Devil believes, that, he rose again)
but, believe, he rose for thee, for thy justification, for thy salvation, as
Paul affirms Romans 4. 25 Then, this is our faith in Christ, whereupon our
resurrection is grounded; Faith, that he died for me; Faith, that he rose
again, for my salvation. Then, to the next ground. They, says he, who hes
sleeped in Jesus. The second ground is nothing, but, perseverance in this
Faith in Christ, even, to the last gasp and breath: So, that, in death and in
the point of death, thy soul take hold on Christ crucified, and risen, and
stick by him in the dissolution of the soul from the body. It is requisite,
that, in all our lyfe-tyme and in every moment of our lyfe-tyme, we should
have a grippe of Christ, apprehend him, take hold of him and rest on him: for,
I assure you, they who will not grip him, are in a stagring estate, but,
specially in the hour of death, when the greatest tentation is, and the
Devil is busiest to deceive you, it is most requisite, that, the soul have a
grip of Christ, grip to his Croce, grip to his glorious Resurrection: for,
there is no standing, but, by the apprehension of Christ: and if thy grippe
go, and his grippe go off thee, in that same moment thou art in Hell: for, no
life to any, but, to them, who are in Christ, as members of his body, to
them, who hes an apprehension of him, and of whom, he hes a grippe.
Therefore, seeing, the time of our departure is very uncertain (who knovves,
when it will please the Lord to call on him?) every one of us, night and
day, time and tide, should see, whether we be in Christ, or, not, whether we
have an hold of him, or, not: In the morning, when thou rysest, the first
thing, thou should think of, is, Am I in Christ? have (...) a grippe of him?
or, hes he a grippe of me, or, not? A knave will rise and grippe to his staff,
or, sword, but, he hes no mind of a grip of Christ. Alas, when Christ grippes
thee not the Devil caries thee, all that day, body and soul to wickedness.
Say, therefore, Lord hold a grippe of me; for, I am as a child. (Never a
child was so stagring, as thou art, except thou lean on Christ.) This is most
true: It is not so much our apprehension we have of Christ, as his apprehension
of us, that holds us up: A child that is learning to go, albeit he grippe, he
cannot hold himself up, but, it is the grip of the Nourse, that holds up
the child: It is so, between God and us, We are all infantes, Jesus hes us in
his hand, we make a glifring to grip him again, but, when he lettes us go,
then, we fall: So, this is our comfort, that we are gripped by God, and his
grip vpholdes us, for, when he grippes to the heart of any man, his hand never
lowses again, and thou shall never go out of his grippe: yea, even in that
time, when thou think, thou art gone, and the Lord hes casten thee offyn the
meane-time he hes thee in his grip and in that meane-tyme when thou appearest
to be left, call to remembrance, that, he hes gripped thee, and then, assure
thee, yet he grips thee. And say, Who shall be able to separate me from the
love of Christ? Romans 8. 35. And Jesus says, None is able to reaue my sheep
out of my hand. John. 10. 28. Who shall be able to lowse his hand? This is all
in one word: Seek this apprehension, and stand fast in Christ, and death
shall not sever thee, from him, but life shall follow death; glory shall
follow ignominy; immortality shall svvalovv up the mortality, that we are
here subject to. Well then brethren, who wait when we shall be stricken?
Therefore, let us ever be prepared, and let us not look to the Pest. Nothing
shall be able to severe us from God, if he have gripped us, `Paul says,
Philipp. 3. 8. 9. that, he counted all things but dongue, that he might be
found of him, and know him, and the force of his resurrection.

Yet, to insist in the words expressing this resurrection: he says that, God
shall bring us with him, that is, with Christ. So, our resurrection what is
it, What is our resurrection.
but, a bringing of us to God, to be joined with him, in that blessed society?
Our felicity and blessedness, both in body and soul is, to be joined with
God. For, understand, so long as thy body lies in the grave, lies in
ignominy, in a manner it is severed from God. it is apart from God, in some
manner, it is not so near him, as it will be: it is yet lying in ignominy. Now in
the resurrection of the dead, that body that was separated from God and lay in
ignominy for a time, ryses to be joined with God, to the end it may be
glorified for ever. This is the resurrection of the bodies of the godly. But,
it is far otherways, with the resurrection of the ungodly. They rise indeed,
and must rise; for, they shall be pulled out of the grave; for, feign would
they ly still: they must rise, to receive that pain of damnation, they shall
rise, but, never to be brought to God. The Scripture indeed speaks, that, they
shall rise, but, never to be brought to God, but, they rise to be severed from
God, more, nor they were. They are severed, when they are in the grave; but,
when the body shall be joined to the soul, then, they shall be farther
severed. And look, how far is between the hie Heavens and the low Helles, as
far distance shall there be between God and the reprobate. They shall not be
conuoyed up to meet Christ in the clouds, as the bodies of the godly are: No,
but they shall stand on the earth.

Yet, to insist. Are the bodies of the elect brought them alone to God? No: what
ever body must be brought to God in the resurrection it must be brought in
company, it must be in a society and conjunction, ere that body be conjoined
with God. He says, with Christ. That body must be brought to that glorious
society with God, but, first it must be joined with Jesus; otherways, thou
shall never rise to God. Then, would ye have the order Paul speaks of in this
resurrection (for, every one shall rise in order.) The first is Christ, Christ
the first of them, that rises; his glorious body rose first; Then, after that,
they who are in Christ, that is, they who stands in that conjunction with him,
as imps in the tree, who are ingraft in his body, then, they shall rise, with
him. Therefore, in one word. Would thou know, whether thou shall be joined
with God, or, not, look, if thou standst fast in that conjunction, and union
with Christ, in this life: and if thou find thy self united with Christ in
this life, then, in the glorious resurrection, with God shall thou be. And so,
this is a thing, that, I ever advertise you of. Look ever, that, thou be a
member of that glorious body. Be either an eye or, foot, or hand, be some
part of the body of Christ. And certainly, being joined with him, when he is
joined with God, even God the Father of necessity (thou being a member of the
body) thou must be joined with God. For, thy conjunction with God is not
immediate, but thou must first be joined with Christ, and being conjoined with
Christ, thou shall be joined with God also in glory.

Now, who shall be the doer of this? It is a great work to draw up this
body out of the grave to Heaven, and set it in that glory. Will the body
rise the alone? where got it that strength? will any Angel draw it up? No, all
the Angels in Heaven is not able to raise up a body to Heaven: all the power
in earth cannot raise up a dead body. Then who must do it? No power in Heaven
nor earth, but the power of God. Paul Ephesians. chap. 1. verse 19. calls it the
effectualnesse of the strong power of God. There is no work in this world
wherein the power of God appears more, nor in the work of the rising,
first of Christ, when he was dead, and then of our bodies that are in him.
The power and strength of God as greatly appears in the raising of the body,
as it did in making of the world, when before it was not. It is as great a
matter to make a thing to live, as to make it: There is as great power to make
the dead to live, as to make any thing of nothing. And this power is only
proper to God. The power of the world may put out the life: but no power can
give life, but, only Gods. There are many slayers; but, none to give life,
but, only God. Therefore, let us glorify the God of life. Then, mark two
causes of our glorious resurrection. 2. causes of our resurrection.
(He speaks not of the resurrection of the reprobate.) The first cause, is,
the conjunction with Jesus, begun in this life. The second cause, is, the
power and might of God, in raising of them being found in Jesus. Take any of
these two away, thou shall never be brought to God. If thy conjunction be not
with Jesus in this life, the power of God in the latter day shall not raise
thee, to join thee to God. Take this first cause away, the second shall not
follow. Then, again, if the hand of God at the day of the resurrection should
not be put (as it were) out of Heaven, to take up thy body, thou would ly
still. Therefore, join these two. First, the conjunction with Christ, that is
by Faith: then, join, with Faith, the power and virtue of God, and so, rise
shall thou, and be joined with God in glory. Now, as to the power of God to
raise us, it is not extended to us here, but, we shall see it in that great
day: but, the thing, we have to, care for, is to look, that, we have says,
and of necessity, the second must follow. Have thou faith? and art thou joined
with Christ, by Faith? of necessity the power of God must reach to thee, to
raise thee, out of the grave. Thou need not to fear, if thou be found in
Christ. All mercy, power and glory is in him: if thou be out with Christ, no
glory, nor mercy, but, damnation for thee; for, the power of God shall be
extended to thy destruction.

Now, to the next verse. Yet, he goes forward and teaches them, that, not only
they shall rise and be brought to God, and be joined with him, But, he says,
This say we unto you, by the word of God, that, we, who live and are
remaning at the coming of the Lord, shall not preueene them, who sleep. He
speaks, here, of himself, as though he should have been living at the day of
judgment: and yet, he died, more nor a thousand year since: To teach us, ever
to be in readiness: no hour, nor, moment should be, but, we should look for
the coming of Christ; and think, we shall be living, when he commes. This is
our vain thought: we think, we shall die before the day of judgment. No* Paul
spok not so: we should not speak so, but, be ay ready, to meet the Lord, at his
glorious appearance.

Now, the third head, wherein he instructed them, is, the order and rank of
men, that shall meet the Lord, in the clouds. All that judgment shall pass
by order. The God of order shall be judge, Order in meeting the Lord, after
resurrection.
and all shall be in order, and men shall be in rank: they who shall be raised
up from this earth, to meet the Lord, shall have their own place and rank.
Now, the Apostle would teach them, that, they shall have this order. They who
hes departed first this life shall not be prevented, they who shall be alive
shall not be put in the rank before them, but, they who are dead shall be in
the first rank, and order, and ere ever that sudden change be made of them,
who shall be found alive, changing them from mortality, to immortality
(which change shall be in the twinkling of an eye) the dead in the grave
shall be raised up first, by the power of God, and their bodies shall be first
glorified, and then shall come on that sudden change, of them, who shall be
alive, and then, all shall be rest up to the clouds: first, they, that were
dead, next, they, that were changed, and so, we shall come all to meet our
head Christ. This is the order. Now to be short. This same very speaking of
the Apostle, and his instructing of them in this preferment teaches us, that,
there should be in us such a desire to meet with Christ, that we should
strive, who shall meet with him first: strive to be first, and not to be last;
cast us to have a part of this preferment, and considering this preferment is
promised to them, who dies first, it should make us joyful to die first, and
to say to them, who are standing about us, when we are on deathbed, I will
get a preferment. I am called to death first, before you, I shall be preferred
to you in meetting with my Lord, in Heaven. Ye shall live after me, but, I
shall meet first with my Lord. O, what it is, to get preferment in heavenly
glory! Ye will count of preferment with Kings of this earth, and men will
strive, who shall first meet with the King. O, then, should we not strive
to meet with the King of Kings in Heaven. The Lord grant us faith, that we
may be joined with Christ in this body, that at that last day soul and body
may be glorified in Heaven with Christ our Head. To whom with the Father and
the holy Spirit, be all glory and praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE XVIII. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 4. verse. 16. 17. 18. 16 For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the
trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise again.

Then shall we which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

18 Wherefore, comfort your selves one another with these words.


THE Apostle (brethren) in this present text (by the way as it were) instructs
the Thessalonians in that head of doctrine, that concerns those who are
departed this life: Of the which either they were ignorant, or thought not of
it as they should have done. And therefore, in the death and departure of their
kins-folke and friends whom they loved well, they mourned excessiuely, as
though there estate had been miserable: as though after this world there
should have been no more of them, but they should perish like beasts. And
therefore the Apostle, to the end that for death they should not mourn so
desperately, he instructs them in certain heads of doctrine concerning the
departed. The first was, that they that died, died not so much as sleeped: this
death is not so much to be called a death, as a sleep, for there shall be a
waking again, as a man lying down to sleep, shall awake again. The second
point. Their resurrection shall be glorious: Being laid down in the grave they
shall not ly for ever, but shall be gloriously raised again: for here he
speaks of the resurrection of the elect and chosen. Now the third thing he
instructs them in is an piece of honor they shall have in their resurrection.
They that are dead first, shall see the Lord before them that shall be found
alive: for the dead shall rise first, and then the change shall be made of
them, who are then living. And as the dead shall rise first, so they shall be
first in rank among them who shall go to meet the Lord in the air: first
the dead after their resurrection shall be rest up to the clouds: then they
who shall be living, shall be rest up after them. So the dead shall get the
first sight of Christ, then they who shall be found alive, shall be changed and
get the next sight. This before ye heard taught to you.

Now in the text we have red, the Apostle takes occasion of that which he spoke
of immediately before, concerning the ranking and order of those that shall be
found dead on that great day. To enter in this matter more deeply, and to fall
out in a description of the Lords coming in that latter day. He points out
the manner of it, and that glory that shall appear. Thereafter he commes to
that effect that shall follovv there-vpon. The first effect, shall be the
resurrection of the dead; ere ever they who are alive be changed (which shall
be in a moment) the dead rising first, shall be rest up to the clouds, and
then they who shall be changed, shall be rest up after them. The estate of
both is, they shall meet the Lord, and be with him for ever. Then in the
last verse, he desires the Thessalonians with such speeches as these, every
one to comfort another: whether he sorrovv for his own or for another death,
and to speak one to another of the resurrection, and of the glory that shall
follow on it. Now this text stands in a narratiue of the form of Christ's
coming, whereof I will speak no farther, nor I can gather thereof out of
the Scripture, and with as great shortness as I may: For, it is folly to
speak any thing herein which is not revealed and spoken of in the
Scriptures. Now Brethren, I shall speak first (according to the Scriptures of
God) of the signs and tokens that shall appear in the world before Christ's
coming. For, ere he be seen, they who shall be found alive at that great day,
shall see signs and tokens of his coming. Next I shall speak of his coming
and of the manner of it. And in the third rovvme I shall speak of the effects
that shall follow in the world immediately on his coming.

As for the signs that shall be seen, ere he be seen. There are some of them
that shall go before his coming immediately before he rise out of his Throne,
where he sittes at the right hand of his Father, even immediately before his
rising there shall some signs be shovven to vvarne the world, that the King
of Glory is coming. Then there shall be some other signs, that shall be
adjoined with his coming, as he commes through the Heavens and air to judge
the world. So the signs are of two sorts, some signs before his coming
immediately, Signs immediately preceding Chr^stes coming.
some joined with his coming. The signs immediately preceding the Lords
rising out of his Throne, to judge the world, are, The whole world shall
shake, Heaven and earth shall trimble; they who shall be living at that day
shall see it. The whole powers of the Heaven shall be shaken: The Sun, the
Moon shall be darkened, all shall be obscured: the Sun shall have no light,
the stars shall fall down, or, at the least, shall appear so, because they
shall give no light, and light shall be away, nothing in the face of the earth,
but darkness: nothing in Heaven but darkness. Ye may read this Matt. chap.
24. verse 29. Luke chap. 21. verse 25. Christ gives these same signs himself,
that shall be immediately before his coming. What shall be the estat in the
mean-time of those who are living when these signs shall appear? Al
consciences shall be wakned, all shall get up, there shall be no sleeping. The
murderer who hes his conscience sleeping now, shall be wakned then: the
harlots conscience shall waken. There shall be two sort of folk found living
then; some reprobate, some elect; the world is never without these two. As
for the reprobate when they shall look up and see such a wonderful
alteration, the shaking of the Heavens, the darkning of the Sun, and Moon,
then they shall begin to shudder and to be stricken with such a terrible fear,
that, they shall be as they were dead: and for fear of that judgment that is to
follow, they shall run and seek holes and secret places to hide them from the
face of the Lord, and cry, Hills fall down on us, Mountains cover us, Yea,
even ere they see the Lord before his coming down, Read of this in Luke 21.
27. Reuelat. chap. 6. verse 16. etc. Now as to the elect that shall be found
alive at that time, they shall conceive at the sight of these first signs an
unspeakable joye, and shall not be afraid, but shall avvaite for that
Redemption, which they shall see to be at hand, that full Redemption in the
Redeemer the Lord Jesus. And therefore, they shall not run away and seek
holes to hyde them in, but they shall stand up and lift up their heads and
faces to the Heavens and shall look greedily for the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ: indeed it is true, they shall conceive a sorrow and shall be
touched with a remorse, and shall weep bitterly; but a sweet weeping they
shall weep, that ever their sins procured the death of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that Lord of glory. Therefore, they shall be both joyful, and
sorrowful: joyful, because the Redeemer is at hand: sorrowful, for their
sins, that Christ should have died for them; that they should have peirced
him through with them. Read of this at length Luke chap. 21. verse 28. Zachary
chap. 13. verse 11. Revel. chap. 1. verse 7. yea, they who peirced him through,
with their sins, shall bewail him. All the godly Kings of the earth shall
bewail him; all the elect shall sorrow, that their sins should have procured
the death of this sweet and glorious Lord. This for the signs immediately
going before his coming. Understand (brethren) that there shall be a process
of time in the day of judgment, so that one thing shall (by a certain space)
go before another. It shall be sudden, but, not so sudden, but they who are
alive, shall see one thing done by a space of time before another; it shall be
so sensible, that every one that is living at that day shall see every thing
done sensible.

Now to come to the signs joined with his coming. At his down coming, Signs
joined with the coming of Christ.
when the Lord rises out of his Throne, before he be seen, the whole world
that shook before he rose, shall be set on fire, and there shall be a terrible
dissolution: All things shall be dissolved, and so shaken lowse, that the
world shall not appear, unto the time it be made a new World, a new
Heaven, a new Earth, as Peter speaks. Come to the particulares. As to the
Heavens, they shall be burnt up, and being burnt up, they shall pass away
with a sound and noise (says Peter) as the sounding of Chariot-wheeles. The
elements, the air, the water, all shall be consumed with fire, and be burnt up
and euanish. The earth, and all the works on the earth, planting, building,
all shall be burnt up with fire, nothing shall be spared. These shall be the
signs that shall be joined inseparably with Christ's coming. The sign of
Christ.
In the mean time he shall come down, when all the world shall be on a fire.
And this is called by Matthew 24 verse 30. the sign of Christ, the sign that
shall be conjoined with his coming. Read of this whole matter in this 24.
chap. of Matthew verse 30. 2. Epist of Pet. chap. 3. verse 10. 12. Reuelat.
chap. 20. verse 11. and chap. 21. verse 1. Then brethren, if there was such a
commotion in the heart of men, in the first signs that past before, what
commotion shall there be in the hearts of men, when they shall see the whole
world on fire? A wondrous thing. When all this consumption shall be, no body
shall be burnt, but the power of the judge shall reserve the bodies to the
judgment that is to follow immediately. Peter when he hes told of these
signs, says, If such a dissolution of the world be, what manner of men should
we be? how should we study to prepare us to meet the Lord? So on that great
day, all these things shall not make the godly to shrink, but they shall ay
prease forward to meet the Lord in the clouds. As to the reprobate, o, that
horror and terrible fear that shall overtake them at his coming! Now this
for the two sorts of signs. The first, going before his coming: the second,
joined inseparably with his coming down to judge the world.

Now, shortly to speak of Christ's own coming. And this is it which the
Apostle speaks of in this place. Which for our understanding I shall gather
out of this and sundry other places of the Scripture. Christ's coming.
Now as for the coming of the judge, he shall not come from the Sea, from the
Earth, from the Plane. Wherefrom commes all the Kings of the earth, when they
are in their triumph? The Roman Emperors came out from the Capitol in their
Chariots. But, the King of Kings shall come from the Heaven of Heavens, abone
all these heavens that we see, from the highest place. The manner of his coming
is sudden. These signs that I spoke of, shall come on a sodaintie; and yet
there shall be a process of time in doing thereof. He shall come on a sudden,
as the deluge of Noah did, as the 24 chap. Matt verse 37. tells. The people
knew not of the deludge, that overwhelmed them, until it came: No more shall
this miserable world know Christ's coming, until he come suddenly. And
therefore, considering this, in the Scripture the Lord gives a watchword to
his Disciples: Many hundredth years are past since, and repeat it here, he
says, Matt. 24. 42. Watch, for ye know not when the Lord shall come. The
sodaintie and uncertainty of his coming should make us ever ready to look
for it. The Chariot he shall be carried in, is the clouds of the air. As in
his ascending the clouds resaued him from our sight, so shall the clouds
resaue him at his coming. Such a Chariot got never Emperor in all his highest
triumph, none of them was carried in the clouds. The company that shall conuoy
him: he shall come, says Matt. chap. 24. verse 30. with the Angels, and a flame
of fire, that fire that shall burn up the world, and shall burn up the
reprobate in the own time. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8. Jude says, verse. 14. He shall
come with millions of Angels, there shall not be an Angel, but all shall come
in that conuoye, to let all the world see, that, all the Angels are but
servants to that Lord, and servants standing about him, to obey his will
what he commandes, that his glory and Majesty may be seen. In the
meane-tyme he hes no need of them, for they neither can add to his glory,
nor diminish it: yet it hes pleased him, so to utter his glory to the world.
And in that meane-tyme, when he is coming, he will not come in silence. Ye
see, when an Army marches forward, there is a great noise and crying,
shouting, and blowing of trumpets: So, there shall be a noise in the Lords
coming down. The Angels of Heaven shall blow the trumpets. So he speaks
Matthew. 24. verse 31. Paul in this place says, there shall rise a sound: The
word in this place is a word of exhortation, (...), borrowed from that
sound which the Mariners uses to others, every one to move others to row. A
shout direct to the dead that lies in the grave: it shall pearce through the
grave and ears of the dead, and shall waken them up. With the shout shall be
conjoined the voice of the Archangell, and with the voice of the Archangell,
the sound of the trumpet of God, and this shall be the last trumpet, and never
shall the voice of the trumpet be heard again, and it shall be the sh^^llest
trumpet that ever was heard. Now when the Lord in his coming down shall come
to the place where he is ordained to sit, to judge the world, which shall be
in the clouds: Then all the Angels shall show their presence, and the Angels
shall make a glorious Throne to the Lord of glory, and there he shall sit.
This much shortly for the coming and appearing. I shall be short in this
matter. For, I will speak nothing but make a narration of it out of other
parts of Scripture.

Would ye understand the effects that follows on his coming? Effects
follovving Christ's coming.
Certainly notable effects must follow on it. The Lord prepare us for it.
The Father shall be there, the Son shall be there, coming.
the holy Spirit shall be there with all their power, and all their
Majesty. The glory of the Father never appeared so glorious, as it shall
appear that day. The glory of the Son never appeared so glorious as it
shall appear that day. The glory of the holy Spirit never appeared so
glorious, as it shall appear that day. Ye see in the Parliament the Kings of
the earth appears in their greatest glory to the people; so, the Lord of the
world shall appear with an infinite and incapable sight of glory. Now to come
to the effects that shall follow on his coming. Asse^bly.
The first effect. There shall be an assembly, a conuention, the fairest
conuention that ever was since the world stood. There are none that ever took
life, but all shall be there: all shall be sommonded with the shout of the
trumpetuall shall compeare: no excuse, the grave shall not excuse, death shall
not excuse, dead and living, never man, nor, woman excepted, all shall be
there. So, the first effect that shall follow the coming of the Judge, shall be
a conuention of the whole world, elect and reprobate, dead and living. And I
shall tell you, after what order it will be, by the Scripture. The first that
shall come there to the conuention, shall be they who were dead, they shall
preueene them who were alive. And Adam and Eve, shall be with the first, and in
the first rank. For before they who in the world shall be changed (which
shall be in the twinkling of an eye; and it shall stand to them in stead of
death) ere this change be made, the dead shall rise first. 1. Corint. 15. 51
52. Some of them who are dead, shall rise to life and honor, to wit, the
elect: Some of them, to wit, the reprobat, to dishonor, ignominy and death,
and a worse death nor they ly in presently. Then when the dead is raised up,
and compeares first, then shall follow that sudden change of them who shall be
alive: the elect that shall be alive shall be altered in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, to a glorious estate. The reprobat alive, shall be
altered to, but, if they were ignominious before, they shall be more ignominious
then: for, not only their soul, but soul and body shall be ugly, and if they
had any beauty, Estate of the bodies of the elect.
it shall be changed in a wonderful foulues. But, to speak of the body of the
elect: for, the Scripture speaks most of them. Paul (1. Cor. 15. verse 35.)
moves the question, with what bodies shall they rise? what body shall the
elect have? For, he is not curious of the bodies of the reprobate, but he
marks narrowly the rising of the bodies of the godly at that day. And the
first quality he gives them, is, that, whereas their bodies were natural, when
they were laid down in the grave, their bodies in that day, shall be made
spiritual: Not, that our bodies shall be changed in spirits; no, our bodies
shall be bodies indeed, of that same substance they have now. The very same
substance of the body thou have in this life, the same very substance thou
shall have in that life, and no other. It shall be present at that day, that
same very body, that same very hand and foot, etc. and no other body, nor
no other hand nor foot, etc. And there shall be none of the ashes of the
body, but it shall be kept, until that day, and shall be gathered up and
joined better, nor ever it was before. Then, the body shall abide. Our life
shall be much better. I live here a natural life, by a natural power in my
soul, but, in the resurrection, my life shall be spiritual, and I shall not
live a natural life: Now I live by a natural power in my soul, but, then, I
shall live spirituallie, by a spiritual power in Christ. Yet, there shall be
more. Another property of the body shall follow on this. This body, if it
were never so fair, yet, in respect of the glory it shall take up, it is but
ignominious, but the body shall rise glorious and shyning as the Sun; not by
this natural skin and color that we have here; but by a passing light and
brightness, conform to that brightness of Christ, when he was transformed on
the Mountain. (Read Matt. 17. 1.) and conform to his glory in Heaven, as
the Apostle tells Philipp. chap. 3. verse 21. Yet more, ye see our bodies
weak. The strongest man is soon beatten down for all his strength; all the
power of man is feeble and weak, but in the resurrection, the body shall be
strong and pithie. One man (to be homely with you) stronger in the
resurrection, nor an hundredth: yea, nor thousands are now. For, all feebleness
shall be left behind him in the grave, and he shall rise strong, like the
Angels in glory and strength. Yet more then this. (What matter of all this
former glory, if it were possible, that, this spiritual body could perish:)
The Apostle adds to this. We shall rise incorruptible, immortail, to life
everlasting: when we shall rise in that strength, that power and freedom,
immortality shall follow after mortality, glory after ignomnie, strength
after weakness, spiritualitie after naturalitie. In life we shall be
spiritual, in quality glorious, in time everlasting, there is no end of it.
This is the property that Paul speaks of our bodies in the resurrection.

Now to go forward. There shall follow more in this conuention. That same
power that shall conueene all men together, Separation of the elect from the
reprobats.
that same power shall make a seuering. The Angels, the Ministers of that
glorious judge, shall stop in between the elect and the reprobate, and put
them a sunder. They shall severe the sheep from the goats, they shall put the
sheep at the right hand of the judge, and the goats at the left hand. Read
Matt. chap. 25 verse 33. Appearantlie Paul here would mean to us another
kind of seuering: and yet all is one. This appearantlie vvoulde be his
meaning. They shall al be gathered together on the earth, and all shall stand
together in a troup, and then this seuering shall be made: Then all the elect
shall be rest up to the clouds, to meet the Lord in the clouds. As for the
reprobate, they shall all stand still on the earth, and shall not get that
honor, to be rest up in the air, but shall bide on the earth, and receive
their judgment there. For, Paul, when he says, they shall be rest up to
meet the Lord in the air, he speaks only of the elect. Then, there shall be
a seuering, after which there shall never be a meetting again: a great golfe
shall be between them that none may pass: We are all mingled here through
other, and none knows other: The sheep oft-tymes are taken for the goats,
and the goats for the sheep; but, at that great day, the sheep shall be
severed from the goats, and shall never meet again, be it man with wife,
parents with children. There are two effects, a conuention of all, and a
seuering of all.

Yet the Judge and the power of the Judge shall pass forward, and the third
effect follows. When the Judge hes all gathered together and none away: when
the row is called, and all are present: Then when one sort shall be placed
at the right hand, Judgment pronounced.
and the other at the left hand; then shall he fall to judgment: He cannot
judge before he severe; the very seuering tells the judgment: but, before
the seuering, the judgment shall not be pronunced. Then generally he shall
judge all according to their works. The books shall be opened, the book of
conscience shall be opened, the book of works shall be opened and al their
judgment shall be according to their works (...) understand this. The elect man
shall be judged according to his works, not that his works shall be the cause
that shall pro^^^ his life: but he shall be judged by his works as a testimony
of his faith in Christ and of the manner of life that he hes lived in the world
as a member of Christ: So he shall be judged by his works; not as a cause, but
as a token of the true cause, as ye would judge a man by a witness: for the
works shall be the tokens of the true cause, which is, the only justice of
Christ imputed unto us by faith. I dare say, albeit the reprobate worthe^^e
shall be damned according to their works, yet they shall be specially
condemned that they believed not in Jesus Christ, but contemned his Gospel
without faith. Then to come to the sentence. The Lord will begin at the
elect, as best and worthiest and he shall give them their sentence, Come ye
blessed of my Father, and vvher^^^ the Kingdom prepared for you, before (...)
of the world. Matt. chap. 25 verse 32. From once this sentence is past out on
them, when this absolution from death and damnation is pronounced, look what
estate they (...) be in: They shall stand with the Angles, as assessours to
judge the reprobate. So Paul 1. Cor chap. 6. verse 3. says, know (...) judge
the Angels? that is to say, we shall allow that most just sentence of Jesus:
And among all the rest of the (...) the twelf Apostles specially shall have
place. For, they shall sit on twelfe Thrones, to justify that just sentence
that shall pass on the reprobate. Then shall the sentence pass out on the
reprobate: the voice shall go down through the air to the earth, a terrible
voice, (...) accursed of my Father to the fire prepared for the Devil and all
his Angels. Brethren, think not this a fable, many will not believe this,
until they feel it in them selves.

Now to be short. To speak of the life of the reprobate after this sentence,
they shall no^ remain on the earth. In the very moment of the doom (that is
certain) they shall pass to d^mnation. (...)
At that same very moment thou receiuest the sentence of life, thou shall go
to Heaven: The moment the reprobate receives sentence of damnation they shall
go to Hell. Now to speak of this death and life: I will not be curious, there
is much spoken in the Scripture thereof, both to let us see the glory of the
elect and the torments of the reprobate. But, I tell you in one word, it was
never all told. Never Prophet nor Apostle expressed the greatness of the joy
that shall come to the godly, nor of the pain that shall come to the
ungodly. There shall be another pain nor fire and brimstone to be tormented
in. Neither can any express the joye in Heaven, There shall be such glory and
joye as the ear of man never heard of, the eye hes not seen, nor yet hes it
entered in the heart of man. Now look how Paul speaks of this joye here.
He says, (...) shall be (...) with the Lord. He contents him with these
words. To be with the Lord imports not a dwelling only with him, but a life
and glorious life, joye that is with him unspeakable: I cannot tell it: all
the tongues in the world cannot tell it: For, all the joye in Heaven it is in
the Son of God, and shall shine through him, that is, through the natural
(...) of man, covered over with a Majesty; and so all Heavens joye and glory
shall be with him, and they who shall be with him shall be in that glory
and joye with him. I dare say more. These things shall not be outvvith us
only, but within our bowels. The joye and glory shall not be outvvith the
godly, as it is now: Commonly the glory, the pleasure, are ou^vvith us, the
matter of joye outvvith us, and we (...) to it. But then, all matter of joye
shall be in us; Christ first be in us, and God shall be all in all, and God in
(...) be dvveling in us; and then, when thou have all within thee, what
shall thou want? And therefore, in the Revelation chap 21. verse 2; it is
said, We shall not need things outvvith us. neither a Temple, nor Sun, nor
Moon, for, God being in thee, shall be unto thee a Temple, he is all in all;
and he being in thee (...) all (...) thee. In one word, He shall be within
the^, (...) because God in Christ shall dvvell within thee, and (...) part of
that glory and felicity of that life. Now is there no more nor this? What
matter if it vverfor a time we were to be with him? What matter of Heaven if
Heaven lasted not? What matter of a Kingdom that vanishes away? A man set up
on a pomp to day, casten down to morrow? what matter of heavenly glory, let
be the earthly glory, if it lasted not? but the Apostle says we shall be with
him for ever. Take up then our blessedness. It stands in two points; first a
passing and exceeding joy and glory: and secondly in an eternity and
euerlastingnesse of joy and glory. Paul plainly and pithilie settes these two
together. 2. Cor. chap. 4. verse 17. He calls it a weight of glory, that is
excellent: Then he calls it an everlasting glory. There are two, a weight of
glory, and an everlasting weight of glory, and more excessiuelie excessive.
He cannot get words to utter it. It is a weight that will weigh down all
the world, and then a weight of glory excessiuelie excessive, and then
eternal and everlasting. So our felicities in glory, and passing great glory
and an everlasting glory. As for the pains of the reprobate* I will not
insist to speak of them, because the Apostle is speaking here to comfort the
elect.

Now when the Apostle hes made a discourse of the coming of Christ, He makes
his exhortation and says, and so I say also, Comfort one another with these
words. Brethren, many hes sought comfort, death is dolorous and wearisome in
the own nature: and therefore, many of the Heathen hes busied themselves to
get comfort and matter of consolation in the hour of death. What matter of
death, if there be a comfort therein? but then is death dolorous when it is
without comfort. But, was there ever any that got comfort that knew not
Christ, and the resurrection, and a life after this life? no, never man;
neither king nor Emperor. As for all the comforts they had, all was but
vanity, and dreams of comfort. Again I say. Was there ever any that gave
comfort to a body in death, or that gave comfort to them that was heavy for
the death of their freinde, but that man that hes a sense of that glorious
resurrection of Christ and of his coming? And therefore, as thou would have
comfort in death and give comfort for death; know, that, the Lord is to come in
the world: know, that, there shall be a glorious resurrection, and after the
resurrection there shall be an eternal joy and glory in Heaven. And look,
that, this be not only words in the mouth. There are many vain bablers of
Christ, and of that glorious resurrection: A knave, an adulterer, a murderer
will flatter himself, and clatter of that glory and joy: but all is vanity*
Will thou be a knave, and then speak of these things? The Lord shall punish
thee. Look therefore, that, thy speaking of the latter day be not in vain
words; Heaven and life everlasting is not in words; but, look, that, it be
fectfull in the heart, and that, of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speak. Before thou speak, feel it in thy heart, and then speak. So says
Paul 2. Cor. chap. 4. verse 13. I believe I shall rise, and therefore I speak
to you. And David says, I believe, and therefore I spoke. Psalm. 116. 10. And
say, I pray God that I believe all these things that I speak to you. The Lord
give every one of us grace, that, we may believe all these things of Christ's
coming, and of the glorious resurrection: For, without Faith and Hope, of
these things, no comfort, no life. The Lord give us Faith and Hope, until he
bring us to the full sight and fruition of these things through Christ. To whom
with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and praise for ever and
ever

AMEN.
THE XIX LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA, CHAP. 5. verse. 1. 2. 3. 1 But of the times and seasons, brethren,
ye have no need that I write unto you.

2 For ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come,
even as a thief in the night.

3 For when they shall say, Peace, and safety, then shall come upon them
sudden destruction, as the travail upon a woman with child, and they shall
not escape.


IN the text immediately going before ye have heard (brethren) of the coming
of the Lord Jesus, the Judge of the world in that day appointed, to judge the
quick and the dead: Of the resurrection of the dead especially of the chosen
that shall be dead before that day: of the changing of them that shall be found
living that day by virtue of the resurrection of Christ, and of the life,
glory, and joy that they shall enjoy after they are rest up in the clouds.
They shall be with him for ever.

Now to come to this text we have in hand. The Thessalonians hearing and
understanding that the Lord will come from heaven, Jesus will come and judge
the world, might have moved the question to the Apostle, about the time of his
coming: when he will come? what year, what day, what hour, what time
generally shall we look for him? The Apostle meets this, and answers, It is
not needful, brethrer, that I writ unto you of the times and seasons: for ye
yourselues know perfectly that the coming of the Lord shall be as a th^efe in
the night. And therefore, why should I go calculat days and years to you?
seeing that the Lord shall come at unawares, and on a suddainty: the world shall
not wit until he come. And he proves this in the next verse from the effect of
his coming. They who shall be found in a deadly security sleeping, they
shall be stricken suddenly: For when they shall say, Peace and safety, then
shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape. And upon that follows an exhortation to
vigilance. Now to come to the words of the text, I need not writ to you, says
the Apostle, concerning times and seasons. It is not needful (would he say) it
is not expedient, it is not profitable to you, yea more it pertaines not to you
to know it. As the Lord says Act. 1. 7. when the Disciples a little before his
ascension was curious to know the times, he says, It is not expedient to you
to know the times and the seasons the Lord hes in his (...) By times is meant,
all times less or more, whether it be the time of an hour, a day, a week,
year, or any greater time. It pertaines not to you to know any time of
Christ's coming, yea to know in what age of the world, let be, the month,
week, year, or day it shall be. It pertaines not to you to know any definite
or certain time. The next word is (...). It means a more strait and
particular time when things commes to pass according to the Lords preseryued
time, in his counsel the artickle of time God hes appointed to it. There is
nothing the Lord hes appointed, but it shall f^ll out in that same moment and
artickle of time. Now would ye know what means these seasons? I understand by
them* the morning, noontide, evening. In the 1. chap. Act. It is not for you
(says Christ) to know times and seasons, which the Lord ^es put in his own
powers. Ye should not know the time of his coming, whether he come in the
morning, even tide, midnight or cock-^^^w* So the answer the Apostle makes,
is, ye should not be curious about the time of Christ's coming* asking for
days, weeks, months, years, it is not for you to know this.

Now to mark something, for I will not go deeply in this matter. We learn
of the text immediately going before. There is nothing under the Sun more sure
not this, that, Christ will come. Certainty of Christ's coming.
This is a thing that every one of us is bound to know, that Christ will come
and sit in judgment, and put an end to all things in this world And this is
an artickle of our Creed. From thence he will come to judge the quick and the
dead. If thou believe not that Artickle, howbeit thou believe all the rest of
the Artickles, thy faith is nothing. Then the second thing I mark of this, is,
the curiosity of the Thessalonians. This curiosity hes been in all ages,
that when any man heard tell that the Lord Jesus is to come again, and to
judge the world, and to put an end to all things, in all ages there hes risen
up men curious to understand the time, and to search when he shall come. The
Apostles begouth this: Curiosity in searching the time of Christ's coming
repressed.
for, immediately before the ascension of our Lord, they uttered this
curiosity, asking the times and seasons of his coming again. But incontinent
their curiosity is snibbed and repressed by the Lord, Act. 1. 7. From that
time men hes never left off to be curious of these times and seasons. Men hes
been curious to lay an account if Christ's coming shall be in this year, in
this age: yea, men in our age hes done this: but all is vanity. Now thirdly, I
note on Paul's part, and his answer to them. Men should not search in
curiously anent the time of Christ's coming. Men should not seek the month,
day, year nor age: that perteines not to them. There is great difference
between the first coming of Christ, and his second coming. As to the first
coming, it was the will of the Lord that the time of his coming should be
known to the world: And therefore, he revealed the year of his coming to the
old Prophets. As ye may see 9 Daniell. And as Peter tells 1. Epist. chap. 1.
verse 10. They searched in to the very time of this coming, and they did
nothing but that which they should have done. And Christ finds fault with the
hypocrite Jews, that could take up by the sky what manner of weether should be,
but searched not the time of his coming. Luke 12. 56. But as to his second
coming, he never told of the time of it. Yea, in Daniell in his last chapter
4. verse, there is a plain inhibition to seek out the time of it. Therefore,
it perteines not to men to know it: yea, it is better not to know the time of
it, nor to know it. And this Christ means Matt. 24. 42. Watch therefore, for,
ye know not at what hour your Master will come. Where he teaches us, that
the ignorance of the time of his coming is very profitable for us, because it
makes us to watch and pray, whereas the knowledge of it would make us careless.

Ye may ask at me, May we on no ways speak or think of the Lords coming to
judge the quick and the dead, and the time thereof? I answer. To define a
special time, either in the cogitation or thought of thy heart, or in the
words of thy mouth thou can not, nor thou should not do it. But
generally to think and to say, the Lord will come shortly, whether this age,
or the next age, I know not: but, I know well, it shall not be long when the
judge shall come, it shall be soon: it is lawful for thee to think and say
this. For, the Lord himself hes said, When it is craved (Revel. chap. 22.
verse. 20.) Come Lord Jesus, yes (says he) I come shortly. When he says, he
will come shortly, let us believe it. The History in the Gospel Matt. 24. 25.
etc. of the evil and the good servant, teaches us what we should do, until
the Lords coming. The evil servant says, My Master delays his coming home,
therefore, he will begin to play the wanton, and to drink, and to smite his
companions. The good servant will say, I am looking for my Masters coming
shortly: he will come at noone-tyde, or midnight, or Cock-crow, I will wait
for it, and therefore, I will be vigilant. And so this good servant tells that
we should ever await for the Lords coming diligently. And surely his coming
is near, and feign would the godly have his coming, to end their misery,
and to perfect the joy and glory he hes appointed for them. And therefore, the
Lord says, I come shortly, I shall not be long. And albeit we think it be
long since he promised this: yet, think not, he delays his coming. For, a
thousand years, in the sight of the Lord, are but as an hour. 2. Pet. 3. 8.
and in respect of him, there is neither long nor short time. So, think ever
with the good servant, the Lord will come shortly, and he is daily coming:
yea, and we should desire him to come shortly every day, and we should ever
patiently wait for it. And therefore, this clause is added in the Lords
prayer, Let thy Kingdom come: Which desires, that, he would perfect that work
of glory. Ye see Paul says, 2. Tim. 4. verse 7. 8. I have fought a good
fight, I have kept the faith, I have run out my course. Then, he subjoines.
But, what restes? I shall (...) the crown of glory, which the Lord Jesus
as Judge, general will give, me, and (...) only given to me, but to all them
with thirstes for his coming. Assuredly that body shall receive the crown
of glory. Whereto are we so curious of the time of the general judgment?
Know we not, that, our own death is our particulare judgment? Know I not,
that within a short time, I shall be called to an account before that
Tribunal? No sooner shall the soul depart out of the body, but as soon
shall my judgment begin: for, the soul shall immediately depart to that
place where it shall remain for ever. Therefore seeing the day of my death is
the day of judgment to me* (and how many of you that hears me this day will
be living this day twenty years?) What needs us to be curious an^ut the
time of the general judgment? seeing our own particulare judgment is at
hand. The Lord is already warning us to (...), and yet, the Lord will not
have us more knowing the particulare time of death, no^ the day of judgment.
The Lord will have us uncertain, albeit men will be curious to know it. The
cause is, that, all may be in readiness, that there be not an hour in the
day, but thou be ready when the Lord shall call on thee, and will say to
thee, Go, I will have thee carrying here no longer: That thou may say, Lord,
I will go with thee, and vvele come death? The Lord refuses to tell his
Disciples particulare times, but biddes them watch for that time. This
doctrine is very requisite to us. They are living this day whom (...) this
day eight days, the Lord will call on. Therefore, let every one prepare
them selves.

No: in the second verse he gives the reason wherefore it is not expedient
that they should know of Christ's coming to judge the world. For, says he,
ye your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord shall come (...) as a
thief in the night. That is, S^daintie of Christ's commi^g (...) the (...) of
it uncertain
(...) sodaintie* Men shall never know, until they see Christ come. If he,
come in the morning; then ye may say when he is come, The Lord is come in the
morning. And before that time thou should not think no^ speak of the
certain hour of Christ's coming. There are two things that cannot be
known both together* The coming of Christ on a sodaintie, and the certain
time of the coming of Christ. If I knevv the Lord would come sodaintie, it is
folly to me to travail to know the special hour thereof: when thou have
calculate to see the very hour of his coming, it is but vanity. I tell
thee, the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, which time is most
uncertain, and therefore all thy calculation fails thee. Yet, farther. He
says, that ye yourselues know perfectly that he shall come at a certain
time. Here is a certain time, but there is not a certainty of a certain
time, but a certainty of an uncertain time. And if the Apostle settes down a
certainty of an uncertain time, it is impossible to thee to get a certainty
of it. Ye shall read this in Matthevv^ chap. 24. verse 42. And who ever hes
travailed in any age to count the hour and time of his coming, the Lord has
let them see they are confooted of error, and the Lord hes condemned that
labor. It is a bold thing to man to seek out that thing the Lord hes hid*
Men will stand up and calculat such a year of the Lords coming. O vanity,
thou passes thy bounds, and thou had no such thing in commission given to
thee. The Lord keep us from such vanity.

But, to go forward: in the the third verse the Apostle gives the reason of
the sodaintie of the coming of that day as a thief in the night. For, when
they shall cry Peace, Peace, etc. As he would say, The effect shall show it,
bide, until he come. The sudden destruction at his coming shall show his
sudden coming. When they shall say, peace, etc. and say, all is well, shut
the doors, and be merry, then, on a sodaintie, the destruction shall overtake
them. Then, I see, that, the death, that men shall die at Christ's coming,
shall be a sudden death. Who ever shall die at Christ's coming, shall die
suddenly. A great difference between this death, which we die now, and that
death, which shall be at Christ's coming. When men now dies, they get leisure
to die. There is patience in God, there is leuitie and long suffering: for,
when we see we are on deathbed never to live again, then, he draws us to
repentance, and he will not suddenly strike us to death, but gives us time to
amend and turn to him. A murderer he will take him and cast him in prison,
and will let him a^yde there, to see, if he will repent. So, there is
patience now: But, in the day of judgment, there shall be no lenity, nor,
patience. And if thou be a reprobate, thou shall not have grace nor time, to
say, Lord, be merciful to me: for, er thou end the word, when thou beginst to
speak, thou shall be stricken. And what means this? Even, that, this is the
acceptable day, the day of Gods patience and long suffering. Repent therefore.
Sit not the time, for, certanilie, will thou sit the time, until that coming?
no patience, no grace, no repentance, but a change shall be in the twinkling
of an eye. The Lord when he gives us time to repent, gives us grace also to
repent. Think it a great blessing, when the Lord lays thee in pain, that he
gives thee that time to repent, and make vauntage of it.

Now the words would be marked. For, when they shall say, peace, then shall
come on them sudden destruction. In the chapter going before, the first death
was called a sleep, yea, the reprobate when he is stricken it is called a
sleep; and where sleeping is, there is a waking again: But, the second death
is commonly called destruction, an utter wreak and destruction, and no death.
In the 2. Epist. Thessal. chap. 1. verse 9. Paul speaking of Christ's coming
to judgment and pain of the reprobate, he castes to a property to this
word, and calls it an everlasting destruction. Here, he calls it a sudden
hasty destruction. How can these two stand? Well eneugh: for, in the coming
of Christ, it shall be sudden: and yet, albeit the coming be sudden, the
destruction shall be endless and not sudden. Well were them, if they were
beasts: for, so soon as the branes of a beast are beaten out, then, the wreak
of it is done: But, the reprobate shall ay be deing, and never be dead, ay
wreaked, and never an end of their wreaking. What matter, if* at the end of ten
thousand years, there could be an end of their destruction. Paul in that place
gives a reason of that endless destruction. (There is none of us but we should
understand this) Seek the cause from the judge and striker: The cause is not
so much in the man stricken, as in him who strikes, who is infinite. And
therefore, the pain is infinite. As for exemple. Let a King, or, Monarch take
a man and torment him, and yet hold his life in: Burn him, and boil him with
^yle, yet, that pain shall end. Let him pull the skin off him, do what
torment he can to him, yet, that pain shall end. For, never a Monarch yet
could keep a man in endless pain: they may well pyne folk, but that pain
shall have an end: all the judges power is bounded and limited, and therefore,
he must have an end in his tormenting: But, the Lord is inf^^t. And therefore,
he may torment in pain everlastingly. Al torment here, is but child's play, in
respect of the heavy judgments of God: what matter, to fall in man's hands:
their wraith and power is nothing, in respect of that infinite wraith of God,
who punishes, without an end of pain. Hell is not so light a thing, as men
trowes. That terrible day is not as men believes. Therefore, in whose hands
that ever thou cast thy self, cast not thy self in the hands of an angry
God: No, rather choose to die ten thousand times, ere thou fall in the hands of
an angry God: If thou knew the torments of Hell, tho would be afraid. So, the
thing especially we should care for, in this life, is, ever to seek, to stand
in friendship with him, to be war of his wraith, and rather take on thee the
wraith of the whole world.

Now, he notes the time, when this sudden destruction shall fall. When they
shall be saying, Peace and safety, at this time, scarcely shall he have ended
the word, when the strok shall light. We read of Belshazzar, Daniell 5. 5. who
was profaning the veshels of the Lords house and crying peace; but, he had not
spoken the word, when all his joints severed, and the hand writting on the wall
afraid him. In the words, mark two things. First, on whom shall this sudden
destruction fall* secondly, what time should this destruction be. Then, who is
it, on whom this sudden destruction falls? The word bears, men and women
making mirth in this earth, without the care of God, or, man. The thief when
he breaks in in a house in the night, who is it in the house, he oppresses?
If there be a body, that is found sleeping, he will cut his throat, but,
if there be any waking and on his guarde, that man will escape the thief:
So, the Lord, when he shall come and will compass the whole world (as it
were in a spanne) whom will he oppress suddenly? Him whom he finds
sleeping in the senseless bed of security, without thought, either of God,
or, of the Devil, such a man, the throat of him shall be cutted, and he
will be casten in Hell incontinent. But, who shall be safe? They who are
watching and praying* lying also in a security, but in a spiritual security
having an assurance of Gods grace, and mercy to them. Their throat shall not
be cutted. But when is it, that the body sleeping in a deadly security shall
be destroyed? Even when they are in the highest degree of security. Degrees of
security
Of this sleeping and security there are degrees. The best that lives is not
altogether fred from this sin, but there is some that glories in their sin.
The murderer glories in his murder, and he will say, He hes slain one to me,
but I have slain three to him for it. The whore glories in whoredom. Then in
the meane-tyme when he is on the hight of his sleep, eating and drinking, then
he is in the entresse to hell; and when he is tumbling in sin, the shall the
Lord come and strike him with a sudden stroke and light on his head with an
heavy, bloody and iron rod, when thou art in the midst of thy sin, in
drinking, in murder, then shall this ^odde light on thy head to destroy thee.

Now this word (...) or speaking, which the Apostle uses ^^ere, would be
marked, there are sundry kinds of speakinges. There is a speaking in the
mouth, there is a speaking in the heart, there is a speaking also in deeds and
actions. The Psalmist says Psalm. 14. 1. The foolish man hes said in his heart,
there is not a God. They confess him in mouth, but, in heart they deny him.
Paul speaks of some wicked men who professes, they know God, but in words
they deny hi^. (...)
Tit. 1. 16. Now, the words of the Apostle are not to be taken so strait, of
them, that spoke with the mouth only, but of those also, that speaks the
fairest with their mouth, but with a false heart and a wicked deed in the hand.
If thou be found speaking peace, and all sure, whether it be in mouth, heart, or
hand, this sodaintie in vengence shall ouertak thee. Among all the tokens of a
judgment coming, security is one of the chief. Would ye know, if a
judgment be coming on a creature, I will tell you: If I find the (...)
sleeping and s^o^ting in murder, (...) and wickedness. I will say. Thou art
able to get a black wakning. And therefore, among other (...) that shall go
before the latter day, a dead (...) shall be one: For, when they are sleeping
in their high sleep, the^ (...) the Judge come (...). When was it, that the
destruction lighted on the first world? when they were sleeping, eating and
drinking, without thought of Heaven, or, Hell. When was Sodom destroyed? when
all the inhabitants thereof were eating and drinking, then, fire and brimstone
came down from Heaven and destroyed them. Again, in your own memories what
ever judgment lighted on any City, or, person in Scotland, but ye might see
a sensible and dead security on them? It is most sure. Ye shall see the
experience of it in a child brought to the s^affold, among other lamentations
of his misery, he will say, alas, I was sleeping in sin, until now: I was
sleeping in security, I was playing the harlote, I was murdering etc. the
very month of him will tell his security. These plagues of Pest and (...)
began among these borderers: what was their exercise sleeping in sin, reauing
from others. So, most justly the plague hes seized on them. Trow ye to be free
of it? No truly, the Pest had never so soon come on Edinburgh, except ye had
been sleeping. And I pronunce, in Gods name, if there be not a wakning in
time, and arysing up out of this senseless security, there shall be another
kind of death.

Now brethren. Then comparison would be marked, whereby he settes out the
sudden judgment Even as a dolor takes a woman with child, So shall that
pain overtake them. The dolor of a woman traveling, and the dolor in Hell
is like other, in sundry points. And therefore the Scripture takes often the
exemple of it, to descryue the pain of Hell, as in this part. Ye see, the
woman bears the matter of her pain in her own bosom, the child: and where
shall be the matter of pains of Hell, which is sin, but in the catiues own
bosom? likewise as a woman with child will be full of child: So, the heart
of a knave will be filled with wickedness and be heavy, albeit he leap and
skip on the earth. They are like in sodaintie. For, as the sickness commes on
the woman suddenly: So, the strok of hell shall be sudden, and stricken
suddenly. Compair these two pains in sharpness. As the woman hes a sharp
dolor, which if it lasted, were intolerable: if the Lord gave not leisure to
draw their breath, between shower and shower (as they call it) it were
intolerable. So the pains of Hell are exceeding sharp and intolerable. (But,
here, they differ. The woman's pain is but for a time, but, the pain of Hell
indures for ever.) Again, when the pain will come on a woman, she may be at
the table eating or drinking, or she may be sleeping, and it will suddenly
take her. So the pain of Hell will come suddenly, when the wicked are eating
and drinking and making merry. But, alas, when the Apostle hes compared it to
the pain of a woman travailing with child, he hes not ^aulde all, no not the
thousand part of that pain. The pain of Hell passes all measure. The
Scripture for our capacity settes down a comprehensible pain to signify an
incomprehensible pain. O, the incomprehensible pain of Hell! Always when
thou see a pain intolerable, think on Hell. And say, O Lord, this pain on
me albeit it be in the flesh, it is exceeding sore: therefore, Lord save me
from that exceeding pain in Hell.

Now when he hes spoken of the time and pain of it. He says, they shall not
escape. Some will say, May not men and women flee? He therefore seals and
stampes the word which none can open. Thou shall not escape. Art thou one who
hes been playing and living in dead security? thou shall not escape. The
bullet came never so suddenly out of the gun, as the judgment shall come on
the knave and murderer. Men will flee these earthly judgments, when the
sword commes, a knave will flee from it. When the Pest commes, it may be, that,
a knave will escape, better, nor one, that is worthy twenty of him. O, the
patience of God! Know ye what God will be doing in the meantyme? It may be, he
is reserving the knave and oppressor to a sorer judgment nor the Pest: he may
be keeping him to the day of Judgment, when he shall be stricken with the
sudden pain of Hell. And this is true. The longer he is reserved and repentes
not, the heavier shall the judgment be when it lights. For, the keeping of
him is an occasion to heap sin on him. Keep a murderer who hes slain one
to day, if he repent not, he shall slay another to morrow, and ay increase in
sin. One sin is the punishment of another; and a wicked man will run from
one sin to another, until he come to the head of the ladder, and have filled
the cup full, and hold it up in his hand, saying, It is full. What is the
Lord doing? Hes he done one sin? The Lord heaps up an heap of wraith for him:
Hes he committed another sin? He adds to another heap of wraith, and so,
until the cup be full, the wraith of God is daily augmented, until it be
powered out on his head. Alas, will not the visible experience of Gods
judgementes move us? But how ever it be that men escape now, until Christ
shall come to the judgment, yet there shall be no escaping at that later day.
O, the hand of the Lord will ouer-spanne all, the Lords hand will draw thee
out, be where thou will be. It is true, at that latter day before Christ's
coming some will run to one hole, some to another hole, some will cry,
Hills, cover us from the vvraith of the Lamb. Shall the hills cover them?
No, no: the Hills shall present them to the judge, all the creatures shall
serve that God and search them out. The watter shall spew them out, the very
fire shall present them to that Judge: No escaping from the sight of that
Judge. Then, ye have the suddentie of this judgment, the eternity of it, and
pain of it. Let all these hold us in awe. Paul says, Knovving the terror of
the Lord, I travel to be faithful in my calling, I exhort men. 1. Corint.
chap. 5. verse 11. So, let us think on all these things, and set our selves
to serve God in this life, that we may be fred of pain for ever. The Lord
grant us grace to do so, for Christ's sake. To whom with the Father and the
holy Spirit be all honor and praise, for ever.

Amen.
THE XX. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 4. 5. 6. 7. 4 But, ye, brethren, are not in
darkness, that that day should come on you, as it were a thief.

5 Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not
of the night, neither of darkness.

9 Therefore, let us not sleep as do other, but, let us vvatch and be sober.

7 For, they, that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunke^, are
drunken in the night.


BRETHREN, ye heard, that it was a thing most sure and certain, that the Lord
Jesus will come again to judge the quick and the dead; ye heard again in the
beginning of this chapter the uncertainty of the day and hour of his coming,
what age he shall come in, what year he shall come, what month, what day,
what hour, whether in the morning, noone-tyde, midnight, cockcrow, etc. No
man knows, neither is it revealed neither is it a thing to be known, it is
not for our well to know it, but for our well to be ignorant of it; for, if we
knew it, it would engender a security in us; the ignorance of it is, or, at
the least, should be, an occasion to us of waking and preparation of us, for it
makes us ready at what time soever he shall come to meet him. Always when he
shall come to the ungodly there shall be a destruction. Judgment shall
suddenly overtake a great number of men and women that shall be found alive at
his coming, especially these who shall be glorying in the face of the world,
saying, all is well, shall be suddenly stricken, as the dolor commes on a woman
with child, and they shall not escape,

Now to leave all things taught before and to come to this present matter I
have read. The Thessalonians to whom the Apostle writes, hearing, that, at
Christ's coming there shall be a sudden destruction, might have consaued a
fear, (as no doubt some of them did) they might have thought, that, that
sudden destruction should have overtaken them at the coming of Christ. The
Apostle meets this fear, with a comfort, and he says, to them who were
turned, who were translated from darkness to light. Brethren (using an homely
style) Ye are not in darkness, the sudden destruction shall overtake them
only, who at the coming of Christ shall be found in darkness, lying in
blindness, not knowing Christ: but, as for you, brethren, that day shall not
come on you as a thief, that sudden destruction shall not light on you.
Indeed, it is true, it shall come on you at unawares, but it is as true,
albeit it be unawares, yet, it shall not destroy you: The reason is, because ye
are not in darkness, ye are translated out of that darkness ye were before
into, to light, to the light of Heaven, and so ye shall be found waking when
the Lord shall come, and so ye ye shall escape that destruction that shall
overtake them who shall be found sleeping in gross ignorance at that day. This
is the meaning shortly of the Apostle in this place. Now to mark something.
Learn here, first, when the judgementes of God are threatened, when mention is
made of that latter judgment, and of that sudden destruction that shall be at
Christ's coming. Who are they that fears and trimbles? who are they that are
stricken with fear and terror? It is not the wicked of the world that is
lying in darkness, in the ignorance of God and of Christ, that is feared for
any threatening of a judgment. Threaten on a year, the wicked who is endured
in heart will never be stricken with fear* The wicked mocks the judgment of
God.
tell him of judgment, the judgment shall never move him a whit^ albeit it
pertain to him. Speak to him of the sudden destruction that shall be at
Christ's coming in the world, tell him, there shall be a day of count, and
albeit he seem in the mouth to acknowledge it; yet, he shall scorn it in his
heart. Read the second Epistle of Peter chap. 3. verse 4. There the mocker is
brought in, saying, Where is the promise of his coming, for since the Fathers
died, all things continue alyke from the beginning of of the creation. Christ
indeed shall come to judge the quick and the dead, there shall be a general
judgment, and a count and reckoning for all our actiones and works done in
this world, good and evil, and a sudden destruction of the world: yet, tell
the mocker of these things, he shall scorn them all, and he will think, all
are but vain fectlesse threatninges. Yea, not only will the wicked contenine
all the threatening of judgment, but also the very judgment it self that is
lighted on him, except it be all the heavier, he will contemn it. Read Fsay 9.
10. They say (says he) in the pride of their heart, it is but brick and clay
houses that are casten down to us: (when the judgment commes on them) but we
shall build up again houses of stone. Se the contempt of the judgment of God.
So except the judgment be the heavier, they shall contemn it, and scorn God
in his face. Experience tells this. The Earl, the Lord, etc. will say when his
house is casten down in the just judgment of God, What matter that this house
be casten down, I shall build up one far better, but the Lord may make that
new house fall about thy ears. So, the world will never know the judgments of
God, until the judgment light on them to their destruction. Well then if the
wicked fear not the judgments of God, then, who fears? the godly, they whom to
the judgment of God pertains not: The godly fear gods judgments.
And I dar say, in Edinburgh the godliest is ever most feared for Gods
judgments. The Lord is terrible when he commes in judgment. Paul speaking of
that day of judgment. 2. Cor. 5. 11. he vtters the fear he had of it
himself, Knovving, says he, the terrors of the Lord, we bring men to the
Lord, that when he shall come in that terrible judgment we may find mercy: Be
not sensles at the threatening of God. If men had not been seusles at the
judgeme^ts of God, by famine these years bygone, this Pest had not comde: and
if theribe not yet a greater fear of God, he shall strik on with his judgme^ts.

Next I mark of this place. Who is it that is comforted against Gods
judgementes? Consolations belong only to the godly.
To whom belongs consolations, promises, and speeches of comfort in the
Scriptures? Speaks the Apostle to the Heathen that ly in ignorance and not
converted to the faith of Christ? They feared not, where there is no fear nor
down casting, it is foolishness to comfort. Whereto should I comfort them who
are lifted up in pride? whereto should I prease to lift up him who is over high
and conceatie already. So, consolation, raising up of the heart, promises of
God, that serves to consolation pertaines nothing to the wicked, that hes no
sense of misery, and lies in ignorance of God: nothing pertaines to them but
threatening upon threatening, judgment upon judgment. And when they say, Peace,
and all things sure; I may say, a sudden destruction shall overtake them. And
to the men in this land lying in a dead sleep of this fleshly security, and
crying Peace, when they are in the midst of harlotrie of murder, etc. I say a
sudden destruction and vengence shall fall on them. This shall ever be my cry,
until they fear and trimble, and have a sense of their misery. never another
word to them, but judgment out of my mouth. Should I say to a man lying in
darkness, brother, ye are in the light, judgment shall not come on you? No,
no: But I will say, the Lord shall come suddenly on thee with judgment to
destroy thee. So, consolation pertaines to the godly only: and who ever ye be
that fears not Gods judgments, I bid you in Gods name take no promise of
comfort to you, no consolation, until ye be touched with a sense of misery
and feel your sins. Then to whom pertaines all the promises of consolation in
the word of God? To the godly only who hes their eyes opened to see God in the
face of Christ, hes their heart opened to feel the grace of God through
Christ, to them they appertain: And therefore, ye shall find in all the
Prophets when a judgment is threatened, immediately after the threatening, they
subjoine a sweet consolation to the godly, least they should think the judgment
to pertain to them.

The third thing I note. Mark the cause here, wherefore the Thessalonians
shall escape that sudden destruction: Because ye are not in darkness,
Knowledge of God in Christ the cause of escaping judgment
says he, therefore, that sudden destruction shall not overtake you. Mark
this cause. The ground of escaping this judgment, is, to be fred of darkness,
to be fred of this gross ignorance, wherein we are inuolued by nature, and to
be translated to the light of God, wherein we may see the face of Christ and
Heaven, and the glory thereof. There is the ground. Whosoever shall be found
lying in darkness at Christ's coming* albeit they be found lying waking and
looking up with bodily eyes, (...)
yet if they be in blindness in the soul, so that they can see nothing in
Heaven, God nor Christ, judgment and destruction suddenly shall overtake
them, and all their brains shall be beaten out ere they get leisure to cry God
mercy. But again, who ever they be that at Christ's coming shall be found in
the light, with the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ with some sight of
Heaven, they shall escape and shall live eternally. When the thief breaks in
in an house, whom is it that he suddenly oppresses? Whom but these whom he
finds sleeping with their eyes closed, he will cut their throats ere they be
wakned. But when he breaks in on an house, and they who are in the house be
waking on their guard, and ready for the danger, then the thief shall not
prevail. They will eschew the danger: so shall it be at Christ's coming if he
find thee sleeping sudden destruction shall overtake thee; if he find thee
waking ready for the danger, thou shall escape and live. So ye see how needful
a thing it is to have knowledge and light, that every man may be saved. O what
it is to know God, to know Christ to get a ^ight of Heaven and of the life
to come! Thy safety consistes in it. Then again see how dangerous a thing is
ignorance, and specially the ignorance of God, to put off the day and the night
in ignorance of God. Give thee good cheer, rest, play, honor in the world,
thou will put off one day, two days, three days, thou will say, what care I
more; but woe to thee when Christ commes. thou will be sleeping in ^inne.
sudden destruction shall overtake thee: all this tendes to this end, ly not in
drunkenness, get knovveldge out of the word, know God in time, know him
in mercy: If thou know him not in mercy in this life, thou shall feel him in
judgment at that great day of Judgment. The Lord give every one of us grace
to know him; that having the right knowledge of him which leads to salvation,
we may at his coming be elected of him to reign in his everlasting glory in
the Heavens.

Now that which he had said before of darkness, in the next verse he makes
it more plain, and says, for ye are the children of light, and of the day.
That is to say, the fairest light that can be possible. For what in this
world is fairer nor the light of the Sun and day light. As he vvoulde say,
ye are not in the common light, but in the light of the Sun that shynes most
clear; ye are not children of the night, but of the day. These two will
never stand together, to be the child of the night and of darkness; and to
be the child of the light and of the day. If thou be the child of light and
day, it is impossible to thee for to be the child of the night and darkness.
And if thou be the child of the night and darkness, it is impossible thou can
be the child of the day and light. These two can never agree both together.
Two Kingdoms cannot stand in thee. If God reign not in thee, the Devil must
reign in thee: and if God reign in thee, the Devil cannot reign in thee.
Indeed so long as we are here, light and darkness may be both in us, for
we are never free of this darkness, neither is this light of God persite in
us, but both cannot reign together in us: but howbeit darkness be in thee,
yet it hes no dominion over thee. For where any spark of the light of God is*
the light reigns, and God reigns in thee, albeit thou have great darkness in
thee: For vvhereuer God is in any measure, he ever reigns. He says, Ye are
all the children of the light, and the children of the day. Mark the words.
For they import a pithie meaning. They mean, that not only they are in a
light, but that in substance in a manner they are light. As I am light, and thou
art light; if thou be the child of light, in substance thou art light, even so
as in substance thou art a body, in substance likewise a soul; So in a manner
in substance thou art light. For ye must understand this, the child is ever by
nature of the substance of the Father and Mother. Then if ye be the children of
light, of necessity ye must be in some manner of the substance of light. Paul
Ephesians. chap. 5. verse 8. says to the Ephesians, that some tymeye were
Gentiles, sometime ye were darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord,
walk as children of light. He says not ye were in darkness, but he says
in very deed ye were in a manner a very lump of darkness. Then again he
says not ye are in the light, but ye are light, your substance and nature is
changed in the con^rarie, where ye were in substance darkness, now ye are
in substance light, turned from the substance of daknesse, to the substance of
light. Now the words this way exponed, take up an higher ground and of the
escaping of judgment at the coming of Christ; It is not enough to be found in
the light only, but thou must be found to be light it self, and the child of
light. I shall make this plain. There are two sorts of things and bodies in
this world that hes light. There are some bodies that in themselves hes no
light in the world, they are dark in themselves* yet they will be in the
light: As for example, Ye see the black floor ye sit on, it hes no light, of
it self it is black; but when the Sun shynes on it, it hes light and shynes.
There are other bodies that are not only in the light, but in the own nature
are light, as the Sun, it is not only in the light, but it is light the self,
and there is no other light to give it light except the self. Now to apply
this. There are two sorts of men and women in the Church of God. I leave
Pagans, Turks and Jews, and I speak of these who are in the Church, and
professes themselves to be Christians: There are some of them in the light, in
the midst of the Saints of God, and professing the word as the Saints does,
that hes no light of themselves, the light they have is the light of others; as
for themselves they are but black bodies and black souls; Hypocrites that hes
nothing in themselves but blackness (an hypocrite hes nothing but blackness,
and yet he will be in the Church, and as far in as any man,) but shynes in
the light of the word, and of the Saints of God. Again there are some who are
not only in the light, shynes not only in the light of others, but in
themselves are light, and shynes in their own light, and there are beams that
commes from them, and lightens both themselves and others that sittes with
them; as the Sun both shynes the self, and makes other inferior creatures to
shine. Of the which sort were the Philippians, Paul writes to them, Philip 2.
15. and says, Ye are compast with Pagans and Heathen, and ye shine in the
midst of them. So who ever gets this grace to have this light and to carry it
out to the world, they are the children of light. Now in the day of judgment,
it will not be enough to be in the Church, to be among the faithful and
renewed creatures, and among them who are light, to be at preaching of the
word, except thou be light of thy self: what care I, if the light wherein I
shine be not my own, but the light that shynes from another. If thou have no
more, thou shall be suddenly destroyed. Therefore if thou would be fred
from this sudden destruction, seek light, regeneration, illumination, and
never rest nor be glad until thou find in some measure, the regeneration of
thy nature, and thy self to be light in Christ.

Again mark here the universal partickle (ye all) He says not some, but he
calls all the Thessalonians the children of light, and of the day he maks no
exception, he is not so precise as men are now. This learnes us both Pastor and
people, a good lesson to be observed, to think and to judge the best of every
man and woman, that hes once received the seal of Baptism, and hes given
their names in baptism to Christ, and professes christ outwardly For, albeit
many of them will be hypocrites yet it is our part after the exemple of Paul to
call them the children of light. Thou art over seueare a censurer to call them
who hes taine the name of Christ upon them, the children of darkness. Severe
not thou the popple from the wheet, the caffe from the corn, the goats from
the sheep, until the Lord come and he shall severe them. Put not men in
Heaven when thou vvilt, and men in Hell when thou vvilt, but be ware with
this rash judgment.

Now to come to the next verse. Upon the grounds he hes laid, that all are in
light and not in darkness, and that which is more, that they are the children
of light and not of darkness, he gathers his exhortation. Then, says he, if
it be so that we are the children of light, let us not sleep, but let us
vvatch and be sober. This is the effect of the words. There are two things
that here are forbidden, and two things that are commanded. The two things
that are forbidden, are sleeping and drunkenness: for under sleeping, as the
text that follows makes plain, is comprehended drunkenness. These two
things go commonly together; a drunken body is ay doting and sleeping, for
the senses of him are so burdened with surfeit he can do nothing but ly down
and sleep. Now there are two things recommended, watching and soberness,
these two agree also together; for a temperate man who hes moderation in
drinking, that man is able to watch when others sleep, and to do a good turn
in the night* But to go through every one of them, and to begin at sleeping,
for he begins at it here. There are two sorts thereof. First, a bodily
sleeping, when the senses of this body are chosed, Sleeping.
the eyes closed, the ear closed, and all the senses closed, so that they
leave their function, that is called a bodily sleep. There is another called
a spiritual sleep, and it is the sleeping of the soul and spirit, when the
eye of the soul is bound up, so, that, it hes no sight of God, the ear of the
soul bound up, so, that, it cannot hear the word of God. In one word.
When all the senses that should grippe God are bound up, and the soul is lying
in a deadly security; That is shortly the second sort of sleeping. Now in
this place I understand not chiefly this bodily sleep, but the spiritual
sleep also. For this bodily sleep is natural, and is lavvfull: the Lord hes
ordained that these bodies of ours should be refreshed with sleep; and if
thou be sanctified thy self, thy sleep is sanctified also, and all thy
actiones, eating, drinking, sleeping, and the rest are sanctified (if thou be
not sanctified, all thy actiones, eating, drinking, sleeping, are unhappy to
thee.) Next I doubt not but at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, there
shall be found some sleeping in the bodies, who shall be waking in their
souls. Christ says in the 17. of Luke. 34. verse Two shall be in a bad
sleeping, one chosen, and another forsaken. And last, albeit the body be a
sleep, and all the outward senses closed, yet the spirit of man will be
waking, the eye of the soul will be opened, the ear opened; and in the
bodily sleep, if it were at midnight, a man will be waking in Christ, and
apprehending him. So I understand that spiritual sleeping, for he forbiddes
not this bodily sleeping only, but this spiritual sleeping, when the soul
is sleeping without sense either of Heaven or Hell, and whosoever shall be found
so sleeping with his a soul altogether senseless of Heaven and of the life to
come, that soul shall perish without exception. Sleep on* if the Lord come
when thou art sleeping, die shall thou, thou shall not escape. There is no
escaping for thee. But to speak of the bodily sleeping something. Men should
be ware to yield over much sleep to the body: for certainly where the
body is over much given to sleeping, it is a token of a sleeping soul, and
who delytes in sleeping in the body, the soul appearantlie is sleeping, and
all moderation should be used. The sluggisher the body be, the sluggisher the
soul is. The vvalkrifer the body be, thee vvalkrifer the soul is. Now the
next thing that is forbidden here is drunkenness. Drunkenness.
There are two sorts of drunkenness, the one bodily when a man takes on
over much drink oppressing the senses. This is over well known in Scotland,
and we find over great experience hereof. Then there is secondly a
spiritual drunkenness, when the soul is oppressed with surfeiting and
immoderate care of the world, when it drinks in out of measure the pleasures
of this world, through desire, all the riches of this world, through ambition,
all the honor, through a foul appetyte, all the lusts, So the soul becommes
drunken and stopped, an auaritious body a dotting body, a man set on
pleasures a dotting body. Trow ye when the soul is so oppressed with this
world that it will get the eye opened up to see Christ? No, it is impossible.
Christ speaks of both these sorts of drunkenness Luke chap. 21. verse 34.
Now brethren, in this place, ye shall understand not so much the outvvarde
bodily drunkenness, as the inward spiritual drunkenness of the soul. Woe
to that soul that shall be found drunken with the pleasures and lusts of
this world, and so consequently sleeping when Christ commes. Yea farther,
brethren, the very outvvarde bodily drunkenness is much to be eschevved. For
it is not only with drunkenness as it is with sleeping; for we get
license to sleep, if we use it moderatlie. But God gave thee never leave to
use drunkenness. So it is a dangerous matter to be found drunken. It is a
thing unlawful and forbidden, ye shall find that a drunken body commonly
shall have a drunken soul, and vvoe to that soul, vvoe to that body, where
both are given to drunkenness. The Lord save us from this sort drunkenness.

Now before I come to the other two things that are recommended unto us in
this place, the argument whereby he dissvvades them it vvoulde be marked, Let
us not, says he, sleep as others do. As if he would say, Fie on you that ye
should be have your selves as infidels. It is the Gentiles that are sleeping.
Let them sleep on, but sleep not thou. The exemple of their sleeping should be
an argument to you to watch. The exemple of their drunkenness should he an
argument to you to be sober. Now, how reasons the world? Is not this the
fashion of all men, therefore why should not I do so? all men sleeps, why
should not I sleep? He drinks until he be drunken, why should not I drink
until I be drunken. Companionry is wondrous good, I should do as others do.
But Paul reasons otherways. It is the infidels that are sleeping and drunken,
therefore watch thou o Christian and be sober: Paul to the Romans chap. 12.
verse 2 says, Fashion not your selves after the manner of the world, but be ye
changed through the renewing of the spirit. Follow not this old sleeping
drunken world, but be changed by the renewing Sprit, and be waking and sober.
And indeed let every one look to their own experience, they who are once
translated and translated out of this world (for transplanted must thou be in
some measure if ever thou see Heaven) the more they see men running on the
course of the world, the more they detest the world; the more sin they see,
the more they detest sin; the more drunkenness and sleeping they see in men,
the more they abhor it. So the following of the multitude and the course of
the world testifies that men were never transplanted out of this world, out of
darkness unto the kingdom of light, nor renewed in spirit, and if they
continue on, they shall perish, for this world will perish, and they who
follows the world will perish.

Now to come to the two things commanded. The first is waking, Waking.
the other is sobriety. There are two sorts of watching, the bodily
watching, when all the senses are waking and opened to do their own functions
natural. The second, when the soul of man is opened, the eye of the soul
opened to see Christ and the life to come* and to see these things that the
eye of the body cannot see. It is a wonderful light the soul hes, for it
sees things invisible, and sees in as it were to the very heart of God to a
bottomless deep* for God is infinite. Yet for all this, the heart that is
once illuminate by the Spirit, will see him. So the spiritual watching is,
when all the senses of the soul are opened and hes the fruition of God in
Jesus, and all exercised about the graces of God through Christ, that is the
spiritual waking, which is here specially meant of, not the watching of the
body, but of the Spirit. For the body may be watching, the eye looking up,
and all the senses exercised in their functiones. And yet the soul of the
body may be sound sleeping: When the murderer is busiest at his murder,
albeit he be ryding and running, the quickell man in body that ever was, the
soul in the meane-tyme is lying in a deadly sleep. So I doubt not but if the
Lord Jesus would come in this hour, alas the vengence that would overtake many
of them. So they who are in harlotrie, and their senses exercised most in
harlotrie, then they are most sleeping in soul. Trow ye if the eye of the
soul saw God, that for all the world they would be exercised in such a filthy
exercise. So he means chiefly of the watching of the soul. Indeed it is
true (as I have said before) it is good to be walkrife in body, for if thou be
sanctified, thy body waking shall be exercised in some good exercise. And
therefore Christ in the garden immediately before his passion, Matthew chap.
26. verse 4. would have his Apostles waking in body, as well as in soul,
least they should enter into tentation; for they sleeped until his enemies
came, Sobriety.
and so for fear they left him. Then the second thing commanded is
soberness. There are two sorts of it: The one of the body, the other of the
soul. The body when it is not surfetted with any excess: The soul when it
is not drunken with the world and pleasurs thereof, is sober: for, as the body
hes her sobriety, so the soul hes the own sobriety, and here, I specially
understand the sobriety of the soul, but indeed the sobriety of the body is to
be joined to it. For the sobriety of the body helps much to the sobriety of the
soul. As I said before, when the body passes measure in drunkenness, the soul
is commonly drunken to: so when the body is in sobriety, the soul is in
sobriety and applied to godliness. So both the drunkenness of soul and body is
forbidden. In the 21. of Luke 34. He says, Be vvare least your hearts be pressed
down with surfeiting and drunkenness, that is of the body, and with the
carefulnes of the world, that is of the soul. Therefore keep sobriety in body
and soul. Then, brethren, there are two things forbidden and two things
commanded viz. sleeping excessive, and drunkenness in soul and body
forbidden: watching and sobriety in soul and body commanded.

Now in the next words, he gives the reason wherefore they should not sleep
and be drunken, but watch and be sober. They that sleep, sleep in the night,
and they who are drunken are drunken in the night. Now he would subsume, ye
are not of the night, therefore be ye not drunken, but be sober. So this
argument is taine from the inconnenientnesse of the time, it is no time to you
to be drunken now, ye are not in the night. Men uses to sleep and be drunken
in the night, men who does evil seeks darkness. Ye are not in the night, but
ye are the children of the day. Therefore it settes not you to be sleeping or
drunken, but ye should watch and be sober. I take up the lesson shortly. In all
our actions and doings we should have a special respect to the time: for there
is great moment and weight in the time, when we should do this thing, or that
thing, and specially in the two times, the day and the night. All actions must
be done in these two times. The day hes the actions of the day. The night hes
the actions of the night. The actions of the day should not be done in the
night: The actions of the night should not be done in the day. This should be
commonly kept, albeit necessity sometime compels otherways. There are some
actions that are seemly to be done in the day that is not seemly to be done
in the night. As for exemple: It settes a man to be wakng in the day, it is not
seemly to wake in the night, except necessity compel. Again there are some
actions that are setting to be done in the night and not in the day, as to
sleep in the night, and it settes a man better to drunken in the night, (if he
would be drunken) nor in the day. It is a shame to be drunken before the Sun
and day light. Paul in the Romans chap. 12. verse 11. 12. 13. says, Men and
women should walk in comeliness all manner of way. So soon as thou go out
to the sight of the Sun; albeit none saw thee but the Sun. it becomes thee to
be comely. So thou who would be drunken, drink in the night. Fie o^ ^t, that a
drunken body should come to the Sun, if there were no more but the light of
the Sun, it cries to God for vengence on drunkenness, albeit no man saw it.
Now brethren, there are some unnatural men and women who will turn the action
of the day to the night, and the night to the day. Fie on thee that preuents
nature. When this fair Sun ryses in the morning to comfort them, to let them
see the face of it, and to do their duty in that function the Lord hes
called them to, What will they then do? off their clothes and go to their
beds. Nothing the most part of the day time, but dead sleeping, except they
be constraint otherways. Then when the Sun goes down, they are glad, and ryses
to their villainy. And so they testify that they detest the glorious light of
the Sun, which should rejoyse us. Always when others go to their beds, then
they begin to rise, to eat and drink, etc. and to take their pleasure, this is
not comely, and I tell thee, the vengence of God will light on thee, if it were
only for the preventing of the order of nature. Let the day be day, and the
night be night. No question, this perverting of nature procures the heavy
vengence of God to fall on them and their houses. Trow ye that God of Heaven,
who ordained nature, can suffer nature to be so abused without auengement? No,
I dare say, thou that do slaye before the Sun, the Sun shall bear
witness against thee, and say, Lord this villan so abhominably committed
murder in my eye, thou set me in the Heaven that none should work villainy
in my eye, but he set me to little avail. The Sun no doubt is wearied and
groans, to see the wickedness of men and women, and the creatures groans to
see their vile sins and feign would be releued thereof. This earth they go on,
groans under the burdene and would as feign be releued of them as a woman with
child would be releued of her birth. Well then, if the Lord will revenge so a
sin that is done before the light of this Sun that shynes, and if the light
of this same very Sun aggreadges their sin before the Lord and maks their
judgment the greater. O what greatness must be in sin, and how fearful must
the judgment be, when sin is committed with an vplifted hand in the face of
Christ, that Sun of righteousness shyning to us in his Gospel! The villane
cares not to commit filthiness in Gods presence, he looking to us viuely in
the Gospel. Well were it to thee, thou had never heard of Christ and the
Gospel. Then more tolerable might thou have sinned. But when in the face of
God and christ, and in the face of the Gospel thou committes such sin, how can
it ^e, but thy sin is a thousand tymes^ greater nor the sin of the Gentiles,
and thy damnation ten thousand times heavier? And in Hell they that so sins
shall curse the time that ever they heard the Gospel, saying. Woe to me, I
have sinned in the face of Christ and the Gospel Be ware of this, the greater
grace, the greater contempt thereof, the greater judgment and damnation for
it. No not so much shall thou be punished for being a thief, a murderer, etc.
as for that (will the Lord say) thou spat in my face. And therefore we ought
instantly to seek God to give us grace to reform us from this wilful
contempt in the clear light of the Gospel. To this God be glory for ever.

Amen.
THE XXI. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 8. 9. 10. 8 But let us which are of the day, be
sober, putting on the brestplate of faith and love, and the hope of salvation
for an helmet.

9 For God has not appointed us unto vvraith, but to obtain salvation by the
means of our Lord Jesus Christ.

10 Which died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him.


THE last exhortation of the Apostle (brethren) unto the Thessalonians, was
that they should not sleep nor be drunken: but by the contrare, they should
wake and be sober. Two things are forbidden, sleeping and drunkenness: Two
things recommended, waking and sobriety; the sleeping which he means is
properly a spiritual sleep, when the soul sleeps in a deadly security.
Drunkenness is not so much this bodily drunkenness (which is also forbidden)
as the drunkenness of the soul, when the soul takes a surfeit of these earthly
things, so that it hes not the care not sense of that life, but is set
altogether on vain pleasures. The waking he recommends is a spiritual waking,
wakrifenesse in soul when the senses of the soul are opened, the eye of the
soul to look to the face of Christ, to the glory and life to come, the care
of the soul likewise opened to hear and receive inwardly the Gospel, which
is the word of God uttered by the Minister. The sobriety that is recommended is
properly that te^perance of the soul when the soul is content with a
moderation of the things of this world, and uses this world as though it used it
not, not passing the bounds of rejoicing in this life, but setting the joy and
pleasure on the life to come, that is the inward sobriety of the spiritual
man. Now when he hes set down his exhortation he subjoines reasons thereto, and
the first reason to move them not to sleep, not to be drunken, is in respect
of the time wherein they are and for the inconvenience of the time: It is no
time to be drunke^, he that sleeps, sleeps in the night; they that are drunken
are drunke^ in the night, No night now, since Christ is come in the world there
is a continual daylight. And therefore since it is not night, it sets not you
to sleep and to be drunken as if it were night. For in all the actiones in this
life we ought to have a special regard of the time wherein we do any thing,
and specially of these two times, the day and the night. The actiones that
becommes the day, settes not the night; and by the contrare the actions of the
night sets not to be done in the day. The Lord so distributes the doings of men
that he hes given the night his actiones and the day his actiones, and in a
manner it is a confusion of nature and of the ordinance of God, to do the
actiones of the day in the night, and the actiones of the night in the day, and
a kind of beastliness.

But to come to this text. In the first verse we have red the Apostle gives the
reason wherefore they should wake, as he gave the reason wherefore they should
not be drunken. It is in respect of the estate wherein they stand presently.
But ^e are the children of the day: Therefore ye should be vigilant and sober.
Even as in all our doings, the time of doing is to be respected, if we should
do every thing in the own time that God hes appointed thereto. So the
condition of men and women who does any thing should be regarded in their
doings, every one should do as becommes their estate, condition and calling;
thou that art of a calling, should not do that which pertaines to another of
another calling, thy actions should be in that calling God hes placed thee in.
Now there are two sorts of estates and conditions of men in this world
especially to be considered. The first the estate of the children of light:
The second, the estate of the children of darkness, there are none but of
necessity they are of one of these conditions. Either they are the children of
the night, or else, the children of the day. Choose thee, if thou be not the
child of the night thou art the child of the day* if thou be not the child
of the day, thou art the child of the night; if thou be not Gods, thou art the
Devils. In all the doings and actions of this life, men does according to one
of these two estates If thou be the child of darkness, be drunken on, for, in
spite of thy teeth if thou be the child of darkness, thou shall be drunke^ both
in soul and body: if thou be the child of God do as besets thy estate, sleep
not but wake; wake in the spirit and soul and have the inward senses of thy
soul open. If thou be the child of the light and day, be not drunken either
in soul or body, for none of them becommes the child of the day. If thou take
upon thee to be the child of the day and light, and give thy self our to be a
Christian, and yet will sleep and be drunken in thy soul, and have thy senses
closed, and have no more of the child of light but the ba^e name it is better
to be without it, for, the very name will aggreadge thy sin before the Judge,
and in the latter day, it will stand up and testify in thy face against thee,
and as it will aggreadge thy sin, so it will make thy damnation the greater.
Whereas the judgment of a Gentile who took on him the name of dark-and not of
light, shall be tolerable in a manner, thy judgment shall be intolerable and
double. A murderer who bears the name of a christian commits double murder,
and therefore his judgment is double: an harlot who takes the name a christian
his sin shall be double, and double shall be his damnation and he shall wish
that he had never been called in the world a christian man. Let none therefore
think they are well eneugh if they be called christians, ^and come and sit in
the Congregation of the Lord, for if then they commit villainy and knauerie,
the greater shall be their damnation. If thou be the child of the day do the
works of the day; if thou be the child of the night do the works of the
night. Thou must do one.

Now to go forward in this verse. As he recommendes to them these two
things, vvakrifenesse and sobriety. So he recommendes to them in the third
place armor, wherewith he will have them inarmed. Putting on, says he, the
breast plate of faith and love. There is the first piece of the armor, and the
hope of salvation for an helmet. There the next piece of the armor. In all this
place what is he doing? Instructing a warrior, a soldier what he should do,
teaching him to wake and not to sleep, to be sober and not drunken, to be
marmed and not to be naked. Ye know in the worldly warrior there are three
things required: first wakrifenesse, a sleeping soldiers is nothing worth.
Then with wakrifenesse sobriety, temperatnesse in his mouth and belly,
otherways when he is lying drunken, the enemy will come on him in the
night and cut his throat. Now the third thing that is required, is that he
have his armor on him. It is not eneugh to be vvakrife and sober, but he must
have his armor on him. Armor of a spiritual vvarrior, faith, love and hope.
For, if he want armor the armed enemies will come on him and slay him Even
so it is in a Christian warrior. There is no Christian man nor woman but
they are vvarriours, and they must make them to fight under the banner of the
Lord Jesus Christ their captain. And as it is required in the earthly
souldioures that they be vvakeryse. Even so it is required in the Christian
soldiers. The next thing that is required in the Christian soldier is
temperance, have not a drunken soul, thou who wilt be a souldior under
Christ's banner, thou must not be drunken with the pleasures of this world.
Now these two things are not eneugh, with vvakrifenesse and sobriety
therefore thou must have an armed soul: as the body of the worldly warrior
must put on armor, so thy soul must put on armor. othervvaies, when the
enemy makes the assault he will prevail against thee; if sin make an
assault, if thou be without thy armor, sin will prevail. Brethren, (ye
know and it is here meant by the Apostle) The worldly warrior when he
arms himself, he hes respect in special to these two parts of his body,
the first his breast where his heart lies, where the natural life hes her chief
residence: therefore he puttes on his brestplate. The next part of the which
he hes a special regard is of the head, where all the senses lies. The head
is the fountain of all the senses and moving of the body, and so he will put on
an Helmet to save his head. If these two parts be well preserved from wounds he
will regard the less of the rest of the body. If a wound be received in the
heart, no life: A wound in the head and branes, no life, but a wound in the
leg, etc. may be mended again. So the Christian hes a chief regard to two
parts as it were, to the heart where his spiritual life lies, which is
begun in this life, and to the head where all the spiritual senses hes
their ground, and where his spiritual moving is, to defend by armor the life
spiritual. What ever other part of him be wounded, he hes a special regard
to these two. Now the Apostle bringes in this by a comparison taine from the
worldly armor used by earthly soldiers. The piece of armor that should be
put on on the heart of the worldly warrior, is the brestplate. The piece
that couers the head is called the helmet. The Christian warrior hes his own
brestplate and helmet. Yet more ye see. There are two parts of the vvarriours
brestplate, the brestparte and backparte, and piece before, another piece
behind, that the heart receive not a wound, neither at back nor breast. So the
brestplate of a Christian warrior is builded up of two parts, the fore
part, Faith that embraces Jesus, the other part which we may call the
hinder and backparte, Love, and it flows from the other part, love to our
neighbor it hanges on Faith to our God. As to the Helmet it is but a piece,
and it couers the whole head and senses round about. So the Helmet of the
Christian warrior is of one piece called the hope of salvation. Hope, that he
shall be saved and live with Jesus Christ. And this is his head piece. So long
as he keeps this hope he shall save his head and all his spiritual senses,
feeling and moving. etc. keep me hope, nothing shall destroy thy spiritual
seeing, hearing and feeling, and all the rest of thy senses. And if thy head be
bare of hope, thy spiritual senses shall soon be overthrown by the assaults
of the enemy. So the sum shortly, the chief things whereby the spiritual
life, the spiritual feeling and moving is keept within a man, are, these three
things, which is chiefly told of in the Scripture, Faith, Love and Hope.
Faith in God and Christ. Love to thy nighbor. Hope to be safe in the grace of
Christ. Keep these three, thou shall stand inarmed to resist the Devil and
all his works, keep one of these, thou keep all; lose one of these, thou
losest all. Lose Faith, thou losest Love; lose Faith and Love, thou losest
Hope. col.
It is otherways with the Christian warrior, then with a worldly warrior, he
may have his Helmet on and want his brestplait, but, I assure thee, if thou
want a piece of this christian armor, thou have no part of it; have thou a
piece of this armor thou have all: have thou Faith, thou have Hope and Love:
The spiritual graces that are wrought by the Spirit of God, wherein stands our
regeneration, are so linked together, either must they be altogether in thee,
in some measure, or, else, thou have none of them. Either must all the powers
of thy soul and al thy affections be renewed, or, else, none of them is
renewed And therefore, if thou would try if thou have these graces, look if
thou have any one of them, for, then, thou have all. Look if thou have Faith,
look if thou have a love to thy nighbor. For, I assure thee, if thou have no
love to thy neighbor, thou have no Faith, speak as much thereof as thou will.

Now to the next verse. When he hes spoken of the hope of salvation, he
grounds this salvation upon the own fundation, that they might see the
fundation of it whereupon it stands so fast and firmly, to the end they
should have the certainty of the hope of salvation, and look certainly to be
safe. The grounds are two. The first, Gods eternal ordinance and his
appointing of them to salvation The second, the death of Jesus Christ. So we
shall go through these two grounds. As to the first. For, says he, The first
ground of the hope of our salvation, gods decree.
God hes not appointed us to vvraith: that is to punishment. But to obtain
salvation through the me ^es of the Lord Jesus Christ. Then I mark the first
foundation of our life and salvation, is, in Gods eternal election, and it is
decreed from all eternity Our salvation stands upon the ordinance and
appointment, decree^, and purpose of God before the foundation of the world:
the foundation of thy salvation was laid ere ever the foundation of the world
was laid. Upon this ground of Gods ordinance ryses up the building of thy
salvation. So as salvation it self is grounded on this eternal decree, so
hope of salvation is grounded upon the sight of this eternal decree. So that
if thou get not a fight in some measure of the eternal ordinance and decree
of God appointing thee to salvation, thou cannot have a sure hope of salvation:
For what certainty can thou have without a ground. So of necessity thou
must have some knowledge of Gods decree to ground hope on. I speak this for
them who faies it is a thing over curious to search in in predestination. No,
no: For if thou get not some sight that thou art in the decree of salvation
before the world was made, and say in thy self (God hes decreed that I should
be saved, therefore I will hope for it) thou shall never have a sure hope. Now
the decree of God is far of, it hes no beginning, and therefore it hes a far
sight: for the sight of it is not gotten immediately. Neither I nor any man will
be able to look in to Gods ordinance concerning salvation immediately, God will
not take thee by the hand and lead thee in to his secreet counsel and let thee
see it: How then is it gotten? Mediatly I know it by the effects, and by them
one by one I clim and ascend up until I come to that decree of God. Paul Romans
chap. 18. verse 30. These whom God hes predestinate, he hes called them
effectually, and hes given them faith. For in faith stands our effectual
calling, and them whom he hes called, he iustifies, and whom he iustifies, at
last he glorifies. Then vvoulde thou know that thou art appointed to life
before all eternity, look if thou have a beginning of sanctification, look if
thou be sanctified by the death of Christ, and then go to thy calling. And
find thou these in thee, assure thee God hes appointed thee to salvation
before the world was made. If I feel within my self my effectual calling by
God out of this world to God, I assure my self God hes decreed from all
eternity, I shall live with him in glory. So to touch this again, It is
foolishness to say that it is curiosity for men to seek a vvarrand of their
salvation. And never shall thou have an assurance of thy salvation, if thou get
not this hope grounded on this decree. The error of the Papists is here
rebooked, that says, there should not be a certainty of hope of salvation.
Folly, folly, For if I know the ground of my salvation, that it is grounded
upon the ordinance of my God, I assure me of that life everlasting, because I
know the certainty of Gods ordinance, therefore I may justly assure my
self, that I shall live with Christ here, and in the end I shall be
glorified with him for ever

Yet to stick on the words. He says God hes not appointed you to vvraith.
Learn by the way. From all eternity there hes been two ordinances of God
concerning men and women. 2. decrees of God, one to salvation, another to
damnation.
There hes been from all eternity, and before the creation of the world and
of men and women an ordinance to life. Agane there hes been another
ordinance, that some should go to Hell: as there past an ordinance of life
in the counsel of God, so there past an ordinance of death. And these two
decrees must stand. The decree of life cannot be rescinded. The decree of
damnation cannot be rescinded. And in this place the Apostle speaks of them
both. Now, brethren, to enter deeply in this matter it is not meet. But this
understand. It is not a naked permission of God that men should go to Hell.
No, the Lord hes decreed it to be done by himself, and not to suffer it be
done by another. As for exemple, As ye see a potter makes a vessel to honor,
so of purpose he makes another to dishonor and for vile purposes. Romans chap.
9. verse 20. So the Lord hes appointed one sort to salvation, and another
sort to damnation. Take head. This appointing of God of the creatures to
destruction, as destruction is a just penalty coming from the judgment of
God for sin, so it commes of God, and he is the executer thereof. But if ye
will take the destruction not as a punishment but as an utter vvreake of the
creatures, I will not say it commes of God. As it is a penalty of sin I
think it commes of God, and he is the doer thereof himself, otherways not.
Alvvayes all these grounds stands sure, there is a solid foundation of life,
and a solid foundation of damnation. So this should teach every one of us to
strive to get a sight of that solid foundation of life, and Gods appointment
of us to life. It is sure some are appointed to damnation, yea and not a few
number. Some will say, God sorbid any should go to Hell, hes not Christ died
for all sinners? Alas, except thou see thy warrant of Gods ordinance to thy
salvation thou shall go to Hell. God is just as he is merciful. And as he
will be glorified in mercy toward the godly, so will he be glorified in
justice toward the wicked.

He says, He ^es appointed you to salvation by the means of Jesus Christ.
Then I see ere ever Gods appointment to life and salvation take effect, there
must of necessity interueene a purchasing of that life that God hes appointed
to thee, that life he hes appointed to thee before all eternity it must be
boght. But by whom must it be boght? by thee: by thy moyen: No, I give thee
this doom. If thou think that any piece or least title of the deserving of
life stands in thy hand, thou shall never get it. Then who shall purchase it?
He says, to be obtained by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ. If the Apostle
had said by thy merits, then I would have run on with the Papists, and have
cried merits, merits as fast as they do. But the Apostle speaks plainly it
is obtained by Christ. And therefore fie on him that thinks that he is safe by
merit. It is a wonderful thing, God of free mercy appointes to salvation,
and yet ere we come to it, be will have it boght. What free mercy is this? No,
never thing was so dear boght as thy salvation. For it was not boght with gold
nor silver, but with the blood of the immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ: And
therefore he says in the first Epistle to the Corint. chap. 6. verse 20. ye
are boght with a price, he calls it a price, by reason of the high
excellency thereof. As though there were no price but only the blood of Jesus
to be esteemed of, and yet it is a free grace of God. How can it be afree grace
and boght to? If I buy it, and that with a dear price, how can it be free?
Indeed it is true, if thou had paid the price thy self, it had not been a
free gift; but seeing it is not boght with a price that co^mes out of thy hand,
but with the precious blood of Jesus, who is Gods Son, it is a free gift to
thee. For who gave the Son but the Father? Who gave the price but he that
received it? God gave as it were out of his own purse the price for thee. The
mercy and love of God to his servants is wonderful. Will thou look to thy
salvation, nothing but mercy in God: if thou have nothing to glory in but free
grace and mercy without any deserving; otherways if thou join any part of
merit with mercy, and say, the mercy of God and my merit did it, shame shall
come to thee. And therefore the Apostle says we are only saved by Christ, and
speaks not of merit.

Now to go forward to the next ground whereupon he buildes the hope of
salvation (As thou would have an assurance of life everlasting it is needful
for thee to spy out the grounds) The next ground of thy salvation, is the thing
that fell out in time. The sec. ground of the hope of salvation, christ's death.
He says, Christ died for us, that whether we walk or sleep, we should
l^ue together with him. As our salvation is builded upon God ordinance, so it
is builded upon the blood of Jesus Christ, not living but crucified and
slain: And as the blood of Jesus is the ground of thy salvation, so the
ground of the certainty of thy hope, is the sight of Jesus crucified. Except I
see Christ bleeding for my sin I can never assure me that I am safe, except I
see that sacrifice offered up for my sin (as it is a sacrifice offered up for my
sin, so it is a merit to obtain life to me) I will never think I am safe.
How necessare therefore is it to me never to let the blood of Jesus go out of
my mind: Men will say, I wait well I am safe, and never will have an eye to
Christ crucified and his blood. But I say to thee, except thy eye be fixed on
the blood of Jesus Christ, when thou fairest, thou art safe, thou lie
falsely. Therefore look ever to Christ deying, and sheding his blood for thy
sin. Another thing I see. There is no life but through death, he hes died for
us that we should live through him, to learn men and women not to count so much
of death and to scare at it, for I tell thee this general will stand, No life
but through death, it springes out thereof, as thou see the stalk of the
corn rise out of the dead pickle. So except thy life spring through death, it
is not possible to thee to live. For first death is the price of it, not thy
death, but the death of Christ: for he hes gotten life by his death. Then after
Christ hes purchased life to us, yet the way whereby we must enter to life, is
by the way of death. Through many troubles behoues it us to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: Act. 14. verse 20. for strait is the way to Heaven, thou
must be drawn as it were through Hell ere thou come to Heaven, and yet thy
suffering and death shall not merit. The only merit stands in Jesus.
Brethren, this lets us see how hard a thing it is to a sinner falling from life
(as Adam fell and we all in him) to come to life again. Think it not an easy
matter. There must be a death, yea, two deaths ere ever thou come there. O the
great suffering Christ hes suffered for us land again thou must suffer and die
thy self ere thou get life. Therefore learn how hard a matter it is to get
life. Many difficulties interueenes, death must enter ere life come: which lets
us see what it is to offend God; be loath therefore to offend God. The godly
knows this how hard a thing it is when they have offended to get again the
Spirit which they have extinguished, the Lord will not look on them for a
time as it were. Look in David after his fall. But o the sweetness of mercy
after the restorance! They who hes tasted in any measure of the sweetness of
Christ, give them all the pleasures of the world, they will never get
contentation, until they get a sight of Gods ^^ce again lost by their sin.
David would have given his kingdom for it again when he made the 51. Psalm.

The Apostle here says, whether ye sleep or wake ye shall live with
Christ. Then ye see if Christ hes once died for our life we shall live: That is
the certainty and ground of our hope, that Christ hes died for us. Then when I
feel this, nothing can stay life, nothing can hinder me to live with him.
There is nothing in this world that will hinder thee to live with him, but live
must thou. Sleep thou in thy bed, thy sleep hinders nothing, thou live in
him: wakest thou? thou art living with him; live thou this life? thou art
living in him: art thou dying and drawing thy last breath? yet thou art living
with him; what ever thou art doing in the world thou art ay living, eating,
drinking, if thou be one of the godly for whom he hes died, thou art living
with him. Yea, I dare say more if he have once died for thee, thy sin shall not
hinder thee from that life to come. David's sin his murder and adultery
hindered him not from that life, but the Lord turned it so about, that he made
them work all to his well. All things turns to the best to them who loves
the Lord. Albeit thou find thy sins many, yet stay not on them, nothing
shall hinder thee from Christ. Yet this should not make thee to take pleasure
in sin: For if thou love Christ well, thou will be loath to offend him. Then if
we in so many troubles in this life live with Christ, shall we not much more
live with him in that life to come, where there shall be no trouble, no
impediments, and in the midst of all these troubles let us comfort our selves
with thinking on the joy that we shall have when we shall be in the Heavens
with our Lord and Savior. Now to mark the words. He says, that we should
live with him. Look the nature of the life that we get in the death of Jesus.
It is a life that we live with Christ, not a life that we live from him, there
cannot be a spiritual life from him. Death will not serve to life, if thou be
from him, but thou must be with him. Thou must not only live with him as a man
will live with an house and family, but thou must live in him. As by
comparison, the arm lives with the head, so thou must live with Christ. Ye see
the conjunction natural that is between the head and the members, that same
conjunction must be between thee and the Lord Jesus. If thou live with him,
thou must live as a member, he must be thy head, and thou must be a leg, an
arm, or some part of the body. Well is that soul that is any part of the
body of Christ. Therefore draw ever nearer and nearer unto him, until thou be
fully conjoined with him; we have no life except we be ingraft in him, as the
imp is ingraft in the tree, and so prease ever to grow in that conjunction.
Look how thou was joined in him yesterday, say, Lord make a nearer conjunction
this day: and to morrow say, work yet a nearer conjunction that I may draw
nearer my head. But, brethren, this full conjunction cannot be until we see
him face to face, we are far of now, but we shall be with him, we are from him
now for a little space, but then we shall be with him for ever; and then in that
great day thy blessedness both in body and soul shall be perfited, we shall
be with him and stand for ever in that full conjunction with out head Christ in
whom is all blessedness. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be all
honor and praise for now and ever.

AMEN.
THE XXII. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 11. 12. 13. 11 Wherefore exhort one another, and
edify one another, even as ye do.

12 Now we beseech you, brethren, that ye know them, which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,

13 That ye have them in singular love for their works sake. Be at peace among
your selves.


IN the last exhortatation (brethren) the Apostle stirred up the Thessalonians
to be good soldiers and warriors, under the banner of the Lord Jesus Christ.
In a warrior we show you there are three things specially required. First
vigilance and wakrifnesse. Secondly, sobriety and temperance. And last of all
that he be in his armor with his Helmet on his head, and his brestplate on his
breast, and all the rest of his armor on: For albeit he be waking and sober,
yet if he be naked the enemy will overcome him. So it is in the Christian
warrior, the same three things after a manner are requisite: First he must be
wakrife in soul: Secondly, temperate in soul, having a soul not drunken with
these earthly things which draws our whole heart and faculties away from
God; So that they who are full thereof are laid up as it were in a dead sleep.
And last it is requisite that he be clad with his armor, his own Helmet which
is Hope, his own brestplate, which is faith and love, take away hope, faith
and love, he is but a naked man in the world and shall soon be destroyed, if
he be not clad with faith and love in his breast, and with hope in his head, he
will not be able to gainstand.

Follows now in the text ye have heard another exhortation* and it is to use
these means, whereby we may continue in wakrifnesse, in continual sobriety
and spiritual armor enarmed against the enemy. There are the words of the
exhortation, Wherefore. As he would say, Seeing we must be wakrife, sober and
enarmed in the Christian warfare, therefore I exhort you to get the means
whereby these things are kept. The means are Exhort one another, even as ye
do already. So my exhortation is that ye continue to the end. It is not
eneugh to begin, except ye continue to the end. Now there are the means. Then
brethren, this lesson offers the self to us The means not to sleep in the
soul, but to be wakrife, not to be drunken but to be temperate, not to be
naked, but to be clad with spiritual armor is, instant exhortation. Stir up
men and women by exhorting in edifying* in an instant building up and
confirming them in the doctrine and knowledge that they have once received.
This work of building will not be done in one day, or two days, or twenty
days, but this building of the soul of men and women, building them up in
that spiritual building must be raised up higher nor ever Babell was, yea it
must rise to the Heaven of Heavens, and to the head Jesus, who sittes above all
Heavens. This building must be instant. In one word. The means to hold men
waking, and sober, and temperate in the spiritual warfare, and to hold this
armor on them, is instant exhortation. Take me away the voice of exhortation,
take away building in the doctrine ye have received and edifying therein in
stead of wakrifenesse, there shall come on you a dead slumber, in stead of
sobriety and spiritual temperance, thou shall be drunken; in stead of armor,
nothing but nakedness and ye shall be a pray to the Devil, this world and
your own cankerd nature, assay it when ye will. So then brethren, in one word.
See the necessity men hes of instant exhorting and edifying, not for one day
or two, yea if thou should live Methusalems days the voice of exhortation
should never go out of thy ear: For there are a thousand things to draw us
down to cause us sleep, until we die in sleeping, many things to make thee
drunken, to ly down like a drunken body without sense of the life to come.
Many things to denude thee of armor, to set thee up naked to the eneme, Would
to God this world would consider the necessity of instant and continual
exhortation to move them forward in the course of godliness.

Mark next. Who is this that should exhort? Who is this that should edify?
who should hold men waking in Spirit, hold them in sobriety, and hold on their
armor by exhortation and edifying? who should do it? He says not the Pastor,
ye have Ministers, let them do it, it is their office. It is true indeed, they
have a special calling for that effect, and are placed in the Church to hold
you wakrife, to cry in your ear until ye waken again, to exhort and edify
continually to build up that spiritual building, and to build men and women up
as lively stones in that spiritual building. Therefore in the first Epistle to
the Cor. chap. 14 verse. 3. Paul says He that prophecies (that is the Preacher)
he speaks to men, and whereto? to edify in building. There is the end of his
speaking to exhortation, consolation. In the 4 chap. Ephesians. verse 11. He says,
When Christ past up to Heaven, he left not his Church void or destitute of
builders, but he says, he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Deacones and Pastors. And whereto? All to build up the
body of Christ. If a Pastor be not a builder, he serves for no purpose. Yet
not withstanding of this albeit it be the Pastors special calling to exhort.
The Apostle says, Every one of you exhort; ye men and women every one exhort
and edify another. Thou should exhort thy neighbor, and let him exhort thee
again. Hold thou him waking and let him hold thee waking hold thou him in
sobriety, and let him hold thee in sobriety again; hold on that spiritual
armor on him, on her let him and her hold on thy spiritual armor on thee
again. So there are none of us in Christ's Church, but we have all this general
calling in the Church to be builders edifiers exhorters every one of others The
simplest in the flock is bound to exhort and build up the best of them all
that speaks with a tongue: For the Lord hes given to the least member some
piece of grace to build up and instruct the body: For know ye what our
calling is in Christ? As he is King, Priest and Prophet; a King to rule a
Priest in offering up that only one propitiatory sacrifice for all; a
Prophet to instruct and teach: So there is not a true Christian man nor woman
but they have all these three offices, they are Kings. Priests and Prophets;
Kings to rule in the Church of Christ. Priests to offer up in a manner a
sacrifice to God, Prophets to teach and help up the building, I mean the
whole bedie, until it come to the head Christ, that once the man, whose head
is Christ, and the body the Elect in the earth, may be perfect. So say not it
is the Ministers duty to do this, what have I to do with this? Nor when
one exhortes thee, say not, art thou becomme a Minister? well it thou accept
not such doctrine of them, thou shall die for ever, for the Lord hes opened
their mouth for thy edification.

Now the third thing I mark in the last part of the verse, even as ye do. I
will not bid you exhort one another, as though ye did it not already. No, I
acknowledge the grace of, God in you in doing it already, take your own
praise. Well then they are doing the thing he exhortes them to, and yet he
exhortes them to do it. When I see a man do any thing what needs me to
exhort him to it? When I see a man exhorting and building what needs me to
exhort him to exhort and build. Learn then. There are none in this world but
they have need continually and instantly to be stirred up in their doing, we
are far from perfection, and albeit we be running on in the rink, yet we are far
from the butt which is heaven, we are but running yet and so whil we are
running, let us go forward, if it be a minister that exhorts let him exhort on.
Who ever they be that exhorts and edifies, let them go on in edifying and
exhorting to the building up of the body. Now beside this, consider ye not the
sluggishnesse of our nature? our nature is so dead and stupide that searslie
will we have put our hand to the turn when we will fall from it. Ye will see a
sleeping body put his hand to a turn, and in the meanetyme he will fall down
and sleep. Our nature is so slippery that when we are laying up one stone in
the building, if one cry not in our ear, awake and be doing, we will let
it fall. So when we are exhorting, and searslie will the word of exhortation
be out of our mouth, when we will fall from that purpose. So considering our
nature the best of us hes need to be stirred up and exhorted: when we are
doing fastest, then we have need to be stirred up. Yet brethren, for all this
exhorting he will not misknow the grace of God in them. Take head when thou
see men doing well that thou close not thy eyes thereat, and say not to them
that they do nothing; some are over sore censorers that will say thou do
nothing, thy exhortation is nothing. No let every man have his own praise. If
they be doing any good thing, be it never so little, commend them and stir them
up to it, by giving them exhortations and praising them. This for this
exhortation. All this part of this Epistle is full of exhortations concerning
Christian behavior.

Follows now another exhortation which is more particulare, and concerns the
duty that the people ought unto the Pastors. I shall hold me by the words of
the text. Then, to come to the words. Brethren: There the style, he calls
them brethren, a loving style, to testify that love he bare toward them.
Now we beseech you. There the next word, a word testifying the earnestness
he had in exhorting them to do it, because it was a great matter, he bids them
not simply do it, but, he says, I beseech you do it. When a great thing is
to be done by any man, certainly it requyres, we use an earnest and not a
simple and slender speech. The first thing he desires of the people, is an
acknovvledging. Whom of? of them who labors in the work, that is first.
Then, of them, who are over you and above you in the Lord. That is next. Then,
of them that admonish you. That is last. The second thing he desires of the
people, that they have them in a singular and most special love. col.
Love them, not as ye do commonly any other man, or, woman, but, love them
after a singular manner. Wherefore should this love be? Not so much for the
persons sake, as for the works, love them for their works. There is the sum
of the words shortly. The exhortation may be taine up in two words. Do your
duty to your Pastor. Yet he is not content with the bare words, but, he
lays out the minister before them in the whole substantial points of his
calling, letting them see every piece of his calling after another. And more
then this which he speaks of the peoples duty, he lays not out their duty
simply, but substantiouslie: know him, acknowledge him; there one part; then
have him in a singular love, there is another part. And so, it is not eneugh,
to have a simple knowledge of him, but they must know what a man a Pastor
should be. Men will say, I know him, he is a man standing up in a Pulpet
preaching with a gown. No, the Apostle shows us, to know him in every point
of his dalling, in this point and that point of his calling, know him to be
a Preacher set over you, by God, know him to be an admonisher and instructor,
and again, when ye come to your own duty, know the points of your duty;
I should do this, I should meet him with this duty, with that duty other
ways thou knows nothing neither in the Pastor, nor in thy self. Therefore,
the Apostle lays them out openly to thee to know them.

But, to come to the words. Ye have first a short description of a true
Pastor. Description of a true Pastor.
The first point of the description of a true Pastor, is this, He is a
laborer among the people, not an idle man; He says not, acknowledge them that
sittes idle, but acknowledge them that labors among you. He labors, and how?
He labors in the work of God. As the Apostle speaks to Timothy in the first
Epistle chap. 5. verse 17. Elders, says he, is vvorthie of double honor,
especially those who labors in the word of God, he labors in opening up the
scriptures of God: the preaching is thought by men to be no labor as though
preaching were no more, but only to stand up and tell a tail: yet the Apostle
calls that labor, yea, I say, they labor as well as they who holds a pleugh
labors. Wherein labor they? In word and Discipline: in taking ordour with your
manners. Not only labor they in preaching, but also they take ordour with the
manners of the people. Then to gather the lesson. This part of the description
of a true Pastor excludes from the ministry and Pulpet; idle bellies,
Ministers that bear the name of ministers, and in the meane-tyme are but idle
bellies away with them: let them never face the Pulpet. Fie on them that takes
the Ministry on them for an idle life and and to serve their affections; an
idle Bishop that never opened his mouth to preach, an idle Pope that will sit
up in a throne fie on him, why should he take the name of* Minister on him and
do no good therein? The next part of the description of a true Pastor is, they
are over you, not under you, but above you, set over you, as it were over your
heads to look down to you, in a kind of superiority over you. Then a
Pastor, a Minister sent of Jesus Christ the Pastor of Pastors, the great
Pastor. he hes a kind of superiority and pre-eminence above the flock. But
brethren, he is not over them as a Lord (the only Lord that is over the people
is Jesus Christ) He is not over them then in things civil, in things
bodily, concerning the body, concerning their temporal lives, concerning
things politic, for entertaining of this temporal life, but he is over them
in the Lord, not as a Lord, but in the Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ. Not over
them in things civil, but in matters of the Lord, in things spiritual, in
things Ecclesiastic, in things concerning the consciences of men. Therefore
Paul speaks to Philemon verse 8. I have great liberty to command thee as a
superior; but how? Not of my own authority, but in the Lord, I am over thee
as a superior, but not as a Lord. Take heed. There are sundry sorts of
superiorities, A Steward in a family, in a manner, is over the family he hes a
preferment by reason of the office: And yet for all this, if the steward would
take upon him to be Lord of the family, he would be a knave, and would usurp
the place of his master, So, a Minister in the family of the Lord, he is a
superior, but not superior as a Lord, but as a steward, to dispense the
mysteries of God to the soul, and no other superior: for none can sit over
the conscience of any man, but only the Lord Jesus. All the Kings of the
earth cannot have a dominion over the consciences of men, the Lord is only
Lord and supreme superior thereof; all the Ministers and office-bearers in
the Church only stewards, with spiritual stewardrie, dispensing the
spiritual food. I mean the word of God. Now brethren, this second part of
this description of the Pastor condemns the Pope, who usurps a spiritual
jurisdiction over the souls of men, who will strive also for a civil
jurisdiction with the Emperor and Princes of the world.

Now to come to the third part. He says, and admonishes you. There is the
last part of the description of the true Minister of God. Admonishing stands
in calling back again men in the way who hes made desection, either in
doctrine or manners. In this point consistes their labor. So, that, by this
word, I understand the whole parts of the office of a Pastor, as exhorting,
rebuking, comforting and teaching. It is not for nothing, that, he hes made a
choose of this word admonishing, to teach us, if he could do all these things
never so well, labor in teaching, comfort, exhort. If he cannot do this,
admonish a sinner, tell him, sinner thou art in the vvrong way; if he fail
in doctrine, tell him, thou failest in doctrine; if he fail in manners, tell
him, he fails in manners: if he cannot do this, he is not meet to be a
Minister, if he cannot admonish them that are sinners, if he cannot admonish
them that are in the vvrong way, he is not meet to be a teacher. Now, see the
peruersitie of our nature, for, many there are, who will hear comforting,
exhorting, but not admonishing: but Paul teaches thee, the Pastor must be an
admonisher: There is the Pastor set down in three parts of his calling.

Now, to end this doctrine concerning them, I shall take up this one note. I
gather of this, as it were, the nature of the ministry. What is this
Ministry? It is first a labor, an exercise, not an idleness, but a labor, it
is a burdene, and he that takes it not on, as it were, a load on his back, he
is not meet for it, he that enters to be a Minister, he must lay down his
shoulders, and take on his load on his back, as you see an horse take on his
load on his back. So, it is a burdene and an heavy burdene: a labor and an
heavy labor. But, brethren, there are sundry sorts of burdenes and labors
in this world; There are some that are vylder, some that are honorable. Now
what a labor is this Ministry? Indeed, it is true, this ministry is thought
a vile burdene, and of all exercises, the labor of the ministry is thought
most vile, in the sight of our profane, men in Scotland this day. The very
name of a minister is thought vile in the earth, and so often as they speak of him
and names him, it is thought a vile name; the name of a cook is not so vile as
the name of a Minister. But, in despyte of thee and all the world, the Spirit
of God will call him an honorable labourer, a person exercised in an high and
honorable exercise. 1. Timoth. chap. 3. verse 1. The King is a labourer, but a
honorable labourer. Even so, every one that labors and hes offices in the
Church, are laborers, but yet they are honorable laborers. So the Ministers are
laborers, but, honorable laborers, for he is over thee, and is thy superior.
And he hes a burdeene, but a honorable burdeene, and at the appearance of Jesus
Christ in spyte of thee that contemnes him thou shall see his honor and glory,
and thou shall wonder at that day, that ever he should be promoued to that
honor, for he shall shine in the Heaven as a star: this shall stand in despyte
of the world.

Well, come on now to the duty of the people to their Pastor (A Kings
Master-houshold will be accounted of, the Master-housholde of Christ's Church,
what manner of honor should ye have him in? Duties of the people to the Pastor.
) The first words that expresses the duty of the flock are, know them,
misknowe them not. The people would misknow them very feign; yet what knowing
is this? It is the knowledge of the mind, when in mind we take up and know that
calling of the Ministry to be the Pastor by Jesus Christ the great Pastor to
the Church, to be a dispenser of the mysteries of God, and the in searchable
riches of Christ, such a dispenser as never was in the world, not of bread and
drink as these world lie stewards; No, but of the insearchable riches of
Christ, and that to salvation and feeding of the soul to that life everlasting
wherein soul and body shall live for ever. This is the knowing be speaks of
here. What more? It is not a simple knowledge, to know, that, he is a
Minister, but with knowing, to join reverence, give him his own honor. Paul 1.
Cor. 4. 1. says, Let a man count of him (not as thou cou^^s of Christ) but
count of him as a Minister and dispenser of the mysteries of Christ. give him
no more and cursed be that beast of Rome that would take the place and honor of
Christ on him. Now this part of duty of the flock, in reuerencing of the
Pastor, is answerable to that part of the calling of the Pastor; he is a
superior, a superiority craves reverence, who ever he be that is a superior,
whether in families, cities, or common-wels, or, in Church, if he be set over
you, honor him* this is the ordinance of the Lord, if the Lord have set him
over you, honor him, look not to the man, but, to the Lords ordinance. And
this, I continually persaue, there is a natural hatred and contempt in the
hearts of the people ever toward any superior, whether in Church, or, Policy, a
natural io^y: we are bred with it, and we entertain it, and incresse it. Thou
have a natural hatred against thy superior if thou were never so good, if
thou would feign have him away, if thou would cast of all yock, but this is
a thing, the Lord is offended with. For, I affirm this, all superior powers
that are set over us, whether in Church, or, Policy, reverence and honor is
craved to them. God ordaines it, and God will avenge the contempt thereof. Now,
to speak generally. There are two sorts of superiors. One in the Policy,
over the bodies of men in the world; another superior in the Church of God
which is nothing else but a stewartrie. Now say I, reverence should be ever
given to both, reverence the Magistrate, whisper not against him, but reverence
him, if it be possible hold out evil thoughts out of thy heart, let be evil
words in thy mouth. honor all, begin at the King and come to the lowest,
honor every one in their own rank. Again in the Church honor the Ministry
as stewartes in a great family, the family of the Lord of Lords, honor him
as a faithful stewart in the house of the Lord. If ye compare these two
together, every one of them are bound to reverence other, the Politic
Magistrate to reverence the superiors in the Church: Again the superiors in
the Church to reverence the civil Magistrate, I tell you my mind, mutuallie
they are superiors to others. The Church man is inferior to the Magistrate in
things civil, and therefore, as a common man is bound to reverence him, and
should teach all reverence to them, in that estate. And by the contrare, the
Magistrate, if it were the King, should be ruled by the Minister, in things
spiritual: and he who is a stewart in the Church of God, the King is bound to
take out of his hand the thing whereupon his soul feeds, and so, he, and all
other Magistrates are bound to reverence him, as Gods stewart. If this mutual
reverence were kept well were it to Church and Commonwel; but, where it is
not kept, no well in Church nor Policy, and I shall crave ever to get this
mutual reverence kept, and my travel and exercise hes been this year
bygone to get it kept, God is my witness. Now this is for the first part of
the duty of the people.

The second thing, he says, have them in singular love, for their worker
sake. Not in a common love, but, in a singular love. it includes all the whole
affectiones of the heart, and yet there is more to be understood here, the
consequentes of this love, and the effects that follow thereupon. If love be
in the heart, it will break out in the hand. So there are two things here.
The one the singular love in the heart: the other the outward good deed in the
hand. If the Ministers give to you things spiritual to enterteine the
heavenly life; is it a great matter to you to give them things temporal,
things to enterteine this frail life? Now, brethren, this point of the duty
of the people answers to that part of the duty of the Pastor, which
stands in labor. A labourer would have love of them he labors for, if it
were but the servant that labors in your kitching, ye ought to love him, love
them who loves you. Now he who labors not in a vile office, but in an
honorable labor to your salvation; how much more should ye esteem of him
honorably and reverence* him* An honorable labor would be honorably
handled. Ye see the meeting that the Apostle craves. The Pastor lies under a
burdeene, and an honorable burdeene. On the peoples part he craves a meeting,
because the burdeene is honorable, and the Pastor should have preferment,
therefore he craves reverence And because the Pastor labors, therefore he
cranes love and entertaining of the people. It is a common saying, Friendship
will not stand long on the one side. If this meeting be not of the people to the
Pastor, the Ministry cannot stand, and the men cannot be able to bear the
burdeene. Brethren, what shall I say, alas, experience tells us, for fault of
this meeting on the part of the people, and specially of these in Policy, to
whom this matter appertains, this Ministry is not like for to stand. And I
affirm, if there be not a better meeting, and greater care to reverence this
calling, and to love and honor it, and to provide sustentation for them that
labors, the eyes of our posteriue shall see this Ministry decay. It is going
away. Men believes, it is well, if they get the teyndes, If the Lord and Lord
get the teyndes, Teinds.
he will indent and subscryue all with you. But, either must these things be
redressed, or, else, certainly there shall be a decay, and then, farewell all
grace. Shame and confusion to Scotland. Trowes Scotland, that, the common-well
shall floorishe, or, that, the estate shall be good, if this Ministry go
away? No, there shall be nothing, but desolation. If they were here to whom
this matter and this admonition pertaines, I would charge them in the name of
God, that they would show a better meeting to entertain this Gospel, or else,
shame shall overtake them. Now this far as the words of the text furnishes
to me I have spoken of the duty of the people.

Now, there is another precept added to this exhorting to peace. Peace
commanded.
Be at peace, says he, among your selves. This is agenerall precept given to
Ministers, to people, and to all men, commanding peace, love unity and
concord of mind. This is the fountain of other graces. She goes before us as
a mother, other graces as children follow her: If she go not before, no
following of graces. Where peace is, there is grace; where peace is not, there
is no grace. And therefore Paul first to Tim. chap. 2. verse 1 says, Pray for
Kings: for what end? that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. Where he means, where peace is, these two follows,
godliness which is the ground of the first table, and honesty which is the
ground of the second table. Where peace goes away, farevvell these two. Will
ye look to your own families, if there be not peace betvveen the Husband and
the Wife, tell me what grace can be in the family? tell me can godliness, can
grace be in the family, where there is nothing but strife and envy? can
common honesty be there? No, no grace, Go to a City, where there is nothing
but dissension, can therebe grace, godliness or honesty there. Go to a Kingdom
or common-well, where a Kingdom is rent in pieces, can there be grace,
holiness or honesty there* So it is the peace in Jesus Christ, which is the
mother and conqueror of all graces; where the hearts of men and women are
bound up in peace, there is floorishing, either in City or household. But yet
what peace should this be? Wherein stands it? It stands not in a fair word,
in a fair good morrow, nor in an outvvard behavior, or false fained smiling
with thy mouth, when thou have no love in thy heart; but this peace stands
chiefly in the lenity and conjunction of minds and hearts. Paul to the Ephesians.
chap. 4. verse. 3. says, Study to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace: where he earnestly recommends an union of minds. Paul to the
Philippians in the 2. chap. verse. 1. says, If there be any consolation in
Christ, if any solace, if any communion of the spirit, if any bowels of
pity, fill up my joy; and wherein stands it? Be, says he, of like mind and
affection: There my joy, let your affection be one, have one love, have one
mind dwell with all your souls together. Join so your hearts together as if
they were one heart: join your souls together, and make up one soul of all.
And as concerning your judgments, he says, be not of contrare opinions and
judgementes: There are some that ever delytes in contradiction. When one will
say one thing* they will make a contradiction to it. Now ye see wherein this
peace stands, and this is the peace that makes up the Kingdom of God. Paul
says to the Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God stands not in meat and
drink, but in peace and righteousness toward God. Indeed the Kingdom of men
will be made up of an outward counterfaite peace. The Grecian Kingdom, the
Roman Impire stood of an earthly peace, but all vanity, the Kingdom of Christ
is made up of an unity of our souls, knit together in Christ. When our
conscience is peaceable, then our souls is knit to him, Read the 4. chapter to
the Ephesians, ye shall not find so many arguments in no place as there, to
exhort men to unity, There is, says he, but one body, one spirit, one hope
of your vocation, one Lord Jesus, one faith, one baptism, one God, one Father
of all. Then if there be so many one things, why should ye not be one. Now the
whole blessing of men stands in union. Yea, the blessedness of God stands in
an union, the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit united together in one
God-hood. The blessedness of our nature stands in the union with our head
Christ, and in the union of the members among our selves. Where this union is
not, there is nothing but misery. In the Kingdom of Heaven there is nothing
but unity; by the contrare, there is no peace in Hell. If the father and the
son go to Hell together, trow ye there shall be any love between them? No,
nothing but inuy, all inuy and hatred is among the Devils: all peace and unity
is in God, who draws the souls of men and women together, and makes one soul
as it were in that glorious body of Christ. The Lord give us this bond of
unity and love that we may be joined with the rest of the members in one body
to our head Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the Spirit be immortal
praise honor and glore world without end.

AMEN.
THE XXIII. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 14. 15. 14 We desire you, brethren, admonish them,
that are unruly: comfort the feeble minded: bear with the vveake: be patient
tovvarde all men.

15 See, that, none recompense evil for evil unto any man: but, ever follovv
that, which is good, both tovvard your selves, and tovvard all men.


WE go forward (brethren) in these exhortations and precepts, concerning
good manners and godly conversation, which the Apostle settes down here, to
the Thessalonians. As for these, whereof we have already spoken, as, that
wakrifnesse, that should be in them, that soberness, that spiritual armor,
vvherevvith they should be armed, concerning that mutual exhortation, every one
of them ought to other, concerning that duty, that the flock and the people
ought to their Pastor, concerning that mutual peace, that should be among
them, we speak nothing now, recommending all to your memories, who heard us.

Now, in this text we have read presently, first, we have three particulare
directions, concerning three estates of persons: first, concerning unruly
men: secondly, concerning feeble minded men: and last, concerning them, that
are infirm and vveake in says, vveake in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
of the things, that concerns him, not firmly persuaded of them, as we
shall hear, 3. diseases, with their remedies.
in the own rovvme. So, there are here three diseases, or, special
sicknesses: The first is unruliness, that is, louse living; the next,
feebleness of heart; the third is weakness and infirmity in faith, and in
that persvvasion, that, we should have, toward Jesus Christ and the
Gospel. And as there are three diseases, So, the Apostle prescryues three
several remedies against these three diseases. Mark it. For every disease he
prescryues the own proper remedy and cure, for in ordinate living and
unruly life, Admonition; for feebleness of mind and casting down of the
Spirit, Comfort, for weakness in faith and infirmity, bearing with, to
bear with the vveake and infirm in faith Now, to go through these, and first
to the diseases, and next, to the remedies thereof. The first disease is
unruliness, 1. Vnruelinesse.
inordinatnesse. The Apostle 2. Thessa. 3. chap. verse 6. tells who are
these, he calls unruly, they, that live not according to that doctrine and
instruction, he gave them. The word of God is the rule of life. The man, that
lives not according to the word of God is unruly. Yet, more plainly in that
same place, he descryues the unruly He calls them, 11. verse, they, who
labors not for their living, they, who have not a trade of life. Then, he
adds, that are busy bodies, busy, in other men's turns, doing nothing in
their own, and therefore, they must be exercised in evil exercises, in
things, that pertaines not to them; prattling and babbling here and there,
putting their hand to this man's and that man's offices. There are two
properties, idle and exercised; idle in their own tume, exercised in other
men's turns: An evil sort of men, these men are unruly. Now, to come to the
remedy, shortly. The remedy is admonishing, reproving. This unruliness it
is an evil malady, and eneugh to cause a man die. What medicine should we
use to such men? shall we foster and entertain them in their folly? No, he
says, admonish them, use them sharply and severely in admonishing, tell them,
they are out of rule. The 2. Thessa. chap. 3. verse 10. he tells, how he
used them, he denounced against them, that, if they wrought not, they should
not eat, but, their mouth should be bound up, so, that, they should die for
hunger. Also, in that same place, he gives a charge to all men of severe
themselves from these men, that they may be ashamed of that life, it is a good
and an honest thing to see a man well exercised, and that in his own calling.

Now, to come to the second disease and remedy for it. The next disease is
feebleness of mind; 2. Feebleness of mind.
when the heart of man is casten down, troubled, assaulted, heavy, so, that
there is no spirit, nor, courage, but, ay going in the way of despair. What
is the medicine and remedy of this man? Deal not roughly with one, who is
diseased after this manner, add not affliction to affliction, afflict not him,
who is afflicted, trouble not the troubled, the proper medicine to such, is,
comfort. Comfort them, that are dejected in spirit: David, in the 41. Psalm 1.
verse, he pronounces a special blessing, to him, that will comfort the
afflicted, Blessed is the man, that judges vvysoly of the poor, that is, that
can have compassion on a troubled conscience. Now, the arguments of
consolation, he uses, in that Psalm, are two. The first, from the promises of
God, to be bestowed on them, in Christ. The other, is, prayer: Promise then
grace, to the troubled heart in Jesus Christ, and then, pray for it. If the
heart be dejected, no comfort for it, but, from God. All the world, all the
powers in Heaven and earth are not able to comfort and raise up the soul, but,
only the power of God, through Christ and his blessed Spirit.

Now, to the third disease and remedy thereof. It is weakness in faith, 3.
Weakness in faith.
weakness in the knowledge of Christ and the Gospel, when a man hes not
a through sight and persuasion of these things, that concerns Jesus and the
Gospel, when he knows them not well, neither is confirmed in them. Such, as,
concerning diversity of meats, all meats are sanctified in Christ, many knew
not that, and therefore made conscience, in observing diversity of meats, and
likewise, as concerning days, that put difference in days and kept them,
these he calls weak ones. The remedy is, bear with them, break not the bruised
reed, quench not the smooking slax; no, enterteine the least beginning of
grace in the weakest body. A fire that hes smook in the beginning, if thou
enterteine it, it will, in end grow a fair fire. What know thou, but these,
that hes a little spark of faith, if they be enterteinde, by process of time
will grow to an high measure of knowledge, and will be as strong, as thou. Paul
15. chap. Romans 1. verse speaking of these same weak ones, says, We who are
strong in faith, that is, knows the liberty in Christ Jesus, let us bear the
infirmities of the vveake, take their burdene off their back and lay it on our
shoulders, heap not on them burdene upon burdene, but releue them, and that
we please not our selves and make off-casts of others. Therefore, he adds,
let every one please their neighbor. Please their neighbor, and bear with
him, that is the word: and he commes on, with Christ's exemple. Christ he bare
not with himself, self-love carried him not, as it does us, but, as it is
written, the reproaches of them, that rebuked thee, fell on me. He spared
himself so little, that these igneminies and reproaches, that should have
lighted on us sinners, he took them on him. He took our burdeene on him.
There are the words shortly.

Mark our lessons. This world is all diseased; men and women in this world are
full of diseases: yea, and they, that thinks themselves wholest are sickest. I
will not speak of the diseases of the body. There are few without their own
diseases, and that is the reward of sin, yea and death follows on the end
of them, but, I speak of the sickness of the souls of men and women; never
one but they have their own diseases in their soul. He hes this sickness in
his soul: she hes that sickness in her soul; he is miserable in his soul,
another feeble in mind, the third, weak, without a sure knowledge of Christ;
every one of these sicknesses are deadly, every one of them, eneugh, to cause
a creature die: Art tho unruly, if it continue with thee, and be not cured in
time, it shall cause thee die, not such a death, as the death of the body; it
is a sickness in the soul, thy soul shall die. The sickness of the body
will cause the body die, if it be not cured; the sickness of the soul will
cause the soul die, if it be not cured: Art thou feeble minded, thou shall go
to dispare, if thou be not comforted: Art thou weak in persuasion, thou shall
grow weaker and grow to nothing, if thou be not cured in time. So considring so
many sick bodies, and an heap of maladies among many Christans, there must
be be many mediciners. A man is a man, a Minister if he be his alone in a
flock, if he were the best Minister, that ever spoke among so many diseased
bodies, what can he do? Therefore, look, how many men are in the Church,
there should be as many mediciners, every one of us is bound to cure others
diseases. Thou bound to cure my disease and I, thine; thou have one that I
lack, I must labor to cure thine; I have a malady, that thou lackest, thou
must labor to cure mine. Compete^s medicine to be applied to every man's
disease.
I tell you plainly, none of us, but we are bound to do it: Think not, this
perteines only to a Minister, to admonish, to instruct, exhort and rebuke,
think not, the Minister should do all: but, if thou be a member of Christ,
this binding is laid on thy back, to be a curer of thy sick brother and
sister. Now, ye know the special virtue, that is craved in a Mediciner, is
discretion, to know the nature of the diseases, to tell, this is this disease,
that is that disease, and thereafter, to apply salve to the sore. To apply the
competent medicine to the sickness. He is nothing worth, that hes but one
kind of salve for all soars, and he will destroy the body, if he apply only
one medicine for all sores; For, that, which is mending salve to one disease,
it is poison to another disease: So, in the spiritual mediciner, discretion is
craved, to know the malady of our brother and conform thereto, to apply the
medicine, When I see an unruly body, that works nothing, that perteines to
himself, but busying his head, about other men's callinges, then, I should take
the medicine of sharp rebuke and lay it to the sore, and tell him the disease,
and bid him take a lawful calling, that he may serve God therein, and sustain
his body. Again, when I see one cast down in spirit, I must not use that
medicine to him, but, must comfort him. Jude in his Epistle verse. 22 says, Put
a difference among sinners, in the curing of them, to some, show comfort and
compassion, some bodies craves pity and compassion, as to others, save them,
how? with terror, that is the word, threatening vengence on them, and he adds,
pull them out of the fire quickly, as it were, by the hair of the head, they
are burning, if thou save them not with a sharp doing, the fire will consume
them shortly. All men would be handled meekly and gently, and the unruly man
would be handled as tenderly, as the body, that is dejected. Is that the way to
cure him, to put smoothing coals on him? no, that is the way to let him burn
if he lie in the fire: smooth him over he shall burn: A misruelie man he
stands, as it were, in a fire, and such a fire, as shall burn him, if he be
not all the sooner pulled out.

Now, I will not insist on these particular directions, but, I go forward, be
patient tovvard all men. This is a general direction, not given for a
particular disease, that concerns this man, or, that man, this disease, or,
that disease in special, but, this concerns all men and all women and is, as
it were, a general medicine, meet for all diseases: Patience, lenity, long
suffering, meekness (to speak it so) is a simple medicine, that must be
mingled with every medicine: Leaity medicine for all diseases
Put therefore lenity and meekness in rebuking; lenity and meekness, in
threatening; lenity and meekness, in admonishing: lenity and meekness, in
exhorting, ever lenity: For, I tell you, if this very simple, to wit,
lenity, be not mingled with all medicines, the medicine shall become a poison,
rather, nor a medicine: As, for example, rebuke a sinner, that deserves
rebuking, if there appear nothing in thy rebuke, but, bitterness, severity,
anger and wraith, I tell thee, thy rebuke is a poison, thou poisons the man,
that thou rebukest, thou edifiest him not, thou destroyest him. Therefore,
hold thy tongue, be thou Minister, or, private Christian, that hes nothing,
but bitterness and gall, in rebukes, for, the Lord forbids such, to speak and
to rebuke, because they, who only spewes out gall and bitterness, makes
medicine, venom, and so, will destroy the body. Brethren, as this patience
and lenity should be used toward all sort of sinners, so all should use it.
a Minister, a private Christian, man, or, woman, as well, as a Minister: Look,
that, none speak any thing to any brother, or, sister, except it be tempered
with lenity, except the body find some sweetness, or, meekness in the
rebuke, or, admonition. As for the Minister, look the second Epistle to
Timothi^, cha. 2. verse. 24. It becommes not the seruante of the Lord to strive,
nor be a stryker, will thou stand up, to instruct men and be a striuer and
fighter? No, he says, use lenity toward all men, suffering men, to win
them, then, he commes to the means to win them, Instruct, says he, with all
lenity, him, who is contrary minded. Then, 4. chap. 2. verse of that
Epistle, Improve and rebuke with all lenity. Now, as for the common men and
women, how should they behave them, in using their medicine* Paul to Titus,
chap. 3. verse 2. says, Put them in remembrance, that, they show all le^itie
and gentleness tovvard all men, remembering, that, we were all once, as they
are, all unwise, by our mind, Ministers and all. Our bygone estate should
move us to lenity: strive therefore, to win them with lenity, for, they are
no worse, nor we were, and the best of us was once as evil, as they are:
forget not this, let never thy misery go out of thy mind, and let not grace
so blinde-folde thee, that thou misknovve what thou were once; for, if thou
do it, it will make the^ forget lenity toward thy neighbor. Galath. chap.
6. verse 1. He says, If by any occasion, thy brother has fallen, ye, who
are spiritual, restore him with the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, that stands, least thou fall also. There is no sinner so miserable the
day, but, by the grace of God he may be restored to morrow. None of us so sure
to day, but, to morrow we may fall. My case the day may be thine to morrow:
thou stand not by thy self, it is by grace, if it please the Lord to dravve
away grace from thee, suddenly shall thou fall; then all standing is by
grace: They, therefore, who stands, let them not rejoice in their own
strength, but, think, that, it is by the grace of God, they stand, and pit^ie
them, that are fallen.

Now, to go forward. The next exhortation concerns revenging of injuries,
randering, or, repaying of vvronges, we have great need to be instructed in
this, because our nature is so bent to revenge. He says, See, that, none
recompense evil, for evil, unto any man. There is an inhibition, Whereof
much might be spoken, but, I shall bind me to the words of the Apostle. Then,
to come to the first words. See, beware, look to it. The word signifies an
earnest care and study. As he would say, take care, be earnest, beware in this
turn, for, it will begyle you, if you take not all the better heed to it.
This very word, he uses, lettes us see the great difficulty and hardness,
that is, in obeying of this precepte, in not randering evil, for evil, but,
by the contrary, randering good, for evil. For, brethren, there is a
wonderful promptness and bentnesse in the nature of all men ever to revenge,
the spirit of vengence is by nature in every one of us, yea, in the silliest
and simplest body, that is. This point of doctrine, not to rander evil for
evil, but, by the contrare, good, for evil, abhorres from nature, and nature
abhorres it. Say to a natural man, do not evil, for evil, but, do good,
for evil, he will scorn and laugh at it, and many in Scotland scorns it. Our
nature abhors it so far, that, the ^uld Philosophers: (who set down many good
moral precepts) never spoke one word of it: among all their moral precepts ye
will not get this precept, Do no evil for evil, do good for evil. The
Scrybes and Pharisees Matt. cha. 5. verse. 38. etc. exponing the Law of God
could not atteine to this, but gave out this meaning of the second table of the
Law, love thy friend, do good, to him, that does good to thee, hate thy
enemy. So they exponed the Law, until Christ came and purged the Law. Only,
then, in the schole of Jesus, only in the Gospel, Patie^^^in suffering
vvronges, bardle ar^ed.
this point of doctrine is taught and learned, that* men should not do evil,
for evil, but, good, for evil. Indeed, brethren, this lesson is very hard to
be practiced. Good Christians, who professes themselves to be scholars in
Jesus school, how long time will they spend, ere they can get this lesson
learned? Who, let see, is brought to this point, that, gladly he can be
content to suffer wrong, or, to suffer a double wrong* ere he revenge, yea, to
do good, for evil, ere he revenge wrong; Who can do this? No, all these
murderers, all these oppressors, these contumelies, wherewith the land is
filled, tells plainly, that, many thousands in the land hes never learned this
precept of the Gospel, that the Lord hes given, to do good, for evil. Who of
our Lords and Lairds hes learned it? If he hes gotten one slain to him, he
will slay two: yea, come to the Gentlemen, ye shall see, that, this lesson hes
never been learned of them. Who of our women hes learned it? for, if were but
with the bitterness of their mouth, they will revenge their quarrel: and
they, who hes atteined to any grace, or, any part of obedience of this precept,
yea, the best of all, the most patient soul, how hardly can he, with a
patient, mind dejest injuries. There is no grace of God, no sort of obedience
to Jesus, but, so long as we live here, we keep it with a battle: have thou
any grace, ever the canker of our corruption stry^^s to put but the grace. So,
that, if we be not holden up, we shall lose this grace; and among all graces,
that, men gets, I trow, this grace of Patience we keep it with the greatest
trouble. There is no grace, that hes so many assaults, as this, ever to stir us
up, to take vengence, our own nature, wicked company; fie on on thee (they will
cry) beastly body, thou have received wrong and will not revenge it; there is a
thousand such instigations. What matter, if we could be content to rander wrong
for wrong, but, our heart is so full of venom, that it cannot be satiat, until
we double and triple ten wrongs, for one: the heart is so full of hatred, that
if we could, we would shut our enemy soul and body in Hell. So; this grace of
Patience, in not revenging, is the grace we keep, with the greatest assaults.
Read the 39. Psalm when David had taine purpose to take heed to his ways,
that he should not speak an evil word against his enemies, yet, the heart
begins to take fire and out goes the flame, and he burstes out, in murmuring
against God himself. All this tells us, how hard a thing it is, to one, to
digest wrong, and how much more hard, to do good, for evil. And so, we are to
cr^ue ever at God, to give us this grace of Patience, to suffer wrong: Alas,
the company of this world is so wicked, that we are ever stirred up to
vengence. And so, we should crave ever, the Lord give us patience, that with
patience we may abide the wrong, and the Lord will avenge. The Lord says,
Vengence is mine and I will avenge it. Deuteronomy. chap. 32. verse. 35. Bide, till
this time come and surely will the Lord repay it* And I darsay, never man got
wrong and with patience abode it, but, either he got revenge here, or, else, in
that day he shall see his wrongs fully repayed by God.

This, for the first words. Now, he says* See, that, no man. This precept
perteines to all men, it is general, he excemes no man, no, not the Kings of
the world, from the King to the beggar, no man exemed, every soul is inhibite
to do wrong, to rander evil, for evil, for, it is the King of al kings that
puts out this inhibition. Brethren, the conceit, men hes, of their own
estimation, if the Lord call them to any estate, begyles them. If a man be
preferred to another, he beguiles himself* and he thinks, he may do what he
will, because of his preferment, he may do double wrong, and he will say, I am
such a man, this is my estate, will I suffer a wrong, I cannot do (...)? How
can I suffer this indignity? The Lord says, thy preferment is of me, thou art
no better, nor the person, that is under thee; I command thee, under the pain
of death, that thou patiently abide, until it please me to avenge this deed.
Then, he says, do no vvrong to any man; without any exception: thou art
bound, not to rander evil for evil to any man, to the silliest and basest
body, that goes on the earth. Measure not Gods Law, by your own discretion.
The holy Law of God forbids thee to rander injury for injury, to the vylest
body in the world. And even as the consait of men, who are preferred begyles
them, even, so, the opinion of the vile estate of other men in their eyes
begyles them. How durst (will they say) such a vile lowne, or, villa^e do such
a turn, should I suffer such a wrong of such a rascal? I shall wring my hands
in his heart blood: But, I say, the Lord, that is Lord over thee and him both
gives thee an inhibition, if the man that does wrong were never so vile, handle
him not, but, bear with him, until I revenge it.

But, to come to the precept it self. What forbids he? and what bids he? He
forbids one thing, and bids another thing: he forbids to do evil, for evil;
he bids do good, to all men, and that, at all times; mutuallie do good every
one ever to another; extend not your beneficence to the faithful only, but,
extend it to all, from the King to the beggar, to the Turk, to the Jew, etc.
But, to come to the negative, that is forbidden. Do no evil, for evil. 4.
Sorts of randering
There are four sorts of randering: First, randering good, for good:
Secondly, randering good, for evil: Thirdly, randering evil, for evil: The
fourth sort, randering evil, for good. The first, randering good, for good, is
every where commanded, as for randering good, for evil, it is also here
commanded: As to the third, to rander evil for evil, here it is forbidden: As
to the fourth, randering evil, for good, it is much more forbidden. The
Apostle speaks not here expressly of it, for, in a manner, it is thought, that,
such foull ingratitude could not be in a man; I think the Apostle hes thought,
such a precept needed not, as being contrare to the Law of nature. The
Philosopher made not a law, against a man, for slaying his Father, because,
said he, I cannot trow, that, there can fall our such an unnatural fact: So,
to rander evil, for good, it is such a thing, that, it should not once be
named. But, ^ Scotland is full of such mishant ingratitude, in randering evil,
for good, and the man, who hes done most for him* in his greatest need, he will
abhor that man most. Fie, if vengence shall overtake him, that randers evil,
for evil, what vengence shall overtake such an ungrate reprobate, that randers
evil, for good? Brethren, understand, in this doctrine, do not evil, for
evil. He forbids, not only the action of the hand, or, the speech of the
mouth, to speak an evil word, to do an evil deed, but, he forbids also the
inward hatred of the heart; the Law of God touches the heart. And he says, On
pain of death, look, that, thou keep no vengence, nor, rankor in thy heart,
to him, that hes done evil to thee, for, suppose thou would not do him evil
with thy hand, and would hold thy tongue, yet, if rankor and vengence be in thy
heart, thou and thy heart, for breach of this precept, shall perish, suppose the
Magistrate cannot punish thee, if thou keep thy mouth and hand from evil; yet,
the Lord, that sees the heart will revenge the inward rankor of the heart: he
forbids likewise, that thou should do evil for evil to another. Men are now
very vile, in this point, they will seem to do no evil themselves, yet, by
another they are doing evil, he is not revenging with his own hand, but, yet,
he is revenging wrong for wrong, with the hand of another man. O, but, God will
not be scorned, thou shall pay for it surely. The Lord sees all the conuoy very
well, it is worse, then the other thou do thy self. I will say further,
Abuse not the Majesty of God, in revenging thy querrel, yea, even, when at the
Magistrates hand thou seek justice of them, who hes done any injury to thee,
be ware, that, thou respect not thy particular. It is lawful to the
magistrate, to take vengence, of them, that hes done wrong, but, take heed to
thy self, upon what mind thou seek it, look, that, it come not of thy
private affection, that thou seek not the hurt of the man, to satisfy thy heart
being carried with the thirst of revenge, that thou have. For, he, whom other
ways the magistrate justly punishes, I tell thee, if thou do any thing to him
upon malice, thou art guilty of his death, and God shall think thee a
man-slaier, but, seek revenge, in the love, thou have to justice, that God may
be glorified in justice, in randering vengence, to him, that hes done wrong. It
is weldone, that the wickedman suffers punishment for his fault, but, thou have
to look to thy heart. Seek not the satisfaction of thy foull heart, for, if thou
do so, thou shall be the s^ayer of the man, but, seek, that, God may be
glorified, in randering justice on the sinner: Lord, if we could do this. It is
a good turn, to cut away a murderer. Always, albeit he had slain thy
father, look to Gods glory and not to thy own affection. yea, I say further,
be ware, in dealing with thy God, in seeking venge^ce. Thou will say, the Lord
acqui^e him: It is not of the love of God, but, of vengence in thy heart, thou
say it, and I tell thee, if thou make such a prayer, vengence shall turn to
thy self. David hes many sad imprecations, in his Psalms, not only against
Gods enemies, but, also, against his own enemies. And yet, this came not of
that private affection, to be revenged of them, but, David respected this, that,
God should be glorified, in randring vengence, to the sinner. Beware of it. Men
may know by themselves, how hard it is, to get this love to our enemies: but, I
tell you, if there be not a striving to these things, and a resisting and
mortifying of thy nature, thou and thy nature both shall perish. Well is the
body, that, can fight against their wicked nature in this life, albeit they
come not to perfection. No there is not a tree, that hes spread the (...) so
broad in this earth, as rancour and vengence hes rooted themselves in our
hearts. So, our stryuing must be ever to pull out piece and piece this rancour.
This day pull out one piece; to morrow, another piece, ay strive to the
slaughter of it. They that will not strive shall never get the victory.

Now, to the second part of this precept. Do good, says he, to a^men. First,
to brethren and christians, and then, next, to all sort of men, albeit they be
enemies. This is far more. How can our nature bear this* It is enough to me,
thou will say, to do him no evil, the man, that hes dong me so many wrongs,
must I do I am good, for evil? Yea, the Lord says, do him good, for evil,
do no evil to him, but, do him good. There are the words. I say to thee, the
man, or, woman, that does no good to another, when they may, if their need
craves, if it were to their enemy, in not doing good, they do evil, in not
saving, they kill. Read, in the Gospel of Mark 3. chap. 4. verse. When Christ
healed a man on the Sabbath day, the Pharisees found fault with it, The Lord
says, Whether it is better, to do good, or, evil on the Sabbath day; To save
a man's life, or, kill him? whereby, he means, that, he, that saues not a man's
life being in danger and able to save him, he slayes him, as it were, with his
own hand. This is thought hard dealing, flesh and blood would wonder at this
dealing, and yet is the Lords will. Men says, commonly, he hes done me a
wrong, I will do him no evil, but, as for my good he shall get none of it, I
will neither be friend, nor, foe to him. Then, he thinks, he hes done eneugh.
Christ tells thee, here, If the man inlacks, or, if he be hurt through the
holding back of thy good deed, if it might have helped him, thou art the doer
of it. Alas, why flatters thou thy self, I tell thee, albeit thou do him no
evil with thy hand, if thou bear malice in thy heart, thou art a murderer,
and shall be challenged for a murderer, in that great day. Degrees of
patience, in bearing wrongs.
Brethren, there are two degrees of patience, in bearing with injuries; The
first degree of patience, is, not to do evil, for evil; The second and
higher degree, is, to do good, for evil; if thou would have perfect patience,
go up these two steps, do, not only no evil to thy enemy, but, do him good,
strive ever to a further perfection; thy strife in this life shall be crowned
with victory, in that life to come. They who strives not to perfection in this
earth shall never be perfect in the life to come. Well is him, that can strive
to perfection, albeit he come not to it here, he shall obtain it hereafter.
Do good, says he, How long? ever. There is no word here, in vain, do good
to thy enemy, ever on, so long, as thou have an hand. Galat. 6. chap. 9. verse.
he speaks this matter more planely, let us not weary in doing good, and he
adds to the promise, we shall reap the fruit of our good deeds in our own
time, if we long not, but, go; forward ay to the end. This language is
borrowed from the laboring of the husbandman; He will till the land, and go
forward, and then, cast the seed in the land, but, if he begin then to think,
he hes done eneugh already, and let the land be vnharrowed, or, when the corn
commes up, he do not weed it, how shall the fruit prosper? shall he have a
great harvest, if he harrow it not? the fowls shall gather it up, the weather
shall wash it away, and at harvest he shall get little of it to reap: So it is
with us, if we begin to do good and continue in well doing for a little space,
and then, begin to close our hand and our purse, and think, we have done
eneugh. Alas, when it commes to the harvest time, in that great day of the
Lord, there will be no shearing, nor, reaping to life everlasting: except, by
perseverance we continue to the end, no fruit of our labors. He that strives
not continually, he shall not over come: therefore, let us ever persevere,
while we live, and then, when our harvest and reaping commes, we shall have a
fair barn-yarde. Blessed is that man, that can persevere. Then, he says, in
that 6. chap. to the Galath. While we have time, let us ay do good, and he
makes two ranks of them, to whom we should do good: First, to the family of
faith, and then, to all manner of men. This time would be well marked: For,
there is a season of all things; a season of tilling, a season of sawing, and a
season of reaping. The season of sawing in the spring-tyme. If thou saw not in
that season, thou shall not reap fruit in Harvest: So it is in spiritual
things; in this life is the time of polwing, sawing, and harrowing. The life to
come is the time of reaping, and reaping the fruit of our labors. Lose thou
the time of thy sawing and harrowing here, thou will never get it again, and
when thou come to the season of reaping, thou shall not find fruit. Alas, I
have seen great men, when they have been on deathbed, and found death to be at
hand, would say, I have abused my time. Lord, if I had my time again, I should
spend it better, nor I have done. Always, many never gets this repentance And
well are they, who hes repentance for the time, that is misspent; but, where one
gets this grace, twenty gets it not. Now, all tends to this, to go forward in
well doing, while that we meet our head Christ: saw, harrow, and go forward,
until the time of our Harvest and reaping* for if thou he sluggish here and
saw not, thou shall not reap hereafter.

Now, to whom should they do good? To your selves. First every one, to other,
first, to them, whom he calls the family of faith. Gallat. chap. 6. verse 10.
He that would show a good deed, let him begin at Christians, for, we are all
of one family, even, of the family of Christ. I assure thee, that name,
Christian, binds thee, to show a good deed to them, that caries it. It is a
sweet name, I tell the more, albeit that body be thy enemy, yet, that name
of Christian, in him, binds thee to love and help him, and do good, for
evil, to him. It is no small obligation, binding every man, to do good. Then,
he ads to, and says, do good to all men. To Christian, to no Christian, to
Jew, Gentile, Turk, Pagane, what ever he be. Mark this. The Lord requyres,
that, this beneficence and liberality to men and women be extended to all men
in the whole corners of the earth: bear they the name of men and women, thy
liberality should ay extend to them. Look what reasons, Paul, Rom 12. 20.
verse. gives, in recommending the same well doing to our enemies. He says, If
thy enemy thirst, give him drink, if he hunger, give him meat. Give him not
it bitterly, with the buffet, but, give him it with cheerfulness, and pray
the Lord, to mend him: the reason is, For, in so doing, thou shall heap coals
on his head: For, if he repent not, for all thy doing good to him, the meat
and drink, thou give him shall be as many fiery coals on his head. Another
reason, Be not overcome with evil, but, overcome evil with good. He wins
the better, that suffers the wrong, and renders good, for evil, for, at last,
he shall be crowned with glory. The Lord bring us to this glory, for Christ's
sake. To whom, with the Father and holy Spirit be all honor and glory for
ever.

AMEN.
THE XXIV. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 16. 17. 16 Rejoice evermore.

17 Pray continually.


THERE are three precepts here, brethren, which the Apostle joines together.
The first is the precept of patience, in suffering wrong and not rendering
evil for evil, but, doing good for evil. Of this, we heard the last day.
There is next the precept of joy and peace of conscience, in the first words,
we have presently red, Last, there is the precept of prayer, seeking to God,
and thanking God, for the benefits resaued, in the next part of the text. The
Apostle Paul, not only in this place joines these three together, but, also,
in the 4. chap. to the Philipp. ye shall find the same three precepts joined
together, howbeit not in this order. he begins there, Patience, joy and
prayer joined together.
at joy, and he says, rejoice in the Lord alvvaies, again, I say, rejoice:
then, he commes to patience in suffering wrong, let your patient mind, let
your moderation be known (...) all men: for, the Lord is at hand; And last,
he commes to prayer and says, be not careful for any thing, but, in all
things let your requests be shovvne to God, in prayer and thanksgiving: Then,
he commes to peace of conscience again, and the peace of God, which passes all
understanding shall preserve your hearts, etc. These three are joined together:
The precept of patience, joy and prayer, because these three graces of God,
patience, joy and prayer are inseperable, every one of them joined unseparably
with another: tak one away, thou shall not get the other; tak prayer away, thou
shall not have joy; take joy away, thou shall not get patience in suffering. So
these three are so unseparably lined together, that, if they be not altogether
in the heart of a man, none of them can be in the heart; and if one be in the
heart, all shall be in it. Howbeit patience be set down first here, yet, it is
not the first grace, prayer is first; joy, next, and then, patience: for,
prayer first bringes joy; then, this heavenly joy being brought forth and
entertainde by prayer, it bringes patience, in suffering troubles. Now,
brethren, what shall we make of this, ere we come to the words? Only, this, the
graces of God, which are parts of our new birth called Regeneration are so
inseparably locked together, that, they cannot be severed, and therefore, he,
that would have any one of them, let him seek them al; he that would have
patience, let him seek joy; and he that would have joy, let him seek prayer,
let him seek them altogether; either seek them all and get them all, in some
measure, or, it shall pass thy power to keep any one of them, either keep
all, or, want all: this is their nature, ye saw never a chain so linked
together, as these graces of regeneration are linked. It may be, that, a man
have the outward show of a grace, but, indeed, it shall pass his power to
have a true grace, except he have the whole graces of this new birth, in some
measure. Many will seem to suffer wrong, and yet, they will not have the joy
of the holy Spirit; but, they, that wants the joy of the Spirit, albeit they
seem to suffer many wrongs, yet, they are but hypocrites. Therefore, seek
one, seek all; want one, want all; either have all, or, want all.

But, to come to the text and speak of this joy, Rejoice, says the Apostle,
evermore. True rejoicing, or, joy, is that joy, that entertaines patience in
suffering. Go to experience and try it. There is none of us, that hes tasted
of this heavenly joy, but, we will find, by experience, it raise up the heart
of man and woman above all these things earthly, in some measure. It raises
up the heart to an higher kingdom, nor all the kingdoms in this earth, this
heavenly joy raises us up, to the kingdom of God. This kingdom of God, says
the Apostle, Romans chap 14. verse. 17. Is peace and joy in the holy Ghost. So,
that, they, who hes this joy, are in another kingdom, as far above these
earthly kingdoms, as the heaven is above the earth, and by this joy, they are
lifted up, to heaven, and being up there, they look down to all these things
on the earth, the troubles, afflictions and persecutions, as though they were
nothing, and thinks them nothing: joy being in the heart, it swallows up the
heauiest displeasure, that, can be (look this by experience) A little measure
of it in the heart will swalow up sadness, suffering of wrongs and injuries in
this world. This world is but a world of suffering. In the 5. chapter of the
Acts, verse 41. ye see, the Disciples of Christ after his ascension are drawn
in, before the Council; there, they are scourged, manassed, and threatened,
that they should not speak in the name of Christ. But, what do they, when
they are dimitted? They go away with joy: is there matter of joy here? they
are beatten, scourged and boasted, yet, they go away with joy, reioicing,
that, they were counted vvorthi^, to suffer, for Christ's sake. Brethren, if
joy had not swallowed up sadness, the Apostles had not rejoiced. Read the
Psalms of David, He begins with such a sadness in many of them all, that he
would appear to be in Hell, and ere the Psalm be ended, ye will see, that, he
burstes out with exceeding great thankfulness. This means, that, there was a
joy, and an exceeding great heaviness in the heart, and there was a battle
betwixt them, and in the end, joy got the victory and swallowed up sadness.

But, now, what is this joy, that he means of, when he says, Rejoice euermo^.
It is no other thing, but, that, which he calls in the fourth chapter to the
Philippians, Description of ^oy.
The peace of God, that passes all understanding, standing about the heart, as a
guard. And to speak the truth of this, it is the end and crown of all the
graces of God in Jesus Christ, it is that end, whereto all the graces of God
tends: and when they come there, they go no further. Wherefore came Christ in
the world, but that we should have peace and joy in conscience? Wherefore died
he? that we should have joy. Wherefore rose he? that we should have joy in his
resurrection. Wherefore are we all called to be Christians? that we should
rejoice. Wherefore are our sins remitted? only to rejoice. This is the end of
all, joy. What is Heaven but joy? What is life everlasting, but joy
unspeakable? What is glory, but joy? Paul joins these two together, joy and
the crown of glory. 1 Thessalonians. chap. 2. verse 19. Therefore, in one word, what
is true happiness? nothing but joy, joy in God, through Jesus Christ. What is any
thing under Heaven without joy in the heart? If a man have all the world and all
the honor and riches of the world, except he have joy in them, what auaill
they? So, joy is the blessedness of men and women: And therefore, when the
Apostle bids us rejoice evermore, what craves he, but, that we should prease
ever forward to our blessedness and Heaven; begin thy blessedness here, or, thou
shall never get blessedness hereafter Life everlasting begins here, in a measure
of joy, that is not persite, and ends in the next life, in glory, which shall
be perfited.

Yet, brethren, the nature of joy would be better seen and known, that men be
not deceived with it. The joy, that is craved, of what kind is it? There are
sundry kinds of joy. Is it a fleshly and carnal joy, (...)
that will be in the mouths of prophaine people; be merry, eat, drink. Is
that this joy? no, no. When Paul bids thee rejoice, he bids thee not pass the
time like the Epicurians, Eat, drink and be merry: The joy, that he craves,
the nature thereof is not fleshly: but, it is clean, holy and spiritual. To
speak the truth, it is in the heart (all joy is in the heart of a body) but,
it is not so much the joy, that is of the natural affection, as it is the
motion of the spirit of Christ within us, using the affectiones of our heart as
a part to rejoice in, when he is dwelling in us. When a man reioyces
naturally, it is his heart, that reioyces, but, this is another kind of
rejoicing. It is the Spirit of consolation, that comforts, the Spirit of
Jesus, that dwelles in the heart, and wakens up the affection above nature, and
makes it, It is (...) and (...)
that was natural, as supernatural, it cannot be so well told, as felt. Romans
chap. 8. verse 26. The Spirit of God requests for us, with sighs
unspeakable. Then, the Spirit sighs within the heart. If the Spirit of God
be within the heart, the sighe will not be so much the sighe of the body, as
of the Spirit of God: (...)
It is so with that spiritual joy; the joy in the heart if will not be so much
the joy of the heart, as the joy of the Spirit of God, a joy unspeakable. No,
no tongue can tell the greatness of it. And, brethren, if there were no more,
but, this, that it cannot be toulde, it tells you the nature of it, it is not
a natural joy, the natural joy can be all toulde. the heart of man is
comprehensible, and the affectiones of the heart can be toulde, but, the joy of
the Spirit of God is incomprehensible. The joy of the Spirit of God in the
heart of the poor sinner cannot be toulde by all the Angels of Heaven, let be
by the tongue of man. For, no man can re^^ the infiniteness of Gods Spirit.
Therefore, put a difference between it and all other joys.

The property of this joy is here expressed, Properti^ of this joy, It is
continual.
it lastes evermore, it is continual, it alters not, it is without
interruption, it is not broken off* prosperity will not break it, adversity
will not break it, life will not break it, death will not break it, it
abydes, in life, it abydes, in death, yea, even, to the very point of death,
when it pleases the holy Spirit to work, it will be in a greater measure
in his soul than, nor it was in the life-tyme. When we think the body should
be heauiest and saddest, then, it is most joyful. This earthly joy is soon
broken off. he is now in joy: in the twinkling of an eye, it shall be broken
off: this hour glade, the next hour, woe. Balthazar was a merry man when he was
profaning the vessels of the Lord and banketting in the mean time of his
merinesse came the hand, writting upon the wall and then, he begins to shake,
and his countenance is changed with shuddering and shaking. (...).
Ye heard in this same chapter, when the wicked says, Peace, all things are
sure, then, a sudden destruction ouertakes them. So, this worldly joy is ay
interrupted, it is ay turned in sorrow; if thou be content with a worldly joy
proceeding of a worldly thing, (if it were all the kingdoms of the earth) thy
joy shall be turned in a weeping for ever; but, the spiritual joy is
continual without interruption.

Then, if this be the nature of it, it is spiritual, it is clean and pure,
heavenly, not rude, fleshly, nor, earthly. If this be the property of it,
Matter of spiritual joy.
it continues ay (for, this property must follow on the nature of it, a
spiritual thing must ever abide) What can be the matter of it? there must be
some cause of this joy. No joy, but there must be some cause and matter, that
moves it. Then, what is the matter of it? There are two sorts of things in the
world, that wakens up joy in the heart of man. The first is earthly things; ye
know the things, worldly honor, riches, they waken up joy in the heart: Another
sort is called spritual, heavenly, clean. There is no other, but, these two,
either things heavenly, or earthly, to cause men to rejoice. Then, are these
earthly things the matter of this spiritual joy he speaks of? Examine the
nature of it, it is spiritual, it is the joy of Christ. Will these worldly
things, if there be no further consideration of them, cause the Spirit of
Christ rejoice within thee? Will a kingdom make Christ's Spirit within the
heart of a man, to rejoice, if there be nothing more, but, as it is a worldly
kingdom? No, I say, they will not be the matter of this joy: look to these
worldly things how thou resauest them, if they be not resaued out of Gods hand
as arlespennies of heavenly things, and tokens of better benefits and of
life everlasting, they shall never make the Spirit of Christ to rejoice in
thee. Thy heart may be blyth for worldly things, because thou art an earthly
body. A King may rejoice in a kingdom, etc. but, if they be not taine out of
Gods hands, as arlespennies of heavenly and spiritual benefits, the Spirit
of Christ shall not rejoice in thee. Take heed, if it were but a morsel of
meat, if thou take it out of Gods hand, as a token of that heavenly food to
life everlasting, the Spirit of Christ shall rejoice in thee. Therefore, be
never content of earthly things, as earthly things only, nor, of the natural
joy of the heart of man. A sow hes a natural joy, (...)
in filling the belly. No beast in the field, but it hes a sensual joy in the
self, by nature, in the food thereof. Fie on thee, that cannot have more joy,
nor a beast. Thou art made for Heaven and not for Kingdoms here: Therefore,
rejoice in heavenly things; and I say, the Kow and other beasts are better,
nor thou, if thou rejoice not with that heavenly joy, for the kingdom prepared
for thee, in Jesus Christ. Woe to thee, that hes not the joy, that proceeds of
the Spirit of Jesus. Again, this joy lasts evermore, it is continual, it bides
in the night, it bides in the day, it perishes not. These worldly things are al
perishing. He will be a King the day and will be casten down to morrow. He is
rich the day, and will be begging to morrow. How can things changeable, be
matter to me of joy, that stands evermore? No, they cannot. If my joy restes
on earthly things, when earthly things fails me, of necessity my joy must
fail me. When the ground of joy fails, my joy must fail. Worldly things must
fail, therefore, the joy in worldly things must fail, and specially, in
death: Either shall earthly things fail thee, or, else, thou shall fail them;
if thou were a King, thou must fail in thy kingdom, thou must leave (...);
either shall the worldly things be taine from thee, or, thou from them: What
Monarch ever yet since the beginning of the world for all their dominions, if
they had not God and Christ, had ever a spark of joy at the hour of his
death? A dram weight of this joy is worth all the kingdoms of this earth; and
if thou have gotten a little piece of this joy, think it better, nor thou were
made Monarch of all the world. No question, the least piece of Christ's graces
and of this regeneration is worth all the Kingdoms of this world. Even so,
these earthly things cannot be the matter of this joye. Thou shall never get
the joy of the holy Spirit, if thou seek it in the world. Then, wherein
stands this joy? Paul 4. chap. to the Philippians verse 4. says, Rejoice in
the Lord. He says not, rejoice in the world, or, kingdoms of the world, but,
he says, rejoice in the Lord and in all those graces, he hes brought with him,
in remission of sins, in life everlasting, etc. Take heed, compare this joy
with the matter thereof, This joy is spiritual, Jesus is a Spirit, all his
graces are spiritual. Then, these two agrees very well, a spiritual matter, a
spiritual joy. Then, again, this joy is continual, Christ is for ever. Heb.
13. 8. His graces stands for ever. All the mercies of God in Christ are
eternal and unchangeable. How well then stands these two, a joy continual, a
matter continual; a joy, that is eternal; a matter, that is eternal. But,
thou will say, (...).
albeit that matter of my joy, Christ Jesus never perishes, yet, we must
perish, and albeit he stand, yet, we must fall. No, no. Paul, to the Romans chap.
8. verse. 35. says, What shall separate us from the love of God, in Christ? No,
if thou be once well imped in him by his Spirit and a lively faith, all the
world shall never bring thee back again, thou shall never be separate, heaven
and earth shall first perish, ere they, who are imped in Christ, be separate
from him, death shall not separate them. Paul says, Christ is to me both in
life and death advantage. Philipp. chap. 1. verse. 21. These earthly things may
vantage thee in this natural and transitory life, (...).
riches may vauntage thee in this life, honor may be pleasant to thee here,
but, when death commes, then may thou justly say, I will get no more vantage of
my riches, I will shake all off me and go naked to the grave, but, Christ will
go to the grave with me: yea, even, to the resurrection he shall accompany
thee, and then, soul and body shall be joined together, and thou shall be with
him for ever. In one word, the matter of this joy are not earthly things, but,
spiritual. It is Christ and his graces, that is the ground of all this joy,
until thou come to that life everlasting. And this, for the opening up of the
words.

Learn, Vse^
then. There are none of us, that walks in the light of the Gospel of Christ,
and hes taine the name of Christians upon us, but we are bound and oblist to
rejoice, and be glade, and that, not for one time only, one day, or, one
night, or, one year or, one season, but, evermore, and at every occasion, in
prosperity, in adversity, in life and death, ever rejoice; and weulde ye know
the pain? all obligations are under some pain, the pain of it, is, under the
pain of banishing us out of Gods Kingdom, out of heavenly Jerusalem. He that
would not rejoice under the hope of heavenly Jerusalem must be banished out
thereof. Romans 14. verse 17. Gods Kingdom in righteousness and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost; if thou prease not to rejoice in Christ and his Kingdom, in
life and death, prosperity and adversity, thou shall be shut out of it. I say,
they, who never felt of this heavenly joy, and never rejoiced in Christ, in his
Redemption of us from sin, in that life purchased to us, by his blood, who never
rejoices in these, but ay is glad when he is exercised about these earthly
things, that man never yet saw Christ's Kingdom. And albeit he be outwardly in
the Church (the Church is called the Kingdom of God, in the Gospel) yet,
indeed, he is not one of the Kingdom, he is going up and down in company
with them of the Church, but, he was never in the Church, for, thou must be
spiritually in it and not bodily. And if there be a great sin in the world,
this is one, not to rejoice in such a matter of joy; God offers thee salvation
in Christ; if thou rejoice not therein, thou cannot do a greater contempt to
the light of the Gospel, wherein life and salvation is offered, no^ a greater
injury to God, thou bereaues God of his glory* for, what shall be the chief
glorifying of God, but a rejoicing in his mercies, through Jesus Christ. Alas,
what great blessedness we defra^d our selfs of, when we rejoice not in the
work of our Redemption. It is wonder, what joy the Angels have, in looking in,
to this work of the Redemption of man. Peter, in his 1. Epistle, chap. 1.
verse. 12. says, The Angels desires to look in to this mystery. Were not the
Angels preachers to the shiephirds, of that joy and blessing, that came to the
world? Luke chap. 2. verse 13. 14. Fie on thee, Christ is come, to redeem thee
and not the Angels, and yet, they rejoice, and wilt not thou rejoice? The earth
and heaven leapes and rejoices for the hearing of their deliverance by Christ's
coming again, and thou cannot rejoice, fie on thee, When all the dumme
creatures, above, under, and about thee, rejoices, and thou cannot rejoice.
Waken up that dead heart of thine, and rejoice in God, or, else, the spirit of
sorrow and sadness shall waken thee, that thou shall weep for ever. The time
of joy is precious, if thou rejoice not here, thou shall never get that joy in
Heaven hereafter.

Now, ye will say, should we rejoice ay? The wise man says, Ecclest. chap. 3.
verse. 4. (...).
All things hes the time, there is a time of weeping, a time of laughing. How
should we ay be glad? I answer, it is true, there is a time of mourning, and
a time of sadness: and, I trow, this same very time is the time of sadness.
But, I tell thee, again, for all this sadness, rejoice must thou, and when
thou art commanded to be sad, for sin, thou art commanded to rejoice in Christ,
for remission thereof: where nothing is in the heart but sadness, it will bring
a man to dispare, Sadness would ever be mingled with joy, sadness, for
misery, would be mingled with joy, for hope of relief, or, else, the end shall
be dispare. And it is wonderful, to see the Spirit of Jesus at ^ time to work
joy and sadness, (...).
how he will make the heart sigh, with sighs unspeakable, and in that moment,
with that same very sigh, that same very Spirit will make the heart rejoice
with joy unspeakable: Know ye not this? This sadness is called contrition and
brokennes of heart, it is a sadness wroght in the heart with sighs unspeakable,
conjoined with joy, that is unspeakable, if it be with faith in Jesus Christ.
Peter says, 1. Epist. 1. cha. 8. verse. Believing in Jesus Christ, we rejoice
with joy unspeakable and glorious. So, when thou art sad, have thy eyes set
upon Christ, when thou art sad, go from the sight of men, but go not from the
sight of Christ, if thou were in wilderness, if Christ be in thy eyes, with
sadness, unspeakable joy shall be mingled. Then weeping is recommended,
rejoicing is recommended, and we must sorrow while we are here, but look,
that, Christ in thy sorrowing be in thy eyes, and that joy that is mingled with
sadness, in the end it shall swallow up the sadness, life shall swallow up
death.

But ye will say, the best man and most faithful will be some times so easten
down, that he cannot get a spark of joy, look to it. Thou will say, rejoice
thou; he will say, I cannot; (...).
I tell you, if he had all the kingdoms of the world, he would give them for a
spark of joy, the soul of him will be, as it were, bea^ten down to Hell. How
then says he, rejoice euermore^ how can he bid this? The answer is easy. The
Apostle speaks of that thing, that should be indeed: it is true, a Christian
should ever rejoice; and it is as true, at some time, there will not appear a
spark of joy in him. But, I say, if ever a person hes gotten the Spirit of
Jesus, and hes had this solid joy, that person shall never altogether leese
that spark of comfort and joy. Yea, brethren, that spark of comfort and joy
will be lying, as it were, smored under an heap of ashes, so, that, it will not
be known by the persons self, in whom it is, and yet, it will be lurking in
this heart; and in spite of the devil and the world (that would drive men to
dispare) it will break out. David felt this, when he had angered the Spirit.
and says, Restore to me thy spirit again Psalm. 51. verse. 12. He had done
foull factes, adultery and murder, he lay long in these sins, yet the Spirit
leaves him not, but, abode in him, and yet he says, restore to me thy Spirit;
for, yet, he could scarce know, that, he had the Spirit, albeit in the meantime
this Spirit was within him. The Lord keep us, from angering this Spirit; if
thou anger him, he will anger thee, and will draw himself aside, in such sort,
that thou will not know, thou have him; and, in the meantime, he will waken the
conscience of sin and make it accuse thee, and as a tortor within thee, to
torment thee, as if thou were in Hell. Therefore, anger not the Spirit of
Jesus. This much for this precept.

Now, as to the precept of Prayer, to touch it shortly, When he said, rejoice
evermore. Then, he says, Pray continually. There the third link of this
chui^e, Prayer.
Prayer, The first, patience; The second; Rejoicing; The third; Prayer^ Pray
continually, says he. The Apostle, 4. chap. Philipp. 6. 7. verses. He draws
out the peace of God, out of Prayer: Be (...) careful in any thing, but, in
all things let your requests be shovven up to God, by prayer and
thanksgiving. Then, he says, The peace of God, that passes all
understanding, shall be a guard to your my^des and consciences. As if he had
said, when ye are troubled for any worldly thing, I tell you, if ye can call
to God. for all things that falls out, ye shall get contentment; Gods,
Spirit shall guard you in all trouble, the peace of God shall preserve you;
what have thou lost, when thou have lost the world and gotten that heavenly
joy? When thou have gotten an heavenly thing for an earthly, what have thou
lost? No, never man, in the want of an earthly thing prayed to God effectually,
but, he got comfort, he got that peace of conscience. So, that, if the got not
the earthly thing, he got heavenly things. Thou will find such joy in the
heart, after prayer, that it is unspeakable. Then, it is prayer, that fosters
joy: For, I tell you, homelines with God in prayer, makes joy, and keeps Gods
presence in our eyes Ever seek from him and ever speak to him, and that will
keep the face of Jesus before us. Now, what is it, that keeps joy in the heart?
Only the keeping of the face of Jesus in the heart. When thou have not the face
of Jesus, no joy. Turn thy heart from the face of Christ, and turn thy speech
from him, thou shall have no joy in heart. Again, turn thy heart to the face of
Jesus, hold thy heart before his face, of necessity thou shall have joy. Felt
ye ever the spiritual joy, when ye felt not Christ in the heart? Who ever felt
comfort, that felt not Christ dwelling in their heart? None. Therefore, Peter
says, Believing in him. (What is believing in him, but, keeping him in heart?)
were joyce with joy vnspeakbale. 1. Epist. chap. 1. verse 8. Would to God
this were more, nor words. Our heart and mind is so blind and senseless,
that, Christ and all his graces is but words and wind, that strikes on the
ear. Seek the solid feeling of Christ in the heart. Think it not eneugh, to
prattle of him and to have him in thy mouth, but, seek to find him in thy
heart. Thou shall never find him, if thou find him not in thy heart, it is in
the heart, he makes his residence; and if he be inthy heart, thou shall know:
for, thou shall find a sensible joy possessing thy heart and it shall open thy
mouth, to say, dwell Lord, in my heart: The Lord work these things, that they be
not words.

Now, brethren, there are two sorts of prayer. One, in seeking to beg and
seek at God, two sorts of prayer.
for, we are all beggars. The other is in thanking him, when we have gotten any
thing: Seeking must come of need and necessity: a beggar must be a misterfull
body, otherways, 1. Seeking
he is a shameless beggar. He is shameless, who can stand before God and
seek any thing, if he have no sense of his need and mister? Our need and
mister is double. For, we mister ay a new grace, every moment, a new benefit:
we never get so many graces at once, but, ever there is some new grace we stand
in need of. God gives thee not all benefits at once, but he will have thee
ever seeking: again, when we have received any grace, we have need of a new
grace, to keep it. Alas, we are so weak, that, we cannot but lose the grace,
that, God hes bestowed on us, except the Lords hand follow on and keep it in
our heart. There are two needs of prayer. One need of grace, another need, to
keep the grace, we have received. So, there is two sorts of begging: the first
is for grace; the next is for keeping of the grace. Never weary to ask. The
Lord would have thee ever begging. Ay, say, Lord, give me. Then, say, Lord keep
this grace, thou have given me, otherways, I will lose it. For, I assure thee,
if the Lords hand be not every moment holding grace in thy heart, thou art ay
ready to lose it. Therefore, the Apostle says, Pray continually. Alas, if we
knew what thing we are bound to, we would discharge a better duty to our God,
we should not pass the time in playing, but, we should pray continually.

Ye will think it an hard thing to be ever praying; ye will say, should we
do no other thing, but, ay, pray, should this be our exercise continually? Take
heed: By praying, is understood, not preceesly this outward form of prayer,
the falling down on our knees, the lifting up of our hands and eyes, so, that
we do not another turn. No, I mean not so. Thou have a lawful vocation, go
win thy living, according to thy calling. He that said, Pray continually, The
same said, Go labor and win thy living, otherways, thou shall not eat. Away
with Munkries and Nunries. Then, when continual prayer is craved, no other
thing is craved, but, that, thy heart and mind be ever exercised on God. Let
thy heart and contemplation of thy mind be ever on him, be never so distracted
with any exercise of the world, but, keep God ever, in some measure, before thy
eyes, seeking his grace and blessing to thy exercise. When thou art busiest in
thy exercise, let thy heart be seeking blessing thereto. Paul says, 1. Cor. 10.
chap. 31. verse, Whether ye eat, or, drink, or, what ever ye do all to the
glory of God. If I eat to the glory of God, my heart must be blessing and
thanking him for the benefit received, seeking a blessing of him, that it may
do me good, desyring, also, that heavenly food. I tell thee, this earthly
food should be nothing else to thee, but, a remembrance of heavenly things,
and of Christ, that is only the food of the soul. Then, in all thy
exercises, ever hold thy heart on God; let thy heart be praying, when thy tongue
is speaking of these things, that concerns thy exercise, so, thy exercise
shall be in the Lord. The Apostle uses to say, do this, and do that, in the
Lord. What means he, but, only, in that doing thy heart should be set on the
Lord? Ay enterteine Gods Spirit. Think not, that, the exercising of the heart
on Christ shall hinder thee, in any thing, in thy exercise. No, but, by the
contrare, the face of God looking on thee it brings blessing; keep him in thy
eye and think on him, and so, thy exercise shall be sweet; keep God in thy
eye, and thou shall find a wonderful joy, and an help in thy exercise. Now,
I end, with this prayer. Lord, seeing there is no blessing but, when we keep
Jesus Christ in our eyes, Lord, grant, that, the face of Christ go never out of
our eyes let never the remembrance of Jesus depart from us. To this Christ, be
honor and glory, for ever.

AMEN.
THE XXV. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 18. 19. 18 In all things give thanks for this is
the will of God in Christ Jesus, tovvard you?

19 Quench not the Spirit.


THE last part of this Epistle (Brethren) which we have in hand presently,
stands in an exhortation to an holy life and conversation vvorthie of the Lord
Jesus Christ. The last day, we show you, there are three precepts joined
together; the precepte of patience, to bear vvrong and injuries in this
world patiently, and not to rander evil for evil, as we are bent by
nature, but, to do good for evil. Then next, the precept of joy, the inward
joy, and peace of soul and conscience, that passes all understanding that,
evermore we should rejoice. And last, the precept of prayer, which stands in
two parts, the one, in seeking at the hands of God; the other, in thanking
him, for the grace received at his hands. We show you that conjunction that is
among these graces, patience, joy and prayer, patience is the effect of joy,
and the inward joy that is heavenly and spiritual is the mean to enterteine
patience, and to make a man bear patiently the wrongs he suffers in this
present world* for, in a manner, it rauishes him up above the world and all
things in the world, and makes him to look over all these earthly things and
injuries that falls out in the world, as though they were not, and, in some
measure, he hes his contemplation with God, in Heaven. So, that, the joy he hes
will swallow up all these earthly troubles, and the life of God in him will
swallow up mortality and death. Again, prayer is the mean to enterteine that
joy we have with God, for, it keeps Gods presence and the face of Jesus in our
sight, and the face of Jesus is so joyful, as no tongue can tell: For, all the
light and joy we have in our hearts proceeds from the face of Jesus, and from
the face of God in Christ, and then, it shynes on us. And this face of Jesus it
shines in the Gospel. And therefore, blessed were we, if we could look ever
in the mirror of the Gospel, where we shall get this light and the face of
Christ, that makes us rejoice: it appears in a mirror now, but, we shall see
him face to face, when the body of Jesus shall be perfect; all is but a
beginning now, that, we have here, he is far from us, and all the sight we have
of him is but a blenke; let every one look to experience; there are so many
things goes in between us and him, that we can skarcely keep his face, in
the which stands our joy. Always, it is prayer, that enterteines this
presence of God; look to it by experience, take away prayer that men pray not
to God, take away mediatation and thanking of God, take away this communing
with God, it shall pass thy power, to have any presence of him, and without
his presence, no joy in him. Then, shortly, to come to the matter in hand: This
prayer consistes in two parter. In asking and seeking at him, according to the
needs and misters we have, we are full of wants and misters. There is none of us
all, from the greatest to the lowest, from the King to the beggar but great is
the need we have; so, every one of us hes need to be begging: never was there a
beggar at our door, that hes so great need to beg, as we have need to beg at
Gods hand: beg things spiritual and things temporal; things for this life,
things for the life to come; for, if we beg not, we shall die for hunger and
plain want of grace, and we shall, not only lose this life present, but a
better life, life everlasting. The next part of Prayer is thanksgiving; we
spoke the last day of seeking. Now, this day, first, in this text, we have red,
we have to speak of thanksgiving which we should rander to God.

The words are. In all things give thanks; for, this is the will of God.
When he hes said, pray continually, immediately he subjoynes, in all things
give thanks. Mark it. So he joins these two together, Sec. part of prayer;
thanksgiving.
Prayer, or, asking at God, and then, thanking of him. Brethren, I see, not
only in this present text these two things, Prayer and thanksgiving joined
together, but, in sundry other places, Philippi. chap. 4. verse 6. Be not
careful for any thing, but, in every thing let your requests be shovven
forth to God by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving. To the Colossians
4 chap. 2. verse, Continue, says he, in prayer and watching, with
thanksgiving. there, they are conjoined: Seking and thanksgiving, ever joined
together.
the one of these should not be severed from the other; Prayer should not be
severed from thanksgiving, thanksgiving should not be severed from prayer. The
need and necessity we have in this world, that mooues us to prayer, is not so
great, but, ever there is matter of thanksgiving to God, for the graces that is
given every moment of our life, day and night: For, there are none of us, but
we have experimented, in some measure, the bountifulness of our loving God;
who dare say otherways, but in the greatest strate, that ever he was in, he
^and by experience of the mercy of God, a measure of grace, for relief? Alas,
if it were no more, but this grace; in thy need, to get grace to seek grace, it
is a special grace; thou art oblist to thank God, for that grace, thou getst,
to beg grace. Again the blessing and mercy of God is never showen on us in
such abundance in this world, but, in the me and (...) thou have need and
mister, and in the most floorishing estate, thou art in, thou stand in
need. The greatest Monarch, that is in his greatest floorishing, he stands in
need; and therefore, as he hes cause to thank that God, that hes exalted him,
so hes he cause, to be a beggar, to seek more: For, there is a Kingdom, that
is above all Kingdoms; a glory, above all this glory; riches, above all
these riches; a pleasure, above all earthly pleasure; so, as long as thou art
not come to this hight; yet, beg, for, none shall come to that hight, neither
King, nor, Monarch shall come there, but, by continual begging. Ye see David,
in his Psalms, he prays and asks, when he is in need and in his necessity.
But, at that same very time, he also thanks: Ye see, he will begin a Psalm
with great heaviness of heart, but, ere he come to the end, ye will see, in
that same Psalm, how he will rejoce, and with joy he will thank. Then, look
Paul, in the beginning of all his Epistles, he commonly says, I thank God for
you; but what more? are ye in such estate, that, I need not pray for you? No.
Therefore, he subjoynes, ever praying for you. As he would say, as I am
thanking God for you; so, I am a beggar for you. Brethren, learn to pray, by
example of these old fathers, who were better learned, nor we. When thou
seek any thing at God, thank him also; there is not a more forcible
argument to God, to move God to grant any thing, nor to thank him: I cannot
know what tune a prayer can have, without thanking: For, effectual prayer
cannot be without thanking. To let you see this, in one word. Read Romans chap.
8. verse 36. and there, ye shall find, that, the Spirit of Jesus interceedes
for us. Well, if the Spirit of Jesus raise up in the heart sighs, and furnishes
thee prayer, it shall not be without thanksgiving. And if thy prayer be any
thing worth, it must come from the Spirit of God. Many will make a form of
prayer, but, without the Spirit, it is but pra^ling: and therefore, their
prayer is abho^^nable. Therefore, enter never to prayer, but ask the Spirit
of Jesus to pray with. It is impossible to man to open his mouth to pray
fervently, except the Lord open it by his Spirit. David say in his 51.
Psalm, verse 15. Lord, open thou my mouth and then, I shall preach thy
praise. And Paul, to the Corinthians, says, None can name the name of Jesus
and call him Lord, but by the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 12. chap. 2. verse. if the
Spirit open not thy mouth, thou may babble of that glorious name, but, to speak
of it to thy comfort, and as thou should do, without the Spirit teach thee,
it is impossible. Now, to return to the matter. If the prayer be any thing
worth, if the Spirit of Jesus request for us with sighs unspeakable, then,
impossible it is, but God must answer thee. The Spirit of (...) never seek
any thing at God, without effect. If the Spirit (...) prayer to thee, it is
impossible, but thou must resaue an answer. Romans chap. 8. verse. 26. it is
said, The spirt interceeds with sighs unspeakable: And the Lord knovves the
meaning of his own spirit. A man sighs not so soon with the Spirit of
God, but, as soon is the sigh conveyed up to the presence of God. And to
speak it plain, the sigh touches not the heart of man so soon, but, as soon
it touches the heart of God; so, of necessity he must receive an answer. The
very prayer makes a way and access to the presence of God. And brethren, all
the joy in this world is in that sight and presence of God. Thou never knew
what joy was, that never got a sight of God, in Christ. Then, what must joy
bring out? (Prayer to God gets Gods presence, the presence bringes joy) What
must joy bring out? Of necessity, an heart, that rejoices, must burst out in
thankfulness. If the heart rejoice, the mouth must be opened to thank. Go to
experience. Your hearts was never touched with joy, but, either heart, or, mouth
bursted out in thanking. Joy cannot be without thanking, and the proper effect
of joy it thankfulness. Then, ye see, neither should these two, Prayer and
thankfulness be severed one from another, neither can they be severed. It may
be, our Spirit will make us pray and utter not thanksgiving; but, all that is
partling and uttering of grief, and not prayer; but, the Spirit of God prays
not without thanking God, and again, he thanks not, without prayer. Now, to
go forward. I have made you see how these two goes together. But, to come
nearer the purpose: We said, whatsoever forte of prayer it be, whether it be
asking or thanking, it serves to bring out joy, all tendes to joy; for, in joy
is our blessedness: I ^ould you the last day, the blessedness of man is in
rejoicing in God. So, that, he who hes not that spiritual joy, hes no
blessedness, if they had all the world. Then, we see, prayer bringes joy,
asking bringes joy, so, also, we see, thanking bringes joy, thanking of God
rises on joy, thanking of God ends in joy, thanking of God stands in the
midst. Prayer will begin with sorrow, and it ends in joy, upon this joy commes
thanking, upon thanking commes joy again. So, all ends in joy. Would ye have
this out of the Scripture? in that 4. Philipp. verse 7. draws not Paul that
peace of God, that passes all understanding, our of prayer and thanksgiving? In
all things, let your requests be shovv^n to God with prayer and supplication,
with thanksgiving. Then, he subjoines, when ye have prayed and thanked, that
peace, says he, that passes all understanding, shall guard your minds in
Christ. Then, peace rises on these two grounds, prayer and thanksgiving to
God. So, thanking brings joy, asvvell as prayer.

To go forward in the words. Thank him, says he, in all things. As he would
say, in all things, that are incident and falls out in the world, thank him.
As all is matter of joy, Prosperity and adversity; well, vvoe; life, death;
so, let all be matter of thanking, what ever he sends, thank him. Is it a
great matter, to thank him in prosperity, when things goes well with thee?
But, I say, thou have not the grace of thanksgiving, except thou can thank him
asvvell in adversity, as prosperity, asvvell in death, as in life. Then, I
see, these three things, joy, prayer and thanking, they have a common
property, which is continuance, without intermission, in all manner of things,
in prosperity, in adversity, in well, in woe, in life, in death rejoice
evermore; in prosperity, in adversity, in well, in woe, in life, in death,
pray ever. And last, in prosperity, in adversity, in well, in vvoe, in life,
in death, in all things thank him: Will ye go through them. As for joy, thy
estate can not be so evil in the world, if thou be in Christ, but thou have
matter of joy: Then, again, were thy estate in this world never so good,
yet, thou have need to pray; for, so long as thou remainst here, thou getst
not all graces: And last, if thy estate were never so miserable, yet, if thou
have a grip of Christ, thou have matter to thank God* Then, if this be true,
hes not the Apostle said well? Rejoice evermore. Then pray continually, then,
in all things give thanks to God: Let not therefore these things be words
only, but, practice them in life. There is none of us, but we have matter to
practice our joy. Who are in such a misery, but they have some matter of joy;
yea, there are none of us, but we have cause, to use all these precepts;
Rejoice evermore; pray continually; and in all things give thanks.

Now, to come to the reason, in the next words. For, this is the will of God.
In all things, in prosperity, in adversity, thank him. Wherefore? Because
it is Gods will, that, ye should thank him, as well in adversity, as in
prosperity; in death, as well as in life, it is his will, rest on his will.
Yet, brethren, to speak one word of this will (I have spoken of it sundry
times before) I say, and the Scripture says, The only light of this world is
Gods will. Gods vvil, the only thing to be known, and the only rule of our
actions.
And I say, the only knowledge and wisdom, that a man can have in this
world, is to know what is Gods will. Fie on all the knowledge and vvisdome
of men in this world, if they know not this. He will start up, and he will be
called a wise man. All the Philosophers would be counted wise men: but,
which of all the Philosophers did know what was Gods will? And these two
parts of his will is specially ^oulds us in the Scripturel First, what we
should do, that we may serve him. And then, what he will do with us. A
vain Philosopher he knovves much of nature, but knovves he the will of God?
Knovves he it not? Then, he is a plain fool. Knovves he these things? Then,
he is a wise man. Paul, to the Ephesians, chap. 5. verse 17. Be not fools,
but understand what is the will of God. Then, wherein stands wisdom? To
know what is the will of God. Who is the fool? He that knows not, what is
the will of God. Who knows Gods will is wise, and the end shall prove it. Then
as the only true knowledge and wisdom in this world is to know Gods will: so,
the only (...) and square of our life in the world, is the rule of Godds will.
There are two things, we have to seek, knowledge and action. Would thou have
knowledge? Know Gods will. Would thou have action and do any thing that would
merit any commendation? Do according to Gods will. The rule, of all actions
that is truly commendable in Gods sight is his will: for, that man who hes the
commendation of God, is only the man, that should be commended; do any thing
because God hes willed thee to do it; go not to thy, own will* for, thou do,
thy will and manners not being agreeable with Gods will, shall lead thee to Hell.
Then, do nothing, but, according to Gods will. First, know what is Gods will,
and then, do nothing for all the world, but, that, which is agreeable thereto. If
thou do thy own will, or, the will of any man, look, that, it be
conformable to Gods will and so, do it, otherways, not, and then, do it,
because it is the will of God, and not because it is the will of man. Then, see
ye not, how grave an argument, the Apostle sets down, knowing it is Gods will,
that, we should thank him ay, should we not repose on his will? It is Gods
will, which is the only light and rule of all actiones. Whosoever knows his
will, they have a fair light in all their actiones. A man will never wander
wrong, who hes such a light before his eyes. If thou see, that, it be Gods
will that thou go through wilderness, through darkness, yea, through Hell,
obey his will and take journey, and I promise thee, thou shall find the
fairest outgait, that ever was. Count not of the way, if thou have the light of
the will of God before: It is not possible, that, Hell shall prevail against
that body, that settes the self to pleasure God. Well is him, that sets
himself to pleasure him, who is Lord over all, and who only is able to
pleasure us all. The world shall not pleasure thee, if God pleasure the not.
What matter to displease all the world, if we set our selves to please him.

Mark, further, he says, It is the will of God, toward you. This is a
special will, that concornes all Christians, not a general will, concerning
the world, but, a special will, concerning you, that are Christians, who hes
given your names to Christ, and are translated from this world, that ye thank
him, in prosperity and adversity, in well and vvoe, there is the meaning.
Then, ye see, in this place, a special, will of God concerning this calling
we stand in, and the special, will of God, concerning us Christians, is,
that we thank him: Christian men and women are most debtfull to thank him,
and ought, above all creatures, to thank him: Fie on thee, that will take the
name of Christ on thee and not thank him. Thank him in all things, he can lay
before thee. It is his will, that thou thank him, at least, strive to thank
him for well and woe, prosperity and adversity, for death, as well, as life. As
for other men, Jews, Turks and Pagans, etc. that are not Christians, God
craves not this thanksgiving at them. A marvelous thing. The Turk he hes the
glory and wealth of the world, and yet the Lord says, I will have no thanks
of thee, neither in well, nor in vvoe, because thou art not in Christ, all my
glory is in Christ, all the service I crave in the world is in Christ. So, the
prattling of the Turk and Jew, that makes them to thank God, is all but
vanity, he craves it not of them. O, how great a honor is it, to call a man
to thank and to serve him. No, never King got such great honor, as we get,
when we are called to thank and to serve that King of Kings, all our glory
stands in serving and making homage to God; so blessed are they that are
called to this honor, through Jesus Christ. Therefore, he says, through
Christ, meaning, that, in Christ is the matter of all thanksgiving. There is
matter in Christ, of all thanksgiving. In well and vvoe, Christ is to me
advantage, both in life and death* says Paul. If thou have advantage in death,
why should not thou thank him? In one word, where Christ is, there is matter
of thanksgiving to God, in the greatest misery we can be in the world. Again,
where Christ is not and who are not in him, as members of that glorious body,
joined in society with that glorious head, if they had all this broad world,
they have no cause to be merry, nor to thank, no, to open their mouth to
praise. And to speak the truth, they cannot be merry. They may laugh, but, the
true joy is in God, he is the Lord of joy; a man may well laugh, but, he can
have no true joy, except he have Jesus in his heart. That man in adversity and
in the point of death will laugh more sweetly and utter greater joy, nor the
greatest worldly man in the midst of his prosperity. So, I say, and I command
thee, look, that, thou rejoice not, without Christ; I say, to all men, rejoice
not, but, be sad, if thou have not Christ. The Lord hes not ordained thee to be
glad, it is his will, only that they, that are in Christ, rejoice, and be
never glad until thou get Christ. I counsel you, if ye had all the world, if
ye find not Christ in the heart be, never glad. What matter have thou to be
glad, when the great God turns his back on thee? It may be, he will cast a
kingdom to thee over his shoulder, as it were a bone casten to a dog, what is
that to thee, if thou get not his joyful presence? Read David, in all his
Psalms, he was never glad, but, when he had the presence of God.

Now, I come to the next precept. Quench not the spirit. The words are few,
but, they conteyne great matter. Quench not the spirit, put not out the holy
Spirit of Christ. Take heed. He ^es been speaking before of the graces of God.
What is patience in suffering wrong? What is joy? What is thankfulness, but
the graces of the Spirit? He hes been before speaking of his graces and
recommending them to thee. Now he commes to that glorious person himself, who
is the giver and worker of all these graces, of Patience, of Joy, of Prayer
and Thanksgiving. The holy Spirit the third person of the Trinity that God
gives to me and thee, if thou be Gods servant. It is vanity to think that a
true Christian man gettes only the graces of the Spirit: they get the very
Spirit. No, it is not the graces of the Spirit that will dwell in the heart
and soul and body of a man; no, but the Spirit it self. The Spirit will
dvvell as surely within thy heart as ever a man dwelled in an house. That
Comforter that Christ promised to his disciples when he was going up to Heaven,
was not the graces of the Spirit; no, but, the Spirit it self to dwell in our
heart, and to work it in all the graces. So, it is not the graces, but, the
spirit he speaks of, here, when he says, quench not the spirit. Paul says,
Ephesians. chap 4. verse. 30 Grieve not the holy spirit. It is a simple guestning to
make thy guest sad, make not the spirit of Christ sad: Paul says in another
place, that the spirit is given thee as an arlispenny of thy salvation. Ephesians.
cha. 1. verse. 14. Thou ^oses the arlespennie, if thou make him sad. But to the
words. The speech, when he says, Quenching of the spirit.
quench not the Spirit appears to be metaphorical. It is borrowed and not
proper and it is borrowed from a fire or candle that uses to give light and
heat. Then if it must not be quenched: It must follow that the Spirit of
Christ must be a fire within us; It must follow, he must be a light
inlightning our souls as a lantern and lamp of light set up within the dark
and dead soul, to let the soul and affectiones have light; and the Spirit of
Jesus shynes within the dark soul of a man, as a lantern shynes in a dark
night, and puttes out that mass of darkness that is in the soul of man. And
therefore because it is as a fire, he says, Quench not, And Paul to Timothy
2. Epistle chap. 1. verse. 6. says, stir up or kindle the gift that is in
thee, it is like a flamming fire, the gift of it is but a light or flam that
commes from this fire. So he says, Stir up, kindle up the gift that thou have
received. Now ye see by experience, a fire or light is two manner of ways
quenched; take me away coals timber, or such other matter to burn; take me
away the nourishment that holds in the fire, it will die out: Another way,
cast water on it smore it, it will also die out, albeit ye take not burning
things from it. So it is with this heavenly fire: First draw me away the
means whereby the Spirit is fostered, and the fire of the Spirit is holden in
(for as the fire feeds on the subject, so the fire of the Spirit feeds on the
own nutriture and food) take me away this food of the Spirit, as thou see a
fire die out, so he will die out. Take me away this word and prophesying, even
this word preached, take me away the ministry, Mean^ to (...) the spirit.
in spyte of thy heart the Spirit shall die out. The world would feign have
this word away, but this is a maine violence done to Jesus, to put the light of
Jesus out of the heart: O Lord what count shall there be at that great day for
the contempt of this word! But is there no more to be had but the hearing of
this word, to enterteine the Spirit of Jesus? Yea. It will not be the hearing
only that will hold in the Spirit. Thy life must be answerable to the word. Thou
must feed him with holy motions and thoughts within the heart, feed him with
holy speeches in the mouth. Paul Ephesians 4. chap. 29. verse, speaking of
certain vices to be contempned, he means planely that rotten talk puts out
the Spirit. Last, he is fed within the soul with holy actions, that holds in
the light of Jesus Spirit: As the oil holds in the fire, take away these
materials, the Spirit shall die within thee. The other mean to put him out is
not only to draw away from him the matter he feeds on, but to give him as it
were poison to feed on. An harlot poisons him with an harlatrous heart: A
murderer with a bloody heart: A blasphemer with a blasphemous heart; we poison
him with foull thoughts in the heart, foull speeches in the mouth, wicked
actions in the hands, this is water to put out the fire.

Then brethren learn one lesson. As every one should take heed to the graces
of the Spirit, to keep patience joy, prayer, and thankfulness continually
(these are the graces of the spirit) So specially and before all we should take
heed to the work^ of all, the holy Ghost that dwells in our souls as a temple.
Take heed how thou treatst him, what enterteinment thou give him, look that
thou treat him well, do every thing thou think may pleasure him abstain
from all things may offend him. Set thy heart to please him, and let thy
pleasure be in pleasing him, and pray ever, Lord if thou have given me thy
Spirit, give me grace to enterteine him that I anger him not, Lord give me
grace to do all things to please him, to do nothing to offend him. Alas if a
honorable man would come in thy house and take a nights ludging, thou would
look diligently that all the house and family were in good order. So hold thy
body and soul in reverence and order for the holy Spirits sake that dwells in
thee, othervvaies he vvll not ludge with thee. Murderer, fyle not thy hands
with blood if thou would have him to dwell with thee. Paul says 1. Cor.
chap. 6. verse 19. 20. The Lord hes boght thee out of the devils hands, out of
thy own hands, for thou would lose both thy soul and thy body, if it were
in thy hand. He hes boght thee with the blood of the immaculat Lamb, and to
this purpose to be a ludging of the holy Spirit to dwell in. He is speaking to
harlots, he says. Thou art not thy own: Thou art boght with a price. God hes
boght thee with the blood of Christ to be a temple of the holy Spirit. Where
the Spirit ludges, there is the Father and the Son, the whole Trinity. So in
effect the man boght with the blood of Christ is a ludging to the Trinity, the
Father, Son and holy Ghost. Alas, if thou could look to this, for all the
world thou would not destroy that ludging of God. If once this truth of God
could sink in men's hearts, for all the world they would not quench this Spirit
and defyle this temple of God. Alas the blindness of men who knovves not
what estate they stand in for want of sight and attention, for want of
regarding of the truth we go to Hell. And if ever thing was to be deplored in
this world, this is to be deplored that the Spirit of God is abused; when he
commes to sanctify men and women he gets villainy and wrong done to him: they
would pollute him when he commes to sanctify them. Indeed he is disludged of his
ludging. These murderers takes him by violence, as it were, and with their
hands puts him out of their heart by the shoulders. God keep us from the sin
against the holy Ghost. Go thou on this way ay conte^ning the Spirit, thou
shall enter in this sin which shall never be for given thee in this life nor
in the life to come.

Now to speak of the way how we may know that we have this Spirit. These
things cannot be told by words, thou must go to experience and there is none of
you that hes had a taste of the sweetness of the Spirit, but ye will feill him
dwell in you; if ye have him, thou will know him as well as ever thou knew any
guest that ludged with thee, for he brings with him such a fair light, such a
life and joy, etc. that thou may easily know him. He commes in joy, in prayer,
in thanksgiving, thou will know him in these, but thou will find him in
experience; if thou growest in his service to honor and reverence him as he
dwells in thee. To treat him as thou would treat a honorable man that ludges
with thee; he will dwell with thee, but if thou be ^^uggish in these things,
thou will find he will draw himself to a nuke of thy soul, as it were, for a
time, thou will find him cease from his working of regeneration within thee: if
thou cease to enterteine him by prayer godliness in heart, holy speeches in the
mouth, holy actions in the hand, he will ly closse within thee for a time and
do nothing. And then if the man be godly, he will be ^ad and sorry: For no joy
in the godly but when he feels the Spirit within him. Now if when he is not
well (...), he depart: How much more when we strive, as it were, to poison him,
when we bring up evil motions in spite of him, when we fall out in evil
language in mouth, evil deeds in the hand, shall he withdraw himself and
depart, so that we will find no sense of joy? When a man fails to harlotrie,
he smores the Spirit. As for exemple, David, if ever man felt the Spirit of
Jesus in him, he felt him; yet when he fell to adultery and murder the spirit
lay so closse in him that he found him not. Then he wakens, and says. I have
been sleeping. I find not the joy that I was wont, and so he says, Restore to
me thy spirit again. Psa. 51. verse 12. Would he have said restore, except he
had found the Spirit of God which he had before, withdrawn in working within
him: What shall I say. No joy nor rest without this Spirit be enterteinde
within us. The Lord give us grace to enterteine him in soul and body, in holy
speeches, thoughts and deeds. To this Lord be glory and praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE XXVI. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 20. 21. 22. 23. 20 Despise not prophesying.

21 Try all things, and keep that which is good.

22 Abstain from all appearance of evil.

23 Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout: and I pray God that
your whole spirit and soul and body may be keept blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ.


IN this part of this Epistle (brethren) there are certain exhortations and
precepts so linked together, that the next is ay the cause and mean of the
former. He began at Patience in suffering, and not randering evil for evil,
but recompencing good for evil. Then he came to joy. Rejoice evermore. Joy is
the mean and cause of Patience: from joy he came to Prayer, in asking that
which we need at the hands of God, and in thanking him for the grace and
benefit receyned. Prayer is the mean that interteines joy in the heart; from
Prayer he came to the Spirit, the holy Spirit of God who is the worker of all
these graces in our heart. The Spirit works Patience, the Spirit it works Joy,
the same Spirit (...) up the heart to Prayer and to thankfulness. This Spirit
the worker of all grace in the heart should not be quenched by leaving off of
well doing, or by doing evil, for both these two quenches the Spirit.

Now ^hortly to come to ou^ purpose. In the first verse we we have read
presently. He commes to the mean whereby the Spirit of Christ, the worker of
all graces with us, especially is inter^ind in the soul and heart of a man and
woman. And he says Despise not Prophesying. The thing he recommends is
Prophesying. To make the words plain to you. By Prophesying here I understand
not the foretelling of things to come (as there was raised up from time to time
Prophets in the Church of God that fortold either well or w^ that was to fall on
the church in the own time) this prophesying was not such foretelling of things
to come, it is no other thing in this place but the opening up of the
Scripture: and so this word Prophesying is taine in the 1. Cor. 14. chap.
throghout all that chap. But he that Prophecyes, says he, he speaks to men,
to edifing, to exhortation and consolation. That is, he applies the word of God
to the present use for the time: So that if a man needs to be edified, he
edifies; to be comforted he comfortes; to be exhorted, the exhortes. So then to
make the words plain, `Despise not Prophesying: It is as much as he would say,
despise not the preaching of the word, despise not this ministry whose calling
is to preach this word. Now, brethren ye see here among all the means whereby
the Spirit of Christ is enterteinde in the heart of a man, the Apostle makes a
choice in this place of preaching, hearing the word of God set down in the
Scripture opened up and applied to the right use. Certainly, this is to the
great commendation of this same visible ministry, and of this teaching of the
word in the presence of the congregation and people of God. Shall I tell you?
There is such a necessity of the preaching of this word (for as base as it
semes to men) that if it be not holden up, farewell the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
If it be not, there shall not be in the earth a visible Church, for the word
preached is the slandart that is holden up on high to the world, that men and
women that would be safe may go in under it and make up a Church. Take me away
this slandart, where shall men go to? who shall know the Church? So take me
away this outward preaching of the word unto the which men should resort to
seek salvation, no Church. Will men go to experience (I shall but touch it)
there is but over great experience of this in this Country this day: Abstain
(...) hearing of the word, let it be of negligence or of malice, yet thou shall
in process of time feel thy heart void of all sense and feeling of God, thou
shall lose thy eyes, thy light and sight of God, thou shall lose the sight of
life and Heaven, if that thou do it in contempt and malice, thou shall grow as
profane as a prophaine dog, and wallow in all kind of wickedness, and evil
deed after evil deed shall fall out in thy hand. Look to the great men of this
land. What is the cause he is such a murderer? Only the contempt of this word
preached. What is the cause he is such an adulterer? only the contempt of the
word. I cannot tell if there be any great men's houses (at least there is very
few) but thou may see the contempt of this word hes heaped judgment on
judgment on them. Ye who would read of Prophesying which is the opening up of
the word in the face of the Church of God, and who would read of the powerful
working of it in the heart of men. read 1. Cor. chap. 14. verse 1. Seek after
spiritual things, but specially after Prophesying. And in that same chapter
24. verse by supposition he lets us see, by comparison between Prophesying and
strange language, what prophesying works: When a man is teaching the word, then
commes in at the door an infidle that hes no understanding, he lays to his
ear and hears, and he hears himself rebuked; incontinent his conscience
wakens and lets him see the filth that is within him. So the poor man having
his conscience wakned, he falls down on his face and seeks mercy, and then he
will be moved to make a confession, and say, It cannot be but this man hes the
Spirit of God that maks my sin so manifest to me, it cannot be the spirit of
man, but it must be the power of God whereby he speaks. I will not insist,
Brethren. I shall sum up to you in few words the diversity of the
disposition of men concerning this word of God. Al is not alike disposed,
Diversity of men's disposition concerning the word.
toward the Spirit and the word, which two things only saues men. There are
some that cares neither for the Spirit nor the word, such (...) dogs;
atheists, men living without God in the world; speak of a Spirit to them they
will scorn it; a profane body that hes not the Spirit, the name of a spirit
is but a scorn unto him, tell him of spiritual life he will laugh an heedfull
laughter. Lykevvise speak to him of the word, and tell that salvation must be
by the word. the prophaine dog will laugh and scorn at it. These are the
vvorst men in the world. There is another sort that clames to a Spirit. They
will acknovvledge the Spirit of God, but when it commes to the word of God,
they vvil feuere so the word from the Spirit, as though the word had nothing
ado with the Spirit, nor the Spirit with the word: And as though all the
speaking to the Church were not by the word preached but by other
revelations: they will bind the Spirit to vain fantasies, illusions and
dreams. These are Anabaptists that dependes on these illusions of the devil
and their own fantasies and foolish revelations. The third sort will acknowledge
the Spirit, so will they the word and Scripture, but they think it is eneugh to
read the word. He will say, I will sit at home in my chamber, and I will read,
sometime of the old and sometime of the new Testament, and what will the
Minister tell me in the Pulpet but I will get it here, and as for the opening up
of this word, he will scorn is. This sort of men is very evil; and they will
find in the end that the word read and not preached will do them little
good. Now the last and best sort who will get grace, are they who reuerences
the Spirit and word, and seek by all means to have them ludging in their
souls, not only reads themselves if they have knowledge, but hes a pleasure to
have it opened up to the use of the Church, and their use in the congregation.
It is these men that by the Spirit truly embraces the word, for faith is by
hearing. Romans 10. 17.

Now I go forward to the text. In the next verse is another exhortation. Try
all things, and keep that which is good, retain it after try all. Trial of
doctrine.
In these words the Apostle settes down the order after the which a man or
woman shall allow or disalow of prophesying, that is preaching, when they
hear it. The allowance or disallowance of it must be after a certain order.
The order is this in one word. Try (...), and then either allow or disallow.
There are two sorts of extremities in hearing of prophesying. There are some
that will allow ere ever they try at the first hand. These are vain heads.
Peter calls them unstable souls. 2. Epistle 2 chap. 14. verse. These are men
that hes souls ever fleeting and flowing, and will be ever carried away with
every light wind of doctrine. This is the cause that so many becommes
Heretics, and I believe, there be some among us that delites in new faces; if
a stranger step out in the midst of them and speak, incontinent will they fay,
there was never such a man in the world, this is an extremity. Another sort is
of them, that will not hear preaching and give audience, that there after they
may try: when a man presents himself to speak in the name of the Lord, they
will not give him audience; and certainly if there were no more, but, the
reverence we ought to God, we ought to hear him that speaks in his name, but
then try his doctrine, and allow, or disalow thereof, as it agries with the
word. Now these are the two extremities. The midst is between them, and this
midst is to be tain as best of al. Hear, and when thou have heard, try; after
tryell, if thou findst^it sound, good and wholesome, keep it; if not, farewell
it, lend not thy care any longer to it. This is the rule John sets out in his
first Epist. chap. 4. verse. 1. Well-beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirit whether it be of God, or not: If thou find not the doctrine
agreeable to the analogy of faith, away with it. The Jews at Berea are
commended for this, Act. chap. 17. verse 12. when Paul and Sylas came among
them, they heard, but believed him not, until they ran to their books and
conferred that which they had heard with the ^ould canonical Scripture, and
found, that, they agreed, then, they allowed of their doctrine. Now, brethren,
in this Church of Thessalonica among all the rest of the gifts of the Spirit
that they had, this was one; the gift of discretion and judgment, to disce^^e
between true doctrine and false doctrine, between spiritual doctrine and
carnal natural doctrine. Paul knowing this, wrytes (...) them and desires
them, according to the gift of the Spirit of discretion, to discern right
doctrine from wrong. I^ is even so with all the Church of God on the earth. The
Lord, among all the gifts he gives to the members of this Church, he gives
this gift also, to judge of that which they hear, to judge between true and
false doctrine, the doctrine that is like stubble that may not bide the fire,
and the doctrine that is like gold. The Lord in the Church hes given some this
discretion* and certainly if it were not so, the Church should spoue be
poisoned. Some gets this gift to taste the doctrine whether it be wholesome or
not: A man that wants the taste will ^eceiue poison for (...). So if the Church
want this taste, they would receive poison for food. But mark again. ^uerie
one gets not this gift, and the Church is beholden to them who gettes it: for
they try doctrine and saues the Church from poison. And, I say, where one hes
it, four wants it. And where one is spiritual and hes it, ten will be carnal
and flestilie. The Corinthians, as we may see in Paul, (Alas there are many
like the Corinthians amongst us) took upon them, being carnal hearted, to
judge of spiritual things, and so they preferred vain men that came in with
^^ratorie to the Apostle Paul who spoke with the power of the holy Spirit.
Always among the Church there are some that hes it, and ye that wants it,
seek it: for it is a special gift to decerne between the truth and falset;
and when ye go to hear a preaching, among all your prayers, say. Lord give me
grace to discern what is spiritual, and what not, that I may embrace that
which is spiritual, and may leave that which is carnal. Some will have it
in some greater measure nor others. In the 8. chap of the Acts, Philip a good
man being in Samaria, Simon M^gu^ the sorcerer was with him, Philip took him
not up, but yet when Peter came he perceyved him, and he says, knave, I see
thee in the gall of bitternesse^ repent thee or destruction shall suddenly
overtake thee. Mark it. Further this place is not to be understood of false
teachers who are already damned* neither of them who hes not a calling to
speak in the Church: but of them who hes an ordinary calling, the doctrine
of such men only should be tried by the Prophets and every one that hes the
spirit of discretion. 1. Cor. 14. 32.

Now (brethren) to go forvvard shortly to the next verse. The^ words are
these. Abstain frem all appearance of evil. This precepte is general, and
concerns asvvell doctrine as any other thing in the world that can have the
appearance, or any show of evil: As for the doctrine when thou have heard
it, and have tried it; if after trial thou be not satisfied with it, but yet
there abydes a doubt in thy heart. Then, what should thou do? Abstain from
it, meddle not with it, do never thing with a doubting conscience. And
therefore, I say to thee, if thou doubt of the very least thing that is good,
if thy conscience be not persuaded; it is good, do it not^ I say to thee, it
is better, to do the thing that is evil, and have a persvvasion in thy
conscience that it is good, nor to do the thing that in it self is good if
thy conscience think it evil. If thou do against thy conscience it is ever
evil. Do never against conscience. What ever is not of faith, it is sin; if
thou be not persuaded in conscience it is good, if it were never so good, it
is sin to thee. So if there lies any suspicion in thy heart of the doctrine,
that it is not altogether sound, abstain from it, and meddle not with it. As
for other things, any thing in the world that hes appearance, of evil,
Appearance of evil to be eshevved.
suppose it be not evil yet if it appear to be evil, touch it not, meddle
not with it. If thy conscience tell thee, this is sin, on pain of thy life do
it not. Fight never with thy conscience what ever thou fight with (suppose it
be evil informed) for it is sin. If it seem to thee, to be evil, meddle not
with it. More, if it seem to be evil to others, namely, to those that the
Apostle calls vveake ones, albeit thou be persuaded of thy christian liberty;
yet, for their sake that thou make them not do contrare their conscience,
abstain: abstain for their sake, albeit not for thy own sake, from these
things may offend their conscience, as, meat, drink, etc. Jude in his Epistle
verse 23. goes further in this, and says, and hate even the garment spotted by
the flesh; that is, the outward coat that is spotted with sin, touch not once
the coat of sin. Lay not thy finger to the outward slugh of it, for, it will
spot thee if thou lay thy finger on it. Then, brethren, take it up in one word.
Ye see, here, how ware, men should be of sin, thou art bound to abstain from
it, yea, to hate and detest the very appearance of it, the mow of it, let be
the inward body of it. Thou sinst when thou layest thy finger end on the coat
of it. Alas then how sinst thou, when at all thy senses thou drinkst it in, as
it were, water. The murderer drinks in blood, as it were water; the harlote
drinks in harlotrie at all his senses, as it were water. If it be evil to
allow of the appearance of it, how great evil is it to take the whole body of
sin in thy arm and lay it with pleasure to thy heart. Never man will take thing
so sweetly in their arms, as men will take this viper of sin in their heart. A
murderer can never be satiat with blood; an harlot can never be satiat with
harlotrie; A blasphemer can never be satiat with blaspheming. Ye that would
do no evil (the common word is) do no evil like, abstain from the hew and
color of it, touch it not once, let be to embrace or suffer it to reign in
thee.

Now, brethren to go forward, to that which follows. In the last verse we have
red; he^ concludes the whole exhortations of this Epistle with a prayer to God.
I shall be short in it. Now, says he, the God of peace sanctify you
throughout. I pray God, that, ye may be keept in soul and body in
sanctification to Christ, Exhortation concluded with prayer.
that is the effect of the words. All his exhortation is to holiness and
sanctification: For, that is the general he laid down in the 4. chap. 3.
verse. This is the will of God, even, your sanctification. Now in the
conclusion, what does he? He prays. What prays he? That the Lord would grant
them that same thing he was exhorting them to. He was exhorting them to
sanctification; and he prays God, to give them sanctification. This is the
Apostles fashion in other places, to the Ephesians. 3. chap. 13. verse, He beseches
them to stand constant in the faith of Christ and faint not, for his
tribulation. And then, he subjoynes, For this cause I how mykrees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye grow not faint. So, he exhortes them
to constancy and he prays God to give them it. Paul and the rest of the
Apostles never exhorted any Church to sanctification, to any good thing, as
though it had lain in the hands of the people and Church to have done it. But,
in the mean time while, he exhortes them, he was perswadod that it behooved God
to give them grace to do it, and that it lay in the hands of God only whether
they should do it, or not do it. And therefore when he exhortes them to do any
thing, he adds prayer, I beseech God to give you, the grace to do it. The
Papists thinks it lies in the hands of a man's self to do godd; they ever
extol free will Fie ^n them, it lies not in the power of flesh and blood to do
any thing that is acceptable to God. No, it is a poisonable doctrine: and this
vanity they gather, upon these precepts and exhortations; If, say they, there
were no power in man's hand, why should the Lord command^ it is vanity, to
command that which cannot be done? I answer, in one word; This is a foolish
conclusion, if there were no more but this that the Apostle says, first, it is
the will of God, your sanctification. Then, he subjoynes. I pray to God that
he would give you the gra^e of sanctification; as if he would say, I bid you
not, as though inlay in your own hands but, I pray to God, that, he would
work it: It shows the vanity of this conclusion.

Now to the words. Whom to prays he? To the God of peace. The God of peace,
says he, sanctify your souls. Read all the Canonical scriptures, ye shall
never find that any of the old fathers directed their prayers to any Saints;
either to Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, or to any other holy men or Angels. But,
this, by the way. In all the prayers of the old fathers, and all the Psalms,
there is never a prayer, but to God only. Now how styles he him? He calls him
the God of peace. The God who is the Author and giver of all peace. Peace.
What peace is this? Even the peace that he calls, The peace of God, that
passes all understanding, that guardes your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
Philipp 4. chap. 7. verse. No other thing, but that same peace of the
conscience, when we are surely persuaded, that, all our sins are freely
remitted unto us, in the blood of* Christ and that through him we shall get
glory for ever. Then if we have this peace, we will be quietness in all the
miseries of this world. Then end of all grace is peace. Justification ends in
peace: our calling and predestination from all eternity ends in this peace of
conscience in the soul; regeneration ends in this peace. Now, look, how this
style agrees with the matter, he is praying for sanctification, and he styles
him the God of peace, who is the Author of all peace; Both the means and the
end ar^ of God.
and he asks at his hand sanctification. Mark this. He who is the giver of
our felicity, is he that gives us all the means that brings us to that
felicity, he that must give thee the crown of glory, he must give thee
sanctification to glory. In one word: he that gives thee felicity, is the
gi^e^, also of all the means, whereby we attain to felicity. So, thou have
no cause to glory in thy self. The beginning of grace is of God, the means
is of God, the end is of God, nothing in our selves, all in God.

To go forward to the petition. There are two things he craves in this
petition. Sanctification and conservation thereof, craved of God.
The first is sanctification, or holiness. The next is conseruing and keeping
in that same sanctification and holiness. First, he prays, that, they may be
sanctified. Next, he prays, that, they may be keept, until Christ come
again. Paul 12. Romans 2. verse. Be not fashioned, that is, shapned like the
world and men of this world, but be, transchanged, that is, turned away, from
that thing to another, and that, though the renewing of the mind, that ye may
prove what that good and acceptable will of God is. What ^row ye then
sanctification is? It is no other thing but a new shaping over of them again,
as ye will shaip a garment. The Apostles takes that similitude. Brethren, we
were all well eneugh shapen in Adam and Eve ere they fell, and we had an
exceeding good shape; but since they fell we become all wanshapen creatures and
monsters. When thou see an unregenerate creature, a murderer rejoicing in
murder, then say, thou art a cursed monster of a man. So, in Adams fall we
became monsters of nature. Thou saw never such a monster as an unregenerate
man. Now, we being monsters through Adams fall, in Christ we begin to take on
us a new shape, according to the glorious Image of God. So our sanctification
is only as a renewing of us again, according to the first shape of the
Creator, in holiness and righteousness. Now what is it must be shapen over
again? What part of us is it that is wanshapen? The Apostle says, The God of
peace sanctify you throughout. The whole man, through that foull aposta^ie in
Adam is become a monster. Not a finger in thy hand, but it is become a monster.
The eye a monster, or, else, such a foull look would not be. The tongue a
monster, or, else, such foull language would not be. The ear a monster, or,
else, we would not desire to hear foull and evil speeches. No part of thee,
but, all are monstrous, except thou be renewed: And therefore, he prays, that,
they may be renewed and made over again through Christ, even in the whole parts
of the body and soul. Therefore pray thou and say, Lord renew, not this part,
or, that part only, but, renew me wholly. The Lord renew the mind and begin
there; The Lord renew the body, the Lord renew the eye, the ear, the hand. The
Lord renew all over again. For, I tell thee, if therebe any part of thee
unrenewed, thou shall al go to Hell, for that unruly part. The Lord uses not to
renew one part and not another, but, he renews altogether. This shortly for the
first part of the petition.

Now in the next part he beseches the Lord of peace to sanctify them
throughout, and that their whole spirit, soul and body may be kept without
spot or blame, to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. He prays, that they
may be kept in holiness So, it is not eneugh, to get one grace, to get
sanctification and holiness, but, thou must be kept still on, in that grace,
until thou come to glory. The^ again, as grace is of God (al grace is of God)
So, the perseverance in grace to the end is of God. Thou have no more in thy
power when thou have gotten grace, to stand one moment in grace, if God hold
not his hand about thee, nor thou had to tak that grace before thou got it.
Thou have no power in nature to stand in grace. So, perseverance in grace is of
God only, as well as the grace is in Gods hand to give. And as we must pray for
the grace, before we get it, and say, Lord sanctify us; so, we must pray for
the continuance of it, and say, Lord, continue us in it, if thou Lord hold it
not into my arms I will not get it kept. Therefore, Lord, keep thou it.

Now, to go forward. What should be kept blameles without spot? All the parts
of man to be kept blameles.
One part, or, piece, or, the whole man; should I pray to God, to keep my soul
only in holiness and not my body? my body only and not my soul? Will thou
part them? or think thou, that, God will keep one part of thee in holiness and
not the whole? When men goes to Idolatry, they will pray to keep their heart
holy; When they will bow their body to Baall, they will say, my heart is to
God. No, if he keep not all, if thou dedicate not all to him, all shall go to
Hell. So, the Apostle says, I pray the God of peace, that, he would keep
blameless your spirit, your soul and body. In these three things he takes
up the whole man, within and without. I will only speak this far. By the
Spirit he understands the cleannest part of the soul. Ephesians. 4. chap. 23.
verse. He calls it the Spirit of the mind, that is, the light of the mind,
which is reason. The reason is not common with the beasts, but, it is common
with the Angels. So, it is the special part of a man, and thou may thank God,
that hes it, and thou should pray to the Lord, to keep it. The next is the
soul, whereby he understands the inferior part, wherein are the senses, that
part of the soul that hears, sees, etc. Then, he says, the body. So, ye see,
God must keep all in holiness; and he that would be kept of God, must seek to
be kept whole, and every part of him, without exception: For, I tell thee, no
part of thee is able to keep another. The old Philosophers made a Queen of
reason, as though she should keep all, and should keep the soul and body in
her light. It is solie, who can keep her? God must keep the Spirit, that is,
the reason, as well as the body: and the Spirit hes as great need to be keept
as the foot; for, sin will begin at the reason, it is the first breaker of:
so crave that he keep all, or he shall keep none. Alas, what is man, without
grace? What hes he to boast of? Thou will boast of thy will and reason. If the
Lord withdraw his hand from thy reason thou shall be a plain idiot, thou shall
fall to filthy wickedness. So, brethren, these words are of great weight. He
says not that he prayed that he would keep the Spirit, but the whole spirit;
the soul, but the whole soul; the body, but the whole body. So we must not
be kept in the special parts, but in the whole properties and inferior
powers of the soul and body; if the least hair of the head be not kept by
the Lord, if the Lords providence extend not to the keeping of the smallest
part of the body, thou shall not be able to stand. Think not thou shall
stand, except the Lord hold thee up, no growing but in God. Therefore the
Apostle says, Thou that would glory, glory in Christ. 1. Corinthians. 1.
chap. 31. verse. He is our keeper, and we are not able to stand one moment of
an hour without his aid, neither in soul nor in body.

Now, how long should we be kept blameless? He limits the time, and says,
Unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. Mark the time. Is it no longer, but
till Christ come again? No, brethren, evermore. It is true, our conferuation
and perseverance uses to be limited, to Christ's coming. Paul 2. Tim. 4^. chap.
18. verse, says, God will keep me to his heavenly kingdom, that is, until
I enter in his heavenly kingdom. Peter says, 1. Epistle 1. chap. 5. verse. We
are kept through the power of God, till the last time. I tell you the cause,
we are in greatest danger in this world; infinite dangers are we in, as it were
hanging above Hell, ready to fall down every moment, if the Lord hold us not
up; the devil is seeking whom he may deuote, and when we trow least, then we
are most suddenly assaulted by him: Beside the devil, have we nor this ^ankerd
sin, that is within us? Have we not a this broad world about us? Have we not
the grave and death great enemies in their own nature, except the Lord
sanctify them? Certainly they also would deuote us, except we were in Christ.
We are compast in this world about on every side with cruel enemies.
Therefore, considering this dangerous estate, the Scripture craves ay, that, we
may be kept, until Christ come, and then all enemies shall be slain, the
devil, the world, death and all shall be slain. Death shall die for ever.
This canker of nature shall be swallowed up, all our enemies shall be wreaked.
So, our conservation is craved, until his coming; but, our conservation shall
not end then, but even in Heaven we shall be conserved by the hand of God for
ever, through Jesus Christ. When thou come to Heaven thou shall not be thy
self alone, thou shall not stand by the nature thou took of Adam, nor by any
power that is in thee, no more nor a newborn child can stand alone; but,
when thou come to Heaven, thy standing shall be by Christ and God. Then,
seeing all our conservation and standing, both here and hereafter is by God,
we should rander all honor to his glorious Majesty for ever.

AMEN.
THE XXVII. LECTVRE UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSA. CHAP. 5. verse. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 24 Faithful is he, which
calls you, which also will do it.

25 Brethren, pray for us.

26 Greet all the brethren, with an holy kiss.

27 I charge you in the Lord, that this Epistle he read unto all the brethren
the Saints.

28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.


WE have in hand presently (well-beloved in Jesus) the conclusion which is the
last part of this Epistle. He begins it with a prayer, craving in his prayer
even that same thing he had exhorted them to, to vvitte, holiness,
sanctification, continuance, and perseverance in holiness and sanctification
to the end, and so acknowledging God to be the giver of that same very thing
which he exhorted them to, and that it lay not in their hands nor free will to
will or do any good, but all stands in the hands of God, who is the giver of
all grace. He prays, that, it would please God to give them that grace he
exhorted them to, and he would stir them up to seek that same grace at the
hands of God; for it is vanity to strive to any grace without God. And
therefore as thou would do any thing, pray to God to give thee grace to do it.
Let thy eye be ever on God, and in the midst of the action when thou think
thou art best exercised, crave grace of perseverance: for, I assure thee, he
leave thee in the best of thy action, thou will fall backward. Therefore there
is such necessity that the eye be ever on God, that it is impossible to a man
to do any thing that is good, except his eye be ever on him, begging grace and
perseverance in grace at his hands.

Now he goes forward: and in the things that follows to the end of the
chapter and Epistle, there is such a variety that every thing here set down
is a several heed of doctrine. First, he promises to them that same thing he
had prayed for at God. Then he maks a petition to them, desiring them to pray
for him. Then to commend him to the brethren. Then he adjures them that they
read this Epistle to all the people. And last he bids them fairewell,
recommending them to the grace of Christ. Ye see what varitie of thing she hes.
I mind to be short in them, seeing they are almost things common in every
Epistle, making a choice of that I think best for our comfort and necessity.
Now he begins at the promise, Faithful is ^e which calls you, which also
will do it. There is the promise. The Apostle would say, that that I pray
God, that he will grant you; to wit; he will preserve you in the end in faith,
that I am assured he will do; He will not leave you, unto the time he perfect
his work begun in you. There is the promise. Ye see first in this promise,
the prays that he made immediately before for them, praying to God, that he
would preserve them in holiness to the end, is grounded upon an assurance in
the heart, that God would grant that same thing which he prayed for to the
Thessalonians. Mark it. And first, learn, concerning prayer: All prayer for
things heavenly and spiritual concerning the life to come (I speak not of the
worldly things, Confidence in prayer.
but things heavenly and spiritual) should arise on some certainty and
assurance of the heart, that God will grant to us the things we ask. Therefore
James in his Epistle last chap. 15. verse. he calls prayer, the prayer of
faith, that is, that ryses of faith and assurance in the heart, that God will
grant us the thing we ask. John in his first Epistle, last chap. 14. verse, he
joins these two together, confidence or assurance, and prayer, and he says.
This is that confidence we have in the Lord, that, if we ask any thing
according to his will, he will hear us: There is confidence in prayer, that,
when we pray, we should have that assurance that God will give us these things
we seek, not according to our will, but according to his own will. It is his
will that we should have these heavenly things, through the blood of Christ.
And therefore our prayer for them should rise on confidence, that God will
grant them for Christ's sake.

Yet farther, I see in this place three things joined together. First, he
exhorts them to a continuance in an holy life to the end. Secondly, he prays
for the same continuance in holiness, that God would preserve them to the
coming of the Lord Jesus. Exhortation, prayer and promise conjoined.
Thirdly, there is a sure promise made to them of that same thing he prayed
for, that God would perfect his work in them, and never leave his work,
until he crown it, and these three, continuance in holiness, prayer for it,
and promise thereof, cannot be well severed. It auailes not to stand up and
exhort to any good thing, except the exhorter pray to God, that it would please
him to grant them that grace he hes exhorted them to: the man that cannot pray
for that grace he hes exhorted them to, he is not meet to exhort. Then again,
prayer without promise auailes little. A man who hes not assurance in his heart,
to promise grace from the hands of God unto any people or person. is not meet
to pray for any people or person. He to whom the Lord hes not given that grace
in heart to promise with assurance, he is not meet to pray, for pithie prayer
must rise on some confidence in the heart. To be short. In a Pastor these three
must go together. He must be a man that is meet to exhort, that hes a grace
to pray, and an access to God; and last he must have an assurance in his heart
of that grace of God, so, that he dar be bold to promise to them that grace he
exhortes them to, and craves at God. And that which I speak of a Pastor, I
speak of all men. For all should be exhorters, and every one teachers of their
brethren, and so every one should see if they have these graces to exhort, to
stir them up to godliness, to pray for them, and to promise to them grace with
assurance.

Now to go forward. He sets not down his promise simply, and barely, the Lord
will do it, but he lays down the ground and foundation whereupon he builds
his promise, which (...) their effectual and inward calling. He is faithful
that he^ called you. So, the ground of this promise is their inward and
effectual calling. By this calling, I understand no other thing, but an inward
declaration of the eternal will of God in the heart of any man concerning his
salvation; 2. sorts of calling.
To speak the truth, this calling of a man by the word, is nothing but a
revealing inwardly in his heart, that election and choising of God that was from
all eternity. He calls him when he reueales that eternal election to him,
and assures him that he hes chosen him before al eternity. There is another
calling when the word soundes in the care, without persuasion of the calling in
the heart. This is an outward calling. Many are called this way, but few gets
this inward calling in their heart to salvation. Then this is the meaning of the
Apostle, as if he had said to them, if ye be called (Thessalonians) if ye find
the Lord to declare inwardly to your heart his eternal will in your election, I
dare be bold to promise, that, that God who hes made that declaration in your
heart, shall never leave you, until he persite his work, and put you in
Heaven. This ground stands sure, that God shall never leave you who hes gotten
the assurance of election, until he crown his work in you. There are the
words shortly. Then, mark, brethren; The promise that one can make to
another, that, God will not leave them to the end, it must not be spoken
absolutely, but it must be conditional. The condition is, of thy effectual
calling. This condition holding sure, that thou art effectually and inwardly
called to life, surely the promise may be made to thee, with assurance, God will
never leave thee to the end: And I or any man upon this condition may boldly
make you this same promise, that Paul made to the Thessalonians, and I may say
to you (this ground holding that ye are called inwardly, and that ye have
received an inward declaration, as it were, out of the mouth of God of your
election in Christ) I may promise you, that, God shall never leave you until
he crown his work. Then, if it be so, who ever would have comfort of the
promise of God made in Christ, when life is promised, perseverance is promised,
the crown of glory is promised, who would have comfort in these promises, let
him go to the ground, look if thou findst in thy heart thy inward calling,
look, if God by his Spirit inwardly assures thee that thou shall have lyfes,
if thou findst it, assure thee the promise perteines to thee; but if thou find
it not spoken inwardly by God to thee, thou have no warrant, that the promise
of grace perteins to thee, think never thou will be crowned, and that he shall
perfect his work in thee, seeing he never began to work in thee. God will
never perfect the work he never began. Therefore every one of us should take
heed when we read or hear the promises of God in the Scripture, if we have
this ground or not; if I find I have the ground, I may fully assure me, there
is no promise but it is made to me; but if I see not the ground, no promise
perteines to me. Then, on this, mark further Gods fashion of doing. This is
his manner of doing: Gods calling vncha^gable.
First, he calls, that is to say, he lettes men and women understand by faith
inwardly, that he and she is one whom he hes taine purpose from all eternity
to save. There is the beginning. Then he goes forward and never leaves them
until he persite his work in them. No, if he begin once with them, and give
them assurance that they are inwardly called, the gates of Hell will never
prevail against them, albeit they be in Hell at that same time of their
calling they shall end in Heaven; he will draw them through Hell to Heaven,
through death to life, all the world shall not alter his purpose. If he begin
once he will end. Therefore, to the Philipp. 1. chap. 6. verse, he says, I am
persuaded, that, he that hes begun the good work in you, he will perfect
it to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ: I am persuaded, there is never one,
with whom he begins the work of their effectual calling, but, of necessity
he must perfect it. A man will begin a work and draw his hand from it
again, and let it stand; but, God is not like man, he never began the work,
but he will perfect it. And therefore, I say, who ever they be that would end
with him, and have an assurance that God shall be with them in their end, and
shall crown them with a crown of glory, they should take heed whether God
hes begun with them or not. If I find his hand begin to work with me, I will
persuade my self in spite of all the world he shall perfect it; but if we find
not God begin with us, he shall never crown the work: Al stands in the
beginning, all the grace we get in this life, such as holiness, sanctification,
is nothing in effect, but the beginning of grace. So that the thing we have to
do in this life, if we should live a thousand years, is to enter in count
whether the Lord hes begun this work or not. If I find he hes begun this
work in me, then in my death and letter hour I will assure my self, the Lord
will end his work with me, I will make a sweet end, and he will crown me with
glory.

Yet, farther, he says, Faithful is he, which calls you, which also will
do it. He grounds again this promise of the continuance of Gods grace,
Heighest ground of faith, the constant nature of God.
which is under this condition of effectual calling on an higher ground. If
thou would have a suit faith, thou must have many grounds, faith is not builded
on the sand, it must have sure grounds: He grounds this ground of their
effectual calling on an higher and surer ground, that all the world will not be
able to shake, it is upon the unchangeable and unalterable nature of God, the
constant nature of God, not fleeting and flowing, as man's nature is. God is not
like man. The word he speaks, it stands, it never alters. The purpose he
takes is unalterable. To the Heb 6. chap. 18 verse. It is impossible, that, God
should lie. 2. Tim. 2. chap. 13. verse. He cannot deny himself, he abydes
faithful and sure. Then, brethren, if he hes said to the heart inwardly, It is
my will from all eternity, that thou be one of these that shall be safe. Hes he
spoken it? that word shall never be altered, Heau^n and earth shall all go to,
ere there be one word of that altered, God is faithful, the word he hes spoken
cannot be altered: Therefore if he hes called thee, given thee a sight of thy
election, it will never alter. Paul knew this well, and therefore he assures
them, that he would perfect the work begun in them: on this condition, that
he hes called them inwardly; this assurance should be in the heart of the
Preacher, thou should have thy heart established on these same grounds, thou
should know the unchangeable nature of God, that he cannot alter: for, if thou
know not, that he cannot alter, thou have no certainty of faith. So, the
ground of faith is, the unchangeableness of God. it never restes until it
pearce into that infinite deepnesse in God. To speak it so, It is not the word
of God that is spoken that is the chief ground of faith: for faith goes in
through the word, and grippes in to that unchangeable Majesty. Then the chief
ground of faith, is the unchangeable nature of God, and it never gets rest,
until it get that unchangeable God. And then when it hes gotten him, it restes
on (...) restes then on his word, and obeyes his word; if he then speak to me,
I will hear him and obey him. Then God should be painted out in his nature, so
far as man can: But who can do it? He should be known to be a merciful, true
and just God, and none can have faith but he must know these. Alas, thou that
wilt be content with the scrufe of the properties of God, and will not seek in
to the deepnesse of God, and take him up in his properties, and pearee in to
his nature and rest on him, thou shall never get a settled faith. Therefore
seek ay knowledge, and prease in to him, that thou may stand in some
setlednesse.

Now to come to the rest of the text. When he hes exhorted them, prayed for
them, made promise to them: What then does he? He commes down and says,
Brethren pray for me. He he been a^ it were, sitting above them, exhorting
them, praying for them, promising to them as a superior far above them, and
ere ye look about you he commes down, and sits down on the earth and his
course about looks up to them and biddes them pray for him: What learn we of
this? There is none so high mounted that hes so excellent graces in the Church
of God, if it were the Apostle Paul himself, but he should humble himself, as
it were, under the most humble and lovvlie in the Church, and as he hes
prayed for them, so he should pray them to pray for him again. Pray for me as
I have prayed for you; as I have exhorted you, exhort ye me; as ye have need
to be prayed for by me, so have I need to be prayed for by you. So, nothing I
can do to you, but I have need of it my self. Ye see the ei^ of the head far
above the foot, the one is low on the earth, the other high in the head; it
is the light of the body and guides the foot, bids it go on this way, go on
that way, it hes graces far above the foot; yet for all this pre-eminence and
gifts it hes gotten, it must look down again to the foot, and say, foot
carry me, and bear me; for if thou carry not me to this place, and that place
where I would be, I cannot come there. I^ is so with the members of the body of
Christ: The eye of them, that is, the man that hes gotten greatest
pre-eminence, he must sloup down and humble himself to the poorest body in
the Church of God and seek help mutual in the Church: the silliest body in
the Church hes gotten a grace which he hes not gotten, without the which grace
he is not able to stand. The foot can carry the eye, but the eye cannot carry
the foot: So the poorest and vylest body in the Church hes gotten some grace
that the greatest in the Church must s^oup down and seek a grace at the
silliest body. Therefore let none be proud. Thou that wilt contemn the
soberest grace that the filliest body in the Church of God hes gotten, thou
shall lose all grace. Then I see again (brethren) the necessity of prayer.
Necessity of prayer.
The Lord grant this that we could once know it well. There is no grace nor
perseverance in grace without prayer: Without prayer to God let none seek to
stand to the end, thou that cannot open thy mouth to pray to God neither
morning evening nor midday, etc. thou shall never get grace; look never for
this perfection. Thou cannot go forward in the rinke without prayer, and so
thou shall never come to the butt. And as ye see here, it is not only man's
own prayer that is requisite, to bring them to the rinks end but it must be
mutual prayer; I must pray for thee to help thee forward thou must pray for
me to help me forward. So prayer must be mutual, and as it were, every one
must be taking others by the hand, and lifting them up from the filth of the
earth to heavenly things. So he that will contemn mutual prayer and say, I
will pray for my self, I am familiar with God, I have a b^^ad back to bear
all their curlings if they were never so many. Alas the curslinges will thrust
him down to Hell, and his prayer shall not avail: And thou who contemnest the
pray or of the silliest body in the Church for thee. if thou should (...)
all day on thy knee thou shall get small ^^therance. The prayer of the Church
is a nece^^ar mean to bring thee to Heaven; For as he appointed thee to
Heaven, so he^ no appointed prayer of the Church to bring thee to it.

Now he commes to the (...) says he, one another with an holy kiss. As he
would say, I cannot be present with them, I cannot speak to them face to face,
but (...) you to whom I direct this Epistle, con^oy my salutation to them, and
in my name salute them as it were with my mouth. Brethren, what is a
salutation? A testification of our love that we bear so them we salute. Now
there are sundry fortes of salutations, a man will salute one with his own
mouth, then when he cannot get him saluted with his own mouth, he will send
his commendations with another man. There are two fortes, I will testify my
good will by my own mouth in his presence, and again I will testify it by
another, and will send my (...) good will by his hand: And truly look how
sure ever thing in this earth was carried by a mediat person, as sure this love
will be carried by one to another; he will take my love on his back and carry it
to another; and as sure as any gift is presented to any person as sure will my
love be presented to (...) I send it. And what good will it do? The chief
thing we ^aue is the conjunction of the members one with another. Now the band
that conjoynes the members, is love; and ^ may send this same band by an other.
He may tak my band that commes from my heart, and eary to any man: Then the band
that commes to him it kindles up his heart, and he loves me again, and so his
heart is given to me again. So, seeing this happiness in this life stands in
this conjunction, every thing should be used that may enterteine this
conjunction, if it were but a good morrow or a good night, every thing holds
this conjunction together, until we be fully joined to Christ, in the which
conjunction stands our full happiness.

Yet to insist. This salutation is to all the brethren, none excepted. To
speak it in one word: Such familiar salutations as these, salute them with a
kiss and an holy kiss, they are not competent between all sorts of men; I
perceive not that the Apostle salutes this way any of the Gentiles and Heathen;
it is true we are bound to wish well to all, to the prophainest in the world,
yea to the enemies of Christ, and I will say, the Lord turn every enemy of
Christ to him: but certainly, when it commes to such salutations as these that
Paul uses, as to say, salute with an holy kiss, they are proper only to the
domestics of faith, and therefore he says, salute all the brethren, not all
that ye meet with, but all the brethren. Love pertaines to all, but there as a
special love that pertaines to the members of the body, as to brethren and
sisters, there are special salutations that specially pertaines to the members
in the body, and therefore discretion must be had; all salutations must not be
had to al alike we should have a regard of the condition of the person whom we
salute. There may be a fault as well in this indiscreet doing, as when we leave
it undone; give every one their own duty. Thou art addebted to a brother in a
special kindness and salutation, and is not addebted so to a Turk, and to
one that is not in Christ.

In the end held esires that they salute all the brethren, with an holy kiss.
We know it was a fashion of old ere Christ came; the^ Jews at meeting they
would kiss other even men would kiss men, the same fashion continued in
Christ's days, and after Christ it was l^fed also, as (...) may see in the
Epist^^ of Paul, and in the primitiue^ Church at their meeting together, at the
Supper of the Lord they would kiss in token of their unity. Now this holy
kiss is called by Peter, the kiss of charm, 1. Epistle 5. chapter. 14.
verse. Join (...) an holy kiss is nothing but a (...) that ^yfes of an (...)
loue^, when love is in the (...) it is sinceere without by (...) other ^ife it
is not sinceere* ^ad is kiss was not holy because love was not in his heart
when he kissed his Master, Sincerity to be used in salutation.
so this kiss was in hypocrisy. So in our fashion that is now used, albeit
we, kiss not one another when we ^id good-marrow, or goodnight, we make
(...) outvvard testification of the love, of the hate inwardly; if there be
not love in the heart, all is but hypocrisy. And except helsing rise of love in
the heart, it were better to thee to hold thy tongue, thou art but an hypocrite;
when thou salutest with thy mouth, if thy heart would eat him up, thou will
appear to have honey in thy mouth and the gall of bitterness is in thy heart.
Alas many Iudasses now. Sweet sleeked lips, false malicious inuyfull hearts.
Always the lesson is, in all these outward testifications of love, look ever
that there be (...) love in the heart, that the testification may be sinceere,
and thou may get good of them; For I assure thee, this love to thy neighbor
does good to thee: o Lord if sincerity be not good in the members of Christ!
Alas this decreeped age is turned to a plane hypocrisy, and al are but words
of office; thy vylde salutation returns to thy own hurt. As it does him no
good nor evil whom thou salutest, so it does thee evil and returns to thy own
hurt. Hypocrisy ever hurts the heart it came from.

Now to the next words I charge you in the Lord, that this Epistle be read to
all the brethren, the Saints. This is another purpose: For in the end as I
told you there is variety of things casten together: Appearandly, by the
words it would seem, that this Epistle was directed chiefly to the Pastor,
Elders, etc. and in one word, to the Presbytery, that was there. Therefore,
lest the inferior and common sort of Christians should be defrauded of this
benefit, the Apostle shows, that, it is his vvil, that this Epistle be
communicate to the whole vulgar sort of christians, that vve^ in Thessalonica,
never one should be defrauded of the benefit of it. He says not simply, I
will you to do this, but, he uses another word, I charge you in the Lord; I
bind and oblishe you, under a pain, the pain is the vvraith of the Lord,
Mark it. There must be great grounds and causes of this strait charge, under
al highest pain. First, this strait charging lettes us see the great
necessity, that was, that the common people at Thessalonica should hear of
this Epistle, asvvell as the rulers of the Church. Secondly, it lettes us see,
that, the Apostle perceived, there should be impedimentes casten in, that
should hold aback this writing of his, from the people, he knew the deceit of
the devil, that he would be busy, to have this letter closed up and never to
be communicate to the common people: and therefore, he charges the^, that it
should be read to the people. Now, I observe. This, that he speaks of this
Epistle, which is but a part of the Scripture, I draw it to the whole Scripture
canonical of the old and new Testament; Necessity of reading and bearing the
Scripturs.
and I observe the need that all sort of men and women so long as they live in
this life hes to understand the scripture, to read it, or if they cannot read
it, to hear it red: there is a plain necessity laid on every one of you men
and women in all ranks to read the scripture* and if ye cannot read them, to
hear them red, Search the Scriptures, says the Lord, in John 5. chap. 39.
verse, for by them ye shall obtain salvation; it stands men on their salvation
and damnation to know the Scriptures. Then secondly learn. The devil, the
enemy of man's salvation, knowing how necessar^ the Scripture is to the
salvation of men, hes ever striuen to hold the Scripture hid as a closse book
from the common people. What ca^es he of the chief of the Clergy to let them
know the Scriptures, he will let them pass if he can get the multitude of
people to carry to H^ll with him? This wicked doing of his continues still in
the world, and the word is closed up among the Papists, and it is forbidden to
be red by laikes, that is, by simple men and women, and it is forbidden to be
translated in their own language. Mark yet further. They who are rulers in
the Church, teachers of the common sort, are bound under the pain of the
wraith of the Lord Jesus to light on them, that they communicate these
Scriptures to the common people, and put the book in the hand of them that can
read, and if they cannot read themselves, to read to them. The rulers of the
Thessalonians are charged to read this Epistle to all the common sort. So all
the rulers in the Church to the end of the world shall be oblished to instruct
the common people; and therefore the translating of the Bible in every common
language is ordained, that the idiots who hes the mother tongue only, may
understand what is the will of the Lord in the Scripture. Then if it be so, the
Doctors in that harl or Church in Papistri^ that hes closed the book of God to
the people, and clasped it with double claspes, O what damnation abydes them*
(if ye have an English new Testament to the fire with you*) dare tho^ be bold
to read the Scripture thy self in thy own language* thou shall die for it.
Alas the wraith of Christ binds (...) and holds them (...) to their utter
destructions. If it were but for letting the people of God remain in ignorance
without knowledge.

Now to the last words. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you, and he
seals it up with this word Amen. When he entered in with them in the beginning
of the Epistle, what was his salutation? Nothing but a recommendation of them
to the grace of Christ: at his first meeting with them he prays that they
should receive the grace of Christ. Grace without merit vvishes both in the
beginning, and ending.
When he bids them farewell he bids the same grace of God be with them; he
wishes grace in the beginning and grace in the end. Learn this, If the Apostle
had thought that there had been a greater thing in the world nor the grace of
Christ, he had wished it either at the beginning or at the ending; but knowing
well the best thing he could wish to the people is Christ's grace, as he began
with it, so he ends with it. And alas, what can we wish more, for under the
grace of Christ all the graces and blessings we can have here, and in the
life to come are comprehended: If one would set himself to wish the best thing
in the world to another, what can he wish better nor the grace of Christ? for
all is in it. Now it is to be understood what is the grace of Christ. No other
thing but the free favor of God in Jesus Christ; I call it free, because it is
without desert or merit on our part, a favor that commes not on our
deserving; for we merit nothing but Hell. Then, brethren, what is this he hes
been speaking to these Thessalonians? Certainly, I read not in all Paul's
Epistles of so high a praise of Faith, Love and Charity of any Church, as he
hes of this Church of Thessalonica; and yet for all this in the end he says
not, I beseech God that he consider your merit, for ye have deserved well, and
he is much oblist to your deserving (as that presumptuous villain the Pope
will say) Lord reward you according to your deserving. No, he ends not so, but
he says, Indeed Thessalonians ye have done well* but yet I commit you to the
free mercy of God. The thing I wish to you is not for your deserving, but
against your deserving. I wish to you the free grace of Christ, according to
Christ's saying in Luke 17. chap. 10. verse. When thou has^ done all that thou
can do, say, I am but an unprofitable servant, I deserve not so much as a
fair look of Christ. Hell shall overtake thee for all thy doing, except mercy
come between thee and thy God. Then only mercy without deserving is our
salvation. In the 2. Tim chap. 1. verse 16. he names one Onesiphorus, and he
reckons out great kindness that he had done to him (and that which was done to
Paul was done to his Master) he says, he hes refreshed me, when I have been
exceeding weary, be thought no shame of my fetters and bonds, and hearing tell
I was at Rome he sought me out very diligently. Yet for all this, he says
not, Onesiphorus deserves well at Gods hand, and I pray that the Lord would
reward him according to his demerites. No, but he says, The Lord shovv mercy
on Onesiphorus. And he doubles it over again, and he says, God grant as I
have found mercy at Onesiphorus, so he may find mercy at the Lords hands in
that day. He says mercy, not reward but free mercy: and so I end. Nothing
but mercy and free grace; when we have done all we can, nothing but mercy,
mercy in earth, mercy in heaven. On pain of life when thou have done all the
good thou may do, beware thou think of any deserving at the hands of God But
cast thy self on thy knees, and hold up thy hands, and cry for fre mercy and
pardon of thy sins, and say, away with all my works, they are but dung and
filth; I crave pardon for my sins of thy free mercy in that blood of Jesus
Christ: Except thou crave this, thou shall never have solid joy in thy heart.
And shall I say that one of these false quenchers of the Spirit felt ever this
sweetness in Christ, which only ryses of the assurance of the free mercy of
God. Therefore let our only reposing be upon this free favor in Christ. To
whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be all praise for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.
LECTVRES UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.

PREACHED BY THAT FAITHFVLL servant of God. Master ROBERT ROLLOK, some-tyme
Minister of Gods word, and Rector of the University of EDINVRGH.



EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT CHARTERIS, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno Dom. M. D. CVI. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Majestatis.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.
THIS second Epistle to the Thessalonians seems to have been written soon
after the first. The occasion of the writing thereof may be gathered of the
Epistle it self. The Thessalonians were at that time persecuted and heavily
troubled for the faith of Christ; and likewise there entered in amongst them
false teachers and deceivers who went about to persuade them that the coming
of Christ was instantly at hand, taking occasion, as it appears, by the
Thessalonians mistaking of certain speeches uttered by the Apostle in the
first Epistle, especially these words in the fourth chapter, We which live
and are remaining in the coming of the Lord shall be caught up in the clouds
with them that are dead in Christ, after their resurrection, to meet the Lord
in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Whereupon the
Thessalonians concluded that Christ should come before they died, and they
should be on life at his coming. The devil to confirm them in this error
raises up these deceivers who went about to persuade them of it, as though it
had been true that they should have been living at the coming of the Lord,
alleging that they had it, both by the re^elation of the Spirit of God, and
also by the tradition of PAVL. The Apostle therefore thought it needful to
(...) this second Epistle to the Thessalonians, partly to comfort them against
the persecutions of their enemies, partly to admonish them that they give not
ear to these false deceivers, assuring them that before Christ come the
Antichrist should come, and there should be an universal defection from the
truth. The Epistle may fitly be diuyded in six parts. The first part is the
salutation in the two first verses in the first chapter. The second is the
Preface, wherein he rejoices for their perseverance and increase of Faith, of
Love and Patience in all their persecutions and tribulations, from the third
verse to the fifth. In the third part he comfortes them against the troubles and
persecutions that they sustained for the faith of Christ from the fifth verse to
the end of the first chapter. In the fourth part he admonishes them that they
give not ear to these false teachers that said Christ's coming was at hand,
showing them that before the second coming of Christ the Antichrist should be
reueiled, and there should be an universal defection from the faith of Christ
Yet he comfortes them against the fear of defection, and exhortes them to
abide constant in the doctrine they had received from him, craving (...)
comfort and constancy to them at Gods hands. This par^e is conteinde in the
whole second chapter. The fifth part contains exhortations to good manners and
Christian duties, from the beginning of the third chapter to the sixteenth
verse. In the last part he concludes the Epistle with prayer and salutation,
from the sixteenth verse to the end.

THE FIRST LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 1, verse. 1. 2. 3 4. 5. 1. PAVL and Siluanus, and Timotheus,
unto the Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God our Father, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ.

2 Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

3 We ought to thank God alvvaies for you, brethren, as it is meet, because
that your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of every one of you tovvard
another abounds.

4 So that we our selves rejoice of you in the Churches of God, because of
your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye
suffer.

5 Which is a token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted
vvorthie of the kingdom of God, for the which ye also suffer.


HAVING ended (Brethren) as God gave the grace, the first Epistle of Paul to
the Thessalonians, I thought it meetest to go forward in the second Epistle:
for otherwise the work would seem not to be perfyted, and the matter
contained in the second Epistle, is very worthy to be insisted upon And it
appears very well among all the Epistles that Paul vvrote, that, these two
directed to the Thessalonians were the first: This second Epistle which we
presently have in hand appearantly hes been written soon after the first. The
occasion of the writing of it appears well of the purpose and argument it
self. The Apostle in this Epistle comfortes the Church of the Thessalonians,
which was persecuted and heavily troubled for the faith of Christ. Another
occasion we take up in the second chapter: There entered in this Church (for
the devil can never be idle) false teachers and deceivers, who went about to
persuade the Thessalonians, that the coming of Christ was instantly at hand.
The Apostle therefore taking occasion hereof, admonishes them not to give ear
to these men; and he tells them that before Christ come the Antichrist should
come, and that there should be an universal defection in the world. I take
these to be the two occasions of his writing.

There are three chapters of this Epistle. In the first after he hes saluated
them, and given thanks to God for them, he enters in to comfort them against
all the troubles they were in for the present. In the second chapter he
admonishes them not to give ear to these false teachers, that said that
Christ's coming was at hand. And therefore he prophecyes of the coming of the
Antichrist, and of the universal defection of men in the world And in the
third and last chapter he enters in (as his manner is) to exhortations, and
Christian admonitions to the end of the Epistle. Now to come to the first
chapter, first he salutes them, next he commes to a congratulation for the
graces of God received by them, last he commes to the consolation.

As to the salutation, it is the common form he uses in all his Epistles, and
there is not one word altered from the salutation he used in the first Epistle.
And therefore because I handled every word in the first Epistle, I mind not to
insist in it here again, only this far, There are three persons that salutes,
Paul, Siluan^ and Timotheu^^ Paul an Apostle, Siluanus. and Timothe^^ two
Evangelists. These three persons salutes the Church of God at Thessalonica:
That Church, he says, that is in God the Father, founded and grounded first on
him. Then in the Lord (...) Christ the Son, builded on the Father and the
Son: All (...) must stand on the Father and the Son. The graces he wishes to
the Church are these common graces he uses in all his Epistles. The grace of
God, the peace of God, that is from the Father, and from the Lord Jesus his
Son. Now only this far: by the example of the Apostle we learn of the
salutation that he permits before his Epistle. When we enter in to speak of
any Church, to write to any people concerning faith, concerning Jesus Christ,
to make a declaration in the entresse of that love, that benevolence, that
hartlinesse, that we bear to that people, to the end that they may be prepared
again to hear with alike love, benevolence and hartlinesse, and so the Pastor
uttering his lyking to the people, and the people again their lyking of the
Pastor: the Pastor may have courage and liberty to go forward in doctrine:
the people may give audience and receive the better instruction. There is the
end of all the salutation.

Now I go forward to the thanksgiving, and I will speak something of it as
God will give me the grace. We should thank God alvvaies for you: He says not
we thank God simply, but we should thank, we are addebted, bound and oblist
of duty to thank him Then the lesson is clear. Thanksgiving to God is a
debt that we are bound and oblist to pay to God; Gods benefi^es matter of
thanksgiving.
for we give him not thanks for nothing: Ye will not bear the Apostle say, we
thank him simply, but ye will find a matter wherefore he thanks him, even for
his graces and his benefits. There are two sorts of his benefits and graces,
there are some bestowed on our selves, some on others. As for them that are
bestowed on our selves, out of question, there is none but he will confess he
is debt-bound to thank God for them, at lest he must confess this in word,
think as he will. As for the benefits bestowed on others, we are bound
likewayes to thank God for them. As concerning the Pastor that hes ado with
any people, if ever man was bound to thank God for any benefit, he is bound
to thank him for the benefit showen on the people he hes ado with; because
their blessing is the fruit of his labors and travels: and therefore he is
bound to be thankful for it. I say more. There is no member in the Church of
Christ but he hes cause to thank God for every blessing he bestows on
another. I am bound to thank God for the blessing he bestows on thee, thou
art bound to thank God for the blessing he shows on me. And every one should
thank God for others blessings. All is for the well of the body, the grace I
get is for the well o^ the body. The grace thou gettest is for the well of the
body. We are al members of the body, and therefore we are al bound to thank God
for the benefits bestowed on the body: I shall give you a familiar
similitude. Should not the hand of a man thank the man that hes cured the
foot, if the foot hes been sore. The eye likewise in a manner will it not be
thankful to him that hes cured the hand; and so of all the rest of the
members. Now would to God we were as sensible members of the spiritual body
of Christ, as the members of the natural body of man are sensible among
themselves, and could understand that every one is a member of that body. But
let our sense be as it will, if thou be a member of the body of Jesus Christ,
thou art as much bound to be thankful to God for any benefit bestowed on
another, as the hand is bound to be thankful for the graces bestowed on the
foot; otherwise thou shall be challenged at that day of judgment for
unthankfulness. Paul 12. chap. to the Romans 15. verse. says, Rejoice with
him that reioyces, and mourn with him that mournes.

Now to go forward. We should thank God ^lvvaies. Then (brethren)
thanksgiving is an everlasting debt, a continual debt we ought to God, there
is no end of it, there is no intermission or leaving of it day nor night* As
Paul speaks of charity to the Romans chap. 13. verse. 8. Owe nothing to any
man, but love every one another. Charity is a debt that should never be paid
out at the ground, but ay continuing in paying. Even so thanksgiving to God is
a debt we should ever be paying but never put an end to paying of it, for it
can have no end: in earth ever thanking: in Heaven when we are with ^im ever
thanking, and our glory shall be in an everlasting thanking of him: for why, if
he could leave off to show grace and could draw his hand from us, as men does,
then we had cause to (...) from thanking. But the graces of God in Christ are
endless grace for grace. And therefore seeing his grace hes never an end, why
should thou make an end of thanking him: when his hand is opened liberally to
thee, why should thou close thy mouth, and not render thanks to him.

Yet further. We thank him alvvayes for you, says he, as it is meet. Mark
the words, as it is meet, as it is worthy. The word sounds so in the proper
language, as if he had said. He is worthy of all thanks, and therefore we
should thank him. There is a worthiness in God for the blessings he
bestovves on us, there is a deserving in him, there is a merit in him; it is
be only that deserves and merits. There are two things, debt and merit, (I
but touch them) every one respects other, where there is a debt, there is a
merit; and where there is a merit there must be a debt. God only merits and
man is debtor.
These two words answers to other* There is no merit under the Sun but
Gods merit when God hes to do with man. As for us there is nothing but debt,
no deserving in us, all that we can do to our God is mere debt; as ever a man
was addebted to another. All the thanksgiving we can give him is debt, all
works we can work are debt, what ever he gettes of us, he merits and
deserves it* This is the truth, and yet the enemies of the truth will turn
this ever again, and will ascryue the merit to stinking flesh, and the debt
to God. The debt that appertains to us they ascryue to God; and the merit
that appeartaines to God they ascryue to us. They set us above God: for he
who merits is above the debtor: Lord what a change is this? Paul to the Romans
chap. 11. verse 35. says, Who gave him first, that hes bound him to give them
again? Will thou be before him? gave thou him first any good? if thou can do
it, then thou merits; if not, then it is a blasphemy to think that thou can
merit: Fie on thee, there is nothing in the part of the creature but debt, yea,
mere debt, nothing on the part of God but merit.

Now to go forward in the matter of this thanksgiving that never hes an end,
that should be without intermission, and that God deserves at our hands. The
matter and cause of thanksgiving is grace: The first grace is Faith; not a
simple faith, but an exceeding grouth in faith; Because, says he, your faith
grows exceedingly. The next grace is love; not simple love, but abundance
of love, and abounding in mutual love, so that the hearts of them ran over
in love, as a veshell will do when it is over full. Well then, there is the
matte^ and cause of this thanksgiving, an exceeding grouth of sure faith, al
^undant mutual love that every one bare to other. Then compare this place with
that which is in the first Epistle, chap. 1. verse 3. He thanked God for their
faith and love, not for their grouth, now his style is higher: and he thanks
God, not for faith simply, but for grouth; not for love simply, but for
abounding in mutual love. Then ye see since the first time the Apostle wrote
the first Epistle to them, the Thessalonians hes grown in faith and love.
There is the lesson. Grouth in faith in love.
There must be a grouth in grace, grace must grow in us, and we must grow in
grace. If thou grow not in grace, faith and love, if thou go not forvvard, of
necessity thou must go backward. Think not that a man will stand still in one
estate of faith and love, so that he will say, I will fix my stalfe here, and I
will go no further nor this point. If thou fix down thy stalfe in faith and
love, thou shall fall faster backward nor ever thou came forward, and thou
shall never come to the end nor mark. If thou fix thy stalf and never prease to
go forward, thou shall never come to that glorious resurrection; in plain
talk, thou will never come to Heaven. To be homely with you; We should have a
care ever to grow in this life; for so long as we live, we are either children,
or at the farthest we are springels (to use that word) Then I ask, will a
child come to the stature of a man or woman, if there be not grouth? No* Even
so if is impossible to one to come to the stature of that spiritual man
without growing: we are men when we come to Heaven, and are joined to our head,
and no sooner, and there our grouth ends. Can thou come to a spiritual man's
stature, if thou grow not in faith and love in this earth? And therefore, as
ever ye would come to Heaven and obtain that glory; prease to grow in grace,
to spring in faith and love in this world in some measure; mark your grouth in
grace as ever ye did in stature. He will be busy to see it he be higher this
year nor he was the last year: but whom marks if he be grown higher in
spiritual things this year nor he was the last year. This stature will away,
these earthly things will away, but this grouth ^ Christ abydes for ever. Of
this grouth read Ephesians 4. chap. verse. 13 14. 15. where he exhorts us to grown
faith to the (...) age of Christ, and to grow in love, until we be joined with
our head.

Yet mark more. As ^n the first Epistle 1. chap. verse 3. he thanked the Lord
for faith simply, and love simply, so here he gives him all thanks for the
grouth therein. Mark it. He thanks not them for the grouth, he gives them not
one part of the thanks, and God the other, but he thanks God for all. And
good reason, for who is able to put one inche to his stature? Art thou able to
make thy self grow in this bodily grouth? No, it is impossible. Then far
less is there any grouth in the spiritual man, but that allanerly which God
gives. No standing nor perseverance in grace but that which God gives. Al is
given by God. Fie on that stinking doctrine of the Papists. When God, say they,
hes given man a grace, he permits a man to his free will to go forward, as it
were in man's own option whether to go forward or not. I only touch this. As
the graces commes of God, so of necessity the increase and grouth of graces
commes of God and not of any grace left in us. In one word, Give him the praise
of the beginning of grace, give him the praise of thy progress in grace, give
him the end, give him the praise of all: For he it is that gives the grace, the
progress and grouth therein, it is he that crowns his work in thee, it is he
that works all, that all the glory of grace may be given to him.

Yet to insist. What is this Faith? Faith is nothing but a joining of us with
God in Christ. What is Love? this mutual love? Nothing but a joining of us
with the Church here on earth. What is grouth of Faith? Nothing but a growing
nearer and nearer to God, to dravv him nearer and nearer to us. What is the
growing in Love? Nothing but a drawing nearer and nearer to the Church, which
is the body of Christ. Then draw near to the head, draw near to the body
severe not thy self from it. Then what is the matter of thanksgiving? Even
this, that they were drawn nearer nor they were before to Christ, and to his
Church. Then, brethren, when have we matter of thanking God for any man for any
people? Even when we see any man or people drawing nearer to Christ, and the
body of Christ nor they were. If a man had all the kingdoms of the earth, there
is no matter to rejoice for in him; if we see him ly aback from Christ, and
from his Church; if he draw not nearer and nearer to Christ and his church in
this life, I will never rejoice for all his kingdoms. Unhappy is that man
that sunders from Christ what ever he be; is he a Lord, an Earl, a King, and
in the meane-tyme hes he nothing ado with God, unhappy is he: For the greater
blessings worldly, if he be not joined with God and the Church, the greater
shall be his damnation.

Then last here, look what he speaks of love, and of the abundance of love;
it is not single love, but love that is double and mutual; M^tuall love.
that is to say, the love that commes from my heart to thy heart; and again, the
love that commes from thy heart to my heart that is mutual and double; this is
the love that he praises, the double bond of love: and it must not be a double
bond only between two: there are sundry thinks they love wel-eneugh if they
love one, and that one love them again. No, the Apostle says here, Every
member of the body must love all from the highest to the lowest: The hand of a
man in the own sort loves the whole members of the body, from the head to the
foot, honorable or vnhonorable, high or low, be what it will, no member in the
body but it loves all. So the love the Apostle craves, is that love that one
hes to all; and again, that love that all hes to one. So that there should be
no member in the body of Christ but it should be linked in with love to Christ,
and every member of his body. There is no member of the body of man but it hes
a certain link whereby it is linked to the rest. The finger of the hand hes a
link with the toe of the foot, albeit they be far distant. So there should be
no member of the body of Christ, but it should be linked with every one of the
rest of the members, albeit they lay ten thousand miles sundry. It lies not in
our power to cause all men love (...) it lies not in my power to cause al men
love me, nor in thy power to cause all men love thee; but I tell thee what thou
should do, look thou love all for thy part, and if they love not thee again,
they have to answer to God. For he cranes this mutual love of us. This is the
mutual love that holds the brethren together, if it be not, the members
cannot be joined together in the body. It is true, we will never get it
perfect in this earth: for so long as the devil, the flesh and our lulles
abydes, there will be ever distraction; yet we should strive against the devil
and our own cankerd nature to be linked and joined with the members of the
body, until we be perfitely joined with Christ, where there shall be no
seuering. If we were once perfitly joined with him, we shall never be severed
hereafter. There shall neither be devil nor canker in nature to lever us then.
Therefore this should be our prayer, Lord join us to thee, that we may no more
be severed from thee and thy Church, by the deu^le, by sin, nor our own
corruption.

Now in the next verse he amplifies this their faith and great love. Their
faith and love was so great that he was forced to preach their praises in all
the Churches wherein he resorted: he came to no Church but remembering their
great faith and love, he was compelled to preach their praises, and to set them
forth as an example to be followed. Before he thanked God for them, and for
their faith and love; now he glories in the graces they had received, before
the world, men and the churches where he came in his journey. When he thanked
God concerning them he vtters never one word of their* praise; but coming
among men, and speaking to men and to the Church, there he praises them. Mark
this difference. Then brethren, there is a great difference in speaking of the
graces of men, when we speak to God and before him, when we speak to men and
before men. When thou speakst to God of man, let no praise of man be heard
before him: be ware of that, but let God have al praise and glory if thou be
speaking to God, if it were of all the kings of the earth, utter no praise of
any king there; for, in comparison with God, kings are but dust, and worse nor
the dust that is trod under foot. So, let God have all the praise of any grace
he hes given to any man; and say not, Lord I praise thee for this part, of the
grace, and I give man praise for that part of the grace. No, but say, Lord, I
give thee the whole praise of the grace, because all the grace he hes gotten
is of thee. But when we speak to men and tells them of the graces of God men hes
gotten, then we may glory in men, but with this provision, that it be in God.
We may commend men before men, for their faith, love, patience, but look that
all this commendation be in God first, and then to this end, to make men whom
thou commendst as examples in well doing. See that thou look to the well of them
thou speakst to, that they should follow them whom thou praisest for well-doing.
If thy mind be puffed up without reverence of God, and without respect to the
well of him thou speakst to, thou derogatst Gods glory; we should be ware when
we speak to the praise of any man, that we derogate nothing from the glory of
God.

Yet mark further the order he uses. He glories not first before men, and then
begins to thank God; but first he turns to God and gives God the glory of the
grace he hes given to them. We ought to thank God, says he, alvvaies for you,
as it is (...). Then he commes to men and glories of their graces in the
presence of men. Then, brethren, it is dew time to praise men and to give them
their own commendation for the graces God hes given them: when first thou have
glorified God, giving him the first praise and commendation. This is the order.
When thou give God the first praise, and then commes to men and praises the
graces in them before men, that praise is in God and he allows of it. But
when thou begins in praising men to men, and remembers not God the giver of
all, thou spoilest God of his glory. So we should take very good heed how
we praise godly men: for very narrovvlie shall we escape derogation to Gods
glory, except the Spirit connoy the whole heart and mouth. And therefore in
praising men we should be vvart we derogate nothing to the glory of God,
who is the chief giver of all. All the kings of the earth should stoup and
give all honor and glory to God.

Now in the end of this verse he sets down the matter of this his glorying,
Faith namely, and with Faith he joins Patience. because of your patience and
faith in all your persecutions that ye suffer. In the verse going before he
made mention of faith without patience, but in this verse he maks mention of
faith and patience, and there eason is, Because faith in effect is nothing but
the anchor of the soul: As the Apostle to the Heb. chap. 6. verse. 19. calls
hope the anchor of the soul: and as an anchor is casten on sure ground to
stick; so is Faith casten on Christ and fastened on him. Now there is nothing in
this world that the devil, the world, sin, which are the enemies of Faith in
this world enuyes more nor when they see the soul of a man anchored on Christ,
as on a sure ground. And therefore they seek ever to severe thy soul from
Christ, and to break the anchor. He will spew out floods of persecution and
tentation, javv after javv, to raise, if it were possible, the anchor of Faith
in Christ, that the anchor being away, the man may flow and fleet, and at the
last perish. Then what is the remedy? It is needful, that, faith be sure
grounded: if faith be not grounded on Christ she shall perish; and further she
must have a troup of graces about her, she must be hedged on all sides with a
variety of graces. Ignorance of God and of Christ are the causes of vengence.
And so it is, where ever true faith is in Christ, there is a troup of graces
about it. Now all these graces that compasses her are as many branches that
commes from her self as from the root. There stands about her, Hope, Love,
Patience, etc. a number of graces of all sorts, all commes from her, for she
is mother of all. All serves her, for she is Queen of all; Hope, Love,
Patience, and the rest, are as many maids standing about her to serve her. Now
among all these graces Patience is one; the duty and service of Patience is
to stand between faith and the jaws of tentations and persecutions, and to
receive all the jaws of tentations on her shoulders, that the anchor of the
soul which is Faith may stand sure. So, Patience stands up and holds the jaw
off Faith, otherways, thy faith will be broken: and it is impossible to him
that hes no Patience to abide the speeches, let be to sustain the persecutions
of men; if Patience be not, Faith will not abide sure. And by the contrare
look how needful it is that Patience be joined with Faith, it is as needful
that Faith be joined with Patience: and therefore he joins these, your
Patience and your Faith in all persecutions. And as I told you, Faith is the
mother of Patience, and where the mother is not, the daughter cannot be: and if
this anchor of Faith be not anchored on Christ, Patience will not hold off the
jaw: for the solid ground to rest on is Christ. Where faith is not, Christ is
not; and take him away no standing. So the chief ground of all standing, is
faith grounded on Christ Jesus, all the rest are but branches to Faith* faith
is the chief ground. The standing of all is through Christ when the anchor of
the soul is grounded on him.

Now one word in the end of this verse. He speaks here of a Faith in
tribulation and persecution, not of Faith in case, rest, and quietness, but of
a Faith in trouble. The Faith of the Thessalonians was not a Faith in ease and
quietness, but a Earth that lay under a continual exercise, lay under
persecution: for, the Church of Thessaloniea was exceedingly troubled, as
appears in this Epistle. Many will be content to believe, faith in Christ is a
wondrous fair thing: He would believe and she would believe, but look what
kind of faith men would have, a faith with quietness in the world, with honor
eneugh, with riches, and all this worlds wealth. This is the faith that all men
would have. But (brethren) the faith of Christ (which is the true faith) must
be casten in the furnace, otherwise it will be full of dross: Will ye get
fine gold that is not casten in the furnace and fined in it? Trow ye to get a
fine and true faith that is not fined in the furnace of trouble and
persecution, at the lest, one vexation or other? all troubles are not alike,
but of necessity faith must be casten in some furnace; Faith fined by troubles.
thou must be in some tribulation, either within thee, or without thee, in
goods, riches or some thing: and this is the faith that hes the commendation
here, a fined faith as gold hes the fynesse through the fire. Peter 1. Epist. 1.
chap 7. verse. tells the excellency of this faith compared with gold: gold when
it is casten in the fire and the dross of it burnt up will be far better nor
it was, and yet there was never gold so f^ire but it will perrish; fine it
oft-times over it may be ever the finer, but it shall perrish in the end; but he
says, faith that is fined and tried, shall be found to your praise, glory and
honor, when Christ shall be manifested. As he would say, it shall not perish,
but at that great day of Christ* it shall tend to thy everlasting glory Let us
not prease to feed our selves in our fantasies, thinking that we shall have a
faith in ease, quyetnes and honor. No, lay this ground down, if thou would have
a faith to abide till Christ come, assure thee thou must suffer, and thou must
abide the jaws of tentations till all thy faith be tried, and the whole dros
washen away, and the fine gold stand up. At these are but dreams, to think
that thou would hold Heaven in the one arm and the world in the other arm.
No, thou must let the world go, and take Heaven in thy whole arms with
affliction, or else thou shall lose Heaven and get the world in thy arms with
damnation. Now this for the thanksgiving and congratulation for their increase
of faith and abundance in love.

Now come to the second part, Consolation: Making mention of their
persecutions, he takes occasion to comfort them, and I think that be the
principal purpose he hes to do with them: and the first argument he uses
here, is that just and latter judgment, that general judgment. He says,
the persecution that ye suffer for Christ's sake, for the kingdom of Heaven,
they are sure arguments that there shall be a just judgment, and that Christ
shall come to judge the world, and render to every one according to his works.
And therefore upon the remembering of this just judgment that shall be; ye
Thessalonians comfort your selves, Persecutiones of the godly, a sure argument
of the day of judgment to come.
for it shall try who did right and who did wrong. Then take up this, The
persecutions the godly suffers in this life, what are they? they are very
ocular demonstrations (that is the force of the word) of the general judgment
to come, wherein Christ shall judge the world. And in the persecution of the
godly (as it were in a mirror) I may see or thou may see Christ coming to
judge the world, and to render to every one according to their deserts: for
look how I or thou may reason: When I see a person troubled for righteousness
sake, I will conclude, here is an innocent man, here are godly people troubled
wrongously, therefore, of necessity there must be a judgment wherein all ods
must be made even; I look certainly for a judgment to come: God cannot be
God, if there be not a judgment, wherein he shall be anenged for the wrong
done to this man: I will not conclude a particulare and an earthly judgment; I
will not say, when I see a godly man troubled, therefore, the troublers of him
shall be plagued ere they go off the world: it is over high. Indeed the
Prophets of old had this revelation, but it is over high for us* because
experience in all ages hes proved that some of the greatest persecutors hes
died in peace, and no visible judgment hes ouertaine them here. But, this I
am sure of; when I see godly men oppressed, I may say, there shall be a day of
general judgment, wherein God shall be anenged of the persecutours, if
repentance interceede not. Now would ye know any token that Christ shall come
again and put an end to the world, and that there shall be a general
judgment? Look if ye see or hear tell that the godly and innocent are
troubled in the world, take that for as sure an argument as can be that a
general judgment shall be. And as surely as the master is coming after the
forerunner, as surely shall the general judgment come after the suffering of the
godly, they must dravv on a judgment, and at the last they must draw Christ out
of Heaven to take upon him the place of a Judge to rander to every man
according to his doing.

Now another thing: He comfortes them taking his reason from the general
judgment, he tells them there shall be a terrible judgment, when a terrible
judge shall come and sit down in a judgment seat. What comfort is this? Ye
see many will shake and shudder when they hear of it, and feign would desire
never to hear of it. It is true the promise of the general judgment will
never comfort the wicked, and they that troubles others; the more that they
hear of it, the more will they trimble and shiuer. But it is as true that the
most comfortable voice they that suffers wrong can hear, is the hearing of the
coming of Christ in that latter day, and it is the matter of patience, it
will make them ly under affliction with exceeding joy; the thought of the
coming of Christ gives patience in all troubles, and this may be found in
experience: the chief joy of the godly is the remembering of Christ's coming:
It is not men's judgment, their absolution and condemnation that we should
stand upon. What cares me, if all the world would absolve me, if I be condemned
by God? And again, what care^ me if all the world condemn me, if God
absolve me? It is not men's absoluing or condemning, that bringes the true joy
or heaviness to the heart: but it is Gods absolution and condemnation that will
do this. And therefore as thou would have comfort in that terrible judgment,
do well, and suffer wrong, and bide patiently, for surely it will not be long;
there is such a crying of blood, and such vvronges in this world, that,
truly, in this decrepite age, Christ must come shortly. Then, this is the
first argument of consolation.

The other is more effectual. I shall touch it. Ye that suffers shall be
thought vvorthie of the kingdom of God, for the which ye suffer. He commes
nearer, as he would say, ye have no cause to trimble and fear, ye shall be
absoluted from that terrible judgment, and ye shall be counted worthy of the
kingdom of God. The enemies of the truth gathers of these words, that, there
is a merit and worthiness for suffering. But Paul Romans chap. 8. verse 18.
says, All this suffering is not vvorthie this weight of glory. So I answer.
This worthiness is not our own, but that which is Christ's worthiness and
properly pertaines to him, here is improperly ascryued to us: for, through that
strate conjunction we have with Christ, he and we are made one, and therefore
his graces, after a sort, are ascriued to us. I having Christ may challenge his
merit and worthiness, his graces that he hes conquised, as life everlasting,
etc. to me as ever man might challenge any land or heritage. Therefore gather
not here any worthiness simply without Christ. Always, I see the chief cause
of consolation to the godly that suffers here, is not so much that the wicked
shall be punished for ever, as that the godly shall be adjudged to glory. There
is the chief ground of my consolation, Let a man do all the evil he can to
me, my comfort is not that he shall be punished at that latter day, but that
then God shall glorify me at that latter day. Desire not so much the latter
judgment that then the wicked may be punished, as that thou may be glorified.
Look Gods purpose, he hes appointed this latter day, only to this end, that,
the godly may be glorified. The other end of the punishment of the offenders is
not the chief end, for the chief end that God looks to, is, that, he may be
glorified in mercy. It is true, he will be glorified in justice, but he delytes
most to be glorified in mercy. He seeks to be glorified in all his
properperties, in his wisdom, power, etc. But the mercy of the Lord passes
all, and he seeks above all, that, his glory should shine in his mercy toward
sinners. And certainly Christ was sent in the world that his glory should
shine in mercy. His preaching was to mercy. God hes greater glory in saving one
sinful soul in Christ, nor he hes in condemning of millions of the wicked.
So, brethren, wonder not that many goes to Hell, but, wonder, that, ever a
sinner should be safe, and marvel more at the mercy of God, in saving of one
sinner, nor at his justice in the perdition of ten thousands. So the mercy of
God is wonderful, his power and all is wonderful, but, his mercy passes all
his properties. To him be glory for ever.

AMEN.
THE SECOND LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA, CHAP. 1. verse. 6. 7. 8* 9. 6 For, it is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them, that trouble you.

7 And to you, which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall
shovv himself from heaven with his mighty Angels.

8 In flaming fire, rendering vengence unto them, that do not know God, and
which obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9 Which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power.


IN the first part of this chapter, ye have heard (brethren) next after the
saluatation a preface, wherein he rejoices together with them, for that
increase and grouth of the graces of God in them, namely, of their Faith, Love
and Charity. In rejoicing with them he gives God the thanks and all the
glory of whatsoever grace they had received. We entered the last day in the
second part, which contains a consolation: For these Thessalonians sustained
affliction and trouble for the faith of Christ, therefore the Apostle confortes
them. We heard the first argument of comfort he ministered to them, was from the
just judgment of God. Your troubles and afflictions ye suffer are all sure
tokens, that, Jesus Christ will come one day and judge this world justly:
Among all the assurances of the latter judgment ths is one. The trouble that
the godly suffers in this world. In the affliction and trouble of the godly,
ye may see (as it were, in a mirror) the Lord coming to judge the world, when
we see an innocent man troubled, we may gather our conclusion, there must
follow of necessity a day of count and reckning: it cannot be, that the just
Lord will suffer* unjust dealing to pass away unpunished. Then, in the second
argument he draws nearer to them, and sets down the end of this just judgment
that shall be, the end shall be for their well: For, when the Lord shall come
to judge the world, they shall be counted worthy of that kingdom, the kingdom
of Heaven, for the which they suffered. Worthy, not in themselves (for, all
the affliction under Heaven will not make a man worthy of Heaven*) but, worthy,
in the righteous merits of Christ, wherewith one day we shall be clad, and
for his worthiness and merit shall be adjudged to life everlasting

Now in the beginning of this text, he proves, that the day of judgment they
shall be adjudged to life euerlasiting and glory. He takes his argument from
the nature of that Judge. It is a just thing, says he, to God, to recompense
tribulation to them who troubles you. As if he had said, the Judge is just,
yea, by nature he is justice it self, and therefore, the judgment must be
just, and in his just judgment he must adjudge you to life, and he must render
to every man his due; being just, he must render to them who hes afflicted you,
affliction again. And to you who are afflicted, he must tender rest, even, as
he renders to us: For, I in my own person have been afflicted as well as ye
have been, and I am assured, he will render rest to me, and so also will he to
you: there is the meaning of the words. Then ye see, brethren, here, he grounds
their deliverance in that latter judgment upon the just nature of God: ye may
see our life everlasting unto the which we shall be adjudged in the day of
judgment leanes on a solid foundation, even the most just nature of the Judge;
all the world is not able to shake it, if thou can shake God, then thou may
shake our life everlasting. Sever justice from him, and sever life from his
own, both are alyke; do the one, if thou may do the other. And so, brethren,
ye see whereupon the assurance of your faith and hope of life everlasting is
grounded, it is grounded upon an insight of the nature of God, upon a knowledge
of him, what he is in his own nature, that he is just, he is righteousness it
self, knowing then that he is just, seeing, as it were, at the least in some
measure in God, and in his nature that he is just, I take assurance that that
just God shall adjudge me to life, I make this more general: all assurance,
all hope of any grace we have to receive at the hands of God, what ever it be,
must proceed from an insight and knowledge of the nature of God; how can I or
any man look for any good at the hands of him who is not known to me? how
shall I assure my self I shall get any good from him, I know not? Therefore,
the man or woman who would have faith in God, or hope of life, or any good at
his hands, must seek to pearce in to the deepnesse of the infinite nature of
God, so far as can be, to know him in his justice, wisdom, power, mercy,
and in all these infinite properties in his nature; then knowing him in these
infinite things, he must assure himself of such and such graces at his hands;
I know him to be powerful, therefore, with his power he will deliver me; I
know him to be merciful, in his mercy I am assured he will show mercy* on me; I
know him to be wise, therefore I am assured he will deal wisely with me, he
that is skillful and the God of order will deal skilfully with me. Then, ye
see, that, faith will never be builded upon a scroofe and superficial thing.
The world thinks it enough, to know, there is a God* to know his name and no
more. No, thy heart cannot be builded on a s^roofe. It is impossible to any to
have that solid and assured faith in God and that hope of life, except they
have a solid knowledge, in some measure, of his nature and of his properties.
And that body that preases not to pearce in to the deepnesse of God; cannot
have that Spirit of God: for, in the first Epistle to the Corinth. chap. 2.
verse. 10. it is said, The spirit of God searches, and what? in to the infinite
deepnesse of God, and there he lets thee see Gods mind toward thee. So,
that, if any be indewed with that searching Spirit of God, of necessity that
Spirit must conuoy their eyes, in some measure, in to the secreetes of God, to
the deepnesse of that infinite nature: It is a wonderful sight that a true and
solid faith hes in God. It will peace in to the infinite nature of God, and
build on that infinite nature the solid ground of faith. I speak this that
ye may seek to know the nature of God.

Yet to the words. It is a righteous thing with God, not to men, but, to God.
The meaning of the Apostle is, What ever seems right in the eye of man, this
is righteous in the eye of God, to render to every man his due. Now the Lord
forbid, that our life or death everlasting hang upon that that seems just and
unjust to man. Lord forbid, that Heaven or Hell hang at man's girdle, or
depended on his judgment, I assure you, many would go to Hell from hand. As
God in nature is a just Judge, even so, man by nature a wrangous and unjust
judge: Let him be given over to himself, he shall never judges one whit of
that which is just, Difference between the judgment of God, and of men.
at the least, he shall never judge sincerely of that work. I shall tell you
the differences between the judgment of God and man shortly. Man when he
judges is oft-tymes so blinded, that he sees not the thing that is just: for,
he will take up the thing that is unjust to be just, and the thing that is just
to be unjust. Then again, supponing by the light of the mind he see the thing
that is just, yet there is such a perverseness in his will and affection, that,
in spyte of the light of the mind he will pervert justice; that thing he
knows to be just he will call it unjust. And the thing he knows to be unjust
he will call it just. But it is not so with God: for, first, he by that
infinite judgment in him sees that thing that is just to be just, nothing can
begyle him, at the very first look he will know that which is just. And
then again, when he sees it to be just, there is such an uprightness in him
that he will decerne it to be just. Then, brethren, it is well with us that
our life and death dependes not on men, upon their judgment, their speaking,
it is well with us that our salvation and condemnation depends not on their
blind and corrupt affection, but on him that sees every thing, as it is, and
judges justly. There is the ground of our salvation.

Now to go forwards. The effect of his justice, what is it? The just Judge
sitting in his judgment seat he renders to every man their own, his
justice stands in distribution: He renders to the troublers, by the saw called
Lex talionis, even such thing as they did, to wit, trouble. But to the godly he
gives rest, joy and comfort for ever. What should he render to the afflicters
but affliction. To the troublers but tribulation again. So what ever man does,
he gettes the like repayed to him again in his hand: God readers infinite
trouble to the afflicters of the godly.
afflictes he, he shall be afflicted: trouble he* he shall be troubled, if all
the world had said the contrare. Indeed it is true, brethren, the affliction
that he receives, albeit it be alyke in quality: (for affliction is ever like
affliction) yet look to the quantity of that trouble the troublers shall
receive, It is incomparable, in quantity: for, in quantity it shall be
infinite. All that which they may do to the godly is but finit and hes and end:
But that affliction wherewith they shall be repayed home again is infinite.
And therefore read the Romans chap. 2. verse. 8. 9. where Paul tells of that
rendering alike at that great day, he cannot get words sufficiently to express
their affliction. They shall get indignation, then wraith, they shall be
oppressed with tribulation and anguish, and shall be casten in the press of
affliction. Whereto should we speak of this? Can any words express it? No,
all the words of the Angels of Heaven and men in the earth cannot express the
affliction they shall be afflicted with in that day. Indeed, the afflictions:
the godly sustaines here may be suffered, but the affliction the wicked shall
suffer at that day shall be intolerable. Now ye may say, how can this stand with
Gods justice, to repay a thing infinite for a finite thing; to render infinite
affliction for finite affliction; to render the pains of Hell for a short
temporal pain? I answer. God in repaying wrong to them that hes done wrong,
looks not so much to the wrong that one man does to another, as to the wrong
done to his own Majesty that is infinite. Thou oppressest thy neighbor, thou
troublest a brother. The Lord when he commes to judge, he looks not so much to
the wrong thou have done to thy neighbor, or to thy brother, as to the wrong
done to himself: He respects the wrong done to him who is infinite, and
therefore, thou shall be repayed with an infinite pain. This is Gods justice.
Then again. Never a man that did wrong. and that hes taken pleasure to do
wrong, did ever the wrong, nor was able to do so great wrong, as he would have
done, if he had gotten his will fulfilled in doing wrong, there would never be
an end of his wrong: If the trouber had his will in troubling, no end of his
trouble: If the murderer had his will in murdering his bloody svvord would
never be put up, but he would ever be murdering, he would be ever
oppressing. And therefore, God in his judgment looks not so much to the thing
thou do, to the stroke of thy hand, to the word of thy mouth, as he looks to
the thought and will of thy mind. It hes no end of evil. The Lord for thy
endless evil will in heart, will render thee an endless pain. This much
for the first rendering.

The second rendering is the rendering to the godly according to Gods justice.
What renders God to the godly? Not as he did to the wicked, affliction for
affliction, trouble for trouble; but by the contrare, where they were
afflicted, lying tread down in the press of affliction, then the Lord shall
louse their bonds, and take the oppressors and vvrap them in the same bonds,
and tread them under his feet. So, the second sort of rendering, God renders
infinite glory, to the godly afflicted.
is rendering not alyke to alyke, but a thing that is unlike, rendering to the
afflicted relaxation for ever. Brethren, there is no comparison betvveene the
afflictions of the godly, and that which the Lord shall render to them for
their affliction. That which the godly suffers is but a mean and small
thing. It is not vvorthie to be spoken of, to be rent on the Raoks, to be burnt
quick, for the name of Jesus, is not vvorthie to be spoken of in respect of
that wonderful glory we shall possess. The Apostle in that second chap. to
the Romans, 10. verse, cannot get words to express their glory which they
shall enjoy at that latter day. Honor and glory, that passes all the ignominy
that can be in the world a thousand stages, immortality, thou shall never die
again, life, and life that is without end, peace and joy everlasting. There is
no comparison. In the 2. Corinthians. chap. 4. verse 17. Paul calls the
afflictions of the godly, the momentaneall lightness of affliction: they are
first light, then their afflictions lastes but for a moment. Yet, says he,
they shall work to you an everlasting weight of glory, and glory that is
excellently excellent: he cannot get words to express it. The glory is in
quantity a weight, in time it is everlasting; in dignity it is excellently
excellent. Whereto shall I speak it? All the tongues that is in Heaven and
earth is not able to express that glory as it is vvorthie to be spoken of:
For, in the 1. Epist. to the Corinth. chap. 2. verse 7. it is said, These
things hes not entered in the heart of man that the Lord hes prepared for them
that love him. And who are they, if not they who suffers for him? This much for
the rendering both to the one and the other according to the just nature of God.

Now in the end he adds to this word, with us. He shall render relaxation to
you and to me also. I am troubled as you are. And therefore I hope for the same
deliverance and relaxation that I promise to you. Promise nothing to the
people, but the thing thou think to get a part of thy self. Promise no
resurrection, except thou think to get a part thereof. But the thing I
mark is this. I see all grace and glory is in a society with the Saints:
resurrection, life everlasting is with the godly: For as there is a communion
with the Saints in afflictiones 1. Peter chap. 5. verse 9. so there is a
communion with the Saints in rest, in grace and glory. Ephesians. chap. 3. verse
14. 1. Thessa. chap. 3. verse 13. And this thing we may take up ever in this
Apostle, he speaks of no grace but ever together with the Saints, all is in
one conjunction. Let none therefore prease to come to Heaven but in this
conjunction. Thou will leap from the Church, but I assure thee leap as thou will, and think to come to Heaven without that society, thou shall never come
to Heaven, thou shall never get relaxation but in this society. Think it no
small matter to be of the number of the godly: thou shall never be glorified in
that latter day, if thou be not one of that number. Then mark another thing.
He says, they shall get relaxation with him. Then it follows that he was
afflicted with them. Who gettes rest? but they who are troubled. Who will come
to Heaven? None but they who for Christ's sake on the earth hes suffered some
affliction, either within or without. No, look not that a man will come
sleeping to Heaven. Heaven is a relaxation out of bonds; who can be lowsed,
but they who have ^ene bound? This may learn us to take in patience to be
bound, to be evil spoken of, and to suffer either one thing or other for the
hope of that life everlasting.

Now to go forwards in the text follovving* ye have a short but a pithie
description of the Lord Jesus coming to judgment to render and repay. When
shall this rendering be? When shall affliction be rendered to the afflicters,
and relaxation to the bound and troubled? When our Lord Jesus Christ shall come
to judge the world. Not till then. There is the diet nothing but patience
until then. Thou art over sudden. Thou would have the Lord rendering to thee
rest, and to thy enemy trouble at the first moment. Thou would have him to put
thee in Heaven at the first hand, and thy enemies* in Hell at an instant. No,
bide, till the time of the manifestation come. Time of rendering.
Then, the time of rendering is the time of manifestation of light, it is the
day of light, of such a light as was never in the world* for, while Christ
come, all is hid* Heaven is hid. Hell is hid: Right is hid* wrong is hid;
damnation is hid; salvation is hid; life hid, death hid; godly men is hid;
reprobate men hid; all hid, till Christ come to judgment. 1. John chap 3. verse
2. When Christ shall come he shall be first revealed from Heaven, an infinite
light shall come from Heaven accompanying that glorious Majesty. Then Hell
shall be seen, Heaven shall be seen fair and broad, life shall be seen,
death shall be seen, all shall appear then as they are. So, bide still a
while, and bide in patience, thou who would have relaxation, and thy bonds
shall be loused in patience; bide, till that time. Thou that would see
afflicters afflicted^ly* still in patience* for, in that moment when thou shall
see the Lord coming from Heaven* thou shall see an end of all these things
such rendering as ever thou would have desired. So nothing but patience.

Now, mark the style the Lord gettes in this revelation and coming. He is
called* The Lord* A style of glory, a name of power. So the Lord in his
coming and manifestation shall be manifested like a Lord, and in a surpassing
power over quick and dead. Romans chap. 14. verse 9. He died and rose again,
that he might be Lord both of the quick and the dead. Then again he is called
Jesus, that is, a Savior* as he shall be manifested at that day as a Lord; so
shall he be manifested as a sweet Savior Jesus, to the just and godly of this
world. So, then, his appearance shall be as a Lord and Savior, to the comfort
of his elect and as a Lord in power, to the destruction of the wicked.

Now, to go forward* (I shall not be ^ur^ous, but shall open only the
words*) The Lords coming and revealing himself as Lord, and as Jesus the
Savior is descriued and set out in an high glory: Christ shall come from heaven.
His revelation shall first be from the Heaven. That word Heaven is not put in
lightly. He is reuealled not from the earth, or from any low part: No Monarchs
that ever reuealled themselves in the world came down yet from Heaven: The
Lords revelation when he shall show himself to the world shall be from the
Heaven: The Heaven now is a veil casten in between our eyes and the Lord. So
that we cannot see him, but at that day the Lord of glory shall break down
thro^gh the veil and come down to the air to be seen by us. Now if ye will
ask what an Heaven this is* Paul 4. chap. to the Ephesians. verse. 9. 10. says he
was carried to an heaven above a^ the^e heavens which we see. And therefore
these Heavens from the which the Lord shall appear, is a place above: He shall
break through all these Heavens while he offer himself to be seen in the
clouds. Then this coming from Heaven lets us see he shall come to his in
glory. The greater glory, the greater comfort to us, the greater discomfort to
the wicked, the greater fear and trembling to the reprobate. Take heed to this
ye who takes pleasure in sin, what fear and terror shall overtake you in that
day. So this is the first part.

Now in the next words he is des^ryued from his company that shall conuoy
him. Angels shall accompany Jesus, in his coming.
The Lord in his second coming he shall not come his alone; in the first
coming he came in the world basely, like a poor man accompanied with no
glorious train. The Lord was made poor that thou should be made rich; the
Lord took upon him ig^^miny that thou should get glory. Now in the second
coming he shall be gloriously a^companied. No never Monarch was so accompanied
when they came to their kingdom as the Lord Jesus shall. They shall wonder that
he going in his first coming in the world so poorly should have such glory.
The first company he shall come with shall be Angels, the gloriousest creatures
that ever was, not one or two, but millions of Angels, principalities and
powers. Jude says 14. verse. the Lord (...) come with thoulands of his S^ints.
And I say as I think, there shall not be an Angel in Heaven, but all shall
come with Jesus. And what shall be then habit? They shall come like an army
al as it were, in a^mes. Men who are in their armor in their harnes they
appear most glorious to the world. So all the Angels shall come as an army
armed with power; and therefore it is said, Angels of his power* terrible to
the wicked, because they shall be enarmed against them; comfortable to the
godly, for they come for their defense. The Angels in their own nature are
strong, by their creation potent; they are principalities, powers by virtue of
their own nature. But the word would import more. They shall not only be
strong with their own power, but, they shall come enarmed with the power of
Christ, with an exceeding and extraordinary kind of power, such a power, that
they were never seen in before, in such a majesty as never was seen of before,
and al to the glory of that glorious Lord Jesus, who is Lord and judge blessed
for ever. An earthly king when he is in his greatest glory is but accompanied
with selie infirm creatures who hes little strength. But, the Lord Jesus, who
is King of kings shall be accompanied at his coming with Angels of such an
infinite strength, that the devil and all the world shall not be able to
withstand any one of them.

Now, to go forward, the next company that shall be with him shall be
creatures, something inferior, Not so glorious as the Angels, Flaming fire
shall accompany Christ.
but, very glorious, a flamming fire, a fire with a great flame; and therefore,
fire that shall cast down from it exceeding great heat and light to the world.
Ye will ask, what fire will this be? I will not be curious herein: but, I
think, that, that fire that shall be at that day shall be that same natural
element, that the Lord created, when he made the rest of the creatures. This
appears very well, of Peter, in his second Epistle, chap. 3. verse. 6. 7. When
he says, the first world was destroyed by water, and the second world shall
be destroyed with fire. Certainly, as the first world was destroyed by a
natural water; so, shall the second world be destroyed by a natural fire.
This fire shall then appear in such a glory, quantity, and light, as it was
never of before: because it is employed in the service of a most glorious Lord.
Would ye know what shall be the use of this glorious fire? Read. 2. Epist.
of Peter chap. 3. This fire going before him shall burn* first, the heavens;
then, it shall come to the elements, and melt them all with heat. It shall next
come to the earth and shall burn up the earth and all the works. Would ye know
what shall come after? There shall be a new heaven and a new earth. And so,
this fire shall* serve for the purifying and burning of the dross of the
creatures: for, all the creatures, the Heaven, the Earth, the Sun* the Moon,
he^ drawn on a corruption, through our sins. But, is there no other use of
this fire? This fire shall also in the Lords justice be a fire to devour the
adversaries* Heb. chap 10. verse 27* to burn the reprobate for eeuer. And
therefore, vain man, who takes pleasure in thy sins, let ^he memory of this
flamming fire terrif^e thee, that, in time, thou may repent. Now, this much for
that glorious company, wherewith the Lord Jesus shall be accompanied in that
glorious coming.

Now, come to the effects, in the next words. When he is come from the Heaven
accompanied with the glorious Angels and flamming fire, certainly, he will not
come for nothing: Kings in the earth may fli^ their camps for nothing; but,
the King of glory will not do so. Now, the effect, in one word, is,
rendering, repaying, recompencing; the judgment is, in rendering to every one,
his own due: In rendering, first he begins at the godles and wicked after
his coming in such a glory. He shall render the wicked, that, which is due to
them, that is, vengeance. To whom? To them, that know God on this earth, (...)
them, that obeyed not the Gospel of the Lord Jesus. Mark it. The Lord keep
us from the causes of this rendering. There shall be none, that knew not God,
Faith accompanied with a troup of graces.
and obeyed not the voice of Christ in the Gospel, but* vengence shall
overtake them in that glorious appearing of that judge in the world* These are
the two great ^aultes and sins, that shall procure, in the day of judgment,
vengence* from Jesus Christ. Now, as there are two things, that procures this
vengence, so, there are two things, that brings life at that great appearance
of the Lord Jesus Christ. The first, is, the knowledge of God. The next, is,
the knowledge of his Son the Lord Jesus Christ* John chap. 17. verse 3. This
is life everlasting, to know thee to be the only God, and whom thou have
(...), Jesus Christ know these two, know God, know Christ in his Gospel,
(...)* vengence shall not overtake thee* Then, by the plain contrare. There
are two grounds and causes of death and damnation* The misknowing of God, and
the (...) of Jesus here (...) in his Gospel, and these two are (...) gether.
Then* brethren, in one word, Let not the Jew be bold to say, he knows God*
when he knows not his Son; all the knowledge a man can have of God, when he
knows not his Son, is nothing: for, God the Father cannot be known, but in
his Son Jesus Christ, and without the knowledge of God in his Son, there is no
salvation from judgment. The Son is the Image of God, and God will be known
in him. Heb. chap. 1. verse 3. He is the brightness of his glory, and the
ingraued form of his person. So, that there can be no sight of God, but in the
face of Christ the man. Join these two together, know God know the Son, know
the Son that thou may know the Father; for, no sight of the Father, but, in the
Son.

This further would be marked. When he speaks of obedience to Christ. He says
not, they that obeyed not the Lord Jesus, but, he says, They who obeyed not
the Gospel of the Lord Jesus. This is spoken, to the commendation of the
Gospel, and of the preaching of it, and this base ministry which men esteems
so little of. Look how he ranks this Gospel and the preaching of it with
Christ himself. He counts them that obey the Gospel, to obey Christ, and he
counts them, who are rebellious to the Gospel, to be rebels to Christ. And
therefore say I, boast as thou will, of Christ, and of the knowledge of him, if
thou despise this Gospel, and this base ministry, vengence shall light on thee:
Thou will say, thou know Christ and in the mean time, there will be nothing
in thy heart, but, a contempt of the Gospel and of the preachers of the Gospel.
But, boast as thou will, of the knowledge of Christ; thou shall find, if thou
be impenitent in this point, vengence* shall light on thee. Rebels to the
Gospel and preaching thereof, in earth, rebels to Christ, in the Heaven. Think
not, when thou hungerst the Gospel out of the land, by drawing away in thy
^lookes all the thing the Gospel should be sustained on* that, thou know God
and Jesus Christ. What matter of the hungring of the bodies of men, in respect
of the Gospel. When thou closest the mouth of men, so, that, for hunger, they
are not able to preach, say not, thou know Christ and loves the Gospel,
thou lie falsely. When through thy gredines thou art an hinderer to the
ministry, whom the Lord thrusts out, to be dispensators of the food to the
souls of men, thou hungerst the Gospel. When thou do this, say not, thou
love Christ. Thou will say in that great day, Lord, where saw we thee
hungring, where saw we thee naked, etc. But, the Lord then shall say, What ever
thou did to the Ministers of the Gospel, thou did it to me, thou stayed the
planting and progress of the Gospel, through thy avarice. O sacrilegious
Abbot, Bishop, and Priour, and the rest of that rabble, and o ye ravening
woolfes, that deuoures the teinds, to the prejudice of the plantation of this
ministry and Gospel, to the hungring of innumerable souls. Look to this matter
and tak up your selves, that the Lord meet you not in vengence, look to this
at this time, and with draw not the moyen whereby this Gospel may be
propagated in the world. I speak no more of this matter. One day will show the
truth of these things.

Yet, ere I leave the words. Mark, further. He is speaking of the godly, that
were persecuted, and he brings in the Lord Jesus rendering, and yet, he says
not, he shall render vengence to them, that afflicted and troubled the godly,
he speaks not of them, that were afflicted. But, he says, to them, who obeyed
not the Gospel of the Lord Jesus. So, he touches the grounds: persecution and
troubling of the saints rises ever on this ground, rebellion to God, rebellion
to Christ, no persecuter, but a rebel to God, a contemner of the Gospel of
Christ, be is a contemner of God and Christ. And in the meane-tyme, with this,
he comforts the persecuted Thessalonians, they shall not escape trouble, who
hes troubled you, because the Lord hes his entrest. And therefore, assure the^,
if there were no other thing, but, this rebelling against God and Christ, of
necessity, vengence must follow. Trouble ever rises of misknowledge of God.
What matter of men, in afflicting men, they ^rebell against God, and that
rebelling shall not escape punishment.

Now, in the next words, he commes more particularly to the vengence. To sca^se
of these things oue^ far, it is but vain curiosity. Therefore, it is
expedient, in these things, to ^old fast the plain words, that we alter not to
the one side, nor, to the other. Curious spirits hes spoken much of this
matter without any grounds. It might have been asked, What can this vengence
be* He answers, and calls i^ a perdition. Then, he calls it, everlasting
perdition, and wrack of the creature. There are sundry sorts of vengences, all
vengences are not the utter wrack of the creature: for, many men after
punishment will get up their heads again and come through, but* after this
punishment, utter wrack and perdition shall follow. A beast, when it dies and
is feld, it is wracked; but, look the nature of this wrack, it shall be
everlasting, a wrack without an end, a death without a death, a death that
shall never have an end, ay dying and never dead. So first, it shall be
perdition and an utter wrack, and then, never shall have an end. The ho^ling
and utter cry of the reprobat in Hell, ^ how dolorous is it? But, what matter
of the extremity of it, if it had an end; but, alas, extremity without end of
pain, how dolorous is it? Many will never know this, till they be shot in Hell:
Heaven and Hell is thought mocking: Many will never know, there is an Hell, until
they feel it in experience. The Lord waken us, that once we may think of this.
Alas, there is such a stupiditie in the heart of man, that he can never believe
this. So, there the vengence, a perdition, and an endless perdition.

Now, in one word. He resolves this particular vengence in the own grounds;
there is, first, a perdition; then, an eternity of perdition. In the next
words, he lets you see the grounds, first, of perdition, and then, of the
eternity thereof. As to the perdition it self, He says, it commes from the
face of God. The wicked shall not see so soon the face of Jesus Christ the
Judge at that day, but, as soon they shall melt away, as the wax at the fire;
and as ye see the matter of melting is in the wax it self; so, the matter of
the melting of the wicked shall be in themselves. But, what matter, if it had
an end. And therefore, next, he lays down the ground of ^rernitie ^aine from
the glory of the power of the infinite Judge. The power of the glorious Judge
is eternal, infinite and endless; the power of man hes an end. He is a mighty
monarch to day; but, to morrow euanishes; his power lasts not. But, the power
of the lord Jesus shall never hauean end; and from once he begin to pu^ the
finger of his power on the soul of the wicked, they shall never be free of
vengence. It is a terrible thing to fa^in the hands of an angry God; from once
he grip thee, his hand shall never louse* his power indures ever, and therefore
shall thy pain endure ever. So, ye that will think, an endless pain cannot
be, lift up your eyes and consider the eternity of his power and infinitnes of
God, and then ye may see the great and everlasting vengence that he hes to be
po^red on the wicked, and great and everlasting mercy on them that pertaines to
him in Christ. The Lord give us eyes to see it, even for his Christ's sake. To
whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE THIRD LEC^TVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
^. THESSA. CHAP. 1. verse* 10. 11. 12. 10 When he shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that believe (because our
testimony towaryou was believed) in that day.

11 Wherefore, we also pray alvvayes for you, that our God may make you
vvorthie of his calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and
the work of says with power.

12 That the name of the Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, (...) in
him, according to the grace of our god, and of the Lord Jesus Christ*


THE last day ye heard (brethren) the purpose of the Apostle in this place was
to comfort the Thessalonians against the affliction^s vvhere-vvith for the
time they were exercised. The first and the cheifest argument of consolation
was taine from that just jugdement of God when he commes: for the afflictions
that the godly and innocent suffers in this life for the name of Jesus Christ,
are as a mirror wherein we may see the Lord Jesus coming to judgment, to take
vengence on the afflicters, and to render and to give rest (...) his own. The
Apostle taking occasion of this argument, points out the Lord Jesus coming to
judge the world. He notes the place from which he shall come, an Heaven above
all these visible Heavens; he notes the company wherewith in his coming he
shall he accompanied. First the Angels of his power enarmed with the power of
the Judge the Lord Jesus to execute his just judgment. The next company is a
flamming fire; This fire at the coming of the Lord Jesus shall burn up the
Heaven, shall melt the elements, shall burn up this earth, and all the works
that is in it, as Peter declares in his 2. Epistle chap. 3. and at last shall
consume and deuore the wicked, and that everlastingly, ever burning without
end. When he hes painted out the Lords coming to judge the world, he subjoynes
the effects that shall follow upon his coming and judgment. The first effect
is, he shall inflict vengence to them who in this world knew not God, and would
not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And after this, he descryues
this vengence more particularly, it shall be an utter destruction, so that
they shall never get up their head again, and this destruction shall be
endless; a death without a death, the sorest death that ever man died; the
cause of the perdition shall be the face and angry countenance of the Judge,
his face shall be as fire, and they shall be as wax, the heat of his face
shall melt them as the fire melts the wax: the cause of the eternity of their
perdition shall be the glory of his power, his power shall never have an end,
and therefore their pain, anguishe and perdition shall never have an end. The
power shall ever hold them still in a torment, and so this vvraith everlasting
shall sease and feed upon them for evermore. And so they shall ever be doing
and never be dead.

Now, in this text, we have the second effect, that, shall follow on the
coming of the Lord to his judgment. The first effect concerned the wicked.
This effect concerns the godly. To come to the words, shortly. He says,
When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints. The meaning is, this
vengence of perdition everlasting shall be inflicted on the rebels of God and
Christ, at that time, when he shall come to glorify his own, the Saints,
that in their glory and life everlasting he may be glorified himself. Chief
end of Christ's coming* is, to glorify the souls.
This is the meaning, shortly. Now, if ye will mark the first words, When he
shall come. Ye may see, that, the first and chief end of the coming of the
Lord Jesus to judgment, is, not the wrack of the reprobate, but, his chief
end in his coming to judgment shall be, the glorifying of his own, that in
their glory, he may be glorified for ever. The order of the giving out of
their doom and sentence of life and death at that day makes this master
pla^ne. Read the order of the giving forth of this sentence in the 25. chap.
of Matthew verse. 34. etc. John 5. cha. 29. verse. The sentence shall be given
first to the godly, and the Lord shall say first to them ere he open his mouth
to the other, Come ye blessed of my Father and (...) that kingdom that is
prepared for (...). Then when that sentence is past he shall draw the godly to
be assessours to him, and with their consent and approbation in a manner he shall
come to the doom of the reprobat* and shall say, Dep^^ from me to the devil
and his A^gels. John. 5. chap. verse. 28* 29* The hour shall come, when all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall come forth, that
have do^e good to the resurrec^^^^* of life, but, they that have done evil, to
the resurrection of condemnation This his order of proceeding shows that the
chief end of Christ's coming is the glorifying of his own. The cause is,
because in the glorifying of his elect chiefly shall God be glorified. And
seeing the Lord, chiefly respects his own glory, therefore, the first respect
he shall have in judging, shall not be* to punish the wicked* (for, ^e shall
cast them by his hand, as dogs) but, to glorify his own.

To go forward in the words. When he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints. That is to say, when he shall come, first, to glorify his Saints* and
so, consequently, to glorify himself* For, he cannot be glorified in his
Saints, except he glorify them first. And therefore, it must be understood,
that he must glorify them, that in their glory, he may be glorified. Now,
mark. As the first and chief end of the coming of the Lord to judgment
shall be the glorifying of his Saints: So, the chief mean, whereby the Lord
shall be glorified shall not be the damnation of the reprobate, but* it shall
be the life and salvation of the godly because in the godly at that day shall
be manifested to the whole world, the goodness of the Lord Jesus, his mercy,
his omnipotent power: in one word, his Majesty and his glory, chiefly shall be
manifested in them. So, that, the whole world, when they see them stand up, as
it were, in a shout shall cry, Glory, glory, glory be to the Lamb, that
sits on the Throne, when they shall see the elect so shining in glory, they
shall brust forth, in crying, glory, glory, glory, and nothing shall be
heard but glory ever more. These are the things, we shall once see and hear,
either to our everlasting glory, or to our everlasting destruction. It is
true, the Lord Jesus that day shall be glorified also, in the damnation of the
reprobat, and that, in his justice. Ye read, in the 14. of Exodus I shall be
glorified in Pharao and his army, in pouring out a vengence on them, I shall
drown them. But, yet, the justice God, the justice of Christ serves not so
much to his glory, as his mercy does. And it is a greater matter, yea and
more glory shall come to him by the saving of one soul at that day, nor by
the condemning of an hundredth. Came Christ Jesus in the world, for this end
cheeflie, that, God should be glorified in his justice? No. Christ came and the
Gospel of mercy is given us, that, men and Angels in that day should glorify
God, cheeflie in his mercy.

Now, to go forward. And to be made marvelous in all them that believe. This
is, in effect that same, which he spok of before, even, the glorifying of God;
for, it is one thing, the Lord to be glorified, and to wonder at him. The
meaning is, shortly. When he shall come. First, he shall make the faithful
wonderful, in the sight of the world, and then, in their wonderfulnes, all the
world shall wonder at him, who hes made them wonderful. Now, mark. The Lord
Jesus, in Esaias 9. chap. 6. verse. among all the names he gets there, he is
called the vvonderfull and the marvelous one. Now, this name, in effect shall
show the selfcheefly in that day of judgment: for, chiefly in that day Christ
shall be wonderful, and all the world shall wonder at him. It is but a little
wondering we have here. Christ, at his coming, vvo^derfull.
Ye know, wondering presuppones novelties, things of exceeding great importance.
Then, it must follow, that, the Lord Jesus at that day shall be reueiled to
the world in such a wonderful glory, at never man, nor Angel saw yet^ it shall
be such a glory, as never eye saw, ear heard, or, once entered into the heart of
man, as the Apostle ^aies, 1. Cor. 2. chap. 9. verse. They who saw him ^^ani^ed
in a vile habit, judged, condemned, scourged, and crucified under Pontius
Pilat, they shall wonder, when they shall see that Lord (whom they thought once
so vile) raised up and exalted to such a sublimity and hight of glory. Pilat,
then, shall wonder; the Priests shall wonder, they, that with their wicked hand^
crucified him shall wonder at that day. And in one word, there shall be nothing
in that day in Heaven and earth but a wondering at the Lord Jesus Christ and
his Saints glorified. Ye see here next the chief mean that shall make the
Lord wonderful, to be the wonderfulnesse of the glory of his Saints and
elect, whom in that day he shall make wonderful. The world shall look in and
wonder at them, and then they shall look to the Judge and wonder at him. Then
in that day they who hes believed in Jesus in this life (look what faith brings
with it) shall be blessed and made glorious: For first these faithful shall be
made so marvelous in glory that they shall astonish the whole world: I tell
thee more, when thou shall be so translated, when thy vile body shall be so
changed, thou shall wonder at thy self: for the ear has not heard, the eye
has not seen, etc. that wonderful glory which then thou shall enjoy. As for
the wicked of the world the troublers and afflicters of the godly, when they
shall look to any one of the glorious elect, they shall weep and wonder. This
is set down in the 5. chapter of the book of wisdom, albeit Apocrypha. First
they shall mourn and weep, when they shall see the glory of the godly, and
say, O we fools and sensles bodies, esteemed we not the life of these godly in
the world a miserable life? Then they shall come on with wondering, How is this
that this vile body so shynes, and that he is so exalted? So they shall both
mourn at this sight and wonder, and weeping and vvondering they shall count
themselves to have been fools and sensles bodies. The Lord give us grace to
seek that true wisdom in time. For certainly that true wisdom is esteemed
foolishness in this world, and he that would be wise, let him be a fool
first, he shall never be counted wise that day, except he have been a fool
first, and humbled under this foolish preaching of the Gospel. It is true, the
condemnation of the reprobate shall be a mean to make the world wonder, and to
make the Judge wonderful. O, the pains that shall be inflicted on the
reprobate shall be wonderful, and they shall be set up as spectacles of shame
at that day, and the godly shall wonder at their shame and confusion. O,
wonderful shall that weightinesse of judgment be! they shall wonder that ever
there should be such a wraith in God, they shall wonder that ever the arm of
God should be so heavy upon them. O, Hell is lighted now (will they say) the
wraith of God is lighted now! O, what a mass and weight of wraith is this that
we see now! Men will now leap here and there, and make little count of the
weightinesse of the Lords hand, and securely contemn threatenings and
judgment; but in that day, to their everlasting woe they shall find it the
heauiest thing that ever was: for by the weight of it, they shall be so pressed
down that they shall never be able to prease up again. Alas, what a dead
senslesnesse is this of men in this world that they regard neither Heaven no^
Hell, living like beasts and not as men! Lord waken us in time to acknowledge
these things.

Now to go forward. Who are these that shall be made wonderful, that in them
the Lord Jesus may be made wonderful? In one word, He calls them, believers,
a base and simple style among us. He called them before Saints, holy ones; and
now he commes to the ground of their holiness, and calls it faith. It will
not be a fair, honest, civil dealing with our neighbor that will do the
turn, albeit many men thinks so. No, but faith in Christ must be the ground;
any man that in any measure hes had a sense and feeling of that life, he will
find in his experience he can not have hope or assurance of life in the
fairest outward dealing that ever men did, except he find his heart settled on
God, and his anchor casten on Christ. This is the only cause of thy salvation,
faith in Christ. As for all thy good works, they are only effects and tokens
that thou have that faith in Christ, which will do the turn, and is the only
cause of thy salvation. O, blessed for ever is that heart that hes faith kept,
let never thy remembrance be off it. What ever thou think, or speak, keep
it; have thou it? be assured of thy salvation; lackest thou it? do all thou
can, thou shall die. Seek ever to have Christ in thy heart, And seeing, we who
are now living may die in one moment, Lord, if we should not seek earnestly to
have Christ dwelling in our hearts! It is only his merits that saues us.

In the next words he defines them that he calls believers, and pointing them
out, he says not, they that believes in Jesus Christ, but they who in this
life hes believed my testimony, the Gospel teached by me, by my
fellow^seruants, by the rest of the Apostles and Pastors. So, take up the
nature of this faith and be not ^egyled with it. It is not faith in Christ
barely, but faith in Christ preached. By whom? by a selie body. What was Paul?
a selie body. So look never for life nor salvation in that great day, except
thou humble thy self under the foolish preaching (as men thinks it) and
believe the foolish teaching of the Gospel. Thou shall never come to grace
and salvation except thou humble thy self under this preaching, which thou, by
nature and in thy judgment, thinks foolish. If thou believe not in this, take
thee this doom, never shall thou be justified in that great day.

Now to come to the last words in the verse. In that day. There is an Emphasis
in this word, that day, the Lord shall be glorified in the godly, in the glory
of his own, in that day. It is true, brethren, at this time, in this same
moment, the Lord Jesus is glorified, and the Saints and faithful hes their own
glory. But the glory of Jesus and his Saints is not in that fullness which
shall be at that day. Thou see him now, as it were, in a mirror darkly, he
is coming behind thee, and thou art looking in a glass, but at that day thou
shall see him face to face with these bodily eyes, thou see him now in
glory* but in that day thou shall see him in a surpassing and exceeding great
glory. It is even so with the Saints. We are the Sons of God now, we are
glorious now; but in that day we shall have another kind of glory. The
Apostle John 1. Epistle. 13 chap. 2. verse, says, Dearly beloved, we are the
Sons of God now, but it appears not what we shall be. The very sight of
him shall transform us. So that day in the 2. chap. to the Romans 1. verse, is
called the day of manifestation, all things shall be manifested. Glory,
righteousness, Heaven, Hell, and all hid now. But in that day all shall be
brought forth to that light, and be manifested. The Heaven shall be opened to
see that glory in it, the Hell to see that darkness and shame in it. The Sun
shall shine then most clearly, right shall then appear right in the own
garment of righteousness; wrong shall be seen to be wrong; sin shall
appear in the own color, every one shall see it perfitely, all things shall
be maid manifest.

Now, in the next verse to the end of the chapter, the Apostle, to conquise to
himself the benevolence and good lyking of the Thessalonians (why should not
the teacher have the good will of his people whom he teaches) lets them see, all
that he does is for their cause. Wherefore, says he, we also pray alvvaies
for you, that our God may make you worthy of this calling, etc. Well this sets
out this part* of the Minister, as he teaches life to the people, So, let his
prayer be ever to God, to help them forward to that life and glory he speaks
of. This for his part. Then, ye see again, Prayer a mean to life.
among all the means of bringing men to life, Prayer is one. Thy own prayer,
the prayer of the Pastor for thee. I call it the mean, not the cause: for,
thy own prayer will never merit Heaven, albeit thou pray continually, and
be of that opinion, that thy prayer will merit Heaven, vain art thou, thou
shall never get it. Yet, the Lord hes appointed prayer as a mean to further
men and women to Heaven. If thou neglect thy duty, thou shall never come to
Heaven. The Lord raise us out of this beastlines and senslesnes that makes us
so unwilling to pray. Men will rise in the morning and go to bed at night
without one motion of prayer; but if thou continue so, thou shall never come to
Heaven: for, mark the Lords doing. As the Lord hes ordained thee for life, so,
he hes ordained thee a midway, whereby he bids thee go forward to li^e. If thou
take not the straight way the Lord hes given thee, but tak^ ^ by rode of thy
own, thou shall never come to Heaven. What should keep Christ with us, but only
this prayer? what should sanctify all the speeches of our mouth, actions of our
hands, but this continual praying? The remembering of this life should stir us
up to prayer: for it is and shall be found the way to that life.

But to come to the matter of his prayer. He says, for this cause we pray for
you, That, God would make you worthy of his calling. By this calling he
means life everlasting, by the mean he understands the end: for, he takes
not the word calling properly, but he takes it for the end of our calling,
which is life everlasting. Then, ye see, he craves this life and glory at the
hands of God. Then, Life everlasting the gift of God.
learn. This life everlasting is the only gift of God, thou have it not by
nature in thy own self, it must be given thee, as a free gift of God, or,
thou shall never get it. Further, I see one, or, two means, whereby we must
come to this life, set down here. Before thou come to that life, thou must
have a calling to it, albeit thou would reaue a kingdom here, by tirannie,
yet, thou shall not come to this kingdom, except thou have a former calling to
it. And when have thou this calling? When this same word of the Gospel soundes
in thy ear, (...)
and thou beleuest in it. If thou lay not to thy ear here, thou shall never be
called; and lackest thou that calling by the word, thou shall never get life
everlasting. Then, the other thing, I see here, that goes before life and
glory, is a worthiness, a dignity, ere thou enter in that kingdom, thou
must have a worthiness. Who will choose a man to an earthly kingdom without
dignity and worthiness? Therefore, he says, that he would make you vvorthie.
O, but understand, it is not my worthiness, nor thy worthiness, inherent in
me, or, thee. No, it is that worthiness of Christ Jesus, that must be imputed
to us. Christ's worthiness must be imputed to us, and we clad with it. When ye
hear this word worthiness in the Scripture, take it never to be an inherent
worthiness in thee, or, in me, but the worthiness of that only worthy one,
Christ the Lord, made ours, by faith.

Then to the words following. He points out more clearelie this life
everlasting, and says, That he would fulfill all his good pleasure. Which
good pleasure? Which commes of his gentleness and goodness. Then he adds. And
that he would fulfill. What? a work. Whereof? of faith. After what manner?
with power and might. Then there must be a power, or, else, faith will not be
fulfilled. Now to return to every word. That he would fulfill Mark then.
Life everlasting, glory everlasting is the accomplishment of a thing begun, of
the decree going before, of life everlasting. First, there must be an entry to
it, there must be a be^ginning going before, and then, life everlasting commes
on, as fulfilling of the thing going before. What is the thing that goes
before? It is his good pleasure. By his good pleasure is understood the decree
of life, that was given out from all eternity, concerning his own. So, life
everlasting is but the accomplishment of a decree, that was made in that
glorious kingdom of Heaven before the world was made. Thy life begins at a
decree that never had a beginning and ends in a glory that never shall have an
end. He calls it not simply a good pleasure, but all his good pleasure,
whereby he means here an ample thing. He means with the decree of life, all
the means that serves to bring us to life. There is not one mean to life but
all must come of this decree. Art thou called in time? it commes of a decree.
Rom 8. 28. Art thou justified? it commes of a decree? Prayest thou? it commes
of a decree. Nothing commes to thee in the midway of thy journey, but all
commes of a decree. What ever commes, whether it be prosperity, or,
adversity, think no^, it commes by chance, but, it is a mean, that the Lord
hes ordained from all eternity to bring thee to life everlasting. 1. Pet. 2.
21. So, life everlasting proceeds of a decree from all eternity. He calls it
the good pleasure of his goodness. By this word goodness he designs the
cause of this eternal decree, not to be any thing, which God foresaw in us, but
his own only goodness, and that, to the end he may have all the praise of
our salvation. Read Ephesians. 1. 5. 6. 9. Yet, there must be another thing, ere
one get life. What is it? He calls it a work, that hes a beginning. The
work, that must be accomplished hes a beginning, and then, it ends and
resolves in life. And what is the work? Faith in Jesus Christ. What is life
everlasting then? (...)
but, the accomplishment of this faith, that we have in this God: Faith is this
building, that goes up continually. John chap. 6. verse 29. When the Jews
glories in their works, Christ says, This is the work of God, that ye
believe in me. This is the building, that must be builded, even, Faith. Thou
must ever be building this faith, this day, one stone, to morrow again,
another, until thou come to the top stone, which is glory and life
eternal. Paul says 2. Timoth. chap 4. verse. 7. 8. I have gone forward in this
building, I have kept the fay^h; now, the crown of righteousness is laid
up for me. Then life everlasting is the crown of faith, without faith, nor
crown. Who can crown thee, except thou have faith? It is faith, that, must be
crowned. Look thou to be crowned, and in the mean-time, have thou no faith?
thou deceaues thy self. Therefore, seek ever faith in Christ, or, else, seek
never to get that crown. Then, he says, with power. This must be done with
power, or, else, it shall never be done. All the Monarchs of the world, and all
the Angels shall not be able to lift up this crown, to set it on thy head, It
must be only the infinite power of Christ, that must lift^vp that crown and
set it on thy ^ead, after thou have gone forward in that work and come to the
end. It is said Phill. 3. chap. 21. verse, When the Lord shall come, this vile
body shall be transformed and made like that glorious body of Christ. What is
the mean? Through the effectualnesse of his power, whereby he is able to
subdevv all things, the devil, sin and death that would hold thee aback from
that glory. There must be power in the Lord, to kill sin, Hell, and to overcome
the devil and all thy enemies. And the Lord by his power must give thee power
over all, before thou be made conform to him.

Now, to come to the last verse. He sets down the last end of his praying.
That the name of the Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him.
Then, the chief respect he hes, in praying, is, not their glory, but, Gods^
glory. Howbeit he would have the Thessalonians to be saved, yet, that is not
his last end, but, al their salvation is, that, God may be glorified in them.
The end of his praying is, that, God may be glorified in them; because our
glory should rend to the glory of God. Now, mark one rule in praying. When we
pray for life, either to our selves, or, to others, let not our minds be so
much set on our and their glory and salvation, as, Gods' gglory chiefly to be
required, in our prayer.
that, the God of glory may be glorified, and say, Lord, I seek glory and
salvation, that in my glorifying and salvation, thou may be glorified; and
so, let ever that glory of God be more precious and dear to us, nor all the
glory and life can come to us. And they that gets grace to pray this ways,
they may be assured, they shall be glorified for ever. So, renounce all, Heaven
it self, our joy, our glory, and our inheritance in Heaven, to the end, that,
he, to whom all glory pertaines may be glorified. This did Moses and Paul, they
craved to be ^^athema, that, God might be glorified. And this should be the
desire of every man, seek, if it were thy own condemnation, rather, ere God,
who created thee be not glorified; prefer Gods glory to thy own salvation.
Lord give us this zeal to his glory. What shall the end be? Trowest thou to
lose any thing by so doing. No, look what God says to Moses, Exodus 32. chap.
33. verse, when Moses desired to be scraped out of the book of life. No, the
Lord says, Moses, thou, who so earnestly desired my glory, I will glorify
thee, and will scrape them out, that deserves to be scraped out. Then, the way,
to come to life eternal, is, to renounce thy self, to seek only, that, thy
God may be glorified. O, the joy, that is in the heart, when we find that zeal,
that we can prefer Gods glory, to our own salvation. That joy surpasses all
joy, that ever was.

He adds to another thing, to this, He says, That he may be glorified in you
and ye in him. Learn, there is no piece of glory, that, Christ gets, but it
redounds to his elect. Is he glorified in thee? that same glory commes back
again to thee and glorifies thee. I shall tell you how it stands. First, thy
life and glory, that ye call everlasting life, is nothing but, a fair glance,
that strikes from the glorious face of Jesus Christ as ye see the Sun shining
on a man, makes him to shine: So, thy glory and life is as a very glance, (...)
that strikes from the glorious countenance of Christ, as the glance of the Sun
striking on a black body makes that body glance: o, much more will the beams
of the face of Christ beating on thee, make thee to shine. What was the shining
of the face of Moses, that made the people afraied, but, a glance of the face
of God. Then, when the glory of God hes first shined on us, we shine; and then,
our shining again with a reflex goes back to that Son of righteousness, it
came from, and he of new shine^ again on us, in a fairer shining* nor before.
Now, in this mutual reflex and shining, yea, and the (...)
Christ is both the beginning and the ending: the shining begins at him and
ends at him. And therefore, it is said Romans 11. chap. 36. verse, For, of him,
and through him, and for him, are all things: to him be glory for ever. Now,
what shall be the cause of this glory of ours? He sets it down in these
words, according to the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace is
the cause of our shining. Grace from the Father, grace from the Son. Then,
there is nothing, but grace, there shall be nothing, but, grace in Heaven,
grace in earth; no merit in this earth, no merit in Heaven: No merit in this
earth, but, Jesus merit, no merit in Heaven, but, only grace, grace and
mercy in earth: all standing here and in Heaven is only by grace. And so, the
cause of our everlasting standing is everlasting grace, the only grace of God,
in Christ. To whom, with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all glory for ever.

AMEN
THE FOVRTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 1. 2. 3. 1 NOW we beseech you, brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our assembling unto him,

2 That ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor troubled neithr by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as it were from us, a^ though the day of
Christ were at hand.

3 Let no man deceive you by any means:


IN the chapter preceding ye have heard, brethren, first of the salvation of
the Apostle, wherein he wishes to the Thessalonians grace, from God the Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Then we came to his preface, wherein he
rejoices and gives thanks to God, for the increase of grace, of faith, of love
they had received. And thirdly, we came to that consolation, that he ministers
to them against the affliction and trouble under the which they lay for the
faith of Christ. Now to come to this chapter. In it the Apostle first
admonishes the Thessalonians that they give not ear to deceivers and false
teachers, who would persuade them that the coming of the Lord Jesus was at
hand, and thereafter ^e enters in a refutation of this point of false doctrine
and heresy. Now to make this more plain. The occasion (as it appears) of
that* which the Apostle wrytes in this chapter is this, In his* first Epistle
written to them and fourth chapter thereof he spoke concerning the second
coming* of the Lord Jesus, (...)
and beside other things, as we may read there, he specifies these words, We,
says he, which live and are remaining in the coming of the Lord shall be
caught up in the clouds with them who are departed this life after their
resurrection. The Thessalonians reading this, incontinent concludes, Christ
shall come ere ever we die, we shall be found on life at his coming, and we
shall be re^t up in the air to meet the Lord in the clouds with them who
are departed* Now in this meane-tyme the devil is busy to confirm them in
this error, and therefore he raises up deceyuers and false teachers that went
about to persuade them of the truth of this, as though it had been true, that
they should be living at the Lords coming. These false teachers alleged for
them partly the revelation of the Spirit of God, partly a tradition of Paul,
which both were false. Therefore, the Apostle understanding this, took
occasion to write this Epistle, and especially, this second chapter, wherein
he admonishes or rather effectuouslie requests them, that they suffered not
themselves to be deceived, as though the coming of the Lord were at hand, and
thereafter falls out in a refutation of this error.

To return to the words. In the words we have read in the first verse we
have the earnest request of the Apostle, together with an obtestation adjuring
them with all gravity, by the coming of the Lord Jesus, by the assembling of
the elect to him at his coming, that they should not suffer themselves so to
be deceived, as though the coming of the Lord were at hand. Now to insist in
this first verse, Now we beseech you says he, by the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and by our assembling unto him. The words bears a great
obtestation, wherein he straites them under the pain of life and death, that,
as ever they would look to have joy in Christ's coming and to communicate with
his glory, they should not suffer themselves to be deceived. Then* brethren, ye
see in requesting and that in lenity, he obtests and adjures them in gravity
and in some severity. He joines and tempers two contrare things together,
sweetness and lenity on the one part, sowrenes and severity on the other part
First, he draws them on and intreates them willingly to obey that which he
requyres of them; and then again in a manner violently he pulles them. He both
leads and draws. Requesting in l^^^tie he leads them, obtesting in seuerine
he draws them, as it were, violently. Commonly ye shall find he uses this
form of requesting. In the 2. Epist. to the Cor. 10. chap. 1. verse, (...) I
Paul myself, beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of our Lord Jesus
Christ. There ye have the request with an adjuring and charging of them. Now
brethren, take these two, take lenity with severity together, they will
have a great force in the hearers to bring them forvvard: sunder them, none of
them will be so effectual; lenity the alone hes less force, severity the
alone is over sharp. It will destroy more nor vvin, bind them together they
have a great power. In the 2. Epistle to Timothy 4. chap. 2. verse, (...)
there is ^eueritie; and again, exhort with all (...) suffering and (...),
there is meekness* Look that these two be not severed. This was the Apostles
manner of doing, and thus form ^e uses binds every one of us that speaks in
the Church of God to the end of the world to use the like.

Yet to insist in the words. I beseech you by the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our assembling unto him. Ye see two things here whereby he
adjures them to obey his request. The first is the co^^^ing of Christ. The
second is our assembling to him at his coming. Then it fellows, that seeing
he obtes^s by these two things that we should not doubt but the Lord Jesus
will come, and when he commes that we shall assemble unto him: for all
obtestations are made by things, which are counted undoubted trueths. The
things whereby any man objures and obtests another man should be sure grounds.
Now the Apostle obtests them by these two things. Therefore we should not doubt
but these two are true, Christ's sec^nd coming to the cause of our assembling
unto him.
that Christ shall come, and we shall assemble unto him. Yet compare these two
together, the first is the cause, his coming; the second is the effect. our
assembling unto him. The coming of the Lord shall be found effectual in that
day to our recollection, to the gathering and assembling of the whole elect
unto him. The presence and the coming of Christ is ever effectual to the
meeting of the Saints, where he is, there must be a meeting, he cannot be his
alone. In the 24. of Matthew 28. verse. Christ says, Where the ^ar^on is, the
there will the Egles resort. So where Christ is, there shall the elect resort.
He came no sooner in the world but some elect both Jew and Gentile resorted to
him, so that there was not a Church raised up: But at second coming there
shall be another kind of assembly. At that time all the elect from the four
quarters of the earth shall be gathered, and never one shall be missed, all
shall be in that general assembly, when the Lord shall come in that glorious
day, and that assembly shall be through the power and effectualnes of Christ.
At his coming there shall come a sweet smell from him that shall draw all the
elect that ever was together unto him.

Yet to insist. These two things are joined together with great discretion:
He says not only by the coming of the Lord, but also by our assembling unto
him: For if he had said, by the coming of the Lord only, it had been a great
motive to have terrified us: For the speaking of Christ's coming without any
further consideration and mention of our life and our assembling unto him would
rather terrify thee nor comfort thee. Therefore the wicked desires never to
hear of his coming: for when their consciences are vvakned they are
terrified. But when the godly hears that Christ shall come, and that men shall
be conjoined to him and be partakers of his glory, and that he shall not be
glorified without them, that is comfortable* they never hear it without joy.
Therefore if ever thou would find comfort at Christ's coming, look that thou
find an assurance in thy heart that thou shall be made partaker of his glory at
his coming Further mark in this obtestation. This undoubted certainty of
Christ's coming, and our assembling unto him, binds and oblises every one of
us to believe the truth of the doctrine concerning his coming, and to slay and
eschew all false doctrine thereof. As namely this point of false doctrine that
stands in limitating and bounding his coming at a certain time, as they would
say, He will come in such an age, in such a year, such a day, an hour, all is
false doctrine. So I say the benefit of his coming, and the glory we shall
receive at his coming binds us that we believe nothing but the truth: in
such sort, that, if we will believe the truth of his coming, we shall be
partakers of his glory at his coming. If we decline any thing from the truth
of the doctrine of his coming, we shall hazard the glory, which otherways we
should have. This which I set down unto you in particulare concerning one
Article of our faith, is true in all the rest: For, there is not one blessing
of God in Christ, but it oblises us to believe the true doctrine, concerning
that blessing, in such sort, that, if we will believe the truth concerning that
blessing, we shall be partakers of that blessing, and if we believe not the
truth spoken, concerning that blessing, we depryue our selves of that
blessing. To make it plain. The benefit of justification, whereby we are
justified before God, only by the blood of Christ and his merit, and not by
the merits of men, binds us to believe the truth of it, in such sort, that,
if we will believe and seek justification in the blood and merits of Christ
only, we shall be justified. If, again, we refuse to understand the true way
of our justification and repose on our works, we hazard our justification.
In the 9. chapter, to the Romans, verse. 31. 32. we read, the Jews soght to be
justified by the works of the Law. (So does the Papists, by their merits)
But, what came of it? The Apostle says, They attamed not to it. And why?
Because they sought it not by faith, but, by the works of the Law. Ye see,
here, that perverse and false opinion, which the Jews had, concerning man's
justification made them, not to attain to justification. No more shall thou be
justified, who will be justified by thy vain works. The Prophet Esaias says
(Esaias 64. 6) all our righteousness is like a menstruous clout, scarcely to be
looked on, let be to be presented as a mean, whereby to be justified by God;
if thou will seek to be justified by thy works, I denou^ce to thee, in the
name of God, that, at that great day, thou shall find thy self not to be
justified. The Lord give us grace to embrace the truth, and the only way of
justification and salvation.

In the next verse, he commes to the thing be requested them, not to do. It is
this, that, they should not suffer themselves to be deceived, as if Christ's
coming were at hand. Now, for the better understanding hereof, I shall take
up this second verse, in these three points. First, we have that thing, which
he requests them not to do. To wit, That they be not suddenly moved in their
mind, and be not suddenly troubled; in one word, that they suffer not
themselves to be deceived. Then we have the means (which are three in number) by
the which the false teachers used to deceive them. The first is by revelation
pretending falsely the revelation of the spirit. The second is by word or
tradition. The third is, by letter, as it were from him. In the third place he
sets down the Heresy which false teachers labored to perswad them to be true,
to wit, that the day of the Lord was at hand. Now to come back to the words.
In the beginning of the verse he says, I request you, that suddenly ye be not
moved. Consider the words, and then he subjoynes nor yet troubled. The first of
these two respects the mind, next the heart, moving from the mind respects the
mind, trouble respects the heart: for, the heart and the affections are suddenly
troubled. Now by the mind I understand not every mind: for, every man hes a
mind, an Heretic hes a mind, an Idolater a mind, but, I understand, here,
a sound mind and rightly informed, and specially in this point of doctrine
concerning Christ's coming: A mind that is enlightened, not with the light of
nature only, but also, with the spiritual light of faith in Christ. Now he
requests them, that, they be not moved, as it were, a jaw of the sea (for, the
word is borrowed) And moved, to what thing? If the moving be from a sound
mind, and informed by the light of Christ, it must be to a mind that is
without faith in Christ, a mind peruerslie instructed, without the light of
God. The manner, is suddenly. It is shame to be moved from that which is good,
but it is a greater shame suddenly, as it were, with every light wind to be
carried away. Thefore, the Apostle marueiles, that the Galathians was so
suddenly carried away to another Gospel. Galat. chap. 1. verse 6. Now to come
to the lesson. Who is the man that is in his right mind? Who is he that is in
his wit? Is every man in his wit? No. Only that man is in his wit, whose
mind is enlightened by the supernatural light of the faith of Jesus Christ.
Only the beleuer is in his right wit. Who is the man that is by his mind and
is mad? Tharman (albeit otherways he had all the wit of the world in his head)
that wants this light of faith in Christ, is mad, and the end shall kythe,
and declare it, and the vviser in worldly things; if he be without this
supernatural wit he it (...) the madder. (...)
This then must follow. By nature we are all borne mad and by our minds, mad
foolish, witless, no otherways borne. Therefore, the Apostle, to Titus chap.
3. verse. 3. says* We also, jews, as well as the Gentiles, were vnvvyse, mad
and by our minds, meaning, that, without Christ we are all mad fools.
Brethren, there are two sorts of this spiritual madness, one natural common
to all the sons of Adam, all are ever mad, till they know Christ, ever
continuing in madness, till they beeleue in Christ. The other sort of madness
is, that is acquyred by the defection and falling away from the knowledge of
Christ, every Apostate is mad, every one that hes known the truth and falls
therefrom, becommes mad. Of this madness Paul speaks Gal. 3 chap. 1. verse, O
foolish Galathians, etc. Now if ye will compare these two madness the one
natural, the other by defection. The second is more dangerous, nor the first.
Madness that commes by Apostasy, of all other is the most dangerous madness: and
therefore Peter 2. Epistle chap. 2. verse. 20. says, The latter condition is
vverse, nor the former. Madness that commes of the defection from the known
truth is worse, nor the madness we had before we knew Christ. And so he
subjoynes, It had been better, never to have known the way of Christ, nor,
after knowledge, to have fallen back again. It is better to a man ever to
have bidden in the natural madness, nor once to have been wise and enlightened
and then, to have made defection. There is a recovery after the first madness,
but, after the second, it is very hard to get recovery. An apostate hardly
recouers, but, often, the Apostate will fall to blasphemy against the holy
Spirit. Therefore, let every one strive by all means to keep the truth.

Now the next thing he requests, is that they be not troubled. The word is
borrowed, and in the own language it signifies that horror that ryses in the
heart of man, through the clamor, or noise of any tumult. Ye see, men will be
afraid, when they hear any tumulte. So were the Thessalonians afraid, when
they heard, that, Christ's coming was at hand. Now will ye compare this
terror with the moving out of the mind, it follows very well: For, the
man who hes his mind evil informed, and not enlightened by the faith of
Christ can have no rest and peace in heart. For ye see a mad man hes never
quietness in his heart, but his affections are ever in trouble. So a man
spiritually mad without the light of Christ and salvation is never settled in
his heart. An Idolater is never settled in heart, an Herotike hes never a settled
heart, ever his affectiones on fear. Therefore he who would have that peace and
joy that passes all understanding, let him seek light to know Christ, and to
know the truth concerning him, otherways shall he never get peace and joy.
Then in one word I ask the question. Who is he that is happy? Who is he that
hes a stable and settled heart? Who is he that hes peace in his affectiones, and
hes them set in order, so that he may take rest both day and night? I answer.
The faithful who believes the truth in Christ. This man is blessed being
justified by faith we have peace toward God, says the Apostle. Romans chap.
5. verse 1. If thou be not justified by faith in Christ no peace, but ever
trouble and unquietness both with thy self and with God. God shall make one
affection to fight with another, and to harle thee before his fearful
tribunal. Then who is he that hes not a stable and settled heart? Who is he that
hes not his affections settled? He that believes not in Christ, he that believes
not in the truth of God in Christ, he that knows not the way of salvation, he
hes not a settled heart. It is truly said Es. 7* cha. 57, verse 21. No true
peace for the wicked: for they have unstable hearts; and when thou see the
jawing and moving of the raging sea, thou may say, this is nothing in respect
of the trouble that the wicked hes in conscience: for the trouble of the heart
and unquietness in the affectiones, of all troubles is the greatest; and
surely he who hes not the peace of God, but is troubled in heart, would
gladly be turned in any thing. When it pleases the Lord to make one affection
rise against another, o what pain trovvest thou that person sustaines? And
again, o how prerious a thing is faith in Jesus! Have thou it? nothing shall
trouble thee. So prease ever to have faith in Christ: Have thou faith? thou
shall in joy peace and a quiet mind: What ever be thy estate in the world, be
thou rich, both on poor, have thou faith in Jesus Christ, thou rests by day
and night, nothing troubles thee: yea even in these things, that appears to
bring some grief to thy body outwardly, as siknes etc. Yet in thy soul in
some measure thou shall enjoy peace and joy in Jesus Christ, that shall make
the patiently bear the outward cross.

Now in the second part of the verse we have the means set down which the
deceivers used to deceive the Thessalonians with concerning Christ's coming.
(...) of deceyuing men.
They are three: first, Neither by spirit, that is to say, by dreams which men
pretended to be revelations of the Spirit. The next is, neither by word, that
is by any tradition that they said they had of Paul. The third is, neither by
forged writing or Epistle, as if they had any which Paul had written to them
concerning Christ's coming Now what are the things that chiefly ever from the
beginnig hes made men mad, and hes troubled the hearts of the people and the
Church of God? Even these same three things. In all ages men hes risen up that
hes said, We have received revelation extraordinar from the Spirit of God. Such
as of old were the Valentinians and Montanists, such are the Anabaptists this
day, such are many Papists, and Monks in their closters. When they dream they
pretend the revelation of the Spirit; yea some of them hes pretended a
revelation to slay kings. O but it is a false revelation, and it is not from
Gods, Spirit, but from the Spirit of the devil. This is the first mean of
deceyuing. The next which hes ever troubled the world and brought men to
madness is. Traditions, which the Papists extols so highly that they make them
equal with the holy writ. The last that hes made men mad is writtings that
hes been stolen in into the Church of God under the name of holiness, and yet
written by wicked and profaine men. Such as were the Gospels of Thomas,
Barthelmevv, and Nicodemus, and the Papists are full of such writtes bearing
the names of men that never saw such paltrie. So these three things hes made
and makes men mad. Now as these three makes men mad, so there is one thing
that keeps men in their minds, that is only the Canonical Scripture of the
Old and New Testament, the writings of the Prophites and Apostles. Keep me
the Scripture, hold by it only, thou shall be kept in thy right mind, and
thou shall have an settled heart. Trow therefore no spirits, that is false
revelation of Spirits. Trow nothing but that which is reueiled in the word: for
I lay thee this as a sure ground. The Spirit of God will never reveal nor
speak to thee any thing but that which is written in the old and new
Testament. If any will come with a revelation, ask at him, is that contained
in the Scripture? Is it reueiled in the word? Trow not these traditions and
these unwritten verities that is ascryued to the Apostles: for with these the
world is deceived. Trow nothing but that which is in the word or may stand
with the word. And last, as for writtes, believe no writ but this writ which is
contained in the old and new Testament, and such as godly men hes set down
agreeing with the old and new Testament. Keep this ground of the Canonical
Scripture. I assure thee, thou shall be kept in thy mind, and shall be
reserved so till the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.

In the last part of the verse. The Heresy is set down, as though, says he,
he day of Christ's coming were at hand Brethren, it was an Heresy to say the
coming of Christ was at hand. Ye will wonder at thi^. Says not James in his
Epistle 5. chap. 8. verse The coming of the Lord draws near. Says not
Peter in his first Epistle chap. 4. verse 5. Christ is ready to judge the quick
and the dead, and thereafter says he not. The end of all things is at hand
and are not these days called the last days? Is not the Scripturefull of
this? and so is not the day of the Lord near hand? How count ye it an Heresy
then to say, The day of the Lord is at hand? I answer. There is a great
difference between these two: for these men who said the day of the Lord was
instant prescryued a certain and definite time to his coming, at the least
they thought that Christ should come in that age and generation wherein they
were, and so they bounded Christ's coming till a certain time. To say he will
come in this year or that year, in this age or that age it is Heresy. These
men went about to persuade the Thessalonians that the Lord Jesus should come in
that age, which was false and pernitions; and that it was false experience
teaches us. There are past since that time sixtene ages that is sixteen
hundredth year, and yet they said then that the Lord should come in that age.
Again it is pernicious and evil to limitate and bound Christ's coming; for if
his coming be not in that age which they calculate, it will fall out, that,
either the godly that would feign have his coming (for, they sooke ever for
it) will faint and fall away through impatience, or else it will make the
people to think that this doctrine of Christ's coming is but a fable. They will
say, the time of Christ's coming which they said was is by past and he is not
come. Therefore beware to prescryue to it a particulare time. Now I mark two
pernicious Heresies in the new Testament concerning his coming. One that
prescryued a time, and said, Christ shall come shortly, in such an age, in such
a year, as in this place: Another that said he shall never come. 2. Peter
chap. 3. verse. 3. 4. Let us prease therefore to hold us by the truth, and
keep us from these extremities that the devil preases to draw us to.

Now in the next verse and in the beginning thereof he repeats again his
request and that in few words. Let no man deceive you by any means. It is the
same thing which he said before, but it is contracted in fewer words. Now what
needs this repetition and doubling over? was it not eneugh to him to have said
once be not deceived? Brethren, men can never beware eneugh of seducers and
false teachers, and therefore the watchmen can never over earnestly and often
eneugh warn them to beware of them. And if I should stand up from morn till
night, crying, keep you from deceyuers, it will not be sufficient; I speak not
so often as need craves. Paul to the Philip chap. 3. verse 1. says; It greenetly
me not to vv^^ to you the same things, and for you it is a sure thing: and then
he subjoins. Bevvare of dogs, bevvare of evil workers, bevvare of the
concision. So I say, we can never be earnest eneugh in warning you to beware of
false teachers, and namely to beware of Papists: for experience might have
teached us within these few days what need we have to warn you to beware of
Papistrie. Now he says, Let no man deceive you, that is, be not deceived with
any man without exception of person, in matters of Religion believe no man for
his rank. Brethren, experience teaches this daily. The persons and authority
of men deceiues many simple men. The estimation of learning and dignity
deceiues many. The Apostle knew this, and therefore he says, Let no man; and
again he says, he no means, neither by this mean, nor that mean: as he
excludes all persons, so he excludes all the ways of deceit. The ways of the
devil that he suggyres to false ^eachers to deceive men by, are infinite.
There is no end of his ways. Hes he set one way? failles that way? he hes
another way. If that failles too, he hes another, and so forth without end. So
infinite are his ways to deceive the godly. Therefore the Apostle knowing
that the devil hes many ways to deceive them, forbids them to believe any of
his means. Now the argument whereby he deceiues them, is, all is deceit. What
ever be the person, what ever be the way, all is deceit. Therefore be not
deceived. There is such a great lose and damage in this one thing we call
deceit that there is no other thing that will vpset it. The lose thou getst by
deceit will never be vpset: all the kings and doctors under Heaven will never
set up thy lose thou getst by defection. Alas, what hes that (...) win when he
hes win all the world and lost his soul by falling away from the truth. Now
the Lord let every man see that there is nothing comparable to this hurt of
deceiving. What pleasure can thou have of all the kingdoms of the world when
thou have a troubled heart and conscience, when thou have an unquiet soul
within thee? Therefore as we say, It is good to sleep in a sound skin. Change
not a settled mind and pacified heart with all the world, and prefer a sound
mind enlightened with the knowledge of Christ to all the honors and dignity in
the world. And because we are so unstable minded and so ready to alter that
except we be surely anchored on Christ we shall be ever beatten away with every
light wind of false doctrine. Therefore we have to pray that our souls may be
anchored by a sure faith on Christ. The Lord therefore by his grace anchor our
souls on Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be all honor and
praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE FIFTH LEC TVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 34. -- for that day shall not come except there come
a departing first. and that that man of sin be disclosed, even, the son of
perdition.

4 Which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called God,
or, that is worshipped: so, that he does sit as God, in the Temple of God,
shovving himself, that he is God.


WELBELOVED brethren, ye have heard the request the Apostle makes in the
beginning of this second chapter to the Thessalonians. He requests and adjures
them by the coming of the Lord Jesus, and by our assembling unto him at his
coming* that they suffer not themselves to be deceived, or put by their
minds, troubled in heart and affection, especially in this head of doctrine
that concerns the coming of the Lord in the latter day, and that they should
not be deceived by false teachers who went about to deceive them in this point,
teaching that the day of the Lord is at hand, he shall come incontinent, ye
shall be found alive when he shall come. This age and generation shall not be
past when he shall come. This point of false doctrine that these false
teachers went about to persuade the Thessalonians, and so to vnqiuet them, held
them ay in vexation of sprit and mind, looking ay for Christ's coming,
assuring them that he should come ere that presentage should end.

Now in this text the Apostle enters to a refutation of that false doctrine,
and he proves that the day of the Lord was not instant, that the day of the
Lord would not beat such a time, that it should not fall out in that present
age. Now mark his reasons. If the day of the Lord were instant then there
should not be an universal Apostasy and defection from the faith of the Lord
Jesus Christ, before the day and coming of the Lord: Universal defection must
go before the Lords coming.
For, why? This Apostasy must crave a large space of time. Then, he
subjoines, but, so it is, before that day shall come, there shall be an
universal Apostasy and defection from the faith and truth of Christ Jesus.
And so, he concludes. Therefore, it is not so, as they say: The day of the
Lord is not instant and is not so near hand, as they go about to persuade
you. Mark his reason. The proposition and first part of the argument is not
expressed in the text. The next part, the assumption is set down in the
text, to wit, The day of the Lord shall not be, before that an universal
defection be first. Now, before I come to the words, take up shortly this one
thing. The Thessalonians, to whom he wrytes being deceived, thought, that,
incontinent Christ should come, and that they should be rest to the Heaven with
him, and glorified from hand. The Apostle, to put them out of this consaite,
tells them, ere they and the Church be rest up to Heaven and glorified there,
that, they shall suffer yet on the earth some trouble, there shall be yet a
great alteration and vexation in the Church of God. Brethren, mark it. The
battle must go before the victory, let none look for the victory before he
fight, thou will not come sleeping to Heaven. Thou must fight on earth ere thou
come to glory and ere thou triumph in Heaven, thou must be victorious on
earth* through many tribulations we must enter in the kingdom of heaven. This is
that, which the Apostle teaches the Thessalonians.

Now, to come to the words of the text, and to make this matter plain, we
shall insist particularly on every word, taking up the meaning of Gods Spirit
here. And first, ^here occurres this word Apostasy, which must be before the
day of the Lords coming. This Apostasy is nothing, but, a falling away, a
flyding aback. This Apostasy is not a particulare Apostasy, or, defection of
this man, or, that man only, of any one person, or any two or three persons
only. But it is an universal defection of multitudes of men and women in this
world. For the word ye see is generally set down in the text to be a
departure without any restriction. It is not said a departing of this man or
that man, but generally a departing. Therefore the Apostle must mean of a
departing and falling away of multitudes, and great multitudes. Now all the
question is, what Apostasy means the Apostle of? I am not ignorant how a
great number of the old Latin fathers in the Church, understands this
Apostasy to be meant of the defection of many Nations from the Empire of Rome.
It is true indeed the Nations of the world fell away from the Roman Empire:
But how well and rightly they understood this Apostasy of that falling away
from the Roman Empire God knows. And it is a wonder that so many learned and
quick spirited men should have erred together in this point so long: Indeed
it is likly that when one of them fell in this error all the rest followed on in
troops without further discretion or judgment. But I leave them. What
Apostasy is this then that the Apostle means of here? I shall tell you. It
is an universal defection, not from an Emperor or earthly King, but from the
King of Heaven Jesus Christ, and from his faith. This agrees with the course of
this text and with that which follows immediately of the Antichrist the head of
this Apostasy. This agrees with the speaking of this same Apostle in sundry
other places. In the 1. Tim. chap. 4. verse 1. he foretells of this universal
defection from the faith. The words are, The spirit speaks evidently that in
the latter days some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed to
spirits of error and doctrine of devils, forbidding to marie, and commanding to
abstain from meats which the Lord his ordained to be received with
thanksgiving of them which believe. There the sum of this defection
whereof he speaks in this place. Look also the 2, Tim. chap. 3. verse. 1. 2.
3. In the latter days there shall be troublesome times, men shall be lovers of
themselves, lovers of pleasures and not of God, corrupt in mind, reprobates
concerning the faith: There the Apostasy from the faith. In that same Epistle
chap. 4. verse 3. The time shall come when men shall not suffer to hear the
sound doctrine, but according to their own lusts shall gather together
heaps of teachers: to wit, orders of Monks, Friars, and heaps of Jesuits,
and the rest of that prophaine and deuilish rabble, that the devil by his
spirit hes thrust in on the people of God, and they shall auert their eyes from
the truth and turn them to lies. Peter in his 2. Epistle chap. 2 verse 1.
says, There shall be among you false teachers who shall bring in damnable
heresies, and many shall follovv them to their perdition. They shall go to
destruction with their Heresies, and many shall go after them. And before them
Christ himself foretold of this defection 18. chap. of Like verse 8, When,
says he, the Son of man shall come, think ye he shall find faith on the
earth? No, there be an universal defection. Then this universal defection is
nothing else, but this Apostasy and defection from the faith of Christ that
shall be before Christ's coming in the world. Now ye see then this is a
prophecy of the thing to come. Is this Prophecy fulfilled yet or not? Is it
come to pass? Is that universal defection of the world from the church, from
the faith of Christ come, or shall we look for it? There is the question. I
tell you, it is come, I cry it out, it is come, and come long since, and very
long since; It holds on and shall hold on. Mahomet began it, when he drew
away not only the people from the faith of Jesus, but also drew away the very
name of Christianity, so as there durst not one avowe himself to be a
Christian. The Oriental Churches so well planted by the Apostles of Christ,
whereof this Church of Thessalonica was one, may bear witness hereof. Who
followed on? (Mahomet ended it not then) The Popes, that beast of Rome followed
on. As Mahomet played with the Oriental Churches: So the Papists played with
the Wester and Occidentall Churches. The Pope hes drawn away this occidental
Church of Christ in Europe, not indeed from the name and outward profession of
Christ, for all are called Christians, but he hes drawn them from the faith of
Christ, without the which there can be no salvation. So this Apostasy
prophesied so long before is come now to pass. Church militant subject to
errors.
But ere I go forward mark here. The estate of the Church of Christ militant
on the earth, she is subject to errors and Heresies, to be carried away with
false doctrine, subject to defection, yea to an universal defection of the
whole visible Church on the face of the earth. And, brethren, even godly men
seeing this thing they have been compelled at times to doubt (they were so
offended) whether if this Church was Gods Church or not, whether if this
building was builded by God or not which they saw so beatten down, and lying
so long dead. It is a lamentable thing to see the Church of Christ so long
under the dominion of the Antichrist. And therefore the Lord by his Apostle and
others hes foretold of this universal defection that the godly may be
comforted and stand: seeing nothing commes to pass but by his providence and
foresight. Then again ye know the Papists proposition; the church cannot ere.
Now consider this place and ye shall see it cannot stand with that opinion. I
ask how can that opinion stand with this Prophecy of Paul who tells, not of
a light error, but of an universal defection from Christ? Either this must be
false which the Apostle says, and which Christ spok before him (which were
blasphemy to affirm) or that which they say, that the Church cannot err must
be a lie, and it is so. And all the Papists are blasphemous liars, believe them
as ye will. No the godly are not ignorant of their purpose in this their
assertion. They hold that doctrine to be a pretense to keep the Antichristian
Church in her error and Apostasy: for she is altogether out of the way, and if
she could think she could be subject to error she were curable, but because
she lies in her stinking Heresy and Apostasy and will not acknowledge it,
therefore in the just judgment of God she shall perish, perdition shall be
her end, if the Lord waken her not in time.

Now to the words. The words are, That the day of the Lord shall not be
until the time that that man of sin be reueiled. That man of sin must be
reueiled ere the Lord come in the world again. This is one thing with that
which went before of an universal Apostasy, the coming of an universal
Apostasy and the revelation of that man of sin the Antichrist, is one thing in
sundry words: For what is the Antichrist but the head of this Apostasy and
universal defection? and of all Apostats under the Heavens he is the chief
Apostate. Now he is called here a man, the Antichrist as though there were but
one person. Mark it, (for this place is mistaken) When ye hear of this name
of the Antichrist, who is here called the man of sin, be not deceived. The
Antichrist would persuade you that this name of Antichrist signifies but one
man some one person who shall be in the world at such a time. No, the name of
Antichrist imports not one man only, but a succession of persons, one after
another: in one kingdom or tyranny over the Church of Christ in the world;
All this succession of persons is expressed by the name of one man or one
person, because they ran on all one course, and every one of them hes but one
purpose to exercise their time in oppression of the Church of God. Therefore
the whole succession is called but on man. But when shall this reueiling of
him be? He is said to be reueiled when his kingdom and tyranny commes to the
height and full perfection in the sight of the world: He began long before
he was reueiled, and he was in the days of the Apostles. When Paul and Peter
was in the world, he was. And beginning in their days, he grows on piece
and piece in greatness from a small beginning until he came to such a
wonderful and great height that he makes the whole world vvonder at him: and
this fell out in Anno 666. Revel. chap. 13. verse 18. He came to his height
under the Emperor of Constantinople, Constantine, (...) being Pope of Rome at
that time. John in his first Epistle chapter 2. verse 18. says, that the
Antichrist is to come: Then he subjoynes, even now there are many Antichrists.
By the many Antichrists John means these forerunners, little Antichrists,
false Prophets, and little Heretics who were forerunners to prepare the way
to this great Antichrist the monstrous beast of Rome against his coming. By
the Antichrist that was to come, he understands the great Antichrist, the
head of the Apostasy, the mid-man betvveene the Dragon and the Antichristian
kingdom and the Church. Revelation chap. 13. verse 16.

Now to go forvvard to the description of the Antichrist (...) it follows.
He is first descryued from his nature. Secondly from his properties.
Description of the antichrist
And thirdly, from his actions and effects he bringes in the world when he
commes. Mark it, This is a Prophecy not of the little false Prophets, but of
the great Anchrist and false Prophet that (...) at Rome.) What is he of nature?
His nature.
A man like unto other men of nature, not a devil, nor substance of a devil,
but he is of an humane and manly substance. Some thought that the Antichrist
should be the devil or a beast: it is but solie. He is not a beast of nature,
but he is called in the Revelation a beast for his beastliness, and for his
filthiness. (O how capable is the nature of man of evil, if God give it over
to be guyded by the devil!) Then, what manner of man is he? His properties.
The first property, the Antichrist hes, he is a man of sin. He calls
himself the servant of the servants of God, No, but he is a slave to sin,
his meat and drink is sin. The second property, he is the Son of
perdition, destinate from all eternity to Hell and everlasting damnation.
Peter in his second Epistle chap. 2. verse 3. says, Long ago his damnation is
not idle, or, his destruction sleeps not, but, wakes. He gettes this style,
that Judas gettes, in the 17. chapter of John 12. verse, the son of
perdition, adjudged to perdition from all eternity in the secreete counsel of
God. These two properties stands well together, the man of sin, addicted to
sin destinate to perdition. The second is the ground cause of the first For,
he, whom God from all eternity destinates to perdition, that man will never
do a good turn. Nothing will come from his mouth, heart, or, hand, etc. but,
all sin. Alas, when we look and see men, who can do nothing, but sin,
sin in the house, sitting, eating, drinking, and in the field, ever sinning,
what shall we speak of them who does so, if they take not up another course,
ere this life be ended, but they are men from all eternity destinate for
Helles fire. Let every man try himself. Alas, if thou looked to thy bloody
heart and hand thou would think, thou had little warrant of thy sal^ation. Now
this for his nature and properties.

Now, to his actions and doings. What doing shall he have? The first action.
His actions.
He shall oppone himself against all, that shall be called God, and shall be
worshipped. This is the first action, a plain opposition to all things that
keeps the name of God, His first action.
and is worshipped in Heaven and earth. He shall oppone him against all powers
and magistrates, and against all things, that caries the name of a magistrate,
whether they be Princes, or, Emperors on the earth, or, in Heaven, God and his
Christ and from this opposition, he is called an adversary, as the devil is.
As the devil is called Satan, that is, an aduersar; so shall he get the name of
an aduersar. And he is called Antichrist, that is, an aduersar to Christ. Now,
let us see who must be this man. I make my reason. He that oppones himself to
every thing, that hes the name of God, or* is worshipped either in Heaven, or,
earth, that man of necessity must be this Antichrist, this is the action, that
properly is competent to that person. Who is this man, then? look about al
nations, if ye can take up such a man. Who is it in Europ, or, out of Europ,
that oppones himself to Jesus Christ the Lord, in doctrine first, in life and
conversation next? I tell you, if ye find such a man, he is the Antichrist.
Now I shall tell you some points of Christ's doctrine, wher-vnto this aduersar
oppones himself, that by them ye may find out, Pope the antichrist
who is this Antichrist. The Lord Jesus says and teaches Thou shall adore the
Lord thy God only, and him only shall thou serve. What man of this world is
it, that commes in and says No, thou shall not worship him only, worship
Angels, worship men and the souls of men departed this life, worship Images,
dead men's bones called relicts, do reverence to graves, and above all thou
shall give that worship, that is due to God only, to that breadie God in the
Mass? Who does this and teaches it? Is there any so ignorant, that knows him
not? Again, Christ forbids to worship God with such worship as men hes
invented, to worship him with men traditions and inventions. Who is he that
says, he must be worshipped by infinite traditions, which are out with the book
of the Scripture, and many against the book of the Scripture, and bids serve
him according to a rabble of vile traditions invented by the brane of man. Yet
more Christ says, this Scripture, the old and new Testament is perfect, it is
sufficient to make the man of God perfect, it conteines all things necessary
to our salvation. Who is he* that says, it is confused, difficle, mutilate,
manked, the mother of all Heresies? Who says this? Look over to Rome, who but
the Pope. Woe to him and all his adherents. Yet, further. Christ says, I am
the only Mediator between God and man. Who is he, that says, No, there must
be many more intercessours and mediators? Is it not the Pope? Christ says,
Justification is only by true faith in me. Who says, No, no, thy merit and
good works must be a part of thy salvation and thou must deserve it? Is it
not the Pope? Christ requyres of us a sure confidence, that in his blood our
sins are for given, and that thereby, we shall be safe and get life
everlasting. Who says, it is an high presumption to believe so firmly, and
biddes thee doubt whether thou shall get life, or not: Is it not the Pope?
Christ says, it is impossible to fulfill the Law of God. Who says, it is
possible to fulfill i^, is it not the Pope? A plain contradiction. Christ
says, the only price of remission of sin is my blood. Who says, I shall
give thee Indulgences and pardones for thy sins? is it not the Pope? Christ
commanded to minister the Sacrament or the Supper under both the kinds. Who
says the bread may suffice the laikes, let the Priests take both? is it not
the Pope? Christ permittes the use of marriage to all persons, without
difference. Who commes in with that doctrine of devils, forbidding marriage, and
meats which the Lord hes commanded. Wherefore should I be long? Who is he,
that oppones himself to every article of our faith? begin at the one end
and leave at the other, he oppones to them all? Is it not the beast of Rome?
Know ye not this to be true? His life.
ye shall see it in that great day. Then come to his life and behauior, wherein
he denies Christ. Christ when he was in the world was holy, yea, holiness it
self. But, what command is there, either in the first, or, second Table, which
he transgresses not most evidently? Who is the head and chief Apostate from
Jesus Christ the head of the Church? Who is the chief Heretic under the
Sun? The chief Idolater, the chief Magitian and sorcerer under the Sun:
Who is the chief blasphemer under the Sun? Go to the second Table. Who is
the dishonourer of all powers and Empyres upon the face of the earth? Who, of
all murderers, is the greatest murderer, and can not be sat^ate with the
blood of all the Saints? Who is most adulterous and filthy? Who is the
greatest thief and oppressor, reauing kingdoms? Who is the most perjurde
person? And come to the last. Who is most full of all concupiscence in this
world? Who is he, that settes himself above all men in this earth, and with
an vplifted hand oppones himself to God, in all things? Read the Popes hues
written all by their own men. So, I gather, in one word. This Antichrist, that
maks opposition to the great God of Heaven, to all power and majesty on the
earth, he was never, he is not now, nor never shall be, if he be no^ that man
of Rome, who sittes not in Peter's chair, but, in the chair of scorners, in
the seat of pestilence: He is the very Antichrist and thou have no eyes to
see, if thou see not this.

Now come to the next action. His second action.
He prophecyes of another action, that shall be, when he shall come. He shall,
not only in malice oppone himself to every thing, that is called God, but, in
the pride of his heart shall exalt himself above every thing, that is called
God and is worshipped on the earth, against all power both heavenly and
earthly. Now, who is this, that exaltes himself this way? Spy this man, who hes
this action in his hand, and without doubt this man is the Antichrist. Now, I
will ask some few things, that we may find him out the more easily. Who is
he, that exalts himself above the Emperor? Who, under God is the head-man of
the world? Who is he, that will cause the Emperor stand and hold his stirrup,
and will cause the Emperor hold to his shoulder, that he may lean on it, and
cause him hold water to his hands, and go before with his first mease, to his
dinner? Who will say, he hes an absolute power, to make and abrogate laws at
his pleasure? He will make account to no man. He hes an absolute power, to
close the Heaven and open it at his pleasure. To carry with him cartfulles of
souls of men to Hell, if it please him? Who is able to comprehend this matter?
Is there any here, that hes been in Rome and seen the Pope in the solemn time
of his jubilee, and who hes heard, or, read of it? How he commes out of his
Palace with such a rich and glorious arrayment, that he makes the world to
wonder, with his threfold crown of gold, and precious stones on his head
mounted up on men's shoulders, in a golden chair, with his relicts and his
breadie-god borne before him. Then, he will go to his paradise, the people on
every side crying for remission of sins. Then when he commes to Paradise,
with an hammer of gold he will knock and bid the gate open, and he enters in
and there he gives indulgences, some gives this homage, and some, that, yea,
such, as is competent to God only. Fie on him, such is his pride, that he will
scarcely afford to put out his feet to kings to kiss them ^s not this an
horrible abomination and monstrous villainie?

I will not insist. His third action.
There follows two particular actions, which rises on his pride. The first is,
He shall be so proud that he shall sit in the Temple of God as God, that is, in
his Antichristian kingdom, which yet keeps the name of Christ, because it
keeps a kind of profession of the word of God, and in some respect hes the
ensenzies of the Church. But, how shall he sit? Not like another man, but, as
God, he puts God out of his chare and sittes down in Gods chare. What is the
seat of God? Gods chare is the consciences of men and women, which all the
Angels dare not prease to. Yet, he will sit down there, and give out Laws,
bind the consciences. Now, will ye spy this man out? Is this the Mahomet?
Papist, I ask at thee, sittes the Mahomet in the Temple of God, sittes he in
the Church, that hes the name of the Church of God? O, says the Papist, this,
that shall be the Antichrist i^ not yet come: This that shall be the Antichrist
shall be a wicked man, that shall be borne at Babylone of an Hoore, in whom the
devil shall dwell bodily, a Jew by nation, of the Trybe of Dan, who should be
circumcised and brought up in the cities of Chorasin and Bethsaida, who shall
be detestable, for his forceries and witchcraftes, who shall come to Jerusalem,
and there reedifie the Temple of Solomon, and take upon him the name of Christ,
and shall reign by the space of three years and an half with great tyranny
and cruelty, against the Christians, and shall slay Enoch and Elias the
forerunners of Christ, and then shall come the latter day, when in the Mount of
Olyues Christ shall destroy him, and condemn him to Hell. A fair fable. It is
thou, o man of sin, thou, beast of Rome, that sittes in the consciences of men,
it is thou, that shall be beatten out of the chare to the Hels. It is thou o
beast of Rome, that sits in the Temple of Christ.

Another effect of his pride. He shall show himself to be a God sitting in
the chare of God, (...) fourth action.
in the Church of God: He shall give himself forth as God, as prease to
counterfoote God, in his name, style, dignity, and all other circumstances,
and bereave God of that, which is proper to him. Well, spy this man. Who is he,
that taks the name of God on him in the earth? He is not God only, not man
only, but he is a midde thing between a God and a man. Who takes to him the
style of a king and power above all the kings of the earth? Who says he hes
the right to bear both the swords? Heard you ever of a Pope Benifacius the
^ight^ of whom it is said, He entered in like a Tod, reign like a Lion, and
died like a dog. In the time of his jubilee in the first day thereof he commes
out in the Popes weed, and as he goes he blesses the people. In the next day he
commes out in Cesars warlike clock and a naked sword horn before him and
sitting down, he cries out, Behold two swords here, I am the head of the
Church, I am the Pope and Caesar, I have the Empire in Heaven and earth. Who
calls himself the head of the Church? A style only proper to Christ. Who
calls himself the Vicar of Christ? The brydgrome of the bryde the Church Who
calls himself the high Priest? Styles only proper to Christ. Is it not this
beast of Rome? Whereto should I insist? It is wonder, that, the earth can bear
such a proud filthy villain. It is a wonder, that the Heaven can cover him;
but, we must reverence the long suffering patience of the Lord. And seeing the
Scripture hes pointed him out so evidently, it is a wonder that men should be
so blind, that they should so reverence him, when he rages this way in sin,
and that they will call him the successor of Peter, and the head of the
Church. What shall I say* all reading and hearing will not inlighten the mind
and persuade men* except the Spirit of God be present to open the heart.
Therefore leaving this beast, I pray God to send his Spirit to let men see,
that they may abhor such an enemy to God and Christ, and that they may
embrace the light of Jesus, and that he would keep us, that we be not deceived
by these vanities. To this God, even, the Father, Son and holy Spirit be all
praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE SIXTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 5. 6. 7. 8. 5 Remember ye not, that when I was as
yet with you, I told you these things.

6 And now ye know what vvithholdeth; that he might be reueiled in his time.

7 For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he which now
vvithholdeth* shall let till he be taken out of the way.

8 And then shall the wicked man be reueiled, whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his
coming.


THE Apostle, Brethren, ye heard, proves against the false teachers that the
coming of the Lord was not so near hand as they thought and as they teached.
He takes his argument from one thing that was to fall out in the world before
Christ's latter coming: Ere ever become (says the Apostle) there shall be an
universal defection from that faith of Jesus Christ. This matter will contain
a long process of time, and therefore would the Apostle conclude, Christ's
coming is not so near hand as they make the people believe. He expresses not
the name of the Antichrist, but for the name he hes a long description and
painting out of him This description we entered in the last day, and he lets
them see when he shall be, when he shall come. He points him out in his
nature. First in his very essence he shall be a man of nature like other men.
Then he commes to his properties. What shall they be? First, a man of sin, a
wicked man as ever was or shall be in the world. The next property, He shall
be the son of perdition a man long ago ordained to destruction. Then he commes
to his actions (when he shall come and reueile him in the world) he shall
oppone himself against every thing that shall be called God or shall be
worshipped. That is, against every superior power and Majesty, whether
earthly or Heavenly, against God himself and his Son Jesus Christ Another
action. He shall not be content only to oppone himself in malice, but in
pride he shall exalt himself above all things that shall be called God and
worshipped, either in earth, or in Heaven. Then, he commes to two special
actions of his pride; first, exalting himself above God, he shall sit in the
Temple of God in the Church of God. (For so the Antichristian Church is termed,
because she keeps some ensenzies of the Church of God, the Word and
Sacraments) He shall sit there as God on the consciences of men and women, to
thrall and control them at his pleasure. The other particulare action of his
pride, he shall show himself as God, in the properties perteining to God, he
shall take them all on him. This far we proceeded the last day in the
description of the Antichrist, whom the Apostle prophecyes will come in the
world ere Christ come again, only this I advertise you, as I did before. Take
not this man whom ye call the Antichrist to be a single man, one person, take
him to be a succession of men, every one following another in one kingdom and
tyranny. The kingdom of Antichrist, all is termed under the name of a man.
They are but one kingdom of all, one purpose of all, to exercise tyranny on
the Church of God here on this earth.

Now, brethren, to the text. He leaves off this description for a time until
he come to the ninth verse following, and there he returns again. Now in the
meane-tyme he falls out in some speeches and admonitions to them concerning
the Antichrist: and in the first verse we have red, he confirms the thing he
hes spoken of the Antichrist, from the speeches he had with them when he abode
among them in Thessalonica. Concerning the Antichrist I write, would he say, no
other thing to you now nor that which I told you when I was with you. That
which I then spoke that same thing now I write unto you. Then in the next verse
he shows to them that the Antichrist and Antichristanisme is come and begun
already in the world, albeit his reueiling and his coming to his pride is not
yet* yet the Antichrist is come Antichristanisme and falls religion is begun.
Then again he tell, what withholdes him that he is not reueiled so soon and
hastily. There is an impediment casten in which I told to you when I was with
you: He insistes on this impediment, and tells when this impediment shall be
tame out of the way, then this wicked man of sin shall be reueiled. And last
as he hes told of his coming out, and growing to an height in his pride, so
he propecyes of his decay and his destruction.

Now to return to the words. Remember ye not (says he) when I was with
you I told you these things. To assure them the more of the truth of these
things that he wrytes to them concerning the Antichrist, he calls them to
remembrance of that which he spoke to them face to face concerning this same
purpose, and in doing this the vtters some piece of anger. Remember ye not. He
uses some sharpness in words, because they were so obliuious, as to forget a
thing so needful for their salvation. Now to take up some lessons shortly on
these words. Then Apostle then began very soon to foretell the
Thessalonians of the coming of the Antichrist and of that universal defection
that was to fall out so long after that: (for this prophecy is especially of
that great Antichrist who came not a long time after this.) The estate of the
Church of Thessalonica was floorishing at this time, he castes in a matter of
discouragement here. There shall be an universal defection. Defection of the
Church ever to be feared.
Well, brethren, it i^ good ever to foresee the evil that is to come on the
Church of God on the earth, yea eue^ when she is most floorishing to fear a
decay and that her state will alter: For this is the nature of the visible
Church of God here on the earth, she is not so stabled nor settled, but she is
subject to alteration and trouble, to defection, to falling away from God, from
Christ and the truth, and that both particularly and universally, our
setlednesse is not in this world, there are none so well stablished but they
may fall, and therefore we should be ever in a dread and fear of destruction
and alteration. And it is the part of the Pastor above all other, even in the
floorishing of it, to be forwarning and foretelling of an alteration and
defection to insew: For he as a watchman should have a sharp eye to foresee,
and he should crave a foresight of God to know things to insew that he may
give aduertismentes to the people, and they may be prepared for all dangers to
come.

Another lesson. Ye see the Thessalonians hes been forgetful of that which the
Apostle told them when he was with them, and therefore that which he spoke then
he wrytes now to them. Naturaly we are forgetful of spiritual things.
So obliuious we are especially of things concerning our salvation, that we
will receive them in at the one ear, and let them go out at the other; we
hear to day we forget to morrow. The seed is not so soon sown but the
devil as a ravenous foull is ready to pull it out of the very ears that it
be to us nothing but a vanishing sound: and therefore it is the Pastors part
ever to be calling to their remembrance the things that are heard. Ye see in a
school, the master considering the weakness of the memory of the youth is
ever repeating the thing they have heard: as needful it is to the Pastor to
be ever repeating the thing he hes teached, for all are as infantes in thee
school of Christ. 1. Cor. 13. 11. and it is the peoples part to be as diligent
to hear over again these things that pertaines to salvation, and to crave
that the Lord would bless their memories there in that they may be the more
able to gainstand all assaults of the devil and his suppostes: how can thou
gainestand if thou be not furnished with the armor of the word of God?
Therefore the Lord grant me grace to forwarne you and sanctify your memories to
receive and keep the things that concerns your salvation: for it may be the
day of tentation is nearer nor we believe.

But mark the form how he calls it to remembrance: He does it with a rebuke and
reproof. Remember ye not. They who are forgetful of things heavenly should
not go away without reproof, calling to remembrance should be with rebuke.
But mark again the le^itie of the Apostle in rebuking. Remembe^ ye not says
he? I told you before. Therefore all this rebuke should be with lenity and
love: sharpness should ever be mingled with le^^tie. This is the thing I ever
find this Apostle doing.

Now to go forward to the next verse. Because he said before the Antichrist
was not as yet reueiled. The Thessalonians might have asked the Apostle. What
withholdes? What stays? What impediment is there? Why is he not reueiled? The
Apostle answers shortly. Ye know what withholds, it is not needful I tell you,
I told you it else when I was with you, call it to remembrance, it is not
needful that I should lose time by often repeating of it. Yet, brethren, albeit
he knew it, and the Thessalonians knew it, because he had told them of it
before, yet we know it not for any thing he shows here. Therefore we must
see what was the impediment that stayed the reuiling of the Antichrist till his
hight and pride. The Roman Empire, and publishing of the Gospel are
impedime^tes staying the reueiling of the Antichrist.
What was it? Both the old and late writers agrees in this. It was the Roman
Empire that floorished for the time. The event and issue of things declared
this to be true: For so long as the Roman Empire stood and the Emperor keept
his own seat at Rome (which now is usurped by the Pope,) so long neither
Mahomet in the East prevailed: (for, he was one of the destroyers of the Roman
Empire) neither the Pope in the West got up his head: for the Empire suffered
him not to come to his hight. But when once the Roman Empire decayed, the
Emperor changed his seat, left Rome and remained at Constantinople. Then up
gets the Mahomet his seat in the East, the Pope in the West, and he sits down
in the Emperors seat. This is one impediment. Latter writers joines to this
another impediment, that stayed the reueiling of the beast and his coming to
his hight, to wit, the decree of God, concerning the publishing of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ in the world: Ere he should come to his perfection, it behooved,
that the Gospel should be preached throghout the world: Ere there be any
falling there must be a standing; ere there be any Apostasy there must be a
receiving of the word: It behooved, that, before apostasy the word should be
universally teached. Therefore the Roman Empire decaying, the course of the
Gospel coming to an end, the Euangell being universally teached, the
Antichrist breaks in and takes upon him both the jurisdictiones, takes on him
the earthly power, and then the jurisdiction over the souls of men, he killes
the body with the temporal sword he killes the soul with the poison of fall
doctrine. His kingdom is ever slaying, either of the souls of men with false
doctrine and poison of Heresies, or else if men will not obey, he slayes their
bodies with the sword. These are the impediments held him back vnreueiled.
Then learn here, it is the Lord who stays and holds back evil from the
world; and his maner^^; he castes in impediments before the devil and before
wicked men ere they rise: The devil and his suppostes is coming out rushing
on the people, the Lord casts in impediments to them and then they must stand
until these impedimentes be some way removed: For, brethren, the power of the
devil and of darkness and wickedness is so great on the earth that the Church of
God could not stand one day except the Lord did cast in impediments in the way
of the devil and wickedmen to hold them off. And so all the glory of the
standing of the Church in the earth, is to be ascriued to that God that holds
off and shall hold off by his providence* ^ill they will they, the devil
wicked men from their wicked interpryses; and the Lord forbid the Antichrist
should prevail; for if he prevail, assure thy self if thou stand steedfast:
in the faith thy blood shall pay for it: for of all Tigers in the earth he is
the most bloud-thirstie.

Now the words following tells wherefore these in pediments are casten in.
That he should be reveiled in his own time, As he would say, his time is not
yet come, that article of time God hes appointed and decreed from all eternity
he should be reueiled in, is not yet come Brethren, this is true, and all the
Scripture makes it manifest. The Lord from all eternity hes appointed times,
opportunities, hours, moments, when euerything should be done that falls out
in this world, every action hes the own moment prescriued to it, be it good,
or bad. The Lord hes written the hour of it in his book when it should be
done. Now ye see by experience, the devil ever seeks to prevent the time,
yea, the best of us all when the Lord hes appointed a time to our deliverance,
or to do anything, cannot bide that time, but are ever freatting and fuming.
Therefore, the Lord castes in stays both to the devil and to men on earth.
When they are running forward, he will cast in a stay, and thou must stand
there, and thou must stand until that same time and article come that he hes
appointed, and it shall not ly in the power of the devil and of all the earth
to prevent that time.

Now to come to the next verse. There are two things concerning the Antichrist.
The first, his coming in the world. The second his reueiling after his
coming. There is a difference between these two: His coming to the height
and his revelation. As concerning his coming to his height, it might have been
asked by the Thessalonians, Is he come yet? we understand by thy speaking, he
is not reueiled yet, but is he come yet? He answers, Even now the mystery of
iniquity is in doing: shortly the meaning is. The Antichrist, the
Antichristianisme, false religion, Heretical doctrine, is come already, albeit
it be not reueiled and come to the hight. He calls Antichristanisme iniquity:
for, of all iniquity, false doctrine is the greatest iniquity, and of all
sinners on the earth a false teacher and deceiuer of the people of God is the
greatest sinner. Therefore he is called the man of sin, a man addicted to
sin, as a slave to his master. Further he calls it the mystery of
iniquity. It is called a mystery, because it came not to the light at the
first, but, lay up hid in a mystery. It was not known not detected in the
own color nor came not to an height that men might know it. Then, mark, ye
see, the Antichrist and Antichristianisme, that is, false religion began
very soon, Even now there are many Antichrists, says John 1. Epist. 4. chap
3. verse. It began in Paul's and the Apostles days. It was conserved, as it
were, in the mothers belly in those days, but, it lay long and many years
hid up in a mystery, and it lay long time lurking in Rome and in the Church
thereof, and then, at last broke up there the great Antichrist. It lay so hid
up, not coming to the perfection, to the year of the Lord six hundredth and
three years, and then, it was brought to a great maturitie and perfection, by
Phocas the Emperor and Pope Bonifacius the third. It layth the mothers womb
getting form and grouth, ere it came to the revelation, so, the Antichrist is
an old child. Mark it, there are many mysteries in the world, and among all
the rest, there is a mystery of sin: as there is a mystery of godliness. 1.
Tim. 3. chap. 16. verse, so, there is a mystery of ungodliness, and sin lies
very long hid, ere it break out and appear in the own cullor in any person.
Alas, thy sin will ly long hid, as it were, clocked under a clock in thee, ere
it come to an height, (for, sin is a deceyuing thing) but, at last, it will bud
out in spyte of thy teeth. And to speak of this sin of false doctrine in
particulare. It lay hid many years ere men knew of it. No question, in the
days of the old fathers Chrys^stome Augustine, and the rest of them, many
corruptions broke in, which they saw not, because they lay hid up in a mystery
so, that, they could not see them, until it hes pleased the Lord now to
reueile them Wonder not, that the doctors reproved not this Heresy and that
Heresy; no, sin lies hid up wonderfully. The greatest sin will ly hid up under
the greatest holiness.

Then in the end of the verse, he returns again to the impediment, and he
speaks two things of it. First, how long it shall lust, and then, what shall
follow from once it shall be ^aine away, to wi^, that man of sin shall be
reueiled. Now to the words, ye lays, He that vvithholds shall let, till he be
taken out of the way: that is to say, the Roman Emperor, for, he speaks of
the succession of Emperors, as of one man, because there was one kingdom to
wit, the Roman Empire, as before he spoke of the Antichrist. He shall withhold
that head of the Roman beast from using, unto the time he be taken away. Then,
what time shall he be taken out of the way? Even, at that article, the Lord hes
appointed* then the Lord suffered him to be taken out of the way* Who took him
one out of the way? Mahomet with his (...) the (...) and Turks in the East were
the first subverted the Roman Empire, and then; Boniface and his successors
ouerthrewit in the West. Mark this* When as the point of time prescriued by the
Lord to things to be done commes, then all impediments, that hold back that
thing; if it were the Empire of all the world shall be put out of the way* and
shall have no standing, but will vanish away. By the contrare, before that
point of time come, I shall make one stray stay a man, one word shall hold him,
the least thing in the world shall hinder him were he raging never so fast. To
let you see, that al goes by the effectual working and dispensation of God
that works all. I^standis not in this man, or, that man, albeit he were an
Emperor, or, Monareli, but only in God, who hes appointed a time to every
thing that all glory may be given him. That men say not, I did this or that:
No, it is the Lord, that from time to time hes wrought it. Ye will see some
times a marvelous hardness to win things that ye think be easy to be done,
and again an easiness to come to things which ye think hard. All tends to
this that we may know, all is decreed by the secreet and effectual providence
of God.

In the beginning of the next verse, we have the effect, that shall fall out,
upon this prophecy, when once he that withholds the (...) out of the way that
is the Roman Emperor, which is termed here as a man, by reason of a
kingdom, many Caesar's, but, yet, one kingdom. The^, says he, that wicked
man shall be reueiled, that great Antichrist shall be reueiled. (As for the
small Antichrists, that were forerunners of the great, he speaks not of them,
then this great Antichrist shall show himself in power, to the world, he is
called a lawless man, and who cannot be subject to a law. Who is that? He that
craves an absolute power. And who craves an absolute power, if not that beast
of Rome? Who breaks and makes laws as he pleases, Gods law, men's law? Read
the history of him. So ye have here the reueiling of him, his coming to his
greatness. To make this plain. When was it, that the great Antichrist came?
for, this prophecy is of him, and this reueiling is to be understood of him.
When came he to this perfection? When was he first reueiled? I show you before,
in the days of the Apostles the Antichrist began and lurked, unto the six
hundredth and three year of our Lord, and a great part of that time lurked in
Rome he was not yet in greatness: well then, his greatness began in the six
hundredth and three year of God, as the Histories notes. And upon what
decasion? Growing and reueiling of the antichrist.
One Photas an adulterer, a parricide and wicked man always, when he had
slain his master (...) Emperor, and so had become odious to the people, to
(...) to him the favor of the people he would show himself beneficial to the
Church, he pronounces Bonifacius the third and his successors after him (there
is the Antichrist) to be Popes, to be supre^me and (...) Bishops of the whole
earth, which styles (...) his predecessor so much abhorred. Then in the six
hundredth and seven year in a Sinod all counsel holden (...) Rome under the
same Bo^^facius the third, this privilege to be universal Bishops of the world
is ratified to the Bishops of Rome. A little after this (see how this grows)
in a counsel holden in Africa under the Emperor Constantine the nephew of
Heraclius. Theodorus the Bishop of Rome gettes this style and these tytles
sent to him, Domino, Apostolico culmini sublimato, sancto patrum patri,
Theodoro Papae, and summo omnium praesulum princip^ Synodus Africana. That is,
unto the Lord lifted up on high to the Apostolical seat, the holy father of
fathers, the most high Prince of all Prelates Theodore the Pope, writes the
Synod of Africa. And yet he is not come to his height, till in the 666. year
of the Lord, which number in the revelation of Iohny* 18. is called the number
of a man, that is, an explicable number, easy to be counted with men. In this
year he commes to the height of his perfection, as that prophecy of John tells
and experience teaches. Who makes him up and perfites him? Even, he who should
have holden him down, the Emperor of Constantinople Constantinus, Prorogatius
Barbarus, Vitilianus being Bishop of Rome for the time, he makes up the beast:
He sets him up on the top of his honor. Then, brethren, the Roman Bishop,
who was before but a legate to the Roman Emperor, he is set down in his
soueranitie, subject to no mortal man under the Heaven. Then commes in all
abominations, all corruptions, all vices, and among all the rest, in commes the
Mass, and it is determined, that it should be celebrate in the Latin tongue
in all the world. The Antichrist in this 666. year commes to the height of
height, he cannot come higher.

Now, brethren, to end this matter. Hear a little of his down going again.
As the Apostle here prophesied of his climming up to the height of the ladder,
so, to comfort the Church of God in all ages, he prophecyes of his
destruction. Whom says he, the Lord shall consume with the breath of his
mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming. There are two
parts here of his decaying. The first part is his consuming; the next part is
his abolishing. His consuming is with a slownes; for, as he came not
incontinent to his height, so, he decays not incontinent, long ere he decay,
he consumes away, as a body consuming, and then, ^e ends at a sudden. Who
consumes him? Who abolishes him? Who, but the Lord Jesus Christ? He it is who
shall consume the Antichrist. Ma^er of co^suming of the antichrist.
To speak of his consuming. Wherewith melts he him away? with the breath of
his mouth, that is, by the preaching of the Gospel, and that by the poor
Ministers, who are despised in the world: He makes his Ministers breath and
blow on the beast, and this breath of the Ministers consumes the beast. When
began this consuming of him? Even soon after he came to his height. Ye heard
of one John W. ckle^ff in anno 1383. he blew on the beast. John Husse, Jerome
de Praga in Bohemia, albeit he was burnt and the beast got the mastrie of him,
yet he consumed the beast. Ye heard of Luther in Germany, his name shall not
be buried. Melanthon, Zuinglius, Oe^olampadius, men of worthy memory; and
then good John Calvin in France, Viretus, Farellus. they blew in their time on
the beast. What shall I say? To be short, so many faithful men as the Lord
raises up in the ministry they are as many slayers of the beast with their
breaths. Now learn one thing. When the Antichrist is come to his height, who
goes too to beat the beast down from his height? Is it the Emperor? is it
this king or that king? No, no word of them. Is it any power in this world? No,
it is the Lord Jesus. He will have the honor of the wreack of the Antichrist.
And therefore, as it were, in his own person he will enter in combat with the
beast. Now what armor uses he? Commes he on with this wordly armor, gunnes
and gainzies, I ask of thee? No, no thing is spoken of them, but a breathing
and blowing is told of* Jesus Christ blows on the beast and consumes him
with the breath of his mouth. The word of the Gospel is the armor he uses:
that same armor the beast abuses to hold up his kingdom vvithall, the Lord
takes out of his ^and and slayes him with. What instruments uses he to this
turn? He takes not Angels from the Heaven to breath on him. No, but silly
simple bodies, some out of the beasts own body, some otherways raised up to
blow on the beast. Mark all these circumstances. They all let you see* that*
in beatting down of the beast only Jesus Christ ought to have the glory of
the victory. Whether ye look to him who strikes the battle, the armor, or,
them, who are soldiers in the battle, all lettes you see, the glory should
be given to Christ alone. What is more vile, nor the word of the cross and
this vile ministry, and yet he will have him vvreaked and consumed with the
word and ministry. He chooses not great and mighty things, not kings and
Emperors to this work (wonder not, nor be not moved, that ye see so many
kings stand by the beast, to see the Emperor, the kings of France and Spain
stand for him) but the Lord will use base means to destroy the beast, that the
glory may be given to him allone.

Now to come to the other point, his abolishing. He is abolished at the last.
When shall this be? When Christ shall come again. How shall it be? The face
and presence of Jesus shall devour him. As soon as the Lord shall come down,
as soon shall he vanish and be burnt up, as caffe with the fire. The word of
the Gospel consumes him and burns him, but, not quyte up. But, the face of
Jesus in that day shall burn him quite up, and then, that prophecy of John
Revel. chap. 20. verse 10. shall be accomplished: He shall be casten in a lack
of fire and brimstone which shall never have an end. Then, brethren, beware of
this word; for, if it work not to life, but be a savor of death to death; if
it do thee no good in this life, be assured, that most glorious face of the
Lord in the world to come shall destroy thee. Therefore, look, that, the word
be an instrument to thy consolation, and the power of God to thy salvation.
Look how the word is effectual to thee, in this life: for, so shall the
presence of Jesus be to thee in the life to come, either to thy salvation, or,
damnation. The face of the Lord shall consume thee if the word hes wroght no
renewing of thee in this life. It is said in the chapter preceding verse 9.
They which did not obey the Gospel shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the gloree of his power:
one blenke of that face shall consume in an instant, all the reprobate. Crave
then, that, the word may be powerful, that ye may escape this fire of that
presence of Jesus in his coming. Then, here, ye may perceive, that, the
kingdom of the Antichrist is not altogether abolished, it takes a long time,
ere it be taken away. Wonder not, that, he hes such a power in this earth: for,
certainly, this prophecy tells us, that, there shall be some face of the
Antichrists kingdom, until Christ come. Look not, that, Papistry end, ere
Christ come, look not that every reformed Church shall be quite of them, but,
they shall be as thorns in their sides till Christ come, and let no man over
soon triumph, but let every one make him for the battle. There are none of
the professors of Christ's truth but they should prepare them for battle.
Therefore, let every one seek this armor, that being enarmed with that
spiritual armor, so far as God will give the grace, echone may breath on the
beast to his consumption, that, so, God may be glorified and then shall thou
triumph for ever with him. To whom be praise and glore for ever.

AMEN.
THE SEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 9. 10. 9 Even, him, whose coming is by the
vvorking of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders,

10 And in all deceiuablenes of unrighteousness, among them, that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.


WE return again, in this text, to the description of the Antichrist to be
reueiled, the Apostle before had casten in some things in the way pertaining to
the present purpose. Ye heard the Antichrist to be reueiled was descriued from
his nature. First, of nature, he should be a man, like other men, then, he is
descryued from his properties; first, a sinful man, addicted to sin, a slave
of sin and iniquity; next, the son of perdition, a man from all eternity
ordained to perdition. Then, he came to his actions, that, he shall do, when
he shall be reueiled; first, in malice of his heart he shall oppone him to every
thing called God, in Heaven and earth, to the powers and majesty's, here, on
earth, to the Majesty of God and Christ, in Heaven. Another action, when he
shall be reueiled. in pride, he shall exalt himself above all thing, that is
called God, and is worshipped in the world. Yet, more, in pride he shall sit in
the Temple of God, not like a common man, but, as God, in Gods seat, on the
consciences of men and women, in the Church of God. And last, he shall show
himself to be God in all things, in all his titles and styles, and al his
dignities and shall bereave God, so far, as lies in his power, of all dignities
and honors, that pertaines to him allone.

Now, to speak nothing of that, hes been spoken before. In this 9. verse,
the Apostle returns again to the description of the Antichrist, and in this
place he descriues him from the effectualnes, or, effectual power, he shall
have, in men ordained for perdition, when he shall come and be reueiled in the
world. Then, to come to the words. Satan effectual, by, and in the antichrist.
Whose coming, says the Apostle, shall be according to the effectual power
of Satan. As he would say, when he shall come and be reueiled in the world,
Satan, that sent him shall be effectual and powerful by him, powerful in men
and we^en, that perishes, that are ordained from al eternity to perdition.
Herein, shortly, learn, then. Even, as God, by Jesus Christ in his ministry,
whom he sends out, will be effectual, in these, who are his, if all the world
had sworn the contrare: So, Satan the enemy of God and ^atan, in this point
will prease to be like God, and in his manner, will be effectual and powerful,
in them, that are ordained for death, by the Antichrist. As God in his church
for salvation will be powerful by his ministry: so, the Antichrist will be
powerful, to them, that are ordained to perdition. Yet, brethren* the words
imports more, to wit, that, Satan shall, not only be effectual by the
Antichrist outwardly, but, he shall be effectual inwardly, in the heart of him;
and when he shall work by him, he shall not work by the mouth, or, hand
outwardly, but, by the effectual working in his heart and will inspire in his
heart to do the turn. In this point likewise Satan preases to be like God.
When God by his minister as effectual, he not only works by his mouth, or
his hand or any outward member; but he works by his soul and inward
affections chiefly. 1. Cor. chap. 14. verse 25. it is said of the Prophets that
God is in them. Indeed he prophecyes not only in the mouth but he enters in
the heart, and thereby he prophecyes as well as by the mouth: Paul says* 2. Cor.
4. 13. We believe and therefore we speak. If the Prophet speak not with the
tongue because he believes in the heart, all his preaching is dear of a penny.
See Coll. 1. 29. So Satan will be like God in this point, he will enter in his
minister, namely the great Antichrist, he will possess his heart and all the
inward affections of his soul, and by them he will be powerful in them that
are ordained for damnation before the world was made.

Now to go forward in the text following. The Apostle setdowne two means by
the which the Antichrist when he shall come shall be effectual in them who
perishes. Mark the two means, and experience this day teaches the truth of
them. The first mean he calls it, all manner of power, then he expones
himself what he means by this power, by signs and lying wonders: wonderful
working that commes of a power. Another mean in the verse following. And in
all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness, that is, doctrine that is first false,
secondly fraudulent, having only a color of the truth. So to take it up
shortly. The two means, the Antichrist shall have, is first working
wonderfully next speaking, uttering false doctrine; first work and wonders,
and then word: Work and word are the two means whereby the Antichrist deceiues
you, by his work he deceiues the world, by his word he propo^s false doctrine.
Now to speak of the first mean: His first mean are wonders and miracles. The
Antichrist shall be effectual by working wonders in them who are ordained to
perdition when he shall be reueiled in the world. Brethren, as the minister of
Christ is effectual by working of signs and wonders, as the Apostles were,
and before them the Prophets in their own time: So the Antichrist the minister
of Satan he will prease to be like them, and he will be effectual ^n these who
perishes by working of wonders and miracles. But what wonders are these that
the Antichrist works by? The Apostle calls them lying signs, and wonders,
lying first in respect of their end, wherefore they are wrought, to confirm
false doctrine and lies to men; to establish falsehood: and again lying,
because the wonders that are wrought are no true things in substance, they are
but ilusions* and mere juglerie to deceive the people. Ye see the devil would
feign be like God, and in the meane-tyme he is a plain counterfairer, and to
call it so the ape of God, counterfaiting God: So the minister of Satan the
Antichrist a plain counterfaiter of Christs-Minister, an ape set up, as he hes
seen the Ministers of Christ work, so he will stand up and counterfaite, all
are but apes, all their miracles and working but apes playing.

Now, brethren, I think, ye would ask this question, whether, if Satan and
the Antichrist hes power to work true miracles and wonders, or, not? I answer
shortly, In truth, I say, Satan is not able to work one true wonder, he hes
not power to work one miracle, Definition of a true miracle.
that is true in substance, and I prone it, both by reasons ^n Scripture; but,
shortly. By reasons: a true wonder, or, miracle is a work, that is wrought
above nature, against nature, contrare to the course of nature, contrare to all
second causes, of the which, when it is done, none in the world is able to give
a natural reason, wherefore it is so. There is the definition of a true miracle:
I could let you see out of the Scripture many examples of these, the rauishing
of Enoch and Elias to the Heaven. Who can give a natural cause, for the
lifting up of two heavy bodies to the Heaven? The preservation of Noe with so
many with him in the Arc, a work against nature. The confusion of languages,
at the building of Babell; a wonder. Saraes conceiving of a Son, when she had
past the date of conceiving and bearing children. The passing of Israel safe
though the red sea and through the floode of lordane. The standing of the Sun
in the heaven, when Joshua fought. The going back of the Son, when Ezechias
wasick. The Eclypse of the Sun, when Christ was crucified. The saving of
Daniell, in the Lions den. The saving of the three children, in the fire. The
saving of Jonas, in the Whales belly. The burning up of Elias sacrifices with a
fire from Heaven* against nature. Come to the new Testament, the raising up of
so many dead bodies, and the greatest wonder of al, the incarnation of the Son
of God, his suffering, his resurrection, the greatest wonder, that ever was
wrought. Satan cannot work true miracles.
Who can give a natural cause of these things? Now, come to the assumption.
Satan cannot change nature, it passes his power to impeed the course of nature,
to do any thing against the second causes, it must be of as great power, to
change nature, as to create nature, the power, that alters nature is as great,
as the power, that creats nature: Satan, by all men's confession hes no^ the
power to create, only the Lord hes power to create: It passes the devils power
to create the smallest creature on the earth; and therefore, it passes his
power to change nature, and to do any thing against nature and the second
causes. And therefore, Rom cha. 4. verse. 17. these two, the changing of nature
and the creation; are only ascryued to God, as proper to him. To God, says he,
who quickens the dead, that is an alteration of nature, and calls these
things* that are not, as if they were, that is, creating, by the word of his
mouth: at the naming of it, the thing, that was not, stands up and is. And so,
we must conclude, Satan hes no power to work one true miracle. This, for the
reason* Come to the Scripture. Read ye not, 72. Psalm verse. 18. Blessed be the
Lord God, even, the God of Israel, who does only vvondrous things. And in
the 77. Psalm, verse. 13. 14. Who is so great a God, as our God: thou are the
God, that (...) wonders: as he would say, there is none, can work wonders,
but, God. So, this question is easily solued. But, there is another question.
Will not God work ^vvonders by the ministry of the Devil and the
Antichrist* shows not God his power, in vvorking wonders by them, as he
did, by the Prophets and Apostles his own servants. Brethren, I shall show
you my opinion, without the prejudice of any man's judgment. I think, not:
for, all the wonders, that, the devil will work are to this end, to
establishe lies, against God and his glory. Now, I say, the Lord will not
lend his power to Satan, to work one true wonder, to deface his own glory and
to establish false doctrine, and I think, I have a sufficient probation of
this, out of the 9. chap. of John, 16 verse. When Christ had given sight to the
man, that was blind, the Pharisees made inquisition of the man, they fell in
altercation amongst themselves, the one half reproaching him, the other half
defending him, and they say, If he were a sinner, that is, a deceiuer, he
could not work wonders, but, he hes wroght this wonder; therefore, we
conclude he is not a deceiuer. And the man himself* who got sight reasons
after this manner, verse 33. This man hes wroght a wonde^ in me, therefore, he
is no deceiuer. Then, ye will ask. What miracles are these, that, the
Antichrist works in the world? I answer, Either they are only delusions,
nothing in substance, only juglerie, deceiving of the senses of men; or, if
there be any thing in effect, if there be any solid work in them, they are
done, because they are natural, they are not done against nature. O, but* they
seem vvonderfull, to vs^ I answer. The old serpent knovves nature and the
force of it, better, nor we do, and he knovves the second causes and sundry
thing in nature, that never Physician took up. Again, he hes a slight in
vvorking, which we cannot take up, and therefore, knowing the nature of things,
and having slight in vvorking, we think the things that are done so, to be
wonder* albeit in effect they be no wonders. So in one word, Satan never
wrought one true miracle, but, either they have been delusions, or, else,
works agreeing with nature, which we think to be wonders, because the
causes of them are unknown to us.

Now, Marks of the Antichrist. 1. False miracles.
brethren, there is one mark of the Antichrist, that, Paul foretelles shall
be, when he is reueiled. Men shall know him, by this mark* He shall work
false wonders and miracles. Now, let us seek where is this man, that glories
most in the world in working wonders, when al ordinare wonders by God hes
ceased: Whether is he in the East, or, West? Who is he, that says, miracles
and wonders is a true mark of the true Church? so, that, if wonders be not
wrought in it, it cannot be the true Church. Is it the Turk? No. Who is he,
that with five words, Hoc est enim corpus meum, will make daily such a
vvonderfull transsubstantiation of bread in the flesh of Christ, and of wine
in the blood of Christ, and sacrifice him over again? Who is he, that bragges
of wonders wrought at dead men's graves? Who is he, that will make you trow,
that, dead and dumble stocks and stones, Images set up in Temples, will laugh,
whiles weep, whiles speak to you, vvhiles cast a glance to you? And last, to
come to one thing (for, a thousand things in this purpose is nothing; always,
the Lord keep us from the sight of this) Who is he, that tells a wonderful
tail of our lady of Laurete, Maria Lauretana, so called from the Mount
Laurete, that her Idol being in Galilea without the hands of men by the Angels
was lifted up from Galilie and set down in Italy, where she is worshipped
with multitude of pilgrims, out of all countries offering to her precious
jewels, and she is worshipped this day as the Idols among the Gentiles were
worshipped. Ye may know, and if it pleased God to open men's eyes, none needed
to doubt who it is. Is it any other but the Pope of Rome? It is he that is the
Antichrist, and if he be not the Antichrist, there never was nor shall be an
Antichrist in the world.

Now I go forward to the next mean, whereby he shall be effectual in them
who perishes. The next mean is doctrine. He calls it the deceiuablenesse of
all unrighteousness. This unrighteousness is false doctrine; 2. false
doctrine.
it is doctrine in substance, but, false doctrine, then in color it is fraud
and deceiuablenesse, a false color; it hes a color of the doctrine of
Christ, but a color only. So the Minister of Christ is powerful in the
elect by doctrine and the word preached. So the Antichrist is powerful by
doctrine in these that perishes and are in the Antichristian Church, so, that,
he preases to be like Christ's true Ministers in this point. But as in miracles
he is false, so, in teaching doctrine he is false. There is another mark
whereby we shall know him. As false miracles was one mark, so, false
doctrine, doctrine of deceit is another mark. Who is he that propones such
doctrine as this, that first is false, and next hes a fair color that
deceiues the world, who will speak fairly of Christ, his work, his nature,
his substance, his incarnation, and pretends his glory in all things and yet
mingled with falsehood, and all to decei^e the world? Is it the Turk No I tell
you what the Turks is, he is a man that oppones himself to Jesus Christ and
his doctrine directly* not fainedlie but openly: so he is not the Antichrist.
The Antichrist is fained: the Antichrist under the pretense of the name of
Christ oppones himself to Christ. Then again the doctrine of the Turks is
not culloured, but is opposite in plain terms to the doctrine of Christ. So
neither can the Turk ^e the Antichrist, nor* the doctrine of the Turk ^e*
such a doctrine, he speaks hereof. Then who is the Antichrist* and who is it
that propones this Antichristian doctrine? Who is it that takes the name of
Christ, and calls himself Christ's friend, and shows a color of Christ's
doctrine? Alas that men should be so blinded in such a light, as it were in
malice to put their finger in their own eyes, and when the Lord hes set him up
that all the world may see him, rather ere they should see him, they would put
out their own eyes. But albeit they should close their eyes never so fast that
they should not see him yet this word of Jesus shall cry it in their ears, and
convince their consciences, nill they will they, that that beast of Rome the
Pope is the Antichrist.

Now to go forward and to come to these, in whom the Antichrist shall be
effectual, when he shall be reueiled and in whom now he is effectual* by
false wonders first, and next, by doctrine, by fraud. In these, says he, who
perishes, he shall be powerful in these who perishes. Who are they? That long
ago were ordained to damnation, destinate in Gods counsel from all eternity
to damnation. Paul 9. Romans verse 22. calls them vessels of wrath, made and
formed (as a potter will make a pot) to dishonor, So are they ordained to
destruction before all eternity. Paul calls them Ephesians. chap. 2. verse 2. the
children of disobedience. antichrist effectual in them, who are ordained to
perdition.
This we have to rejoice in, the effectualnesse of the Antichrist is bounded;
it is not said, that, he shall be effectual in all men: No, God forbid, but
his power is bounded; it shall only be effectual to them that perishes, and
are appointed to damnation. I read in the 9. chap. Revel. verse 4. the locusts
that rose out of that smook of that bottomless pit, they destroyed only them*
that had not the mark of God in their foreheads. 13. chap. 8. verse, it is
said, that, they only should adore the beast whose names are not written in
the book of life of the Lamb. Then, only the reprobate that are ordained to
perdition are subject to that final deceiving by the Antichrist, that his
deceit may be as a chain to bind them to perdition. Lord if they who are
bound with the chains of the Antichrist hes great cause to search out the
ground of their election, whether they are such as are ordained to perdition,
seeing they are in the wrong way. Go out of Babylon, commit not fornication
with her: for, certainly, if maliciously ye continue in byding with her, ye
shall be condemned with her. Mark again another comfort to the elect. The
elect of God are not subject to these deceiving errors and Heresies of the
Antichrist as the reprobate: They are not subject thereto finally, although
for a time the Lord will suffer them to be drawn away, to the end they should
know themselves to be dissolute Christians. Matthew chap. 24 verse 24.
Christ says, false Christ's and false Prophets shall do such wonders, that if
it were possible they should seduce even the elect, meaning that it is not
possible the elect should fall in this final defection. Who are they then in
whom the Antichrist preuailes? Only they who are ordained to perdition: That
is, such an object as is disposed and prepared before all eternity to be
deceived by the Antichrist in time: they are the matter that is perishing and
is ordained to perish. I will make this more clear by an exemple: When the fire
burns up the caffe and dry timber, ye see, the cause of the burning not only
in the fire; for, if a stone, or, iron were in the place of caffe, it would bide
the fire: so the cause is not in the burning heat of the fire only, but also,
in the caffe that is the matter thereof: Even so it is with them that are
deceived by the Antichrist, the cause of there deceit is not only in the
force of the Antichrist, but also, in the evil disposition of the men that are
deceived. In plain talk, many are ordained to Helles fire, and therefore when
the Antichrist lights on such folks they are readily and easily deceived. And
yet, I see, God hes his part: Who gave this disposition? Who hes ordeinde it?
Who hes ordeinde men to damnation? It is God in his eternal counsel. So the
Antichrist is not able with his effectualnes to do any thing in man, but,
that, which God hes determined. First, the Lord of all creatures he dispones,
he makes some vessels to honor, some, to dishonor. That eternal decree of God
gives such a disposition to the creature, that, in time it is capable of good
means, to life; capable of deceit, to destruction. So, it is God in his
eternal counsel, that justly dispenses, and the Antichrist in his time works
according to Gods dispensation. So the Antichrist hes not the glory that he can
do any thing without God, neither needs the godly to be offended nor affrayd
for the Antichrist, nor to be discouraged when they see men daily falling away
from the truth. Nothing can be done without Gods decree. Christ was crucified,
a foull fact, yet, it is said Act. 4. verse. ^7. that, the Lord had appointed
from al eternity, he should suffer for salvation, and for that cause, the hands
of Herod, the Jews, the Priests and al were lowsed to crucify him: nothing
commes, but by the Lord, that he may have the glory of all works.

Now to go forward. He subjoines, a cause of the perdition of the wicked that
are deceived and so, reserved to damnation, besides this, that it is Gods
ordinance. There is another cause, there are none seduced by the Antichrist, but
they who deserves justly in Gods judgment to be given over to be deceived.
Gods decree is the ground-cause of damnation, yet, of necessity there
interuenes a cause or doing, where by justly thou deserves thy own damnation,
and closes thy mouth that thou have not one word to speak, when the Lord is
putting his eternal decree to execution. Come to the cause. They perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
What can be but perishing, when men maliciously will not love the truth, but
contemnes it? What can ensue? The Lord is truth, embrace the truth, ere thou
shall never be saved: when men hes renounced the truth whereby they should be
saved, how shall they be saved? Now take heed, there are many means and causes
that will bring men to Hell. Murder will bring thee to Hell, Contempt of the
truth a cheef men's of damnation.
harlotrie, perjurie, blasphemy, foul concupiscence, any of these will cause
thee die. But, notwithstanding of these and many more sins against the Law, the
Apostle maks choose of one sin, one chief sin that procures damnation,
contempt of Gods truth, contempt of the Gospel teached, he leaves all causes
and takes up this. The lesson is, lfye will look to them who hes once given up
their names to Christ, and so, are called Christian men and women, and taking
on them the name of God, and profession of the faith of Christ, in the day of
judgment we shall see this to be true, the chief point of dittay, that shall
be laid against them, is, thou contempned my Gospel in the earth. It shall not
be said to them, thou art a murderer, harlot, etc. no thou art a contempner of
my Gospel. That shall be the cheef cause of thy perdition: for, it is the
mother cause of all sin, because if men would embrace sincerely the truth of
God and love the Gospel, if they would embrace Jesus in their heart, O, if he
would not keep the^ from many inconuenients! It is the contempt of the gospel
that leads thee to thy sins, it is the contempt of the Gospel that makes thee
a murderer, an adulterer, etc. Thou contemned the Gospel of Christ, and
therefore the Lord castes thee away and gives the over to thy own affections,
to commit sin with greediness, to be a blasphemer, an adulterer, and to commit
other sins. So the mother cause and special ground of all sins is the
contempt of the light and the word of Jesus, and this may evidently be seen in
this land, especially in great men's houses.

Now he says not, because they received not the truth, but he says, because
they received not the love of the truth There are many will seem to receive
the truth, and who will take heed to the Gospel so diligently as they? And
therefore the first thing that men should take heed to, is the heart, look if
in the heart there be an unfeigned love of God and his truth. It is not thy ear
in hearing of the word, nor thy mouth in speaking well of it that will make
thee a good receiver of the truth, but it is the heart. Look there be an
unfeigned love to the truth, in it, and then hold up thy ear, and it will
sink in so sweetly in thy soul that thou shall feed on it so joyfully as no
tongue neither of man nor Angel can tell. It is not the outward profession nor
the outward receiving (if thou should sit a thousand years hearing) that will
bring thee to life: First thou must have heart and soul disposed inwardly with
an unfeigned love to God, to Jesus Christ and his Gospel, and then Heaven and
earth shall got together ere thou perish. An heart that loves Christ and this
light shall never perish: on the other part, all the outward form of doing, the
protestation, subscription and the rest of these outward things shall not save
thee in the day of the Lord, if there be not a piece of this love in thy heart.
And so I end with this word. (...) accursed be he that loves not Jesus Christ
and his truth. And by the contrare blessed are they that loves Jesus Christ
and his truth, even this word preached by this ba^e ministry, and blessed
shall they beforeuer. To this Christ with the Father and the holy Spirit be all
praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE EIGHT LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 11. 12. 13. 14. 11 And therefore God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe lies.

12 That all they might bed^mned which believed not the truth, (...) had
pleusure in unrighteousness.

13 But we ought to give thanks alvvay to God for you, brethren, beloved of
the Lord, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation,
through sanctification of the Spirit, and the faith of truth.

14 Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ.


THE days bygone (beloved brethren in the Lord Jesus) we have heard a Prophecy
of that uniuersall Apostasy that was to come, and of the reueiling of the
Antichrist, who should be the head and ringleader of this universal
Apostasy. We heard of the Antichrist to be reueiled, he is painted out and
deferyued in his own colors before he was reueiled, even as we see him this
day: For Paul could not have set him out more viuely in his nature, properties
and actions, if he had seen him nor he hes done in this Prophecy: for he
descryuos him even as if he had seen him with his eyes. He hes descryued him
from his nature, He shall be a man, says he not a single man simply, but he
means by this word one man, a succession of men in one kingdom. As for his
properties, he says, he shall be a man of sin, and addicted slave to sin.
Next he shall be the son of perdition, destinate to destruction and
everlasting perdition from al eternity. As for his actions first in malice of
his heart he shall oppone himself against all thing that is called God, and is
worshipped either in Heaven or in earth. He shall oppone himself both against
the Majesty of God in Heaven, and against the majesty's of Kings and Princes
on earth. Again in pride of his heart he shall lift himself above every thing
called God. More, in the pride of heart he shall sit in the Temple of God, as
God in Gods seat upon the consciences of men, to control them, which thing
properly pertaines to God. No creature hes power over the consciences of men,
it is proper to God only. More, he shall show himself in all his styles
dignities and names as God. He shall reaue these from God and shall cloth
himself with them. Last, he is descryued from that effectualnesse and
powerful working which he shall receive of Satan, and which at his coming he
shall have in the hearts of men, partly by working wonders, partly by false and
fraudulent doctrine. But in whom? He says, in them that perishes, that is, in
them that are ordained to destruction before the foundation of the world was
laid; in these he shall be powerful, they shall believe him in all that he
does and says. Then he sets down one cause of the perdition of these men in
whom the Antichrist is and shall be effectual. To wit, their own merit and
desert, they will not receive the love of the truth, they contemn the light
of the Gospel, and therefore perish shall they. God indeed hes decreed from
all eternity that they shall perish; but, before the decreete be put in
execution, their merit shall interuene, and in time they shall contemn the
truth of God, which shall procure that damnation, to the which from all
eternity they were predestinate.

In the first verse we read the Apostle shows by what order damnation and
perdition shall follow upon the contempt of the light of God in Jesus Christ.
Mark this. Damnation shall not follow upon the contempt of the truth
immediately, but something shall interueene, first there shall follow one plague
of God: for he shall send upon these men strange illusions, that is, he shall
hound out the Antichrist with his effectualnesse, and he coming with the
effectualnesse of Satan shall deceive them, he shall blind them, as it were,
and put out their eyes. What shall follow on that? Being blinded they shall
go forward in their sin and so go down toward Hell, as it were, by
another step. And as they contemned the light before, so now, being deceived,
they shall embrace greedily lies. And what shall follow upon this? Embraceing
lies and vanities damnation shall ensue. This is the meaning of this verse.
Then, ye see, a man is not shot in Hell at the first. No, when a man hes
committed one sin, God will not put him in Hell at that same instant, but he
shall make him go to Hell by degrees, from step to step, and from sin to
sin in his just judgment, he shall make him stop from a smaller sin to a
greater sin: and this he will do by plaguing of him and inflicting on him
either spiritual or temporal judgments, and being beatten he will not amend.
No, mark this. A reprobate will never mend, all the temporal judgments in the
world will not better him, but he will be ay worse and worse, so that if he
sinned before, now being plagued he shall go to a greater sin, and shall not make
an end of sinning till he end in judgment.

Mark another thing here. Ye see what the Antichrist is with all his force and
effectualnesse, his wonders and his doctrine whereby he is effectual in them
that perishes. Is he without God trow ye? No, he is no other thing but a burrio
sent from the Tribunal of God to plague the ingrate world, as the king would
send an hangman to hang a thief or murderer; God in his just judgment sends
him to execute justice upon this ingrate world for the contempt of the light of
the Gospel. The Pope is Gods burrio whom God sendes, for to plague this
ingrate world for the contempt of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. When this great
universal apostasy began the great Antichrist was sent by God to be the worker
of it. And, brethren, what trow ye is the cause of this trouble sent in our
Church this day? This high contempt of the light of the Gospel hes been the
cause, and if we continue in this contempt, troubles shall not leave off. This
same Antichrist the Pope by his supposts shall make ado amongst us, the Lord
shall send an auenger to plague the souls of men that will not believe the
Gospel. Another thing mark here. He says not that God shall suffer him, and
suffer strong illusions to be wrought by him, but he says, he shall send them,
he shall be an efficient, a doer, and a principal directer of this turn. Then
ye will ask, Is God the author of evil? I answer, there are two sorts of
evil, there is one evil that they call the evil of a fault, there is another
evil that is called the evil of punishment, according to that saying of the
Prophet, There is not one evil in the city, (that is, there is no punishment
in the city) that the Lord does nor. As to the evil of a fault in sin, he
is not the author and worker of it, but suffers it to be wrought by evil men.
And as to the other the Lord is the author of it, as that saying of the Prophet
before uttered by me witnesses. And therefore, Hell as it is a punishment, is
ordained by the Lord, and so this place is to be understood. Who hardened the
heart of Pharao? Who gives up men to a reprobate mind? Is it not the Lord to
punish their sins? But I will not insist in this matter.

Lastly I note in this place, that, this plague the Apostle speaks of here, is,
a blinding and deceiving of the mind. There are two powers of the soul, the
mind and the heart. This plague is especially the plague of the mind. I shall
make this clear to you. There are two sorts of lights in the mind, there is
a natural light wherewith we are borne, and there is a supernatural light,
which we get by the word and Spirit of Christ. Now there is such a conjunction
between these two, that, if a man, when the supernatural light is offered
from Heaven, refuse and contemn it, look what will follow. The Lord from the
Heaven in his just judgment shall pluck from him the natural knowledge, and
set him up blind in things natural and common, he shall pluck the common
sense from him, that is, he shall render him over to a reprobate mind without
al judgment and discretion. What shall follow then? Then like a mad man he
shall run here and there to fin; he shall pass over the bounds of common
honesty, he shall leap over all the laws of the second table, he shall be a
rebel to God and man, he shall be a murderer and a thief, and he shall
follow all concupiscence in the world, and as for the first Table, which is
concerning godliness, he sets himself against: He will be an Idolater, an
Heretic, an Athist, a man of no religion, and all this commes of a reprobate
mind which is procured of Gods just judgment because that spiritual light
was so contemned that he would not suffer it to be conjoined with that natural
light. Therefore when we see these lightmynded men, and these that will be
counted Lords and Peers in the Land, repyne to this glorious light of the
Gospel, take up the judgment of God that lights upon them. The Lord suffers
them to pass the bounds of common honesty, they are wrapped up in a reprobat
sense. Count no more of them then of mad men whom the Lord in justice shall
confound for ever. No, if they were here, I would say they were mad men,
running headlong under the vengence of God to destruction. The Lord give them
eyes to see this and hearts to understand that they may be reclaimed from this
fearce wrath of the Lord. They want both natural wit and supernatural: for he
that will not suffer this light of the Gospel to be conjoined with this
natural light, he hes no wit at all, he is a mad body, he will not care to
do whatsoever evil he may both to himself and others. The Lord save us from
this sort of men.

In the verse that follows first we have the effect that ensues upon this
sin of believing of lies; upon the first sin the contemning of the truth
follows; the next sin of believing errors and lies, upon this sin again
follows judgment and indignation that they may be condemned, says he. In the
next part of the verse he repeats the two sins upon the which damnation
proceeds, the first is insidelitie, who believed not the truth; the second is
believing of lies and untruth, and all manner of unrighteousness. He joins
these two together, not believing the truth and believing lies, and they go
together necessarly: for if thou believe not the truth, of necessity thou
shall believe untruth. If thy heart repose not on God and his truth, of
necessity thy heart shall repose on the devil and untruth; the heart cannot want
some faith. Thou must have some faith and something to put thy confidence in*
^shal make this plain. The heart of the creature cannot stand alone, but
especially the heart of the sinful man cannot stand up, except it have a
leaning-stock or prop to uphold it. The hearts of all the kings of the earth
cannot stand alone, but they must repose on something: Ma^shart must either
stand on God, or on Satan.
for this is the difference between God and the creature, God will stand him
alone, he needs not a foundation or leaning stock, as the creature needs: for
it must lean ever on something or else it is impossible to it to stand. Now
there are two things whereon man reposes, either man reposes himself on God
and his truth, or else on the devil and his falsehood. If thou leanst not on God
on Jesus Christ and his Gospel, of necessity thy confidence shall be on Satan
the Antichrist, vanities, lies, and falsehood. Well then when thou have leand
thee over on Satan and lies thou will stand no longer nor does vanities and
lies, yea nor the devil will stand, and he will not stand ay, albeit he have
strength for a time, yet he and vanity and lies shall fall down and thou shall
fall down with them: for if thou be found leaning on lies and on the Antichrist
thou shall perish with them.

The word he uses is to be marked. He says not, they that believed lies, but
they that had pleasure in unrighteousness. Even as we see and find by
experience reposing on God and his truth is with a joy of the soul. So when a
man is leaning on the devil and on vanity he hes a kind of pleasure and
delight in his reposing on them, but it is a false and deceitful pleasure, a
fained rest and joy, and here I take up the plague of the heart (as I did
before of the mind) when he makes the heart with a pleasure to rest on Satan
and vanity, when the heart is beatten with a senslesnesse that it cannot
grippe a solid thing, but grippes vanity, and leanes on it, as if it were a
solid thing: when it thinks fleeting vanity to be solid, when it is
fleeting in the Air it beleues it be on the ground. So that the plague of the
heart is when it is made senseless that it cannot grippe a solid thing but
vanity and lies, and this plague is of Gods just judgment. Mark then here
the order. Wickedness and malice begins at the heart first, so that when the
truth is offered to the mind, the malice of the heart oppugnes and will nor let
it enter in the mind. Romans 1. 28. Ephesians. 4. 18. upon this God beattes first
the mind and casts the man away in a reprobate sense. But, lets he the heart
alone? No, the heart that began the mischief escapes not, but he beattes the
heart that would no^let the truth enter, with a senslesnesse to live upon lies
and vanities, and ere she know of her self she and her leaning-stock shall
be both beatten down to Hell. So beware of this malitiousnesse to the truth:
for if thou have a malicious heart against this truth o^ God, assure they self
thou have a blind ignorant mind plagued of God, and thou, thy heart and mind
and all thou leanest to shall be plagued with Gods everlasting destruction Lord
save us from a malicious heart: for all stands in the disposition of the heart;
if it be pliable to embrace the truth, thou shall get true knowledge and
solid joy, otherwise woe to thee for evermore.

Now in the next verse the Apostle leaving off this doctrine and prophecy
concerning the Antichrist and this (...) Apostasy, turns him to the
Thessalonians and begins to comfort them, thinking well that the
Thessalonians understanding (...) these that the (...) Apostasy from Jesus
Christ; and that the Antichrist shall come with effectualnesse to deceive the
world, should be discouraged with such doctrine. Therefore he begins to
comfort them. And certainly if we knew what? Apostasy were* and (...) danger
is (...) it, (...) what is the (...) Antichrist, what a deceiues he were and
what false doctrine were when it is sown among people, and what damage it
imported, the very name of Apostasy and of the Antichrist and false doctrine
would terifie us and discourage us altogether. For I trow therebe none of us
but if a canker enter in a joint of our finger we would (...) for it. Brethren,
false doctrine is a canker and there is as never a canker that will consume so,
as the canker of false doctrine, and so, when it enters in the Church, there is
not a member of the Church but it should be fearde for it, and astonished to
see it: but alas, there is not feeling of the spiritual canker, we (...) so
gro^^e in our (...) that we cannot ^eele the (...) spiritual things. But to
come to the words, (...), says he, should thank God (...) for (...) Wherefore?
Because that God (...) from the beginning (...). As he would say, be not feared
with these things: (...) and on a (...) He says Brethren, Our eternalelectio^
proceds of Gods love.
(...). The cause of this style is in the word following (...) for this
eternal election commes of a special love of God; for if he had not loved
thee, he had (...) came of an unspeakable love of God toward thee, as the
reprobation came of (...) hatred to the reprobate. Therefore Romans 9. 13. It is
said, Iocob I have loved, but as for Esau I have hated him from all eternity,
and therefore I cast him away. Well since election commes of love, it is not
without cause when we speak to the elect that we call them the beloved of God.
This is a token of love when God hes elected a man from all eternity, and
there is not a man, (look to your experience) there is not one, I say, when
they ^eele their election, (for thou should feel it and find in thy heart that
thou art chosen of God) but they will feel it with such a joy and sense of
love of him that hes chosen them as is unspeakable: for there is no^one gift of
God but when we feel it and consider it, it brings with it a sense of the love
of him that gave thee the gift, and it wakens up the joy of the heart
exceedingly. What matter of the benefit, it with the benefit bestowed on us
the sense of love be not communicated: for the least and smallest benefit given
with a sense of love* is (...) not a great benefit and gift without the sense
of love. When God castes a kingdom to a man in hatred* there is no joy nor
sweetness in it, because there is no sense of love; no if it were but a
morsel of meat given, of love, that love will* make it so sweet to ^ee that
thy heart shall be unable to (...) the sweetness of it. Therefore whateuer God
gives thee, be it little or much, labor to feel that it is given of love to
thee: otherwise there is no true pleasure or joy in it: for all true joy is
when the love of God is shed abroad in the hearts of men by the holy Spirit Romans
chap. 5. verse 5.

Now what says he, We, to wit, I and they who writes with me, thank God, and
not that only, but we should thank God, Mark it. All offices of thankfulness
that we can do are debt and no merit, if thou lost thy life for Gods cause,
there is no merit in thy part: all merit and desert is on the part of God, as
for thy part it is but debt: and thanksgiving is a debt we ought to God, not
for our selves only, but we are debt-bound to th^nke God for the graces
bestowed on another: and a Pastor is cheeflie bound to thank God for the
graces bestowed on the people. He says more, alvvayes, not for one time or
two, but ever and ever. Thanksgiving is a debt that should be ever in paying,
ever counting and telling down; as Paul says to the Romans 13. 8. Pay love
ever: for thanksgiving is a debt will never be pa^de, neither in this world,
nor in the world to come. Now he subjoynes the cause wherefore he thanks God,
that is the argument of consolation he ministers to them. Because, says he,
the Lord hes chosen you from all eternity. Blessed is that body that the Lord
hes made a choice of Paul in the 2. Tim. 2. chap. 18. 19. verse. when he hes
spoken of the defection of some, and that there were some Heretics namely
Humineus and Philetus, thereafter he subjoines a comfort, but, says he, the
foundation of God stands sure having this seat the Lord knovves who are his
own. Whereby he strengthens the godly that they should not be discouraged when
they heard of that defection, and his argument is from that solid foundation of
their election: even so here when he hes spoken of this* universal defection
and effectualnesse of Satan, he ministers this argument of consolation to them,
their eternal eternal election. Then the lesson is. The chosen of God they
stand fast, The elect are not subject to final defectione*
they are placed without all danger of defection and falling away, at least
finally, and are not subject to Heresies and errors as are the reprobate, and
therefore well is that soul that is ordained to salvation: for the devil will
never have power to seduce that soul by Heresies. Indeed the soul may be
deceived for a time: for this effectualnesse of Satan by the Antichrist is
hardly escaped, even by the elect, yet they ^tand sure: For a man having his
salvation standing on this solid foundation, even the election of God that man
shall not altogether fall away, but when he hes been wandering to and fro for
a while and hes slidden, then the hand of the Lord shall pluck him up again:
and why not? Who is able to shake the foundation of the Lord? Is Satan able to
shake that decree of the Lord concerning thy salvation? Men will change and
alter men's decrees, but how vvil^ thou get that decree of the Lord altered? No
thou can not. But as God himself is unchangeable, so is the decree of thy
salvation. Indeed thou may make the elect of God shudder and shake while he is
here, but as for his salvation it is keept up in Heaven where the decree is,
and therefore it is impossible to shake it. It shall be impossible to shake the
man of^ this solid foundation of his election. Again learn. If it be so as
it is indeed. The Apostle when he would comf^rtmen when he see^ one assault on
this side, another on that side, one behind another before, he telle^ them,
thou art settled on a solid^ foundation, look to it, lift up thy eyes to that
decree of God. Now if the Apostle (...) this kind of argument, Certain^y of
election requisite.
what men are these that teaches, that men should not have a certainty o^
their election; while they stand in the midst of Apostasy? Men will say, this
is curiosity and presumption, but alas, what comfort can thou have except
thou bear the decree of thy election in thy bosom? Alas, what joy can thou
have in thy soul, or how dare thou presume to seek for mercy or life
eternal, if thou have not this certainty that tho^ art one chosen of God; if
thou knew what this matter meant, as I speak it to thee, thou would never rest
til thou got some assurance of thy election.

Now in the end of the verse the Apostle shows by what mids the Lord chus^s
a man to salvation, (...) Look^ the mids (...) and the faith of the truth.
Mark it* The decree of God to salvation, is not without mids; but as he hes
ordein^e thee to salvation, so hes he ordeinde thee to pass by such a way^ He
says not simply* My will is that this (...) shall be (...), but he says.
Sanctification and faith means requisite.
It is my will that this person get life (...) by such a mids, that is by
sanctification, and by faith in Ie^us Christ; and therefore as there is a
decree of the end, so there is a decree of the mids. Thou art appointed by
the decree of God to life, and tho^* art likewise appointed to come to that
life by mids. There are two mids to come by this life* The first is
sanctification, which is nothing but our regeneration ^rought in us by the
Spirit of God. The second is says holden in the truth, which is the ground of
holines^e that springs out of the heart of him that believes in Jesus Christ.
S^^ says the Apostles Act. ^5* 9. Having their hearts ^urged by faith, so that
without faith there can be no holiness in a man. And all this civil fashion
of d^ng is doing without faith. Men trowes they do well enough if they keep
civil honesty. I say to thee, it is but a counterfaite doing: for where there
is no sanctification in the heart (...) hypocrisy. If the love of this Gospel
and ^aith in it b^ not in the ha^^, all thy doings are but counterfaite* and
they shall not be a mean to salvation: for it is true holiness coming of a
true faith in this Gospel, that is a mids of thy salvation. And therefore
all other outward shows, how honest and civil that ever they appear to be, I
say to thee, they are no mids to thy salvation, and thou shall never be (...)
to (...) by them, for all is hypocrisy, therefore that thy life and form of
action may d^^ ^hee good to thy salvation, thou must have this faith in the
Gospe^l and truth of Jesus. If ye will join these two together (...) and
faith in the truth of Jesus Christ, thou shall be saved, and thou shall go on
in the way of thy salvation to the which thou* were appointed from all
eternity. Ye see then here further, brethren, before that ever that eternal
decree concerning salvation take effect and be put in execution in the world to
come, what must be done in this world. This decree must be put to execution in
faith and holiness in this life, first in faith and then in sanctification.
Then would thou know how thou shall know the decree of thy salvation? (for there
is no decree extant in the counsel of God concerning thy salvation) I will not
bid thee run up to Heaven rashly* but take up the assurance of that decree in
the execution of these mids ere thou come to the end* I send you to easy
means, have thou faith and holiness, and perseueres in them, conclude and say
with thy self, Lord I thank thee* I am of the number of thy chosen, thou have
given me the arlespenny of my election, I have gotten that blessed Spirit of
Jesus that seals up my salvation. I have gotten faith and holiness blessed be
^e that hes given me these things. And so it is not curiosity to be sure of
thy salvation, nor it is no temeritie to seek the certainty of thy election
Brethren, there is no doctrine so true, and so good and profitable, but wicked
men abuses it and turns the grace of God into wantonness. lipiturians and
Libertines whose pleasure is in uncleanness when once they hear of election,
they, will start up and say, If I be chosen, what matter what I do? do what I
will and play the wanton as I please, my election stands sure, I must be safe.
Vain man, fie on thee look* what the Apostle says, God hes chosen thee to
salvation. But how? by these mids, they must have sanctification that is
wrought by the Spirit of God, thou must live holilie in his sight, and then
thou must believe, thou must have faith that is through the truth of Jesus
Christ, or else thou were never chosen. If thou have not faith, if thou have
not an holy life, no salvation for thee.

Then shortly in the next verse. Having spoken of faith, he shows how a man
commes by faith, how he gets it. He says, unto the which ye are called. Faith
thou is gotten by calling, if a man be not called and cried on, as it were,
with a shout from Heaven, O, the dead body will not waken! for if thou be not
cry edon, thou will not get grace to believe, if thou be not cried upon by the
cry of God in his word thou shall never get faith: for faith is kindled up by
the voice of the Euangell. The Lord says John 5. 28. 29. The hour shall come,
and now i^, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they
that hear it shall live, meaning the dead in sin. So faith rises by a cry
and call, when he says come out of that death thou that s^eepest; if thou
hear, thou shall incontinent arise and believe. O the power of the voice of
God! It is his voice only that makes the dead soul hear and to believe. It
is not thy free will that makes thee to answer; it is the cry of God only
that kindles up faith in thee, and what means uses he to call men by? Even the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the voice of God: For what is the word of God
but the voice of God shouting and crying upon thee? So calling is by a word and
voice. Now, calls he thee by the voice of the Law? No, long would thou have
lye^ ere thou had answered to the voice of the Law, the more it cry upon thee,
thou wiltly the longer dead. What is the voice then? The sweet voice of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, when it is told to thee that the Son of God is
incarnate for thy sake, he hes suffered and is risen that thou may get
remission of sins and life everlasting: in one word, the speech of the cross
of a dead man, it is the speech that puts life in thee, and so no faith without
calling and no calling without the voice of the Gospel, and no life without
the voice of the Gospel. Thou shall never see the face of God without thou
hear the voice of the Gospel.

Yet mark. He says, our Gospel, that is, that I Paul and my fellow laborers
ministered. Then I ask, what is the mouth out of the which the voice of the
Gospel sounds, and by the which the Lord calls the dead man: Even the mouth
of silly simple men; and therefore Paul calls it his Gospel. Paul's mouth Peter's
mouth, and the mouth of all the faithful ministers are the voice of God to the
end of the world calling thee to faith, and therefore do they call this
Gospel their Gospel. The Lord hes so ordained that without the mouths of
silly men no voice of God should be heard in the earth. Go to thy chamber,
read as thou will, thou shall nor come to Heaven if thou contemn the mouth of
silly men: for without the voice of silly men that soundes this Gospel there
is no voice of God calling thee to faith. And therefore without this base
ministry is no salvation for thee. I say farther, If the mouth of this
ministry whereby the Lord speaks be contemned by thee, there is no faith, no
life appointed for thee God hes so bound himself to this ministry, that if
thou contemn this ordinance thou shall never see Heaven. He will have thee
safe by a foolish preaching, or else thou shall never see heaven Say not might
he not send Angels? No, close thy mouth: for by foolish preaching thou shall be
safe and by no other means. Mark this ye that contemn the preaching of the
word of God out of the mouths of silly men.

Now in the end of the verse he sets down another end of this calling, the
first end was faith: the other is the participation of the glory of Heaven in
Jesus Christ, all is in Christ, glory is in him, so thou shall not get either
grace or glory if thou get not Christ, always this is an end both of
election, and vocation, life everlasting. Election is from all eternity,
vocation is in time, and life everlasting follows as the only effect and end
of both. Now the calling begins here, and what other thing is al our
preaching but this, come to Jesus Christ the Anchor of your faith and life, and
this cry holds (...) till Christ Jesus come, and then he will cry out that last
cry. Come ye blessed of my Father and inherit the kingdom prepared for you,
and then the chosen shall enter in the participation of that glory through
Christ that never shall end. And therefore to this Jesus the Anchor of our life
and the caller of us to life and glory with the Father and holy Spirit we
render al praise and honor for now and evermore.

AMEN.
THE NINTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 2. verse. 15. 16. 17. 15 Therefore, brethren, ^tand fast, and
keep the instructions which ye have been laughed, either by our word, or by
our Epistle.

16 Now the same Jesus Christ our Lord, and our God, ^^en the Father which
has loved us, and has (...) us everlasting consolation and good hope through
grace,

17 Comfort you hearts, and stablishe you in (...) and good work.


AFTER the Apostle he^ ended that Prophecy of the universal defection from the
truth and faith of Christ Jesus, and of the reueiling and manifesting of the
Antichrist, and his power, he does three things in the end of this chapter.
First he comforts the Thessalonians against this Aposta^ie and defection,
assuring them it should not touch them, because they were grounded upon that
stable foundation of the eternal election of God, of the which they had sure
tokens and testimonies, the sanctification of the Spirit and faith in the
truth, the calling of God to faith and participation of the glory of Jesus
Christ* Next in the text we have red there are contained two things. The first
is (...) exhortation to the Thessalonians to stand and per^euere to the end.
The other is a prayer conceived by the Apostle to God the Father and to the
Lord Jesus, that it would please them first to comfort the hearts of the
Thessalonians, next to establish them in every good word and work.

Then shortly to come to the text. We have set down in the first words an
exhortation to the Thessalonians that they should standfast. But first we shall
consider how this exhortation follows on the doctrine passing before.
Therefore, says he. Then it must be inferred by a consequent upon the doctrine
preceding. The cause of their standing and perseverance must be in the text
preceding, to wit, their eternal election to salvation, their sanctification,
their faith in the truth of Jesus. their effectual calling to life ever
lasting, and the glory of Christ: upon these grounds he inferres this; I
herefore, brethren, stand fast: as if he did say, seeing ye are so sure
grounded, therefore stand fast on your ground. Then thelesson is, when a man
finds in his own heart that God hes chosen him to salvation from all
eternity, when he finds he hes faith and the Spirit of sanctification, and
finds the Lord from Heaven to call on him and to put out his hand as it were,
and to take him by the hand again, and to lead him forward to that salvation
to the which he hes appointed him from all eternity Then though Heaven should
fall and all the world go to ruin, though thousands of men should fall away
from the truth at this time, yet it becommes him not once to shudder, or to
suffer himself once to be shaken in the mids of all confusion, and that not
through any confidence or strength in himself (for then he will be beguilde)
but only through the power of the grace of his God which he hes found in
experience: ground himself on that ground which we have Romans 11. 29. The gifts
and calling of God is without repentance, if once the Lord begin to bestow
these spiritual blessings, and to call a person to the glory of Christ
effectually, Heaven and earth shall go together ere that person perish.

Now ere I go further to the words I would solue a question that may fall out
here. Hes not the Apostle even now before certified these Thessalonians of
their election from al eternity out of the which it follows necessarly that
they are placed out of al danger of final defection: for it is impossible that
they that are elected from all eternity can fall away finally and perish: how
is it then that he exhortes them to stand considering this their sure election
is unchangeable? I answer shortly. It is true the chosen of God are placed
outwith all danger of this defection, unto the which the reprobate is subject,
and it is impossible that they can fall away finally. indeed they may have
their own stumblinges and stoppings; but as concerning their final defection
it is a thing impossible that they can be subject to it by virtue of their
election: for, brethren, so many as are ordained to life, of necessity they are
ordained to final perseverance; if thou be ordained to life, of necessity
thou must stand fast to the end in some measure: but it is as true on the other
part that they that are ordained to perseverance they are ordained to stand by
such and such means: and of these means this is one, exhortation; another is,
admonition; another is teaching; another rebuking, (for if need be we should
rebuke, even the chosen of God, and threatten them) yea the prayers also of the
Saints and Pastors are means to make the chosen to stand fast. And failing
these means by the which the Lord hes ordained that they shall persevere, and
especially if thou contemn these means, exhortation, admonition, rebukes,
doctrine, and prayers of the faithful, thou shall fail of perseverance, and
failing of perseverance thou shall fall finally away. And if thou fall finally
away, thou shall find that thou were never one of these that were chosen to
life everlasting. And therefore, brethren, seeing these are the means of God to
hold thee up to the end till he glorify thee, thou should be glad when thou
art admonished exhorted and taught, for they are the tokens to thee of thy
election if thou take them in a good part. Beware then that ye contemn not any
of these means.

Now to go forward. When he hes exhorted them to stand fast, then immediately
he subjoines (as it were) the definition of this standing what it is. Standfast
(says he.) What is that? Hold a fast and a sure grip. Whereof? of the doctrine
I have taught you either by word or writ, stand fast by it. Mark then. Ye
see the perseverance he craves is the perseverance in the faith, and in the
^ight of the word; the doctrine of Jesus Christ is the light of the world, and
perseverance in knowledge of this word is to hold it fast. To make this plain.
There are two sorts of perseverance. One is the perseverance in the truth, in
the Gospel, in the faith of Jesus and in the light, two sorts of perseverance.
and all these are one. There is another perseverance, and that is an holy
life, well doing, and in a godly conversation. Mark them both: if ye will
compare them together, the first which is perseverance in faith or in truth
must be the cause of the other, and the other is the necessar effect of it;
where perseverance is in the light of necessity there is a perseverance in
godliness: for a man that perseueres in the light of necessity that man
walks in the hie way to Heaven in his action and manner of living, and must
go the direct way to salvation; but once take away the light, and let him
reject and contemn the light and verity of Christ's Gospel, he shall not go
one stop rightly, but he shall decline from the hie way. Take the Gospel and
the light of Christ out of his eyes and heart, he shall never do one right
action, he may seem to be good and have a fair outward show, and his words
may seem glistring, so that he shall not seem to be a murderer, a thief, or
an harlot: but if the Gospel be out of his heart, all is but hypocrisy, and
there is nothing in his hand that pleases God, all is abomination, and his
reward for all his fair doing shall be with the hypocrites in Hell. So let
not man pleasure himself in his doing, if his eye be not set on Jesus Christ
shining in the Gospel: If he walk not in the light of Jesus Christ, he is in
the wrong way when he thinks he is in the rightest way. Lord give men this
grace that when they think they stand, they may grip to this light of te
Gospel.

Yet to mark more narrowly these words. Keep, says he, hold a grip and
stand fast. How shall I stand? By keeping of a grip, no standing for man but by
a gripping, if thou let thy grip go fall shall thou. Now what shall they grip?
Doctrine, keep light, the best thing in the world is to keep knowledge. There
is no standing for men, except by keeping light and knowledge. Yet what
doctrine is this he wills them to keep? He says, which I have delivered and
teached you. There is no standing but by gripping of doctrine. And what a
doctrine? Even the doctrine of the Apostles, grip to it only: For grip as fast
as thou will to the traditions and vanities of men they will not all make thee
stand: for there is no standing but by gripping of the doctrine of the
Apostles, Paul, Peter, and the rest of them, there is no standing but on the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Paul writing to the Ephesians. 2. 20.
speaks of their building, Being builded, says he, upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles. Thou shall never be builded on Jesus Christ, if thou be
not builded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and if that be not,
then there is no salvation for thee, go to Spain, go to Rome as thou will,
thou have noght ado with Jesus Christ if thou stand not grounded on the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Then would ye see what ye call true
perseverance in faith? What is perseverance and apostasy.
Even that is true perseverance that is in the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles only, and no more, and no less. Then what is Apostasy that is
contrare to perseverance? If perseverance be in keeping of the doctrine of the
Apostles, then that is Apostasy when thou falls away from their doctrine. No,
brethren, the falling away from that Roman Antichrist is no Apostasy. The Lord
at his coming in that great day shall justify this, and shall judge that
Church to be a false and an adulterous Apostatike Church, and whoeuer joines
with it if they repent not, shall be adjudged that day to damnation; and they
that departs from it and sticks to the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles
shall be judged to be the holy ones of God.

Now follows in the end of the verse two sorts of teaching of them, that the
Apostle used. The first is by word, when he spoke to them face to face. The
other is by his Epistle. The lesson is easy. Men are taught as well by writ as
word, all teaching is not tied to the personal presence of men. No, men are as
surely taught by writ as by word. And seeing it hes pleased the Lord to show
this mercy on us that the writtes of the Apostles are comde in our hands, which
are read in your audience, therefore we have Paul to be a teacher to us as well
as the Thessalonians had. Therefore conclude surely that it is not so much this
Minister or that Minister teaches you, as it is the Apostle Paul and Christ
Jesus in him: for every Minister is not so guyded as he was the ministers may
err and hes erred, but the Apostles could not err: for they were immediately
called of Jesus Christ, and were in their writting direct fully by the holy
Spirit. Therefore think that ye have the Apostle Paul and the rest to be your
teachers, and as for a Minister if he go a stray breadth off that ground of
the Apostles, he teaches false doctrine; and so the surest teachers that we
have are the old Prophets and Apostles that cannot err. Think it not a small
mercy that the Lord hes made their writs to come to us; and no doubt Christ
when he took goodnight of the Apostles had respect to this. Matt. 28. chap.
19. verse. Go your way and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, of the Son, and the holy Ghost, and lo I am with you until the
end of the world: as he would say, ye in a manner shall bide and live till I
come again, if not in your persons, yet in your writ, and I shall accompany
your writ, as I did accompany your persons in the world: and surely the
Spirit of Christ accompanies this same writ and word as ever he did their
dresence on earth.

Now I will answer one doubt that he ere occurres before I go forward. Ye that
hes red any thing knows that the aduersars preases to make advantage of this
place, keep that that I have taught you by word or writ: Then cry they out
traditions, traditions. The Apostles, say they, hes left traditions besides
their writs, verities unwritten, and therefore as great credit should be given
to them as to the written verity, and they should be received with as great
reverence as their writs. Brethren, it is true the words importes a diversity,
but if ye will look well about you ye shall find that there is no diversity in
the matter and substance, but only in the manner and form of teaching: as if
he should have said, Keep that which I have teached you either by word or writ,
which is all one thing: for that which I spoke I wrote, and that which I wrote
I spok; this is certain. But giving this to them, supponing the Apostle had
spoken something which he had not written at this time, what is it to the
purpose? Ergo wrote he i^ not afterward? Supponing the Apostle had not written
this whole doctrine to the Thessalonians, yet wrote he it not to the Romans,
Ephesians, etc? and in one word, the Apostle spoke nothing by mouth which he
registered not in writ. The same doctrine he spoke by mouth, the same he left
in register in writ to be red by the world.

Now then to return to the matter. When he hes ended the exhortation he
subjoines prayer, and the same perseverance he exhorted them to, he begs to
them from the hands of God. Brethren, al exhortation, Teaching without the
spirit povverl^s
all this doctrine and preaching, all precepts and admonitions are but wind
and vain voices shall sounds in the ear and goes not to the heart* except with
the word the Lord concur by his spirit If the Lord by his power and spirit
inwardly move not the heart and affections of men all is but vanity and wind.
Now the mean ye see to get the Spirit to the preaching and hearing of the
word, is prayer. And therefore take the lesson. A man should never preach nor
hear preaching but the eye of his soul should be lifted up to him that is
able only to give the power and increase: In preaching the Minister should be
begging power, and the people praying and saying, Lord as this is thy word,
which is thy power unto salvation, so by thy Spirit make it powerful in me. If
thy eye be on the man, and thy heart be not lifted up to God, thou shall go as
empty home as thou came abroad. Therefore set thy eye and heart on him who is
only able to give power to thy life, and upon him who gives only consolation
when thou have need, and finally on him that gives salvation to all that
beleues aright, to wit, the Lord Jesus: for without him there is no grace to be
bestowed on man, be what he will. Prayer is the mean to get the presence of the
Spirit concurring with the word: for the word, without grace and power be given
to it to open the heart, is powerful to close the heart. The Gospel is an
instrument to obdure thy heart, if it be heard without prayer to God and
presence of his Spirit. Therefore pray that in hearing ye may understand, and
that ye may walk according to the knowledge thereof.

Now then to come to the words. There are three things in this prayer. First,
the persons to whom it is directed: The second is the arguments whereby he will
assure the Thessalonians that the prayer shall be granted to them. And the last
is, the things that he prays for to them. To come to the persons, I pray,
says he, the Lord Jesus Christ. He names him first, for the sweetness of
grace he had found in him ever since first he knew him; his soul was so filled
with the swetnes of Christ that in nothing he could forget him, neither in his
prayer nor exhortations to others, as every one that is touched with such a
feeling of Christ will do: Know ye not this ye that make a glorious profession
of Christ? (...) is thee that ever took the profession of Christ in thy mouth
if thou find not a sweetness of his grace toward thee in thy heart; if thou
find it, thou will never speak of any matter concerning grace and salvation
but Jesus Christ shall be first in thy mouth. Next he commes to the Father, and
he says, and God our Father* There then the two persons which are the two
fountains of all grace that comes to man in the world. Mark here a double
honor given to Christ. First he is joined with the Father as a fontaine of all
grace, and next he is first named: for he says, I pray the Lord Jesus: and
then he says, and God our Father. He puts the Father in the second rowme,
Jesus Christ god equal with the Father.
albeit in other places he puts God the father in the first rowme, as ye may
find in all his salutations. Now what must follow on this? Even this, that
Jesus Christ is very God, as he is very man, coessential of the same nature
with God, coequall, of the same dignity and majesty with the Father, and
coeternall with him; if this were not, he could not have given him such a style
without blasphemy against God. The old Heretics thought they got a great
advantage of such places of the Scripture that placed the Father in the first
rowme, to conclude that Jesus Christ was not only inferior, but far unequal
to God the Father, and especially they gather it out of these words, I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, etc. Ergo, say they, the Son
is inferior. But look here and ye will find that Christ is named in the
first rowme. That old doctor Chrysostom* when he hes reasoned against this
fond opinion, at last he concludes. They are equal in eternity, dignity and
in every thing, that is, or may be called truly God. Indeed the Father is the
first person, but that makes not that the Father is above the Son; for there
is equality in dignity and essence, and therefore he whiles puts the one
before the other, and that not in respect of any supremacy, but to testify
that Jesus Christ our Savior and the Father is one, and equal in every respect.

Now to come to the arguments which are not set down so much to move God* as
to assure the Thessalonians that the things shall be granted that he craves
for them* The arguments are from the effects of God. First, Who hes loved us.
Secondly, who hes given us everlasting consolation: And the last, who hes
given us good hope, and all through grace and mercy, contrare unto our
deserving. Mark, bethren, a general. He bringes these Thessalonians to
remembrance of these graces of God bestowed on them before, Arguments to
assure us, that, God will grant us benefits craved in prayer.
to assure them, the Lord will grant them these benefits he prays for to them.
When God begins to show his mercy on men, or, women, and in Jesus Christ to
power out his blessings upon them, he gives, as it were, an obligation
subscriued with his own hand, I shall be with you for ever, never man bond
himself as the Lord binds himself: from once he begin to deal mercifully with
us, if he begin once to give us faith in Jesus christ and to minister that
inward consolation, and to give us hope of life everlasting, in so doing he
gives us an obligation that that mercy shall continue with us for ever.
Therefore mark the graces of God given to thee and never forget them: for they
will hold thee up. That God that hes comforted thee once shall comfort thee for
ever: He is not like man, I am, says he, Iehoua, not changeable; and
therefore, ground thy heart on that vnchangablenes of God. For, he, who hes once
begun with thee to give thee mercy, assure thy self, he shall not leave thee.
How was David and the godly of old, holden up, but, by this same obligation?
Would ever any of the old fathers have stood without this? No. There only prop
and vp-hold was the experience of the mercy of God once shown on them, and
diligently remembered by them.

Now, to come to the particulare. Who hes loved us, not as a Creator does a
creature, The first Gods love
but, as the father does the son, that is an higher degree of love; for, he
called him Father, immediately before, then, he subjoines, he loved us.
Brethren, would ye come to the things we have of God, through Christ? The first
is grace, mercy, and free favor: He is bound to no creature, but, what ever he
gives, he gives it freely. The first blessing, that God bestows on man on
earth, and the first effect of grace and of his free favor, is love (this love
is given to make the creature to power out, as it were, the heart on his Creator
again) He hes loved us, ere ever we were, of this love proceeds eternal
election, as ye may read, in sundry places of the new Testament. This love
stays not here, but, after, he bringes us in the world at his own appointed
time, he makes the love, that was in his heart, before all time toward us, to
break out, and he sheds it abroad, in our hearts. And the first effect of it is
our effectual calling. He will say, Come hither out of the foul pollution of
the world, and I will exceme thee from the damnable end of the world, and so,
from thence forth, mercy hes no end, but, from calling he proceeds to
justification; from justification, to regeneration; and last, to glorification.
So, the first thing God gives thee, is his heart and hearty love. He will not
give thee any of these blessings, that are in Jesus Christ, until with them
he give thee his heart: He is not like man who will give thee a fair
countenance alone, and will take no further thought what become of thee, but
God will give thee his heart, as the first gift, and giving thee his heart, what
can he deny thee? When he hes given thee his heart, can he deny thee life? And
therefore, Romans 5. 5. it is said, that, the love of God is shed abroad in us,
by his holy Spirit. Now, as he embraces us with love, Lord if we could meet
him with half love again. We cannot love him, except he love us first. 1.
John 4. 19. There is none that loves him, but he that hes the sense of Gods
love in his heart furnished by the Spirit of God. O, the joy and consolation in
the heart, when it finds the Lords heart powered out on it! And without this
sense of Gods love toward thee, fie on thee, if thou were a king for all thy
kingdoms, if thou were ruler over all, fie on thy glory and pleasure: for, all
the things under Heaven may well minister to thee a false joy and peace in thy
heart, but they shall never give thee the true joy: for there is no true joy but
through the sense of the love of God in thy heart. So there is the first gift
and argument whereby he assure* these Thessalonians that the things he asks
for them shall be granted to them without all doubt.

The next argument is, And hes given us consolation eternal. In this word he
sums up all the blessings given to man in Jesus Christ in time, The second
is eternal co^solatio^.
our effectual calling, our justification through his righteousness,
forgiveness of sins, and an acceptance in his favor, our sanctification by
his Spirit, the resurrection of the body, and life eternal in glory: al these
we have in him to whom Paul maks this prayer. So all the blessings of God
commes and meets in the heart of man as in a center: they end all in
consolation, our effectual calling ends in consolation, our justifying ends in
consolation. Therefore, says Paul, Rom 5. 1. Being justified by faith we have
peace tovvard God. Then in one word. As all blessing begins at the heart of
God, and at that love he powers our on us, so al blessing ends in our heart. The
beginning is Gods, the end is ours, and our end is this, that peace that passes
all understanding: This love of God is as a floode through the which slowes
down all these blessings bestowed on us which are as as many springs and
conduits coming from that great and unspeakable love of God and entering once
in upon our hearts wakens up an infinite and unspeakable joy in us: For from
once* that wa^e^ of the love of God touch the heart, there flows such a
consolation as is unspeakable. The Lord of Heaven give every one earnestness
to seek this consolation: for it is the arlespenny of these everlasting joys
which once we shall have in Heaven through Jesus Christ. He calls it eternal,
because it is a fontaine that never is stopped, it never goes dry, but ever
runs, when the fountain ever ^^mes the river that runs from it will never
go dry. And therefore when that fountain of love in the heart of God commes in
thy heart, thy consolation must last for ever, his love running down in thy
heart makes thy joy everlasting. The things of this world when thou gettest
them will waken up some joy in thy heart, but that joy which thou have the day
thou will want to morrow, for it is not permanent: but as for that joy which
proceeds of the love of God, it hes no end, it is eternal; and therefore they
that will seek consolation in Jesus shall never have an end of joy. Indeed
sometimes this our joy seems to be troubled here, because it is compassed
with many crosses and afflictions, but the Lord from time to time makes our joy
sensible, and wakens it up in us, and when thou shall be in Heaven thou shall
have an endless consolation without any vicissitude or alteration for ever. Seek
then I pray you for this love of God, as ye would be everlastingly blessed with
this joy unalterable.

Now, the third benefit is good hope. He calls it good, because it is of the
best thing, The third, good hope
that ever was, that is, it is of that chief felicity: for, what is it we
hope for? Even, that consummation of our chief and everlasting felicity with
our God we hope for that possession of the glory of our Lord Jesus, and
therefore, it is not without reason, that, it is called good hope. Wherefrom
flows it? Even, as consolation flows from love, so, hope flows from
consolation, Romans 15. 4. and consolation is as an arlespenny, that, God puttes
in thy hand, that thou shall get the^ full payment of the whole sum. And
therefore, it wakens up thy heart to hope, so, that when I get a piece of
consolation, I am induced to hope certainly, that, that Lord, that hes given
me that arlespenny shall not leave me, till he fill my heart with the fullness of
consolation: for, the saciety: and full contentment is not, till we see Christ
face to face, and until this time we must live by hope.

In end, he says, all these things are by grace. Love is by grace,
consolation is by grace, hope is by grace, that is, of the free favor of God,
without any desert, or, merit, on man's part. And it is well with us, that it
is no^ so, that all is of free grace, without out merit: for, if any blessing
of God hang upon a man's merit, upon his doing and deserving, alas, vveak
would this ground be, and there would not be one day, but we should fall
from the grace. If it (...) depended on me, I would lose it every moment of
the day: So, the ground of thi^ surety and stabilitie of Gods blessings is
only in God, even, his free grace and love. When the Lord regardes thee, not
for ought, that is in thee, but looks to himself, then, thou have
steadfastness by the grace of God, as ye may collect of the 4. chap. to the
Romans verse 16. Therefore, it is by faith, that it might come by grace* and the
promise might be sure, to all the seed. If the inheritance hang upon thy
stinking works (for, thou fylest the works of the holy Spirit in thee) thou
should never see Heaven: And thou, that vvilt stick by such a ground, and
say, Heaven and salvation depends on thy works, thou shall find thy self
frustrate, in that day, and shall not attain, to that inheritance, that, thou
looked for: for, there is no blessing of God in Christ, but that, that hangs
upon the free favor and mercy of God to us, in Jesus Christ. All the world
shall not louse this ground.

In the last verse, we have the things he prays for, to these Thessalonians:
I pray the Lord Jesus Christ and God, even, our Father, that they would comfort
your hearts. The next, establishe you in every word of the truth and every
good work. Prayer for consolation.
These are the two things he prays for, consolation and perseverance in well
doing. Hes he not said before, that, God the father had given them eternal
consolation, what is the crause, then, he prays for it, as though they had not
gotten it? He says, he hes given us eternal consolation, and now he says, I
pray the Lord Jesus that he would comfort you. How can these two stand? Mark,
brethren, This he says, to tell us that consolation is gotten by prayer, look
the necessity of prayer. If there be no prayer at no time, there is no
consolation; that man that cannot pray to God and beg comfort at his hand, that
manifest never spiritual consolation in his heart. Go to experience. I pose
thee in thy conscience, felt thou ever comfort without prayer? No, if there be
not prayer to God, thou shall have no comfort: and more, if there be not
continuance in prayer, thou shall get no continuance in consolation: Leauest
thou off prayer, look whether consolation will leave thy heart, or, not*
Leauest thou off, in prayer to meditate on Jesus Christ, I pose the, whether
the consolation in the heart leaves thee, or, not? Again, striuest thou to
keep that presence of Jesus Christ, by prayer, and in all thy exercises,
castes a blenke to Jesus Christ, (be not so exercised, that thou forget Jesus
Christ) have thou thy eyes ever on Jesus, by prayer and meditation, will thou
not find a joy and swetnes in thy heart, such, as thou cannot be able to
expres? Again, when thou art so fixed on the things in this world, yea even in
thy lawful exercise (for, in thy lownry, thou cannot have an eye to God) that
thou cannot get a piece of thy heart to God, it may be that thou have a carnal
and false joy: but, true joy and comfort have thou not. Well, then, brethren,
that peace and consolation flows of prayer and earnest meditation in Jesus.
Therefore, as the Apostle says, Philip. 4. 6. 7. Be not solist for any thing,
but in euerything* let thy requests be shovven forth to God and that, by all
manner of prayer and supplication; and supponing thou get not the wordly
relief. I shall tell thee, what thou shall find, the peace of God* that
passes all understanding shall stand about thee, as a guard, and what lakest
thou, if thou have that peace and tranquillity of thy soul? And what have
thou, if thou lakest this peace? Now, fie on al, if thou lake this guarde of
Gods peace, if thou were a king, or, Monarch, abounding in riches, pleasure and
honor, what shall all avail thee? So, he draws consolation, from God, by
prayer. And as it is sure, that, every thing, that lives, hes the being and
continuance of God. So, it is as sure, that, that person that is disposed to
pray keeps and shall keep the comfortable presence and peace of God, that
passes all understanding. Therefore, the Lord dispose our hearts to pray, that
by prayer, we may keep some meditation and presence of Jesus Christ in our
hearts. Kings will leave their kingdoms; Lords, their lordshippes, and every
man will leave this world and all, that is within it; but, vvoe to that man,
whom God leaves, when the world leaves him.

The next thing he prays for, is, that, the Lord would establish them, Prayer
for perseverance.
as we say, settle them, and make them firm and stable, not changing and
wagging, as the busse wagges, and so, inconstant in their religion, but, that
they be settled. Ye heard, wherein stood our perseverance. It stood in holding
a fast grippe of the Apostles doctrine, the truth of God. Now, here, I find
more, He prays to God and Jesus Christ, that, they would establishe them, that
is, hold a grippe of them. So, that, in our perseuering, there must be two
things, of necessity. The one, is, thy hand must be festned, or, else, thou will fall: for, there was never one, that had not his heart festned upon the
truth of Jesus Christ, by holding a grip of it, but he fell down to Hell. The
other thing. The Lord must hold a grippe of thee, or, else, thou cannot be able
to keep thy grip; so, thou must grippe and God must grip thee; thou must stand
on a fundation, which is Jesus Christ, and the Lord God himself must hold thee
on thy fundation: for, otherwise, thy feet will slip off the ground: So, ever
say, Lord, hold me on this ground and fundation, or, else, I will not be able to
stand one moment.

Now, then, to come to the fundations, whereon we must stand, and whereon the
Lord must establish us: they are these, first, every word of this truth: and
next, every good work. Ye may see, there are two fundations here, whereon
thou must stand: for, he that would stand to the end, must have his feet set a
spar-waies, he must not stand on a slippery place, nor on one foot only, but,
he must have a sure ground, and must stand on both his feet, and every foot
must have the own ground-stone to stand on, and the first ground is the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. Therefore, first, lift thy right foot and set it on the truth
of God, the Gospel of Jesus. The next ground is holiness of life and good
works flowing from the former; then, take thy left foot and set it on
holiness of life and every good work, and then, both thy feet stands sure. I
shall make this plain. There are two things in man, the heart and the hand. The
man, that would stand, must have heart and hand both fastened. The heart must be
first fastened and locked on the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and that, by the lock
and bond of faith; and next, the hand must be fastened too, and it must grip
first to every good turn; think it not eneugh, to have thy heart exercised.
If thy hand be idle, or, doing evil: (for, if thy hand be not well exercised,
it shall be doing evil) keep these two fast then, thy heart, on the word of
God, and thy hand on every good work, and then, firmly shall thou stand.
These two are so joined together, that, they cannot be severed: for, if thou
six thy heart on the Gospel of Jesus Christ, of necessity thy hand shall be
exercised in well doing; keepst thou one of them, thou keepst both; losest thou
one of these two, thou losest both: for, it shall pass thy power to have a
good turn in thy hand, if thou want the Gospel of Christ Jesus in thy heart.
As, by the contrare, hant evil doing, and then, come to hear the Gospel, in
despyte of thy heart, thou shall not get the Gospel within thy heart, but, thou
shall want Christ. Therefore, as thou would keep one, keep both, and strive
to fasten thy heart and hand on both, and I shall assure thee, in the name of
Jesus Christ, that, he will hold his hand to thee, and stand shall thou fast to
the end, until thou be put out of all danger: For, when once thou art brought
to the mark, and comes to the rinkes end, then, thou shall be out of all fear
and danger: For, there is no defection in Heaven, no falling, nor, stumbling
there: but, an everlasting stabilitie, when this mirror is away, and we shall
see our Savior Jesus, face to face. Therefore, as the Apostle prays for
stabilities, to these Thessalonians; Even so, I beseech Jesus Christ and God
the father, to keep us on this solid foundation for ever and ever: and let
every one of you pray for the same, in the name of Jesus. To whom, with the
Father and holy Spirit, be all praise and honor.

AMEN.
THE TENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 1. 2. 3. 1 FVrthermore, brethren, pray for us, that
the word of the Lord may have free passage, and be glorified even as it is
with you.

2 And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men: for, all men
have not faith.

3 But, the Lord is faithful, which will stablish you, and keep you from
evil.


THE Apostle (brethren) hes comforted these Thessalonians against the
afflictiones and persecutiones which they underlay for the present: He hes
instructed and informed them concerning the second coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, showing to them that his coming should not be so soon and sudden as
the false teachers preased to persuade them; but before his second coming
there should interueene a great thing, to wit, an universal apostasy and
falling away from the faith of Jesus Christ, which should take a long time in
growing and in the decaying, and so ere the Lord should return it should be a
long time. Thereafter he comforts them against this Apostasy, the coming and
reueiling of the Antichrist, that notwithstanding of this they should stand fast
unchanged or put off the ground of their faith; for the Lord that had begun his
work in them, should hold them up and establish them to the end. Yet he exhorts
them to stand, and be careful of it: for a sleeping man will not stand: the
Lord hes not appointed standing for a slothful man; negligent bodies must of
necessity fall. But as he hes appointed standing to his own, so he hes
appointed them to be careful of it, and to use means to procure their
standing. And therefore he falls out in prayer, and beseeches God the father
and the Lord Jesus Christ that he would hold up this people, and comfort them.

Now shortly to come to the text red. In this last chapter we have the last
part of the Epistle, wherein the Apostle gives out admonitions and precepts
concerning good manners and a christian behavior: for a bare knowledge of
Christ, a pretended faith, a profession outward is nothing worth, except that a
man that says he hes faith in his heart, can testify it in his doing before
the world, God counts not of it. Now the first admonition concerns prayer: for
it is one of the chief duties that the Lord craves of man, and it is a duty
of the first Table whereby the Lord is honored. Therefore the Apostle begins
his admonition at prayer, and desires them to pray: and because immediately
before he prayed for them, therefore he desires them to recompense him in that
part, that they should do a mutual duty to him, to pray for him and
Syluanus. Ere I go further mark the lessone. Even as all duties and offices
among Christian men should be mutual: (for he that does a good turn to
another, should receive a good turn of another; he that loves thee should be
loved again of thee.) Even so there is a mutual duty craved in praying. If
one prays to God for another, that other is bound to pray for his well again,
and especially this duty is craved between Pastor and people. The Pastor
should pray for the people, and the people should pray for the Pastor. The
Pastor should begin, the people should follow the example of the Pastor: for
the people is bound to recompense the good doing of the Pastor; for the whole
duty of the people to the Pastor is called a recompense, as the duty of the
child to his parent is but a recompense for the good deeds received of the
parent. It is even so with the people and the Pastor: All that the people does
to the Pastor is but a recompense. 2. Cor. 6. 13. he says, As children I
speak to you, I (...) a recomtence: there is nothing I crave of you but a
recompense, only rander a duty for that I have done to you.

Now to come to the words. Pray for us, says he, brethren. There are two
things in the words following, Paul craves prayer, both for the Gospel, and
for the ministers thereof.
in respect of which they should pray for Paul, Syluanus, and Timotheiu. First,
he desires them to pray, in respect of that Gospel that was concredite unto
them: Then again, he desires them to pray for him in respect of their persons.
Mark then the order. When he desires that they should pray for him, he desires
not first that they should pray for the good estate of his person, but to pray
for him in respect of that commission he had of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus
concredite to him, and so he desires them rather to pray for the Gospel then
for himself. The lesson is easy. A pastor or preacher after the example of Paul
is bound to care for the Gospel more nor for his own life. Then after the
Gospel let him come on and care for his person. But mark this, that his care
of his person be for the Gospels sake. Brethren, the Gospel of Christ is not
ordained for the Minister or Prophet, nor for the Apostle or Pastor, what ever
he be, to be a servant to him, that he may make his vantage by it, to seek
himself by it; but the Minister is ordained for the Gospel to be a servant to
it: for the Gospel is an hundredth thousand times worthier then he, if he were
the best preacher that ever spoke. Therefore that man must sin greatly in the
heighest degree that will teach the Gospel, not so much for the Gospels sake,
as for his own sake, that by it he may entertain his dignity and life. It is
true indeed, the Minister should live by the Gospel, and should be
entertained by it, yet his living should not be the end of his preaching, but
his preaching should be the end wherefore he should desire to breath, eat,
and live.

Again to come to the words. That the word of the Lord may have a free
passage, and be glorified. Concerning the word of God he desires two things.
The first, is, that, it may run through the world, and have a free passage in
running. The next, is, that it may be glorified. The first is less then the
other, to wit, to run, to have a course: The next is greater, to be glorified
in running, that is to say, in running to be powerful, to be mighty and
effectual in the hearts of the hearers, to turn them to God, and to reform
and renew them according to the Image of God; and so, consequently, to be
glorified in the sight of the world. To make this more plain. There are two
sorts of the running of the Gospel. There is one sort, when it runs only
through the mouths and ears of men, and no further, when there is nothing but
a bare hearing and speaking of it. There is another sort, when it runs
through the hearts of men, that is, when in her course she is powerful in the
hearts, to work a true faith in them, working sanctification, an altering and
changing of the soul, and reforming the hearts of men, and conforming them to
the Image of God. As concerning the first, she gets no glory, nor honor, but
she is rather stained by it. As to the other, she runs with glory and
majesty, and she is carried through the world, like a glorious Queen, and is
magnified by men and Angels. Now among whom is she glorified, and among whom is
she defamed? When she is powerful in men to sanctification, there she is
glorified; who ever lives holily glorifies the Gospel; and when men hes nothing
but a bare word of it, and lives licentiously and wickedly, then the Gospel is
defamed and shamed by these men, as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 2. 24. out of
the 52. of Esaias. For your sakes, says he, my name is blasphemed among the
nations all the day long. Then they who lives a life contrare to the Gospel of
Jesus, they shame the Gospel, and therefore, in the world to come they shall
receive shame, for shaming of the Gospel.

In the end of the verse, he says, as it is with you. To move them to this
purpose to pray for him, or rather for the Gospel, he brings in their own
example and experience. Thessalonians. I wish you not to pray for another thing
but that ye have experimented your selves; see whether or not the Gospel be
glorified among you? yea it is glorified. Ye are not bare professors of it:
then are ye not bound to pray the Lord to communicate to other that grace that
is bestowed on you? So they who finds the Gospel glorified in themselves, and
finds her powerful in their hearts to a sanctified life, are bound to wish and
crave this blessing to every soul. if it were possible. Wherefore shall I have
a grace if I pray not to God to communicate that grace to another? Wherefore
should I enter in Heaven and not put out my hand to help others to that
kingdom, if it be possible? Wherefore should I not pray, thy kingdom come?
which is nothing in effect, but, Lord, open Heaven to thy people, and let many
enter in, that thou may be glorified. And it is most certain, that, col.
if a man have entered himself in Heaven, he will not inuy to have others with
him; but he will strive to make rowme, if it were to all the world, that they
may enter in. He will not be like the Pharisees that will not enter in Heaven
themselves, neither yet will let others enter in it. A man that is once in the
light he would have all in the light. As a man that is in darkness would have
all in darkness with him.

Now in the next verse he desires them to pray for his own person, and for the
rest of his fellow-laborers, that they may be delivered from unreasonable and
evil men. Mark something before we enter in the words. Ye see the next care
is of himself, that he may be fred from his enemies. The thing that man should
care for next after the Gospel that worthy thing, should be, the person of the
men that caries this Gospel before the world: for when she runs, she is
borne up in the hearts and mouths of men: so next her self, there should be a
special care had of them that bears that glorious Queen, that they that sees
her may be safe. Next that Heavenly treasure the Gospel, that is, the
unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ, care (I say) should be had of the laime
vessel, wherein it is contained. 2. Cor. 4. 7. A man is but a laime vessel,
wherein the Lord puts so rich a treasure. But wherefore should there be a care
of him? Even for the treasures sake, for that precious things sake. The person
himself or the Minister is bound to care for his own person in respect of the
treasure: And the people to whom he distributes so precious a treasure, is
bound, as ever any man was bound to any thing to have a special care of the
person of the Pastor for the treasures sake: for if he have this treasure, they
will get more good of him, nor he will get by any benefit in this world that
they can bestow on him. God himself for his treasures sake, ere he suffer the
vessel to be broken, Mark the great care God hes of his pastors.
he will mingle Heaven and earth together, and stupifie the world with wonders,
and by wonders he will work the delivery of the man in whom he hes put his
treasure: so long as he hes ado with him for the dispersing and distributing
of his treasure, for the salvation of men, Heaven and earth shall go together
ere that man perish. Was not Peter casten in a strate prison, were there not
watches within and watches without, was not the door locked, was he not in
irons? (Act. 12.) and yet in the night an Angel is sent from Heaven, and he
commes in the house with an exceeding light, and calls upon Peter, and bids
him rise, he shakes off his fetters, the doors are made open, and all without
doing of any man, the watches perceiues not, Peter escapes. Wherefore does he
this? Peter was a vessel in the which the Lord had his treasure. This vessel
was not yet emptied of the treasure. The Lords work was yet in Peter's hand:
but as soon as Peter had finished his work he suffered him to die without
much ado: so did he with Paul: for albeit oft-tymes before wonderfully he
delivered him, yet when he hes done his work with him, the Lord let him go
his way, and suffer without any miracle. So long as the Lord hes ought ado
with any man, all the world shall not be able to to beat him off his seete, he
hes such a care of him Now to end this, I dare say and affirm, they that hes
no care of the persons of men whom the Lord uses to be his mouth, to preach
this his Gospel, that they had never care of the Gospel it self. If thou
have no care of the preacher, praise the Gospel as thou will, thou art an
enemy to the Gospel. He that would break the vessel he would scatter all the
riches of Jesus Christ that is in that vessel, that is, he would make a lose
of the glorious riches of the Gospel. Therefore when ye have ado with this
base ministry it is not with men that ye have to do, but with the treasures
of Heaven and unsearchable riches of God. Lord if men now would once consider
this.

Now to the words. Pray for me, says he, and my fellow-laborers. And wherefore
that we may be delivered in our own person, was he in any danger at this time,
wherefore he craves their prayer? Appearandly he was in his journey toward
Jerusalem, and so he was to go among as many Tigers, Lions and Wolfes, as he
found in experience: and out of the way as he was in his journey he craves that
they would pray for him: Ye will say, got he not fore-warnings eneugh, that
nothing was abiding him but bonds at Jerusalem? Yes Agabus told him that,
Act. 21. 11. Then what needed him to desire the Thessalonians to pray against
that, that of necessity behooved to come, and he must prove in deed, bonds was
prophesied, and bonds he got: persecution was prophesied, and persecution he
suffered. Brethren, I am not of that mind that he desired them to pray that he
should be altogether fr^ of the cross and affliction: for it is not lawful for
a Pastor or any other man to pray that he be burdened with no cross. What
says he to Timothy. 2. Tim. 1. 8. Be not ashamed of my bonds, but be thou
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, etc. It is not lawful to a Pastor
to go sleeping through the world, and none to cross his way; for a faithful
Pastor cannot be without either one cross or other. The^ what a delivery is
this that he desires them to pray for? Even that being under crosses, the Lord
so long as he had ado with him would deliver him and set him free, and so it
is lawful for one lying under persecution for the Gospels sake to pray for
such a deliverance, so long as the Lord hes a work to do with him yea, and he
is bound to pray that he may be victorious, and triumph both in death and life.
What matter of death if he triumph in death? the Lord Jesus triumphed in death,
the martires triumphed in death, the true Pastor in death he will triumph. So if
the Lord grant victory in the end, what matter what men suffer. This Apostle
says in another place of his Epistle we ever triumph notwithstanding of al
these afflictions we are into, Rom 8. 37. Paul in his death triumphed. 2. Cor.
2. 14.

Now from whom should they crave that he should be delivered? From unreasonable
and evil men, as he would say, This world is full of evil and unreasonable men,
beastly-bodies. The first word signifies men of an absurd nature, and of a very
evil inclination. The next word signifies men that are ever doing evil, and
troubling the innocent. So he speaks of two sorts of men, evil in heart and
evil in hand. And certainly he means his own countrie-men who were worse
inclyned in mind and deed toward him and the Lord Jesus then were any
other. And so, brethren, mark shortly: where ever a faithful Pastor shall
go, he shall meet with such men: go where he will he shall encounter with
men evil minded, and doing evil. The Gospel so long as she is preached shall
not be free of these men: of enemies that shall make contradiction: Count not
the worse of her that she is gainesaid: for she is as naturally subject to this
contradiction as ever any thing was subject to any property. It is the
vvearde of the Gospel, and the preachers thereof to meet with such men: It
will never be broken: But what remedy? Come to the next best: How shall a
Preacher be in safety, seeing he must enter with such men. The remedy is set
down here, Prayer the remedy against the co^tradiction of unreasonable and
evil men.
Prayer: let him pray to God, and the Church pray for him. When Peter was in so
great and extreme danger, what was the Church doing? Act. 12. verse 5. etc.
12. Praying for him, and by their prayers the Angel was brought down from
Heaven, by whom he was delivered: So prayer is wonderful strong, and
especially the prayer of the people for the Pastor will have a vvonderfull
power before God for his safety. Then if this be the duty of the people,
alas, is not this an unnatural thing to see the stock rise up against the
Pastor to devour him. When this commes, either there must be a great sin in
the Pastor, or in the people, or else in both, and it is one of the heauiest
judgeme^ts that can light on a Pastor or people.

Now to go forward. They might have been offended at this that the Apostle
spok, that there was so many that made contradiction to him, that there was
such a multitude of them, that be where he would, he could not be quite of them,
thereby they might have doubted of the truth: for this is a vain conceit that
comes in men's heads, hey think the Gospel should have such a sound progress,
as there should not be a contradiction to it; but I say to thee, where there is
no contradiction there is a mark of false doctrine. And again, where the
truth is, there for the most part a great contradiction will be* men when they
see a multitude rising against the truth, and making contradiction to it, then
they begin to doubt of the truth. They will say, this cannot be the truth; is
not all the world risen up against it: But Paul tells you the cause of that,
Faith a rare gift.
when he says, all men have not faith, faith is a rare gift. Every one gets
not faiths where one gets it, forty wants it. So when men begins to offend at
the Gospel, it is the want of faith in them that makes them so to do: for
there are very few that hes the faith of Jesus Christ. Remember this that there
is a few number that is chosen to life everlasting; many are called, says
Christ, but fevv are chosen. And again there is none that gets faith in time,
but he who is chosen to life from all eternity. As is said, Act. 13. 48. so
many believed as were ordained to life everlasting. Therefore when thou hearst
that few gets faith, remember it is not an Herb that grows in every man's
garden, it is a rare gift of God. And therefore findst thou that thou have
gotten faith this precious gift, rejoice and be glad that the Lord hes called
thee to be of that blessed number, and vvonder not at the multitude that
oppones themself to the Gospel; but rejoice thou that thou art one of the
elect, one of that chosen number. Last in this verse ye see where there is no
faith; where the heart is not sanctified, there is nothing but unreasonableness,
and he that hes not faith is a wicked man, an evil disposed person: and so ye
may reason; he hes no faith, ergo he is an evil man; both evil minded and an
evil doer. Then again he is an unreasonable man, what follows? Even this, it
is very evil dwelling with such folks; it is not good to men to dwell with the
faithless: for thou shall get some damnage of them, either in thy body or
soul; for if thou escape the harm of thy body, thou shall not miss to be
harmed in thy soul. Again, where faith is, it will turn a lion in a meek
lamb, and make a tiger the meekest creature that is. We are in deed borne cruel
and savage by nature (for by nature a lion or tiger passes not a man in
cruelty.) Now what turns thee from the nature of a beast? nothing but this
faith of Jesus Christ. And thou shall not have faith so soon, but thou shall
be changed. O how good is it to live in the company of the faithful, for thou
must live with them for ever: take thee to such company in earth, as thou would
have to be with thee in heaven. If thou delight not in their company in earth,
thou shall never be with them in Heaven. The wicked shall not be there.

Yet to go forward. They might have been offended, when he said, al men hes not
faith. It is a rare gift given of God. Now they might have doubted, whether
they were of that number: and if they were, whether they should stand or not.
For, brethren, as it is an hard matter to get faith, so it is as hard a thing
to keep it: for in keeping it, a thousand doubts will rise in the heart, whether
one will persevere in it or not, and especially they that are most careful to
keep it, they are most assaulted with tentations: for others that hes no care
of it, they will not be moved with tentations, and so a careful keeper of faith
is most subject to doubts This tentation is met by the Apostle in the next
verse, he says, The Lord is faithful who shall stablish you and keep you from
euil^. As if he had said, ye shall not lose your faith. And wherefore? because
God who hes given you it is in mutable, and repents him not of any gift given
in Christ, for his gifts are without repentance. Romans 11. Therefore doubt not,
but leaning on that God ye shall be keept steedfast to the end. Then I see here
how ready the godly are to stumble, they are so ready that whateuer they hear
they fall in stumbling with it: No, so long as we are here we are subject to
doubting, thy feet shall be ever subject to slyding. It shall be impossible to
go forward without offense: all the the things thou shall see, all that thou
shall hear shall move thee doubts, and thou shall offend at them. These
Thessalonians scarsly can hear one word of the Apostle but incontinent they
are offended at it. They were offended at the multitude of the enemies of Paul;
and again they are offended at the remedy he gives them, therefore he gives
another remedy. The godly are very ready to offend. But what is the duty of a
Pastor? Even with Paul ever where he sees one to stumble to put out his hand to
hold him up: the godly will stumble, but God forbid they fall to the ground: the^
bewar with speeches, and when thou vtters any thing by word thou suspects will
offend the godly, thou should go about to meet it and to take it away: for the
Pastor had need to be a discreet man in speaking, especially to the godly: as
for the reporbat they will not care what ye speak, but the godly is soone^^
moved ever ready to doubt. Again I see a man or woman once having received the
faith of Jesus Christ shall never lose it altogether: Faith once received can
never be altogether (...) again.
get once true faith thou shall never lose it altogether. Indeed thou may be
at sometimes without the sense of it, but be assured true faith that once takes
root in the heart shall never be rooted out altogether of the heart again. Fie
on these men that defendes that men having true faith and the Spirit of
regeneration may lose it again, that is false doctrine: For the grace of
regeneration once given shall never be l^st again altogether. Come to the
ground of this doctrine. In the matter of faith there are two things, first
there is a giver, and next there is a receiver. God gives, and the soul
receyues. Now what is the ground of the stabilitie of faith wherefore it shall
never be lost again being once given? Is it the receiver? No, ground it not
upon the receiver, it is hut folly so to do, as though thy soul were so sure a
keeper of the grace given thee: but the ground whereon thou must lean is in the
giver* He is unchangeable, true and never alters, Heaven and earth shall turn
up side down ere he alter one jote. So the immutablenesse of faith and that it
loses not in him that hes received it once depends on the stable nature of God
only, and not in no receiver, nor power of man. Therefore if thou would have
an assurance of ^aith that thou shall not lose it, anchor not thy self on thy
self, but on that immutable God; thou ever alters because thou art not
immutable in thy self, no thou have no stabilitie in thy self. Therefore set
thy soul on that that is immutable, set it on God and stick by that immutable
nature of his, and thus doing thou shall never lose the grace received: for it
is the nature of the elect and godly to set their heart on the giver of grace,
and therefore they keep the grace fast and are established: I dare promise
thee, hold thy eyes on God, and put thy confidence on him, thou shall never
lose the grace received.

He says, He shall stablish you, and defend you from evil. There are two
actions of God here set down, first to establish, secondly to defend: The one
is, in keeping us in stabilitie; the other, in holding off all adversary power.
I shall give you the reasons of these two actions requisite in our standing:
The first is, the infirmity in our self: for the ouldest of vs^^ not able to
stand alone more nor an infant that is new borne is able to stand alone. The
other cause, supponing thou were able to stand, yet there is such an adversary
power, so many enemies, so mighty, so powerful, that thou shall not be able to
stand against them of thy self and by thy strength. Now God in holding us up
respects both: therefore as the nurse will hold up the child and defend it
from falling: So the Lord holds us up by the one hand, and by the other seeing
the adversary power coming on us: (for o his invasions are fearful and
mighty) he holds it off, he holds aback the devil and all our enemies: And
therefore ye see two actions given to God, one in holding us up by the one
hand; and the other, in holding aback all the adversary power. Have thou not
matter to pray then, first to hold thee up against thy own infirmity, and
next against the adversary power that will have thee to the earth if that hand
of God hold it not aback. Now he says, from evil. The word may be taine
generally of al sort of evil. yet I agree with this that it is understood
cheeflie of one, Satan: as 1. John 2. 13. So then the lesson rises, it is not
with flesh and blood we have to do. Many thinks if they be free of men that
they are well eneugh: put me from his gun and pistolet, says he I am sure
eneugh: and in the mean-tyme there is never suspicion of the devil, stronger
and subtiller then all the men in the world: He will get on a croslet and
plateglufe, o miserable catiue, what armor have thou for the enemy of thy
soul? It is not with men we have to do, but with powers, we have not to do
with flesh and blood, but with Empyres and Principalities, Governors, Princes
of the world, rulers in the Air. If thou have ado with Princes and Kings
earthly, they will suit the field with thee; but if thou have ado with the
devil (as every unbeliever hes) he will not suit the field with thee, but he
will be above thy head, where thou shall not get one stroke of him, but he
with great fetches and force will beat thee down, and use thee at his
pleasure. Therefore it is not eneugh to pray to give thee grace to stand, and to
keep thee from such as are enemies bodily to thee, but thou should say, Lord
keep me from that evil one, Satan, from spiritual powers from that devil:
thou art never free of him night nor day: for he is going about like a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may deuore. 1. Pet. 5. 8. and when thou have thus prayed
to be saved from the devil, then say, Lord keep me from these bodily enemies.
Alas, men lives careless of Satan, as though there were not a spiritual enemy,
while as there are millions of them to deuore thee for ever. Ye see then this
that is spoken to the Thessalonians is applied to the whole Church of God in
the world: for this that he speaks of the Church of Thessalonica, he means of
the Church of God every where, that the Church hes many enemies: the Church of
Christ hes and ever had, and shall have many enemies; The (...) ^es many
enemies.
the Church it self is but an handful in respect of the multitude both of
spiritual and bodily enemies, multitudes of devils, multitudes of wicked men
and women in the world: and therefore she cannot be without some noy and hurt;
no think it not. But there is a consolation. The Church of Jesus Christ shall
never be tread under foot, the devil and all his supposis shall never tread
on her, nor overcome the Church of God. Hold that fast for a sure ground. The
Church of God shall never be utterly overthrown: and this is a wonderful
thing. And yet, brethren, as the might and omnipotency of God appears in other
things, so especially his might appears in holding up a poor handful of the
poorest and vilest bodies in the world in appearance, against such multitudes
of strong and mighty, both spiritual and bodily enemies, and the Lord will be
glorified in this few number, and in end he shall make that handful to tread
on the necks of the multitude of the wicked, upon Princes necks, and on Powers
and Principalities, and on the devil himself. The cause of her standing is,
because she is grounded on Jesus Christ who is immutable and unchangeable: she
reposing and leaning on Jesus shall stand still and be unalterable as long as
he is unalterable, which is everlastingly, all the power of the world and Hell
shall never overthrow her and bring her at under. This is her joy that she shall
never finally fall, but shall stand notwithstanding of all assaults for ever.
And at last be victorious over oer enemies through the strength of him on whom
she reposes. Now to this God the Father, Son, and holy Spirit be praise and
honor.

AMEN.
THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL, TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 4. 5. 6. 4 And we are persuaded of you, through
the Lord, that ye both do, and will do the things, which we command you.

5 And the Lord guide your hearts to the love of God, and the waiting for, of
Christ.

6 We command you, brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother, that vvalleth inordinatly, and not
after the instruction, which he received of us.


THIS last part, brethren, of the Epistle of Paul written to the Thessalonians
contains precepts and admonitions to live an holy and christian life. The last
day well ad in hands the first precept, which concerns prayer to God, which is
the cheifest exercise that a christian man can have in this world, there is
none before it. Therefore he began to pray, and as he had prayed for them
immediately before, so he craves of them a recompense which is, pray for me
again, and good reason that when I pray for thee thou pray for me again. When
the Pastor prays for the flock, the flock should interceede again with God by
prayer for him. So the Apostle says, Pray for us, for me, and my
fellow-laborers from whom in common this Epistle was directed. But for what
things should they pray to him? The first thing is the Gospel, and what of it?
Pray that it may run and have a free course through the world. And what more?
That the Gospel of Christ running through should not run through the mouths and
ears of men only, that is a small matter if there be no more: but that in
running it may have the course with power and effectualnesse in the hearts of
the hearers working life and salvation in them, and so consequently she may be
glorified, that is, that men and women feeling the great force may be enforced
to glorify her in this world: for none will glorify the Gospel, but he that
feels the power of it in his heart, and to whom the Gospel is the power of God
to salvation. The next thing that he craves they should pray for, is for his
person, and the persons of his fellow-laborers, that we (says he) may be
delivered from unreasonable and evil men: He gives the reason of this desire.
All men hes not ^aith. When we go abroad preaching the Gospel, we will have
great opposition of many wicked men, evil inclined in heart, and evil disposde
in hand, so that our persons must be often in great danger. Therefore pray for
us: And the ground is, all men hes not faith. Howbeit some will profess God
and religion, yet in very deed God is not in their heart: Christ dwells not in
them by faith: they are not elect, and therefore they believe not. It is
dangerous to be amongst them, yea even for the persons of men: for without
Christ the heart of a man is as cruel as is the heart of a Tiger and Lion, or
any wild beast, before it be drawn away from that cruelty and tamed by faith
in Jesus Christ; this is the nature of all men. Then in that third verse, lest
that matter concerning faith and the scarcity of it should have offended them,
and moved them to doubt* and to think it might be that they should fall away
from the faith. He says, the Lord is faithful, and he shall establish you, ye
are not of this number that fall away: for the Lord he is faithful, and
according to his promise he shall make you stand for ever.

Now here, he follows out his precepts, and in the first verse red we have a
general exhortation to obedience to be given to all the directions, warnings,
and admonitions that he had given them before, as if he should say, What ever I
have bidden you in the name of Christ, do ye it all, and begin not only, but
also persevere unto the end. Brethren, this christian calling that we are
placed into craves a doing and practice; not a thinking or speaking only, so
that all our religion be in our tongue. No, put to thy hand and do, as thou
would show thy self a christian: for a christian man would be a doer; all men
must be doing and set on an action, but not every way: for it is better for
some men to sit idle, and to be sleeping when they are most exercised. The
doing required of a christian should be by a rule, not wavering, but as ye see
a line drawn by a rule or square; so ever the action of a man should be by a
rule, even, straight, direct, not crooked, declyning to this side or that side.
We learn of these words what is the rule whereby the actions of a christian
should be ruled. The doctrine of the Apostles is the rule of our actions.
It is the doctrine of the Apostles of Jesus Christ: do as Paul, Peter, and
the rest of the Apostles hes bidden thee do, and I shall warrant thee; prease
to direct thy actions according to that rule: for he that hears the doctrine
of the Apostles, and follows not their direction, refuses to give obedience to
Christ himself.

Now the form of proponing of this matter is to be marked. He says not, do
as I command you to do, but he mitigates the command, and casts in a motive to
move them to do as he bade them. He says, I am persuaded, I have a sure
confidence that ye will do as I bid you, and so he vtters the good opinion he
had of them, that they did well, and would continue in well doing unto the end.
So the Pastor hes his lesson. It becommes a Pastor or teacher when he sees a
good meaning of his flock, ever to think the best of them, yea to conceive a
persuasion (but in the Lord) that they shall continue in well doing unto the
end. And again in the other part it is very meet that the flock understand
that the Pastor counts and esteems well of them: for when the flock
conceyues that the Pastor hes a good estimation of them, it is no small motive
and encouragement to them to go forward in well doing: for when the child
thinks his father hes a good opinion of him, and that he shall come to grace,
it is an encouragement to go forward in well doing Even so it is with the Pastor
and the people; for if the flock think that their Pastor hes not a good opinion
of them, it is the very way to discourage them and to cause them go
backwards: So men should be very ware least they should hurt others. Another
thing here is to be marked. He says, We are persuaded in the Lord, not in
you, for asvvell as we count of you, our considence is not in you: for then ye
and we should both be beguiled: so he hes not a confidence in them, albeit we
have a confidence of them that they should do well: for these are different;
for if confidence be in a man, it is as much as to ascryue all power and glory
of well doing to man himself, and so to depryue God of his glory. As by the
contrare, to put al confidence in the Lord it is to ascryue all glory to God,
that gives the strength to man to do well: The general is, Why should we not
have confidence of men, and be well persuaded that they will do well, but
beware while thou hopest they will do well that thou hurt not the glory of
God, by giving the glory of their well doing to man: If he were the best on
earth give him not the praise of a jote of the power of well doing, but give it
to God alone, that all the glory may be Gods. Let all the glory return to him
from whom all graces came. This for the first verse I have red.

The next precept contained in the next verse is more particulare, and
conteines a special thing. The Lord, says he, guide your hearts to the love of
God, and the waiting for of Christ. The sum is this, Set your hearts upon the
love of God, that is one. And upon the patient hope of Jesus Christ and his
coming, that is another. There is the effect of the words. So first he
recommends to them the love of God, and then the patient looking for of Jesus
Christ and their salvation, which shall be accomplished when he commes in his
glory. Now mark the form and manner after the which he gives out this precept:
He turns this precept in a prayer (this is wisdom) in which he beseeches the
Lord to direct their hearts to the love of God first, and next to the patient
hope of Christ's coming. Mark this form. By this turning of a precept in a
prayer he would teach us this far, that these commands that are given in the
Scripture, these precepts, exhortations, directions and admonitions, imports
not that there is any power or free will in man or woman to obey, or to do
that that is commanded, and exhorted, or to do any part of it: This is the
doctrine of the aduersares, when they hear of any precept or exhortation in
the Scripture, then incontinent conclude they there is a free will in man to
do that that is commanded, No free will in man to do good.
otherwise it were in vain the command given; if the Lord give not free will
to do it, wherefore commands he? but the Lord knows how this follows: for by
turning this precept into a prayer, we are taught that albeit man be commanded
and exhorted to do such and such things, yet all power of well doing depends
only on the Lord: And therefore often ye shall find either the precept turned
in a prayer, or else with precept prayer conjoined: And therefore when we are
commanded and admonished to do any good, in that same instant our heart should
be raised to God to desire strength at him, and thou should say, Lord give me
the strength to do as thou commandst me. When I admonish and exhort thee to set
thy heart to love and fear God, is it in thy power so to do? speaks thy
conscience so to thee? If it say, that it is in thy power thy conscience
beguiles thee, that conceit is a plain illusion. And therefore seeing it lies
not in thy power to do when thou art exhorted, let thy refuge be to the Lord
and say, Lord as thou bidst me love thee, so give me grace to love thee; as
thou bidst me hope, so work thou hope in me, otherwise I will never be
answerable to thy command.

Now to the words. I pray God to direct your hearts to the love of God. Ye see
here wherefore he prays, not for their mouth or tongue nor for their eyes, nor
for none of these outward members, but his prayer is for their hearts, that the
Lord would direct their hearts. What means this? To wit, that the directer, the
guider, and ruler of all these outward members of the eyes, tongue, and mouth,
of the hand and foot, is the heart; she sittes in the midst and guides all: so
that if she her self be first well guyded, ruled and disposed, it shall be
well with all the members of thy body, she shall guide thy tongue, and bridle
thy mouth in speaking, and guide thy hand in doing, it shall be well with thy
eyes and ears, she shall not suffer thee to look or hear wrong: and so well
is the person that hes a well guyded heart, and well disposed mind. For then as
for the outward members they shall be all made wapons of righteousness to serve
God: but if the heart be evil disposed, but if it be backward and perverse (as
it is of nature) there shall not be so much as the least member of the body,
but al shall go the wrong way, thy foot shall go to mischieefe, a murderers
heart stirs his foot to murder, thy hand shall be a wapon of
unrighteousness to fight against God thy eye shall be looking to evil, and
likewise all the rest, all shall be set to do wickedness. And therefore as the
heart craves here prayer for guiding of it, so every part of the body craves
prayer for it. As the Apostle prays, so let us pray, Lord guide my heart, my
hand, my foot: No, the least member craves prayer: but begin at the first
stirrer, the heart, and say, Lord guide my heart that all the rest of my members
may follow her. Alas, the neglect of this prayer to God that he would guide
the heart makes the heart a foul stinking puddle. There is no stinking flewer to
the stink of a foul heart; (o if thou felt it that thou might detest it!) If
it be not purged, thou shall never see the face of God: if thou ly still in the
filth of thy heart, and every day in thy heart contract some further filth,
remember I forewarne thee, the intolerable judgment of God shall be heaped on
thy head, as thou heapest filth upon filth.

Now, what craves he to their hearts? I pray the Lord, says he, to direct your
hearts. The word in the own language signifies a straightning as it were, an
even line: for, brethren, consider the heart of man, as it is disposed by
nature, and by this foul birth of ours (all within us is foul without that
renewing Spirit of Jesus Christ) it comes in this world crooked, manshart,
crooked, by nature.
and bowed in, as a crooked tree, bowed away from God, to the devil: from al
good things to all evil and mischief. It is backward, that is the term, that,
the Scripture gives it: every man is borne with a backwards heart, bowed
downward from God. And therefore, what thing should thou crave to the heart,
what should thou ask for it? It is not even eneugh, no, so long as thou
live, there shall be ay a crook in it. What should thou pray for it then?
Even this, Lord make it even, put this perverseness out of it: for so long as
it bydes in this backvvardnesse, it is not possible but thy vvraith must be on
it. Then pray for two things to thy heart. First to make straight thy crooked
heart, and say, Lord I find my heart crooked within me, bowing away from
thee, Lord put in day holy Spirit in it, and straighten it. And again, because
it is impossible, so long as I live, that I can attain unto an heart altogether
straight: Lord hyde the crookes of my heart, with that mantle of the
righteousness of Christ. Trovvest thou that thou could stand one moment before
that Majesty that cannot look on a crook, except thy crook were covered with
that mantle of the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Therefore, our prayer should
be, Lord, let Christ my Mediator ever stand between me and thee, to hold off
thy wraith and fire of thy countenance.

Now folovves in the end of the verse, two points, unto the which the heart
should be directed. manshart should be directed to two things. 1. the love of
God.
The thing that is made straight must be directed to a point. The first
point, whereinto the heart must be directed, is, the love of God: the next is,
the patient avvaiting for, of Christ. To speak of the first. The heart as it is
bowed and alienated from every good thing, so, first, it is bowed from God and
his love: be assured, as thou art borne, thou love not God: No, thy nature
inclines to hate him so deadly, that thou have no will, nor pleasure, once to
think of him, the heart abhortes by nature the very cogitation of him, and
feign would thou have that conscience that aduerises thee of him, to be pulled
away: Many would be quyte of their conscience, that is ever sounding to them
of God, thou would give a kingdom, if thou had it, to be quite of it. And as
thou would not think of him, by nature; so, thou would never hear of him:
there is such a natural hatred against God, in the heart of man; for, all are
borne, as it were, with their face away from God, and their backs turned to
God: and the longer thou live the farther thou runnest from him, except by
his Spirit he turn thee, and say to thee turn thee and look on my face. And
therefore the first thing we should pray for, should be, Lord turn my heart to
thee, to love thee, and set it on thee. This is the prayer of the Apostle, and
it should be our prayer night and day. What thing can thou love with any joy
or delectation, if thou first love not God? Will the Husband love the wife if
he love not God first? fie on thee and thy love both: for thy love will be
turned in hatred, and thou vvilt curse thy wife and thy children if thou
love not God first, and then them in God for this cause. This is the first
point unto the which the heart should be directed.

Now the next point he calls Patience, that is, a patient hope. Of whom? Of
Jesus Christ, that is of his coming, and consequently of thy everlasting
salvation that shall be reueiled at his coming. 2. Patient avvaiting for
Christ.
Brethren, it is craved that the heart of man be set beyond any thing in this
life: I tell thee thy heart must be directed farther nor any grace thou can get
in this life, farther nor faith, nor the love of God, which is the preciousest
thing thou can have, thy heart must be set on things that are not reueiled as
yet, on Jesus Christ to come, upon that glorious revelation of him, and full
redemption that he shall bring with him to thee. Now fie on me and thee, if our
hearts be bounded within the things or graces of this life, if we hold our hearts
only on the things of this life, then, as Paul says, of all men we were
the most miserable. 1. Cor. 15. 19. And therefore the heart should put out the
head of it beyond this life and lift it above this earth, above all the
Heavens, up to that place where Jesus Christ is, who shall once be
manifested. Brethren, as concerning hope and that life to come, I think ye
find how ye are disposed concerning it: will nature teach you that ever
Christ shall come again to this world? I shall tell thee; thy nature will
answer, all folly; and men will say, do well to me in this life, I shall take
my venture of the life to come. This lets thee see what is in nature: for
nature will never tell thee that there is a life to come; nature is far from
all expectation of glory after this life. Therefore this is the second thing
we should crave to the bovved heart that he would set it straight upon the
hope of life; and as he prays, so should we pray, and say, Lord my heart is
declyned from the hope of life, and looks never Christ will come, Lord righten
it, that I may wait upon the coming of my Redemer; for I shall not attain to
that life except I hope for it and persist in it till he come. Well ye see then
what is the good disposition of the heart of man and woman, be not be beguyled
with it. When may thou have a well disposed heart, an even heart? When things
falls out that pleates thee, store of honors, of riches, of pleasure, then thy
heart is aloft and glad: but I say, if this disposition be not in thy heart, that
i^ love God first, and next that thy heart hopes for salvation, woe to that
heart: if it be not otherwise disposed before thou die, vvoe to that heart for
ever. So if thou would understand when thy heart is well disposed, go down to
it, and say, my heart, love thou God? if it answer I love him, then thou art
well: And again say, my heart hopest thou for a life after this life, and to
see the Lord Jesus to thy everlasting salvation: if it say, I hope so, then in
joyfulnesse rest there. I beseech you for Jesus Christ's sake, think not ye
have a well disposed heart, except sensibly ye feel in it the love of God, and
an hope for a better life. Strive to this sense of the love of God, that thou
may be persuaded that he hes loved thee first, and if thou feel that sweet
love of this, then it will lowse thy heart to love God with a joy unspeakable:
fie on all carnal and fleshly joys in respect of this solid joy.

Yet one word. He calls it Patience, by the which he means a patient on
waiting and hope: for, brethren, this understand, that there cannot be an hope
of life except patience concur with hope in the heart. If thou have not
patience to bide, look not for that final redemption. Therefore this patience
is the necessary companion of hope: for hope is nothing else but a fair look,
yea a very far look to a thing that is far from us. Well except thou have
patience, trowest thou that thou will hold up thy head from morning till night
to await on Jesus Christ his coming. No such thing, thou may call a blenke and
away at an instant, but thou shall not stand, without patience, no hope. And
again ere thou attain to that life, trowest thou that thou shall go even
forward a sound course, so that never a crossing shall come in thy way, no
affliction touch thee till thou be set in Heaven? Is that thy opinion that thou
may live in quietness, have goods, honor, and store, and none say to thee, ill
goes thou on the way. Any man may take ease in patience: No, no, if thou have
hope of glory, assure thee, an hundredth stays shall be casten in the way, and
thou shall be beatten and tosted here and there. And ofttymes there shall
appear such dark clouds that the fight of glory shall be plucked out of thy
eyes. Therefore if thou have no patience to abide til that cloud be removed,
thou shall have no hope, and without hope look not for glory. And therefore
it is not without cause that Hope and Patience are joined together: He that
would hope for life let him cast him for troubles and crosses; for if life be
ordained for thee the Lord will cast in stumbling blocks ever to exercise thy
hope until thou get that that thou hopest for: for the Lord hes appointed here
continual suffering. The Lord grant that we may be enarmed with Patience ever
till hope be turned into sight.

The next verse conteines another special precept. As the former precept
concerned the heart and the direction of it: so, this precept concerns the
outward society and familiarity, we have with men in this world: for, so long
as we live, we must be in a society, but, beware with whom. So, the effect of
this precept is this, withdraw your selves from every brother, that walks
inordinatly, in his life, that goes out of order and keeps not his own
station, that lives inordinatly. There are two things to be considered, in this
precept. First, the form: Next, the effect of it. The form is, We denounce
and charge you, not in our name, but, in the Name and authority of our Lord
Jesus: for, neither Apostle, nor, Pastor hes any power to denounce any thing in
his own name: for, there is no authority in the Church, over the consciences
of men, but, the Authority of God and of Jesus Christ. And therefore, no man
can say to the conscience, I charge thee in my name. It is only proper to God,
to charge the conscience. Now, gather the lessson. This form, he uses, lets us
see, how hard it is, Men naturally inclyned to eull company.
to be severed from evil company, albeit many will curse it in the end: It
will not be a light word, that will make thee to leave evil company, but ere
thou come from it, there must a charge interueene, and that, in the name of the
highest authority, even, the great God, and that, by the mouth of his servant.
The Lord must say, I charge thee in the Name of the great God, severe thee from
evil company. Brethren, know ye not your nature, never thing stak faster to
another, the^ this nature of ours cleaues to evil and evil men, so, that, by
a great force, they must be pulled asunder. Now, to come to the matter. he
says, withdraw your selves. He says not, shoot them from you, but, draw
your selves from them: so, it importes not a public excommunication, but, a
quiet separation of a true brother from a fained brother. There are sundry
seuerings. One, when we severe our selves from these, that are publictly
excommunicate. Another, when men quietly draws themselves from them, that lives
inordinatly: No, it is not eneugh, to say, He is not excommunicate, and
therefore, I may hant his company. No, but, I say, If he live not well and
holilie, begin thou to draw thy self from him, before, that, by that public
censure he be casten from thee.

Now, from whom should he withdraw himself? He says, From every brother, what
ever they be to thee, and of what estate soever they be of. And who is this
brother? He that takes on the name of a Christian, and yet, in effect, is not a
Christian: company not with such a man, if his life fightes against his name,
away with him, let him stand his alone. There are many sorts of evil company,
but, of all sorts, the worst and most dangerous is a brother, that is an evil
man of life, and takes upon him the name of a Christian, and be assured, thou
shall get more evil of such a companion, nor thou shall get of an Heathen, or,
Pagane. Is it not, trovvest thou, a dangerous thing, to have company with a
brother, that is an adulterer, and a murderer, will he not infect thee? Fie on
thee, that vvithdravves not thy self from him: for, a brother, that hes only
but a bare name of a Christian and not the life of a Christian, is like a lump
of sovvre leaven: for, if it be casten in a whole baking, it will sour all
the rest: even, so, he will infect all. So, if there be a false brother in thy
company, if thou be homely with him, thou shall be within few days made such
a man, as he is; for, familiarity makes conformity in manners. And therefore,
men, when they go to the scaffold to execution (ye have heard) have often
curssed evil company. Familiarity with a fained brother shall make thee cold
in Religion, and draw thee to his manners, and so, being inuolued in his sins,
thou shall have a part of his punishment.

And what a brother is this, from whom thou should vvithdrawe thy self? One
that lives inordinatly, that is, that lives not according to my doctrine and
rule: and what rule hes he preseryued? Look Ephesians. 4. 28. to wit, that,
every man should labor, and that, every one should eat their own bread.
And if thou have not labored, but, hes been idle all day, look, that, thou
put not a nip in thy mouth: for, there is an Inhibition, Let him not eat, that
labors not. This is the rule. Now, learn, how holy this christian life should
be; for, by them that walks inordinatly, he means not of men openly wicked
and disobedient, as, open adulterars, murtherars, oppressors, etc. but, he
means of idle bodies, that are out of all calling, and are not laboring, but
are busy bodies, clauerers and pratlers, looking here and there, making that a
mean, to win their living by: as dron-bees enters in the skeppes and soukes up
the honey of the laboring bees; so, they souke up the meat, that others hes
win with the sweat of their brows. So, as idle busy body is evil company,
clap him, as ye will, entertain him as ye please, he is a plague, and he will
infect thee: for, if he have not a certain calling, let him speak of
Religion, as he will, no religion will follow him: for, the Lord gives not a
blessing to any, but, to him, that hes some honest calling. Another thing,
mark, here. Let none pretend the Gospel of Christ to their idleness: fie on
the mouth, that speaks of Christ, and then is out of all calling and idle:
speak not one word, or, one mum of Christ, if thou have not a calling and be
exercisde therein. I tell thee, Christ's Gospel takes not away any good order,
but, ratifies it. The Laws of Policy hes ordeinde, that every one have a
calling, and the Gospel ratifies the same Law, and it is Christ's will, that,
men keep themselves in their calling: It is not lawful, under pretense of
Christianity and Religion, to cast off a calling: for, as God is the God of
order, so, he looks; ever, that, men be in an honest calling. If thou be idle,
thou offendest him, and prouokst him to wraith: therefore, look to thy self,
(...).
that, thou be not out of all calling: yea, rather, ere thou sit idle, be
exercised in the vylest calling and vocation, that ever was. Now, I beseech the
Lord, that as he hes appointed every one of us, to be exercised in some
lawful calling, winning our living with the sweat of our brows, so, he would
grant, that, we may faithfully travail in our lawful calling, and that he
would join his blessing to our labors, that having sufficiency for our
pilgrimage here, we may consecrate soul and body to him, who cares for us,
and blesses us in all things, that this life being ended, we my be assured to
rest from our labors with Jesus Christ. To whom, with the Father and holy
Spirit, be all honor and praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE TWELFTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL, TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 7. 8. 9. 10. 7 For, ye your selves know, how ye
ought to follovv us: for, we behaved not our selves inordinatly among you,

8 Neither took we bread of any man for naught: but, we vvroght with labor
and travail, night and day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you.

9 Not but that we had authority, but, that we might make our selves an
ensample, unto you, to follow us.

10 For, even, when we were with you, this we warned you of, that, if
there were any, which would not work, that, he should not eat.


THIS last part of this Epistle, we show you, contained precepts and
admonitions, concerning Christian life and conversation. The first precept and
admonition was, to pray* and that, for Paul and his fellow laborers, Syluanus
and Timotheus, who with him directed this Epistle to them. The next precept was
general, desiring them, to do, and continue in every thing, he had commanded
them. The third precepte was particulare, that they should take heed to their
hearts, and set them first on the love of God, and secondly, upon the patient
hope and awaiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. The fourth precept
concerns society and fellowship, and warnes them, to withdraw themselves
from every Christian, that keeps the name and walked inordinatly, that is, not
according to the ^ale, he had set down to them, to follow. In this precept,
first, we have the form, how he propones it, the form is grave, I denounce,
says he, in the Name of the Lord, that ye withdraw your selves. By this
form, he teaches us, how hard it is, to severe the best of us all from evil
company: for this remanent corruption, that abydes in the renewed men cleaues
so fast to evil company, that oft-tymes it preuailes against the Spirit: so,
that, men must be reauen, as it were, by force, from evil company, they must
be threatened with judgment ere they be content to leave them. As to the
matter, Withdraw, your selves from every brother, that walks inordinatly.
There is no worse company, then they, who keeps the name of Christians, and
under the pretense thereof, will live licent^ous^e, idle, without a calling,
busy bodies: a curse and no blessing follows such men. And therefore, they,
that hantes their company, takes pleasure in it, and fosters them in their
fantasy must be inuolued in that same judgment with them.

Now, to come to the text presently red. It contains moral precepts,
concerning manners. Therefore, we shall open it up and gather such lessons, as
shall be offered for our instruction. He turns him to these idle bodies, of the
which, appearandly there was a great number among the Thessalonians, as there
is in this City, and he wills them, to change their manners. The first
argument, he uses, to move them, is taken from his own exemple, Ye your selves
know, bovv ye ought to follovv us: for, we behaved not our selves inordinatly
among you, etc. Ye who lives inordinatly, know, how it behooved you to follow
me, as a light, that goes before you, in life and conversation. Then he
subsumes: I have not lived out of rule, nor out of order. Therefore, learn to
live, as I have lived you before you, not idle, but laboring for your living,
as ye have seen me do, before you. Now, to gather some lessons, on this first
argument. Mark, in the person of the Apostle, when a Pastor hes laid down the
rule of right living: the doctrine of the word of God, concerning an honest and
godly life in this world, how soon he hes set down this rule in the Pulpet,
he is bound immediately as soon as he commes out of it, to walk according to
that rule, he hes laid down; to the end, that, he walking according to the
rule, the people may follow him: For, for this cause, Heb. 13. 17. he is
called aguyde (as he is called a Preacher) because in life, he should guide the
people the right way, according to the doctrine taught by him; and walking
according to the rule of the world, he conciliats credit and authority to the
word, and makes the hearers to believe the word, he hes spoken, when they see
him, in his person practice that word. And by the contrare, not walking
according to the word, he hes preached, he does, that lies in him, that no man
credit him, and so, becommes guilty of the highest crime, that can be: for,
the disgracing of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is the greatest sin, that, a man
can commit; lease-majestie is a great sin, yet it is nothing to this: for,
this sin is lease-majestie, against God. So, ye may see what necessity lies on
him, to live well; otherwise, he shall beat down more, with his evil life,
nor he will be able to build by his preaching: and so, he is a traitor,
against Christ and his Gospel. Now, the chief care of Paul was to honor the
Gospel, that it should get no disgrace; and therefore, he looked to be
partaker of his own Gospel: otherwise, if a man honor not the Gospel by his
life, teach it as diligently and eloquently as he can, he shall not be partaker
of the Gospel. This lesson rises on Paul's person; another rises upon the part
of the people, concerning them, that hears the preaching, and doctrine of
Christ. What is their duty? When they have heard, and when they have seen
the Pastor walk directly according to the rule of doctrine set down by him:
then, there is a necessity laid upon them, to follovv his footsteps, and
walk, as he walks. And more. The words lets us see, that, their conscience
tells them, that, necessity is laid on them, that, seeing the Pastor vvalking
before them, their conscience tells them, that, they should follow: for, if
thou follow not, the first challenger, that shall challenge thee, shall be
thy own conscience, and it shall condemn thee, and if thou follow, thou
shall have the approbation of thy conscience: John says, 1. Epist. chap. 3.
verse 20. If thy conscience condemn thee, God is greater, nor thy heart and
conscience, and he shall condemn thee, Ye know men's voices in this country
and their opinions, we are not all Ministers, we are not therefore bound to
walk so closlie by the rule, as ye, we may play us here and there. It is
true, indeed, the Minister should walk first, and should go before you, but, it
is as true, there is a necessity lying upon you, to follow him foot by foot:
and certainly, if ye follow him not, damnation shall ensue, play thee and pass
thy time, as thou please.

Come to the next part of the argument. He says. I have not behaved my self
inordinatly among you: this is the assumption of the argument. His life was
among them, he past not out to a backside, out of the society of men and women,
but, his life was among christian men and women, continually winning them to
Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel. Brethren, we are bound to live in a
society among men and women, and not to go aside to Hermitages, and to live in
Monks Closters, but, to live among men, in the society of men and Gods
people: for, the life of a good man, or, good woman will edify that
spiritual building, asvvell, as the word will edify: and every one of us
is oblist to edify another, by our life, asvvell, as by our word. Peter 1.
Epist. chap. 3. verse 1. exhorting wives to be obedient to their Husbands,
says, They lucrifie souls unto Christ's, by their lives, without any speech.
A woman will win souls, by her life, albeit she speak not one word.
Therefore, brethren, seeing there is such force in the life, either to build,
or, cast down, take the admonition, that, Paul gives both in the Epistle
giuento the Ephesians chap. 5. verse 15. and also, to the Coloss. 4. 1. Walk
circumspectly, lift not one foot, but know well, where thou setst it down,
walk vvisely: for, be assured, as thou live, others will live and follow
thee; if thou live well, others will follow thee, and if thou walk
wickedly, thou also wilt get followers: and if thou be a stumbling block, woe is
thee. O, woe is him, that is a slanderer with his evil life; it were better,
that, a mil-stone were ha^gd about his neck, and, that, he were casten in the
sey, nor to be an occasion of stumbling. Therefore, we should be careful, not
only for our selves, to live godly, but, for others also: for, othevvise, if,
through our occasion and ensample, others walk inordinatly, their blood shall
be craved at our hands.

I go forvvard to the verse following. He proves, that, he vvalked not
inordinatly, and he takes his argument from the manner of the eating of his
meat. When I was among you, the bread that I eat, it not for noght, but, I
wrought for it: and how? With great painfulnesse. And when? not in the day
only, but, in the night also: and with what instruments? Even, with my own
hands, besides my preaching. The end of all, was, that I should not be grievous
and chargeable, to any man. Now, of Paul's working, read Acts 18. 3. He was a
tent-maker, and besides the teaching of the Gospel, he used his handy-labour.
But, I come to the purpose, ye will see if a man walks ordinatly, or,
inordinatly; the eating of their meat will show it; for, Paul taks his
argument from his eating. If he lives and eats his meat by his work, he lives
in rule and keeps a good order; but, when he steps to his meat and hes not
done a good turn for it, he is out of rule: men commonly thinks, if they get
meat, they care not how they eat it. This is a great sin: and oft-tymes an
idle knave will think that meat sweetest, that hes cost him least travail.
But, mark, the end shall prove, there was never meat so dear boght, as that,
that is gotten without labor, and in end, it shall prove the sowrest meat,
that ever thou tasted: for, what, trow ye, be the price of this meat, how is
it boght? no man should eat, but, that, that is boght, but, what is the price
of it? He hes a pursse full of silver, Hes he paid the just price, for it? No,
there is no true price for meat, but, the price of labor and vvorking. Labor
and eat; otherwise, if thou should die for hunger, thou have no right to
eat. Alas, if men understood the truth, concerning this thing. More, note,
here, two fashions of eating. One there is, by working and that hes the
blessing of God with it. There is another sort of eating for noght, eating
gratis. If thou workest not, thou eatst for nothing. Compare these together.
The one is lawful and thou may eat, with Gods blessing. The other, when thou
have been an idle vagabound, and hes done no good, and yet, stops to thy
dinner, and framples up other men's travels, that is unlawful eating: for, the
Lord says to thee, that is an idle body, touch not, nor handle not, Is there
any exception of persons? No, no, there is not a Monarch can eat his meat
lawfully in a good conscience, except, in his calling, he do the turn, the
Lord hes put in his hands, except he have labored for it, in his own calling.
Yet, mark the words. There is a giving and a receiving: for, he says. I have
not eaten the bread given by any man: Therefore, the Apostle thought it not
eneugh, to eat, because it was given him liberally, except, ere he eat,
first, he had labored for it. Look how men countes of this doing: He thinks,
if a man give him meat willingly, he may lawfully eat of it. No, it is
vanity, except with the gift there be labor. There is nothing under Heaven,
that, will make a right to thee to eat, except laboring in thy own calling
go before: for, measure not the way of life by thy own conceit, but, by the
will and word of God, and as he bids thee live, live; otherwise, woe to thy
life.

But, now, look how he aggrearges his working. He wrought and that, with
labor and travel he wearied and pained himself, that is one circumstance;
look to the time, all times were alike, he wrought by night and by day. Look
the instruments: He wroght with his own hands, he put his own hand to
labor. This is a marvelous thing, if ye knew what Paul was; He was a
gentleman. Our gentlemen thinks much to file their hands: God forbid, that,
my Lords son, and the Lairds son file his hands with work: Paul was a Citizen
in Rome, a man greatly accounted of, he was a Pharisie, he had many worldly
prerogatives, and yet, he puts his hand to work. It is a shame, to see so many
idle vagabounds, they will pretend their nobility, and they think shame to
labor, because they are gentlemen, yet, I say, the curse of God follows ever
upon such. Always, the lesson is, there is such a necessity of working laid
on every one, for their living, that, nothing can exeeme us. There is nothing
can exeeme thee from labor, no, not thy blood and kindred, if thou were a kings
son, all thy lands and rents will not exeeme thee; the painfulnesse of thy
labor will not exeeme thee: No, no time will exeeme thee, when the Lord enters
in count. If thou cannot win thy living in the day, then, work in the night,
no sort of work will exeeme thee. He will say, I cannot put my hand to such a
work: No, put thy hand to the pleugh, and lead muck creeles, and go to the
vylest exercise, that is, rather, ere thou win not thy living by work. Well is
the man, that winnes his living by the sweat of his brows, and woe to them,
that lives on other men's labors.

Now, to come to the end, why he did this. He says, he labored night and day,
to the end, he should not be chargeable to any man. I draw out the general of
this. It is requisite, in a christian man, that, he be as little chargeable to
others, as can be possible. Art thou a christian man? strive, that, thou be not
chargeable to others: Is he debt-bound any way? yet, say* Paul, spare him.
Burdene thy father and mother at little, as thou may: many knaves will not
care, what they waist of their fathers goods. The Thessalonians were much
addebted to Paul, and yet, he spends very little of their goods, he is as
little chargeable to them, as he could. Now, the way to free them of this
burdene, is, to work. If thou be idle, thou must be a burdene: for, an idle
man is a burdene laid to others, that labors. Paul Ephesians 4, 28. says, Let him
that stole, steal no more now, when he is a christian: Brethren, he that hes
sinned, let him sin no more. But, what should he do? let him labor. There
is the remedy: If thou labor not, thou must be a thief, and a throt-cutter.
And how shall be labor? If he cannot get a liberal and honest calling, let him
labor with his own hand, and do that, that is good. To what end? That he may
have to impart to other, that cannot work. So, let him not labor for himself
only, but, for others. And so, we should not labor, only that we be not
burdensome to others, but, also, that we may be helpful to others: for, we are
not borne for our selves only, he gives us not hands and feet, and the rest of
our members for our selves only, but, for our neighbors also: yea, he gives
us not an heart, to love our selves only, but also, to love our neighbor. All
thy working, if it be in respect of thy self, if thou have no respect to thy
poor brother, thou shall get no reward at all, for it.

Now, I come to the verse following. The Thessalonians might have said, Then,
thou have no right, to crave ought of us, for thy preaching? say thou not,
thou laborest, to get thy own living? He answers, no, I have just right, to
tak for my preaching, I writ not this, as if I had no authority: but, this I
have done, when I might have ta^e of you, yet, I took not, to learn you to
labor, and to shame them, that are among you, idle bodies, that works not,
for their living. Now, ye see, here, in the persons of the Thessalonians,
how ready men are, and hes been at all times to think, that, a Minister of
the word hes no right, to these temporal things, as to eat, to drink, 1.
Cor. 9. 4. to mary a wife, to take a stipende. Any man hes a good right to all
these things, but a Minister, they inuy, that, Minister should get so much, as
this common air. They come forward: from thinking and speaking, they come to
doing. Scotland proves this evidently eneugh, by violence, by cauillation of
laws, by one way, or, other, they will reaue these temporal things from
them, that the Lord hes set in his service: a minister hes no right to
personage, nor, vicarage, nor, teindes. What hes the Minister ado with them?
they have no right to them? Hes not my Lord, or, the lord, or, what he is, a
Charter of them? But, Paul says, if any man hes right, I have right: And I
say, a Minister hes as good right to these things, as any Earl, lord, lord,
or, what ever man he be hes to his heritage: but, the ground of this is, men
knovves not, what, life is, what the kingdom of Heaven is, albeit they will
prattle much of it. Now, this ministry is the ministry of the Spirit, and of
the righteousness of Jesus Christ: And therefore, all words of these things
are but vvinde, to them; and they think, a man, that traueiles in this calling
is but an idle man, they count of no exercise, but, that, that is in these
earthly things. O Lord, that heavy count that shall be in that glorious
appearance of Jesus Christ, in that terrible day! Then, this reafe and violence
shall appear to be reafe and violence indeed: Then, no words, no color of
Law shall be an excuse to thee. More, yet, on Paul's part, mark how ready,
good men should be, whether they be Ministers, or, others, to give over their
rightes, which they may most justly challenge. Paul gave over his right,
howbeit he might have taken a stipende: Yet, least it should seem to common
people, that, Ministers had no right, or, title to take by their labors, he
meets it and will not prejudge the right of the ministry, that should
follow, but, he tells, he had authority, to take. Thou may, upon good
occasions leave thy right some-tymes, but, look, it be not to the hurt of thy
brother, look thou impare not his right, by giving over thy right, otherwise,
thou have no sincerity in thy doing; for, if thou hurt him, there is no
sincerity in thee.

Now, in the end of the verse, he tells the cause, wherefore he gave over
his right. To be an ensample, says he, to you, to follow us. Brethren, the
thing, that, the Lord craves of every one of us, is, that, we stand up, to be
a good ensample to others: every one is bound to this duty: for, we are not
borne to our selves only, and it is hard, to win to this, and before a man
attain to this, he must suffer many things, he must suffer many injuries and
vvronges, he must pass from his right oft-tymes, and that, that he hes just
title to, he must let it go. So, we, that we may be ensamples of well
doing, must suffer many things, and do many things. Ye see a mean here set
down, to move idle bodies, to labor, it is set down in Paul's doing. Paul
needed not to work, only preaching might have done his turn, but, to move
idle men there among the Thessalonians, to work, he would work. So, the
lesson is, It is requisite, that, even, honest men, that hes no necessity to
put their own hands to work, put to their hands to work, to move
servants, men and women, that hes no other moyen to live by, but* by vvorking,
to do their duty. As, for ensample. A master of an house, who hes such
servants, as will not put their hands to work, let him go before his
servants in work, that thereby they may be ashamed.

Now, to come to the last verse. He sets down another argument, to move these
idle Thessalonians to work. The argument going before was gentle, taken from
his own ensample, but, this argument is strait, forbidding all, that will
not work to eat. He that will not work, let him not eat. Workst thou
not? Paul inhibits thee to eat. This leanes on a grueat equity. What, trow ye,
eating be? God hes ordained it to be the reward of labor and working. Thou
getst thy dinner, thy supper, meat and drink, as a reward of thy work, thou
have no other allowance of dinner, nor supper, but as a reward of thy work.
Then must it not follow, he works not* therefore, he must not eat. O, ye
will say, that is very strait, if men and women eat not, they will die? But, I
say, die as they will, the Lord vouchafes not a nip on them, except they work.
Yet, notwithstanding of this, great number of men gets meat and lives, albeit
they work not, as, in Edinburgh this day, and Scotland, ye know, is full of
such folk, that never puts their hand to work, and yet, they eat. Yet, I
shall tell you their estate: Let not an idle man think, he is well, when he
eats and works not; for, the curse of God is lying upon him, a miserable
estate. Would to God, that, men would weigh this, that, the curse of God is on
these men, and al is accursed to them, their clothes, their bed, and all, they
have. For, if this be true, that, the blessing of God is on the labourer, Psalm.
128. 2. Prou. 10. 4. and upon him, that eats the fruits of his labors, it
must follow, that, he that eats, when he labors not, the curse of God is on
him. So, idle bodies have no matter of vaunting and rejoicing when they eat;
and they who wins their living with the sweat of their brows hes the blessing
of God with them. Indeed, his blessing is not seen by thee now, and ye cannot
distinguish now a blessing from a curssing. Ye see, here, oft-times it is
as well with the idle body, as with the body, that works; for, Gods blessing
and curse is not well seen here by men, but, in that day it shall be showen
evidently, and this labor is a mean to bring us to that life, that Christ, by
his blood, hes bought to us. The reward of a servant, that labors faithfully,
and that beleues in Jesus Christ, shall be glory Ephesians. 6. 8, Now, as this
inhibition concerns Idle bodies, that they eat not, so, it concerns them,
that labors, that they foster nor idleness in any body; for, that is to
foster them in sin. No, if thou would do an idle body any good, bound him
to work: will thou give a vagabound leave to clatter from morn till night and
then, give him meat, thou fosters and enterteines him in sin: beware of such
help, for, when thou think, thou helpst and pleasure him, thou art procuring
a judgment to him. The Lord give us grace to help all creatures out of that
damnable estate, whereinto they are, by our ensample, that thereafter both we
and they may strive to honor God in our callinges, until we come to Christ,
the Author and finisher of our faith; who according as our faith and belief is
in him, does recompense to every one of us; that, through him, the just may be
saved and the reprobate condemned. And therefore, to him with the Father and
holy Spirit be all honor, praise and glory for ever.

AMEN.
THE THIRTENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 11 For, we heard, that, there
are some* which walk among you inordinatly, and work not at all, but, are
busy bodies.

12 Therefore, them that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread.

13 And ye, brethren, be not vvearie in well doing.

14 If any man obey not our sayings, note him by a latter, and have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed:

15 Yet count him not as an enemy, but, admonish him, as a brother.


THE Apostle, ye heard (brethren) her found great fault with such among the
Thessalonians as lived inordinatly without a lawful calling, idle in the
world. Now to come to the purpose shortly, in the beginning of this text he
lays down the ground of that rebuke, and finding fault with such men: he spok
not begesse, but upon a sure information and report that he had concerning
these men: albeit he was absent, yet the report came to him, that some among
the Thessalonians lived inordinatly, not working and not exercised lawfully,
but in vain speachs and curious and supersluous exercises. The text is plain,
and the first thing I mark here, is; Nothing should be spoken, no rebuke, no
reproof should be directed to any, but upon a certain assurance and good
ground, knowledge and notorietie of it: either upon that knowledge we have our
selves, as when we see the fault our selves, either upon the certainty of a
true and sure report of others that are of credit, and whom we know, to
speak, not of affection, or malice, or of purpose to slander the person of
whom it is spoken, least we speaking upon an uncertainty, and being over soon
credulous, without a full information, in the end such speaking bring a
disgrace to our ministry. Then again the Pastor when once he hes scattred the
seed of the word in the hearts of the hearers, his next care should be to see
how it buddes out and fructifies in their lives and conuersations. Even as the
Husbandman after he hes casten the seed in the ground, his eye is on the
ground to see how the corn brierdes; so, the Pastor should have his eye on his
ground upon the which he sowes the seed of the word, that is, his flock, and
see how it fructifies in them: If he be present, his eye should not be off
them* He should not only look on them in the Church, but his eye should at
all times, and in every place be very instant on them. Alas, for pity that
this care is neglected in all almost, we think it eneugh to study the
preaching, and lets the manners of men pass over, as if they appertained not to
us: If the Pastor be absent, his ears should be opened to hear sure reports
concerning their manners, that, as he hears and sees he may do thereafter,
that if the word fructify he may encourage them to go forward, otherwise he
may admonish, rebuke, and stir up the dead soul: for, a Pastor should
never be idle, but either speaking or doing, comforting or exhorting,
instructing or admonishing, or rebuking. No, there is no idleness for him, as
he would give up a fair count in that great day.

What heard he by report? That there were some that lived inordinatly. Who are
these? He defines them in the words following, They that wrought not at all,
and yet, were busied, and none so busy as they, appearandly. Here, ye see are
two contrares, doing nothing and yet, exercised, they were not busy in well
doing, and in a lawful calling, but they were exercised and busy in
curiosity, and so, evil exercised. The lesson is. There is a common Proverb,
An idle man must ay be doing something, and he that is not profitable and well
exercised, of necessity must be unprofitably exercised: for* the Spirit of a
man cannot rest: for, we see by daily experience idle men and women (and Paul
marked that in some young widows, 1. Tim. 5. 13.) of all people they weary
and fash themselves most; ye see them here and there talking and prattling, and
where ever they come they are in such a business as is wonderful, they gather
all the news and tidings of the country greedily, and then running here and
there they scatter them. In one word, they will be in as great a business, as
if the care of a kingdom were laid on them. Let every one apply this to
himself. Amongst all the faults of Edinburgh this is not one of the least that
would be amended. The manners and behavior of many people which I see in this
City forces me to speak of it.

In the next verse, when he hes laid down the ground, he turns him to them,
and charges and warnes them very weightilie, That they work. Mark the weight
of the charge. He charges and exhorts, so, that, ye see, he mingles lenity with
sharpness. There is a sharpness, in charging; and lenity, in exhorting. In
whose Name charges he them? Not in his own name, but, in the Name and
authority of Jesus, the highest authority, that ever was, which learnes us
this, how hard a thing it is, to make an idle man to put his hand to work,
they must be straited with the highest authority that is. Even, of the great
God of Heaven: yea, when they are charged in his Name scarcely will they put
their hand to work: Once a beggar and unthrifty, never a thriftie man again.
It is a very hard thing to bring thee from thy vaiging. Take heed to this ye
that hes young ones, that they be not brought up idly: for, if thou so do, it
will be hard to bring them to work again. It is Gods just judgment, that, ye
see many of them begging, because ye put them not to labor in their youth.
Now, this for the form. What charges he them to do? Work, says he, and so
do I, in the Name and authority of the great God, I say, to you vagabounds,
work, ye that make a shift, by prattling and talking, I say, to you, work, let
the tongue be quiet, and the hand be doing. And how should they work? quyetly.
An idle body and a body well exercised works both, but, differently; the
idle body works with a noise, so, that, he troubles himself and others also,
all the world is troubled by his working: but, a man in a lawful calling, how
works he? quyetly, without troubling either of himself, or, others, and he is
the man, that, hes rest, both in himself and with his neighbors about him.
Paul 1. Thessa. 4. 11. says, S^ryue to be quiet, then, he subjoynes the way,
to do your own affairs; for, if ye be busy bodies, unquiet will your life
be. This, for the first.

The next, that follows this charge is, Ear your own bread. Who is he, that
does this? The man, or, woman, that labors in his calling with a quietness,
this person lives on his own winning. As for a busy body, look his
vauntage, when he hes wearied himself in vanity, he gets not so much
vauntage, as a morsel of bread, no, not an inche of bread, he may well eat,
and drink, and sleep, yet, all is accursed, and his eating is by violence and
reafe; he hes not an allowance in the Lords count-booke, and in that day he
shall be challenged for reafe and violent opression. Proverb 5. 15. Drink,
says he, of the water ^f thy own cisterne, and of the rivers out of the
midst of thy own fountain. Brethren, there is the first law of equity. If a
man would live justly toward his neighbor, let him be as little burdensome to
him, as he may and let him eat and drink of his own labor.

Now, I go forward to the next verse. Having in the verse going before, spoken
to idle bodies, here, he turns him to them, that lived ordinatly in their own
calling, and requyres an higher duty of them. Ye, brethren that labors
quyetly, vvearie not in well doing. I require more of you, that ye eat, not
only your own bread, but also that ye give pieces about you: yea, as some
expones, give something to the bodies before they perish. support their
necessity, and in the meane-tyme, exhort, and stir them up to work. In
that place of the Proverbs, when he hes said, Drink of thy own cisterne, he
subjoynes, let thy fountains run out to others, that is, help others, let
thy liberality be extended to others. I show, the first Law of equity was,
that men should be as little burdensome to any as they might. The next is,
when he eats his own bread, and sees the want of others, to give pieces of
his own about him, and to help the necessity of others I think that man
happy that can do these two things, that is an happy man that deuoures not
all himself, but vouchafes a part of his winning upon others. The last day I
show to you Ephesians. 4. 28. He that stole, let him steal n^ more, but let him
work with his own hand, that he may have to imparte unto others, not to
live himself only, thereon; that is not eneugh, there is more required: for,
he is the true Christian man who labors to feed both himself and others also
that are in necessity. Now, brethren, to insist here, vvearie not, says he,
be not sluggishe, relent not, grow not cold in well-doing. The Apostle would
mean, that howbeit matter and occasion be offered to us that would do well
through the ingratitude and unworthiness of men not to do a good turn to
them, not to give them so much as a morsel of meat, yet, we should strive
against the sluggishnesse, coldness, ingratitude and indignity of men, and ay
be doing good. It is hard to do well, the days are evil; yea, they were never
worse, and he who would do well must buy it with the preciousest and best thing
that he hes in this world; there are so many things to hinder and cool him to
do well. The ingratitude and unworthiness of men to whom he hes done well,
will meet him, so that, if he will look to these he needs not to prease to
do well any farther. But this should be the rule of our doings, Let us not
look so much to the deserning of men at our hands, to their unworthiness, as
to the will of God, remember what it becommes thee to do, being the son of
such a father, who wills thee to weary and pain thy self in beneficency and
well doing toward ingrate men, awaiting on his will: for the Lord shall reward
thee sufficiently in the end, albeit for all thy well doing thou get not so much
as a good word. Rest then on God, and in thy well doing lift thy eyes to him,
and await for that rich reward when that glory shall be reueiled in that great
day.

I go to the next verse. The next precept concerns stubborn men, obstinate
and disobedient men that will not obey the word of God. The thing commanded
concerning them, is Note the^, abstain from their company, excommunicate them,
put them from the society of the godly, exclude them out of the Church of God.
First in this verse we have their disobedience; next the punishment that should
be enjoined to them. I will not speak largely of excommunication, but only so
much as serves for the meaning of the text. As to their disobedience, we have
first against what thing it is. What is it they disobey? They that obeyes not
our saying. This disobedience is against the doctrine of the Apostle Paul, and
so, consequently, against God himself and his word; the word of the Apostles is
the word of God. Let not men extenuate their disobedience, because (as they
say) it is against a man, a minister: I say to thee, if that man be sent of God
with his word in his mouth that disobedience done against him is done against
God, and he who is a rebel to the word is a rebel to God. Now where is this
saying contained? He says, in this letter. This saying is co^^ained-in this
same Epistle, written to you Thessalonians, by me Paul, Syluanus and Timotheus.
It is alike to be disobedient to the writ as to the word of the Apostle, as
great disobedience it is that is against the writ of the Apostle, as if ye
disobeyed the same Apostle, supponing he were alive: and disobedience against
the writ and speaking of the Apostle, is disobedience against Gods own voice.
Therefore, count of the Scripture highly. They have, says Abraham to the
rich-glutton in torment, Luke 16. 29. 30. 31. Moses and the Prophets, and if
they will not hear Moses, though one should be raised again from dead, they
would not believe him. Some will say, If the Lord would speak to me by Angels
out of Heaven as he did oft-tymes of old, then I would believe. But that is
but folly, if thou believe not this same word left in writ by the Prophets and
Apostles, if all the Angels would come out of Heaven and speak to thee, thou
would not believe them. Now mark the nature of this disobedience. It is not a
single disobedience against any precept or point of doctrine: No, but it is a
disobedience with an obstinatnesse and rebellion: as a man is admonished to do
his duty once, or ofter, yet he will not do it, but rebels and refuses
obstinatly. Therefore take up the lesson. We see, Excomcation proceeds of
contumacy, of obstinatnesse after admonition, not of a simple sin, when men
are admonished to do their duty and then will not do it, but obstinatlie
will rebel, if he will not hear the Church, then follows the sentence of
Excommunication. Matt. 18. 17. Let him be to thee as an heathen man, and as a
publican.

Now I come to the punishment of this disobedience. It is Excommunication. 2.
Parts of exco^mucation.
It consists of two parts. The first in this word, note him. The second is
the word follovving, have no company with him. Note him, that is, mark him
with the note of ignominy and shame, Give him over into the hands of Satan.
1. Cor. 5. 5. Put him out of the Church, 1. Noting of the disobedient.
and then he falls in the hands of Satan; and that is the note of shame to be
in his hands. Brethren, a man should not be stamped and marked lightly thus
way, for it is a sore mark. But, again, when a man cannot be win but by a
shameful mark, then this mark should not be spared: for, that is
preposterous pity; if necessity drives the Church to note him, then shame
him to his own face: for, better it is, to suffer shame here in this world
for a time, then to suffer shame and pain without hope everlastingly. Shame
him, that he may turn and repent and that in that great day he may be saved.
Now well is the man that is shamed to his own grace that he may repent him of
his sin and so live for ever. 2 Forbearing of his company.
The second part of punishment is have no comapny with him, when once he is
stamped with that ignominious mark, leave him, have not ado with him, 1. Cor.
5. 9. for, bearing of company with him taks away the force and fear of the mark
which should be to his repentance: for, if men forbear his company, he would be
ashamed, when company is kept, he hes no shame, and al power of
Excommunication is taken away, so, his repentance is stayed, and so, he is
hardened in his sin. But, gettest thou any good of his company that scarres not
at the mark? None I assure thee: for, thou inuoluest thy self in his
judgment: for, ipso facto thou excommunicatst thy self* But, brethren, ye must
not take this so generally, as though he should have no company at al; no, let
him have company, but such as he cannot want; the excommunicate person must
have some company, otherwise he cannot be in the world, if it were but this
company that can exhort him and admonish him; necessity craves that he have
this company, that he bide not still in the bonds of Satan; only here is to
be understood, company that is not needful, company to pass his time with,
that is slanderous and will foste* him in his folly. There are the two parts of
this excommunication, first marking him with a note of ignominy; then second,
forbearing company with him, as this text marks them.

Now the end of it is, that he may be ashamed. The word in the own language
signifies, The end of excommunication.
the turning of a man within himself. There are many that hes their eyes upon
others outwith themselves to mark their sins, but what man looks within himself
to see what is there, to ripe up their vileness and filthiness, their
rebellion and disobedience, and hatred of God in their hearts? will thou that
art so quick in other men's doings, forgette what thou art thy self? go
down to thy own heart and affections, for thou will not bear the burdeene of
other men's sins, but of thy own sins, that seeing thy own filthiness and
vyldnesse thou may think shame of thy self. The turning of a man, is to look
down to his own heart. If men saw themselves (o, fie on the sight: for all the
vylde and filthy things in this world that ever man saw or felt, the heart of
man is the vyldest, if thou saw it as it is) I say, if thou saw thy self, that
sight of thy self would make thee forget all the world, and remember thy self:
then, seeing thy self thou would be ashamed of thy self. O thou who now art so
lusty in thy own conceit, if thou saw thy self thou would hang down thy head
for shame! and then, shame brings forth some fruit, albeit it be bitter, it
bringes out repentance, and repentance brings with it salvation. 2. Cor. 7. 11.
So then, the end of excommunication is repentance, that a man may get life and
salvation. 1. Cor. 5 5. Deliver him to Satan, that the Spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus. Now how is this repentance gotten? by what means?
by thinking shame of himself, shame is the mean. No, if an excommunicate man
think not shame of himself, I cannot say that he repents thought he never
shame of his sin? he never repented from his heart, and no repentance, no
salvation. Paul 2. Corint. 2. 11. speaking of that incestuous man, he settes
down another mean, sadness or sorrovve, that is according to God. Join
shame and sadness in an excommunicate person, they will bring out repentance,
he will begin to forthinke that ever he should have done as he hes done:
well vvorth that shame and sadness that bringes out true repentance and
salvation. Alas, what matter of shame and sadness for a short time here that
we may rejoice thereafter in the Heavens with our head Jesus Christ for ever.
I read 1. Cor. 5. 5. 6. of two ends and uses of Excommunication. The one is,
the salvation of the person excommunicate: for he is cutted off not to be lost,
but to be saved. The other is, the vvelfaire of the body, that is, the Church,
that that piece of leaven sovvre not the whole lump. Indeed it is true in
Excommunication regard should be had to the well and salvation of the person
that is excommunicate, but the chief regard should be to the well of the
Church and whole body, in such sort, that, if the Church cannot be safe, but
by the cutting off of the rotten member, rather ere the body be infected, let
the member perish. Paul Romans 9. 3. wished to be Anathema, that is to be cutted
off the body for ever, that it might be well with the body, for his
brethren the Jews, to have them saved he wished to be condemned. There
should be such a love and such a care of the Church of Christ, that it should
be far above and should surmount the care of any particulare man or woman.
Our chief care should be of the glory of God in Jesus Christ, and he is
cheeflie glorified in the body, and therefore, a chief care should be had of
the body.

Now, to come to the last verse. Yet, says he, count him not as an enemy,
but, admonish him, as a brother. In this verse, we have a kind of mitigation
and tempering of the rigor and severity of Excommunication: for, brethren, if
Excommunication had the own force in any man, the stroke of Excommunication
would be the sorest stroke, that ever one felt. Read 2. Cor. 2. 7.
Excommunication threw the incestuous person in such an heavy displesure, that
his soul was almost svvallovved up with in him: for, when once the soul is
casten in an heigh displeasure, which is the effect of Excommunication, then,
the devil is ready to bring that man to dispare. Therefore, he says here,
verse 7. Forgive him and comfort him: for, we are not ignorant of the
enterprises of Satan. It is marvelous, that sin blinds men so, that many cares
no more to be excommunicate, then if excommunication were the lightest thing in
the world. There is such a deadnes and senslesnes in the hearts of men, that
there is no displeasure now for sin, but, rather, a delight and rejoicing in it.
Certainly, the less sense of the sharpness of that sword of Excommunication,
the greater misery. If there were any displeasure for sin in thee, it were
an argument that, there were help for thee; but if thou bide senseless at that
ordinance of God, if thou be hardened against the word and discipline both shall
turn to thy destruction. But, when God is powerful with in thee with it (for,
as God is powerful with the Word, so is he powerful by the Discipline) then,
it shall turn to thy well and salvation. Therefore, seeing there is such a
force in it, mitigation is very meet for it. Now here the way how it is
mitigate, Count him not as an enemy: The next, admonish him as a brother. The
first of these touches the inward thought, the second concerns thy outward
speaking to him. The first is, lose not a good opinion of him, hate him not,
lightly him not, as though he were a conjurde enemy against Christ and his
Church, but love him, lose not the love in thy heart toward him, but, love him,
as a brother. Now, loving him in thy heart, speak to him also, think him not
unworthy of any speaking, but, flatter him not in his folly and humor, for,
that will hurt him: for, if thou love him, thou will not, nor thou ought not to
flatter him: But, I tell thee what thou shall do, admonish him both sharply
and lovingly, true admonition commes from the love of the heart, and whom we
love, we admonish: but, yet admonition must be so loving, that it must be
sharp also, and so it is effectual in the heart of the sinner. Now loving him
first, and admonishing him next, is the way to win him, and to bring him home
again, who hes gone astray. And if he be curable, certainly admonition will
do the turn; if admonition will not do the turn, nor, will not move him,
alas, brethren, it is over sure an argument, that, that man is incurable, and
that the Lord hes not ordeinde him for salvation: If the Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them, that perishes, says the Apostle 2. Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel will
not work, it is over sure an argument of perdition, whereunto, long before
they were ordained, as Jude says, 4. verse. Therefore, let a man suspect
himself when he is admonished and obeyes not; and let him say, shall I be for
damnation? The Lord save me* and mollify my stony heart, that I may give
obedience to the word well: give obedience to wholesome admonition, that by man
is given thee out of the word of God, as thou would have a sure warrant, thou
art of the number of those, that are appointed to salvation.

Mark again. Nature and use of Excommunication.
He will not have him called an enemy, but a brother. This lets us see the
nature and use of Excommunication: of a brother it makes not an enemy; he is
now a brother ere he be Excommunicate, and being Excommunicate he remains a
brother. That which was a member of Jesus Christ before Excommunication makes
it not altogether to perish, neither cuts it so the rotten member from the
body, that it shall have no more ado with the body, of a sheep it makes not
a goat, that is not the use of it; of a christian it makes not an unchristian,
he keeps his name. It shoots him not out of the Covenant of grace, God forbid,
but he stands in the bond, being Excommunicate. What does it then? I shall
tell you. A man that hes fallen from Christ, by sin (which seueres thee from
Christ) it binds him again, it bringes him in repentance, and calls him home
again being wandering from God, it holds him within the Covenant: A man going
to be an enemy to Christ and his Church, it straits him to bide still a
brother. So it does him no evil, it is not ordained for his perdition, but,
for his well and salvation. This whole ministry of Jesus Christ and all the
parts of it. Preaching and Discipline, promises and consolation, and threatening
of judgment, and all the parts of Discipline, yea this Excommunication it
self, are al ordained to save souls, that is the proper use of the ministry,
to save all and never to lose one man. Therefore, in the 2. Cor. 10. 8. Paul
says, that, he got power to edification and not to destruction. Never
Minister got power to destroy one body, but, to edify; and if any perish, if
the Word, or, Discipline be the savor of death to death, as, to many, it is,
let him not blame the word, but, let him blame himself: For, men by their
obstinacy and malice turns the word maliciously in an improper use, to their
destruction, and of the Spirit of life they make it the letter of death.
Therefore the Lord keep us from al slubbornnes and all repying against this
Word and Discipline: for I assure thee, repine thou against the Gospel and
Discipline, which should be the power of life to thee, it shall kill thee, thou
shall not need another to kill thee everlastingly? And therefore the Lord grant
every soul submission under the word of God, which is the mean that he hes
ordeind to salvation in Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and holy Spirit
be al praise for ever.

AMEN.
THE FOVRTENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
2. THESSA. CHAP. 3. verse. 16. 17. 18. 16 Now the Lord of peace give you peace
alvvayes by all means. The Lord be with you all.

17 The salutation of me Paul with my ovvvne hand, which is the token in
every Epistle: so I write,

18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen.


IN this text, brethren, we have the end and conclusion of this Epistle, it
consistes wholly in prayer. First he wishes peace to them from the Lord of
peace for ever, every way. Then he wishes to them the presence of the Lord
himself to be with them all. Last he salutes them, and the effect of the
saluatation is a prayer for them. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all,
Amen. So all consistes in prayer. Then learn. He began this Epistle with
prayer and salutation: throughout the whole Epistle prayer is mingled: Now in
the end he multiplies prayer. What means this? Even this, that in vain is all
doctrine, exhortation, admonition, and precept whatsomouer, all preaching is
nothing, except the Lord by his Spirit work inwardly in the hearts of the
hearers, all is nothing but vvinde, except he move their affections. Now the
way to obtain this inward and secreete operation of the holy Spirit, is
oft-tymes to turn to God by prayer, beseeching him to be powerful, and to
join his Spirit with the word, and to join vvorking with speaking. And
therefore how often so ever we teach and ye hear, the heart and eye should be
lifted up, and set upon him who hes kept Spirit and power in his own hand to
give as he pleases: No man can give you it, neither the Preachour, nor no
Angel can give you it. It is only in the hand of God and Jesus Christ to give
thee Spirit and power, and to join vvorking with speaking. And therefore
the eye in preaching should ever be set on Christ. The Pastor should pray and
have his heart above to dravve down grace to himself and the people, that the
word spoken may be effectual in the heart, otherwise, preaching and all
hearing is in vain.

Now to come to the words. The first thing he prays for and wishes, is peace.
The Lord of peace, says he, give you peace for ever and every way. The thing
then he wishes is peace, that is quyetnes, rest and tranquillity, concord and
agreement all these words expresses the meaning of the word Peace. The contrare
is, unquietness, What peace is.
dissension, etc. This Peace is the blessedness felicity and happy estate of
Christ's kingdom, which is his Church, both in earth and Heaven: And all the
graces we have in Jesus Christ tends to this end, that, his subjects may live
in peace, quietness, and joy, for ever: and that shall be the end, when we are
in Heaven, peace and joy for ever. Ye see, the happy estate of a worldly
kingdom, what is it? When men lives in rest, and enjoyes peace and quyetnes,
that is the happiness of a worldly knigdom: therefore, in the 1. Timot. 2. 2. he
commaundes prayer to be made for all men, For Kings and superior powers. To
what end? Even to this same end, that, we may live a peaceable and quiet life.
Even so, the blessed and happy estate of Christ's kingdom, is, an heavenly
peace, concord and quietness. And therefore, Romans 14. 17. he makes this peace
to be essential to the kingdom of God, that he defines it, by this peace,
saying. The kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost.
This Heavenly peace is only in Christ's kingdom, in his Church, in Heaven and
earth. And the subjects of the kingdom of Jesus Christ are only they that
enjoyes this peace here, and after this life for ever: for, without the Church
of Christ, there is no true peace: If thou be no subject in his kingdom, thou
have no rest, no true peace: for, there is no true peace for the wicked, says
the Prophet Esaias 57. 21. If thou be of that number that is without the kingdom
of Christ, no peace for thee, and the end shall prove, thou had never true
peace in this world.

Now, to go forward. He craves, that, it may be given to them: Then, Peace the
gift of god
it is a gift. Heavenly peace is the gift of God; thou have it not by nature:
None is borne with peace, but with war and inimitie, by nature all are borne
with dissension, strife and debate, there is no heavenly peace, by nature. And
the whole life natural, what is it, but a continuance in war, debate, and
strife: first, against God; next with thy self and thy own conscience? And
again, a strife against the Angels in Heaven and men on earth, and all the
creatures of God; thou art an enemy to them, and they unto thee, until the
time thou attain to that new birth in Jesus Christ; and then, by virtue of
that birth, thou getst this heavenly and spiritual peace: for, then, thou
beginst to live at peace, first, with God himself, and next, with the Angels
in Heaven, and men in earth and with all his creatures. So, look how needful
it is, for thee, to have regeneration: for, if thou want it, thou shall be at
war for ever, thou shall have no peace. But how getst thou it? It is a gift.
And who should give it? The Lord of peace. The giver of it must be the Lord,
with dominion and power, with command. And as under his Lordship other things
must be, so peace must be at his command, either to give it, or, hold it. Now,
who is this Lord that hes this power of peace and war? Who is he that says,
All power is given to me in heaven and earth Matt. 2^ 18. This Lord is Jesus
Christ. And therefore, ere ever he came in this world and took on him our
nature. Esaias 9. 6. he styles him the Prince of peace. And Paul Ephesians. 2. 14
styles him peace it self, he is our peacemaker And in John 14. 27. Christ
speaking to his Apostles takes on him to be the giver of peace, and says, My
peace I leave to you, and gives you. So this Lord of peace is the Lord Jesus
Christ, who hes in his hands all grace and glory, in Heaven and in earth.

Yet to go forward. The lords style answer able to the grace (...) prayer.
Why is it that he makes a choice of this style rather then of any other?
Certainly this style he receives here agrees with the petition and thing asked
at his hands: peace is craved, he is styled the Lord of peace: what ever we
ask of Christ it should be in faith that he hes power to give it: ask i^ thou
peace, ask it not but in an assurance that it is in his hand, and that he is
able to give it. Now this assurance that all is in his hand, it cannot be
better uttered then by the Name and style we give him: ask thou wisdom?
say, Lord of wisdom give wisdom: ask thou peace? say, Lord of peace give
me peace: ask thou mercy? say, Lord of mercy give me mercy. So the name and
style we give to the Lord when we crave ought at his hands should be answerable
to the grace and mercy we ask: for then we utter our faith and assurance that
he hes such a grace and power to give us. This hes been the form of Paul's
prayer, and of godly men of old, and should be imitate by us. The Lord hes many
styles, he is called the Lord of peace, mercy and justice, the Lord of glory.
There is not a Monarch that prydes himself in honorable styles and names, that
is comparable with the great Creator the Lord of the world, yea set them
altogether all are nothing in comparison with him, because all are his, all
grace, power and dominion in Heaven and earth is his; and therefore look by how
many graces his Majesty hes spread it self through Heaven and earth, look how
many graces he hes in his hand to give, so many several and honorable styles
may he receive, there is no end of his glory, nor no end of his Names: from his
wisdom he is called the Lord of wisdom; from his justice the Lord of justice;
from his mercy the Lord of mercy; from his peace the Lord of peace; from his
glory the Lord of glory.

Now to go forward. Two properties of peace. 1. It is everlasting
There are two properties given to this peace. The first, It is for ever,
alvvayes, it is not for a time only, but for all times: It is not for this
life only, but for the life to come. This worldly peace serves but for this
life only, but the peace of Jesus Christ serves for the life everlasting. The
peace of God is not peace in prosperity only, but in adversity also. It is
not peace in life only, but in death also. And therefore Symen. in his song
when he had seen Jesus, he says, Now Lord, (...) depart in peace. Luke 2.
29. the servant of God as he lived in great peace, so also departed in peace:
so this peace lastes for ever. And therefore Esaias 9. 7. when he hes called him
the Prince of peace, he says, the largeness of his dominion and increase of
his (...) at and peace shall have no end: his kingdom is an endless kingdom,
and there is an endless peace in that kingdom. I called this peace our
blessedness. Now this is the nature of blessedness, it cannot be bounded
within any terms: if it be true selicitie bound it not, compass it not within
a year, within twenty years, or within a thousand, yea within ten thousand
years: for the nature of true blessedness is everlasting. And therefore ye
see worldly men that places their happiness in worldly peace will dream an
eternity, and perpetuity to that peace of theirs, that neither they nor their
peace will have an end. That rich man in the Gospel, Luke 12. 19. said to his
soul, Live at ease, eat and drink, and take thy pastime, thou have store
laid up for many years: trow ye not but he thought to live for ever, and
thought that that abundance should abide with him for ever? and so faires it
with all worldlings, they dream a rest and peace for ever, but the end will
prove that they were dreaming all their days. Therefore Lord set our hearts on
that peace of Jesus Christ that lastes for ever. This is then the first
property of this peace of his; It lasts for ever. The second property of it
is It is (...) of way. It is peace in all respects, not in one respect only
nor in some respects only, 2. It is in all respects
but in every respect. I shall make this plain. The peace of Jesus Christ is
peace in respect of God, when our souls stands in friendship with him, when
we are reconceiled to him by the blood of Jesus, as it is said. Rom 5. 1. Being
justified by faith we have peace toward God. Then it is peace in respect of
our selves, an evil conscience is an evil enemy, when thou stryuest not
against thy own affections but satisfies them, then thy conscience will let
thee get little rest, it will ay be accusing thee: but when once this peace of
Jesus be given thee, so that thou beginst to be regenerate, and to lead an holy
and sanctified life, then thy conscience rests, and thou beginst to enjoy a
joyful peace in thy soul. Philipp. 4. 7. The peace of God that passes all
understanding preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus: and Col. 3. 15.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts. And again, it is peace in respect of
the creatures of God, with Angels in Heaven, with men on earth (man is enemy
to man by nature) then having this peace thou art at peace with Heaven and
earth, man and Angel: for all are enemes to thee so long as thou art outwith
Jesus Christ, we are enemies to them all, and they all to us: but being in
Christ all things are reconciled to us, in heaven and earth. Ephesians. 1. 10. Col.
1. 20. so in all respects it is peace. Look how many sorts of enimities was,
as many sorts of peace must be; we are enemies to God, to our own conscience,
to Angels and men, yea, and that that is most conjoined to us by nature, be it
blood, asfinitie, or any other bond; if there be no more but nature, there is
nothing but enimitie; the conjunction of man and woman, if there be no more but
their natural bond is enimity; the parents and the children without this
spiritual peace of Jesus are at enimitie. So, look how many sorts of enimitie
there is, there are as many sorts of peace, and our blessedness stands in
this peace. Now look the nature of it. As blessedness must endure for ever,
so our blessedness must be perfect. If thou have that peace of Jesus, thou must
have it in all respects: if thou have peace with God, thou have peace with all
men, so far as lies in thee: (Rom 12. 18.) otherwise, thou have no true peace
with God. Men oft-tymes beguyles themselves. I will have peace with God, will
he say, and yet, I shall be this man, or that man's enemy, I shall slay him:
folly, folly; if thou glory in debate with man and does not that lies into thy
power, to be at peace with all men, thou shall have no peace with God: that
thing which the Lord joins, severe not thou, the Lords peace is with all: if
thou severe it and pride thee in enimitie with any, thou shall not have peace
with God, nor with thy self. What peace hes a murderer with God, or with his
own conscience? Ask at him, I demand thee, o murderer, knew thou what that
peace of God means, when that bloody affection raged and carried thee to
blood? Thou look for friendship with God, folly, thou art neither at
friendship with God, nor his Angels, nor none of his creatures. It is a wonder,
that the Heavens falls not on thee. The earth is thy enemy, and it is a
vvonder that it swallows thee not up for all that blood that thou have shed on
it, but once it shall present it to thy damnation, if thou repent not. This far
concerning prayer for peace.

I go to the next words. The Lord be with you all. He goes to a deeper
ground. Before he wished the grace of the Lord Jesus to them. Now he vvishes
the Lord himself to them, the presence of Jesus Christ in his own person, not
only that he shall be with them in his grace and vertevv, but also that he
may be with them in his own presence and person, which is more then the
first. Then thou must not be content to pray for the benefits of Christ, but
the chief ihing we ought to pray for to Christ is, Lord give me thy self,
give me thy presence in thy own person: for if we get any good of him it
must be by himself, he must give himself to us. In one word, the first
conjunction we must have with him must be with his own person, he must be
our head, and we the members of his body: My hand will not be the better of
any power or virtue in my head, if my hand be not joined with my head; the
first thing then my hand must have, must be a conjunction with the head, and so
of the rest of the members of the body, and then the conjunction being made
with the head, the virtue goes down from the head and is scatred through all the
members of the body. It is even so with Christ Jesus before we get grace or
life out of him, motion spiritual out of hi, peace out of him (he is full of
grace) first that sweet conjunction must be made betvveene him and us, he must
be conjoined with us in a more strate conjunction then the members with the
head. And therefore he goes to the ground of all peace the Lord Jesus, that he
may stand with them, and they may be conjoined with him their head.

Now he prays for this presence to them all: not to one member, to two or
three, but to all and every one of them. Then mark. The Lord Jesus is a
sufficient head and Savior for all the world, none being excepted, all
sufficiency is in him, he may serve to be the head to all the world, yea to a
thousand worlds, his presence is so ample that he may suffice to be a Savior
to a thousand worlds; yea, to an infinite number of worlds. Paul knevv this
that he is not like an earthly king, whose presence serves but for so many,
and is contained within narrow bounds, and therefore he prays for peace to
all. Now if thy head and Savior be so ample, thy heart should not be narrovve,
nor thy mouth narrovve: but as Jesus is a sufficient head for all, so let thy
heart desire his presence to all the world, if so it should be possible. And as
for my self, I vvishe there were none but that they were partakers of this
presence of Jesus Christ: For, why should we seek the vvreak of any
creature? yet the Lord hes his own, and none will get his presence but they
that are his. O, well is that body who is predestinate to life, for that
body must have his presence, he will be an head and Savior to him! But that
body that is predestinat to destruction cannot have his presence; yet we are
bound to vvish his presence to every one.

Now he commes to the salutation, and says, The salutation of me Paul with
my own hand. Then he subjoines the form of it The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. He began with a salutation after his common form, and now he
ends with a salutation. His first meeting with them was by a salutation, the
end of his conference is by a salutation. Then look what example of his doing
should learn us: for as we are bound to obey the doctrine of the Prophets, so
we are bound to follow their fashion of doing: Paul saluted, salute thou. The
thing then I note here is this, In all the meetinges and conferences of the
faithful, either by word, presence, or vvritte, there should be a mutual
benevolence, and an intere love and affection; that as ye see the bodies of men
meet together, so the hearts may meet together joined in kyndnesse and
benevolence: Will thou meet in body and hold thy heart aback, that is, vvilt
thou have the half man meeting, and not the whole man? That is no meeting: for
the meeting should be of the whole man, body and heart: and this should be
uttered all manner of way, in thy gesture, in thy doing, salutatio^s of
christians would be testimonies of their love.
in thy speaking, and all the words of thy conference should smell of love:
Among all other things that testifies of love, this salutation is one, when
thou bidst him good morrow, good night, it is a testification of thy well
willingness and of thy love toward the man: and this hes been the form of the
godly, their meeting hes been with a salutation; and their sending with a
salutation, that if they could not have a byding together here, by their
mutual salvation they might abide together: for all the members that are true
members in Jesus Christ, are joined together in their spirits* hearts and
affections, this exemple we should follow. This manner of doing nowadayes is
counterfaite: Men will seem to salute other gladly, and yet the hearts will be
wishing the worst: in hearts they are enemies to other, and so commonly al their
doings, becking, and off-cap, and good days; both all their words and deeds
are fained. Look therefore what ever thou do, do it in sincerity: for the
Lord hears and sees all, and if thou do fainedly, the Lord shall judge thee
for it in that day.

He says, he wrote this salvation with his own hand. The whole Epistle
before Paul hes dyted, and appearantly another hes written it. Now when it
commes to the subscription, Paul subscryues it with his own hand. Now
wherefore was this? The cause appears to be that before this time there raise
up deceivers that stole in wrytings under the name of Paul, as appears in the
2. chap. 2. verse, be not deceived, says he, etc. And therefore to let them
know what was his, and what was not his, he subscryues with his own hand. This
hes been an old practick of Satan, ever to corrupt Christ's Church, both by word
and counterfaiting of writ, and all manner of way, and this same day we see
the experience of it in the Roman Church. Satan by (...) instruments
cou^terfaits holy writs.
Now to the end that false writtes may be trowed the better, look the craft of
the devil, he hes in his instruments stolen in books written under the name
of Prophets and Apostles, to the intent that the people reading the name of a
Prophet or Apostle should give credit to the writ. Papistrie is full of
deceit, and the chief grounds of their doctrine is Apocryphe-books which hes
been stolen in under the names of holy men* Now look what hes been the mercy
of God, he sees this well eneugh. Therefore it pleased him to imprint a mark
in his holy writ, whereby it should be known to be authentike Scripture, as
in this place he subscryues with his own hand, which was not without the
providence of God: for there is not a part of Scripture but the Lord hes
stamped it with such a sure stamp, that is, with such a Majesty in speaking,
with such gratiousnesse and spiritualnesse, both in words and matter, that they
that hes a spiritual eye to discern between light and darkness will take it
up to be of God. I pray you tell me, how was the old Scripture taken up to be
of God? The Papist will say, because the Church said it they were of God. Is
that all the warrant? And who told the Church? If the old and new Scripture
bare not the marks of the Spirit in themselves the Church had never taken them
up to be of God? So the mark of the Scripture is that stamp of the Spirit,
that Majesty in such a simplicity of words: that gratiousnesse and power
which shows both in the words and matter, these things tells us they are not
man's writs: for, men's writtes hes not the gratiousnesse and power that is in
the Scripture. Brethren, this mark of Paul's subscription is away, albeit we
have the Epistle, but a better mark bydes, the stamp of the Lord bydes, and
this tells that it is the Scripture of God and Paul's writing.

Now follows the salvation. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all. I see the affection of the man in the end of his writ is powered out on
this Church of Thessalonica, and when he takes his leave, he burstes out in
frequent prayer, and al his prayer is for heavenly and spiritual things.
Then, first, we learn, we must not ever bide al together, and we cannot have
ever conference either by word or writ. But, how is our sundring recompensed?
To wit, with greatness of affection, let thy love grow. And how shall thou
utter it? In prayer to God, for them, with whom thou may not dwell: affection
is nothing worth without prayer. And what should we pray for? Especially for
heavenly things: Pray for heavenly peace, for the presence of Jesus Christ,
and that the grace of Christ may be with him: Pray also for things earthly, but
so that they may further him to heavenly things. And I say, the man that
cannot pray for heavenly things cannot pray truly for earthly things. Dare
thou pray, if thou seek not first the kingdom of Heaven? no, thou cannot
pray, if it were for thy dinner, except thou pray first for the kingdom of
God. Now the next word is grace, that is free favor of God. I read not of
such a commendation of any people as of these Thessalonians. He commended them
in both these Epistles, from their faith, hope, love, and all the duties of
love. Yet, he says not, The Lord render you a reward for your merit; but* he
says grace be with you. This is contrare to all merit. Read the 2. Timo. 1*
16. there ye will find a very notable exemple to this purpose. There he says,
Onesiphorus was very beneficial to me, he often refreshed me, he thought no
shame of my bonds: he sought (...) Rome very diligently. How should he be
requyted for this? He says, The Lord grant that Onesiphorus may find mercy
with the Lord at that day: He is but a miserable man when he hes done all
this: And therefore this shall be my prayer for him: for it will not be his
merit that will do him good, but it is the free grace and favor of God. O
fool, all thy merits shall stink in that great day, and then thou shall see
what free grace shall do: for in that day none shall stand, but such as stands
by free grace.

Now whose grace is it he prays for? It is Jesus Christ's: No, there is no
grace but Christ's grace. How is it the Lord Jesus Christ's? He hes boght of the
hand of the Father all grace, al gifts of the holy Spirit, all glory in Heaven
and earth with a price, even the price of his precious blood. And therefore
the Father hes given him all. So there is no spark of grace given to any
creature, but it must come through Christ his hand, even the hand of the man
Jesus. All righteousness, sanctification, and glory must come from him, he
must be the giver thereof. Therefore it is said, he gave gifts to men. Ephesians.
4. 8. The Father gives no graces immediately, but all are given through the hand
of Jesus Christ. Therefore let us have recourse to this Lord of grace, and
seek not to the Father without him, but seek all from the Father in him. Now
how far should this grace extend? Even as Jesus Christ is an head that extends
himself to al, so the grace that commes from him is sufficient for all: it is
sufficient if it were for a thousand, yea infinite worlds. Romans 5. 15. The
Heavens are not capable of the greatness of the grace of Jesus Christ: Greatness
of the grace of Christ.
so that if there were a thousand worlds, there is sufficiency of grace in him
for them all: There is no inlack in him, but the inlack is in thy narrow heart;
it is capable but of a very small portion. Learn here then by the exemple of
Paul that we should not have narrow hearts to wish this grace to a few, but we
should wish it to be given to all. Look what he says of himself, 2. Cor. 6.
11. My meuth, says he, hes been vvyde open unto you, my heart is dilated, ye
dvvell not narrovvly in my heart. So all men should have an open and a dilated
heart in wishing grace: spare not to be liberal in wishing, fill thy heart and
mouth with his grace, and (...) with liberalnesse to others: seek that grace
of Jesus to all, that, if it were possible, all the world might be saved: For
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will that
all men shall be saved, and come unto the acknovvledging of the truth. 1. Tim.
2. chap. 3. 4. verse. Yet the Lord hes his own, and so many as he hes written
in his book shall be saved. Therefore thou should seek all the warrands thou
can to assure thee that thou art Jesus Christ's fore-ordeinde to life
everlasting: for if thou be of the number of the elect, the grace of Christ
shall extend to thee, and thou shall have glory with him for ever. To this
Jesus be all praise, honor and dominion, for ever and ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.

