A Letter lately written from Rome, by an Italian Gentleman, to a freende of
his in Lions in France.

Wherein is declared, the state of Rome: The sudden death and sollemne
burial of Pope Gregory the thirteenth. The election of the new Pope, and the
race of life this new Pope ran before he was advanced. Thereto are
adjoined the accidents that have fallen out, not only in Rome, but in Naples
and other parts of the world also.

Newely translated out of Italian into English by I. F.

Jmprinted at London by John Charlewoode dwelling in Barbican, at the half
Eagle and the Key. 1585.

To the Right excellent and Honorable Lord, Henry Earl of Darby, Lord
Stanley, and Strange: Lord of Man, and Th'Isles, one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Lancaster, and
Chester, and of the City of Chester, and knight of the noble order of the
Garter. I. F. wishes all happiness.
IF the testimony of a duetiful mind, might prove a sufficient counterpeise
to a benefit, I might now (right Honorable) discharge the band, where with I
am so deeply indebted to your honor: But because I am not able with words,
to match so high and honorable deeds, I am contented to remain a debtor
still. For as the magnificence of Carthage was so great, that such as have gone
about to lift it up with commendation, were suddenly stopped and enforst to
confess, they had rather say nothing, then say too little. So when I consider
the excellency of your calling, the nobility of your blood, and the virtues
wherein you shine, though I be desirous to give a taste of your praises unto the
world, yet finding my sight too weak to stare upon such a sun, I am co^pelde
to turn away my face and give it over. Nevertheless, knowing it to be the
part of a Princely cou^sellour, to have an eye in the head of every common
weal, I have presumed to publish these news of foreign parts in your honors
name, and so much the rather, because I find in your honor the disposition of
Panthoidas, who being sent Ambassador into Asia, regarded not their goodly and
sumptuous buildings, the rich ornaments of their houses, and such other
pleasant shows, but rather endeavored himself to learn their policies, their
government, their customs, their Laws and proceedings, the manner of placing
of their battle, the order of their fight, with such like enquiries worthy a
Noble man, whose notable steps your Lordship in your honorable last Embassage
did honorably follow: to the perpetual eternising of your honors ancient
and noble name, and the perfect contentation of both their Majesty's.

Thus being loathe to be too tedious, I leave these nouels to your honors
consideration, until time shall yield better, and better worthy your
honorable view. Till when and ever wholly dedicating my self to your honor,
I wyshe your honor all felicity, and grace. The 29. of June 1585.

Your Honors most humble and dutiful to command. John Florio.

A Declaration of News written from Rome, and from other parts of the world.
IT has peradventure (my well-beloved Sir) seemed strange unto you, that I have
been so long without writing unto you, to inform you of the state of these
countries, as you with many prayers entreated me, and with your sundry
courtesies and favors bound me to do, whilst passing that ways, you
entertained me so freendly in your fathers house: and who knows, whether you
have conceived some sinister opinion of me? How be it, I have no more forgot
you in mind then I could or would my own brother: Which thing if for my mishap
it should happen, or have happened, I beseech you for that dear freendships
sake, that always has been between your house and mine, that you will
utterly cancel, and think that my long silence, has rather been occasioned
of my sundry, and weighty affairs, then of any other cause whatsoever, which
unlooked for, have so greatly hindered me since my coming home, that I could
not discharge that duty in effect toward you, which the love I bear you,
and your courtesies binds me to. Wherefore I pray you not only to accept
this as a lawful excuse, but as the bare truth, which doing, you shall
increase my affection toward you more and more, Know you therefore, that
howbeit I have not written unto you, I have not omitted to note daily the
acccidentes, and all things worthy of memory, that have happened not only in
this City of Rome, but also in others abroad, as they have either been
written or reported unto us, as by this my letter, if your leisure permit you
to read it, you may perceive, which shall not seem long unto you, since that
it contains ye sturres happened for the space of two months in diverse parts
of the world, all things of great importance, and worthy to be read, and
noted of you, who do not follow the example of many others, who spend the
greater part of their time in reading of that which has been done many
years ago, and are altogether ignorant of those things which daily happen in
this our age. Know you therefore, that twenty days after my departure from
you, which was upon the the sixth day of April last, thanks be given to the
Lord, I arrived safe and sound in this City, where I found Pope Gregory the
13, of that name somewhat ill at ease, but so little, that neither he nor any of
his friends made any account of it, but the third night following being ye
ninth of the foresaid month, there descended a rume down into his breast,
with such violence, that in two hours it dispatched him. Whose death, as it
was unto his friends altogether unexpected and sudden, so was it unto them
all most grievous, but especially unto his sons most domageable, for it is to
be presupposed, that if he had perceived any likelihood of death in himself,
he would so have ordered his affairs, yt they should not after his death
have been in those troubles, wherein by reading of this my letter, you shall
perceive them to be. Yet was not his death so grievous unto the greatest number
of the Cardinals, unto whom it seemed that he had possessed the seat too long,
and that it was more then time for him to give place to others, aspiring to
that dignity. I have spoken of the Popes son in the singular number which
may peradventure seem strange unto you, because yt he, besides the Lord
Giacomo, who^ he had before he was cardinal, by him made Duke of Sora (which
Duchy lies in the kingdom of Naples and he with his money and favor bought
of the King of Spain) as I am truly informed, he had another in the third
year of his Popedom, by a fair country wench, that he kept for his own
tooth at Frascato, a place of sollace, not many miles distant from this city,
very pleasant and beautiful, which son was called Lord Philip Buon compagni,
which lived not above 4. year, or there about, of who^ if well you remember, at
my last being with you, I had some communication with your cousin, who said yt he
was ye Popes son, and I answered that Lord Giacomo was his father, for so it
was reported, and given forth at his birth, after which, presently he was
carried to his house, who to take that skandall and slander from his father,
that might have ensued thereby, was contented to father him, upon which thing
was made this Pasquil, which not yet three weeks since was given me by one of
his Courtiers, and because the invention thereof is pretty, and that I know
you take great pleasure in readyng of such devises, I have thought it good to
set it down here.

The Pasquill.
The makes of it fayneth, that Pasquine having prepared himself to fly from
Rome, meets by chance with Marforius, who entering into discourse with him,
says.

M. Pasquine whether go thou in such have?


P. I go to seek my fortune, for I will stay no longer here.


M. Alas, what do I here* and what is the cause that moves thee to forsake
thy dear and natural country?


P. Because there is no more religion here.


M. How many that be? and if there be no Religion here, where is there any
then?


P. That know not I, but well I wot, that the holy Trinity is nothing at all
accounted of here.


M. Alas for you, and where is it more manifestly known and openly professed
then hear? I dare take upon me to make thee confess, and say, that in no
place else so much as in this holy City.


P. I pray thee Marforius, do me that favor, as to make me perceive that,
which if thou do, I promise thee I will not forsake my country.


M. I would do it willingly, but I fear thou will but mock me, being a
thing so manifest that every one may see it, and feel it.


P. I will rather think my self beholding to thee then mock thee. wherefore I
pray thee proceed.


M. Is it possible that thou do not perceive in the Popes person the
representatio^ of the eternal father, and in the Lord Giacomo, that of Jesus
Christ his son, and in young Philip, begotten of the Pope, and fathered upon
L. Giacomo, that of the holy Ghost, proceeding both from the father and the
son?


P. Ha, Ha, Ha, by my faith thou say true. I must needs confess that the
Trinity is not so apparently known in any other place as it is in Rome, and
therefore I will even get me home again, and stay the event of the Roman
Trinity. And thus ends the Pasquill. But to come to my purpose again, where
I left, I say that commonly the day after ye Pope is dead, they are wont to
convey his carkas in a litter along Strasteuere, atte^ded on by his wonted
Guard of Swizers. and light horsemen to the Consistoriall chamber in Saint
Peter's Palace, where being Pontifically apparelled, al in white garments, even
as if he should celebrate the sacred service, he is laid upon the bear,
covered with a cloth of gold, and silk, with letters about it saying,
Gregorius 13. Pont. Max. and two Cardinals hats at his feet, and so he is left
until the evening, at which time the whole College of Cardinales being
assembled there, with all the Bishops and Prelates that then are in Rome, and
with all the Canons of Saint John Laterane, and of S. Peter with their richest
Coapes on, he is carried into the Popes Chapel before the high Altar, where
the Bishops, Prelates, and such people as be there do kiss his feet, after
which ceremony he is carried by the Canons of S. Peter's, and laid before the
Sacrament Chapel, his Pensioners going before with their Polares, the head
downward, accompanied with the Cardinals apparelled in Purple, (which makes a
goodly show) where being laid, the woonted funeral ceremonies unto the dead
carkas, are celebrated by one of the Canons of the said Church, after that he
is carried into S. Sixtus his Chapel, where for three days space he is left,
with his feet toward the grate, to the end, that those that list may kiss
his feet, he being attyred as I have said before, with many Torches burning
day and night about him, with a multitude of Priests tending on him, for fear
he should run away, Three days being ended, he is buried in the said Church,
where it pleases best his kinsmen, wh^^e nine days after continually, many
Torches are burning, for so long his funerals do last, and therefore they are
called Nouendalie, which imports, in English, nine days works. A very high
scaffolde in the form of a Piramides, being made in the midst of the Church,
covered all over with black cloth, with his arms round about, but without
the Keys, with letters, saying, Pope Gregory the 13. which Piramides is
vpheld by many pillars, under which does appear an Hearce, all covered with
cloth of gold, with coushins of the same, where every morning there is a Mass
sung by some Cardinal, created by the last Pope, which Mass being ended, he
with four Cardinals more in black Velvet robes, and the Subdeane having said
the Epistle, taking the cross in hand, the master of the ceremonies, and other
his officers assisting, all the other Cardinals following, they go about the
scaffold, or Piramides. The dead Popes whole household sitting about the same
upon fourmes all in mourning apparel, with burning torches in their hands,
some bigger then other some, according to the degrees of the men* at each
corner of the said scaffolde, is placed a stool covered with black, upon which
the four Cardinales in black Velvet do sit, and he that has sung Mass
sitting upon another stool, in the midst of that side that looks toward
the Altar. Then he that sits at the right hand, begins to give holly
water to the bear lying under the Key, and until such time as they have
agreed about the Popes election, they be so fast, that they can not by any
means come out. Many years since it was wont to be but one hall, divided
into so many little chambers, with hangings of Tapistrie, as there were
Cardinals, but considering that for want of room and and air, many dyed
before the election, there are now two great rooms, divided into more then
three score little chambers, each one of them being more then sixteen foot
square, every one of them having a little cabinet, or closet joined unto it,
for the Cardinales serving men to be in, before the Chambers there is a long
gallerie for the Cardinals to walk in. No Cardinal can bring in more then
three men, that is to say, a Secretary, a Gentleman, and a Chamberlain, who
so long as the election lasts can not by any means come out. All which
chambers are dressed as it follows. Those which pertain to the Cardinales
created by the last Pope, are hanged with purple, with all furnitures
pertaining to it of the same, as Bedsteds, Valences, Curtains, Couerlets,
Pillowes, Cushines, with silk fring of that color. There is in every chamber
a little table with a Purple Carpet to it, a little wooden lantern, a little
ladder to hang up the hangings, one high stool, and one low, which they carry
to the scrutine Chamber, a dust basket, a Chest with lock and key, and such
other necessaries in a Chamber, every thing covered with purple, with the
Cardinals arms upon them to whom they appertain. Al other Cardinals have
their chambers, and other implementes hanged, and covered with green, The
order how they are served in the Conclaue, so long as the election lasts is
this. Before the gate of the Conclaue, there is a fair room, where all the
Archbishops, and Bishops, that then are in Rome, do stand waiting at the
door by turns, day and night or as they are chosen by love, four of them
always ready to help, and do all such necessary business as the place, and
time requires, what occasion soever happen, changing every two hours. Their
Chambers being near the said place. About the gallarie of the Palace going
toward the new gate, are the Roman Barrons, and Lords attending, with two
gardes, one of Italians, the other of Swizers, who are to wait on the
Cardinales going into the Conclaue, or that by reason of infirmity come out,
together with the dead Popes light horsemen, and grooms of his stable, who
accompany them home to their lodgings. The order how the Gentlemen or Sewers
do serve the Cardinals their Lords is thus. At ye gate where as I said before
four Bishops do stand, are two Gentlemen, who are to call ye Cardinals or
Sewers, as they are orderly set down in writing in a scrowle of Paper, yt every
night is fastened upon the gate, wherein are the names of all the Cardinals
written as they are drawn by lots, so that a man may see who shall first or
last be served. Every night that scrowle is newly written. In deed if any of
them be sick, they are first served. Every night there are four of the said
byls of names made against the day following: one of which is kept within the
Conclaue, another is fastened to the gate where the Senators or Sherifes li^,
as I said before, the other two are kept by the two aforesaid Gentlemen, one
of which stands by the dresser, at that door at which the Gentlemen Sewers
go in with meat, in order as they are called, each one having two great
baskets or flaskets of diverse stuffes fashions and colors, the one for kitchen
viandes, the other for other sorts of after service, these carried between
two men with coulestaues. And this is the manner of their service. First every
Sewer has very orderly his dishes placed in the foresaid two flaskets, who
were first made ready by other officers, as by the Cook, Paster, Butler,
Spicer, Comfeter, Fruterer, and such other that belong to keepyng, or dressing
of meats. Before the said meats goes that Cardinals Gentleman Usher that is
first served, and then two grooms of the stable with two staves in their hands
painted of the Cornutas color, for so that flasket is called wherein the
kitchen meats are carried, after them follows the Gentleman Steward, with
four or six Gentlemen more, carrying of fair glasses in their hands full of
diverse sorts of wines, and very clear water, ye Butler going in the midst of
them, with a little glass of wine in his hand, the said glasses are all
covered with Orange blomes, and other sweet flowers, with papers on them
showing the quality, or sort of the Wine, then follow two Grooms of the
Stable that carry the flasket, wherein all other sorts of after meats,
Comfets and fruits are, then follows the Cubberd keeper, with two other
Grooms that carry the Cornuta. All the Gentlemen pertaining to that Cardinal
attending on them, thus going al in order toward the Conclaue dresser, they
meet first at the first door the Conseruours, Senators, or sherifs guard,
then coming to the stayers foot, they meet the other guard of Italians and
Swizers. And so passing along the gallerie, they come into a several room
where are two little doors, one to go in to serve, the other to come out after
they have served, at the entry of that room is also a guard of Italians and
Swizers, which open and shut the doors: where stand the two Cursors, or
gentlemen with bills of names in their hands, who in order call for the Sewer
that must come in first, at the upper end of the said room stands a table
fifteen foot long, the Sewer being come to that table, he takes a very fine
and white Napkin from the Cubbord keeper, and lays it on the table, and
another he lays before the aforesaid four Bishops, with two knives, and two
forkes, which they take up, the Sewer having set all the dishes upon the table,
they uncover them, and taste of them all, there can no Pies nor Pasties pass
whole, nor any kind of poultery, or foul, for they are al cut, carved, and
opened, before the said Bishops. There can no wine, nor water be carried in,
in any other vessels then clear glasses, nor any table cloth, towel, or
Napkin, that is not first unfolded, opened, and very well considered. All
vessels both out of which they eat and drink, of glass, or porcelaine that
once go in, come no more out, for they are the master of the Ceremonies his
fees. The meat that is left, is divided among the servant or officers in the
Conclaue, as Barbours, Mazons, Carpenters, Poticaries, Sweepers, and such like.
So soon as every Sewer, or steward has served, he enquireth whether his Lord
will have any other meat against the next time, or not, then taking Conge, he
goes out of the other door, whylest others come in at the other. And in this
order are all Cardinals served morning and night, so long as the election
lasts. And all that while the Castle or Palace is very well guarded, for at
the first trench, besides the soldiers that are in Beluedere, and those which
guard the market place, which are a great number, there are six and twenty
Swizers waiting day and night, there is a great chain of iron to cross the
way, and a little house of bordes to shield them from the rain, Above the said
trench on the left side going into the Palace, are eight pieces of great
Artillery, guarded by a band of Swizers, and two other gardes, that always are
attendant there. Not far from the said Artillery over against the great
gate, which is also guarded by fifty Swizers, there are three pieces of
artillery more, even in the entry of the Palace, which also is guarded by
three bands of Swizers, and for the succor of the said gate in any need,
there is at the left hand a place or house covered with bordes, in which is
continually a ba^d of Italian soldiers, with a going out one both sides. On
the right hand going into the Court, toward Borgias tower under the gate, which
is locked with an iron chain, is continually another band of Italians, and on
the left hand thereof is an Altar, that may be removed where one list, covered
with very rich Tapestrie, and other ornaments where every morning all the
election while, the Mass of the holy Ghost is celebrated and sung, by the
singing men of the Chapel. All that while that the Mass is celebrating, the
gates stand open, but very well guarded, for then all priests of what order
soever, and Moncks with the Orflins going before very orderly, do go
Procession like through all Courts, and places beneath the watches, and gardes
stand ready armed as if they were ready to fight, or expect the enemy. The
Priest that says the Mass between two Deacons with his face toward the
Conclaue, sings as loud as he can the Psalm Veni Creator mundi, and the
Letanies, with other Prayers, the whole quier answering him. This done, the
Canons of S. Peter, and other Prelates, with the woonted Music go in. The
procession being ended, at the sound of a little bell al men depart, for that
is a sign, that the Scrutinie of that morning is done, and that there is no
Pope chosen, then all ye soldiers do unarm themselves. These orders and
ceremonies are used every day, from that time that ye Cardinals go into the
Conclaue, until a Pope be chosen. The manner how ye Cardinals do choose him in
the Conclaue, is as it follows.


After two manner of ways the election is made. The one is, that every
Cardinal writes upon a scrowle, the name of him whom he wishes to be Pope,
and after he has folded it, he carries it to the Altar which is in ye
chamber, where the Scrutinie is made, and there stands the master of the
ceremonies which receives the said scrowles, and that Cardinal which is
found to have the most scrowles, of ye two thirds of those Cardinals yt be
there, he is Pope, this manner is called the choosing by scrutiny, because
thereby the mind of ye Cardinals is sifted and known. But when in the Conclaue
any is found, that has none to stand with him, then the Cardinals stay not to
have their opinions enquired by scrutinie, but declare themselves by their
voices, and then the Lord Chamberlayne, or some other of the cheifest
Cardinals, causes him who^ they see so favored by voices, to sit upon the
Papal seat, saying unto him. Adoro te in Pontificem, all other Cardinals
following him, striving who shall be foremost, least by staying, any be thought
to be agreeued. This is called election by Adoration, although that he which
is chosen by scrutinie be also adored, which adoration is rather done for
customs sake, then for any necessity. Presently after the election* the new
Popes servants run to break two windows over the Court, where the Mass or
Procession is said, and there the people flocking about the^, they cry
Cardinal Mont-alto is chosen Pope, afterward comes one of the Cardnals
with the cross in his hand, and says three times, Papam habemus. After that,
all the Cardinals for a good space abide with ye new Pope, rejoicing with him
for his election, then they accompany him to his Palace, after that, every one
retyreth him self to his own home. Furthermore you shall understand Sir,
that as soon as it is noysed abroad that the Pope is chosen, all the people
run to the Palace where he dwelt being Cardinal, and wholly spoil and rob
the same. In times past they were wont to find there many things of great
value, especially household stuff, but now they that have but the least hope
to be Pope, cause their servants secretly to convey thence all the best,
leaving nothing but such things as they care not for loosing. Now to signify
unto you the election of this Pope, I say, that in Sede vacant, after the
death of Pius the fifte, ye King of Spain writ to Cardinal Farnese, wishing
him to stand to be Pope, for that he desired only to have him, who at the
first stood in some doubt, thinking that the King did it only in mockery,
but he confirming it by his Ambassador then resident at Rome, the Cardinal
began to persuade himself that he meant in good earnest, and endeavored
himself earnestly to the obtaining thereof, and such were his practizes, that
many thought he should be Pope, until one morning, the Cardinal Granuela in
the Conclaue presented him with a letter from the King, by which he requested
him at that time to content himself, and to labor no further for that
dignity, and that for a special consideration, marry withal that he should
assure himself the next time not to fail thereof, at the sight whereof, the
Cardinal was greatly astonished, perceiving that the King went about to delude
him, and in thought somewhat grieved thereat, answered, that he acknowledged
himself a subject unmeet to bear such a heavy burden, howbeit to pleasure
his Majesty (who^ to please he had always sought) he was moved to attempt
such an enterprise, and now since that he saw that the Kings pleasure was such,
he submitted himself wholly to his will. The^ Cardinal Granuela thanked him, and
requested him to agree with him in choosing the new Pope, and so the next
morning Gregory the 13. of late deceassed was chosen. Cardinal Farnese having
received this scornful repulse of the King, although that in show he seemed
to have forgot it, yet inwardly he deeply imprinted it, and his drift was to
use such means whilst Gregory lived that after his death, of himself
without the aid of the King of Spain, he might attain to his purpose, and be
chosen Pope, which secretly he went about, yet not so covertly, but that many
Cardinals had notice thereof, therefore Gregory being dead, and the Cardinales
being assembled in the Conclaue, perceiving fully Farnese his intent, they
understood that if the time were detracted, peradventure he would have
brought it to pass, therefore suddenly they resolved themselves to disappoynt
him and choose another. Hereupon Cardinal Este, Alexandrino, and Rusticuzzi
with their adherentes, joining together by way of scrutinie elected Cardinal
Mont-alto, and such was their good fortune, that they not thinking that any
others would give their voices, to their Cardinal comes Cardinal Medici,
with six voices to weigh down the balances on their side, and so upon Easter
day they being entered into the Conclaue, the next morning came Cardinal de
Augusta, who entered in, and so did Cardinal Madrucci. On Tuesday at night, and
upon Wednesday morning following at ten of the clock, he was made Pope, and
so acknowledged, and adored of all the College. Whereby Cardinal Farnese was
two ways deceived, the one, in not being himself Pope, the other in not
having any thing to do in the election of the new, a thing that happened not
unto him many years before, he having made almost all the Popes since his
uncles death, who was Paulus the third, having always had many adherents.

Mont-alto being thus chosen Pope on Wednesday in Easter week, which was
(according to our computation) the 24. of April, and presently after his
election, (being before called Felix) he named himself Syxtus Quintus, and
forthwith he deprived Cardinal Como of the office of Secretary, and gave it to
Cardinal Rusticuzzi who had it under Pius the 5. and Cardinal Alexandrino had
ye place, which Cardinal Sant Sisto had in the consultation. The Marquis
Altemps was made Governor of Borgo, and general Captain of both the Popes
gardes. The Duke of Sora was confirmed general of the Church. The L. Marquis
of Riano had the room of S. Mario Sforza, who was Lieutenant General. The
Governor of Rome was confirmed anew, likewise the Controuler of the Popes
household that was first continues still. Great joy and triumphs were made at
the election of the Pope, but nothing so much as was accustomed, and that
because it is thought the people would rather have had Cardinal Farnese. The
Sea was vacant fifteen days without any excess or disorder. Upon Thursday
last Cardinal Mondoui of Piemont, by Sea arrived here, not without great
danger both of weather and Pirates, and at Corneton, great contention arose
betwixt his company and the towns men, there were discharged more then an
hundred shot of Harguebusses. Contrary to the opinion of all men, the Lord
Paulo Giordano Orsino, Duke of Brasciano, came and kissed the Popes feet, who
entertained him very courteously, and with all advertised him to look to the
government of his estate, and to the overthrow and rooting out of the banished
persons, or outlawes as we term them? I laid he did it contrary to the
expectation of all men, because you shall understand, that the Pope had not
many years ago a Nephew, a young man of comely stature and personage, who
viewing on a time a beautiful Damsel of Corambonis de Augubbio, fell so in
love with her, that in short space he won her and wedded her, but he enjoyed
her not long for shortly after he was slain with a gunne, and it was thought
that Lord Paulo had procured his death, for that not long after he became
very familiar with the Gentlewoman, and meaning to marry her, Cardinal
Medici, who is brother in law to him, and all his kinsme^ of the house of
Orsini, labored to ye Pope very earnestly, that he should not suffer their
kinsman to match with one of so base fortune, whereupon the Pope at their
entreaty sent for him, and first by fair means sought to dissuade him from
his purpose, but seeing he could do no good thereby he grew to threatenings,
saying, threatening him with excommunication, but Lord Paulo nothing terrified
nor dismayed, sent the Gentlewoman to his house in the country, and the Pope
as she was going thither, caused her to be apprehended and put into a
monastery of Nuns, where she remained certain months, notwithstanding,
that at the length Lord Paulo found means to get her at liberty, and in
despite of al men married her, and yet enioieth her. For this cause it was
thought, that he would not have submitted himself unto the Pope, and trusted
him, and that the Pope being now in that sovereignty and dignity, would have
revenged the death of his Nephew. But see how vain the judgments of men are
oftentimes, for now there is a marriage entreated of, betwixt the Popes Niece
and Lord Paulo his son, and it is thought that he shall be general Standard
bearer of the Church. The same day Cardinal Sforza had audience of the Pope,
and showed himself agreeued of the deprivation of Lord Mario his Uncle, to
whom the Pope answered, but smally to his contentatio^. It is said that the
last Popes treasurer (a man very well seen both in the civil and Canon laws,
and one that by finding out diverse means to inriche the Church, has caused a
great sort to cry out of him) is close prisoner in the castle, there to give
account of his administration.

A little while ago there were taken out of the Castle great sums of money
for the use of the Sea vacant, which now are resigned again. The two
thousand soldiers appointed for the Guard of ye Conclaue are discargeded,
again, every one having given him besides his promised wages a crown.

The Pope has already bou^tifully requited a great number, which had showed
or done him any pleasure, when he was in low estate and of small ability,
amongst ye rest he has enriched a Cobbler, who had sometimes mended his shoes
for nothing, who ye day following for sudden joy, set all his old shoes,
lastes, and tools on fire.

Yesterday morning the Lords Conseruours, or Sheriffs came to kiss the Popes
feet, and desired three favors of him, that is, abundance, justice, and
provision against outlawes abroad, of whom there is a great number: to whom he
answered, that he would provide for them all as speedily as could be.

The Pope shows himself very thankful to Pius the fifth, who made him
Cardinal, and therefore has commanded Cardinal Alexandrino, Nepew to Pius the
5. that he withal the servant and such as belonged to Pius ye 5. should
come to the Palace, a thing surely very commendable in any man, to be mindful
in time of prosperity of his benefactors.

Yesterday ye Marquis Altemps took possession of Borgo, accompanied by a great
troop of horsemen, and with a guard of Swizers.

The Jesuits coming to kiss ye Popes feet, obained of him, that the
sumptuous building of their commenced College should be continued, and that
when they want money they should repair unto him,

The Lord Paulo Giordano yesterday went to Brasciano with his wife, and all
his Court, Cardinal Sant. Sixtus, Nephew to the Pope that dead is, goes to
dwell in the Palace of the Duke of Parma, it being granted him by Cardinal
Farnese, who desiring of the Pope, that his father might come to Rome, which
the Pope that is dead his brother would never yield, to whom the Pope
answered, that if he were not banished he might come.

By letters received from Milan the 23. of this month we understand that the
visiter Reggius, has commission from the King to receive the accounts of Lord
Giorgio Mariques, without molesting of his person, which has happened by the
intercession of the Empress, and the general muster is appointed to be ye
Kalendes of May, and that to all ye soldiers shall be given a 100. French
Crowns a man besides the ordinary pay, but not to those of Don Giorgio his
company. It is said also that there are taken out of the Castle 200000.
crowns, to send into Flanders. That from Geneua there was brought thither
prisoner a Spanyard, which the last year said to the Cardi. Borromeo, that he
had order from Don Pietro Ant. son to the Duke of Terra Noua, to shoot him
through with a gunne, but being therefore set on the rack, he confessed that
he said so only to get a piece of money out of his hands.

We understand by letters dated the 20, of this month from the Court of the
Emperor in Praga, these news following. On Friday last the Emperor gave
audience, to the Comissaries and Ambassadors of diverse Princes, as touching
the deliverance of the Duke of Saxony prisoner at Neustat, but although his
enemy seek by all means possible to hinder the said deliverance, yet it is
hoped that in the end he shall have some favor showed him. The Ambassador also
of Moscouia had audience, who was accompanied into the Palace by the high
Chamberlayne, and many of the chiefest Courtiers, and presented unto his
Majesty, a great number of exquisite and fine Armelens, with a furniture of a
Gostone. Of the same uncovered of very great value, and brought letters of
credit, written in red sarcenet, he came to confirm and renew the truce and
league that always has been between his princes father, and the house of
Austria whereupon he had a long discourse committed this cruel fact, to heap
villainy upon villainy, took the fairest of the two young Ladies, and in the
presence of all the other ravished her, permitting and commanding his men, to
do the like unto the other, and to all the Ladies and gentlewomen that
attended on them, which done, he caused them most cruelly to be slain, and
flong into the sea. This villainy being heard of abroad, was of all men
detested, and condemned to be more then barbarous, especially of the Venecians
themselves, who sought all means possible to have him taken, which thing Emmo
perceiving, and being gauled with the guilt of his conscience, he took him to
his flight, and being come to Puglia, perceiving himself not to be safe there,
he licenced two of his Galleys, and with all his booty amounting to the value
of 200. thousand Crowns in money and Jewels, upon ye third which was the best
and fairest Galley that was seen upon the seas these many years, sailing
toward the I Will of Malta, where he purposed to yield himself, to the great
Master of the Religion and order, and there to live upon the pray. The
Venecians fearing the displeasure of the great Turk, presently sent the
Captain of the Gulf, who is a Noble Venecia^, to pursue him with one of the
best Galleys, and if it might be, either a live or dead to take him, and all
his accomplices, whose enterprise, the Lord God so favored, to the end such
villainy should not long go unpunished, that in few days, not far from
Puglia he met with him and without great resistance took him, and all his men,
and carried them to Venice, where ye fourth day after being justly by the laws
condemned, he was publicly executed and had his head cut of, and all his
goods confiscated, to a kinsman of his that was with him: but in as much as all
the soldiers protested that he was nothing culpable, and rather had sought by
all means and reasons, to diswade him from that cruelty, they did nothing but
condemn him to perpetual prison. At the first, when the great Turk heard of
this he seemed to be very angry, and demanded to have (besides an infinite sum
of money, Emmo and all the soldiers) and Galleys furnished in his own hands.
The Venecians forthwith, sent Ambassadors unto him with Emmo his head,
excusing themselves as well as they could, and that it was a thing they utterly
detested, and were altogether innocent of, offering any reasonable conditions
to appease him, but he continuing in his anger, demanded great and
unreasonable satisfaction: but now as we hear by these last letters, he is
much altered, and seems to yield to any reasonable conditions, to which he
would never have condiscended, were he in any good estate with that mighty
enemy of his, the great Persian, with whom these three years space he has
had continual war, and has lost very much, who even at this time troubles
him greatly, and that is the reason that he was so soon appeased with the
Venecians. So that now it were an easy thing for the Christian Princes (if
there were any zeal of Christ in them, and that such envy and malice did not
reign among them) uniting themselves together, utterly to overthrow him, and
free so many thousands of Christian souls that live in miserable bondage,
which if they do not but continue still, in seeking to undo and devour one
another. You shall see one day those two mighty States, enemies both to the
name of Christ, join together and fall upon us, as they did upon the Princes
of Greece. Pardon me good sir, if I have gone from my former discourse, for
nothing makes me speak but ye great desire I have, that that enemy of
Christians, should once be set upon by those that might (if they would)
overcome, having the everliving Lord to their guide, as they might have, if
they would follow that good Godfrey of Buloin, that gathered a Christian
power out of England, France, Italy, and recovered the Holy Land. But now
returning to it, I say that with the same letters, we hear that S. Barberico,
who was newly chosen Procurator of S. Marco, which is one of the greatest
dignities in that Signorie, went to the Senate, accompanied with three hundredth
noble men, all in their Senators roabes, which made a rare and goodly show,
and to most of them he made a sumptuous banquet. The Prouisor of Firm Land was
come to the city, his office is also of great credit among them. A noble man
of the house of Contarini, even in ye Rialto (which is a place in Venice as the
Royal Exchange in London) shot at another Noble man with a Pistol, who being
taken, was forthwith banished the city, and all the States thereof, on pain
of a thousand crowns, and to loose his life if he be taken, and howbeit many
sue for him, yet can no favor be obtained, until ten years be expired, and
if his father die in ye mean time, his goods shall be confiscated.

The Cardinal Ceneda, was ready to take his journey from Venice to come
hither. The Patriarch of Aquileia was looked for there. The Soldiers were
pressed before to be sent into Candia to the garrisons, they began now to take
their pay, and to be sent away under diverse Coronels, and Captains. This is al
we heard from thence with the last letters.

From Rome, from the day abouesayd to the 18. of May. Upon Saturday last, there
was a public consistory held, in which the Cardinals Mondoni, Terra-noua,
and Gioyeuse, made their first entry to receive their Hats, who were
accompanied by 32. Cardinals, and a great number of other Lords, Barrons, and
nobles al on horseback. The Cardinals, Este, Ramboglietto, Sirletto, and
Medici were not there. They were most courteously and honorably received, and
entertained of the Pope, who gave them their Hattes, and made them full
Cardinales. The Popes when they made any Cardinals that is not present, they
use this ceremony. First to send them a red Cap where they are, and then the
first time after they come to Rome, and enter the consistory, they give them
the Hat. These three cardinals were made by Gregory, but they had never bin at
Rome before.

The Cardinal Medici had audience of the Pope, and told him that ye Duke of
Toscana his brother, desired to come and kiss his feet, and do his duty to
his holiness, but that he desired to have audience, and to be received in ye
kings Hall, the Pope answered him* that at more leisure he would talk of it,
and gave him an answer.

On Monday in ye Consistory, by ye resignation of Monsier Fautino, ye Church
of Coscenza was committed to Abbot Pastorius, the Church of Concordia in
Friuli, to a gentleman of Venice, of the house of Quirini: that of Salmona to a
Friar, Chaplain to the Cardinal of Aragona. Likewise, two Churches in Polonia
(named by Cardinal Farnese) were provided of sufficient Pastors. The same day,
and in the said Consistory, the Pope declared as Legates, these Prelates
following: Cardinal Saluiati to be sent to Bologna la grassa. Cardinal Colonna
to Campagna of Rome. Cardinal Gesualdo to Marca d' Ancona. Cardinal Spinola
to Perugia, and Cardinal Canano to Romagna. And the Pope nominated his above
named nephew, Cardinal Mont-alto, gyuing him his own Hat, his Arms, and his
name, with seven thousand Crowns revenues at the first dash. On the Tuesday
following, the sealing being ended, Cardinal Farnese departed hence to Grotta
ferrata, there to solace and recreate himself, and it is thought that he is
greatly discontented. The day before Mounsier Fiesco carried a hat and a
hallowed sword to the Duke of Sauoy, and a Rose unto the Duchess, (which is a
ceremony used of Popes in honoring of Princes,) for that the Duke and his
wife coming out of Spain, will land at Nizza, where ye Pope has sent Lord
Fiesco to receive them, and present them with his presents: and as some think,
he shall continue with the Duke as Nuntio. The same day the Duke of Sora
renounced his generalship, and the Marquis Mario Sforza renounced his office,
he being Lieutenant. Upon wednesday Signior Bon compagno, brother to Pope
Gregory came hither, who for some private grudge was not permitted to come
during his brothers life. There went to meet him out of the Gates, these men
following: the Duke of Sora his Nephewe, the Cardinals San sisto his son,
and Vasta villani his Nephewe, with certain others, who conducted him to
Cardinal San sisto his house. Whereby it may be seen how variably ye wheel
of Fortune turns, for if he had been permitted to come whilst his brother
lived, he should have been received of the Cardinals and Lords of the
Court, and with great triumph brought into the Palace. Neither will I forget
to tell you the cause, why the Pope his brother would not see him. The cause was
this. Before Gregory came to ye Popedom, he was a very poor Cardinal, and
maintained his son Lord Giacomo (as well as he could) at study in Padua,
who in time of vacation, always repaired to his Uncles house in Bologna, where
he was very ill entreated of his Aunte, and by her oftentimes misused in terms
and speeches, as calling him ass, dolt, priests bastard, with the like, which
speeches (as you know) with us are counted spightfull and intolerable. This
poor youth, sometimes gave his father intelligence thereof by letters, who
writ to his Brother, and told him that he maruayled (seeing he had the
government of his wife) he would suffer it, and threatening him that if he would
not redress it* he would be so mindful of him, as he should repent it. But
his brother, who not only loved but honored his wife, durst never let her
understand thereof, though secretly to win his Nephew, he now and then
bestowed some spending money on him, who always did commend him to his
father, who presently after he was chosen Pope, sent for his son Lord
Giacomo, causing him most honorably to be received, daily aduauncing him, as
well you know.

Signior Bon compagno hearing of his brothers preferment, forthwith addressed
himself to go to see him, hoping to be joyfully entertained and honored of
him: but the Pope foreknowing his coming, sent him straight word to come no
further upon pain of his displeasure, but to return home again, not telling
him the cause why, knowing that if he listed he might well conceive it. His
brother hearing this message, sorrowful and pensive returned back, and could
never after have leave to come thither, (although Lord Giacomo earnestly sued
for him.) The Pope immitating herein, Pope Pius the fourth, who would never
suffer his brother the Marquis of Marignano, to come in his sight, neither did
he at any time show favor or friend ship to him or his, how be it, in this
point, Pope Gregory differed from him, for he gave to his brothers two
daughters, each of the^ ten thousand crowns in marriage, and caused them to
be nobly and honorably matched, and made one of his sons Cardinal, gyuing
him great riches, and the second Governor of Rauenna, and upon him he bestowed
a thousand crowns every month, and one of his sisters sons he made Cardinal
Vasta villani. Now to return to the things present, I say that the day
following, Sig. Bon compagno came to kiss the Popes feet, who received him
very courteously, and some suppose that he shall be established Governor of the
City of Fermo during his life, although the communaltie of that City made
suit to the Pope, to grant them for their governor the new Cardinal
Mont-alto, who answered them, that as yet he had more need of a Governor
himself then to govern others. Mounsier Ahlobrandino is elected Chauncelour,
and Mounsier Basone shall be Nuntio in Spain, and Cardinal San Giorgio in
Naples. Moun sier Carlo Conti, Governor of Camerino, craves leave of the Pope
to come hither to Rome, it is said he shall have it, and that in his place he
will send Mounsier Maffetti. At the request of Cardinal Altemps, the Pope
has confirmed the old Fiscull of Rome in his office, and has appointed
Lusimbardi ouerseer and Auditor of the Tower of Bologna. We understand by
letters from Spain, that the day of the Annunciation in the Church of
Saragossa, the Duke of Sauoy made the Lords Sig. Giacomo Battista of Sauoy, his
Ambassador resident in Spain: the Marquis of Ciambra, and Conte Ottauio san
vitale Knights of the order of the Annunciation, meaning also to bestow it
upon the Marquis Boba, and Don Michele Bouelli at his return into Italy, and
has appointed that the second ceremony of enstaling, be done in Nizza of
Brouenza. His majesty will accompany and bring his daughter, the spouse to
Parcelona, who has used much kindness and freendship toward the Duke his son
in law, and with Cardinal Granuella only, his other daughter shall be married
to ye Archduke Ernesto, brother to the Emperor.

There is a marriage talked of betwixt one of the Popes Neeces, and Sig.
Iulianus, son to Signior Giorgio Cesarmi, and betwixt his other Niece and
Sig. Pietro Gaetano, son to Sig. Honorato, but whether they shall come to
pass or no, it is uncertain. Mon. Nazaret shall be Legate in France to seek
to moderate and mittigate those hurly-burlies* and therefore the Pope has sent
for him hither. The Bishop of Camerino (in his voyage to olonia, going thither
as Nuntio) is dead. The Archbishop of Naples is come hither. News is brought
us, that in the Mountains of Safso ferrato, a ringleader of Outlawes called
Morte, with 22. of his adherents, is besieged by two thousand me^ and more,
whereupon we hope that he shall not escape. Cadinall Vercelli on thursday
morning, being taken with a certain fever, departed this life in less then 4.
hours, and by his death there fell an Abbye of five thousand crowns a year,
which the Pope has already bestowed on Cardinal Mont-alto his Nephewe. We
hear that in Naples by reason of ye great dearth that is in that City, the
people appointed one to deal with ye Viceroy, that so many people might not
die for hunger, who went and did clean contrary: for when certain ships
laden with corn were in the Haven, he caused them to be sent to Spain, saying
that in Naples there was Corn sufficient, which thing when the people heard
of, they forthwith in a great rage and fury ran to the Gentleman's house, where
they met with certain Friars, who hearing the cause of their tumult, desired
them to be contented, that they might go to his house to confess him, and
persuade him to die patiently, and then to kill him, to which the people
agreed, but afterward, perceiving that ye Friars sought to save him, and to
make him fly, they rushed into his house, and before the Friars faces killed
him, and trayled him a long throughout the City before the Viceroy, crying
all with a loud voice. God save the king and justice. Whereupon, the Viceroy
being at his wits ends, withdrewe himself into his Castle, and caused his
Guard to give diligent attendaunce, and not stir in any wise.

There is come hither another Nephew of ye Popes, who has been twenty years
absent from Italy, his profession is to handle his weapon well, it is thought
that he has been a good one in his days, that he has played many pretty
parts, notwithstanding we think he shall be general of ye Church. We hear
that he has another come from Piacenza, so that now he wants not kinsmen
being in prosperity, and more are coming daily from strange countries,
although whilst he lived cardinal, it was not known that he had any, but ye
husband of Corambona. They write from Genoua, how the four Galleys of Tuscane,
who had chased two Turkish Galleys, even to Marsilia, were come to the haven of
Genoua, where they shall take in the Duke of Niuers, which goes to ye bathes
of Luca. We hear also that they of Genoua had chosen two Ambassadors to send
to Nizza, to congratulate with the Duke and Duchess of Sauoy, and to morrow to
send hither, to render their obedience to the Pope. By letters from Praga, we
hear that the Ambassador of Muscouia, was resolved to see the ceremony of
the golden Fleece, and being invited to a banquet by the Ambassador of Venice,
he dru^ke so much that almost he was choked therewith. The Vice-chamberlaine
began to mend of his sickness, and Lord Traulen was sore troubled with ye
Gout, whereupon his life was greatly doubted, being a man of 76. years of
age. Yesterday the Emperor dispached a Post to Rome, whether the Ambassador
of Tuscane meaning to send another, he was not permitted, for that his Majesty
would have his man arrive two days before the Dukes. This Nuntio is greatly
discomforted by ye death of Pope Gregory, fearing least he should be deprived
of his office, especially for that he has been at great expenses. By letters
from Venice, dated the 12. of May, we hear that news were come from
Constantinople, that ye business of the restitution of the Gallie, to the great
honor of the Ambassador, and satisfaction of the signorie, was concluded and
ended, and that there was no talk of any army, which is a manifest sign of
peace with the Christians, and therefore he has confirmed the league with the
King of Spain for other two years. The Turk is so busied in the wars of
Persia, and against the Persians to his great disadvantage, having received
another notable overthrow of them, and besides betwixt the Turks and
Transiluanes, there is like to be something adoo, for yt some notable skirmish
had been between them already. The prince Valacco placed in his estate with
the favor of the Turk, was again displaced of the people, and ye other that
was put down set up. Cardi. Ceneda of whom before I made mention, is returned
to the cure of his Church, and at the end of August will come hither to Rome.
From Genoua it is said that in Sauoia, there is great adoo to intertaine
sumptuously the new spouses, and there be chosen besides the four
Ambassadors, four Matrons, which speak Spanish to receive the Duchess.
There has bin a Proclamation against certain unknown persons, which robbed a
ship in ye haven with all the munition that there is provided. Yet
nevertheless there be many robberies committed. Doctor Ameranta has bin
stayed by ye inquisition to the great admiration of every one, he being of
great credit in the City. It is known by letters come to the Hebrews, yt the
Tartarians are conjoined with the Moscouites and other Potentates to set upon
the great Turk. And this my loving friend, is as much as at this time, I can
show you of the news we have in Rome, the which if you well consider, you
shall find that there is not at this day, any Court in the world, in which
fortune shows more then in this her power, since that you see that many which
within these two months, sat in the highest part of her turning wheel, are
now thrown down to ye lowest of them was ye only talk while their prosperity
lasted, toward them only were ye eyes of all men bent, and now there is no
more account made of them then of any other, and within a short while their
memory will fail so, as if they had never been. Contrariwise, those of whom
no man talked, and which were accounted as the of scouring of the base, be now
the chief, and they only are in the mouths of men. And to the end, that you
may perceive these things better with the eye of your understanding, I will
here set down before you, as conclusion of this my letter, the whole life of
this present Pope, ye which I had of a learned Doctor of Law, Sometime a
familiar friend of ye Popes, who swear and protested unto me, that 8. years
ago, when he was Cardinal, he voluntarily told it him himself, without
any request thereof, and said, he was not ashamed that any man should know it,
and took great delyght in telling it. And this it is. Mont-alto is a little
village in Marca d' Ancona hid in an unpleasant valley, at the side of the
mount Appennine, and because the country is so obscure, I can not describe it
better, save that it is a little village at the root of ye mountains, there
distant from the noble city of Ascoli, ten miles. In that place was this
present Pope borne after this sort. There dwelt a little fellow named Pietro,
who for his little stature and small personage, was called Peretto, which is
as much to say, as little Peter, and also little Pear. His birth and stock was
so base, and his living so slender, that upon ye hills of Fermo to maintain
himself, he was glad to keep the swine of one Sig. Horatio Brancadoro, and
being one day in the field looking to his swine, there suddenly arose such a
mighty storm and tempest, that leaving his swine to the broad field, at
fortunes discretion, he betook himself to his cabyn a little of to his wife
(who was of no greater Parentage then himself) and lying with her that night,
he got her with child, who in due time was delivered of a iollie boy, who
nursed him her self as long as her milk lasted. Which boy coming to the age
of three years, the father not being able to keep him, he gave him and
recommended him to the Baker of the town, who was a very poor man himself,
for there were no more then four or five houses in the village, to whom he
did bake, who for Gods sake took him, and so the poor child lived a great
while by that slender alms, and croommes of bread, or pieces that the poor
women which came thither to bake, would now and then give him. His attire was
a long time of a course shyrt ragged and torn, his bed was an Ashheape which
was raked out of the Oven, whereon he was enforced to lie, least he should die
for cold, and this poor life led he, till he was almost 8. years old, at
which time there came thither by chance a gentlewoma^ of Ascoli, of the house
of Malespini (who has at this day two sons living, men of great fame and
credit, the one* called Sig. Piccione, the other Sig. Nicolo Malespini) who
being moved to pity at the misery of the child, took him thence, and
having caused him to be well washed and cleansed, caused him to be apparelled in
the habit of S. Frauncis, and committed him to the custody of a poor Vicar
of that Chapel, who had no learning, but could only read and say Mass, and
because the child had no other name but Cenaiuolo, that is to say in English,
a Liar upon the ashes, the gentlewoman called him Faelix, as prophesying that
which should come after, in short space he took to surname his fathers name,
and so was called Felice Peretto. There then he learned of his master to read,
and to be able to help him to say Mass, in so much, as in ye end he grew to
be known of a quick wit, so as if he were well brought up, he might become a
profitable member of his country, whereupon, his Master so commended him to
the Pryor, of the Friars of his order in the City of Ascoli, that he would
needs have him, and there he began to attain to some learning, wherein in
little time he profited so exceedingly, that amongst the disputers, he was
counted one of the chief, afterward he had the degree of a Preacher, neither
was he inferior therein to the best, and therefore he was made inquisitor, and
was called Monsi^^ Felice Peretto, and being enforced to use some devise, for
a seal to subscribe the sentences which he gave, having first sealed his
letters with a piece of money, he devised and took upon him a Lion Iacent,
holding up in one of his paws a branch of a Pear tree, alluding to his
name, thus, Being inquisitor, he was sent by the General to Venice, there to
use and learn to practice the inquisition, and because he too too severely
behaved himself, he was on a time by certain gentlemen buffeted and dry
beaten. By which his mishap, sprung al his benefit and preferment, for Pius
Quintus (who loved such severe fellows as he had been himself, hearing this,
to spyte the Gentlemen that had beaten him, called him to Rome, and within a
while after made him Cardinal: calling him Cardinal Mont-alto, because he
was borne there, giving him seven thousand crowns revenues, and a hundredth
Crowns a month for alms, as commonly Popes give to poor Cardinals, after
which time, he wholly gave himself to ye attaining of good learning, and
study of humanity: and in short time he became a very profound Philosopher,
and is at this day one of the best disputers that is at Rome. And howbeit it
was so highly and so suddenly exalted, yet did he not degenerate from his
first original, for you should have seen him here in Rome, go in a filthy
great, and greasy Hat, al besmeared, and his hands foul and dyrtie. Yet is he
very politic and patient, which was well perceived in him not long ago, when
his Nephew (of whom I have before made mention) was slain, he never gave show
of anger or alteration, which made all the city to wonder at him. He is a man
who will not easily be led, and governed of others, which makes me to think,
that he will not suffer himself to be robbed by others, and as the common
Phrase is to be drawn by the nose, wherein I pray God he still continue, for
we are long ago weary, and have had too many Popes which have been thralles,
and subjects to ye Spaniards. It was greatly wished, that Cardinal Farnese,
had been Pope, who with his worthy Progeny and noble mind, might have
comforted and animated this people, and the misery of all Italy, for to speak
indifferently, we be all abased and kept under, which comes to pass be the
policy of the Spanyardes, who seek (...) to have one that is by base Birth
and bringing up, elected Pope. This man is of stature rather low then tall,
but of a good complexion, lean and dry, used to endure labor, wherefore I
think, that (if he be not overcome with such delicate and dayntie meats as
his degree requires) he will live many years. Here now I cease from
further troubling you, assuring you that hereafter I will use more diligence,
if so be that I shall understand that these are acceptable unto you, and so I
end, desiring God to shield you from all evil. From Rome the last of May. 1585.

FINIS.

