A TREATISE of the preparation to the holy Supper of our only Saueour and
Redeemer, Jesus Christ.

Necessary for all them that vvil vvorthely approach to the Lords holy Table.

Also a dialogue containing the principal points, which they that will receive
the Supper ought to know and understand.

By Yues Rouspeau minister of the word of God. Ttanslated out French into
English by R.B.

Let a man examine him self, and so let him eat of this Bread and drink of this
Cup. Printed at London by Lucas Harison.

To the right worshipful S. John Zouch of Codner Knight R.B wishes a blessed
life, happy days with great increace of worship.
AMongst the sundry woorks of many ancient, learned and wise men (right
worshipful) I fide no one thing more generally commended then the travel that
procures profit and utility to the commonwealth: for to this end all the
estate of man's life te^deth, that whilst we continue in this base territory
here, our whole endeavor should be employed to the ben fit of our country in
some respect. And for this cause the most renowned Emperors and famous
Princes of the world in times past had alvvaies diligent care to advance such
as by their policy conserved their kingdoms in public tra^quilitie, or by
their valiantnes vanquished their enemies, or by justice suppressed the wicked
either else by their vvritings and learned documents instructed the Vulgaritie
to virtuous living. Anaxarchus amongst the Phenicians alovved best of the
maintainers of civil concord, Numa Pompilius exhorts the Romans to
recompense those largly that returned victorious from any battle, Promotne us
willed the Egiptians to make great account of those that were true
Iusticiaries. And Bias king of the Argiues, commanded his people above all
others, to honor and reverence most their vvriters and teachers of vvisedo^e.
Octauian and Mecenas gratified virgil the learned poet, with such rich prese^ts
that Seruius who vvriteth of him, affirms that in short space he was valued
tobe worth six M. Sesterns, which amounts to two hundred M. crowns, such
zeal unto virtue reigned in the noble Pears of that age, that they accounted
those gifts best bestovved which were employed upon them that were singular
in any faculty, to thente^t that others in hope of preferme^t, might the
rather be encouraged to immitate their steps. If that lack of liberality be
found in the princes of this parfet time, in remune. rating the virtues which
abounded so plentifully in the nobility of those obscure days vvherin nature
(without the knowledge of the eternal) bare the only sway, how much it is
to be lamented I refer to the judgment of those that by reading may discern
the praises belonging justly unto the one, and by present sight may behold the
defaults of the other

If a greater desire to pleasure their Country was found in that people which
were governed only by the instinct of nature, the^ there is in those which
now may be directed by that pure and most blessed operation of the spirit of
God: what punishment is due to their rechelesse negligence let those that read
the sacred Scriptures discide, where it is most apparent to be seen, with
what vigor God punished the unprofitable servant, how he commanded that
every tree which brought not forth good fruit, should be hevve^ down and cast
into the fire. These threatenings (if nothing else would move) should stir up
every man to make some increce of those talents which God has lent him,
rather then through slouthfulnes to bury them in obscurity without reaping
gains to them selves, or yielding a just account to God, benefit to their
country, true allegiance to their prince, furtherance to their children, or
pleasure to their friends to whom they be bound. To avoid these
inco^ueniences and to eschew the infamy that breeds through idelnes: I
thought it good to employ my diligence in translating this small Treatise
desiring rather to be accounted a profitable Be: then to be suspected for a
hurtful Drone, for though the Volume be not large, nor my labor great: yet
possible, there is as great consolation to be found for the repentant sinner as
in bigger Tomes.

And because I would signify unto your worship, the good vvil I bear you
and the desire I have to acquit some part of those curiesies which I have
received at your hands, I have presumed to crave your patronage, to this the
first fruits of my labor, hoping that you vvil vouchsafe the accepta^ce
thereof in such part as with good will I offer it. And though that it escape
not free from the ce^sures of some whose delight is to carp at every light
occasion, yet if it may obtain your favorable liking, my desire is satisfied,
and so (with remembrance of my duty) I take my leave, wishing health to your
person, worship to your parentage, and prosperoussuccesse in all your
endeavors.

Your worships to command. R.B

Yues Rouspeau to the Christian Reader, health from Jesus Christ our Lord.
AMongst the causes of common calamities and scourges wherewith God punishes
the world, S. Paul makes mention of the abuse and contempt of the Lords
Supper: sayi^g, for this cause many are weke and sick among you, and many
sleep. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. Therefore we
ought not to meruail that the last year God did so severely punish this poor
Realm of France, with plague, war and famine. For the contempt of the Gospel,
and the abuse and profanation of the Lords holy Supper, were the cause thereof:
so that niether they that followed the Popes faction ought to complain of God,
nor they likewise that make profession of the Gospel, because there was a fault
both in the one and the other. First touching the abuses of the Papists, we
are able to set down sure judgment by the word of God how that the Mass is
wholly fraught with blasphemies: how it abolisheth the holy Supper of our Lord
Jesus Christ: how the remembrance of his death and passion is therein
suppressed and brought to naught, how there is no communion, and that in sted
that Jesus Christ commanded all his in general to take, eat, and drink the
bred and wine, one only takes, eats and driketh for all ye rest. We see
there moreover, how they cause a creature tobe worshipped therein, yea a morsel
of bread instead of the Creator, how they seek Christ Jesus there in earth,
where as ye word of God, the Apostles creed, and the old Canons teach us to
have our hearts lift up on high and to seek him by faith in Heaven. To be short
there are to be seen many other detestable and infinite abuses which I now
pass over with silence. Now then seeing they have obstinatly planted and
grounded the^ selves in that affection, yea and for the maintenance of so vile
and wicked a thing have put to death so many good me^, so many holy and true
martirs of our Lord, Jesus Christ. Has not God rightfully visited us in this
behalf? Secondly we see also ye there were great and notable abuses on their
behalf, that made profession of the true word of God. How many were there
which knew no more then ye Papists to give any reason of their faith and which
presented them selves like beasts to ye Lords holy Supper? Some came thither as
ignorant asses, other as swine leding a dissolute and slanderous life. I will
not speak of an infinite number of hipocrits, false brethern, traiters and
Apostates, Luc. 21.48.
which were unknown and had a countenance and show of honesty. Therefore is
was not without cause that ye wrath of god was kindled against his people, and
that they were scourged with stripes, for wittigly abusing of the knowledge of
his holy name. Now that this good God through his Son Jesus Christ, may cast
his pitiful and merciful eye upon this so poor and desolate Realm: it
behooves both the one and the other to learn hence forward to serve and
honor God according to his word, better then they have done, espetially that
they take heed that hereafter they profane not by any means ye holy supper
of Jesus Christ our Lord. To this end and purpose they may read this little
tretise, wherein they shall find ye the true preparing of our selves to ye
Lords supper, consists not in decking of the body, fair garments, pomps,
John. 4.24.
countenaunces, and outward profession of the name of God, but in clenenesse of
heart, and up rightnes of conscience, to the end that God who is a spirit, may
be also served of his in Spirit and truth.

The Preface.
To come worthily to the holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ / 1. Cor. 11.28.
we must examine our selves according too the admonition of the Apostle Saint
Paul. Now the examination of our selves consists cheefely in four points /
that is to say / in Faith / repentance / giving of thanks to God / and love
toward our neighbors.

Of Faith. The first Article.
FIrst of all we must have faith that is to say, a certain and infallible
assurance and firm persuasion that God is a merciful father Esa. 35.5: 6.7.
Ioh. 3.16.
unto us in the name of his son Jesus Christ our Lord, who^e he delivered to
death for us. This faith comes not of us, Mat. 16.17. To. 7.18. 1. cor. 2.14.
nether is it grounded upon us, nether upon any other thing ye is in us, but it
comes from God and is grounded Math, 11.25.26.27. Ioh. 1.13. and 6.26
upon God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and upon the promises of
the gospel confirmed inwardly within us, by ye working of the holy Ghost,
which cries in our hearts Abba. To. 8 15 Gal. 4.6.
that is to say father. Furthermore this faith is nourished, confirmed and
increased in us by the holy Sacraments. For in the Supper: God as a good father
(after that he has once brought us into his Church by baptism) nourishes us
spiritually with the proper substance of his Son Jesus Christ, applying and
making proper unto every one of us, the merit of his death and passion. To this
end and purpose is it that Jesus Christ him self gives us the bread and Wine:
Math. 26.26. Mat 14.21. Luc. 22.19 1. Cor. 11.14.
that he commands us, to eat and drink it: that he says that the Bread is
his body which is given for us, and that the Wine is his Blood which is shed
for the remission of our sins: by which words he gives him self wholly
unto us, he will be our nourishment and spyrituall life: he will dwell in us by
his holy Spirit, and will that we abide in him by faith, that through belief we
may not perish, Ioh. 1.36.28.
but have eternal life, whereof he is the only heir and giver. Psalm 8.7.
Math. 11 Heb. 1.2 Ioh. 17, 12 27. and 28.18.
In like sort the breaking of the Bread of the Supper serves to the
confirmation of our faith and sure warranting of our salvation, in so much as
it assures us and causes us to see with spiritual eyes, that Jesus Christ
was once broken with the pains of death in Jerusalem, to deliver us from the
same, and to get us eternal life. Also, in that that by the commandment of
Christ Jesus, we take the Bread in our hands, and then the Cup, more over in
that that we eat the Bread and drink the Wine, which turn into the
nourishment of our bodies: we are certyfied, that by the hands of Faith we take
and embrace Jesus Christ our Lord for our only Saueour and redeemer, and that
by the same Faith we eat his body spiritually, and drink his blood to the hope
of eternal life.

Now every one of us must live by his own faith, Aba. 2 4. To. 1.17. Gal. 3
11. Heb. 10.38
according as we may make our confession in the belief which is called the
Apostles, in that that every man says by him self I beleelue in God, and says
not we believe.

We must not here cast our brains or think upon the believing or unbelieving,
upon the worthynes or unworthiness of an other man but upon our own. For Saint
Paul does not teach us to examine other men, or that other men should examine
us, but he says namely, let a man examine him self. 1. Cor 11.28.
Therefore let every one of us for his own part be assured in his heart, that
Jesus Christ the true Messiah is come into ye world to save sinners Mat.
11.28. and 9.13. Mar. 2.17. Luc. 2.11. Ioh. 3.17. Act. 4.12. and 5.35.
amongst whom he ought to account and esteem him self (by the example of s.
Paul) the cheifest. 1. Tim. 1.15
Let him believe that Jesus Christ came down from Heaven into Earth Ioh. 3.13.
to lift him up from Earth to Heaven, that he was made the Son of man: Mat.
1.1. John. 1.14. To. 1.3.
to make him the Child of God, that he was conceived by the holy Ghost Mat.
1.20 Luc. 1 31.
and that he was borne of the Virgin mary: Esa. 7 14. Mat. 1.25 Luc 1.31.
to purify and cleanse his wicked conception and birth. Let him persuade him
self that the Son of God has overcome the Devil: Mat. 4.1 Mar. 1.12. Luc 4 1.
to deliver him from the tyranny and slavish subjection of the devil, that he
has fulfilled all the Law Mat. 5.17. Luc. 16 27 To. 10.4.
(loouing God his father with all his heart, strength and might and his
neighbor as him self) to get him justice, that he appeered before Pilat Mar.
27.11 Mar. 15.2 Luc. 23.3. Ioh. 18.33.
an earthly Judge, and received as evil dooer sentence of condemnation for this
life: to exempt him from appering before the terrible judgment seat of Gods
justice to receive sentence of death and ever lasting damnation, for that he
had offended one eternal and ever lasting God. Let him assure him self that
the same Jesus Christ went down to hell Psa. 22.1 Mat. 27.46. Mar. 15.14.
for him, that is to say that he suffered the sorrows and terrors of the second
death, and of the sincere wrath of God to deliver him, that he dyed a death
accursed of God Deu. 21.23. Gala. 3.13.
in that he was hanged on the Cross: to purchase him life and blessing before
God, that he rose again, for a gage Mat. 28.6. Mar. 16.16. Ioh 20.14. Act. 2.24.
and assurance of his resurrection, that he assended into Heaven, Mar. 16.19.
Luc. 24.58 Act. 2.9.
for a certain token that he also shall assend thither, that he sits on the
right hand of God his Father: to be for him an everlasting Priest teacher,
king defender, reconciler, and aduorate, tobe short, ye he shall come at his
last coming, for his comfort and full redemption. We must also every one of us
for his own part make proper unto our selves, yea and make ours all the
goodness and all the riches that is in Jesus Christ: because that in giving him
self to us he gives us also his benefits. So then in that that Jesus Christ
is God: it is to make us partakers of his divinity, in that that he is heir
and Lord of the world: it is to make us partakers of his Lordshippe and
inheritance, and that we recover in him the government of all things, which we
lost in Adam, in that he is well belooued of his Father: it is that we may be
acceptable unto him, in that that he is rich: it is to make us Partakers of
his riches, in that that he has all power against the Devil, Sin, Hell,
Antichriste the world, and all our enemies: it is to defend and sheelde us, in
that that he is just and good, it is to iustifye us, and make us good, in that
that he is happy and immortal, it is to make us partakers of his blessedness
and immortality.

When we shall thus particulerly apply all the actions and benefits of Jesus
our Lord and also all his essential qualityes unto our selves, putting a whole
trust in him, and in his promises, and distrusting our selves, then may we
boldly come to the Lords table, where at we shall enjoy Jesus Christ God and
man by the benefit of faith, and shall feel moreover a great increace and
augmentatio^ of the same.

But we must note that it is impossible for us to be unite and made one with
Christ, and to be made partakers of ye treasures and riches which are in him,
unless we first renounce Antichriste and his kingdom, and unless we detest
all Idolatry, superstion and traditions of men, directly contrary to ye pure
service of God, bounded and limited out in his word. For seeing ye God is our
only creator: and he gives him self Genesis 17.12.
wholly unto us in the person of his son Jesus Christ ye true Isaac in who^e
all the nations of ye earth are blessed Even. 12.18.
it is great reason ye likewise by faith we give up our selves and yield us
wholly unto god. And thence is it ye God in his law does rightfully require of
his people, ye they have no other Gods but him. Ec. 20.2.
And yt they loone him withal their heart, with all their soul, with all their
strength and understanding, that is to say, with al their parts as well inward as
outward. And thence is it also ye God does not only rebuke and reprove all
them ye halt on both sides. 1. Reg. 18.20.
but commands also ye they which sacrifice unto strange Gods, should be
put to death. Deuteronomy. 13.1. and 17.5.
And to this purpose S. Paul (minding to warn the Corinthians to flee from
Idolatrye) uses an argument taken from ye knitting to gither and union that we
have with Jesus Christ our lord in ye supper speaking after this sort. 1 Cor.
10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? And the bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? As if he would say that seeing ye Corinthians ca^e not to ye supper
to be partakers simply of earthly elements but to be partakers really and in
deed of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be made one with him by
faith, and be made flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones, ye therefore it
were to great wickedness and abomination to be present in ye assemblyes of
Infidels or to be partaker of their Idolatry, and therefore ye Apostle adds
afterward 1. Cor. 10.21.
that the Corinthia^s cannot drik of ye cup of ye L. and the cup of Devils: and
that they cannot be partakers of the Lords Table and of the table of Devils.
Whereby he signifies that it is impossible to serve God and the devil together,
and that who so ever does communicate with Idolatry: does manifestly renounce
our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore seeing that darkness is no more contrary to
light, vice to virtue, death to life, paradise to Hell, then ye Pope and his
doctrine is contrary to our Lord Jesus Christ and to his holy gospel: it
behooves all true faithful people to withdraw them selves wholly from popery
and cast of without delay ye yoke of that Romish Antichrist, that they may give
them selves wholly to ye service of this saueour and redeemer Jesus Christ,
but if so be that ye communion that we have with the son of God, and the
promises of the heavenly Father cannot entice and persuade us to yield our
selves wholly to God, to put our trust in him only, to serve and worship him
only, according to his will, but that we will yet cleue unto Antichrist and his
servants and ministers: yet at the lest, let the threatenings and judgments of
God hinder us and fear us so to do, as when it is said Apo. 18.4.
go out of her my people ye ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. And again, Apo. 14.9.10.11.
if any man worship the beast and his Image and receive his mark in his
forehed, or in his hand the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
yea of the pure wine, which is poured into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be
tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.
And that stink of their torment shall ascend evermore: and they shall have no
rest day nor night, which worship the beast and his Image, and who so ever
receives the print of his name. And again. Apo. 21.8.
The fearful and unbelieving, the abominable murderers, whoremongers,
Sorcerers, Idolatours, and all liars shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone which is the second death. Let this therefore be
well printed in our hearts, that we be not seduced and destroyed with the vain
seruers of this world, which think it a thing not impossible to serve God and
the devil, Jesus Christ and Antichriste, to follow the commandments of God,
and of men, and to satisfy the affections of the spirit and of the flesh all
at once.

Of Repentance. Article. 2.
THe preparation whereof we spoke before touching Faith which applied unto every
one of us particulerly, Jesus Christ with all his riches and blessings can
have no place in us, unless it bring forth also in us a true repentance: that
is to say, a true misliking of evil, and a burning love and affection of
goodness, as we see the example in David, Psa. 51.1.
Peeter Mar. 26.75. Mat. 14.72. Luc. 22.61.
Paul, Act. 9.5. 1. Tim. 1 13
and other holy men. We must have a sorrow and unfeigned greef, for that we have
offended God, for that we have before times wickedly abused our creation,
redemption, and Baptism, for that we have provoked God with all our members,
for that we have abused our understanding, heart, tung, feet and hands: for that
we have given and set forth our souls and bodies (which are the temples
wherein God would dwell) to Infidelity, Idolatrye, superstition, filthiness,
blasphemy, whordo^e, extortion, usury, robery, gluttony, drunkenness,
ambition, excess, riot and other worldly vanities which is as much as if we
would have lodged God the father, the son and the holy ghost: in a most
stinking and filthy privy. We must therefore be sorry for our wicked life passed,
using a true and severe examining of our selves, which may bring forth in us a
displeasantnesse and horror of our fore passed renting and breaking by all
manner of menes of the law of God, to follow the will of the Devil, of the world
and of the flesh. Now the breking Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14 21. Luc. 22.19. Act. 2
42. and 20.7. 1. Cor. 11.14.
of the bread of the Supper (which is omitted in the paosure of the Papists)
should cause us to acknowledge and detest our wickedness, that is to say,
whatsoever is found in us contrary and repugnaunt to the pure and holy law of
God. For in that that the bread is broken for us, or rather in ye that we break
the bread of the Supper our of Lord Jesus Christ: it signifies unto us that
indeed it is we, that it is our sins and iniquityes, which have crucified and
put to death the Lord of life, who is the very same Jesus Christ our Lord. So
that we must not do as in times passed ye Infidels did, which made great
lamentatio^s and inuectiues against the Jews, Pontius Pilate, Herod, Judas,
and them that had executed and put Christ to death, and in the mean season
flattered the^ selves: vaunting of their own merits and deserts, and did not
narowly consider that Judas, Pontious Pilate, and Herod, were but executers and
ministers of their impietyes and sins. Let us therefore consider in the
breaking of the bread, that our sins, yea the sins of every one of us
severally, crucified the son of God, and brake him with the sorrows of the
first and second death, as namely the words of the Supper do show that the
body of Jesus Christ was broken for us, and his blood was shed for the
remission of our sins. And our heavenly father witnesses the same, speaking
of ye death of his son Ep. 53.3
for the sins of my people, have I smitten him. The^ if it be so that our
sins being way in the balaunce of the Justice of God, were found to be so
weighty and of so great importance that his wrath could never have been
appeased toward us, but by the death of his only Son, which makes full
satisfaction, I say, by the cruel and ignominious death of the cross. How
should not we hence forward detest and abhor our sin, as that which is the
cruel and bloody murderer of the only son of God? Behold the Mat. 27.4.51.
Sun and the Moon, behold the element, behold the vale of the Temple, behold
the stones and Rocks which were moved at the death of Jesus Christ, which
showed forth tokens of sorrow, and we which bear within our selves the cause of
his death, shall not we have in horror and detestation this cursed enemy sin,
that is lodged within us?

Shall we suffer him to rule and dwell in us, as before, that it may bring home
death unto us? Not so: but we must detest it as that that before time separated
us from God our cheifest happiness, as that that caused us to loose the Image
and similitude of God, according to which we were created at the beginning by
God. It is that that has wholly destroyed us, that has deprived us of
holiness and righteousness, that has banished us out of paradise, that has
made us flaues to the tyranny of the devil, ye has made us subject to so many
miseryes, and diseases, and tobe short, both to the first and second death, it
is that which after it had set a bar and division between God and us, caused us
to see our own filthiness, purchased unto us shameful and vilanous infamy, made
us to tremble at the voice of our God which was before most pleasant and
loouing unto us. It is that whereby the wrath of God is heaped upon men, that
makes the Earth to become barrain and to bring forth thorns and thistles,
that causes women to bring forth in sorrow, and that men eat their bread in ye
sweat and labor of their bodies. Seeing then that sin brings forth and
procures unto us daily so many miseries: it follows ye we ought to withdraw
our selves from it, if we will not be wilful enemies of our own happiness and
salvation. Now the^ I cite here all disordered and flaunderous persons, which
notwithstanding are so impudent to present them selves to the Lords holy table.
I ask them what it is that they promised to God and his church in baptism?
They will answer me that they promised. God to renounce the Devil and all his
works. But one of the cheef and principal works of the devil is sin. Why do
they not then abstain from it? Why are they traitors and disobedient to God
and his Church? Why have they conspired with the devil, the world and the
flesh, against their own salvation? How dare they present them selves before
God, to ask him pardon and remission of their sins: seeing that more and
more, they hepe sin upon sin, and crucify and kill again (as much as in them
lies) the son of God, or at the least make a scorn and scoff of the
purging of his blood which was applied unto them in Baptism? Put the case that
a wicked man, poor and destitute of all help, were fallen into a mire whence
out he could by no menes raise up him self, and that some yung Prince passing
that way, took ye pains to draw him out of this ditch to make him clean, to
clad him with gorgeous and precious apparel, if this wicked man, and poor
miserable caitif fall again into this mire and beray both him self and his
apparel, being moreover in great danger of his life, would not one think that
this man were maruelously unkind and a contemner of that princely bounty and
goodness, and on the other side, a wilful and sworn enemy of his own health,
worthy tobe lost and cast away with out any help or assistance? Even so
sounds our cause with Jesus Christ. We fell all into the pudle of sin in the
person of Adam Genesis 3.6. Psalm. 39. and. 15.
we are all wicked dooers and worthy of an hundredth thousand gibbetes before
God, we can by no means get out of our selves and out of the ditch of
destruction wherinto we are al fallen of our own fault. Behold ye Son of
God, the king of kings, ye Lord of Lords, which comes to draw us out of this
pudle, which comes to wash us with his precious blood, which vouchsafes to
clad us with the proper Cloak of his righteousness and innocence. If we come again
to wallow our selnes in ye puddle of sin, if we plese our selves in it, if we
defile and be dirt the robe of innocency which he has given us in baptism,
are we not manifest contemners of the inestimable love and gift of Jesus
Christ, and are moreover worthy to rot a thousand times in our filthynes, or
rather to gnash our teeh everlastingly with ye deuiles in hell? It is evident.

Seeing then that it is so ye the end of our redemption, baptism, and
justification requires of us to abstain from sin, (so farfoorth as possibly we
may, and our fleshly infirmity will suffer) we must take all pains and
diligence by the virtue of the spirit of God to cast out from us all foulenes
and filthynes, Idolatry, blasphemy, rebellion, hatred, murder, whordome, theft
and usury and all other things contrary to the holy law, if we will not be more
the^ ingrate toward Jesus Christ and open enemies of his Church and our own
salvation. But because it is not sufficient for the induing of a true and
helthful repentance to acknowledge our misery, to abhor it, to confess it
and to abstain from it, but we must also know, desire and do ye good which
God commands in his word: we must consider ye argument which ought ernestly
to stir us up to the sanctifying of the name of God. First in that we are
joined and made one with Christ Jesus in the Supper in that we are made flesh
of his flesh, and bones of his bones, in that we live by his holy spirit. Ought
not this upon good cause to exhort us to conform our selves to the Image and
likeness of the holiness of our Lord Jesus Christ? Can he dwell in us, nourish
us with his own substance, quicken us with his holy spirit, join us unto him
self by the bond of faith, yet so that he his holy spirit and faith bring not
forth in us good and holy woorks? Moreover, for so much as he does not give
him self unto us halfmele and destitute of his qualities, and richis, and
accompanied with all spiritual gifts and blessings, adorned with righteousness
and perfection, accompanied with innocence and sanctification, how can we
receive Jesus Christ enriched with all his graces that the righteousness of our
head may not shine in us which are his members, yea, shine in all our parts
as well in ward as outward? Must it needs be that the two parts of our soul
that is to say, our mind and heart, which ought to apprehend and take hold of
the promises of God, which ought to receive by faith the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that is to say, whole Jesus Christ true God, equal in
every respect to God his father, and true man made of humain body and soul:
that this mind and heart I say must be applied to the meditation and love of
worldly and wicked things, being destitute of the knowledge and love of God,
and of the love of our neighbor? Does it behooue our body which is the
temple of God, to be profaned? That our ears which were created of God to
hear his voice should be stopped against it, and be open to vanities, wanton
talk and unchaste worldly songs? Does it behooue our tung which is bound by
ye right of creation, to sing the praises of God, and by the right of
redemption to show forth the Lords death til he come 1. Cor. 11.
that this tung which is so proper an instrument of the glory of God, should be
mute to goodness, and incessantly occupied in backbiting, slandering,
blaspheming, or at the least in speaking idle words, whereof one day we shall
yield an account before the throne of the majesty of God? Mat. 12.36.
Does it behooue our mouth which ought to receive the blessed sign of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus to to suppress the benefit of our redemption
and to have Adders poison in it? Does it behooue our hand which ought to take
at the Supper the assured gage of the love of God, the infallible pledges of
his legue with us, the ernest penny of our salvation, to be void of goodness,
and be side that, be given to extortion, theft, murder, oppression and
violence? Does it behooue our feet which ought to run and make haste to
goodness, to be ready and light to run to mischeef? No surely but as he which
calls us is holy, Luc. 11.44 and 19.25. and 20.7. Luc. 1.75 1. Pet. 1.38
so likewise must we also be wholly holy, as he has brought us by holy
baptism into his holy house which is his Church, the communion of Saints: even
so likewise must we lead therein a good and holy conversation, as he has
washed us from our sins, by the precious blood of his son Jesus Christ: so
must we dye to them, and live in righteousness, as he has called us to the
incorruptible hope of the blessed resurrection and eternal life: so must we
lift up our hearts on hye, and not be buried like Moules in this frail and
transitory Earth. To be short, seeing that the grace of God is set before us
every day, and his holy word sou^deth in our ears Tit. 2 11 12.13.14.
to this only end that it may be salvation unto us, and that (renou^cing all
ungodliness and worldly desires) we should live soberly, justly, and godly in
this present world, looking for the blessed hope and appeering of the glory of
the mighty God, and of our Saueour Jesus Christ: we must pray unto this good
God, that he would give us grace so to behave our selves toward him in living
godly, so toward our neighbors, in living justly, so toward our selves, in
living soberly: that we may be found at the day irreprensible, by the means of
that his well belooue Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of thanks giving. Article. 3.
THirdly we must give thanks to this good God for the benefit of our
redemption, and for this cause it is that the ancients called the holly
Supper, Eucharistie, that is to say, gratefulnes, good grace, giving of thanks.
For if so be that our ordinary food, and daily bread which God gives us for
the nourishment of our bodies, ought to be sanctified by the word, 1. Tim. 4.
and. 5.
and received with thanks giving: ought we not much more to thank God for the
heavenly bread, and for the nourishment of our souls which is offered unto us
and really given us in the holy supper of Jesus Christ?

And we see also how Jesus Christ him self shows us an example heerof. For
when he took the bread of the Supper, S. Matthew Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22.
and S. Mark say, that Jesus Christ blessed. And S. Luke expounds this word
to bless when he says that he gave Luc. 22.19.
thanks. Now then, seeing that we see ye Jesus Christ when he took the bread
of ye Supper gave thanks to God his Father, as he did also when he took the
cup Mar. 26.27. Mar. 14.23. Luc. 21.17.
and that for the redemption of man kind: it is our duty to do the like. And
yt we may be ye better moved to give thanks to God: we have to consider the
greatness of ye benefit of our redemption and the excellency of the gift which
God gives us at this holy table, which cannot be done: unless we consider our
miserable condition, which was before figured by the te^porall captivity of
Egypt. We see there how Pharaoh Ex. 1. and 2. and 3.
was strong and mighty, how he knew not the eternal, how he went about to kill
all the seed of the Israelits, by the suppression and death of their men
children, we see also how excessiuely he caused ye Israelites to woork without
any hope of wages, how he would not suffer them by any means to sacrifice to
the Lord, nor to go forth of the land of Egypt.

Which thing continued not for one year or two: but for the space of four
hundred and thirty Ex. 12.20.
years. Here may we lively behold a draught of our misery. We were all lost
and destroyed in Adam. We were holden captives in the helly Egypt under the
tyranny of a spiritual Pharaoh, which is the Devil.

This tirant was strong and mighty: he suffered us not to serve our God. He
made us to labor incessantly in slavish and unfruitful woorks of sin to the
establishment of his own kingdom. He flew not only our men Children: but he
led us all indiferently, to utter ruin and destrustion. And this tyranny bad
not only continued for a certain time: but had been eternal and for ever
parmanent, if the mercy and power of our God had not plucked us out of it by
the ministry of the true Moses, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
true Lamb which the heavenly Father has delivered to death, to deliver us
from it and purchase us eternal life. As it is said, that God so looued the
world: that he has given his only begotten son John. 3.16.
that who soever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Now then, seeing this good God has done in us so great a pleasure, as to free
us from the tyranny of the Devil, of sin, of death, of hell: seeing ye his
love was so great that he delivered his only Son to the cruel and
ignominious death of the cross, for us which were the servants and bond slaves
of Satan: his welbelooued for us which were his enemies: the just, and the
Lamb without spot, for us which were sinners and corrupt: the only heir of
Paradise, for us which were worthily heirs of hell: ought we not tobe ravished
with admiration of this great and unspeakable love of God toward us, and our
tungs tobe for ever displayed to publish with loud voice the praise of ye
benefit of our redemption? It is very reasonable, and therefore we see that Jesus
Christ admonishes us of our duty in this behalf, speaking of the selebration
of the holy Supper. Luc. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
Do this in remembrance of me. And S. Paul expresses what remembrance this
is when he aduertiseth us, 1. Cor. 11.26.
that as often as we shall eat this bread, and drink this cup: we show the
Lords death til he come.

Seeing then ye God requires of us a true acknowledging of his benefits which
we receive at his hands and bou^tifulnes, by ye menes of our Lord Jesus Christ:
let us take heed that we be not spotted with ye fault of in gratitude,
especially if we will not incur the wrathful displeasure of God and
acknowledge him for Judge, whom we would not acknowledge for a gentle and
merciful father, as S. Paul also to this purpose thretneth the ingrate and
forgetful, when he says, whosoever shall eat this bread and drinck the cup of
the Lord unworthily: eats and drinks his own damnation. And rightfully is
the vengeance of God displayed against them which wickedly suppress ye glory
of God, in that that concerns their own salvation. For if so be that a
murderer ready to be hanged for his wicked deeds casting away and rejecting his
Princes gracious pardon (and not vouchsauing to thank him for it) deserves
worthily the gallous, or if a Child deserve ye rod, for not giving once I
thank you to his father, when he has received at his hands great and singular
benefits, much more we which for our sinful and wicked deeds deserve tobe
hanged in hell, if we contemn ye grace of God our souerain prince, and make no
count of this everlasting benefits, which our heavenly father presents us
withal in Jesus Christ, who is offered to us in the Supper, by good right and
reason we are worthy to perish for our unkindness and unthankfulness. But here
must we diligently mark the points that follow.

First this acknowledging must be made to one only God by his only son Jesus
Christ. For even as God by his only son has created us, and redeemed us
from everlasting death: so will he that to him alone, and by him alone, in whom
he is well pleased: we render thanks for all his benefits. As we see how S.
Paul sets this forth unto us in many places, and precisely in ye Epistle
to the Ephesians where he says. Blessed be God even ye father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all his spiritual blessing in
Heaueuly things in Christ as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world, but they which call upon Saints and put their trust in them, or in
their merits, they also which make them patrons and advocates to God ward,
and like wise they which trust in their own strength, in their own free will
or good woorks: rob God of his glory, and can not give him true thanks for the
benefit of redemption. For we cannot give to any creature the least jot that
may be in the matter of our salvation: but we commit sacrilege against God
the creator. And therefore renouncing our selves and every living creature: let
us say with the Apostle 1. Ti. 1.17.
unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be honor
and glory for ever and ever Amen.

Secondly thanks must be given not with the mouth only: but with the heart also.
For seeing that God is a spirit: he riquireth a service of us, that is
agreeable to his nature, that is to say, he will be served of us in spirit and
truth. And therefore when that praising of God for the benefit of redemption,
comes in question: we must have our hearts lift up on hye, and there must be a
consent and mutual agreement between our inward affections and our tungs, as
we see how David exhorts himself to the same, when he says. Psalm. 103.1
My soul praise thou the Lord and all ye is within me praise his holy name. My
soul (I say) praise thou ye Lord, and forget not all his benefits. And the
blessed Virgin sings the self same in her song, saying Luc. 1.46.
My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Saueour, now,
all hipocrits, and wicked persons, also they that sing and praise in an
unknown tung, are here reproved. For where there is no understanding: there is
no affection nor will, and consequently no Faith, without which: what soever we
do be it never so fair and glorious before men, it is but sin and
abomination before God. Let us take heed therefore ye in this be half we wander
not and go astray, lest we be condemned with ye Jewish people which honored
and served God in vain, in so much as they came near unto him only with their
mouths, Esa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8.
and honored him with their lips, but not with their hearts.

Thirdly it must be done at all times and seasons, that is to say, as well in
affliction: as in prosperity, and to this purpose David protests. Psa. 34.1
That he will always give thanks unto his Lord, and that his praise shall be in
his mouth continually. And Saint Paul admonishes the Thessalonians to 1 Thessalonians. 5 18.
give thanks in all things: adding, for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus. But this is clean contrary to time seruers, and to all them which in
time of prosperity fawn upon the gospel and are well content for that time
to praise God whom afterward in time of affliction they defye and set naught
by.

The cause of this mischeef is, for that they have not yielded them selves to
the Church of God for a good end and purpose, as to extol the glory of God,
to seek their own salvation, and the salvation of their brethern, but rather
to greaten them selves in their goods and honors, and to satisfye their own
affections. And therefore it comes to pass that as soon as the devil lifts
up his horns against the Church of God, and perscutions be at hand: they melt
away by and by in affliction, as does War before the fire, they are offended,
and parched with the Sun of the Cross, they are sorry for the good they have
done, they repent the^ selves that they were so hasty to confess the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ in the assembly of the faithful, they wish they had
never known God nor his word, nor his Church, nor his ministers, because they
make greter account (as Esau did) of one mess of pottage Genesis 25.38.
then of the birthright and blessing of the heavenly father, But let such manner
of persons know ye it shall no more profit them, that they made a fair
beginning and ioly holding up of their buckler: then it did Cain, Esau, Saul,
Judas. For seeing that sentence is general, that whosoever continues unto the
end he shall be saved: it follows by the contrary ye all they which do not
coutinue constantly in the confession of the son of God, and are hindered by
their goods and honors, love of the world, ease of their flesh, to set forth
and declare with a continual train, the benefit of our redemption: it follows
(I say) that such persons shall go to ruin and everlasting destruction Last of
all, this acknowledging must not only be private: but public, in the face
and presence of the whole church, and therefore as David says Psalm. 116.12
13.14.
what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows
unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his people. And again, Psalm.
10.9.10.
I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation, to I have not
refrained my lips, O Lord thou know, I have not hid thy righteousness
within mine heart, but I have declared thy truth and thy salvation, I have not
concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the great congregation. So then this
ought tobe well printed in the heart of the weke, and those that are ashamed to
confess and praise openly our Lord Jesus Christ. For seeing that God does
auouche us openly for his people and he gives him self freely unto us, and to
our children, in the person of his well belooued son our Lord Jesus Christ:
we can do no less the^ avouch him publicly for our god and saueour, in the
person of that same his welbelooued son Christ Jesus our Lord.

Of Love. Article. 4.
FAith, Repentance, and acknowledging of Gods benefits, cannot have place in
us, and in vain are we called Christians, or that we brag of our selves for the
practice of the commandments of the first table, which concern the service
of God before mentioned: unless we show the effects by the keeping of the
commandments of the second Table, which concern ye love of our neighbor,
without which also we cannot worthily present our selves to the holy Table of
Jesus Christ our Lord. And therefore is it that Jesus Christ him self in the
sermon of the Supper which he made to his Apostles the same night that he was
betrayed and delivered to death for us, did diligently beat this point into
their heads, saying. Ioh 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye army Disciples, if ye have love one to au
other. And again, Ioh. 15.12.13.14.
This is my commandment that ye love one an other, as I have looued you.
Greater love then this has no man, when any man bestows his life for his
Friends. Ye are my friends: if ye do what so ever I command you. To this same
end tends also that, that the same night Jesus Christ washed the feet of
his Apostles, Ioh. 13.12.13.14, 15.
acter which washing: he said unto them, know ye what I have done to you? ye
call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am, If I then your Lord and
Master have washed your feet: ye also ought to wash one an others feet. For I
have given you an example that ye should do even as I have done do you.

We must therefore (according to ye commandment and example of the son of
God) be furnished with true and hot love, that we may worthily present our
selves to the Lords table. If we will have a true description of this love: we
must take it of S, Paul, which points it out in lively colors, writing to
ye Corinthians in this sort. 1. Cor. 13.4.
Love (says he) suffers long, it is bountiful, love enuieth not, love
does not boast it self, it is not puffed up, it disdayneth not, it seeks not
her own things, it is not provoked to anger, it thinks not evil, it
rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. It suffers all
things, it believes all things, it hops all things, it indureth all things.
See what manner of love ours ought tobe, every one of us must endeavor that
all the parts of this description may rightly agree unto us. We are many ways
and in sundry sorts exhorted to this love and brotherly concord in the holy
Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ. First in that that we must wait one for an
other, 1. Cor. 11.35
and that it is not lawful for every one of us to celebrate the Supper
perticulerly and a part: but when the whole congregation is assembled
together, all the faithful together must take, eat and drink, the Bread and
wine of the Supper, according to the commandment of Jesus Christ. Mat.
26.26. Mar. 14.21. Luc. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.14
Take ye eat ye, and drink ye all of this. It is a true figure and testimony
of the unity ye ought tobe among us. Moreover in that that we being all
gethered together in one house of God, which is his Church, we do there all
call upon one self same Father which is in Heaven, we have all one self same
head, advocate and intercessour, which is Jesus Christ: Math. 12. Ioh. 11.17.
1. Tim. 2 1. John. 2.
we are all quickened with his holy Spirit which dwells in us, in that that
we all have one self same word of God, in that that we all eat of one self same
spiritual meat, and drinck all of the self same spiritual drink, in that also
that we all pretend as Brethren to one self same inheritance, which is the
kingdom of He auen: ought not this inflame us with true and hot love?
Finally, the making of the bread and wine of the Supper does teach us asso
what unity and concord we ought to have one with an other, for as we see, that
the bread is made of many corns, and yet not withstanding afterward is but
one self same lump of Bread: as we see also that the Wine is made of many
clusters of grapes, and yet after it is made, is but one only wine: in like
sort must the Christians which are many in them selves: be joined together
through love into one body, which is the Church, whereof Jesus Christ ought
tobe the only head and leader. But we must note that this love whereunto we are
exhorted by so many reasons of ye Supper, cannot be where there is envy,
brauling, co^tencions, rancour, debate and division: and therefore before we com
to the Supper, (which is a witness of our agreement as well with Christ as with
his congregation) if we have had any strife and contention with our brethern:
we must loouingly reconsile our selves unto them. If any man have offended us:
we must frankly and freely forgive our brethren Mat. 5.23.44.
yea our enemies, as we would that that good God should pardon us, and as we
see how Jesus Christ our Lord has left us an example of this love: when he
prayed to God his father for his enemies which put him to death, Luc 23.34.
as we read also that S. Stephen did the same. Act. 7.60.
Again, we must also mark, that this love ought tobe practiced in all estates.
Kings must love their subjects, they must be Nurces Esa. 49.23.
of ye church of God, loouers of common peace, they must use their people with
all moderation and clemency. So likewise must ye people honor the king, 1.
Peter. 2.13.14.15. To. 13.2.3
they must pay him their tribute faithfully, they must be obedient to all his
Lieutenants and Officers. The Pastor must love his flock, Act. 20.28.31 1.
Pet. 5.2.3.
he must watch, take pains, and pray incessantly for it. 1. Sa 12.13
So like wise must the sheep love their pastor, the Fathers their children,
the Children their fathers and Mothers, the Wife the husband, and the Husband
the wife, the Masters their servants, and the Servants their masters, and
every one in his calling must indeuer to exercise love in ye vocation whereunto
God has called him. For other wise it will be impossible for us to do our
duties faithfully, as well toward god: as toward men, if the rule of love do
not guide and govern us in all our doings.

Article. 5. Necessary observations for them that will come to the Lords table.
IN the articles aforesaid, consists the true examining of our selves,
notwithstanding we must take good heed to these points and notes which follow.

First we have to note, that we must not rast our heds and bend our brains to
examine curiously an other man's life: as many do, which stretch out and
scanne so narowly the blemishes of their Brethren, that they forget their own.
It is to be wished, and we must procure it as much as lies in us, that the
Church of God may be maintained in purity, without show of offense. But for so
much as in this world Corn shall always be mixed with chafe, Mat. 3.12.
weeds with whete, Mat. 13.24.
good fish with bad, Mat. 13.47.
Judas with true Apostles, Mat. 10.
foolish Virgins with wise, Mat. 1.25.
yet none of us must be offended therefore, and moreover let every man endeavor
to find that perfection in him self, which he desires to bring into an other.

Secondly, we must not think that faith, repentance, giuiuing of thanks and
love, and other virtues which God requires of us, can be perfet here in this
world, for there will be always in us, (what rege^erate and newborn so ever
we be) some remnants of sin, of incredulity, of lack of repentance, of
unthankfulness, and of selflooue, which is directly contrary and opposite, to
the true love of our neighbor. As long as we live, the flesh To. 7.23. and
8.6.7. Gal. 5.1.1. Pe. 5.8.
will fight against the Spirit, the Devil and the World, will make war against
us as the life of the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles do sufficiently
witness unto us, so that even to the last breath of our life, we shall have
need to crave of our God that he would forgive us our sins through his son
Jesus Christ.

Notwitstanding so far it is that the imperfections which are in us should
cause us to draw back from God and from this holy banquet: that rather (so
that we are displeased with our selves for the^) they ought to cause us to come
the sooner, to the intent that as poor famished creatures: we might more
greedily and with greater desire, receive Jesus Christ, which is the true
shepherd of our souls.

Thirdly, although it be not required to the worthy coming to the Supper, to
have a perfect faith, perfect repentance, perfect giving of thanks, perfect love:
yet must they be (notwithstanding) true, and proceed from the heart and from the
Spirit. Our faith must not be fained, our repentance must not be counterfeit
and painted, as that of Hipocrites: the thanks which we give to God must not
come only from the mouth, neither must we love our brethren in word only, and
not in deed: but let the whole profession of our faith, and christen life,
abooue all things be far from ostententation and hypocrisy, so ye we take more
pains to be good Christians in deed and before God: then to be so counted and
taken before men.

Against them that willingly and of set purpose abstain from the holy Supper
of the Lord. Article. 6.
AS there are many which do amiss in presenting them selves unworthily to the
communion: so there are many which do amiss on the contrary side, in that
they will by no means come, nor present them selves to this holy banquet. For
fear of communicating (as they say) unworthily, and so consequently tobe
culpable of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. But let them that so abstain
of set purpose from the Lords holy table: know that it is no less fault up on
an unthankfulness, and contempt, to abstain from the holy and sacred meats
which God presents to us at ye Supper: then to receive it unworthily, as we
see that a Patient which being very sick makes no account of the receipt and
diet which the Physician has prescribed: is no less faulty then he which
abuses, or uses it not competently, as the Physician has appointed.

Therefore let not this sort of people flatter them selves, as though by this
means they could be excused both before God and men, seeing that it is a most
certain truth, that so heinous an ingratitude, is in no wise tobe admitted, or
worthy excuse. For first of all, such men do willingly contemn the
commandment of Jesus Christ, which says to all his, do this, take ye eat ye.

Secondly they contemn the blessed remembrance of the death and passion of the
Son of God, who commands all the faithful to selebrate the Supper in
remembrance of him.

Thirdly, they contemn the price of their redemption, that is to say, the
precious body and blood of Jesus Christ, which are given and distributed to
all faithful Christians in the Supper according as it is said. This is my body,
which is given for you, this, is my blood which is shed for the remission of
your sins. Finally, they despise the church and the unity thereof, and
willingly excommunicate them selves from the Communion which the faithful have
in the Supper, as well with Jesus Christ: as one with an other. We see therefore
how fondly these contemners of the Lords holy Supper do fall, and ar utterly
inexcusable. And therefore let us take good heed that we follow them not, if we
will not be punished with the^, which for their Oxen Mat. 22.7. Luc. 14.22
Fermes, Wines, and trastique of merchandise refused to come to the marriage in
the Gospel.

Contrariwise of the^ which come unworthily to the holy Supper of the Lord, or
ought not be thereunto admitted. Article. 7.
Of them which sin against the first Article of the first preparation, which
consists in true faith,
ALl Atheists, that is, such as are with out God, misbeleeuers, ignorant of God
and his word, all heretics and false prophets all Magicians, Idolaters, and
superstitious, which are partakers of the tables of Devils, likewise all they
which have but an historical Faith, all the adherents and ministers of the
Roomish Antichrist, and they that establish by any manner (whatsoever) his
kingdom, or depend there on, also all they which have not yielded them selves
to the Church of God, and have not made profession of their Faith, finally all
they that customably swear, either by the name of God or by their Faith, and
apply it to vain matters, and causes of no value, all these ought to abstain
from the Lords Table, for so much as they have not a true trust in God,
without the which we can not be members of Jesus Christ, nor consequently
be apt and meet to receive life of him, which is the only head of the true
faithful.

Of them which sin against the second Article of the second preparation which
consists in Repentance.
ALl they which live slanderously, all impenitent and unthrifts, all contemners
of God, of his word and of his holy assemblies, all blasphemers and denyers of
the name of God, all despisers of correction and ecclesiastical discipline,
they also ye hau^t and frequent ordinarily evil company, which walk in the
counsel of the wicked Psalm. 1 1.
which stand in the way of sinners, which sit in the seat of the scorneful. To
be short, they in whom appears no amendment of life, no regeneration, and
they that conimit heinous and infamous vices, and such as are tobe punished by
the magistrate, all these, after that they are known tobe such: ought not tobe
admitted to the supper, and if they present them selves unto it: they ought not
tobe received, lest that that is holy be given to Dogs and Swine, Mat. 7.6.
to the great dishonor of God, and slander of his Church.

Of them which sin against the third Article of the third preparation which
consists in giving of thanks.
WIithout true faith and repentance: we cannot be meet to set forth the parises
of God, who will not be praised by the mouth of the wicked, Psalm. 50.16.
and therefore all Infidels, Igno rants and impenitent, sin also against this
Article, and ought not tobe received to the Lords Supper. Also they that are
mad or fools, either by nature or some other accident. They also which by
reason that they be under age (as little children) can not show forth the
Lords death til he come, are not capable of the Supper.

Finally, they which by fragilitie, unkindness, and contempt, in time of
persecution did forsake Gods cause, and renounce the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, ought not also tobe admitted thither: unless that they do first make
open confession of their fault, and be reconciled to the Church of God.

Of them which sin against the fourth article of the fourth preparation which
consists in Love toward our neighbors.
THe disobedient to Father and mother, to the magistrate, and to al superiors,
the seditious conspiratours, fighters, murderers, and such as bear malice and
hatred against their neighbors, they that are carried away with a desire of
reuengement, whoremongers, adulterers, incontinent bougerers, drunkards, and
gluttons, deceivers, covetous, thieves, and usurers, backbiters, mockers, false
witnesses, liars, and conmon perjured persons, and in sum, all they which make
an art of the breach of love toward their neighbors, contained in the second
table of the law of God, ought not tobe received to the Supper. For seeing that
the Scripture pronounces thus, that such sort of men have none, acquaintance
of God, are shut out of the kingdom of Heaven, Ephe. 5.5. Psalm. 15.
and shall not dwell in the Lords holy mountain: they ought of right tobe shut
out from these sacred signs, whereby the faithful are joined to Jesus Christ
and made possessors of eternal life.

Finis.
A Dialogue of the preparation to the holy Supper of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
The Father. How must we be prepared to come worthily to the supper of our
Lord Jesus Christ?


The Child. We must examine our selves according to the precept of the holy
Apostle S. Paul.


F. Wherein consists the eramination of our selves?


C. In two points. First, that we behave ourselves as it is meet toward God,
who calls us to this holy banquet.


Then that we do our duty to our Brethren which are called to this holy Table
with us.

F. What is our duty toward God?


C. It consists principally in three points


F. Which are they?


C. In faith, repentance and giving of thanks.


F. What is faith?


C. It is a certain assurance that God is our father and Saueour in the name
of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.


F. This assurance, comes it of us?


C. No, John. 1. John. 17. Rom 10. Romans 8. Gala. 4.
for the faithful are not borne of flesh, nor blood: neither of the will of
man, but they are borne of God.


F. But what means does God use to beget us unto him, and to give us faith?


C. His word confirmed in us by ye woork of the holy Ghost, who cries in our
hearts Abba, that is to say, father.


F. Is not this faith confirmed and ratyfied in us by the Lords Supper?


C. Yes.


F. How so?


C. First of all in that that Jesus Christ gives himself unto us, promising
us that his body was given to death for us, and that his blood was shed for the
remission of our sins.


F. What more?


C. In that that the bread and wine which we take, eat, and drink, according
to Gods institution, teach us that through faith we take, eat, and drink the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, for the nourishment of our souls.


F. And those that are Insidels, can they eat the body of Jesus Christ, and
drinck his blood?


C. No, because they have no true Faith, without which we can not be members of
Jesus Christ, nor consequently receive life of him who is the only head of the
faithful.


F. What then do the Infidels when they receive the Sacrament of the Supper?


C. They eat and drink their own damnation, 1. Cor. 11.
in sted of receiving the pledges and gages of their salnation.


F. Where must the true faithful seek Jesus Christ, to enjoy him, and to have
the fruition of him?


C. In heaven. For if we be risen again with Christ: Colo. 3.
we must seek the things that are on hye, where Christ is sitting on the right
hand of God.


F. Is not this the matter that the auneient Bishops used in the celebration of
the Supper, to say to the people, Sursum corda, that is, lift up your hearts?


C. Yes. And therefore the people answered. Habemus ad Dominum. We have them to
the Lord. Now that Jesus Christ is in Heaven and we on earth: how can we be
joined and unite or made one with him?


C. By faith and by the woork of the holy Ghost, which can well join and knit
that that is otherwise separated by distance of place.


F. What shall we then say of them that seek Jesus Christ in the Elements of
the Supper, and say that there is a Transubstantiation of the bread and wine,
into the body and blood of Jesus Christ?


C. They err diverse and sundry ways.


F, How so?


C. First, they speak against three Articles of our Belief, that is, that
Jesus Christ is ascended up into Heaven, that he sits on the right hand of
God, and that he shall not depart from thence til he come to judge vothe the
quick and the dead.


F. What more?


C. By their transubstantiation also they abolish the sign of the Sacrament,
that is to say, the bread and the wine, and consequently they abolish the
Sacrament of the Supper, which cannot be without the sign.


F. This doctrine of Transubstantiation has it no other absurdities?


C, Yes, for it gives holy things to swine, and graniteth, that the Insidels
may eat Jesus Christ. Moreover it makes men Idotaters, and causes them to
worship the Sactament.


F. Say on.


C. It makes also the glorious body of Jesus Christ subject to rotting and
filth.

Tobe short it abolisheth the true humanity of the son of God, making him an
infinite body, and such an one as is in all places.


F. But has not Jesus Christ said, Math. 28. Math. 18.
that he would be with us unto the end of the world: and where as two or three
should be gathered together in his name, there he would be in the midst of
them?


C. Yes. But these places must be understood of the presence of his divinity,
and not of his humanity.


F. How can thou prove that?


C. By the witnasse of Jesus Christ him self (which says) that we shall
always have the poor with us: John. 12. Ict. 3.21.
but him we shall not have always, and S. Peeter says, the Heaven must contain
Jesus Christ, until the restoring of all things.


F. Therefore thou will conclude, that although Jesus Christ by his divinity,
and his holy Spirit be always with us: yet notwithstanding touching his
humanity he can be but in one certain place, that is in Heaven.


C. Yea, Aug. 2. Psalm. 54.
as S. Augustine also witnesses saying. Until heaven be ended, the Lord shall be
always on hie. But the truth of the Lord is also with us For his body wherein
he was raised: must needs be in one certain place, but his truth is spread
throughout.


F. What is the sum of this true faith which seeks not Jesus Christ in
Earth, but in Heaven?


C. I believe in God which has created me, I believe in Jesus Christ which
has redeemed me from sin, from Satan, from Hell and from death, I believe also
in the holy Ghost, which has sanctified me.


F. Why say thou perticulerly, I beeleeue, and not we believe?


C. Because that every one must examine himself, Hab. 2. Romans 1. Gala. 3. Hev.
10.
and live by his own faith, and not by the faith of other men.


F. How must that be done?


C. When we do every man particulerly for him self apply Jesus Christ unto
him self with all his blessings and riches.


F. What riches are there in Jesus Christ?


C There is salvation for the lost, life for the dead truth for the liers,
wisdoine for the ignorant, Justice for the sinners, sanctification ctification
for the impure ones, redemption for the captives.


F. Must we therefore by faith apply all these things unto us, seeing we are by
nature lost, dead, liars, ignorant, sinners, unclean and captives?


C. Yea, for Jesus Christ has taken upon him all our miseryes and wretch
ones, to give and communicate unto us all his blessings and riches, as also in
deed they be distributed unto us in his holy Supper.


F. Let us now speak of the second part of our duty toward God, which
consists in repentance, and first of all what repentance is.


C. It is a sorowfulnes and hafred of evil and a love of that that is good.


F. Tobe sorry and grieved for our wicked nesse, is it not necessary to know it?


C. Yes.


F. How do we know the evil ye is in us?


C. First of all by our beginning for that that is borne of flesh is flesh.
Secondly because we transgress the law of God, which is the rule of all
perfection and Justice. Third ly by the ordinary afflictions, which God
sends us because of our sins.


F. Have we not also the Sacraments a glass to behold our sins in?


C. We have so. For is we were not sinners: we should have no need of remission
of our sins in Baptism. And if we were not in death it were in vain for us
to come to the Supper, to seek life and salvation in Jesus Christ.


F. When we know our sins, ought we not confess them before God?


C. Yes. Psalm. 32. and ^. Lut. 18.
According to the example of David and the Publican, if we will be justified
before God.


F. Why should we confess and acknow sedge our sins before God?


C. To obfain parden and full remission, as God is just and faithful to do it.


F. For what end and purpose does God pardon us our sins?


C, For three principal ends.


F. What are they?


C. First to this end, that we should reconcile our selves to our enemies,
secondly, that we should forgive them, thyrdly that we should abstain from
sin, and live to righteousness.


F. Is there nothing in the Supper, that exhorts us to flee and hate ^m?


C. Yes, for in that that we break the bread of the Supper: it shows us
that our sins did brute and break the Son of God with the sorrows of death.


F. What follows then?


C. That we should condemn and detest our sins, as the Authoures of the
death of the Son of God.


F. Is it sufficient to abstain from evil, and not to do good?


C. No, for every tree that brings not forth good fruit: Math. 3. and 5 Mat.
25.
is cut down and cast into the fire. And therefore the naughty Sernant was cast
into utter darkness, not because he had wickedly spent his Masters Talent,
but because he used it not nor employed it.


F. It is therefore requisite that every one according to the talent which he
has received of God: do glorify him in that vocation whereunto he is called.


C. Yea. If we will enter as the good servant, into the joy of our Master.


F. To do this goodness, must we not have knoweledge?


C. Yes.


F. By what means?


C. By the law of God, and generally by all the holy Scriptures, which show
unto us what the good woorks are, which God requires of us.


F. Are we not exhorted to the Supper, to live well?


C. Yes that we are. For in that that we are made one with Jesus Christ, made
flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones, further more in that that we are
partakers of his holiness and innocence: it is to this end, that we should be
holy as he is holy.


F. What more?


C. In that also that we meet and agree in the holy Church, which is the
communion of Saints, in that that by the opperation and woork of the holy
Ghost: we call upon one father which is holy, to be short, in that that we hear
his holy word, and receine his holy Sacraments: it ought also to move us to
holiness.


F. This holiness which God requires of us, is it perfect in this world?


C. No. As the examples of the Saints show us. And moreover unto the last
breath of our life, we shall have always need to ask of God that he would
forgive us our sins through his Son Jesus Christ.


F. And this holiness which is not perfect, can it please God which is parfit?


C. Yea. For so much as by the operation of the holy Ghost, and by faith we
obey the commandments of God by Jesus Christ which covers with the Cloak
of his righteousness all our wants and imperfections.


F. Let us come to the third part of our duty toward God.


C. We have said that it consists in an acknowledging.


F. What acknowledging?


C. Of all the benefits which we have received and receive daily at the hand of
God and espetially of the benefit of redemption by Jesus Christ.


F. Is it not for this cause that the ancients called the holy Supper,
Eucharistia, that is to say, gratefulness, good grace, gining of thanks?


C. It is so.


F. Is this acknowledging necessary for all them ye are partakers of ye Lords
table?


C. Yea. As Jesus Christ has she wed us an example, Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luc.
22. 1. Cor. 11.
and moreover has commanded us to celebrate the Supper in remembrance of him.


F. What are the conditions of this acknowledging?


C. There are four principal.


F. Which are the two first?


C. First it ought tobe given to one only God, by his only Son Jesus
Christ. Se condly it ought not tobe given not only by mouth, but also by heart.


F. Does it follow hereby that all they which call upon Saints and give not
thanks for their salvation to one only. God by his Son Jesus Christ, are
gilty?


C. Yea. And they also err which are Hipocrits, praying in an unknown tung,
honoring God only with their lips, and not with their hearts.


F, Tell me the two last conditions of the acknowledging.


C. That is, it ought to be done at all times, that is to say, as well in
adversity: as in prosperity. To be short, it ought to be practiced not only
privately: but also publicly, and in the midst of the congregation of the
faithful.


F. Seeing that we have spoken enough of our duty toward God: let us now speak
of our duty toward our neighbor,


C. It consists in true Charity and brotherly unity, which do necessarily
follow faith and the true service of God.


F. What is ye true form and rule of charity?


C. That we love our neighbors as our selves, or that we love one an other,
even as Christ looued us.


F. How did Christ love us?


C. He looued us when we were his enemies, and when we were wicked and
abominable before God.


F. Have we not herein an example to love our enemies, although they be
wicked and naught?


C. Yes. For in this part we must be agreeable to ye image of our head, Jesus
Christ.


F. And this love wherewithal Christ looued us, was it fained? or did it
continue but for a time?


C. No, for he looued us not in word only: but in deed. He looued us not only
for a time but even to the end, unto death, even to the sheding of his precious
blood for us.


F. And ought we not to follow him heerin?


C. Yes. To eschew all dissembling and inconstancy, when soever we debate of
loouing our brethren and showing our love by deed.


F. Beside the example of Christ, are we not exhorted to this true love in ye
Super?


C. Yes.


F. By what reasons?


C. First, in that that we do all communicate together at the Supper, that we
eat of the self same meat, that we call upon one self same Father, yt we have
one self same head Jesus Christ, that we are all quickened by his holy spirit,
it ought to stir us up to true love and Brotherly charity.


F. What more?


C. The making of the bread and wine of the Supper ought to exhort us also unto
it.


F. How so?


C. Because that even as the Bread is made of many corns, which are unite to
gither in one lump of Bread, and as the Wine is made of many clusters of grapes
which are afterward put together in one licour: so must the Christians, which
are many in them selves: be joined together by love in one self same body,
which is the church of God.


F. This love which we are exhorted un to by so many reasons in the Supper,
can it be in them which bear malice and batred one against an other?


C. No. And therefore we must forget all iniuryes and reconcile our selves to
them which have offended us, and forgive them with all our heart even as we
would that God should forgive us.


F. May we conclude by all that has been heertofore spoken, that such as do
not their duty as well toward God as toward their neighbor, ought not to be
received to the Supper?


C. Yea, and therefore the true minister of Jesus Christ must take good heed
that he give not that that is holy to such as are open ly known tobe Dogs and
Swine.


F. The father of all mercy defend us in such sort through his holy spirit,
with faith and repentance, that we may publish his praises with a sincere
affection, and love our neighbors, as Jesus Christ has looued us, that we
come not to his holy Table to our damnation, as Infidels and impenitents do,
but rather to our salvation, being assured that we enjoy as truly eternal
life with all riches and treasures which are in Jesus Christ: as we enjoy the
Elements which he appointed us for infallible witnesses of everlasting life,
in the same his welbelooued Son Jesus Christ our LORD.


C. So be it.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Allde for Lucas Harison.


