OIL OF Scorpions.

The Miseries of these Times turned into Medicines and Curing themselves.

By FRANCIS ROUS.

Cypr. Epist. 8. Deus vtique qui quem corripit diligit, quando corripit, ad hoc
corripit vt emendet, ad hoc emendat vt seruet. LONDON

Printed by W. Stansby for John Parker, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the three Pigeons.

1623.

TO MY DEAR COUNTRY, AND ESPECIALLY TO THE dearest part of it, my Countrymen
of Heaven.
Brethren, by the Flesh or the Spirit* or both; WHEN I saw the Miseries of
these Times, by a successine continuance ouer-taking each other, and the
Arrows of the Almighty to fall thick upon us, it seemed to me that Wrath was
gone out against us, and that the Hand of God was upon us. On the other side,
when I saw the dullness and deadness of Men, who having the stripes freshly
smarting and bleeding on their backs, and the sp^s galling in their sides, yet
are like the Horse and Mule that have no understanding, the dullness of the
people seemed to me more fearful then the punishments. For when a Nation grows
stupid and senseless at the Chastisements of God, and does not or will not
understand Gods meaning in them, there goes out a speech from the Highest, Why
should they be smitten any more? whereof this is the meaning; In stead of a
fatherly Correction, there must come a sweeping Desolation. Therefore I thought
it necessary to become an Interpreter to the people, though the meanest of a
thousand, to show Gods meaning in his chastisements; for by them God would have
something to be done, the doing whereof may cure and remove them. It may be
that some will require a prophetical Spirit, rightly to interpret the
Judgment of God, as the rich Man would have one to come from the Dead to
convert his Brethren; but to these I give the same answer that was given to
him; That the Scriptures (...) left unto us for sufficient Interpreters. As
Gods chastisements have been interpreted in them, so may we still interpret
them. By this pattern have the Fathers and Ancients of the Church made
construction of Gods Judgments, and by great Reason. For God is still one and
the same both in Justice and Mercy, and therefore he has left one and the same
Word, whereby to construe his Judgments and Mercies. Accordingly from Gods
Word in the old Testament, 1. Cor. 10. 11
Saint Paul tells us in the New, That Gods punishments on the Israelites in the
first Times of the World, are to be examples to us on whom the ends of the
World are come. Therefore let us boldly, because safely, march under the Shield
of so great an Example, believing with him that now, as heretofore punishments
and sins are tied together. Indeed, if God would have altered his course, and
by a new kind of government send general punishments where there are not
general sins, there might have been need of new Prophets, to have brought us
News of a new Dispensation. But before we begin this warrantable
Interpretation, let us turn our Eyes to things most dangerously unwarrantable,
the Abuse and misconstruction of Judgments commonly used. Some take no notice
at all of the strokes of this Wrath, but with the Mirth and Madness of Wine
and Pleasures, take away the knowledge of it, as the Sacrificers in the Valley
of Hinnon, by the n^yse of Instruments took away the cries of their sacrificed
Children. Such merry men, singing and dancing to the Violl, and withal
forgetting the miseries of Joseph, no doubt, will cry out with Judas. Wherefore
serves this waste? and with David's brother, out of the pride of thine heart
ar^ thou come* down to the battle. But I answer with David, Is there not a
Cause; yea, even the greater Cause, because the Lion has roared; and such
beasts are not afraid; so that the greater the number is of these mad men of
mirth, the greater had need to be the company of Mourners, or the mourning of
that Company. It is the mourning of the penitent, that maintaynes the mirth of
the Delinquent, and it is the ten righteous Men that keep fire and brimstone
from a company of abominable Sodomites.

Others there are that gaze on the stroke, and stand amazed at their misery,
but look not up to the highest Striker; yea, by murmuring and re^yning, (...)
to bite the stones that are thrown at them. A third sort there is, that with
earthly Balmes will cure the strokes of Heaven, and by the strength of their
plots will bind the hands of Omnipotence, and by the finenesse of their little
Wits, will supplant the Counsels of an infinite Wisdom. All these are out of
the way, and either seek no Remedies, or false Remedies, or Remedies out of
order.

Therefore with Elihu, when I saw there was no answer in the mouth of these
men, I thought to answer my part and to show mine opinion. For my Heart was
full and the Spirit within constrained me. A strong desire possessed me that
God might be pleased and appeased, that my Countrymen, even after the Flesh,
might be both temporally and eternally saved, and out of this zeal the fire
burst out, and these following words have issued.

If any find yet another fault, that the work is great, and this work is
little, I answer; That a little Boat may land men on a large Continent, and
the Discourse that of it self is little, may deliver them into a large
Country, where by their own View they may make a large Discovery. It lands us
on the large Field of Consideration; and therein we take notice of Gods
Judgments, and of their Causes and Remedies* The first, their own smart will
discover; and the second, this following Map will somewhat delineate; and where
it wants* refers (...) large ones already made. And in this fruitful World of
Paper, I desire only to supply what is ^anting, not to add unto fullness* But
the Readers themselves may make this work greater three ways, if they please.
First, by joining other Books to this, wherein are larger Discourses of the
Heads that are here but briefly touched* Secondly, by Communication; by calling
e^ry one to his Neighbor, (...) Master to the Family, the Minister to the
(...) ^riend to his Friend (...) to consider of Gods Iudgement^, of their
Causes and Remedies. For by the Considerations of many, these Considerations
(...) be increased; and ^his spark shall become a great fire, by bringing much
wood to it. Lastly, it may be ^ade great, by a great and powerful operation,
(...) a strong working in our Hearts and Lines. A little Doctrine may become
great in working great effects; for (...) Ward is but a Seed* and like the
least of Seede^, yet in a good Heart it makes n Tree for the Birds (...) build
on. Therefore as much as thou would have it enlarged, so much be thou
enlarged in thy (...); for by yielding is great Room and great Nourishment
thou shall make it great, in the growth of good Thoughts and good Actions.
Therefore complain not that it is little, when thou may make it greater thy
self, and indeed this greatness is most to be desired. For then shall it
somewhat resemble the Sermon of Jonah, which was little in words, but great in
operation; for it turned and saved a populous City. But this greatness, comes
chiefly from the Greatest, to him therefore, let us pray, Turn us, O Lord, and
we shall be turned.

Amen.
The Cure of our Miseries is the work in hand; and this work is advanced by
five Considerations, whereof,

The first Consideration shows, That God is offended, when we are punished,
and this appears even by the weight of the punishments. Sect. 1. page 5. A
first, The Pestilence. Sect. 2. page 8. A second, Decay of Trade. Sect. 3. page
15. A third, Poverty and Consumption of Treasure. Sect. 4. page 21. A fourth,
Dearth, Tempests, and unseasonable weather, etc. Sect. 5. page 28.

Hereunto is annexed

A Digression, to remove certain preposterous Remedies of Gods punishments.
Sect. 6. page 36.
The second Consideration, that Gods wrath punishing, is provoked by our great
sinning. Sec. 1. page 41. Our sins are great, for we may discover these, A
first, Swearing and Blasphemy. Sect. 2. page 53. A second, Drunkenness. Sect.
3. page 67. A third, Unthankfulness. Sect. 4. page 76. A fourth,
Deceitfulness of Trade. Sect. 5. page 81. A fifth, Unnatural filthiness.
Sect. 6. page 87. A sixth, Declination to profaneness. Sect. 7. page 96. A
seventh, Backsliding to Idolatry. Sect. 8. page 108. which has with it three
wretched Absurdities, First, Turning from a spiritual worship unto carnal
Idolatry. Sect. 9. page 111. Second, Partaking a Religion laden with blood.
Sect. 10. page 131. Third, Running from God preserving, to God destroying.
Sect. 11. page 140.

Hereunto is annexed a Medicinable Corollarie, containing some undeniable
marks of Antichrist. Sect. 12. page 153.


An eighth, Monstrousness of Apparel etc. Sect. 13. page 166.

Hereunto is annexed an Antidote for the Vulgar, who are not angry with these
great sins, but with the punishments of them. Sect. 14. page 188.


A third Consideration; That Gods punishments for sin, call for Conversion
from sin. page 202. A fourth Consideration; That Man turning from sin, Gods
wrath returns from punishing Sect. 1. p. 202. which being first enlarged, and
after summed, does amount to the Medicine of Repentance. Sect. 2. page 214.
which must have In it First, A Confession of sins. Sect. 3. page 219.
Secondly, A Detestation of sin. Sect. 4. page 224. From whence issues an
Anger and Revenge on our selves for sinning, and here is set down the true
Doctrine of chastising the Body; by Fasting, etc. Sect. 5. page 236. And is
farther cleared from the Leaven of Popish satisfaction. Sect. 6. page 250.
Thirdly, A turning from sin unto the contrary Righteousness. Sect. 7. page
260. And this is to be advanced. First, In our selves. Sect. 8. page 266.
Secondly, in others, Sect. 9. page 276.

With it, Vehement prayer and Invocation. Sect. 10. page 299.
A fifth Consideration, Necessary, if not made unnecessary, by the former
Considerations; It is this. Where lesser punishments prevail not to amendment,
the greater usually prevail to destruction. page 306.

But I pray God to work better things in us, even such a Repentance as
accompanyeth Salvation. Amen.


Place this after the Epistle before fol. 1.

OIL OF Scorpions.
The Miseries of these Times turned into Medicines and Curing themselves.

THE LORD has Roared from SION, and sent forth his voice from the Mountain of
his Holiness. He has bent his Bow and prepared his Arrows, yea, some of
them has he shot, and their wounds are yet green upon us. What remaynes but
to seek remedy for the hurts received, and to search out means that the
remaining Arrows may be retained. Toward this, even the Arrows themselves
will excellently direct us. For they are like the Arrows of Jonathan, that had
a message in their wings; for they can tell us of wrath, and warn us to avoid
it. This language of theirs David does well understand, even men after Gods
heart, but Children in understanding cannot, or will not perceive it. Ye^ this
very use of them God himself has taught us; in his infinite Mercy desiring,
and expecting that his Rod may comfort us, and his stripes may hea^e us. Yea,
he has taught us the Means of doing it, and it is in brief; Consideration
and laying to Conside ration digesteth Gods Judgments into spiritual
nourishment and physic. Hagg 1. 6. Eccl. 7. 2. 4.
Heart. The Lord says by Haggai, that he has smitten Israel in their Corn
and Wine; and what does he infer upon it? Consider your ways. The Wiseman is
commended by the wisest of men, for entering into the House of Mourning, and
^aying it to his Heart. Moses, the Man of God desires to lay the Doctrine of
Mortality to his Heart, that so he may apply his Heart to wisdom. Psa. 90.
12.
And GOD complayneth that the Death of the Righteous, Esa. 57. 1.
a Forerunner of Judgment, passes away without Consideration. It seems then
that God by his Judgments calls for Consideration, without which we are
Barbarians to them, and they are mere Torments to us. Without Consideration,
the profitable part of Gods Judgments is lost, and the Tormenting part is
only left, whereas by it the tormenting part would be taken away, and the
profitable part would remain with us for ever. Let us therefore hear and
consider what the Lord speaks to his Church in his chastisements, and with the
blessed Virgin, Let us lay up his Words in our Hearts.

The first Consideration.
SECT. I.
OF this profitable Consideration, God is offended before we are punished.
I desire this may be the first step or degree: Let us consider and esteem our
Miseries as the strokes of wrath, even of an offended Creator. That we may the
better perceive this Truth, let us look steadfastly upon them, and behold the
breadth and depth of these stripes, and I think they will show unto us the
very Print and Stamp of divine Indignation. It is almost an Impression in
Nature; surely, it seldom fails in the Sons of Grace, when plagues are
notable in Greatness, un Nature believes it.
wontednesse, or vnsutablenesse to their Causes, they cry out, Digitus Dei,
The finger of the Lord. The men of Ashdod being stricken with Emerods,
acknowledge that the hand of God was ^ore upon them. The very Heathen Mariners,
in an extraordinary storm, cry upon their gods, believing strange
punishments to be the effects of a divine Wrath. Even Fools being Ps. 107. 17.
plagued for their Transgressions, cry unto the Lord, and by crying to him
acknowledge that their plagues come from him to whom they cry for deliverance.
Grace acknowledges it.
No marvel then, if Moses the friend of God understood Gods punishments, to
be the effects of Gods wrath; who when the plague was begun after the
Rebellion of Korah, Number. 16. 4^
said plainly, Wrath is gone out from the Lord. And that we may know in some
measure, what punishments are the strokes of that wrath, God himself gives
Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
the Names of some of them Now let us look on our Chastisements, and see if we
can find the Names of them, in those Rolls of Gods Judgments. Yea, let us see
whether there be not in them that greatness or strangeness which has drawn
an acknowledgement of Gods wrath, I say, not from Saints only, but from
Heathens and Fools.

SECT. II. The first Judgment.
ANd here in the first The weight of the Judgments show it.
place, let us call to remembrance a Judgment of Note, whose stroke by the
weight of it, looks like the blow of provoked Omnipotence, whose name is found
in the Catalogue of Gods Judgments, and whereof it has been said in the Word
of Truth, that the wrath of God has given less blows with the same Rod. The
punishment which I speak of, is the Pestilence, which almost devoured our
chiefest City, and with the sickness of the Head, the Body of this Land was
also distempered. I doubt not, but some that have forgotten it, will be almost
angry to have it remembered; but it were better to have a profitable
remembrance of the same plague, then to have a reuengefull remembrance by
another. It is the forgetfulness of Gods old chastisements that makes us so
soon to have need of new ones: for if we laid the former to our Hearts, the
latter perchance would not be laid afresh on our backs. Surely, it ought not to
be forgotten until it has done the errand for which God sent it. This it
seems is not yet done, for then new punishments would not be sent upon the
same errand. Let us therefore remember it, until we have dispatched the
business of it; and then may we best forget it, when it has once been
soundly and effectually remembered. For in this case Remembrance is the best way
to forgetfulness* and forgetfulness is an especial reason of Remembrance.
But herein let us see the baseness and barrenness of our Hearts. We can for
our pleasure read in a Chronicle the story of a great Mortality, how so many
thousands died in one week, so many were laid in one pit, so few, or so none
left to attend, and bury, the dying and the Dead. But to read of such things
for our profit, in a work of Application is noisome and troublesome. What is
this else but to make a mere Recreation of misery, to (...) the benefit of so
re^ (...) a Chastisement, and (...) vnlearning dullness, to call unto God to
make us a matter of like recreation to others? But to the wise of Heart the
remembrance will be profitable, for the wisdom of God has not bin scrup^lous
to record a less plague in the Scriptures, and Gods wisdom will be justified
by the children of Wisdom. Moses the Almighties Numb. 16. 49.
Secretary vouchsafes to speak of fourteen thousand and seven hundred dying
by a plague; yea of that plague he says unto Aaron, That wrath was gone out
from the Lord. If then so small a plague was a stroke of Gods wrath, what shall
we think but, that a far greater stroke comes of a far greater Wrath?
When David received 2. Sam. 24.
a pestilence whereof there died seventy thousand Men, it is recorded, that the
Wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel. What shall we think, but the
like blow comes from the like Wrath, except out of Security or Self-love, we
will think, that in the same punishment God was diversely affected, and that he
loved us more in these last sinful Times, then he did Israel in the Time of
David? If we would yet doubt whether the pestilence be a chief Rod of Gods
Wrath, God himself will resolve (...) maintenance to many. Neither is this
decay of Trade in some lesser limbs and farthest from the Heart of it, but in
a principal Member, even a Member wherein consists, almost the Life of our
Liuelihood. For if a man in a Word would name the chief Commodity of this
Land, which it nourishes most, and by which it is most nourished, it is the
Fleece of the Flock; and a loss in such a general Good, is a general
punishment. It was reckoned among Deuteronomy. 28. 4.
Gods promised blessings, That Israel should be blessed in the flocks of his
Sheep; And it was reckoned among the curses, That Israel should be cursed in
the flocks of his Sheep. The substance of that blessing is the benefit that
Israel should take by the Flock, and the substance of the Curse was a Loss.
So then if we want the benefit of the Flock, and have a loss in stead of it,
the substance of the Curse is upon us, though the manner may differ. And if we
will doubt whether this Loss be a punishment of Gods wrath, Let us but look
about us, and see with what Miseries it punishes us. The Landlord feels a
loss in his Rents and Fines; the Tenant, a disabilitie in paying either; but
especially the Poor, in his whole Liuelihood. So that to the Poor, the vility
of this Commodity is both a Famine and Nakedness. For, whereas ^eretofore by
their Labors they got both Bread and Clothing, now their Labors are so little
worth, that they they can pay for neither. And if it be so, then to the Poor
even a plenty is a famine, and abundance of wool is Nakedness. For what is
the Bread to him that he cannot buy, and the Clothes which ^ee cannot put on? A
pitiful thing when men would labor for their living, but cannot get their
living by their Labor. And though some by the greatness of their E states,
and dullness of their Souls, may put from themselves a feeling of this
judgment (though they can hardly some part of the Loss) yet Christian Hearts
by Compassion seele the Miseries of others, and by Sorrow or Succor bear a
part of their Burden, knowing that it is their own flesh that is hungry and
naked, Esa. 58. 7.
though it be worn by others. Not to do this, were not to be so good, as
one that was evil. For, in the Famine of Samaria when a woman complained to
Iehoram, that she had boiled her Son and eaten him, the Abomination of this
Misery made him to tear his clothes. And if yet we 2. Kin. 6. 30
would see more plainly a hand out of Heaven reaching this blow to us, Let us
mark in what an unlikely season it falls upon us. It is fallen in a time of
our universal peace with the World, and Peace is usually the Nurse of
Traffic, but with us the child pin^s at the breasts of the Nurse. War the
Stepmother of Trade, has sometimes nourished more Returns, then now Peace the
Natural Mother, and what shall we say unto this, but that a Curse, even the
Curse of David is upon us? Let their Psalm. 69. 23, 25.
Table be made a s^are, and that which should have been for their welfare, let
it become a Trap. Which how shall we separate from that which follows? That
Gods Indignation is powered out, and his wrathful Anger takes hold on us: And
yet his Anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

SECT. IIII. The third Judgment.
FOr another Misery has ouer-taken us. And as a Man decays two ways, either
by debarring food that should come from without, or wasting the blood that is
already within, so do we decay both for want of that supply which Trade
might return, and by the wasting of that which is returned in an inward
Consumption. Whither by the gain of Transportation, or the practice of some
that wish well to our poverty, but sure I am by Gods permissiue displeasure,
the Treasure of the Land is abated, if the voice of the people be the voice of
Truth. And though Disproportion of Trade, and this Scarsitie be some Kin, yet
has this more kindred besides, for poverty comes more ways then one. By the
loss of this blood the Commonwealth faynteth, and the limbs thereof grow
feeble. Hospitality dies, Alms are diminished, and Need increasing, the
supply of Need decreaseth. Commerce deceives and is deceived, and even
Honesty it self grows like Dishonestie, while it fails to perform what it
promised, because another promise failed it. No Trade prospers so steadily as
the Trade that deuours trades; for the scarsitie of Money makes a plenty of
Usurers; their hunger devouring most Money, when least is to be gotten. A
strange absurdity, that Money should bring most to the Lender, when it brings
least to the Borrower; and that the Rent of Money should be dearest, when the
Rent of Land is cheapest. By this Means poverty in the Body Politic, is like
poverty in the Body Natural. For poverty in both breeds store of Vermin,
which being bred of poverty, do increase that which bred them. And while
Poverty by the mediation of Usury increases Poverty, Usury in the middle
of these two Pouerties grows the richer by both of them. A Plague begot of a
Plague, the effect of an old Want, and the Cause of a New. So while the Dragons
give their breasts to their young ones, and each thing releeueth and preserves
his Kind, Man only is cruel to his own Flesh, and enjoys the Miseries of
his own Kind; he releeueth not Want, but releeues him self upon it. Yet men
must be mannerly in touching this Vice, for else they will amend their fault
with a worse, and in stead of a leisurable undoing by lending, they will undo
men at once by calling in suddenly what they have Lent. And so from the
unmercifulness of an ouer-cruell Lending, they fall into the unmercifulness
of not Lending. I wish they could find the middle way between hurting by
lending, and hurting by not lending, which perchance might be this, when such
a Rent is set upon money, as both the Borrower and Lender might be able to
thrive. For this I think is the golden Mean of lending in Commerce; though I
know there is a Lending beyond this, a work of Alms and Mercy, which lends to
the Lord in the poor, and neither looks for lending again in exchange, nor
for any other earthly Reward. But avoiding those Rocks in our Sea of Misery*
which both make wrack, and yet seem to entertayne the wracked, I arrive at
this safe and true Conclusion; That if the increase of silver as stones, was
recorded as a blessing in Solomon's time, then may this Want be taken for a
punishment. Yea, this is the putting of money into a broken bag which the
Prophet Haggai Hagg. 1.
names for a punishment, inflicted by God upon the Jews. And if it be a
blessing when Israel lends to many Deuteronomy. 28. 11, 12.
Nations and does not borrow, then is it a Curse when Israel borrowes and does
Leu. 26. 16.
not lend. This is a Consumption, which in many has consumed the Eyes, and
caused sorrow of Heart, and yet the wrath of God is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still.

SECT. V. The fourth Judgment.
FOr to us of late, even the Laws of Heaven, have seemed to change, and the
Covenant with Noah from Genesis 8. 22.
his general Course, has had a particular exception. While the Earth
remains, says the Lord, Seedtime and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and
Winter, Day and Night shall not cease. True is that which the Lord says, The
course of these things shall never generally fail, neither by their ceasing
(as in the Verse before) will he smite every living thing. But in particular
Cases and for the sins of particular Nations. The Sun stands still upon
Gibeon, and the Josh. 10. 12.
Moon in the Valley of Aialon. Thou shall sow, but Mica. ^. 15.
thou shall not reap: yea, be ye ashamed, O ye Husbandmen, for the Wheat
and for the Barley, Ioc^. 1. 11.
because the harvest of the Field is perished. And such has been of late our
punishment. Our Summers have been changed into Winters, the Seasons of the
Year have inuerted their order, and resembled them that have perverted their
Lives. The Sun even in the pride of his Ascending, has covered his face,
with black mourning Clouds, as loath to look upon vnmourning sinners. Yea,
the tears of Heaven, unseasonably in regard of the year, but seasonably in
regard of our sins, have fallen down to wash away the filthiness with which
we are defiled. The fall of the Leaf has been in Summer, and a Spring in the
fall of the Leaf. The Husbandman this while stands amazed, at the strange
displacing, and confounding of his husbandry. By incessant showers the Corn
brings forth in the same place where it self was bred; and the same womb
where it self was bred, is also the womb in which it brings forth. So that
which should have made bread for food, is turned to an unkindly Seed; which
will neither be Bread nor Seed. Yea, we have had a strange kind of Reaping, and
that Reaping has been also an unkindly Sowing. For, the Wind has reaped much
Corn, and that Reaping has bin also a Sowing. So the Husbandman has saved
three labors of Reaping, Threshing, and Sowing, but by all this saving he has
been a great Loser. What shall I say of it? Acerba res est terrae sterilitas
and frugum Greg. Naz. Orat. 26.
pernicies, etc. A bitter thing is the barrenness of the Earth, and the
destruction of Corn, now flattering us with Hope, and drawing near to the
Barn. A bitter thing is an unseasonable Harvest, and to see the Husbandman
sighing over his Labors, and looking upon them as upon untimely Births. We
looked for much and it came too little, God has blown upon our Labors, and
what is this but a punishment pronounced by the mouth of the Lord of Hosts, in
his Prophet? Hag. 1. 6.
And I wish the present Time shew^ us the worst of this Judgment, and that it
do not grow as Time increases. The great poverty of many dri^es their Corn
to the Market in the beginning of the Year; but in the end of the year, when
Poverty can sell cheap no longer, because it has no more to sell, then
commonly the wealth of wretched worldlings sells cruelly, because it may choose
whether it will sell or no. So Poverty in the beginning of the veere, takes
less because it has more need; and Riches in the end of the year, crave more
because they have less need. Yea, Poverty sometimes at the end of the year
pays dear, for that which at the beginning of the year it self sold cheap.
This is a Judgment of God provoked to anger; Leu. 26. 20.
and yet thus the Wrath of God is not turned away, but his Hand is stretched
out still.

For many other Miseries Many other Judgments l^ft to priuar^ Consideration.
have been upon us, a Canker and Caterpiller Injustice and the Proiector,
losses in the East Indies, a Massacre in the West; most lamentable losses in
the Palatinate; Losses by Pirates of Ships goods and Men, and I wis^ with those
Men no losses of Souls. But I desire not to be ouer-large or vehement in
expressing our Miseries, for their smart of it self would make them well
known. Only I take such a part and pattern of them as may enforce upon us an
acknowledgement of Gods wrath, and by that acknowledgement set our feet one
step in the way of removing it. Else we are like Fools that go laughing to
the Stocks, and we call for Greater strokes by not feeling the Lesser. Let us
therefore consider these Judgments, until we acknowledge, Paena patient is,
ira creditur decernentis. The pain of Hillar. in Psalm. 2.
the Sufferer, is the Wrath of the Inflicter.

SECT. VI. The unseasonable kind of curing these Judgments, confuted.
But here the Politician gives me the stop, and Amos. 3. 6.
is himself at a stand, for hearing these Evils he will go no further, but
falls into a ^rance, and therein cleaues his Brain in two parts, and with the
forepart he will discourse to you of the Causes, and with the hinder part of
the Remedies, but in both sets God aside, and thinks not of him either as a
Cause, or a Remedy. But first for his Causes, I would feign know of this
wizard, when ever this Kingdom had more likely Causes of prosperity, then it
now had, in the Union of the whole Island under one King, of the same Religion,
and settling us in an universal Peace. And then for his Remedies; how can we
trust any Remedies of his, when Parliaments, that here to ford ^aue been the
Remedies of most weighty grieuances have not lived themselves, unto ^ipenesse
and perfection* If then such great Remedies prove sick, what will become of the
small Remedies of the politic Discourser? Alas, if we be bound in ^uen, how
can a piece of Earth not seven foot high, reach up thither to untie the Knot?
especially, since he that binds us, has said himself, when he shuts, no
man can open. When God has a Rod in his Hand, and chasteneth sinners, it is
little good manners, and as little possibility by craft or force to wrest the
Rod out of his Hand. But the only way and Method to get away the Rod, is first
to work on his Will, and next upon his Power. If his Will be un moved, the
World cannot master his Power; but his Will being moved, that moves his Power*
Now God himself has showed us Means how to move his Will, but he never
showed any means, his Will being unmoved, how to master his Power. Let us
therefore follow his own Order in prevailing with him, for the God of strength
as Sampson the strong, has showed us the only way, how he may be overcome.
And when once God is overcome, and his Fury turned into Love, then shall we
be loosed above, and set free below: for the higher Cause being pleased, will
give a blessing to the Causes below. If Heaven and Earth be at odds, let the
^sbandman sow and plant never so diligently, the Heaven can make fruitless all
his Labors on Earth. The Sun and the Clouds by abundant absence or presence
can destroy his Hopes. But when Heaven and Earth are friends, then Summer and
Winter* Seed-time and Harvest run on their Race. When God was displeased what
was the effect? Ye have sowed much and reaped little. Again, when God was
pleased; Mark that very day, for from Hagg 2.
that, day I will bless you Wherefore* let us follow Gods own order of
Remedies, and strive to be first healed abo^* and then expect a success on
our Remedies below; and to this end let us pass on to a second Consideration,
which may be this.

THE SECOND CONSIDERATION.
Sect. I.
THat these punishments Gods wrath punishing is provoked by our sinning. Proved
by a comparison of the contrary; equal blessings being upon holiness.
of Wrath, and the wrath that inflicts these punishments, are provoked by our
Sins. When the Hearts of Men, are according to the Heart of GOD, when the Image
of God is in their Souls, and their Actions proceed from that Image, then is
there a most excellent Con^ort and Harmony between Heaven and Earth, and from
thence issue the most rauishing sounds of earthly, and heavenly Benedictions.
To this Harmony the Quier of Angels adjoynes it self, and sings a Dittie
expressing the Music: Glory be to God on High, Peace on Earth, and Goodwill
toward Men. When Man gives God in heaven his Glory, then God reaches out to
Man on earth Peace and Goodwill. Now the Peace and Goodwill of God though they
pass our Understanding, yet we understand so much of them, that from them flow
all the Mercies and Blessings that we can conceive and understand, and those
also which the Heart of Man cannot conceive, nor his Tongue express. For the
Lord having in himself, a boundless fullness of Joy, and pleasures for
evermore, his Goodwill and Peace does unlock unto Man that Treasury, and from
thence flow forth the innumerable bounties of heavenly and earthly blessings.
Hence are those manifold promises of GOD unto Man, of God I say unto Man, when
Man is conformable unto God. To Noah, pleasing God in holiness, is an Arc of
Salvation given amidst a general destruction. To Abraham, pleasing God in the
Sacrifice of his Son, is a promise given that he should be the Father of the
Son of God. To the Israelites Leuit. ^6.
walking in Gods statutes, and keeping his Commandments, God promises rain
in due season, the Land shall yield her increase, they shall eat their bread
to the full; in sum, he will be their God, and they shall be his people;
which is the knot of perfect Blessedness. The like is repeated in
Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 2^.
where to the keepers of Gods Laws are promised, blessings in the City, the
Field, the Sheep, and the Cattle, etc. And Saint Paul testifies the whole
substance of this Truth, in this one sentence, Godliness 1. Tim. 4. 8.
has the promises of this Life and that to come. But By the discord between
God and Man, made by sin.
on the Contrary, Sin makes a discord between God and Man, and from that
discord flow forth infinite punishments. There is no quarrel between God and
Man but Sin, and this is a main one, for it sets Heaven and Earth each
against other. Man walks contrary to God in his sinful disobedience; and
God walks contrary to Man in his wrathful Judgments; but woe be to Man, for
he strives with his Maker, the potsheard with the Potter, and By words of God
in Scripture.
he must needs be battred and broken in pieces. This also is strong by the
powerful confirmation of the word of Truth. Even the Psalm. 2.
Kings of the Earth, if they band themselves against the Lord, the Lord shall
laugh at them, but with a laughter most lamentable. For Gods Laughter is the
forerunner of Judgment, as a blast of Sunshine to a mighty Tempest. And
behold the Tempest; He shall speak to them in his Wrath and vex them in his
sore displeasure; yea, he will break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in
pieces like a Potters vessel. Neither is God terrible only to the Princes of
the earth, but to the People also. If ye do wickedly (says Samuel) ye 1.
Sam. 12. 25.
shall be consumed, both you and your King. And the same places that promise
Blessings to Man being at peace with God* denounce heavy and bitter Curses
unto Man being at odds with God by disobedience. If ye walk contrary unto
me, I will walk contrary unto you in Leuit. 26.
^urie, I, even I, will chastise you seven Times for Deuteronomy. 28.
your sins. Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed in the Field.
Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, the fruit of thy Land, the increase of
thy Kine, and thy flocks of Sheep. Cursed shall thou be in thy coming in,
and thy going out; the Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke.
And the conclusion brings with it the reason of these Curses, which is the
Burden of a Burden; Because Israel hearkens not to the Lord his God, to keep
his Commandments and his Statutes. Neither are these By the deeds of God in
the Scripture.
words only, but they are turned into deeds, and what was threatened was also
surely inflicted. Accordingly the whole story of Israel under Moses, Judges
and Kings is a Mirror of this Truth, the wickedness of Israel being attended
by the plagues of Israel. And even this Moral does the Prophet Micah give of
Isreal's Mica. 1. 5.
Miseries. For the transgressions of Israel is all this come upon them. And
lest It is true under the Gospel as well as under the Law.
we should think this attendance of punishment upon sins to belong only to
the Jews, and not to the Gentiles; to the time of the Law, and not to the time
of the Gospel, let us hear Christ affirming it, and the Apostles after
Christ, and First, Proved by Christ. Mat 23. 37
the Saints after the Apostles. Christ himself having spoken of the bloody
sins of Jerusalem, (with tears) does second the mention of their
bloudinesse, with a prediction of Secondly, By Christ's Apostle. 1. Cor. 11. ^9,
3^.
Judgment: Behold your house is left unto you desolate. The Apostle Paul says
to the Corinthians; That for their unworthy receiving some of them were sick,
and some were dead. Yea, he in^ers a general rule, That not judging ourselves
we are judged of the Lord. Saint John in the Revelation, (...). 16. 6.
or an Angel in Saint John; Reu 18 4.
Because they have shed the blood of the Saints, therefore have thou given them
blood to drink: And the partakers of the sins of the Whore, shall be
partakers of the plagues of the Whore. And since the time of the Apostles, the
holy Fathers followed this rule Thirdly, And so still under stood by the
succeeding Fathers.
in the interpretation of Gods Judgments, not looking for a Spirit of
Revelation, but guided by the Spirit of Sanctification. Saint Cyprian:
Intelligendum est Cypr. Epis. 8.
and confitendum, etc. We must know and acknowledge, that the troublesome
desolation of this pressure, which has greatly wasted our Flock, and yet does
waste it, is come to us according to our sins; while we tread not stedily
the path of the Lord, nor keep his heavenly precepts given for our salvation.
Ambrose Ambrose Se^. ^5.
says, The City does not perish but for the sins of the Citizens. Gregory
Nazianzene, Greg. Naz. orat. 26.
when in his Time a great Hayle had spoiled the fruits of the Earth, he
advises the people that it is most safe to take it for a punishment of sin,
that they may be humbled thereby. Gregory Nyssene: When Greg. Nyss. in vita
Mosis.
we hear that pains and vexations, are inflicted by God upon Men, we must
understand that the beginnings and causes of those vexations proceeded from our
selves. And Hierome (according to his manner) most resolutely. It is manifest
that Famine, Pestilence, noisome Beasts, or whatsoever other Evils we suffer
in this world, they come upon us for our sins. Gregory Greg. Mag. in Psalm.
poenit. 3.
the Great: Quia sentio poenam, recogito culpam. Punishments felt, bring to my
consideration sins committed.

SECT. II. The greatness of our sins amounts to a proof that Gods wrath is
upon us.
THus we see a cloud of witnesses confessing Saint Paul's assertion, That for
sin comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. And as we see
that the wrath of God comes for sins, let us also look upon our sins,
and their greatness will show them to be such, which may justly draw down
the wrath of God. To reckon all our sins, our numberless sinning has made it
almost impossible. And ^here are other works A patt^n of these sins.
that have in some measure described them, only I will give a pattern of some
of the chiefest either in weight or custom, and which I cannot avoid because
they meet me every where. A 1. Swearing and blasphemy
first that flies in a man's face is blasphemous Swearing, wherein if in any
other there is a pride taken in offending God; for other benefit of it, I
think no man can assign. Yet if their dullness would see it, is it easy to
reason; If there be no God, why do I swear by him: If there be a God, how
dare I to offend ^
him? If thou swear by nothing, thou art a fool in thy swearing; and if thou
swear to thy torment, thou art a veryer fool. God has ^
said himself, The taking of his name he will not hold guiltless: And by
(...). ^.
Zachary, that there is a Curse flying out against Hos 4.
Swearers: and by Hosea, that the wrath of God issues out against a Land for
swearing. In all this, thou either beleeuest not God, and yet swearest by him
in whom thou beleeuest not; or else thou beleeuest that thou shall be cursed
for swearing, and swearest that thou may be cursed. But for my part, I
think generally the Swearers belief in God is very bad. And surely, if he
believe not in God by whom he swears, let him excuse me for believing him when
he swears by that God in whom he Two kinds of swearing.
believes not. But of swearing we may consider two kinds. The one is this
voluntary 1.
rash and unnecessary swearing, which issues commonly from a profane heart
and careless of Meditat. and Dis^. of the Time.
God. Of this I have twice elsewhere more largely spoken, and I think it would
be best confuted by a Law whereof there was a conception at the last
Parliamentarie meeting. For before that time, I knew an order made at a meeting
of recreation, that a penalty should be paid for every oath, and that but a
little one, and yet it wrought such effect, that they scarce swore three oaths
in an afternoon, that by proportion of usual swearing should have sworn
threescore, if that order had not been. To a Law against this sin is there
this encouragement, That his Majesty (...). Dor. lib. 1.
in his book to his son with strong reasons diswadeth him from it, as being
a sin of neither pleasure nor profit, and gotten only by custom. Which
exhortation I wish might take place, chiefly in the Cour^, where it was borne;
and next in the Country, to which it is come. For that saying of the Prophet,
The soul that sins shall die, I take to be general, and to comprehend as
well the souls at Court, as the souls in the Country. The other is a more
solemn and ^. Kind of (...).
formal swearing, and that by oaths proposed and offered. Surely in this also
God has been much offended, and that diverse ways. One is, when the Taker of
the oath swears 1. Swearing against con science.
against known truth, for which indeed there is a penalty which can hardly
be too great, since the sin 2. Inconsiderate and confused swearing* of this
three sorts
out-growes it. Another, when oaths are offered of things infinite unlawful
or unknown, and of these I wish a survey were taken. 1. Swearing to things by
the heap and vndistinguish^d.
It is a hard thing for a man to swear at once to numberless things, since
consideration should go before swearing; and he that swears inconsiderately,
swears dangerosly. Now, how hard is it to swear considerately ^
of many things a^ once, and but once proposed? Secondly, I wish there were a
search for swearing to things unlawful, since I have heard it by credible
information, that there remaynes yet an oath of persecuting the Lollards
proposed to one of the chief of the Countrey-Offices. Thirdly, it is a
miserable 3. To things either lawful or unlawful, if not known, and judged
to be that which they are sworn to be.
thing to give oaths unknown. And an oath is unknown either where neither
the words nor matter of the oath are known, or when the words are known, but
not the matter. For these two latter kinds of oaths, a search and cure were
very necessary. And as in all other places so I wish especially they were
examined in the University; That is the Salt of the Land, and if the Salt have
lost his savor, how shall the Land be salted; yea, how shall it self be made
sauourie? The doctrine of swearing from thence should flow most clear and
vntaynted, and with the cleerenesse of doctrine should be joined the purity of
example. And there I wish might be considered, whether the first degrees have
no oaths given them of the Statutes which they know not, and whether it be
easy to know them. I have heard it complained of; and it is pity that he
should first have a torn conscience himself that coms to heal the broken
consciences of others. There is an excuse, that the submission to the penalty
is a performance of the Oath, but I wish it were well proved, that penalties
were added to Laws to dissolve them and not to bind them, to make them safely
not to be kept, and not to make them safely kept. Vide Sayer. Thesa. casu*
cons^. lib. ^. cap. 9. number. 10.
And if this be the intent of the Oath, it were good it were made known to the
Takers by the Giuers. Besides, I wish it were considered whether there be no
Oaths given to young men of the first degrees, whereof the words they know,
but have not judgment of the matter. The Bishop of Oxon. in his Sermons
against Sermon. 4. prope fin.
the Popes Supremacy, says of young Academicks, They are led impetu and
temeritate non delectu aliquo aut sapientia ad judicand^m. Now that which I
infer, is this, That questions diversely held by old Divines, seldom come with
in the Resolution of young Judgments that are without judgment; and if they
in their Judgments know not what they swear, they do not swear in
Judgment, which condition I think is required by God himself in his
prescribed Rule of swearing. God is Icre^. 4. 2.
taken as a Witness of their Rashness and not of their Judgment; and while
they swear, that they believe what they know not, God is inuoked to behold
their Ignorance, and not their Belief. Neither does it appear to me a
sufficient answer, That it is a Truth which is sworn, for it suffices not to
the Swearer that it be a Truth which he swears, except it be known to him for
a Truth. In civil Causes I have heard it taxt in a Swearer, when he has
sworn that such a Man at such a time was at such a place, when himself at
that time was not at the place, but heard that, which he swore, reported by
others. And this meets with an other Objection, That elder Judgments may be
a ground to the younger. But how is it safe to lay the safety of a man's
conscience upon another man's judgment, since it is certain that man is
subject to error, and for ought the ignorant Swearer knows, that may be the
error, which he swears to be a Truth. Is not this to believe as the Church
believes, and to swear a belief in Men, and not the knowledge of a Truth. How
pertinent is his Majesty's advice in this Cause? Ye B^lic. Dor. lib. 1.
must neither lay the safety of your conscience upon the credit of your own
conceits, nor yet of other men's humors how great Doctors of Divinity soever
they be, but ye must only ground it upon express Scripture. For Conscience
not grounded upon sure Knowledge, is either an ignorant fantasy, or an
arrogant vanity.] And, if conscience not surely grounded be an ignorant
fantasy or an arrogant vanity, then what is an Oath issuing from such a
conscience, but the fruit of an ignorant fantasy or an arrogant vanity?

A second Sin. SECT. III. Drunkenness.
ANother loathsome Sin of this Land, that calls for wrath, is beastly
Drunkenness; yea, it is a wrong to beasts to call it their sin, for
generally they are sober. And if the Swine be drunk, who is the Drunkards
emblem, it is by Man's acquaintance, for I never heard of a wild Boar that
was drunk. Filthy in the people
Wherefore it should have a name inferior to Beasts, as indeed it makes Men,
at least for the time of it; for a Man having lost the use of his Soul, is
worse then a beast, that keeps the use of his instinct. Yea, a man that has
lost his senses, is therein worse then a Beast that has them; as sure, as a
living Dog is better then a dead Lion. And as in the natural body the liquor
fumes from below* and works up on high, so I wish in the body of this Land,
this Vice which had his first seat in the dregs of Men, did not aspire to
places of Eminence. Yet the M^st vn^emly in the guides of the people.
higher it is the more hurtful it is, as the greater the light is, the greater
is the darkness by the loss of that light. So the darkning of many Stars
does not so much empaire our Light as the Eclipse of a Sun or a Moon. This
sin in the great does double harm, for by putting out their light, there is
lost both the Light of Direction and the Light of Example. If to entertayne a
great Man, a Room should be dressed as this sin does dress it; I think he
would loathe both his Host and his Lodging. How much more abominable is it to
do filthiness then to see it; yea, to do that Filthiness which he cannot
abide to fee? I may be the more earnest with the greater, because this sin is
like to part from the Lesser, and has most possibility to remain with the
Greater. For God has met it with most kindly Judgments, Shot at by the
Arrows of the Almighty.
even with Judgments most proper to pierce the heart of it. For Poverty and
Scarsitie are the great Enemies of Drunkenness; the Drink by dearnesse calls
for more Money; and the Money that should be more, grows Lesser; so, the
Drink departs farther from the Money, and the Money farther from the Drink.
Then how shall a poor Drunkard continue his Trade, since it is the equal
meeting of Drink and Money that gives him his drunkenness, and how shall they
meet that are still going farther asunder? These are punishments, I confess,
but most proper for our sins and how can we spare them, or with them away
until that Disease be rem^oued, whose Cure they are working? A poor
Sobriety is better then a rich Drunkenness. When a Player was turned Cypr.
Ep. 61
Christian (a far better change then for a Christian to turn Player) he
would continue his Playing by this reason, because Playing was his maintenance:
But what says Cyprian, Contentus sit frugalioribus sed innocent thus ci^s, let
^im be content with a more sparing but a guiltless maintenance. So may I say
of that Scarsitie that brings forth Sobriety, that a sober Scarsitie is better
then a drunken Plenty. Yet were it best of al if we could both beg and obtain
(and by begging we may obtain) the grace of Sobriety. Then should we practice
Virtue out of a love of Virtue, and should not need a constraint by Scarsitie.
Then God would be pleased while our Sobriety is voluntary, and we should be
blessed while a needless Scarsitie would be turned into Plenty. But if we
will needs continue our sins, let us look for continuance of wrath, it being
far better that a Man should be miserable then drunken, and most just that
he that is drunk should be miserable. A man of God (says Huntingdon)
foretold great Huntingdon. lib. 6.
punishments to this Land for great sins, and one of them was Drunkenness.
Surely, if punishment and that sin be tied together, when have we more
strongly then in this Age drawn Tied unto punishment by the Curse of the
Almighty.
punishment upon us, by a huge Cart-rope of Drunkenness? And lest we should
think that this sin and punishment may be parted, we have other prophesies,
above all doubt and exception, that tie woes unto Drunkenness, Woe Hab. 2. 15.
unto him that gives his Neighbor drink, that put thy Bottle to him and
make him drunken also: the Cup of the Lords right Hand shall be turned unto
thee, and shameful spewing shall be for thy glory. And another woe unto them
that are mighty Esa. 5. (...).
to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink. All the beasts of
the field are called to devour; yea, all the Beasts of the forest: For, come
ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. But the
Drunkard (and it is no wonder) knows not what he says, for where he promises
abundance to morrow, behold, scarsitie to day; yea, Scarsitie and her sister
Poverty. The Flesh prophesies prospe^itie to sin, but Gods Spirit
Affliction, God is true and all Flesh is a Liar. And howsoever it goes here, it
is most certain, that if this life be to day, and the next life be to morrow,
abundance of drink to day, shall have scarsitie to morrow. He that powers in
Punished with eternal thirst hereafter.
Gallons here, shall lack Drops hereafter. The fire is hot, the thirst is
great, a drop of water is but little; yet in this hot fire and great thirst,
the little drop ^l be denied. Wherefore drink less here that ye may drink
more hereafter, drink not without thirst here, that you may not thirst without
drink hereafter. But a larger Antidote I Diseases of the Time. cap. 16.
have elsewhere allowed this sin, to which I remit him that would see more
cause to be sober, which upon the matter is nothing else but to see reasons to
preserve Reason, then which nothing is more reasonable

A third Sin. SECT. IIII. Unthankfulness.
THere are yet many sins full of horror and danger, And among them there is
one as fearful and dangerous as the rest, and that is Unthankfulness. But
there are so many sins between that and the Physician, that Almst beyond cure
there is almost no hope of coming near it with a Cure. For before this sin
can come to be cured, the manifold abuses of Gods blessings must be removed.
For how can men be thankful to God for his benefits, until they leave to
offend God by his Benefits? Can they (though it were but in Words) give God any
praise for his blessings, when in their deeds by these blessings they dishonor
him. We have had great deliverances, we have the Gospel set at liberty among
us. We have not yet been given up into the hands of our Enemies but our
merciful God has hitherto chastised us with his own hands, even with
fatherly Corrections. But how shall a man look In the a^es of Gods blessings.
that a Drunkard, a Glutton, or a Player-like Fashionist, should be thankful
to God, I say not for the light of the Gospel, which Owls cannot see, but for
meat drink or apparel, when they all abuse these blessings unto Luxury,
pride and vanity? Surely if they should give GOD thanks for them, it must be
in these words, I thank thee for giving me these blessings which I have
converted unto the fuel of eternal Cursednesse. Therefore first I wish they
might be brought to leave the abuse of Gods blessings, and then would there be
some hope that they would give God thanks for them; if once by a right
indgement they saw them to come from God, and returned them to the honor of
him that gave them, then would they give him thanks both for the blessings and
the blessed use of them. And then indeed do they only become blessings unto
us when we blessedly use them: In the mean time A Cure is yet expected in the
godly.
I expect only of the righteous that they be thankful, for it becomes well
says David the righteous to be thankful. These by their thankfulness
retain the blessings for which they are thankful, for thankfulness being
bred of Gods blessings preserves that which bred it. On the other side
unthankfulness loses the blessings, which thankfulness might have
preserved, for it is not fit man should receive blessings from God when God
from Man for such blessings has no return of glory. It is a small thing to
return thanks for real and great blessings, which if we do we are infinite
gayners. Yea, the more we thank God, the more cause shall we have to thank
him. For thanks for old benefits draws an increase of the benefits for which
we gave thanks, as elsewhere more at Art of Hap. part. 3. cap. 6.
large I have showed.

A fourth Sin. SECT. V. Deceitfulness of Trade.
ANother great sin of A Trade in a Trade
this land is deceitfulness of Trades. Single trades are grown to be double,
for there are two Trades in one; the one is a skill of doing it truly, the
other of doing it deceitfully. And he is the more skillful Tradesman that
knows the falsehood of his trade, rather then ^ee that knows the truth of
it. He that can make an excellent Counterfeit, and sell the Counterfeit at the
price of the true, is an expert Tradesman. Thus men take money not for ware but
for cousenage, they sell deceit and with the price thereof buy damnation. The
Scripture says Prou. 11. 1.
that false weights be an abomination to the Lord. The force of that speech
Hand by God.
lies not in the word weights but in the word false. For God hates not weights
more then any other Instrument of Trade, but he hates falsehood, as in
weights, so in all things else. Therefore let every Tradesman that deals not
by weights, take out the word Weights, and put in the subject of his falsehood,
and then let him take the verse to himself, and say, The falsehood of my Trade
is abomination unto the Lord. These be they that Amos 8.
make the shekell great and the Ephah small, the goods sold as little worth as
they may, and the price of the goods as great as they can and these are as
C^affe and the wrath of God is as Fire. How should they escape, yea, how should
a Land escape where they are, since God has not only said but sworn it. The
Lord has sworn by the excellency Ibid. ver. 7. And with an oath condemned to
be punished.
of Jacob, surely I will never forget any of their works. Shall not the Land
tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells therein? I will turn
your Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into Lamentation, and I will
bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head, and I will
make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.
Neither let every man look for this sin in others but in himself, for few
there be that in dealings do not work upon the ignorance or need of the
buyer or borrower. Neither has this sin gone without attendance of an
immediate punishment, for I have heard a Yea already punished.
credible report, that amongst other natural causes of the decay of Clothing,
this has been one, that Clothes have been deceitfully both made and
colored; and men will not give money again, to be again deceived. It seems
to me the very profit of honesty should be powerful with those, with those
that measure all their actions by To be left for the same cause for which it is
used.
profit. For honesty though it gain but a little at once, yet it gains that
little often and long; for it keeps the Customers which it has gotten. But
deceit when it gets extraordinarily, gets it but once, for nothing but mere
Necessity will bring a man into a trap where he has once been taken, nor
make him join with a known thief in his own robbing.

A fifth Sin. SECT. VI. Carnal and unnatural Filthiness.
THere is another sin which I would willingly pass by, but that the wrath of
God does not use to pass by it. In regard of the filth of it, a man can hardly
speak of it, and in regard of the wrath of it, a man may not hold his peace.
This wrestling of thoughts Epiphanius expresses, when he writes against the
Gnostics. He is pained in speaking, and pained in not speaking; if he speak
he fears to discover the face of a Basiliske, which may rather bring death
then amendment. If he speaks not he fears the Curse, Cursed is he that
knows a murder and does not reveal it. And it may be (says he) some So
filthy that it makes the words that r^proue it almost loathsome.
seeing the ugliness of this Monster will not only avoid him, but go about
to destroy him. O the drunkenness of Lust, which like the drunkenness of Lot,
takes away all sight of the vgliest filthiness even in acting it, when yet to
a sober mind the abomination of it is painful even in speaking it. O the
wildness of Lust, which like a fed Horse, breaks over hedge and ditch, and
will not be bounded but with Diseases, Death and Hell; God has given a bound
and that bound is a Remedy So wild that it de^piseth Gods laws and remedies.
for this ranging Fury. It is better to marry then to burn, says Paul. But
some love single filthiness, rather then honorable marriage, some fly from
Paradise and run into Sodom, some leaving Gods Remedies seek Remedies of the
Devil, whose office is not to quench fire but to kindle it, even the fire of
Lust here, and the fire of Hell hereafter. Therefore art thou inexcusable O
man whosoever thou art, That preferrest thine own Diseases before Gods
Remedies, That wilt not suffer the Creator to give Laws to his own Creation;
but transgressing the Law which by Nature he has set upon his Creature, thou
make unnatural Laws to cross thy Creator. A most abominable absurdity,
that God should be the Creator of us, and not the disposer of us, that his own
order should not be observed in his own Creatures, and that blind Lust should
change the Law which infinite wisdom has given. Surely the Wisdom that was
wisest to make us, was no doubt wisest to order us, this wisdom gave the woman
to A companion and punishment of spiritual filthiness. Bern. Sup. Cant. Sermon.
66. and Ser. de co^uersione ad ^ler. cap. 29. Numb. 25. 1. 2. Romans 1. 23. 24.
the man, all other gifts are presents of Lust and gifts of the Devil, the
first peruerter of Nature, and a destroyer of the Creation as soon as it was
borne. These sins of filthiness were wont to be the fruits of Romish
Chastity, and I wish that Romish Love have not brought with it Romish Lust,
for we see that spiritual and corporal filthiness are often tied together;
Israel whoring with Moab fell to Moabs Idols, and the Gentiles turning Gods
glory to Idols fell to abominable filthiness. But let us remember that carnal
filthiness is a sin that has cast out the Blasted with heavy Judgments.
Ier. 5. 9, 10.
Amorites, and burnt the Sod^mites, and brought vengeance on the Israelies, and
how may we escape the punishment of this sin, when so many for this sin have
been punished? The same God and the same sin* and why not the same wrath?
Who has given us a Patent of privilege from Gods general Law, but he only
who is a Liar from the beginning, and told our first Parents, they should not
die at all, when his whole dri^ was to make them to die even by a belief of
not-dying. So does he deal with us still, he shows us the fairness of
sin, but hides the misery that attends it, he affirms the pleasure and
denies the torment, he shows us the Bayte and hides the Hook. But let
every soul A Remedy for this and all other pleasurable tentations
that would not be caught by this Fisher of souls, deal quite contrary to
the Devil. As he hides the punishment and shows the pleasure, so let the
soul that would be safe, fix her eye on the punishment, and turn her eye
from the pleasure. A miserable exchange, an eternal punishment for a short
pleasure; yea, a wretched Method, that short pleasure should be first, and
eternal punishment after. For what auayles thee that thou have had pleasure,
when now thou art in pain, thy pleasure is not, and thy pain is, and shall
be for ever. Therefore fight against all unnatural fire of Lust in this
world, where men may fight and overcome; for to fight against the Fire to come
there is no hope but it will overcome thee for ever. Bind thy self to the
order wherein the great Creator has ranged his Creatures, and be not found out
of thy rank; for, if thou will not be righted by his Law of Nature, thou shall
be ordered by his Law of Justice; for Pain shall set in order what wicked
Pleasure has confounded. Be chastely single; but if thy singleness do
endanger thy chastity, be chaste by being double; take no other remedy but
what God has allowed thee. All strange fires, and strange remedies begin and
end in Hell; Learn not of the Devil the abuse of Creatures whereof he is not
the Maker but the Destroyer; and if thou will needs have him to be thy
Schoolmaster, be thou assured that he which teaches thee, shall also cruelly
scourge and torment thee. And The Devil whips his best Scholars most.
here is the Mystery of that Infernal School of Iniquity, they which learn
most there shall be most tormented.

A sixth Sin. SECT. VII. Declination to profaneness.
THere is yet another Sin that calls for Judgments, and it is a declination
from Religion to profaneness. The ordinary means which Christ has left to
maintain the life of Religion is the Word and sacraments by the dispensation
of his Ministers. Now this Word and Sacraments, and the Ministers that dispense
them, for the due performance of this work must have a fit maintenance, a fit
time, and a fit place. If By want of maintenance to the Mi nisterie.
any of these be wholly wanting Religion falls to the ground, and as much as
they are impaired, so much Religion is diminished. For the maintenance of the
Ministry, Tithes are allowed; for the place, the Church; and for the time, the
Lords day. Therefore, the abatement of tithes, the ruinousnesse or the neglect
of the House of God, and the profaning of the Lords day must needs be
corrosiues to Religion. Yet the first has long since been done by Popish
superstition, neither has it yet been healed by a due Reformation. I have
spoken elsewhere, and now Medit. 79. 3. part.
heartily pray, That in such places where teaching wants for want of
maintenance, that there might be a supply of it, by a supply of maintenance,
which it seems to me does not exceed the wit of man to devise. And till that
time that it would please Authority either to allow them some help from the
adjoining Ministers, or permit them to buy bread for themselves, or by some
other means provide for that want; since howsoever fullness of bread be
suspected of niceness and wantonness, yet it is pity that want of bread
should therefore lack that compassion which belongs to it. As By the neglect
of repairing Gods House, or repayring to it.
for the place allotted to the Ministry, it has of late received decent
Reformation, but I wish the houses be not emptier as they grow fairer. For Man's
corrupt Nature is apt to make ill use of Liberty and Impunitie, and as there
is a Recusancy of a deceived Conscience, so there is a Recusancy of a
No-Conscience; and I wish the latter Recusants make no ill use of any Liberty
given to the former, neither that they grow bold upon any Impunitie not
intended to them. Lastly, for the Time, which is the Lords day, to lay aside By
works or plays of distraction and incongruitie on the Lords day.
all Jewish superstition, it is most assured, That as the Church cannot
ordinarily consist without the Word, nor the Word without a Place; so neither
can the Word in his place be profitably communicated without an appointed Time.
If Dangerous to the very Life of the Church.
so; then the Time appointed for the Ministry of the Word is a main
preservative of the Church; and on the contrary, the perverting of that Time
is a very corrosiue and consumption to the Church: Then how wary should men be
of encroching upon that time by any unfit or derogatorie action, since the
overthrow thereof has such a fearful effect as the overthrow of the Church?
It is fit that men should keep off from the borders of such a capital Sin,
as they would keep themselves a good ways off from the brinke of a
bottomless pit. And a good and tender Conscience should cast with himself,
how he may be sure with discretion to go far enough from it, rather then
how he may safely come nee^e it. Again, it being The day of Gods Service to
be reu^ndly used as the place of his service.
confessed that the worship of God has as much need of a determinate time as a
determinate place, and that one work even the public service of God hallowes
both the Time and the Place, why should we not think it a profaneness in
turning the time as the place from the work appointed to it. To turn the
place of Gods service into a place of sporting, even when Gods service is not
there, is in most men's eyes a profane incongruitie and indecencie. And why is
it not a like profaneness to turn the day appointed to Gods service into a
day of sporting, even then when the service of God is not doing? Surely, to do
the days work in the day seems to be most proper and reasonable. If so;
then works, or if you will, plays of distraction that make the proper works
of the day less profitable and more forgotten, how can they be justified? Yet
men are not bound wholly and only to the chief works of the day, which are
Prayer and Teaching, but any action is lawful that furthers them and is
agreeable to them, as works of mercy and charity, profitable and comfortable
conference, and any such refreshing as without scandale makes us more
cheerful and able in the duties of the day. So that a Christian is not bound
from any ^it Liberty, but ^om that licentiousness ^ch unnecessarily turns
the day from and against his proper works, which as much as it is, so much it
decays Religion, and admits profaneness. Yet herein men have been most
audaciously violent; and especially such Gentlemen who having played the six
days have least need to play the seventh, yet are in greatest pain if they
may not make it out a whole week. For, three hours labor of sitting (if not
sleeping) in the Church, is so full of weariness, though a Dinner come in the
middle, that a whole six days recreation cannot expiate it, without an
evening sacrifice to the Boules or Cards on the seventh. And these men yet
would feign be excused, Profaneness seeks out means of defending, not of
amending.
and to that end are glad to lay hold on any show of protection; But thereby
they plainly show their partial Love to a carnal liberty, since it is common
to hear from them any pretense for their pastimes on Gods day, but I could
never hear three men to speak of his Majesty's Given at The ^lds.
Proclamation forbidding pastimes on that day. And therein this is remarkable,
that it agrees almost in words with the Decrees of ancient Emperors, cited
Chemni^* exa. part* 4. ca^. De Fes^is.
by Chemnioius, to this effect. The holidayes dedicated to the highest Majesty
we will not have to be bestowed in our pleasures, nor profaned by the vexation
of exactions. Therefore we decree that the Lords day shall be kept with honor
and reverence, etc. and a little after; Neither do we give such liberty to
the leisure of this day, that we should suffer any to employ himself in
obscoene pleasures. Let the Stage that day challenge nothing to it self, nor
the conce^tations of the Circus, nor the lamentable spectacles of beasts; yea,
if the solemnity of our own birth light on that day, let it be deferred: The
words of the Proclamation do thus parallel them; For that we are informed,
that there has been heretofore great neglect in this Kingdom of keeping the
Sabbath day: for better observing of the same, and avoiding of all impious
profanation of it, we do straightly charge and command, that no
Beare-bayting, Bul-bayting, Enterludes, common Plays, or other like disordered
or unlawful Exercises or Pastimes be frequented, kept, or used, at any time
hereafter upon any Sabbath day.

A seventh Sin. SECT. VIII. Backsliding to Idolatry.
I Might here add as grievous a Sin; a backsliding to Idolatry, but that
the falling of some is overcome by the strong constancy of many. It is
comfortable to hear, that the blasts of Superstition have been to so many
like the wind to a Traveler, that makes him to bind his loose garment the
faster. Somewhat t^ compensed by the constancy of many.
This is to follow the very pattern of the Apostles, of whom it is said, that
the unbelieving Jews stirring up the Gentiles, and making their minds ill
affected to the Brethren, Therefore Acts 14.
they abode long time speaking in the Lord. Where the truth is much opposed,
there it ought most strongly to be maintained. And I Gods end in permitting
opposition.
think it to be the very end of God in permitting opposition; that the truth
which before was held too remisly, and perchance too indiscreetly, might be
held with a more inflamed love, a greater constancy, and The best means of
preserving the purity of Religion.
sounder Judgment. And surely there is no better means of keeping the Truth,
then a hearty love and strong affection. It is the doctrine of Christ to the
Churches of Asia, and in them to the Churches of Europe, yea, to all that have
ears to hear, That the holding of the first and dearest love is the means of
keeping the Candlestick, and the loss of that Love the cause of remoouing it.
Let us therefore increase in our love to the Truth, as much as we would
increase the keeping of the Truth; And let us assuredly believe that God may
well be careless of giving that to us, which we our selves are careless to
keep being given. But to them that withdraw themselves basely or wilfully from
Truth to Superstition, I need not say, Heb. 10. 38.
for the Lord has said it, his Soul has no pleasure in them. But this I say,
and desire that all me^ may know it; That such Back-sliders, Three main
follies and miseries at attending Back-sliders.
besides the Egyptian darkness of Ignorance, and a multitude of errors fall by
reuol^ing into three most gross absurdities of miserable consequence.

A first wretched absurdity. SECT. IX. Apostasy from the spiritual worship
of God unto Idolatry.
A First is that mayn and capital point of Apostasy, The turning unto dumb
Idols from the living God. For if Paul make 1. Cor. 12. 2. 1* These. 2.
that the Character of a Convert, even the turning from dumb Idols to the
living God, then it is a notable Character of an Apostata to turn from the
living God unto dumb Idols. For in the same path wherein the Convert walks
from Idols unto God, in the same does the Apostata go back from God unto
Idols. And whereas there has been a slight excuse for so gross a fault,
That an Idol is the Image of nothing in the world; surely, this answer is
nothing in the world. For the Image of those things that are, may be Idols, if
divine worship be given unto them, as Aquinas teaches, Th. Aqu. 2, 2^.
quaest. 94 art. 1. and art. 4. Bellar. de verb. Dei. l. 1. cap. 13. compared
with de Eccles. Trium. lib. 2. cap. 5. Act 7.
and Bellarminc himself proves against himself. Yea, which is more, even
the things themselves may be turned into Idols, for so the Stars of Heaven
were turned into Idols by the Israelites, and the Licaonians would have made
Idols of the Apostles themselves. The meaning therefore of the Apostle is
manifestly this, That an Idol is not at all that thing for which it is
worshipped; or in regard of that Godhead which by worship is attributed to it,
it is nothing in the world. This interpretation does Idolatry practiced most
heartily by the Papists.
Aquinas himself give, and reason it self does show it. For though as it is a
piece of Metal, or a Star, or Man, it has a being, yet as it is an Idol,
and by worship made a God, the Idol of it is nothing in the world. It is a
mere lie, as the Prophet says, even an affirmation of that which is not, For
it tells the People it is a God when it is not. And for this reason do we
detest this wickedness of the Romanists, because by curious shapes, rich
ornaments, forged miracles, and dangerous Doctrines, they And taught by their
Doctors.
draw the people to give divine worship to that which is nothing. And lest we
should doubt much whether divine worship be by their Doctrine ascribed to
Images, we shall find that in plain terms they have confessed it. Indeed
the Council of Trent has How the Council of Trent is a general Council.
herein dealt most cunningly, yet withal most co^trarily to the intent of a
Coun cell; since herein it only deserves to be called a general Council,
because it couers many Questions with general Terms; and so in this Question
it says, we must worship Images debit a veneratione, with due worship.
Surely, a Council should have resolved doubts, and not have continued them,
but hereby it appears that they would not, or could not resolve, either of
which is faulty. But if their Counsels will not tell us their Doctrine, we
must ask next of their Doctors, and some of them plainly show us that Doctrine
of Idolatry. Aquinas though he says that Idolatry is the giving of divine
worship to a Creature, yet Aqu. part. 3. quaest. 25. art. 2. 3.
he excepteth the Image of Christ, and says, divine worship belongs to that.
His reason is most weak for so mighty a Doctor, but we must remember his
judgment was prejudiced by Custom and Education. Because of Christ's Deity,
says he, Christ must be worshipped, and the Image for representing Christ. But
what does Christ's Deity to the deifying of a piece of wood? Not by
Representation, for the Godhead, as Paul says, is not like silver Act. 17. 29.
or stone. Neither by Union or Communication, for the Deity has by no means
given it self so much unto stone that it should be worshipped. Yea, the Deity
has sworn clean contrary, that it Esa. 42. 8.
will not give his glory to graven Images. Another Gregor de Valent. Apol. de
Idol. citat. a Rainol. and confut. pre^ect. 249.
Doctor, Gregory de Valentia, amending the niceness of some, in this point
plainly confesses, that he gives divine worship to the Image of Christ. And
Azorius Azor. Just. Mor. lib. 9. cap. 3.
says, that the Image of that which is worshipped with divine worship, may
with divine worship also be worshipped. But Christ may so be worshipped, and
therefore his Image. And Bellarmine himself cites many great Doctors of the
Church of Rome, in these latter times, that maintain Idolatry. Alexander, Th.
Aquinas, Cardinal Cajetan, De ^ccles. Triumph. lib. 2. cap. 20
Bona^enture, Marsilius, Almayne, Carthusianus, Capreolus, and others. These
hold that the Image of Christ is to be worshipped with Latria. And Latria, by
Bellarmines own testimony, Ibid. c. 24.
is a chief worship due to the true God, and being given to an Image, it is
true Idolatry. And though for his own part, he would fain in this point, as
in others, be somewhat neater then his fellows, yet shall we find in his
Doctrine two main props or parts of Idolatry: the one, where he says* That
the worship given to the Image, is determined or bounded in the Image. And
herein he does no other, but make the Image, a very object of worship. And
secondly, lest by making it a lower kind of worship, and an improper Latria,
he might fly out at a back-doore, which he usually leaves open for that
purpose: he says further, That an Image may properly be worshipped with
Latria, if we join the Image Cap. 23.
and the Pattern in one Imagination. Then a strong or intense Imagination, may
worship Images with divine worship, which is flat Idolatry. This strong
imagination is indeed one of the strong delusions, belonging to the Chair of
Pestilence, by which men are led to believe lies. A noble subtlety, and mere
trick of a Iuggler, which makes things really divided, seem to be one; and
from a seeming Unity, will enforce a real Unity of worship: The Image and
the Pattern are asunder in themselves, and together only in the Imagination,
then how can they escape Idolatry, that give divine worship, to a thing really
and truly divided from the Deity? Surely, Bellarmines reason, if it be helped,
will only go so far, That men may worship the Image which is in their
Brain, and not the Image before their Eyes. For the Image in their Brain,
has an imaginary Union with the Pattern, but the Image before their eyes has
none at all. But what is this, but to become vain in imaginations, and while
men profess themselves to be wise in their subtilties, to become stark
Fools, as Saint Paul speaks upon the same Romans 1. 21, 22.
subject. It must be a real Union, as that is between the Deity and
Humanity of Christ, that must give a real Community of worship. I would
feign know of Bellarmine, if he came into the Popes Wardrobe, and there saw
the Robes of the Pope, and imagined them on the Popes body, whether he would
fall down, and give the same honor to the Clothes, that he would do to the
Pope himself, if the clothes were worn by him. And yet I may tell him farther,
That the clothes being worn by him, there is no real or personal union
between them, and therefore there is some difference of honor, given to the
Man, and to the clothes which are no part of the Man.

Now, if these great Doctors maintain sdolatrie, what shall the blind
Multitude do but stumble, at Gal. 5. 20.
these stumbling blocks laid before them by the Learned? The flesh inwardly is
prone to Idolatry, as the Scripture teaches; the object without by beauty
and conformity is fit to tempt to Idolatry; Ducit enim and affectu quodam
infirmo, rapit infirma corda mortalium, formae similitudo, and membrorum
imitata compago. As Jonas Aurelianensis has out De cul. Im. lib. 1.
of Saint Austine. The likeness of shape, and a resembling ioynture of the
members, draws the weak hearts of men, to an yielding affection. And to the
two temptations inward and outward, is joined in the Middle a Doctrine to
consummate the work of Idolatry, by joining a carnal Heart, to the beloved
Image, in a wretched worship. I may notdenie an election of grace, which was
found in Israel, when their estate was outwardly so desperate, That Elias could
not see one true worshipper besides himself. But I find both by Doctrine and
Practice, that Church is generally and maynly given to Idolatry. Agobardus, a
reverend Bishop, and near to eight hundred years Antiquity, says, Nullus
antiquorum ^ib. de (...). and Imaginibus.
Catholicorum etc. None of the ancient Catholics did believe that Images were
to be worshipped. But now this error by growing is made so manifest, that it
is come near to Idolatry, or the Heresy of the Anthropomorphites, men
worshipping Images, and putting their trust in them. So we see how it was in
the time before him; the Fathers generally denied worship to Images. But N^ dum
e^ error emerserat qu^ n^ de ca* bon^bus* ^inioque vel (...) de figuratae of
figies Sanctae Imag^nes v^carentur and adorandae praedicarentur, ibid. Jonas
Aure^. ^ib. 1. de cult. Image.
withal we see how it began to be in his time, That Idolatry came to be taught
and practiced, as more largely in the same Treatise he shows. Long after
this time Claudius Taurnie^sis, says, That when he came to his Bishopric in
Italy, he found his Churches full of accursed Images, and that men did worship
them, neither does his Adversary Jonas deny it in his answer, but
acknowledges it to be lamentable, Largissimis fidelium lachrymis lugendum and
plorandum. And now for these last times, we see before, how Idolatry has
been improoued by the writings of many Doctors; we have seen with our eyes
how it has been increased by a mighty stock of miracles tied to many of
them; and we see no reformation by the Pope, but rather an approbation, by his
^cribes and Inquisitors. Accordingly, a good Author of ours shows out of
Authors of theirs, That a Mihi vnus tantui^ videtur cu tus imagini debitus,
idem nempe qui debetur exemplari. Rainold. These. 5.
certain Canon was condemned at Si^il of heresy, for denying the worship of
Latria to the Cross. But now if any man will see the danger of this sin, let
him take the story of the Israelites and look steadily upon it, and there
will arise to his sight a most fearful apparition of grievous plagues,
successively tormenting them for this sin in their successiue generations. And
to this day the remembrance of them is so terrible, that of all other sins,
the Jews will by no means be brought to Idolatry. And in this respect, I
think, the Church of Rome by her Idolatry, is a main obstacle to their
Conversion; and it seems by the same reason, the taking away of that fountain
of Idolatry, would further much the conversion of the Jews. Certain it is,
that the Jews shall be called, and that their Calling shall be to a pure and
primitive Truth, for their Calling shall be glorious, even as a Romans 11. 15.
rising from the dead? Neither shall the Gentiles begin their Calling in a
primitive purity, and the Jews have their vprising clouded with the Errors and
impurities of the Gentiles. If it should be so, where is that privilege of
love for the Fathers sakes? If then the Jews shall be called by a Doctrine of
purity, what must become of the Romish impuritie, the Mother of superstitions
and abominations? But in the mean time, let this be our grief, that a Nation
denies Christ which hates Idolatry; and a People maintayneth Idolatry that
professes the Name of Christ. To conclude this point, if any would feel the
weight of the jealousy of God (and jealousy is the rage both of God and Man)
threatened in his Commandment; if any man would feign have the Judgments of
God powered on him, which were heretofore on the Jews, of which themselves are
weary: If any would be partaker of the plagues of Babylon, let them be also
partakers of Babilons Idolatry, Reu. 9. 21.
even the worship of Gold, Silver, Wood, and Stone.

A second dangerous Absurdity. SECT. X. Partaking of a Religion laden with
blood.
ANother gross absurdity and step into Misery, is the entering into a
Religion laden with blood, even the blood of the Prophets and Saints, and those
which are slain upon earth. When a Murderer is convinced of some cruel
bloodshed, who would infect himself with his guilt, and take part to himself
of a Murderers guilt and punishment? But in this purple Congregation, is the
blood of many thousands; yea, the blood of Reu. 18. 24.
many Prophets and Saints, and of all that were slain upon earth. A most
grievous burden, and pressing down into hell. This mountain of blood will
make bloud-guilty men to cry for Mountains of earth to fall upon them, and
cover them. And as upon the last Jerusalem that slew Christ, the sin of the
first Jerusalem that Mat. 23. 34
slew the Prophets; yea, even before Jerusalem the blood of Abel the righteous,
came altogether in one reckoning Yea, with the blood of al* Sai (...) slain
upon the (...).
of punishment; So by the like proportion upon the latter Rome by which is shed
the blood of latter Christians, shall come the blood of the first Christians
shed by the first Rome. Yea, I may say that from Abel the Righteous unto the
last Protestant slain for Religion, all the bloodshed shall be required of
Rome. For first it is said, That in her shall be found the blood of the
Prophets, and all slain upon Earth. And secondly, why should not Rome be as
guilty of the blood of Abel as Jerusalem, and if of Abel, much more of the
blood of nearer succeeding Prophets. Neither is it without Reason; for the
Communication of bloodinesse, is the Communication of blood, the incorporating
into a sinful society, partakes the Judgments of that Society. For as Saint
Austen well observes, There is one City of the Devil which began first in
Cain, and ends in the last sinner, and they that come to be a part of that
City shall receive the Cursed privileges of that City; they have a
Community of plagues by Reu. 18. 4.
partaking the fellowship of that Community. Neither are men in danger only
of partaking their plagues, by partaking the Community of Association, but
because by the community of Association usually comes the community of
Infection. So the associating of a bloody Society Yea, tainting with an
Infection of cruelty and bloudines.
often infects men with a bloody Conformity. Romish Religion (if it shall be
called Religion) herein is most contrary to true Religion. For whereas true
Religion, turns cruelty into meekness, and makes the Lion to sleep Esa.
11. 6.
with the Lamb, this Religion has turned Lambs into Lions, and made men of
excellent natures to become Savage and Cruel. There are too many examples to
prove this Truth, and we need not to set sail for the fetching of them; for
even in this land Sir E. Dig. Knight. Amb. Rook. Esquire.
to the foulest Treason upon Earth, has this Religion perverted the fairest
dispositions. And howsoever the fact being by Gods mercy defeated, now it is
styled by some the deed of desperate and forlorn persons (for such facts Non
laudantur nisi peracta) yet these men neither in estate nor disposition were
such, but in both eminent; and I pity much that ever it should come to pass,
that sweet dispositions should be made cruel by any thing called Religion.
But as pitiful as it is, yet true it is, That a Popish proselite, being
transplanted by a Jesuit, does too often prove a stock on which Murder and
Cruelty is grafted. Let us therefore fear the Communion of this bloody
City, lest we get a Communion of their bloudinesse, which if we do, let us
look for a communion of their plagues, let us expect a part in all the
vengeance belonging to innumerable Murders. Then may we fear that the blood
of former days shed in this Realm, will light upon us, when we partake with
the Doctrine that shed it. If the Son see Ezekiel. 18. 14
his Fathers sins, and avoid them, they shall not be imputed to him. But if
a bloody Father bring a bloody Son, then the bloudinesse of the Father
descends on the Son. In Iosiahs time after Manasses bloudinesse, the
destruction of Israel was stayed, and he had a promise of ending his days in
peace, which he did, for no man fought against him, but he sought war against
himself. But when Zedekiah reigns that Ier. 36 26. and 38. 5. Ier. 22. 17.
cuts Ieremies Roll, and casts him into Prison, when Iehoiakin is full of blood
and violence, 2. Chro. 36. 16.
when the Prophets are misused, and there is no Remedy. Then comes the blood
of the Fathers upon a bloody posterity, and Jerusalem is carried away into
Captivity. So if we join hands with a bloody Doctrine, then let us look for
a share in the whole reckoning of blood which that Doctrine has shed. Our
sins are great and grievous, but yet in this sin, let us give Rome leave to
outcry us, that the greatness of their cry may cover ours, and stop it from
hearing. And indeed, though our sins be grievous, yet their sins herein
have an eminence, because theirs are sins of Antiquity, and sins of
Doctrine; Ours, though grievous, are latter and of fleshly Corruption, not of
Doctrine and Instruction. We are naught as we are men, not as we are
Protestants; Their bloudinesse and Idolatry has been theirs, as they are
Papists. Let us take heed then that we bind not sin unto sin, since one
sin will not escape unpunished. Let us not join the sins of Antiquity to
the sins of latter Ages, nor the sins of Doctrine to the sins of natural
Corruption.

A third Dangerous Folly. SECT. XI. To run from God preserving, unto God
destroying.
A Third dangerous Absurdity, is to forsake the Religion wherein God has
given us miraculous deliverances, and to run to that Religion which in the
same deliverances of us, God has blasted with fatal overthrows. This was ^.
Chro. 25. 14.
the folly and destruction of Amaziah, that he would seek after the Gods of
that people, which could not deliver their own people out of his hand. What a
madness is this to fly from strength unto weakness, from safety into
danger, from Gods protection into Gods desertion, to rest on the help of that,
to which God has showed himself an Enemy. Surely if all the Nations of the
earth would fly from God to Superstition, this Kingdom above all other should
say with Joshua, I and my people will serve the Lord. For our deliverances have
been so eminent, that they cry aloud, The hand of God and not of Man. It is
beyond Our being this day, is no other but a fruit of Gods wonderful
deliverances.
belief if it had not bin seen, That half of an Island should stand strongly,
as it has done, amid great oppositions, and many Treasons, without any notable
supply or help from any other Nation. Yea, it is stranger, that it should be
more then able to help it self, and have a supererogation of help for
others. For the help of this Kingdom ouerflowed to Henry the Fourth of
France, and to the distressed Provinces of the Low Countries; yea, it
maintained and ended a most consuming War in Ireland. And in the midst of
public oppositions, a multitude of private Treasons issued out of Hell,
against the person of the most glorious Princess of the world. Yet was she
safe in the midst of dangers; yea safe without danger. For though their malice
reached at her, yet she was in no danger, because their chain was so short,
that she was out of their reach. God at once defended her, and limited them;
yea, she (...) and resist that which he hates; an irreconciliable Enemy is
then most harmless, when he has no power of hurting. If at any time he hurt
not by nothurting, he endeavors that he may hurt the more hereafter; An Enemy
seems not to hurt, while he is gathering of men, and mustering of his forces,
but even then when he hurts not, he is commonly in the way to do^ the more
hurt. Implacable enmity has mischief still for the end of it, so that the
very smiles and benefits of it are dangerous, and aim stedily to this end. A
third Conclusion, 3. (...).
That there is a main difference of goodness between our Religion and that
of Rome, and of Gods dispensation to either: The Religion of Rome in the
Queens time, made her own Subjects traitors, and sent forth Assasines against
her, but God wholly defeated them. Our Religion never suborned private
Assasines against any King, but GOD gave us publicly great success and
oduantage. Wherefore let me here note, that our Religion agrees better with
the ancient Religion of the Sea of Rome, then the Religion of present Rome. For
this was the Religion of Gregory the great. If I would have to do with the
death of the Lombards, the Nation of the Lombards, this day had been without a
King. But because I fear God, I fear to meddle with the death of any man.

Neither has God alone The strange preservation from the Powder treason.
defended us in the days of that happy Queen, for even in the reign of our
King, we have received a miraculous deliverance. It was God that delivered us,
and he delivered us so, that he would be known to be our Deliverer. For when
Strange, because done by contrary means.
God sends a delivery by the hands of our Enemies, the delivery that cannot
be imputed to our Enemies, must be imputed unto God. Our Enemies would have
destroyed us, God would preserve us, and God resolving to preserve us,
performs it by our Enemies that would destroy us. By Traitors he sends notice
of the Treason, and so defeats the Treason by the same that should effect it.
And he that was wonderful in sending the words, was wonderful in giving the
Interpretation. And as once the words on the Wall were by God vnvsually
written, and by him in Daniel strangely interpreted; so it pleased God that
directed the Letter, to give his Majesty an unusual interpretation of it, so
that Gods wonderful Providence by that Letter, spoke to them to whom the
Letter meant not to speak, and spoke a meaning in the words, in which the
Letter had no such meaning. So are there two Senders and two Indi^ers; God
sends the Letter one way, the Traitors another; God writes one sense in the
words, and the Writer another. A strange delivery, both in respect of the
prodigious danger from which we were delivered; in regard of the means of
delivery; and lastly, in regard of the opportunity of it. For our delivery
from danger was almost in the time when we should have been delivered into it.

And now let this great I^ persuades us to continue our safety by the same
means, which then gave us our safety.
example of Gods wonderful preservation, make us strongly resolute in the
Truth which he defends; and confident in God such a Defender of the Truth.
Let us be ashamed to be afraid, since our fear can but betray us, and make us
weaker, and so more subject to that which we fear. We see here was no fear,
nor preuentions carnally politic, the Bastard-issues of fears; and yet while
we feared not, nor by fear prevented not, we were delivered from a destruction
most fearful. Yea, whatsoever plots, either fear or policy shall hereafter
unlawfully actuate, let it still be remembered, That a delivery, wherein there
was neither fear nor policy gives us our being. And in that delivery it was
the Truth to which God gave our lives as a prey, wherefore it stands us upon,
to preserve confidently that Truth, by which our lives have been preserved. To
run to Popish superstition is to run to destruction. Let us therefore abide
rather with the Israelites then with the Egyptians, with those that were
miraculously delivered, then with those that strangely perished. I will add
for a Corollarie some sentences of Gregory the great, which I desire the
Reader to give to them to whom most fitly they belong. Surely, to me it seems
he had in his Nostrils a strong savor of Antichrist, as if he were not far
from the place where he wrote.

SECT. XII. Some marks of Antichrist discovered by witnesses, not to be
refused by Antichrist.
ANtichristus veniens ipsas Greg. Moral. lib. 33. cap. 23.
etiam summas huius saeculi potestates obtinebit; qui duplicierrore saeuiens
conatu^ ad se corda hominum, and missis praedicatoribus trahere, and commotis
potestatibus inclinare.

Antichrist when he comes, shall be powerful with the Princes of this world;
and raging with a twofold wickedness, endeauours to bow the hearts of men to
him, both by emissarie Preachers, and by incensed Princes.

Quale illud tempus persecutionis ^d. ibid.
apparebit, quando ad peruertendam fidelium pietatem alij ver his saeuiunt,
alij gladijs? Quis enim etiam infirmus Leuiathan istius dentes non despiceret
si non ^os per circuitum potestatum saecularium terror muniret?

How great a persecution will that be, when some shall rage with words, and
some with swords, to overthrow the godliness of the Faithful? For what man,
though he were but weak, would not despise the teeth of this Leuiathan, if the
terror of secular powers did not fortify them.

Been eundem Antichristum Greg. ibid
Psalmista descripsit dicens; Sub lingua eius labor and dolor; sedet in
insidijs cum diuitibus in occultis* Propter ^nim peruersa dogmata su^ lingua
eius labor and dolor est. Propter Miraculorum vero specie, sedet in insidijs
propter Psalm. 10.
s^cularis autem potestatis gloriam, cum diuitibus in occultis. Quia enim simul
and miraculorum fraud, and terrena potestate vtitur; and in occultis and cum
diuitibus sedere perhibetur.

Well did the Psalmist describe the same Antichrist, saying: Under his tongue is
labor and mischief; he sits in ambush with the rich in secret places. For
by perverse doctrine labor and mischief is under his tongue. By the show of
miracles, he sits in ambush. By the glory of secular Power, he sits with
the rich in secret places. And because he uses both the deceit of miracles,
and worldly power, he is said to sit both in secret places and with the rich.

Praedicatores Antichristi Greg. Mor. lib. 33. 26. where he shows that
miracles must be tried like money.
quomodo veram numismatis qualitatem tenent, qui in his quae agunt intentionis
rectae vim nesciunt quia per haec non coelestem patriam, sed culmen gloriae
temporalis exquirunt? Quomodo a monetae figura non discrepant qui ab omni
pietate iustorum iustos persequendo discordant? Quomodo in se integritatis
pondus ostendunt qui non solum humilitatis perfectionem, sed neque ipsam primam
eius januam contigerunt? Hinc ergo hinc electi cognoscant quomodo ^orum signa
despiciant, etc.

How can the Preachers of Antichrist have the quality of current money, who in
their actions have not the power of a right intention; since by them they do
not seek the heavenly Country, but the top of temporal glory. And how do
they not differ from the Image of true coin, who by persecuting the Righteous,
differ from all godliness of the righteous? How do they show the weight of
soundness, when they attain not the perfection of humility; yea, they have
not touched her first and uttermost Gate? Hence, hence then let the Elect know,
how they may despise their miracles, etc. Moral. lib. 12. cap. 5*


Sicut incarnata Veritas in praedicatione sua, pauperes, idiotas and simplices
elegit, sic e contrario damnatus ille homo, quem in fine mundi Apostata Angelus
assumit, ad praedicandam falsitatem suam, astutos ac duplices atque buius mundi
scientiam habentes electurus est.

As the incarnate Truth, in his preaching chose poor, unlearned, and simple
men; so on the contrary, that Man of perdition, whom the Apostata-Angell shall
put on in the end of the World, to preach his false-hood, shall choose crafty
and double-hearted men, and such as shall be skillful in worldly policy.

In fine Mundi Satan hominem ingrediens quem sacra Scriptura Antichristum
appellat, tanta elatione extollitur, tanta virtute principatur, tantis signis
and prodigijs in sanctitatis ostensione eleuatur, vt argui ab homine eius facta
non valiant, quia cum potestate terroris, adiungit etiam signa ostensae
sanctitatis.

In the end of the world Satan entering into the Man, whom the holy Scripture
calls Antichrist, is lifted up with so great pride, does reign with so great
power, is exalted in the show of holiness by so great signs and wonders, that
his deeds may not be reproved by any man; because with terrifying power, he
conioyneth the signs of seeming holiness.

Tu quid Christo vniuersalis Greg. Epist. lib. 4. ep. 38.
sanctae Ecclesiae capiti in extremi iudicij es dicturus examine, qui cuncta
ei^s membra tibimet conaris vniuersalis appellatione supponere? Quis rogo in
hoc tam peruerso vocabulo nisi ille ad imitandum proponitur, qui despectis
Angelorum legionibus secum socialiter constitutis, ad culmen conatus est
singulantis erumpere, vt and nulli subesse, and solus omnibus praeesse
videretur.

What will thou answer in the trial of the last judgment, unto Christ the
Head of the holy universal Church, who would bring all his members into
subjection to thee by the Title of Universal? I pray thee, who is herein set
before thee to be imitated, but he that despising the Legions of Angels, which
were placed in fellowship with him, strove to ascend into a Top of
Singularity, that he might appear to be under none, and to be alone above
all.

Ego fidenter dico, quia Epist. lib. 6. ep. 30.
quisquis se Vniuersalem Sacerdotem vocat, vel-vocari desiderat, in elatione
sua Antichristum praecurrit, quia superbiendose caeteris praeponit.

I say confidently, that whosoever does call him self Universal Bishop, or
desires to be so called, by his pride, he is a forerunner of Antichrist,
because by pride he lifts himself up above the rest.

Let Saint Hierome before him in time, but below him in Ecclesiastical
dignity, speak a little after him.

Tantum vt Romanum Imperium Hier. ad Algas. qu. 11.
quod nunc vniuersas gentes tenet, de medio fiat, and tunc Antichristus veniet,
Fons Iniquitatis.

It remaynes that the Roman Empire which now commands all Nations, be taken
out of the way, and then Antichrist shall come; a Fountain of Wickedness.

And that you may see what is become of the Roman Empire, let Bellarmine
though a Cardinal, yet less then a Saint, speak after Hierome.

Annon Gothi, Vandali, Bell. de Romans Pon. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Hunni, Longobardi Romanae Vrbis Imperium fere ad nihilum redegerunt?

Have not the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, Lombards, brought the Empire of Rome
almost to nothing?

Latini non amplius regnant Bell. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 10.
in toto orb terrarum, sed Turcae sunt qui verissime regnant, and apud nos
Hispani and Galli, non Latini.

The Latins do no longer Reign over the whole world, but ^e Turks are they
which may be said most truly to reign; and among us, the Spaniards and
Frenchmen, not the Latins.

Let a Jesuit and no Cardinal attend a Cardinal and no Jesuit.

Romanus Pontifex vtriusque Azor. instit. moral. par. 2. lib. 10. cap. 2.
Regni, terreni and coelestis claues accepit.

The Pope of Rome has received the Keys of both Kingdoms; the Earthly and
the Heavenly.

An eighth Sin. SECT. XIII. Monstrousness of Apparel, etc.
ANother sin which presents an ugly sight to the face of Heaven, is
Monstrousness of Apparel. Monstrous it is even in the ordinary sense of the
word. For, when we see a thing excessive in measure or extraordinary in
shape, we account it a Monster. So the Poet describing a Monster, he does it
principally by these two Epithits, Inform and ingens, Huge and vnshapely.
Either of these stick as fast to our Fashionists, and therefore 1. In vnco^th
deformity.
makes them to be Monsters. And first deformity cannot be avoided; ^or if
there be an vnshapely shape in the World, then have they found i^, and worn
it, while they have found all shapes and worn them all. Besides, if little be
handsome, then great is deformed; if great be handsome, then little is
uncomely, and yet by following the Tide of Fashion, men fall both into the
great and little deformity, for sometime both men and women swell in Ruffes,
and Puffes, and Gowns, and Garments; yea, Beards and Curles; and sometime they
^bbe away (...) windows. An ancient Father Clem. Alex. ^aed. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Cypr. de discipl. and habitu Virg. Impudi^e ^ nemi^m conspi^is; sed i^sa ^nsp
ceris impudi^e (...) tuos tur^i oblat^tione non p^uis* sed (...) oblectas
alios, ipsa (...).
gives better counsel: Nullo modo pe^mittendum est mulieribus vt nudam aliquam
partem corporis offerant viris, ne ambo prolabantur; hi quidem, vt qui ad
videndum inuitentur, illae vero quae in se virorum intuitum attrahant. It is by
no means to be permitted unto women to show unto man any naked part of their
body, lest both offend: the men in being prouokod to behold their nakedness,
and the women in tempting men to behold it.] Surely, a good Woman is a private
good, reserved from all except preserved for one, and even her face, which Use
and Nature allow to be seen, should be modestly shown. The rest of the body
should be like Cant. 4. 12.
Christ's Spouse, the pattern of Purity, even a Garden shut up, and walled
about. As much of it as thou do publish in so much thou art common; and if
single, In the Virgin i^ gives away part of her virginity. And in the wi^e
part of her husbands property.
thou have in so much lost thy virginal reservedness; and if married, thy
husbands particular interest: the first thou should keep for thine own sake,
and the second for his sake whose only thou should be. Leave off then this
naked foolishness, which makes only for thy shame; Neither let Nakedness be
the Ladies pride which is the Beggars disgrace. Yea, it is more disgraceful in
the Lady then in the Beggar, as a want affected is far worse then a want
necessarily endured. And take heed Es^. 3. 17.
lest God send thee or thine a true nakedness in stead of a false one, as he
did heretofore to the women of Israel, which were as fine as most of our fine
Ones. In the mean time we see God has met our Nakedness with a suitable
Judgment. For, nothing is more contrary to Nakedness then Cold and Rain,
and these heretofore have met this immodest Nakedness, even in the strength
of Summer against the nature of the Time. Yea, Poverty grows on, that may cure
a counterfeit Nakedness with a true one. But yet behold Mo^strousnesse, in
perverting of sexes.
another special Monster of Apparel; and that is, when Apparel goes about to
make an alteration of sexes. For such an hideous confusion has Impudence
attempted; and by a curious invention has wittily found out the chiefest
fashion of Lothsomnesse. This Earth that bears and nourishes us, has been
turned into a Stage, and women ^aue come forth acting the parts of men. It
seems this Monster Ad Eus^och. de custod. Virg.
was seen at Rome in Saint Hieroms time, for he ^aith, Virili habitu, vest
mutata, erubescunt esse quod natae sunt, crinem amputant, and impudenter
erigunt facies Eun^chinas. Wearing Man's apparel, and changing their garments,
they are ashamed to be that which they were borne, they cut off their hair,
and impudently look up with their Eunuchs faces. But let us withal remember,
that in Hieroms Ad princi^ epitaph. Mar c^l.
time Rome also was taken; And as when a strange and uncouth birds do come
into the Country, the people take it for a sign of some plague that will
follow; So may we justly think that these prodigious apparitions, and
monstrous shapes, are both the causes and signs of ensuing misery. But see
with Solomon Eccles 7. 25
the foolishness of madness. A man by creation is the most excellent
creature. A woman by creation is inferior to the man. The excellency wherein
Man excels the Woman is the knowledge and power of goodness; Therefore, if
women would be taken for men, they should strive to do it by a likeness of
wisdom and goodness. But now while they do it, in ^olly and vanity, they
go f^rthest from them, when they strive to come nearest them. Surely, it is
very far from the power of a Tailor or a Barber to make a foolish woman
resemble a wise man. What an endless Maze of Vanity is this, that after the
change of all fashions, Nature her self is grown out of fashion, and violent
hands are laid on the Creation? Is it not time that the universal Fire should
cancel all creatures, when the chief of creatures cancel their own
creation? Surely, it seems to me Unnatural sins hasten the end of Nature
it self.
that these sins against nature, as the sins of Sodom, above all other
sins, that run not immediately against the Deity, cry aloud for brimstone,
and fire, and utter destruction. For why should they be any longer, who
themselves will no longer be that which they are? Why should the Heaven, the
Sea, and the Earth keep their courses steadily, to maintain a Creature that
runs all out of course? A strange Patience of the Almighty, that order
should continue the nourishment of disorder, and Nature should go on to
maintain them that sin against Nature. But let all Vnnaturalists be fully
assured, that Damnation sleeps not though presently she strikes not; the blow
is the greater, the longer it is coming; God shall take part with his
Creation, and justify it against all that violate it; yea, he shall condemn
such, and cast them far below beasts and insensible Creatures; For these have
generally kept their courses and kinds, but Man, who by his Reason should best
have kept his course, he has most forsaken it, yea, he has made head against
it. For the height and perfection The top of sin to which aspireth man's
ambitious wickedness.
of Vice is now no other but a maine opposition against Nature, and a turning
of kinds out of kind, by abominable Pride and Luxury.

A second kind of monstrousness 2. Kind of Mostrousnesse; Excess.
has been described to be excessiveness of measure, or an unmeasurable
greatness. This great excess in Apparel has been too apparent; for it was
made of purpose to be seen, and yet the more it is seen the more is our sham^
and vanity seen. Hospitality, Charity, yea the Patrimony it self has
been cut up into Clothes; for an excess both in costlinesse and variety has
diminished Housekeeping, Alms; yea, sometimes clothes hereby have taken away
the maintenance of Clothes. Virtues by staruing themselves have nourished
Vice, and that which should have lived is dead, that what should have dyed may
live. Besides, this excess of Ap parell has removed the whole Land out of his
place, and lifted it out of the hinges. For by the ambition of clothes there
is a general remove, and the Lower is stepped into the place of the Higher, and
each goes about to be like them who are unlike him. Besides, the whole shape
of this Nation is changed, and clothes are no longer interpreters of the
wearers, but need themselves an interpretation. So that if a man that for sooke
this land some forty years since, should now return again; in good manners
he could not but say your Lordship to a Gentleman, and your Worship to the
Son of a Farmer. But (which is another mischief) if by an interpreter he
once be brought to know a man, the next time he meets him he has need of a
second interpretation, for the old man is lost in some new disguised fashion.
Such a confusion has this vice bred, That by it both men and their degrees are
grown out of knowledge; for unknown they are both to themselves and others.
Surely if ever that were true which Hunting don speaks, That the vanity of
men's minds should express it self in the strangeness of Apparel, these are
the times wherein as we have committed the sin, why should we not expect our
deserved punishment. Our Ancestors were wise in seeking Which has bred a
diminution of necessary duties.
remedies for this Vice, and I wish it were seconded; and that it would please
Authority to enjoin some rules of distinction, and that the ordinary sort of
men might be tied to our own Clothes, especially now when our own Clothes
lack money to buy them, and men lack money to buy the Clothes of other
Countries. Why should such buy the stuffes of other Nations, when our own will
very well become them, the Poor shall be kept in bread by their work,
flocks and Pastures shall at least keep their value, and the Land shall keep
her money? It is a The true way to remove Losses, is to remove Vices.
most-proper Cure when in one Act a Vice and a Loss are removed, for the
removing of the Vice is the true way of removing the Loss. For till God be
pleased, by the removing of Vices, it is in vain to talk of the removing of
Losses. But if no other Remedy be given, Poverty the natural Remedy of
Pride, I think, at last will cure it. And that either a particular poverty
which is commonly the fruit of prodigality; or a general while needless
Commodities abroad fetch away the money that we need at home. In the mean
time this is most certain, That the wrath of God and the punishments of that
Esa. 3, 22, 24.
wrath are denounced against this Monster of Apparel. The changeable suits
shall be taken away, and in stead of a Girdle shall be a Rent, in stead of
welset hair shall be baldness. Yea, God threatens this sin by the Prophet
Zephanie, saying; In the day Zeph. 1. 8.
of the Lords sacrifice I will punish all those that are clothed with strange
Apparel. And that we may know what kind of day that day of the Lord is, he
gives us the sight of it. That day is a day of wrath, Ver. 12, 13, 15.
a day of trouble and distress, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of
clouds and thick darkness. And because these general vices are usually
accompanied with a general security (for if men did generally fear, they
would not generally sin.) Even to such fearlesse men thus settled on their
lees, and that say, the Lord will do neither good nor evil to them, it is
said; Even their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a Desolation.

I must stop my self from running on in a boundless waste of sin, for sin
is almost boundless and gives me no stop. And Too many other sins to be
found easily in our selves, and by the discoucries of others. See diseases of
the Time. Mr. Brinsleys third part of true Watch. Mr. Dikes, deceitfulness of
heart, etc.
though this Land be an Island, bounded by the Sea, yet even in this Island our
Sins are a continent. For a limit of their extent will hardly be found, I
wish we might at length find them bounded with a Sea of penitent tears. In the
mean time it suffices if I have said enough, in that which is too much,
though I have not said all; Surely this is enough for my present purpose, if I
show* sins enough to deserve our Miseries; But I think those which I have
showed are so much enough, that they are enough to bring the Torments of Hell
upon Earth, or to carry down^ the dwellers on Earth alive into Hell. We may
rather wonder at the Mercy of GOD in sparing, then at his Justice in
punishing; how it can be that he punishes no more, rather then that he
punishes so much: Therefore let us confess Dan 9. 11.
with Daniel, The curse is come upon us because we have sinned against GOD.
And with Maurice the Niceph. Callist.
Emperor, when before his face his Children were slain, Righteous art thou O
Lord, and Just are thy Judgments.

SECT. XIIII. Against mutinous speeches and seandalous libels. A Madness of the
Vulgar, who having drawn Miseries on them by sins, murmr against their
Miseries, but not against their sins.
A fault of the Vulgar.
But before I pass to a farther Consideration, I must needs meet with an ill
custom of the Vulgar. When Miseries are upon them, they have commonly mutinous
and tumultuous thoughts; and from thence issue their censures of government,
their outcry for want of Laws, or want of keeping them. In this is a fault,
and I desire they may know it. For whither their censure beetrue or false, they
are in either to be blamed. If it be false, an apparent falshod is an apparent
fault, and therefore needs not to be proved. But if it be true, they are to
blame in the vn-due effects that issue from it. For besides that, Mutiny is an
ill remedy of Misery, the greatest Misery being a bad help of the lesser,
they are to blame in this, That they look so far from them, and above them,
for the finding and amending of faults, which they should have done most aptly
at home. For if sins be the radical cause of Miseries, then it is also the
Cause of the Causes of Misery. So, if faults in government be the causes of
Misery, sin may be thought to be the cause of those Causes. Accordingly
Solomon says, Pro. 28. 2.
That for the sins of the Land the Princes are many, that is, because a Land
is wicked, it is punished with a confused government. And when God was angry
with Israel, then he 2. Sam. 23. 1 24
left David to a sin, that by the occasion of David's sin, the sins of
Israel might be punished. Hereupon Gregory the Great infers, Moral. lib.
25. cap. 14.
That according to the qualities of the Subjects, are disposed the acts of the
Rulers, so that for the sin of the Flock, there may be a fault in the life of
a good Shepherd. If this be true, let the People amend the faults in
themselves, which they seek to amend beyond themselves, and by quitting their
own evil, escape that evil which depends upon it. If the Ex quorum causa
peccauit, says Gregory.
sins of Israel be the cause of the sins of David, the taking away of the
sins of Israel, had been the readiest way of preventing that sin of David.
Therefore, if thou will have any thing amended abroad, amend it at home in thy
self, for there is thy work which properly belongs to thee. But if thou look
to faults abroad, and leauest faults at home, which may be their causes;
surely, wonder not if the faults abroad be not mended, while the faults at home
which caused them be nourished. Leave then the Governors to their Lord and
Governor, who if they offend can punish them himself. Therefore Gregory
says of David, be Moral. in Job lib. 25. cap. 14.
cause he of his own will growing proud, was not without fault, therefore he
also received the punishment of his fault; for the raging wrath that struck
the Bodies of the people, struck the Heart of the Governor. But which is
far more comfortable on all sides, Let the amendment of thy heart please the
heart of God. For* God being pleased, frames the heart of Governors, that they
shall be pleasing to God, and from the abundance thereof send forth that
which shall be pleasant to the hearts of the people.

THE THIRD CONSIDERATION.
A Third Consideration Punishments for sin, call for conversion from sins.
may be this. That the punishments of God for our sins, call upon us for a
turning from our sins unto God. Our merciful God, compassionate to Mankind,
powers not out his wrath all at once, but sends lesser chastisements before, to
prevent the greater; and shootes off some warning Pieces, to make us strike the
Sail of our carnal swelling, before he begin mainly to fight against us, by a
destroying and desolating Battery* Sequitur Hillar. in Psalm. 2.
terrorem benignitas, etc. Terror is accompanied with Mercy, and to whom
vengeance is due for their sins, there is yet allowed a blessed Confession of
sins in Repentance. For God does not presently kill, but first speaks in his
wrath, and holding back awhile the full stroke of punishment, does only
trouble in his displeasure.] Even unto Pharaoh a mere stranger unto God, that
asked who God by less^r punishments calls upon us, that by conversion we
should prevent the greater.
was God, yet God retayns this order of his discipline, and by lesser plagues
gives him many warnings, to leave his sin of retaining Israel; neither do the
greater plagues or his final overthrow ouer-take him, until all the degrees
of former Taught by God.
plagues be in vain spent upon him. Yea, God himself opens to us this method
of his Chastisements, when he tells the Israelites many times in one Chapter,
That having punished Leuit. 26.
them sore for their sins, if they will not hearken and be reformed thereby,
he will punish them yet seven times more; whence it plainly appears, that the
fruit expected of his former punishments, was a reformation of those sins for
which they were punished. Elihu, the Spokesman of Job. 34. 31.
God unto Job; tells him and us, what is meet to be said unto God in
affliction; It is meet, says he, to say thus unto God, I have born
Chastisement, I will not offend any more. Finally, the Heb. 12. 10.
Apostle tells us this use of Gods chastisements; we are chastised (says he)
that we might profit thereby, and the profit he describes to be this, That we
might be partakers of Gods holiness. As this has been taught by God, so has
it been practiced by the godly, Practiced by the Godly.
for by Gods chastisements, they have turned from the sin for which they were
chastised. Before I was chastised, says David, I went astray, but now do I
keep thy Law. The very rehearsal of Judgments upon sin, works in Josiah
a public reformation of sins. And Solomon's Wisd. 12. 2.
wisdom, which is a kind of paraphrase of Scripture, herein agreeable to the
Scriptures, has this observation: Thou chastnest them by little and little that
offend, and warnest them by putting them in remembrance wherein they have
offended; that leaving their wickedness they may believe in thee, O Lord. Yea,
the very Hypocrites ^
and Heathens believed, that conversion from sin was Gods end in his
punishments for sin. Therefore the false-hearted Israelites, Judge. 10* 10 16.
being oppressed by the Philistines and children of Ammon, run unto the Lord;
saying, We have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God,
and also served Baalim; And they put away their strange gods and served the
Lord. The Ninevites, And Heathen.
though Gods judgments were peremptorily pronounced against them, yet they so
far take notice of this purpose of God; that by punishments threatened or
imposed, God aymeth more at the destructions of sins, then of sinners; that
not withstanding, Ionahs peremptory affirmation, they will still retain a
hopeful dubitation. Accordingly runs the Kings Proclamation, Let them turn
every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands, Who
can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger
that we perish not? Thus we see that God has a meaning of conversion in his
punishments, and that Man in them has heretofore rightly understood this
meaning of God. God does not merely afflict, as Elihu truly teaches, but by
affliction does instruct us, his Rods do give us knowledge, and open the Ears
that were sealed. Gods chastisements are like Samsons Lion, which though at
first they come terribly upon us, and with a show of devouring, yet after they
yield us the Honey of Instruction and Reformation if we look nearly into
them. The Apostle puts this Heb. 12.
difference between the Father of Regeneration, and the Father of Generation;
Our spiritual Father does punish us for our profit, the carnal Fathers
sometimes for their pleasure; God delights not in torments or death, no not
in the death of a sinner, but in the death of his sins. What remains, but
that as God intends his chastisements, and as holy Men; yea, Heathens have
truly construed them, so we also rightly consider, receive, and apply them.
Let us hear Gods voice in his punishments, let us understand and obey it, and
let his Correction bring forth Conversion. But I defer the Exhortation unto
the Conclusion.

sins, humiliation for sin, and justifying of God in his punishments for
sin, he will then remember his Covenant with their Fathers. By Ezekiel he
tells Ezekiel. 18. 30
us, Repent and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your ruin; yea, he gives us there particular cases of this
Doctrine. If the Verse. 14.
Son see his Fathers sins and considers, and does not the like, he shall
not die for the iniquity of his Father, he shall surely live. Yea, the same
Man that has committed iniquities, if he turn from his sins which he has
committed, and do that which is lawful Verse. 21.
and right, he shall surely live he shall not die. Yea, all the transgressions
that he has committed shall not be so much as mentioned to him. In Jeremy
there is Iere. 31. 18.
a passionate conference between GOD and Ephraim, which is a lively Table and
Representation of Gods dispensation unto Man, formerly expressed in these
passed considerations. First, Ephraim acknowledges to God that his
chastisements were upon him, Thou have chastised me, O Lord, and I was
chastised. Secondly, that his sins were the cause of his chastisements: He
confesses that he was like a Bullock, unaccustomed to the yoke. Thirdly, he
shows the operation of Gods chastisement in him; it stirred him up to call on
God for the grace of Repentance, Turn thou me and I shall be turned: And
fourthly, the tenderness of Gods mercy to Ephraim, being penitent in most
affectionate words; Ephraim my dear Son and a pleasant Child, since I spoke
to him I do earnestly still remember him: Therefore, my Bowels are troubled
for him, I will surely have mercy on him. This one president, if there were no
more, does sufficiently give a perfect plat-forme of the Cure of our Miseries,
either to the Teacher or the Practiser. The wrath and punishments which sin
has twisted together, Penitence vntwineth and dissolueth. Sin calls for
punishments, Punishments call for conversion from sin, and conversion from
sin expels punishments. Infinite it were to accumulate And by the
performance of those promises.
Gods Promises of mercy to repentance, or examples of such Promises performed.
Backsliding Israel under the Judges often fell back to their sins, yet
often returning from their sins, were delivered from their miseries. Yea,
even Ahab by the outside of repentance, which he wore on his body, in his
garment of sackcloth and gesture of going softly, deferred the rooting out of
his Family for the term of his life. When Manasseth had laden himself, and
Judah with the roaring sins of blood and Idolatry, yet Manasseth by
repentance is unladen himself, and to Judah it is offered by Jeremy, Ierem.
26. 2, 3.
That yet they should hearken and repent, that God might repent of the evil,
which for their evil doings he purposed to do unto them. Accordingly in
Iosiahs time, which was a time of reformation, God spared Judah, though
burdened with these sins, for one and thirty years. And yet to say the
truth, it seems that Judah all that while was but outwardly reformed, and
inwardly rotten. Such a blessing to a people Ier. 25. 3. 5. 7. Zeph. 1. 1. and
3. 1. 2.
is a godly Prince, striving for a true reformation, though attayning but to a
seeming one. Yea, it seems that God did not punish Judah, until they
committed sins like to those of 2. Kin. 24. 3. Ier. 22. 15. 16. etc.
Manasseth. So does Tremellius interpret that place; yea, Jeremy affirms the
substance of this interpretation. For he says it was well with Josiah, who
did Justice and Judgment, but the eyes and the heart of Iehoiakin the son of
Josiah were not, but for his Covetousness, for to shed innocent blood, for
oppression and for violence. Behold, a true pattern of the sins of Manesseth;
but that yet we may be sure to find none of them wanting, let us hear the
Scripture plainly affirming, He did evil in the sight of the Lord, according
to ALL that his Fathers had done. And what follows immediately 2. Kin. 23. 31.
thereupon, In his days Nabuchadnezzer came up, and Iehoiakin became his
servant, and when he rebelled against him, the Lord sent the Caldees, Syrians,
Moabites, and Ammonites against him; yea, he sent them against Judah to
destroy it. Thus we see that Repentance for sin preserves a Kingdom,
though taynted with crimson and crying sins, but the same Kingdom returning
from Repentance unto sins, and by new sins resembling the old, bears the
burden in a fearful destruction both of the new and the old. Neither has
the mercy of God extended it self only to the penitence of the Jews, and
the Children of the Covenant, but even to Nineueh, a City of the Heathen, and
strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel. Yea, by fact he there approves what
by word elsewhere Gods threatenings though never so affirmative yet upon a
condition have an employed Negative.
he publishes. That the sentence of punishment though outwardly never so
positive, and resolutely affirmative, yet inwardly it has an employed negative,
upon the condition of conversion and amendment. The Lord says by Iermie, Ier.
18. 7. 8.
When I shall speak of a Nation, and of a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull
down, and to destroy it; behold a peremptory sentence of destruction, If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced it turn from their evil, I will repent
of the evil I thought to do unto them; behold a negative of that Affirmative
upon a Condition. God in his deed to Nineueh, is as good as his word by
Jeremy, and as he is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, so at the
beginning of days, to day and for ever, He speaks the word and it is done,
his words are most certainly turned into works. A Nation, not the Nation, not
the Nation of the Jews only, but any Nation of the Gentiles, Nineueh, Tyrus
and Sidon, yea Britain it self, has an assured interest in this promise of
God; If we repent of the evil of our doings, God will certainly repent of the
evil of Hierom in Daniel 4.
our sufferings. Neque enim Deus hominibus sed vitijs irascitur, quae eum in
homine non fuerint, nequaquam punit quod mutatum est. God is not angry with
men but with sins; which sins when they are removed, he punishes not a man
for the sin which is not in him.

SECT. II. The sum of the premises cast up, arises to a perfect Medicine of
our Miseries.
NOw if this fourfold Consideration of Gods Judgments has discovered to us
these Truths, that the wrath of God and the punishments of that Wrath are upon
us, That this Wrath and punishmens are upon us for our sins. That these
Punishments And it is Repentance.
which are upon us for sins, call for Repentance, And that Repentance remoueth
the Punishments, What does offer it self here plainly as the fruit of this
Consideration, but an excellent cure of our Miseries. Repentance which our
Miseries call for, is an absolute Remedy to remove and heal our Miseries. Ita
fit Fulgen. Epis. ad Venantiam.
vt qui in nobis abutendo sanitate, infirmitatem peperimus, per infirmitatem
sanitatis beneficia reparemus. Et qui per lae^tiam in tribulationis incidimus
per tribulationem ad laetitiam recurramus. By Repentance it will come to pass,
that we who by the abuse of our health have gotten diseases, may by our
diseases again recover our health. And we who by our Mirth are fallen into
Sorrows, may again by our Sorrows, recover our Mirth.

But as the former truths Whereof the most perfect Receipt is prescribed by God
himself; and has bin found good upon proof
have been copied to us out of the infallible word of Truth, so from thence
also let us take the true pattern of an healing Repentance; There shall we see
that plat*forme of Repentance, by which God has been pleased and miseries
remoned, and let us firmly believe that the same prescription is left for a
perpetual Remedy, and is now as able to cure us ever; For the Word of God,
and the Mercy of God endures for ever. For one entire place there is scarce a
fuller to be Joel 2. ^2. Such a one is in Joel, upon which God promises to
take pity on his people.
found then that in Joel; Turn unto me, says the Lord, with all your heart,
with fasting, with weeping, and with mourning. And Rent your hearts and not
your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the
evil. And the manner of the Fast he describes, Blow the Trumpet in Sion,
sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly; Gather the People: sanctify the
Congregation: assemble the Elders: gather the Children, and those that suck
the breasts: let the Bridegroom go forth out of his Chamber, and the Bride
out of her Closet. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between
the Porch and the Altar, and let them say; Spare thy People, O Lord, and give
not thine heritage to reproach; that the Heathen should rule over them,
wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God? Then will the
Lord be jealous for his Land, and pity his People. This is the Repentance
which God tells us is acceptable, Let us therefore consider it, do it, and
be confident of acceptance.

SECT. III. Sound Repentance is found to have in it. First, A confession of
sins.
ANd if we will by the direction of this place, jointly with others take a
view of the main parts of Repentance, we shall especially discover these. We
must confess our iniquities, confessing we must loath them, and bewail them,
and loathing and lamenting we must turn to the contrary Righteousness, and
to this we must join vehement invocation. We may well confess our sins in
Repenting them, for we have confessed them in acting them: Our sins with
Sodom were not hid in the doing, let them not with Adam be hid in the curing.
Yea, those that are more secret, God by punishments has now publicly
proclaimed, As in Absolons open Incest, David's secret Adultery was punished.
Wherefore, if we had not shame to do that sin by which God was offended,
and we are punished; Let us not take shame to tell what we have done by a
confession, wherein God is appeased and we are eased. Shame properly belongs to
sin done, though denied, but shame belongs not to sin undone, though confessed.
And surely, what by corruption has been done, by repentance is undone. In
confessing our sins, we accuse our sins rightly as the causes of our
punishments, and we glorify God clearing him and his Justice in punishing.
This Leu 26. 48.
is that which God calls the accepting of his punishment, which is one
condition of removing it; for we cannot but approve and accept that
punishment, which we confess has been justly deserved. Accordingly Daniel
^eginnes with confession, and therein gives the shame to Man, and glory to
God. Confession by Solomon is made the first step to Gods favor, an^ Saint
John says, If we acknowledge 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
our sins, God ^s faithful and just to forgive our sins. Let us therefore
open our diseases to our Physician, and let us not be ashamed to be healed.
For certainly, except we acknowledge our sickness, the Physician that came
only to heal the sick will not heal us, being healthie in our own opinion.
Let us therefore confess our sickness, that we may be healed, and not cover
it with the show of health, that we may never be recovered. When we confess
our sins unto God, we tell God no more then he knows before, for our sins
as all things else are naked before his eyes: But by the telling of our sins
God knows, that we know them to be sins, without which knowledge and
acknowledgement there can be no conversion, and without conversion there can be
no cure. How can any turn from those deeds which they acknowledge not to be
sins, and how can that be amended which is not known to be a fault? Then is a
Man wakened, and ceasseth to dream when he tells his dreams, and when we
tell the vain fantasies of our sinful actions, it is a sign we are departed
from them. Therefore Confession must be the first step to Conversion, and by
Conversion the first step unto Healing.

SECT. IIII. Secondly, a detestation of sin: and from thence a revenge on our
selves for doing that which we detest.
TO this Confession of sins, should be joined a Detestation of the sins
confessed. We must detest the sins that we have done, and our selves for
doing them, and out of this detestation must arise an anger, yea, a resolution
of revenge against our selves. That our sins may appear loath some, we need
no more but in one view to look upon them, and look upon Gods Law, and the
purity of the one will show us plainly the filthiness of the other. And if we
cannot well discern the ugliness of our sins, Let us view the shapes which
the servants of God have drawn of them, whereof some models are given in this
Treatise, and else where Diseases of the time, etc.
enlarged. Surely, there is nothing more ugly then a sinner. For the face and
character of his Creation is like a face whose parts are either scratched away,
turned vpside down, or covered with most loathsome corruption. This ugly
deformity To detest sin we must see it, as God sees it.
the Lord sees plainly, and shows it to us by most forcible comparisons. He
expresses the loathsomeness of Sinners, by the most loathsome estate of a
Child in the blood of his birth. Ezekiel. 16. Again, A sinful Land is compared
to the body of a Man from the head to the ^oot turned into one scab or sore;
so that sinners are as ugly as a Man Esa. 1. 6.
covered over all with blisters, swellings and corruption. Again, if the
Righteousness Esa. 64 6.
of sinful man be compared to a cloth of extremest pollution, what comparison
can we fit for his sinfulness? Let us then look on our selves, with the same
eyes that God looks on us, and then shall we see our selves just as loathsome
as God does see us. A spiritual eyesight, That is, Spiritually.
quickened by the eye-salue of the Spirit, will make both us and Laodicea
plainly Reu. 3. 11.
to behold our Blindness, our Nakedness, and our Misery. If a Drunkard with
sober eyes could see himself drunk, he would appear to himself as a most
loathsome and beastly apparition. If a Swearer, with a temperate soul and
awful of his Creator, could hear himself swearing, cursing, and tearing his
Maker and Savior, he would think he heard a mad man, and one far madder
then he that curses his Father, and draggeth his Mother by the hair of her
head. Surely, the greater the Father, the greater the madness of the Son
that dishonours and dispiseth him. If a Fashionist should with an ordinate and
composedjudgment, see himself feathred, and fluttred, and ragged, and turned
into a block, upon which must be set an hundred shapes, and most of them ugly
ones, he could not but think himself some great Man's Fool, or an Ape that
changes himself into a thousand postures. If the Grinder of the Poor with an
impartial eye (and such is the spiritual) could behold his grating and eating
of the Poor by fretting Oppression, if he did but see how his heart pants for
the day that approaches, and his bread dimini^heth by the day when it is
approached, how the childrens faces are both made moist with tears, and yet
dried (...) God the chief and sovereign of Spirits sees, so we in our
measure shall see; and by our seeing we shall see in the sins of the flesh a
most loathsome corruption. To give us but a little Proved by experience; since
the spectacles of the flesh being taken off from the Soul by sickness, sin
appears truly sinful.
pledge of this Truth, take but a natural Man with the small piece of Gods
Image, given in the Cration, and left by the Fall, and behold him in the
Chamber of Death, when the Flesh being quieted and deadded by weakness, gives
the Soul leave in some small measure to use her own Light, and therewith to
behold the sins done in the body. For then does sin appear out of measure
sinful, and it looks just in its own ugliness. Tunc veras voces emittunt
pectore ab imo. Then a man beholds the crookedness of his actions with a
right eye, shows and shadows being taken away, and Truth remaining. Secum
reputat and considerat Justin. Mar. Orat. ad Graecos, ex Platone.
number quempiam aliqua affecerit injuria, atque ita qui multa ^e in vita improbe
gessisse inuenit, vt e somno perinde atque pueri solent identidem euigilat,
meticulosusque est, and cum spe mala viu^t. Then does a Man truly weigh and
consider the wrongs which he has done, then does he truly find that he has
committed many evils, and then does he spend the remaynder of his Time in
wretched despair. But let us prevent this fearful and late sight of our sins,
by a timely discou^rie performed by the Spirit. If this work be done in our
lives, then will our deaths be pleasant and cheerful; our work being done
before hand in our lives, we shall have leisure in our ends to think on the
joys of Heaven, the terrors of Hell being put away by a preventing
examination. It is a woeful thing to have much work to do, when the power of
working is almost done. Yea, it is a pitiful Case, when to the terror of
Death, shall be joined the terror of an affrighting Conscience; whereas on the
other side, a comfortable Conscience is an absolute Remedy for the terror of
Death. There are late and lamentable sights of sin which he that had seen
before, and cured, he needed not at the hour of death, with horror to have
seen them. Let us therefore, in the time of our life, which is called To day,
and by the Light of the Spirit which is the Day Star of our life; behold, the
ugliness of our sins, and by seeing them put away both them and their
terror. Let us not defer this serious business to the Night of Death,
wherein men cannot well work, and wherein ugly sights do usually most
affright us. But let us in our lives with Iehoshua put off the rags of our
filthiness, and with the invited Guests put on the wedding Garment, that when
the Bridegroom calls, we may have no other business, but to enter with him
to his eternal Joys.

SECT. V. Anger and Revenge, the true issues of Detestation of sin.
ANaturall and kindly issue of this detestation of sin, is an anger or
indignation with our sins, and our selves for sinning. The penitent sinner is
at odds with himself for his sins; yea he, hates himself, and from this
Indignation, arises a desire of Revenge upon himself for sinning. A
commendable wrath and an excellent revenge. He confesses himself Revenge
twofold.
worthy of all the punishments of God because he has offended him, and taking
Gods part as it were against himself, he pronounces 1.
sentence of punishment Outward.
against himself, and executes it soundly. His body he appoints to the
punishment of sackcloath, ashes, watching, labor and fasting, or other
Asperities; on his heart he puts the sackcloth of compunction 2. Inward.
and sorrow. And indeed this inward sackcloath is that which gives worth to the
outward, for the hanging down of the head without the humbling of the heart is
to God a detestable sacrifice. It can hardly be, that a heart duly humbled,
should not communicate some humbling to the body, but if it might be, it were
far better that the heart should be humbled without the humbling of the
body, then that the body should be humbled without the humbling of the heart.
But it is fittest that since both have Both ^t and usually necessary.
sinned, both should be humbled; so to avoid the fault of the superstitious
that with a proud and supererogating heart, have a fasting body, and to avoid
the dissoluteness of the Licentious that say they are grieved in heart, when
the grief of the heart imparteth not it self to the body, that had a chief
part in the sin. The Law of sin Paul calls the law of the members, Why
should not then the members also be punished wherein is the Nest of the law of
sin? Lust when it defiles the soul by sin, the sin of Lust is commonly
vshered with some filthy pleasure. Now when Repentance goes about to cleanse
the soul, by a godly sorrow it purges away the filth which sinful pleasure
has left behind it. Yea it is not only content to sweep the filth of sinful
lust out of the soul by the besome of sorrow, but by it and exercises suitable
to it, it would sweep it out of the body also, if it were possible, and so
make all clean by sweeping all filth out of doors. Therefore as by sorrow it
casts the dregs of sinful Lust out of the heart, so by fasting and other
mortifying exercises it seeks to drive it out of the body, that both soul and
body may be clean. Neither let the Papists have any And therefore no
pre-eminence in doing it to be allowed to Papists, but only in the pride and
indiscretion of doing it.
advantage on us in the exercises of humiliation, but only in doing it more
arrogantly, and more indiscreetly. To do it for Merit, or to disable the body,
Let these be their privileges; But in doing it for a penitent humiliation, and
with a measure that keeps the body serviceable to the soul, true Doctrine
gives them no precedence. And therefore, though they brag to their Disciples of
their Religion as the only teacher of Discipline, and accuse ours as the
teacher of Licentiousness, they deceive and are deceived. Licentious men there
are on both sides; and as some of ours puff themselves up with Liberty after
sinning, so some of theirs glut their flesh before their penance for sin;
witness the most mad Licentiousness that commonly fore*runs their
Lenten-fasting. Upon this is grounded an Apothegme of an Heathen, that the
Christians are mad one time of the year, until one come and cast Ashes on
them, and then they recover their wits again. But there are among us holy and
devout men, that practice and aproue a revenge on the flesh, and even in these
times desire it; For most true it is that either for the weakening of sin in
us, or for humbling us having sinned, the punishment of the flesh is an
excellent Medicine. But of a Voluntary penance, no satis^action to Gods Justice.
voluntary punishment for satisfaction to Justice I have no Intelligence; I
have received from a better Pope then ever was since him, to the contrary.
Confessionem Greg. Mag. Hom. in Euang. 33.
nostram ex puro cord desiderat, and cuncta quae delinquimus relaxat, etc. God
desires the confession of our sins from a pure heart, and then he forgiues
all our offenses. The Mercy of the Redeemer has tempered the rigor of the
Law, for in the Law it is written, He that offends let him dye the death, or
be ouer-whelmed with stones. But our Maker has appeared in our flesh, and to
the confession of sins (Non paenam fed vitam promittit) he does not promise a
punishment but life; he receives a woman confessing her wounds, and sends her
away whole. And again, Non in fletibus nostris, non in actibus nostris, In
Ez^k. (...). 7.
sed in Aduocati nostri allegatione confidamus, Let us not trust in our tears,
nor our works, but in the Mediation of our Advocate. Let us therefore be
humbled by outward humiliation, thereby to cleanse our filthiness, but not
trust in it as a satisfaction that merits forgiveness. This were in humbling
not to be humble, but to be proud upon our humbling. Again, in humiliation
every one that is weak may have respect to his weakness. Ne dum hostem
oppugn^t ciuem perimant, But let men take heed, that herein their favor of
themselves be caused by the weakness of their bodies, and not by the
weakness of their anger against sin; In good Fasting, strange only to
carnal men.
duties let us be fervent, and only slow unto evil. What though carnal
liberty by Dis-vse has made some strangeness of it, while it abhors to
diminish one morsel of pleasure, for any degree of spiritual; yea, eternal
consolation? yet the upright in heart mourn and pine in secret for the sins
of the time; yea, David a King, he humbled his soul with fasting, and
Iehosaphat a King fasted; yea, Ahab a wicked King fasted, and by it for a time
deferred the wrath of the Lord. And I must needs But profitable even to keep
us from fasting.
tell thee that love the ease of thy flesh, when wrath is upon us, it is most
for the ease of thy flesh to punish thy flesh. For we see that a short fast
has procured a long time of plenty and fullness, and so for fasting our eating
may be the longer continued. If I say that the fast of Eighty eight has left
us alive this day, to enjoy that portion of Gods blessings which is now allotted
us, I think I might do it by the warrant of great example, and no man can
confidently deny it. But under the standard of the Scriptures I may march
valiantly, because irresistably. In the story of Iehosaphat, first is the
fast, and then the deliverance; In the prophecy of Jonah, first is the fast of
Nineueh, and then the deliverance, and without these deliverances both the
stomach and the meat had been lost. In the prophecy I^el. 2. 15, 18, 19.
of Joel, first a Fast is prescribed, then a Blessing is promised. Yea, in this
very point of plenty is the blessing promised, He will send them Corn, and
wine, and Oil, and they shall be satisfied therewith. A short emptiness,
shall bring a long fullness; and therefore fast that ye may be full, for in
this point also, Blessed are they that hunger, for they shall be filled. True
it is, that turning must be joined with fasting, but fasting also by Gods own
prescription is fit to be joined with turning. Joel. 2. 12.
And why should we not willingly fast, since we see it so inseperablie
attended with deliverances and plenty? We may be confident in Mercy, since
it may not be thought that what has never failed others, should now begin to
fail us. We have read that the wrath of God indureth but a moment, but we
read that his Mercy indureth for ever. Surely, God is not changeable in his
Mercy, wherefore let us be the same with others in our humiliation, and let
us be assured that God will be the same for ever in his Mercy.

SECT. VI. A clearing of the doctrine of Humiliation.
But here by the way, I desire to prevent Error, and to put Truth in the stead
of it, in this Doctrine of Humiliation. To this end I would show how God comes
to be pleased with Man, by these exercises of revenge upon sin in our
bodies. So that the 1. For the licentious; that by knowing the benefits of it,
they do not vnderv^e it.
licentious Man should not think them unprofitable in true Penitence, nor the
Iusticiarie believe them to be satisfactions unto Justice. True it is, that
with this exercise of humiliation God is pleased, and his wrath for sin
appeased, but not as it pays the price of sin, but as it is the abolition 2.
For the (...)-saving Papists, that by knowing the proper work of it, they do
not appoint it to do that for which Christ's blood was appointed.
and expulsion of sin. God is satisfied with the Man humbled for sin, but not
with that humiliation as a satisfaction to his Justice, but as a condition
accepted by this mercy and goodness. It is the blood of Christ only that
pays Gods justice, the just price of punishment for our sins, but the
punishment of our selves is a part of our penitence, and penitence fitteth us
for the receipt of the merits and satisfaction of Christ Jesus. For Christ that
paid an equal price for our sins by his death, does not impart this
satisfaction of his Death, but to those that by his Spirit are made conformable
to his Death. As Christ dyed for sin, so Christians must die to sin, and
therefore by one Spirit Christ gives us both the Death for sin, and the Death
of sin; Now in this humiliation and selfe-judging for sin, we give his
Spirit leave and power to ransack our hearts and to kill the sin that offended
God; yea, by the same we express and testify our hatred of that sin, and
our conversion to God. And we being thus conformed to the death of Christ, the
death of Christ does give it self to us, or rather unto God for us. For his
justifying Death is imparted by a mortifying and sanctifying Spirit, our
penitent Conversion is the condition of Gods Absolution, and then the Death of
Christ is the ransom of our sins, when the Spirit of Christ in penitence
purges the sin that defiles us. For as elsewhere I have Art of H^pp. lib. 3
cap. 7.
showed, in sins there is guilt and a blot; The soul is thereby guilty, and
thereby filthy. Now, God has so ordered it, that the taking away of the filth
should go with the taking away of the guilt, and therefore Christ's justifying
blood is given us by the sanctifying Spirit, and with the taking away of the
filth, the taking away of the guilt is conjoined. The Parable of Christ, with
some likeness, and some difference, may make it more clear to lower
capacities. The Father has two Sons, and the younger calls for his portion and
spends it; yea, he makes a debt beyond it, and sets it on his Fathers Account.
Afterward, he is sorry for his prodigality, he returns to his fathers house,
and there desires his elder brother to mediate for him. The Brother intreates
the Father, he offers payment of the debt, only he entreats mercy and pardon
for his Brother. The Father looks as well for amendment, as for satisfaction,
and will not accept this elder Sons satisfaction, until he be assured of his
younger Sons penitence and conversion. To testify this, it appears to the
father that he hates his former life, because he hates himself for it, and
out of that hatred he punishes himself with fasting, lying on the ground,
and humbling himself to an equality with servants. Upon this penitent
humiliation, his brothers satisfaction is accepted. It is the elder brother
that satisfies, but the penitence of the younger makes him capable of that
satisfaction. So after our sins, Christ's blood is still the propitiation of our
sins, but by serious penitence (the fruit of his mortifying Spirit, and
whereof these exercises of humiliation are fruits) that propitiation is made
ours, and is received for us. This is no new Truth, but has been anciently
known and approved. Poenitens anima Basil. regul. contrac. 10. and 12.
damnatam pristinam vitam odio persequi, and ipsam memoriam execrari debet.
Deinde comminationem aeterni judicij ac supplicij pro timoris Dei doctrina
complecti, and tempus poenitentiae tempus esse lachrymarum cognoscere, certa
quod mundatio peccatorum sit per sanguinem Christi in amplitudine
Misericordiae, and multitudine miserationem Dei. The penitent Soul must hate
and detest his old sinful life. Next, he must receive the threatenings of
eternal condemnation and punishment, as a Doctrine of the fear of God; and he
must be assured that the clensing of his sins is by the blood of Christ,
through the largeness of Gods mercy, and the multitude of his compassions. And
again, Persuaderi potest anima etc. A Soul may persuade her self that her
sins are forgiven her, if she can behold in her self the affection of him
that said, I have hat^d iniquity. For, he that sent his only Son for the
forgiveness of our sins, has done his part that the sins of all might be
forgiven. But because the Psalmist sings both of Mercy and Judgment, and
thereby testifies that God is both merciful and righteous, it is needful that
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles concerning Repentance, be applied by
us; that so both the Judgments of Gods Righteousness and Mercy, may be fully
bestowed upon us unto the forgiveness of our sins.] (...) of this seems to
be the sense. That the honor of Gods Righteousness would be endangered, if he
should accept Christ's satisfaction for impenitent sinners, but if by penitence
we hate our iniquities, then both his Righteousness and Mercy agree to forgive
us. Hierome H^er. adu^r. Pelag. lib. 2.
also most plainly, Quod autem scriptum etc. That place of Scripture, and the
blood of Christ shall cleanse us from all sin, does belong both to the
confession in Baptism, and to the Mercy in Penitence. Gregory the Great thus,
In Gregor. in Eze. Hom. 7.
assiduis fletibus, in quotidiana nostra poenitentia etc. In our continual
tears, and daily penitence, we have a Priest in Heaven that makes
intercession for us. Of whom it is said by John, If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins.

SECT. VII. A third part of Repentance, Turning from Sin unto the contrary
Righteousness.
TO the detestation of sin, and revenge on our selves for sinning, must
inseparably and principally be joined a conversion from sin unto
Righteousness. This ^rning is that which sanctifies our confession, our
detestation, sorrow and humiliation, without which all other actions or
passions of Repentance are but dead ceremonies; bodies without souls: for,
turning is the very life of them all. Then only do the punishments for sin
take their leave of us, when we are thus turned from sin. For, this turning
sets our souls in joint again, which sin had displaced; yea, having set us
in tune within our selves, it tuneth us also at once to our Maker; And when we
are in Harmony with our Maker, and in Harmony within our selves, then
follows a sweet Harmony The only consummatory means to set all in order.
and agreement with the Creatures; so we see the true way how to have peace
with the Creator, our own selves and the Creatures. If God be with us, how can
any thing be against us, how can we be tormented by any thing? Therefore let
us fasten our eyes and hearts on this turning, as the very key that opens the
door, by which we pass from Misery unto Felicity. For on this side of that
door is Darkness, Wrath, and Judgment, even sin, and the punishments of
sin* But on the other side is Light, Joy, the most glorious Countenance of a
pleased Creator; In sum, The most excellent gifts, Holiness and Happiness.
Esa. 45. 22.
Turn unto me and be saved, all ye ends of the Earth, says the Lord. And
Joel 2. 13.
again by Joel, Turn to the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful,
slow to anger, of great mercy, and repents him of Ier. 3. 22.
the evil. And by Jeremy, Return ye backe-sliding children, and I will
heal your backsliding; what remaynes but that we give the same answer which
there is given: Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Yea,
let us continue our song unto God. Truly in vain is salvation hoped from the
hills, and from the multitude of mountains: truly in the Lord our God is the
salvation of Israel. For shame has devoured the labor of our Fathers from our
youth; their flocks and their herds. And then God will continue his promise of
Mercy; If thou will return, Return unto me and if thou will put away thine
abominations out of my sight, then shall thou not remove. Take to you words,
says Hosea, and Hose. 14. 2, 4.
turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, so will we give the calves of our lips. And if we take words unto
us the Lord will take words unto him, I will heal their backe-sliding, I will
love them freely, for mine anger is turned away. Seeing then we have 2. Cor. 7.
1.
such promises, let us by true turning and repentance, cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. Let us confess, and with mourning detest, and detesting forsake the
sins of the Time, and the sins of our persons. Nullus id quod peccatum
Hillar. in Psalm. 137.
esse confessus est deinceps debet admittere, quia confessio peccati professio
desinendi est. When we have confessed our sins, we are bound to forsake
them, because the confession of sin is a profession of forsaking sin.

SECT. VIII. This turning from sin to be done, First, In our selves.
NOw toward the forsaking of sin, let us observe this order; first, to
forsake sin our selves, and next to draw others to forsake it. First, let
every man according to the King of Nineuehs proclamation, put away the evil
that is in his own hands. Let us first be turned our selves, and put away the
beams which are in our own eyes. Let every man sit in Judgment on himself,
and take a survey of his life, and examine by what sins he has offended,
and from those very sins let him turn with full purpose of heart never to
do them again. Let there be a solemn hatred, a^ dissension; yea, an utter
separation between our souls and our sins; and let us cast them out as
garments that carry in them the infection of the plague; yea, of all Gods
plagues and punishments. As we would shut out Poverty, Anguish, death, and
Hell it self, so let us shut out our sins; for our sins bring in all these
with them inseparably attending them. And when we see, feel or hear of any of
those punishments which are now upon us, or may hereafter We should shun sins*
as we do punishments, since Gods Justice ties him together.
afflict us, let the punishment presently bring thee into remembrance of thy
sin, and as much as the punishment is grievous, so much let the sin that
caused it be loath some. For punishments and sins are like counterparts each
to other, and in one is expressed the shape of the other. Our sins are that
part which we present unto God, and punishmens are the part which God
delivers unto us; and such a loathsome look as the punishments express unto
us, such and a more loathsome look do our sins present unto God. So in the
one we shall read the other, in our punishments we shall read our sins.
But if we blot out that counterpart of our sins, God will also blot out that
counter part of his Judgments; and until then, let us complain of our
sins, and not of our punishments; of our sins that wilfully continue them,
and not of the Judgments which are necessarily continued by our sins. For
surely it were pity, that sin should prosper and grow greater by impunitie.
Let our malice therefore be converted from any thing that punishes us, to the
sin, by which it came to punish us; and let us be assured, that when we are
turned from sin, the creatures shall be turned from punishing. In our
selfeiudging let us take greatest notice of our greatest sins, and next of our
strongest sins, which though lesser in show, yet coming thicker by their
usual preuayling, must have a great strength of opposition and repentance. We
must turn greatly from our great sins, and weep bitterly for them, we must
strive mightily with our strong sins, and beseech the Lord thrice for them;
yea, let us not leave prayer and unutterable groans, until the house of Saul
grow weaker, and the house of David grow stronger. Let the Drunkard strive to
turn from his drunkenness, and though he find it a little hard in the
beginning, yet at length he shall feel it more easy; and that a custom of
Sobriety, is far more comfortable to be kept, then a custom of
Beastliness. The dry soul is the wisest and best soul, and so most fit
Clem. Alex. paed. lib. 2. cap. 2.
for divine contemplation, not being dimmed by the smoking vapors of drink,
Custom in goodness, will make goodness more soundly pleasant, then custom
of sinning, does make sin pleasant.
which like a gross cloud do cover it with darkness.] Let the profane
Blasphemer strive a little with his custom of Swearing, and he shall find
that it is as hard for a man to swear that disuseth it, as it is for him not
to swear that has long time abused it. Let the Extortioner by turning
merciful, once taste the sweetness of Mercy, and of that Manna of Charity,
which is the very Honey of Heaven, and he will say, that the taste of
brotherly love is far sweeter then the taste of the heart-bloud of his
brother. Let the Sacriligious person strive to turn from his Covetousness,
and see what odds of comfort there is in the soul of him that has given of
his own to the Church, or given freely to the Church the things of the Church,
and of him that has starued the Church or a Churchman, and he will not spare
the Heaven of a good conscience, for all the earthly benefits, that have Hell
by their sides. Yea, let every sinner look upon his every sin, either in
this Treatise named, in others justly reproved, or in his own Conscience
registered and he shall gain thereby to himself the joys of a good Soul, and
shall procure to himself and us all, a freedom from the evil of punishments.
A powerful goodness should be placed in the stead of sin supplanted.
Neither let us only search out our sins and forsake them, but let us strive
to plant in our selves a solid and powerful goodness. For such a goodness
is only able to keep out sin, when it is thrust out, since we have to do
with strong temptations, and a strong tempter. Thin and shadowie holiness,
and a show of goodness, betrays us to all offers of sin; and let it be
sufficient that hereby we have already received so many hurts, armed with too
slight an armor for a Christian soldier, even with a talking and not a
walking holiness. But let us strive by all means to fortify the spirit in
us, by which we are fortified against the spirit which is in the world; and
let us not leave praying, fasting, reading, meditating, until we feel the
pulses of the spirit beat strongly, whose strength is the great prefernatiue
against sin, and the main stablisher of our feet in the way of peace and
holiness.

SECT. IX. Secondly, We should procure others to turn from their sins.
NEither must we move our selves only to confess, detest, and forsake sins;
but we must endeavor to draw others also to the same duties of Repentance.
There is among us a Natural communion, a Politic Bound thereunto by a
threefold band. ^
communion, and a Spiritual communion. We are of one flesh and blood, of one
Commonwealth, of one Communion of Saints. And each of these Communions are
forcible motives and reasons, that incite us to communicate goodness each unto
other; The members we are of one Nation, of one Kingdom, of one Church; It
were a monstrous thing if the hand should not set a plaster on a bruised foot,
nor the head study a remedy for a sickly body. Yea, there is yet another
Community, and that is, a Communion Yea, a fourefold.
of Misery, and this usually procures mutual Pity, and this pity, succor
and relief. As the good Thief rescued Christ from the reuyling of the bad
one, saying; We all are under one condemnation; So should we say, General
punishments have inflicted general smarts, and losses; Let us therefore St.
Jude 22. 23.
strive to save one another with compassion, and 1. Heretofore begun by the
Magistrate. 2. Chro. 20. 3.
to pull one another out of the fire of Gods Indignation. If you ask where
this should begin, I will tell you where it has begun. When a general Danger
threatened Judah, Iehosaphat the King of Judah feared, and set himself to seek
the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah. When Josiah heard but the
threatenings of God against sins, and knew that those sins were committed,
to which those threatenings did belong, the King stood in his place, and made a
Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his 2. Chro. 34.
Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all his heart, and
all his soul, and caused all that were present to stand to it. When Jonah did
but pronounce the sentence of Destruction upon Nineueh, (we hear of no
Plagues present upon it, no Enemies undermining it by policies, nor oppugning
it Iona. 3. 6.
by force) the King of Nineueh arose from his Throne, he laid his Robe from
him, and covered him with Sackcloath, and sat in Ashes, and it was proclaimed
through Nineueh, by the King and the Nobles; Let neither Man, nor Beast, Herd
nor Flock, taste any thing, let them not feed nor drink water. But let man
and beast be covered with sack cloth, and cry mightily unto God; yea, let
them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their
hands. And as sure as they repented, so sure they were preserved. Now S. Paul
says, That the things which Romans 25. 14
were written here to fore, were here to fore written for our instruction.
Surely, the greatest power works greatest effects, and a Reformation is never
so public, as when they that have the most power on the public set it on
work. The Magistrate by good Laws, by causing good execution of good Laws,
and by good Example is a most Catholic Reformer. The people took notice of 2.
Sam. ^. 35, 36.
David's fasting for the murder of Abner, and it pleased them, for whatsoever
the King did that pleased the people. And not only the higher Magistrates are
causes of Reformation, but the Lower in being careful to suppress Vice by
lawful punishments, and to strengthen Virtue by lawful encouragements. Yea,
their examples also may communicate, either much goodness, or much infection.
Next to the public 2. The Minister ought to call others to turn from their
finnes.
Magistrate, the Minister is a most publique-Person. Therefore it concerns him
also to tell the People their sins, and to call them from their transgressions.
Ezra the high Priest prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord, and to
do it, and to teach in Israel Statutes and Judgments. Yea, Ezra. 7. 10.
he rent his Garment for the sins of the People, and called them to the
reuersing of their sins, until the fierce wrath of the Lord should be
turned away from them. Yea, this and 9, 10.
has been the main office of the Priests, and Prophets of God to turn them
from their sins, and so to For the Minister is a Watch man to descry both
Sins and Judgments.
turn away the punishments belonging to their sins. These are the Watchmen
set upon the Tower of divine Speculation, looking a far off to see both the
sins of the People, and the punishments of God coming for their sins, and
to give notice of both to the People. Thus standing in their watch, if with the
servant of Eliah they see but a little cloud arising, they call to Ahabs, to
Sinners, to escape betime from the Tempests that will follow. In Esaias, a
Watchman Esa. 21. 11.
stands in the watch-towr and speaks unto Sinners. The Morning comes and
also the Night, if ye will enquire, enquire, return and come. Jeremy was set
Ierem. 7.
in a watch-towre, and then the Word of the Lord comes to him, Make your ways
good and your actions right, And think not to steal and kill, and swear
falsely, and to worship Idols, and to trust in the Temple of the Lord, for as I
destroyed Shiloh for the wickedness of Israel, so will I destroy the Temple
for the wickedness of Judah. Ezekiel Eze. 3. 2.
is set on a watch-towre to receive the Word from God, and to deliver it to the
People. If God say to the wicked he shall die, the Prophet himself shall die,
if he do not tell this message of Death to the wicked: Habbakuk stands in his
Hab. 2.
watch, to hear what the Lord will say unto him, and having received the Word
of the Lord, he proclaims it to the people. Woe be to him that couets an evil
Coueteousnesse, to set his neast on high above the reach of Misery. Woe be
unto him that builds a City with blood, and that establishes it by Iniquity.
Woe be unto him that gives drink to his Neighbor, adding his Bottle, and
making him drunk, that he may behold his shame Yea, Christ Jesus himself the
Mediator of the New Testament, and our chiefest King, Priest, and Prophet, to
the Scribes and Pharisees expresses their sins, and denounces the woes
belonging to them. And Jerusalem her self with tears he calls to
repentance, offering to gather her under the wings of an Almighty protection;
Our Savior would, but Jerusalem would not. Saint Peter Acts 3.
also, an excellent Scholar of that highest Teacher, tells the Jews plainly,
that they have denied the holy One, and desired a Murderer, and killed the
Prince of Life; and withal he calls them to Repentance and Conversion, that
their sins may be blotted out when the time of refreshing shall come. Now,
whereunto does all this amount being cast up into a sum? That it is the
office of the Ministers to see the sins of the People, to see the Judgments
of God coming upon those sins, and by Repentance to call the People from
their sins, and so to save them from the Judgments. Therefore The Ministers
must be Seers and Cryers.
even at this Day must the Ministers be Seers, they must see sins, and see
judgments. And they must be Cryers as well as Seers, for when they see the sins,
they must give Men notice of the punishments that attend them, and when they
see the plagues, they must give men notice of the sins that cause them; yea,
when they see both, as at this Time, they must give notice of both. Even now is
Esa. 58. 1. Eze. 11. 13.
the word Clama sent out to the Ministers, to cry aloud and spare not, even to
lift up their voice as a Trumpet. Wherefore, let them not be silent, nor hold
their peace for Sions sake, lest the Prophet die for not spea king, and the
People for not hearing: Better it is to cry aloud a cry of penitence that
brings forth safety and rejoicing; then to cry bitterly hereafter in a cry of
torment, when there shall be none to deliver. Therefore, let each Pastor of a
Flock take heed to the Flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has made him Ouer-seer,
and in his Flock search and discover the sins that are there most dangerous,
and show his Flock both the sins and the danger. Let him call upon them
strongly for Repentance, even this threefold duty of Repentance: Confession,
Detestation, and Conversion, by them striving to dismount the sins of the
Time, which like so many Canons are planted against us, being full charged with
the Judgments of God. There is none that spares his flock more, then he that
spares the sins of his flock Repentance is ever safe, Impenitence ever
dangerous
least. You see a strong Ground and impregnable Examples, warranting this
Action. And if carnal Security could truly say (as it is ready to say any
thing; yea, to sin quietly unto Death, rather then to take the pains of
Repentance) that there is no fear of such a wrath, as speculatiue men may
forge out of the strength of Imagination, yet this is all the danger of this
side, That by persuading Repentance, men are less sinful, more just, and more
safe; whereas on the other side, If our Sins, and Gods Judgments be so near
together, as the foresaid Proofs do enforce, the danger of unrepentance is no
little one, but an utter overthrow, and an abomination of desolation. Let us
therefore strive by the profitable practice of penitence, to make our selves
assured of safety, rather then by an unprofitable Impenitence to hazard an
utter ruin and destruction. Repentance is a thing never 2. Cor. 7. 10.
to be repented of; But Romans 2. 5.
hardness of heart, and a heart that cannot repent, heapeth up wrath against
the day of wrath; And then there will be no place for Heb. 12. 17.
repentance; yea, though thou should seek it with tears. Next to the
Minister, 3. The Master of a Family, ought to turn sin out of his Family.
let us speak to the Master of a Family, who is a kind of public private
person. For an House, is a little Church, and a little Commonwealth; and of
many such little Churches, and little Commonwealths, does the great Church and
the great Commonwealth consist. Accordingly in this little Church, the Master
of the Family has leave to Pro. 23. 13.
reform by instruction, and in this Commonwealth Pro. 29. 19.
he has power to reform by Correction, when Instruction will not serve.
Abraham Genesis 18. 19.
is loved and commended, because he will command his children, and his
household after him to keep the way of the Lord. Iaakob also purges and
reformeth Genesis 35.
his house, putting out the strange gods that were therein. Joshua is resolute,
Josh. 24. 15.
though all Israel be contrary to him, he and his house will serve the Lord.
David promises reformation in his house, as well as in his Kingdom. He that
works deceit shall not dwell in mine house, he that tells lies shall not
tarry in my sight. These paternes should the Masters Psalm. 101.
of the Families propose; which if they were followed, the reformation of all
particulars, would be a reformation of the general. Therefore let every ^y
reforming every hou^e, a whole ^ingdome would be ^ormed.
man see what swearing and blasphemy, what drunkenness and luxury, what
extortion and oppression; yea, what any sin is in his house, and cast out
from it the sin, leaving the person; or the sin with the person, if the
person will not leave the sin. The house of the wicked, says Solomon, shall
be overthrown; Pro. 14. 11.
but the Tabernacle of the Righteous shall flourish. Will thou then keep that
wickedness that may be the overthrow of thine house, and not make
Righteousness thy Guest, which will make thy house to flourish? Again, as
wickedness makes one house to decay, so many wicked houses together by
proportion make a Land to decay; so by not reforming thy house, thou art an
vndoer of thy family, and a Traitor to thy Country. Lastly, 4. Each man
strive to turn his Friend and his Neighbor.
let every friend to his friend, every neighbor to his neighbor (yea, though
he be but such a neighbor as the Jew was to the Samaritane) let him by
admonition, and instruction call him to reformation. If thou feast thy enemies
Ox go out of the way, thou must turn him into the way, how much more thine
enemies soul, wandering in the way that leads to destruction. Yea, for thine
own sake thou should do it, for by his sin, the Land and thou in the
Land may perhaps be punished; but by reforming his sin, the Land and thou in
the Land may be spared. But if the wicked will not be reclaymed from his
wickedness, let the righteous mourn for 5. If the wicked fail, let the
righteous turn the more strongly.
the wicked, and strengthen each other in Righteousness. Let them mourn for
the wicked, that so all sins may be repented, if not by the sinners them
selves, yet by the righteous, which lament, even for this that sinners do not
lament. Let that which wants in the wicked be made up by the godly, and let
them mourn a double mourning, one for their own, and another for other men's
sins. So shall And double his mourning
no sins be left unrepented, and hereby shall they at the least have this
benefit, they shall be Gods marked mourners, and they shall be like the marked
posts of the Israelites in Egypt; Gods Ezck. 9. 4.
plagues shall pass over them. Let the godly also And stre^gthen each other in
holiness.
strengthen each other in goodness and godliness. For the godly are the
buttresses of a Kingdom, and the more ruinous a Kingdom is, the stronger
should the buttresses be that support it. Ten such Pillars would have
supported Sodom from falling, and their prayers would have cried louder in Gods
ears for mercy, then the sins of thousands did for vengeance. And if they
cannot save a multitude of sinners, yet themselves shall be saved from wrath
in the Day of wrath. When Mal^c. 3. 16.
the wicked were slout against God, they that feared the Lord, spoke often one
to another, the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name.
And they shall be mine, says the Lord, in the Day that I make up my Jewels,
and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.

SECT. X. To Repentance must be joined vehement Prayer.
LAstly, to our Repentance let us join undeniable prayer. I call it
undeniable, because it was never known that prayer joined to Repentance was
denied. Therefore in Joel, Joel 2,
when God shows how he may be overcome, having enjoined Penitence; even a
confession of sin, and a detestation o^ sin ((...) pressed in fasting and
weeping) and a conversion from sin unto God; he also adds; Let the Priests
and the Ministers of the Lord between the Porch and the Altar say, Spare thy
people O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should
rule over them. Wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?
And see what follows immediately, Then will the Lord be jealous for his Land,
and pity his People. The prayer of a penitent heart is a most acceptable
Sacrifice; yea, it is an acceptable Sacrifice offered up by an acceptable
Sacrifice. For, first a penitent heart it self, as David says, Ps. 51.
is by excellence the Sacrifice of God; and next the calves of our lips are an
acceptable sacrifice of that sacrifice. So the penitent heart, which of it
self is a sacrifice, is to prayer an Altar. An excellent Altar from which
ascends a sacrifice of sweet savor into the presence of the Almighty.
Therefore David rightly Psalm. 34. 15, 16.
orders his song, when he says; first, Depart from evil and do good, seek
peace and pursue it, And when he seconds it thus; The eyes of the Lord are
upon the righteous, and his ears are open to his cry. children of Israel had
mocked Judge. 10. 15
with God often in a false and short repentance, so that God had put them off
with a denial; yet putting away their Idols, and to their repentance joining
vehement invocation, they were heard in that which they feared. So true is that
Job 33.
of Elihu, The penitent man shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto
him, and he shall see his face with joy. It is sin only that clogs our
prayers, and keeps them from ascending unto God. The stinking smoke of our
sins infects the smoke of our prayers, and makes them unsavory in the
nostrils of the Almighty. If therefore our sins be put away, and a pure
heart send up pure prayers, let it be confident, for there is no doubt of
hearing. The Lord has Esa. 58. 9.
said it, whose word is stronger then the Covenant of the Sun and Moon. Then
shall thou call and the Lord shall answer, thou (...) and the Lord shall say;
Here I am. Wherefore let us depart from evil, and then confidently call upon
the name of the Lord, Let us be as sure of hearing as we are of Repenting and
Praying. Luxt^ Io^annis vocen^* Hierom in Lament. cap 3.
^. Ioh. 3. Tunc cor ^iduciam in oratione accipit, cum sibi vitae prauit^ nulla
contradicit, and bonorum operum ratio orationi conuenit. According to Saint
John's Doctrine, 1. Ioh. 3. Then is the heart confident in prayer when it has
not the check of a wicked life, but good works do accompany When we know a
way to be healed, it can be nothing but our own sloth, that keeps us from
healing.
good prayers.] If it be thus, Then do we know a sure way to prevail with
God, and what remains but that we prevail? Let us never complain of God but
of our selves, if we be not saved, for God has promised deliverance to the
prayer of the penitent; Let us therefore never leave reponting and praying, for
we may be assured that the end will be preuayling. This is the way, let us
walk in it, yea let us lie down in it, and with the woman of Canaan, let
delays or seeming denyals increase the strength of our Cries, for there is no
doubt but Importunity will prevail; and if our prayers mount up incessantly
to God, our Savior will come to us assuredly with health under his wings.

THE FIFTH CONSIDERATION. Necessary, if not made unnecessary by the former.
But if the present punishments do not bring forth this fruit of Repentance,
whereof they are in travel, then must we needs enter into a fifth
Consideration, and that must be this, That where Gods lesser punishments
prevail not to amendment, there the greater will issue forth and prevail unto
Destruction. This is a most lamentable Cure of our sins, and far more bitter
then that potion of Repentance which men so much abhor. Repentance with some
sorrow brings forth joy, but in Destruction, sorrow brings forth only
sorrow. GOD himself gives us the Character of it, A trembling Heart, and
failing of eyes, and sorrow of heart. Thy Deu. 28. 65.
life shall hang in doubt before thee. In the Morning thou shall say, Would God
it were Eeuen, and at Eeuen* thou shall say, would God it were morning. This is
the fruit of Impenitence, and not without reason, since God has proclaimed, If
yet we will not be Leuit. 26. 16, 17, 18.
reformed by lesser punishments, (...) moves them by removing Impenitence
remoou^ Gods chastisements but by a most ^earfull removing.
the effects, which GOD would have produced by them. For God by these
punishments would have wrought in us Repentance, but Impenitence suffers not
God to have this end of his punishments. And then does God also remove his
Chastisements; but this ease is the greatest Misery of all, and it were better
to be still chastised then to be thus eased. While the Rod is burning, the
Sword is whetting, and chastisements are then changing into utter destructions.
A most fearful speech is this, why should they be smitten any more, they wax
worse and worse? Esa. 1. 5, 7, 8
The hard-hearted sinner may think; that he has gotten an excellent aduan^ge
by hi^ profiting in sin, when sinning more, ^e shall be smitten no more. But
let him take that which follows, and then he will wish he had still been
smitten as before. Your Country is desolate; your Cities are burnt with fire,
your Land-strangers devour in your presence, and it is desolate as
ouer-throwne by strangers. A pitiful privilege, Not to be stricken any more,
but in stead thereof to be swept away by an utter Desolation. Let us not
rejoice, but tremble at such sun-blasts, which are followed with these raging
showers of wrath and vengeance. If the drops of his wrath have thus afflicted
us, how will the great showers of his Indignation waste us? Stilla ad Afric^m,
Hierom. in Ezekiel. lib. 1. cap. 1.
etc. Drop thy word to the South. Drop thy word says Hierome, that the whole
wrath of God seem not to be powered out, but some drop or part of it. But if a
Drop be so full of terror, how terrible shall we think are the whole
showers of his wrath?] Let not then the drops seem little to us, least we
feel the showers too great for us. The best and safest way is to make our
sins, and Gods Sins and punishments by seeming little grow greater, and by
seeming great grow lesser.
Judgments appear in their true greatness; for when we truly see their
greatness, that sight in penitent men makes them both to grow lesser. But when
they both seem less then they are, then they both grow bigger. Neither let us
be so nice and selfe*louing, as to think that the punishments which we have
suffered, are not great enough to enforce a general humiliation, For one or two
of these punishments, have been a ground sufficient for the Prophets of God to
call for a public penitence. ^oel calls for Lamentation Joel. 1. 1^, 13. and
2* 2^*
and Fasting, because Gods army, the Canker and Caterpiller had destroyed
their fruits. And Haggai calls the people to the Consideration and amendment of
their ways, because they sowed much and reaped little, and put their wages
into a broken bag. And a reverend Father Greg. Naz.
of the ancient Church upon a tempest of hayle, calls on the people to possess
their souls in tears, to sanctify a Fast, and to amend their lives. Let us
therefore be no wiser then the Prophets and Saints; yea, let us be no worse
then the Scribes and Pharisees, whom John Baptist termed a generation of Vipers,
and yet were forewarned to fly from the wrath to come. Let us make profit of
Gods chastisements, and let that profit be Repentance, and the profit of
Repentance will be the remoouing of the Chastisements. Let us speak unto GOD
in the Ezra 9. ^3.
words of Ezra, After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for
our great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our
iniquities, and have given such deliverance as this: should we again break thy
Commandments, etc? Would thou not be angry with us till thou had
consumed us? Since Gods punishments have been less then our sins; yea, he
has given us many deliverances, should we partake with sins and sinners any
more, that so by increasing our sins we may increase our punishments, until
they amount to a final destruction? It is meet to be spoken to God (says
Elihu) I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more. If it be meet to
be said, let us say what is meet to be said, but let us say it truly, or else
we do not meetly say what is meet to be said. Let us from the heart make a
Covenant with God, and say we have borne chastisement, we will offend no more.
Let us be contented with these punishments which we have already received,
and let us not by continuance in sins make them too little for us. Let us
rather Ne^m 9. 32
pray unto God; Let not all our trouble seem little unto thee, which has come
upon us, but give us so great a Repentance, that may make our troubles seem
great unto thee, and grow lesser upon us.

O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do it.

FINIS.

