DEMOCRITUS, OR Doctor Merry-man his Medicines, against Melancholy humors.

Written by S. R.



Printed for John Deane, and are to be sold at his shop at Temple-barre, under
the gate.

Honest Gentlemen.
SOme ancient Seniors, that experienced be
Of famous Doctors, do applaud these three:
First, Doctor Diet, a right sober man,
That nere disorderd courses ran:
But keeps such rules as nature holds good,
For to prevent corruption of the blood.
He is no glutton, with the filthy swine,
Nor drownes his wits, as drunkards do with Wine:
But by his temperate carriage lives long,
Keeping an able body, sound, and strong.
Next Doctor Quiet, of a modest life,
That always does avoid contentious strife,
He enters not into the swagg'ring fits,
With those whom rage depriueth of their wits.
For every light occasion to contend,
Not caring whom it be (with foe or friend)
To vex himself, in fretfull furyes rage,
For all these passions he can well aswage:
Whereby he keeps himself in perfect health,
Esteeming more of that, then Cressus wealth.
The third is Doctor Merry-man: whose diet
Does keep himself, and all his friends in quiet,
With disposition of a pleasant sort,
And men of wit will unto him resort:
To drive away dull melancholy mind,
Which to a madding frenzy is inclynd:
This Doctor, honest recreation uses,
And such jests as are here, he often chooses:
Not to offend, but like Democritus
That laugh't at the Athenians, he does thus;
He makes but merry with some shallow brains,
And smyles at many in their knauish veins:
And if that any discontenment grow,
It Is not his fault, but theirs that take it so.
Flatteries Favvne.
I Will speak thee fair, and make a loving show,
That thou the thing I wish for may bestow;
I Will give thee honey words, with pleasing smyle,
But it shall only last a good turn while:
I Will go with thee on foot, I Will run, I Will ride,
To have like done, and ten times more beside:
I Will give thee gifts, on warrant of this ground,
For every shilling to receive a pound.
What I enjoy, command it as a friend,
But let me borrow better then I lend.
Your own to use, I ever will remain,
So I may use, and ouer-vse again.
This is the substance of my kindness meant,
How ere I seem, this is my hearts intent,
And in this humor I will ever be
To please the world, that it may profit me.
Doctor Merry-man.
HYppocrisie was kind, and used me well,
So long as I had any land to sell:
Many a (God save you loving sir) I had,
For your good health I am exceeding glad.
What is the cause you are a stranger grown?
The meat does me no good I eat alone
Without your company, pray let me have it,
Of all the kindness in the world I crave it.
When will you ride? My Gelding's yours to use,
The choysest Chamber that I have, come choose,
And lodge with me, command what ere is mine,
Shall we two part without a quart of Wine?
That were a wonder, give it sure I will,
Your presence glads me, I do wish it still.
This usage I had daily at his hand,
Till he had got an intrest in my land:
And then I tried his welcomes in my want
To be, Sir I assure you Coin is scant.
I would do somewhat for acquaintance sake,
If you some good security could make:
But sure to wast my wealth I know not how,
Were folly, what you have bin, is not now.
I wish you were the man I knew you late,
Faith I am sorry you are in this estare:
You should have thought upon this thing before,
Patience is all, and I can say no more.
My business now does hasten me away,
I would feign drink with you, but cannot stay;
Urgent occasions force me, take my leave,
I wish you well, and so I pray conceive.
A Citizen for recreation sake,
To see the Country would a iourny take.
Some dozen Mile, or very little more,
Taking his leave with friends, two months before:
With drinking health's, and shaking by the hand,
As he had trauail'd to some new found land.
Well, taking Horse with very much a do,
London he leaves for a day or two;
And as he rides, meets upon the way
Such, as (what have soever) bid men stay:
Sirrah says one, stand, and your purse deliver;
I am a taker, thou must be giver:
Unto a wood hard by, they hale him in,
And rifle him unto his very skin:
Masters (quoth he) pray hear me ere you go,
For you have robbed more now then you do know.
My horse (in troth) I borrowed of my brother,
The bridle and the Saddle of another:
The Ierkin and the bases be a Taylours,
The Scarf (I do assure you) is a Saylours:
The falling band is likewise none of mine,
Nor Cuffes, as true as this good light does shine;
The Satin Doublet and rays'd*Veluet hose,
Are our Churchwardens (all the parish knows,)
The boots are John the Grocers at the Swan,
The Spurs were lent me by a Seruing-man:
One of my Rings (that with the great red stone)
Insooth I borrowed of my Gossip Ione;
Her Husband knows not of it. Gentlemen
Thus stands my case, I pray show favor then.
Why (quoth the Thieves) thou needst not greatly care,
Since in thy loss so many bear a share:
The world goes hard, many good-fellowes lack,
Look not at this time for a penny back;
Go tell at London, thou did meet with four,
That rifling thee, have robbed at least a score.
A A Mony-monger choice of sureties had,
A Countrey-fellow, plain in russet clad:
His dowbled Mutton-taffaty, Sheep skins,
His sleeves at hand buttoned with two good pins.
Upon his head a filthy greazy hat
That had a hole (eat through by some Rat)
A leather pouch, that with a Snap-haunce shut,
Two hundred Hob-nayles in his shoes were put:
The stockings that his clownish Legs did fit,
Were Kersie to the calfe, and the other knit:
And at a word th'apparell that he wore,
Was not worth twelue-pence, sold At who gives more?
The other surety of another stuff,
All Silk and Velvet, in his double Ruff:
Made Lawne and Cambricke, both such common ware,
His double set, had falling band to spare.
His fashion new, with last edition stood,
His Rapier hilts embrew'd in golden blood:
And these same trappings made him seem one sound,
To pass his credit for a hundred pound:
So was excepted, Russet coat denay'd,
But when time came the money should be paid,
And (Mounsieur Usurer) did haunt him out,
Strange alteration struck his heart in doubt:
For in the Counter he was gone to dwell,
And Brokers had his painted clothes to sell;
The Usurer then further understands,
The Clown refused, was rich, and had good lands;
Ready through rage to hang himself, he swore,
That Sylken knaves should cozen him no more.
A Wealthy Misers Son, upon the way
Met a poor youth, that did entreat and pray
Something of charity in his distress,
Help sir (quoth he) one that is fatherless:
Sirrah (said he) away: be gone with speed,
I Will help none such; thou art a Knave indeed.
Do thou complain because thou want a father,
Were it my case I would rejoice the rather,
For if thy Fathers death, cause the repine,
I would my Father had excused thine.
Envy betwixt two friends, a breach did make,
And the one of the other very hardly spoke:
Railing upon him, with untruths and lies,
And all the slanders that he could devise.
The Other, that no good conceit did lack,
Gave him all gracious words behind his back,
Commending him for a kind honest man,
With as much praise, as for his life he can:
One that heard this, told him it seemed strange,
That for bad words, so good he did exchange;
But he replied, Sir we both liars be,
I do but slander him, as he does me.
A Country fellow had a dream
Which did his mind amaze,
That starting up, he wakes his wife,
And thus to her he says:
Oh woman rise, and help our Goose,
For even the best we have,
Is presently at point to dye,
Unless her life you save;
On either side of her I see
A hungry Fox does sit,
But staying, upon courtesy
Who shall begin first bit.
Husband (quoth she) if this be all
I can your dream expound,
The perfect meaning of the same
I instantly have found:
The Goose between two Foxes placed
Which in your sleep you saw,
Is you your self, that prove a Goose,
In going still to law.
On either side a Lawyer comes
And they do feathers pull,
That in the end you will be left
A bare and naked Gull:
Wife in good troth (quoth he) I think
Thou art just in the right,
My purse can witness to my grief
They do begin to bite;
I do resolve another course,
And much commend thy wit,
I Will leave the Gooses part for them
That have a mind to it:
And if thou ever find that I
To lawing humors fall,
Let me be hanged at Westminster,
(Wife) I Will for-sweare the Hall.
AN idle fellow that would take no pain,
Looking that others should his state maintain,
Was sharp reproou'd by an honest friend,
Who told him man was made to other end,
Then only eat, and drink, and sleep, and play;
To whom the lazy creature thus did say,
(Sir) I do nere intend to labor much,
Because I see the bad reward of such
As take most pains, Horses that labor great
Are cast in ditches for the dogs to eat.
A Crafty kind of knauish fool,
Whereof there plenty be,
Did break his Mistress Looking-glass
And swore it was not he:
His Master did examine him,
Demanding who it was,
(Sir) if you will be content (quoth he)
I Will tell who broke the Glass.
With that, he brought him in the Hall,
To Fortunes picture there,
Say'ng Sir, it was Fortune did the deed,
She ought the blame to bear.
His Master took a Cudgel
And belabour'd him withal,
Who crying out for mercy, down
Before his feet did fall:
Nay (quoth his Master) it is not I,
To Fortune you must speak,
For even she that cudgels you,
The Glass before did break.
A Sort of Clownes for loss which they sustayn'd
By Soldiers, to the Captain sore complayn'd,
With doleful words, and very woeful faces,
They moved him to compassionate their cases.
Good Sir, (says one) I pray redress our wrong,
They that have done it, unto you belong,
Of all that ere we had we are bereft,
Except our very shirts, nothing is left.
The Captain answered thus, fellows hear me*
My Soldiers robbed you not, I plainly see.
At your first speech you made me some what sad,
But your last words resolve the doubt I had;
For they which rifled you, left shirts you say,
And I am sure mine carry all away:
By this I know, an error you are in,
My Soldiers would have left you but your skin.
ONe dying, left three sons
Whom he advise did give,
Of what profession to make choice,
Whereby they best might live.
Unto the first he said,
Law, will be good for thee,
I know as long as there be men,
Some wranglers still will be.
The second he did wish
A Chanons life to choose,
For when as others weep and mourn,
Why thou shall singing use.
And to the third he said:
Physic for thee is fit,
For earth will smother all the faults
Physicians do commit.
AN old stale Widdower, quite past the best,
That had nothing about him in request,
Save only that he carried in his purse,
Would have a tender Wench to be his Nurse.
His sight was dim, his teeth were rotted out,
His hands had palzy, and his legs the Gout:
Yet he would Wench it with a daynty Maid,
Whose beauties pride in all the parish swayde;
And had her equal hardly to be seen,
A tender young one, much about fifteen:
This gallant to her did a Suitor go,
With much ado, his legs did plague him so:
Yet with his staff a pretty shift he made,
To told her Cupid had the villain played
With his poor heart, it was wounded for her sake,
And she must needs the healing plaster make.
She Maid beheld him with a lothing eye,
And for his quick dispatch, made quick reply:
And Sir (quoth she) your suite in love withdraw,
You shall not thatch my new house, with old straw.
A Gentleman, a curious building framed,
A house like those that are from Founders named:
The workmen had enlarged their Art thereon,
Composing it, a curious heap of stone.
Being perfect finished as't ought to be,
The Founder brought his friend, the same to see;
Demanding how he liked that house of his,
Why well (quoth he) only one fault amiss,
And that me-thinkes disgraceth all the rest,
Your Kitchen is to little I protest.
Oh (Sir quoth he) in that you do mistake,
A reason for the same I will you make:
Of purpose I contrived the Kitchen small,
To have my house the bigger therewithal.
A Barber and a Mower did contend,
With much ado before their strife could end:
About the Privilege that each did claim,
And thus the Barbar did his reasons frame.
Sir, I am head of all the trades that be,
For Kings must sit bare-headed unto me;
The greatest Monarch that on earth we find
Puts off to me: Mower, you come behind?
The Other replied, Barber, in vain you jar,
I have a privilege exceeds you far,
For when by me, the Grass with sieth is shorn,
Or that my Sickle cutteth down the corn,
Upon the stumps I boldly can untruss:
What Barber on his work, that dare do thus?
AN humorons phantasticke Ass,
Whose wit and wealth were spent,
Did in all companies he came
Boast of his great descent.
And all the Gentlemen he knew,
Unto his blood were base:
For he could prove from Noyes great flood,
His stock of royal race.
Pray Sir (quoth one) take no more pains
In this same worthy thing;
For it is most apparent plain,
From what old house you spring.
You may just prove your pedigree
From Noah to this hour:
Your Ancestors good Masons were,
That wrought on Babble Tower.
And were I as your worship is,
In spite of Bricklers hall,
I would give Trowell in mine arms,
A Ladder, Tray, and all.
A Quack-saluers Humor.
GEntlemen that approach about my stall,
To most rare Physic I inuit you all:
Come near and harken what I have to sell,
And deal with me all those that are not well.
In this box here, I have such precious stuff,
To give it praise, I have not words enough:
If any humor in your brains be crept,
I Will fetch it out, as if your heads were swept.
Almost through Europe I have shown my face,
In every town, and every Market place;
Behold this Salve, I do not use to lie,
Whole Hospitals, there have bin cured thereby?
I do not stand here like a tottered slave,
My Velvet and my Chain of Gold I have:
Which cannot be maintained by men's looks,
Friends, all your town is hardly worth my books.
There stands my Coach and Horses, it is mine own,
From hence to Turkey is my credit known:
In few I cannot boast as many will;
Let nothing speak for me but only skill.
See you that thing, like Ginger-bread lies there?
My tongue cannot express to any ear
The sundry virtues that it does contain,
Or number half the Worms that it has slain.
If in your bellies there be Crawlers bred,
In multitudes, like hairs upon your head:
Within some hour space, or there about,
At all the holes you have, I Will fetch them out,
And ferret them before that I have done,
Even like the Hare that forth a bush does run.
Here is a wondrous water for the eye,
This for the stomach: Masters will you buy?
When I am gone, you will repent to late,
And then like fools among your selves will prate.
Oh that we had that famous man again,
When I shall be supplied in France or Spain:
Now for a Stoter, you a box may have,
That will the lives of half a dozen save.
My man is come, and in mine ear he says,
At home for me, at least a hundred stays.
All Gentlemen, yet for your good you see,
I make them tarry and attend for me:
If that you have no Money, let me know;
Physic of alms, upon you I Will bestow.
What Doctor in the world can offer more?
Such arant Clownes I never knew before:
Here you do stand like Owls and gaze on me,
But not a penny from you I can see.
A man shall come to do such Dunces good,
And cannot have his meaning understood;
To talk to senseless people is in vain,
I Will see you hanged ere I come here again.
Be all diseased, as bad as Horses be,
And dye in ditches like to Dogs for me:
An old wives Medicine, Parsely, Timbe, and Sage,
Will serve such buzzards in this scuruy age,
Goose-grease and Fennel, with a few Dog-dates,
Is excellent for such base lowzy Mates:
Farewell, some Hempen haulter be the charm,
To stretch your necks as long as is mine arm.
Doctor Merry-man.
ONe came to court a Wench which was presize,
And by the spirit did the flesh despise,
Moving a secret match between them two
But she insooth and sadness would not do.
He did reply, so sweet a fair as she,
Made of the stuff as all frail women be;
Ought by the law of Nature to be kind,
And show her self to bear a woman's mind:
Well Sir (quoth she) you men do much prevail
With cunning speeches and a pleasing tale.
It Is but a folly to be ouer-nice,
You shall: but twenty shillings is my price:
A brace of Angels if you will bestow,
Come such a time, and I am for you, so.
Well, he took leave, and with her husband met,
Told him by bond he was to pay a debt:
Entreating him to do so good a deed,
As lend him twenty shilling at his need.
Which very kind he present did extend,
And the other willing on his wife did spend:
So taking leave with her, he goes his ways,
Meeting his Creditor within few days,
And told him, Sir I was at home to pay
The twenty shillings which you lent last day:
And with your wife, (because you were not there)
I left it, pray you with my boldness bear.
It Is well (quoth he) I Am glad I did you pleasure,
So coming home, questions his wife at leisure:
I pray sweet heart, was such a man with thee,
To pay two Angels, which he had of me.
She blush't and said, he has been here indeed,
But you did ill to lend, Husband take heed;
The falsehood of the world you do not spy,
It is not good to trust before we try:
Pray lend no more, for it may breed much strife,
To have such knaves come home to pay your wife.
A Crew of Foxes all on theeuing set,
Together at a Country Hen-roost met:
Where the poor Poultry went to grievous wrack,
For there they feasted till their guts did crack.
Having well sup't, ready to go away,
Without demanding what they had to pay;
Says one unto the rest: friends hark to me,
Lets point where our next meeting place shall be.
With a good will says one above the rest,
At such a Farmers house, his Lambs be best:
Nay (quoth another) I do know a Clown
Has even the fattest Geese in all the Town:
Well Masters, said a grave and ancient Fox,
Had bin the death of many Hens and Cox.
The surest place to meet, that I can tell,
Will be the Skinners shop, and so farewell.
A Shepherd that a careful eye did keep,
Unto the safety of his grazing sheep:
Perceived a Wolf through the hedge to pry:
Sirrah (quoth he) pray, what make you so nigh?
Why (said the Wolf) thou see I do no ill,
Thy flocks are far enough upon the hill.
What Justice now a days these people lackes?
The Crows ride boldly on thy cattels backs:
And not a word thou say to them at all,
Yet but for looking on, with me do braule.
The Prouerb's true, for now I find it well,
Which once I heard an ancient old Wolf tell:
He that upon a bad ill name does light,
Is even half hanged, as good be hanged outright:
And I my self by proof can now allege,
Some better steal, then some look ore the hedge.
THe Devil did complain he was not well,
And would go take some Physic out of hell:
To England, France, and Spain: with speed he got,
Where all refused him, he did burn so hot.
In have he then to Germany did hye,
The cunning of a Quack-saluer to try;
Where in a Marketplace, upon a Stage,
He found a fellow, could all griefs assuage.
Doctor (quoth he) I want some of thy skill,
For I do find I am exceeding ill:
And any thing for ease I will endure;
What, will thou undertake my pain to cure?
If thou can ease the Mallady I have,
Thou shall have Gold, even what thy self wilt crave.
Gentleman (said this Doctor to the Devil,)
Upon my life I Will rid you of your evil;
Make unto me those griefs you have but known,
And with the curing them let me alone.
Why Sir (quoth he) my head with horns does ache,
My brains does brimstone like Tobacco take;
Mine eyes are full of euer-burning fire,
My tongue a drop of water does desire,
About my heart do crawling Serpents creep,
And I can neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep;
There Is no diseases whatsoere they be,
But I have all of them imposed on me.
All torments that the tongue of man can name,
Within, without, in a continual flame.
Quoth the Quack-saluer, Sir I Will undertake,
A sound man of you in a month to make:
Wilt please your worship, show me where you dwell,
Marry (quoth he) my Chamber is in hell:
Thy charges in the journey I will bear,
And I Will prefer thee to the Devil there.
With speed get up, I Will take thee on my back,
The world may spare you, and in hell we lack.
A Bishop met two Priests upon the way,
And did salute them with the time of day:
Goodmorrow Clerks, unto you both (quoth he)
Sir (they replied) no Clerks, but Priests are we.
Why said the Bishop, then I will consent,
Unto the title of your own content:
Since you deny to carry Scholars marks,
Goodmorrow to you Priests (that are no Clarks.)
ONe clymbing of a tree, by hap
Fell down and brake his arm,
And did complain unto a friend
Of his unlucky harm.
Would I had counseled you before
(Quoth he) to whom he spoke,
I know a trick for Clymbers,
That they never hurt shall take:
Neighbor (said he) I have a Son,
And he does use to clymbe,
Pray let me know that same for him
Against another time.
Why thus (quoth he) let any man
That lives, clymbe nere so hye:
And make no more have down then up,
No harm can come thereby.
AN aged Gentleman, sore sick did lie,
Expecting life, that could not choose but dye,
His fool came to him and entreats thus,
Good Master ere you go away from us
Bestow on Jack (that often has made you laugh)
Against he waxes old, your walking staff.
I will (quoth he) go take it, there it is,
But on condition Jack which shall be this,
If thou do meet with any while thou live,
More fool then thou, the staff thou shall him give:
Master (said he) upon my life I will,
But I do hope that I shall keep it still.
When Death drew near, and faintness did proceed,
His Master calls for a Divine with speed,
For to prepare him unto heavens way,
The Fool starts up, and hastily did say:
Oh Master, Master, take your staff again,
That prove your self the most fool of us twain.
Have you lived now, some fourscore years and odd,
And all this time are vnprepar'd for God?
What greater fool can any meet withal?
Then one that is ready in the grave to fall.
And is to seek about his souls estate,
When Death is opening of the pryso n-gate.
Bear witness friends, that I discharge me plain:
Here Master, here, receive your staff again:
Upon the same condition I did take it,
According as you wil'd me, I forsake it.
And over and above, I will bestow,
This Epitaph, which shall your folly show.
Here lies a man, at death did heaven claim,
But in his life he never sought the same.
A Simple Clown in Flanders,
As he traveling had bin:
(Having his wife in company)
Came late unto his Inn.
A Spanish Soldier being there
A Guest unto the place:
No sooner saw, but liked his wife,
(She had a comely face.)
And watch't when they were gone to bed,
Then boldly in comes he,
And never said friends by your leave,
But made their number three.
The Clown lay still and felt a stir,
Yet durst not speak for's life;
At length his patience was so moved,
He softly iogg'd his Wife.
And said to her, prithee entreat
The Spaniard to be still,
Can I speak Sanish man, (quoth she)
You know I have no skill?
But Husband if you please to rise
And for the Sexton go:
He understands Spanish well,
Assuredly I know.
Faith and I Will fetch him straight (quoth he)
And so the Rusticke rose,
And softly sneaking out of doors,
About his message goes.
Mean while (imagine what you will)
To me it is unknown:
But ere her Husband came again,
The Spaniard he was gone:
Which when the simple Fool perceived,
He fell to domineere;
Oh wife (said he) for twenty pound
I would I had him here.
Tell me sweet heart, when I was gone,
How long the Knave did stay:
Quoth she) you scarce were out of doors
Before he ran away.
Wife (said the Clown) thou make me laugh
That I did scare him thus,
Come let us take a little nap
for his disturbing us.
You see what comes of policy
and good discretion wife:
if I had been a hasty fool,
^ might have cost my life.
A Courtezans Humor.
I Am a Professed a Courtezan,
That live by peoples sin:
With half a dozen Punkes I keep,
I have great coming in.
Such store of Traders haunt my house
To find a lusty Wench,
That twenty gallants in a week
Do entertain the French;
Your Courtier, and your Citizen,
Your very rustique Clown,
Will spend an Angel on the pox,
Even ready Money down.
I strive to live most Lady-like,
And scorn those foolish Queanes,
That do not rattle in their Silks,
and yet have able means.
I have my Coach, as if I were
A Countess, I protest
I have my dainty music plays
When I would take my rest.
I have my Seruing-men that wait
Upon me in blew Coats,
I have my Oars that attend
My pleasure with their Boats.
I have my Champions that will fight,
My Lovers that do fawn,
I have my Hat, my Hood, my Mask,
My Fan, my Cobweb Lawne:
To give my Glove unto a Gull,
Is mighty favor found:
When for the wearing of the same,
It costs him twenty pound.
My Garter as a gracious thing,
Another takes away:
And for the same a silken gown
The Prodigal does pay.
Then comes an Ass, and he forsooth
Is in such longing heat,
My buske point even on his knees,
With tears he does entreat.
I grant it, to rejoice the man,
And then request a thing;
Which is both Gold and precious stone,
The Wood-cockes Diamond Ring.
Another lowly minded youth,
Forsooth my shooe-string craves,
And that he puts through his ear,
Calling the rest base slaves.
Thus fit I Fools in humors still,
That come to me for game,
I punish them for Venery,
Leaving their purses lame.
In Newgate some take lodgings up,
Till they to Tiburne ride,
And others walk to Wood-street,
With a Sargeant by their side.
Some go to Houns-ditch with their clothes
To pawn for Money lending:
And some I send to Surgeons shops,
Because they lack some mending.
Others pass ragged up and down;
All tottered, rent, and torn,
But being in that scuruy case,
Their companies I scorn.
For if they come and fawn on me,
There Is nothing to be got;
As soon as ere my Merchants break,
I swear, I know them not.
No entertainment, nor a look
That they shall get of me?
If once I do begin perceive,
That out of cash they be:
All kindnesses that I profess,
The fairest shows I make,
Is love to all that come to me
For Gold and Siluers sake.
To forward men, I forward am,
Most frank unto the free,
But such as take their ware on trust,
Are not to deal with me.
The world is hard, all things are dear:
Good-fellowship decays,
And every one seeks profit now,
In these same hungry days.
Although my trade in secret be
Unlawful to be known,
Yet I will make the best I can,
Of that which is mine own.
For seeing I do venture fair,
At price of whipping cheer,
I have no reason but to make
My Customers pay dear:
Our charge beside is very great
To keep us fine and brave,
A Whore that goes not gallantly,
Shall little doings have.
Therefore all things considered well
Our charges and our danger;
A daily fryend shall pay as much
As any Tearme-time stranger.
Doctor Merry-man.
A Rich man and a poor did both appear
Before a Judge, an injury to clear:
The Rich did tell a tale most tedious long,
Mending as he supposed with words the wrong.
And ever when the poor man would have spoke,
With bold out-facing speech he did him choke.
The woeful wight at length could hear no longer,
But boldly raised his voice both loud and stronger;
My Lord (quoth he) pray now bid Dives stay,
And hear but what poor Lazarus can say:
My Ox came in his field, which he does keep,
And swears for that, he will pay me with a Sheep.
TWo Beggars did encounter on the way,
That had not seen each other many a day:
Nor met together at the hedge (Rogues hall)
As perfect lowzy, as they both could crawle.
Each had a hat, and Nightcap for the cold,
And Cloakes with patches, full as they might hold;
Great Satchell scrips, that shut with leather flaps,
And each a Dog to eat his Masters scraps.
Their shoes were Hob-naile proof, soundly bepegg'd,
Wrapped well with clouts, to keep them warmer legged:
Says one to to'ther, come, hang care, lets drink,
Our trade is better then a number think:
For I, my wife, and Jack, ply up and down
To make our ery day, worth half a Crown.
Most towns in Flanders, I have learned to name,
And am a poor distressed Soldier lame.
And sometimes I their charityes desire,
Like one has lost all that he had by fire:
Fire (quoth the other) come along mad knave,
Lets go where we some watering place may have.
Where Is the best Beer to give a man content?
I have a penny that was never spent.
And twenty slaves, I Gentlemen did name,
Before I could be master of the same:
To many an Ass I do the worship give,
With Lord preserve your goodness while you live:
Now Jesus prosper you by Sea and Land,
And bless you Master, all you take in hand.
God keep your limbs, and Lord increase your store,
I eat no bread to day, (but drank the more.)
For Christ his sake, make this same up a penny,
Thus do I angle Silver out of many;
I, when I have it for my speaking fair,
If he were hanged that gave it, I near care.
The other Beggar laugh't, and did reply,
Roger, of that same humor right am I.
I can affourd good speech as well as thou,
And unto any knave such words allow;
I will not want that till my tongue do frail,
But preethee come, let us go find this Ale.
I am as dry, as ever was March-dust,
And here is a groat I mean to spend it just:
Well said old Tom (says the other) if thou do,
My groat shall go, and my Tobacco too.
Although a Beggars creadit be not great,
We will be Gentlemen in our conceit:
I think my self as good a man each way,
As he that goes in Velvet er'y day.
We Will spend a Crown, and drink carowses round,
Before some Churles are worth ten thousand pound:
There Is nothing but a pair of stocks we fear,
I Will bring thee to a cup of tickling gear.
FINIS.

