THE ABUSES OF THE ROMISH CHVRCH ANATOMIZED.

BY A Welwiller to Sion, and to all them that love the Truth in the Truth.

Religio a Christo religat Romana: subinde
Aes religit; rectos and relegare jubet.
Viuere qui sancte cupitis discedite Roma,
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes, and are to be sold by John Grismand at
his Shop in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1623.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, (for so I will style thee, till I find thee contrary) The
intolerable abuses of Pole-shorne Popelings, have in all ages heretofore, and
are still so great, that many have been animated, (I had almost said enforced)
thereby to show themselves in Print, who otherwise never meant it, if they had
not been instigated thereto by their abominable Lying, Whoring, Swearing,
Blaspheming, Pride, Drunkenness, Covetousness, and the like. I my self am
one of this number; I have here published a Book, the first which ever yet
set forth, and shall be the last, unless this find kind entertainment. If
then (gentle Reader) thou acceptest willingly and lovingly, what thou find
laid down plainly and rudely, the Author will acknowledge himself bound to
pleasure thee in what he is able; if otherwise thou play the Critticke,
carping at every thing, and construing that ill which was intended well, do as
thou please, use me as thou will, I am

Thine as thou use me, ANONYMVS.

THE ABUSES OF THE ROMISH CHVRCH ANATOMIZED.
Their Lying.
AVgustus, Emperor of Rome, in the Triumph which he made of Mark Anthony and
Cleopatra, brought with him to Rome a Priest, of Egypt, aged threescore years,
who in all the days of his life never told any lie: In regard whereof the
Senate presently ordained that he should be made free, and created Pontifex
Maximus: also, that a Statue should be erected for him, and placed amongst
those of the most renowned men of all the Ancients. In the days of Claudius,
Emperor likewise of Rome, there died a man in Rome named Pamphylus, who never
told any matter of truth in all his life time, but evermore had his chief
delight in lying, which caused the Emperor to give command, that no grave
should be granted to his body, but his goods were confiscated, his house
ruined, and his wife and children banished out of Rome, to the end that no
memory might remain of so venomous a beast.

If the same order were among the Papal Frye still in force, we might hope,
that either we should have more Truth-tellers, or fewer I yers: But that
custom is now abolished, and this vice of Lying reigns more among these
Masse-monging Priests, then any people under Heaven: Witness those many lies
which they tell of their Saints* as for example: Saint Denis the Areopagite,
(say-they) took up his head after it was stricken off, and carried it in his
hand two miles. They say further, that Saint Bernac turned Oak leaves into
loaves, stones into Fishes, water into Wine, and that he sailed over the Sea
upon a stone, as an hundred and fifty of Joseph of Arimathea's company did upon
his sons Shirt, and Friar Herueus upon his Mantle. They go on, and tell you,
that Saint Nicholas whilst he lay in his cradle, fasted Wednesdayes, and
Fridayes, on which da^es he would never suck above once. They report moreover,
That Bishop Tryan having killed his Cow and his Calfe to entertain Saint
Patricke and his company, found both of them the next morning feeding in the
meadow. They further tell of Saint Dominickes books, how they fell into a
River, lay there three days, and so many nights, but were found afterward by a
Fisherman, and taken up as dry as a feather. They say farther, that Saint
Romuala delivered high points of Divinity as soon as he was borne, and
presently after that he was baptized, made a learned Sermon. They deliver
also, that Saint Margaret being swallowed by a Dragon, had no sooner made the
sign of the Cross; but the Dragon burst asunder, and out she came as sound
as a Trout. They say also, that a man who never saw further then the length of
his nose, opening Xauiers Tomb, and rubbing his eyes with his hand straightway
recovered his sight. Yea, they are not ashamed to affirm, that Ignatius Loyola
was rapt up into heaven, and saw the holy Trinity in three Persons, and one
Essence, and that God showed him the pattern of the world which he laid before
him when he made it. They report also, that Friar Bennet of AreZZe being cast
into the Sea in a Tempest, was environed with a little cloud, and carried to
the terrestrial Paradise, whom when (...), and Elijah saw, they demanded of
him what he was? And when they heard he was Saint Francis his brother, they
danced for joy, and led him about to show him every corner of Paradise; from
whence he was carried back again over the Sea in a little Cloud, which
marueilously astonished those that beheld it. They go on still, and would make
you believe that one time, whilst Saint Dunston was at his devotion, the
Devil looked in at the window, in the shape of a beautiful Damsel, thinking
to allure him to lust: but he hating such abominable filthiness, took the
said Devil by the nose with a pair of hot tongs. Neither do they here
cease, but tell wonders surpassing credit, of Saint Thomas Becket: For they
auerre, That when Ail^ardus for stealing of a great Whetstone, (which the
Author that writes it best deserved) was by sentence of Law deprived of his
eyes, and virilities, upon prayer to Saint Thomas, he had all restored again:
Yea, even a bird having been taught to speak, flying out of her Cage, and now
ready to be seized on by a Sparrow-Hawke, said only, Saint Thomas help me,
and her enemy fell presently dead, but she escaped, and (belike) reported it:
Yea, in his life time the Virgin Mary her self was contented to be his
Sempster, and sowed his shirt with red Silk.

But these forgeries be only fit for Monks to indite, Children to read, and
Fools to believe, invented at the first to deceive poor ignorant people, who
cannot perceive this their abominable lying, being nuzled and fostered all
their life long in Ignorance, by a command from his Holiness, least they
should descry their intolerable wickedness. And therefore I will not dwell
any longer upon this point, but conclude it with a proof of their Lying: for
in the Reign of King Richard the second, King of England, their lying was
grown to such a pass, that it was held as good an Argument to reason thus,
Hic est Frater, Ergo Mendax, He is a Friar, and therefore a Liar; as to say,
Hoc est Album, Ergo coloratum: This thing is white, and therefore colored.

Their Gluttony, and Drunkenness.
HItherto we have seen them lying, now let us see them walking like the tops
of trees, tossed to and fro with the wind. Let us also view their Gu mandizing
and Glttony. That these vices are not wanting in them, is evidently proved by
that prayer of theirs to their good Saint Dominicke, which runs thus: Sanctus
Dominicus, sis nobis semper amicus,
Cui canimus nostro jugiter praeconia rostro,
De cordis venis, siccatis ante Lagenis.
Ergo tuas lauds, si tu nos pangere gaudes,
Tempore Paschali, fac ne potu puteali
Conueniat vti, namsi fiat, vndique muti,
Semper erunt fratres, qui nil curant nisi ventres.


Take him also for a witness, who says, If that I must in order tell,
What virtues 'long to Monkish Cell,
He is not fit for Cell or Couen,
That Is not a Glutton and a Slouen,
Sluggish, Lecherous, for naught fit,
A drunkard, dolt, deuoyd of wit,
He must eat at each Repast,
Until his belly well nigh brast:
He must guzzell in the wine,
Till he be drunken as a Swine.
And if he can but chaunt it well,
This man is fit for Quier or Cell.


And him who says of them, O Monachi Stomachi vestri
sunt amphora Bacchi,
Vos estis, Deus est testis, turpissima pestis.


Take his testimony likewise, who says of their Monks: Si prandet, competit
vt loqui nesciat,
Ne lingua dentium opus impediat:
Si bibit, expedit vt bibens hauriat,
Ne pes sub pondere ventris deficiat.
Die deuotus adorat dolia,
Nocte cum bipede laborat bestia,
Tali discrimine, tali molestia,
Meretur vir Dei Regna Caelestia.


But because I will not be too tedious in so plain a case as this is, I will
conclude this point also, with that Epigram which was made upon Saint Anthony,
the Saint for Swine: Diceris Antoni porcos pauisse subulcus
Vivus; adhuc Monachos luminecassus alis.
Par stupor ingenij est, ventrisque abdomen vtrisq
Sorde pari gaudent, ingluvieque pari.
Nec minus hoc brutum genus est, matumue suillo
Nec minus insipidum, nec minus illepidum.
Cetera conueniunt, sed non leuis error in vno est
Debuerat Monachis glans cibus esse tuis.


Englished.

Once fedst thou Anthony an herd of Swine,
And now an heard of Monks thou feedest still,
For wit and gut alike they both have bin,
Both do love filth alike: both like to fill
The greedy paunch alike: nor is that kind
More beastly sottish, swinish then the last,
All else agree, one fault J only find,
Thou feedest not thy Monks with Oken Mast.
Thus much for their Gluttony and Drunkenness.

Their Lechery.
AFter Gluttony and Drunkenness, follow necessarily Lechery and wantonness:
and therefore seeing we have proved them immeasurable Drunkards, we may also
conclude, that they are intolerable licentious, and extremely addicted to the
lust of the flesh. And that they are in this vice nothing inferior, or less
expert, then in their Lying, or Drunkenness, the many bones of children found
about Monasteries, may be a sufficient witness: yet that we may not be
deficient in examples, take these as witnesses of their Fornicating: An
Abbatesse in Lombardie rising hastily from a Priest, (with whom she had layne
that night) to take a Nun with her Paramour, put on the Priests Breeches, in
stead of her Veil, upon her head, which the poor Nun perceiving, desired her
first to tie the strings of her Coyfe, and then to speak. The Abbatesse
perceiving her error, changed the copy of her countenance, and departed. Take
another example or two. A certain Franciscan in a Town of Perigrod at the
marriage of his Hosts daughter, caused meat to be served into his Chamber, for
himself and his fellow Friar, making scruple to sit at the Table with the rest
of the Guests, yet made no Conscience after Supper to go to bed with the
Bride in humility, taking the same pains with her in charity, which he knew
the Bridegroom meant to take: Yea, even their holy Saints, whom so religiously
they adore, are not free from this vice, which we may prove by the Tale of
that Nun, who having a sore thigh, besought Saint Dominicke, that she might be
restored to her limbs again; Falling asleep, she thought she saw Saint
Dominicke close by her, taking from under his Cope a strong smelling Ointment,
wherewith he anointed her thigh. And when she asked him what it was, he
told her, that it was called, The Ointment of Lone: which we may understand to
be the private familiarity which was betwixt them. In the time of Pope Paulus
the third, the number of Whores which were in his Register, amounted to forty
and five thousand; and yet this was but a small number, compared with that
which was before this Popes time. His Holiness himself is many times given to
this vice, as we may perceive by the Epitaph of Pope Alexander the sixth his
daughter, which runs after this manner: Conditur hoc tumulo, Lucretia nomine,
sed re,
Thais: Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.


Englished thus.

Here lies Lucrece in name, Thais in life,
The Popes child and spouse, and yet his own sons wife.
If then the Popes be thus, how can we expect that his Cardinals should be
better? Surely they are as ill as their Master: Witness the Popes holy
Cardinal, Johannes Cremensis, who being sent by Honorius the second hither
into England, in the days of King Henry the first, to redress the
sinneseeming abuse of the Clergy, in retaining and using according to Gods
own Ordinance, the society of their wives; upon the birth day of the blessed
Virgin, made a solemn Oration in praise of Virginity and Chastity, with a
terrible Inuectiue against married Priests; and to amplify their sin the
more, he showed what extreme impiety it was to rise from the bed of
unlawful lust, (for so was their chaste marriage termed) and with polluted
hands to touch the Sacrament of the Body of Christ, but the same night
following, he having that very day consecrated that holy Sacrament, was
himself taken with a whore. If the Popes Holiness, and his reverend
Cardinals be thus wicked, we cannot expect that the Minorites, or petty five
farthing Friars should be any whit better? If the root be unsound, how can
the branches flourish? Assuredly they follow the steps of their Superiors, as
in all other vices, so in this of Lechery more especially, witness him who
says: Proh dolor? hos tolerare potest Ecclesia porcos
Duntaxat ventri, Veneri, somnoque vacantes?


Witness also him who says of their holy Fathers in general: Noctu filium
veneris agitant in cubili,
Mane filium Virginis sacrificant in Altari
Nocte Venerem amplexantur,
Mane Virginem venerantur.


Take his testimony also, who says of them: You Iacobines, Carmelies,
Cordeliers,
You Augustines, and all you fornicating Friars,
How came you by the ghos^ly fathers names:
For under the Crucifixe and high Altars,
You are wont to get us sons and daughters,
In kind acquaintance with our ghostly Dames.


But least they should say, that these testimonies have been devised by men of
our Profession, to disgrace them and theirs let us hear what Mantuan, one of
their own Sect says of them: I pudor in villas si non patiuntur easdem,
Et villae vomicas; Roma est jam tota Lupaner.


And another of their own Profession witnesses, that the first prey which
Soldiers sought for when they entered any Town, was Priests Lemmans: But this
their Lechery was dearly bought and well paid for; when Mounsieur d' Avanchi
a French man, admitted two Franciscans into his Castle, made them good Cheer,
and to make an end of their kind entertainment: He told them he would
pleasure either of them with his pretty wench. They refusing his kind offer at
the first, he requested them to make bold with him, telling them withal, that
he well considered they were but flesh and blood as other men were. In the end
he locked them all into a chamber together, and returning thither about an
hour after, he asked them how they had done; and understanding that they had
not been idle: O wicked Hypocrites, said he, is this the way to overcome
temptation? and having so said, he stripped them as naked as my nail, and
having whipped them as long as himself and men could lay on load, he sent them
away all naked as they were, to teach them to fight another time more valiantly
against such temptations, or not to give them the encounter. One of Marquis
Berengers Chaplains also in Italy paid dear for his pleasure, when being
taken and stripped naked for playing naught with his Mistress, he lost that part
wherewith he offended: Let this suffice to have spoken of their lewd, and
licentious living.

Their Covetousness.
But are they clear or free from Covetousness? nothing less. Witness their
wandering from place to place, and craving the benevolence of those people, whom
they far exceed in wealth: Witness also that ancient Disticke.

Est nullum Monacho majus Daemonium,
Nihil auarius, nil magis varium.
Cui si quid datur est possessor omnium,
Si quicquam petitur, nil habet proprium.
Witness likewise that Epigram.

Curia vult marcas, bursas exhaurit and arcas,
Si Bursae parcas, fuge Papas and Patriarchas:
Si dederis marcas, et jis impleveris arcas,
Culpa solveris, quamque ligatus eris.
And this.

-- Venalia Romae,
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, Caelum est venale, Deusque.
Englished.

Priests, Churches, Altars, holy things,
Prayers, Franckincense and Crowns of Kings:
Yea Heaven and God himself for gold,
At Rome is to be bought and sold.
And that,

Intus quis? tu quis? ego sum, quid quaeris? vt intrem,
Fers aliquid? non, sta, fero, quid? satis intra.
Witness also that made of Pope Alexander the sixth.

Vendit Alexander claues, altaria, Christum,
Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest.
Englished,

Christ, Altars, Keys, does Alexander sell,
Why should he not? for why, they cost him well.
When King Henry the first his Ambassador, told the Pope that his Master would
not loose his right in the Investitures of the Church for the loss of his
Kingdom. The Pope answered, I will not suffer him to enjoy them without
punishment, no not for the saving of my head. This made one brand them with
this mark, that the clemency of the Papal See is never wanting to any so
long as the Red and the White make intercession for them.

Their Avarice may also be seen in their Indulgences, Pardons, Maggot-eaten
Relics, Paxes, Crucifixes, Trentals, Dirges, Pictures of Saints, Bulls,
hallowed Beans, Holy water, Exorcismes, and a thousand such fables and bables,
which were too long and too wearisom a task to relate, all which are invented
for no other end and purpose, but by drawing money from the poor Ignorants, to
fill and stuff the Popes Coffers. We may also call to witness their
covetousness, that best Fire in the Popes Kitchen, Purgatory, which was found
out for nothing else, but that poor people not knowing any thing to the
contrary, might give lands and livings to these Masse-monging Priests, to the
end that they by saying so many Masses, Dirges, Aue Mary's, and the like for
their souls, might rid them out of that (as they think) fearful place. I
will conclude this point with that of the Poet: -- Heu Romae, nunc sola pecunia
regnat.

Their Blasphemy.
Here my hair startles, and my Pen is even ready to fall out of my hand,
considering the many execrable and abominable blasphemies which their hearts
have conceived, their mouths uttered, yea, and their hands committed to
writing: to such a height are they grown of impiety, abusing and wresting
Scriptures (like a nose of wax) to their own ends, and applying those things
to themselves, which were meant of Christ. Alexander the third having
commanded the Emperor Frederick to prostrate himself, and ask him pardon
for his offenses; the Emperor kneeled: This gentle Pope, setting his foot upon
his throat, or (as some say) upon his neck, most blasphemously applied those
words to himself, which were understood of Christ, It is written, Thou shall
walk upon the Aspe and the Basiliske, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou
tread under thy feet. The Emperor highly offended for this contempt,
answered, I do not this to thee, but to Saint Peter. The Pope treading upon
him the second time, said, Et mihi, and Petro, Both to me and to Saint Peter.
Pope Leo the tenth hearing one of his Cardinals preach, who chused his Text
out of the New Testament, burst forth into these execrable blasphemous words,
O what great Riches have we got by this Fable of Christ? Pope Julius the third
loving a Peacocke very well, and missing it one time from his Table, asked
where it was? Answer was made, That his Physicions had given charge he should
eat none, because it was prejudicial to his health. He being most
blasphemously bent, presently replies, Fetch me my Peacocke, Ce dispetto de
Dio. When his Cardinals, and other followers besought him not to be so angry,
he still perseuers in his impiety, and answers them, If God were so angry
for an Apple, as that he cast our first parents out of Paradise, why may not I
who am his Vicar, be thus angry for a Peacocke, which is a greater matter then
an Apple.

A Priest of Lorraine holding a Pixe or box full of unconsecrated singing
Cakes, (as they term them) shuffled them together, saying, Ye little
Whoresons, ye little Whoresons, which of you will be God to day? One praying
to our Lady holding her young Babe in her arms, (whom so religiously they
adore and worship) and having received such an answer as pleased him not, by
one that stood behind the Image, and judging by the voice that it was the Child
that spoke, said, Hold your peace, and let your Mother speak, who is wiser
then you. Yea, they are not content thus blasphemously to abuse God and his
divine Word, but they must boast also of this their wickedness.

And are not (I pray you) their prayings to Saints, yea worse then that, to
stocks and stones, so many blasphemies against Gods sacred Majesty? Is it not
a most execrable blasphemy, to make our Lady equal, yea, above our Savior?
making him but a half, yea, no Savior at all.

If this be not Blasphemy in the highest degree, I would gladly know what it
is? But let them take heed, and consider with whom they have to do, when thus
they mock GOD, even with him whose eyes cannot behold Iniquity, but will
repay the committers thereof. This sin of Blasphemy has he in all ages
punished in the highest degree. Witness Lucius, a notorious blasphemer of
Christ's Divinity, who was devoured with dogs. Arrius had such a looseness of
belly, that he voyded his Intrailes. Jews the eleventh, King of France,
beholding certain Tennis-players, with his wife, amongst other talk, said,
He hoped to do nothing hereafter which should offend GOD: which words were no
sooner out of his mouth, but he fell down speachlesse, and languishing a few
hours, dyed in the same place.

Sophocles writes, That before Ajax went to the Siege of Troy, his father
counseled him to fight valiantly, but withal, to pray to GOD for Victory,
whereto Ajax answered, Adiutore Deo, vel ignavus vincere potest, Ego sine Deo.
And therefore God smote him with a Frenzy, so that he went about the field,
slaying the silly Sheep and Cattle, supposing that they had been his enemies;
and when this was done, he kills himself on the point of his own Sword.

One in an Inn laughing at those which spoke of Christ, offered to sell his
soul for a cup of Wine: one having bought it off him, the Devil being among
them like a Swaggerer, bought it at the second hand, and then making challenge
of his Bargain, hurryed him away with him in the air, after which time he was
never seen.

Certain Gamesters at Mantua breaking forth into blasphemy against our
blesse^ Savior, their eyes fell on the Table. And a child at Rome not above
five years of age, blaspheming the Name of God, was carried away by the
Devil, from between his parents arms. And a Mariner at Ragouse, most
fearfully tearing and rending GOD asunder with his bloody Oaths, fell into
the Sea, and was not seen, till certain days after, that he was found on
the Shore, where his Body was taken up entire and whole, the Tongue only
excepted.

And that I may not be too tedious in a point so evident, we may see it in
the two Popes aforementioned, Leo the tenth and Julius the third; the first of
which being ouer-ioyed for a Victory received against the French, reuelled
three days and so many nights together, and then dyed with Drunkenness: The
latter of them came most miserably to a shameful end.

Seeing then this sin never escapes unpunished, what hope can these
Blasphemers have? Do they think God is not so just, or more merciful then
heretofore he has been? Or do they think he sleeps, or winkes, and will
not see their impiety? It is blasphemy to think either. Let them therefore
either amend, or else look for the like, or more fearful judgment. But I
have been (I fear) too long in this point, and therefore I will conclude it
with that of the Poet Virgil.

Discite Iustiam moniti, and non temnere Diuos. Their Pride.
THat the pride of these Pedlers of Relics is no less, then their forenamed
Vices, may sufficiently appear, if we consider the many Titles, which that
great Vicar, (as he styles himself) of Christ, arrogates to himself, setting
himself above Kings and Emperors, making them to hold his Stirrup; yea, even
to put their necks as a Footstool for him to tread upon, putting on Crowns
with his foot, and casting them down with it again as soon as put on, and
making Kings, with their Wives and their Children, to stand three days
together at his Gate barefoot and barelegged, and there to wayt till his
Holiness be pleased to give them absolution.

Their Triple-Crowne also is no less an Argument of their pride, as is also
their challenging to themselves both Ecclesiastical and Temporal Authority:
Even Lucifer himself is not more proud then is his Holiness, who holds out
his foot to be kissed by the greatest Monarchs: One time as he was stretching
it out to be kissed by an Emperor, a Spaniell got hold of it, and bit it: And
therefore his Holiness lost the Reverence at that time, which should have
been done unto him, because the Emperor refused to kiss that place which a
Dog had bitten. But they will tell you perhaps, that this reverence is not
done to them, but to the Cross which is set upon his Sh^oe: But this argues a
great deal more pride, in that they dare put so sacred a thing (as they hold
the Cross to be) upon their shoe, which seems to be but a contemptible,
and vile place, and not rather in some more eminent part of the body, as Head,
breast, or the like.

Their being carried on men's shoulders, as though the ground were not good
enough for them to tread upon, is a most manifest argument, that this Vice does
reign in them, and yet (forsooth) the whole World must be guided by them, and
submit themselves to their commands: They must be supreme Bishops, chief
Lords, greatest Comptrollers of States; and either all men must obey, and
stoop at their beck, or else out comes a Bull presently to excommunicate
them, as lately it did against our late Queen, now Saint Elizabeth, in which
they pronounce her an Heretic, and an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel.
Each Fiue-farthing Shaueling must be reverenced and observed as if he were
some great man. One of their Profession, a Cardinal, made a Feast to Eleanor
of Arragon, wherein were so many several sorts of meats, and dainty Dishes,
that it lasted for the space of seven hours: and least his Ghestes should
have been wearyed, he caused sundry Plays to be acted, whilst they were
at the Table. And to make his pride complete, he caused every Seruitour at
every new Course, to come in a new Suite. Yet all this is nothing to the pride
he showed to his Concubine Tiresia, for he kept her publicly in such
sumptuous manner, that her very Shoes were set full of Pearls and precious
Stones. Yet these men must be accounted the only Meek, Humble, Gentle, and
Courteous men upon earth: but if these things I have reckoned up, savor any
thing of humility, let any equal Arbitrator be Judge: for mine own part, I
cannot see that any humble man will exalt himself above his Superiors, as the
Pope does.

When Augustine the Monk was sent into Britain from Rome, to teach the
Britains Christianity, it is written, that the Britains went first to a
certain holy and wise man, (which lived an Anchorites life) to ask his
counsel, whether they ought at Austens Preaching and exhortation to leave
their Traditions or not? The Anchorite replies, If he be a man of God, follow
him. But how shall we prove (say they) that he is a man of God? The Anchorite
answered, If he be mild and humble of heart, then he is a man of God; If
cursed and proud, he is not of GOD, neither must you much esteem his words.
They inquire how they might know, whether he were proud or no? If (quoth he)
when you come near him, he arise courteously, and salute you, then think him
to be a Servant of Christ, and so hear him and obey him: if he despise you,
and will not vouchsafe to rise at your presence, let him likewise be despised
of you. They go to him, where they find him set in his Chair, but stirred
not: which when they saw, forthwith waxing wroth, they noted him of Pride; and
therefore endeauored to thwart and gainesay whatsoever he proposed: and so the
preaching of the Gospel was put off, till a man of better temper should come.
Thus in part have we seen the pride and the arrogance of these Shauelings, in
some small manner laid open to the world, but I may say as Virgil said in an
other case:

Non mihi si centum linguae sint oraque centum Ferrea vox, etc. Though I had a
thousand mouths, and every mouth so many tongues; though I had a Stentorian
voice, which would never fail, yet were I not able to reckon up the one half
of their pride.

Their wickedness in general.
LET us now speak a little of their wickedness in general, and so an end:
And nrst concerning their Demy-God the Pope: When Leo the tenth was reproved
by certain of his Cardinals for his loose and wicked life, he answered, If I
be wicked, I may thank you for it: for you made me such a one as I am. They
demanding of him what he meant thereby, he answers, Because you made me Pope:
for it is not possible to be both a Pope and an honest man.

When certain asked Pasquin, what injury had been done him, because he looked
not after his accustomed manner; has any man called thee Thief, Murderer,
Poysoner, or the like? He answered, Oh no, but they have calleo^ me worse.
What? has any man called thee Sacrilegious person, or Buggerer, Parricide, or
Atheist? Oh no, (says he) but they have called me worse. In the end, being
often requested to utter his grief, breathing out many sighs, with, Alas,
Alas, he said, they had called him POPE. The same Pasquin made this Epigram,
or (if thou will) Epitaph upon this word Pope.

Hic Carapha jacet, superis inuisus and imis,
Styx animam, tellus putre cadauer habet.
Inuidit pacem terris, Dijs vota precesque,
Impius and Clerum perdidit and populum.
Hostibus infensis supplex, infidus amicis.
Scire cupis paucis cetera? PAPA fuit.
Hildebrand poisoned seven or eight Popes, that he might come to the Popedom.

Pope Joan was taken for Pope John, till she was delivered of her great belly;
since which time they have gotten a bottomless Chair, through which they were
wont to search the Popes humanity. But now they have left that Custom,
having given sufficient testimony of their virilitie before they come to ascend
the Papal Throne.

Pope Boniface (as I take it) the eighth, crept in like a Fox, reigned like a
Wolf, and dyed like a Dog.

Thus much for the Head, let us now descend a little lower, and search if the
members be any whitt better, and we shall find them simpathize all with the
Head: (...): If the head be unsound, the whole body must needs be ill at
ease. If the Popes Holiness be thus wicked, the people whom they hold to be
altogether unholy, must needs be far worse. They will Swear, Forswear,
Curse, Blaspheame, Fornicate, Kill, Dare to do any villainy; and why? His
Holiness does it, and why not we? That which is good for him, cannot be
hurtful to us: and therefore we will do it: If need be, we can go to him,
and get a Pardon, and when we have done, sin again, and get a Pardon; and
at our death give but so much to a devout Monk, to say so many Dirges, and
chaunt so many Masses, and we shall be in as happy an estate as the best.

Hence come those many Powder-plots, Poisons, Poyniards, Gunnes, Inquisitions,
Croysadoes, Rackes, and a thousand more such devilish things, invented by the
Pope and his Monks, and put in practice by your Laytie. But Oh poor souls,
why do you suffer your selves to be thus seduced and misse-led by the Devil
in the likeness and shape of a man? Look but narrowly with the eye of
discretion into his actions, and you shall see how you are deceived: Weigh our
two Religions in an equal balance, and see if yours be not too light. Think
upon that Epigram:

Esse Lutheranum rumorte Gaurice clamat,
Sed tuus Antistes te tamen esse negat.
Tam scortaris (ait) quam si vel Episcop us esses,
Et potus dubium peruigit vsque diem.
Nec memor es Christi, nisi cum jurare libeb it,
Nec sis Scripturae vel breue jotu sacrae.
Nempe per haec sueuit numquam fallentia signa,
Ille vigill sanas noscere pastor oues.
Here you may see the difference between the two Religions, whether of them
swears, blasphemes, curses, whores, drinks, reuells, and the like, and
whether of them fears to do these things; Judge of them, and as you find
them, so follow them. Let us now speak a little of their holy Fathers. Hear
what one says of their Cardinals: Semiviros quicunque patres radiante galero,
Conspicis and rubrae syrmata longa togae.
Creed mihi nullo saturatas murice vestes,
Diuite nec cocco pallia tincta vides.
Sed quae rubra vides, Sanctorum caede virorum
Et mersa insonti tota cruore madent.
Aut memor istorum quae celet crimina vestis,
Pro Dominis justo tacta pudore rubet.


Another speaking of their Priests, says, that they are Angeli Sathanae per
discordiam, Angeli Apostatici per superbiam, Angeli Jncubi per Luxuriam, Angeli
Abyssi per Auaritiam: And another says of their Monks:

Credibile est Circen, mutasse potentibus herbis.
In Monachosque Sues, inque Sues Monachos.
Englished.

It Is like that Circe with her Spells divine,
Has turned Swine to Monks, and Monks to Swine.
Fulco a French Priest coming to King Richard the first, told him he had
three very badde daughters, which he wished him to bestow away from him in
marriage, or else Gods wrath would attend him. When the King denied he had any
daughter, the Priest answered, Yes, thou have three Daughters, Pride,
Covetousness, and Lechery. The King apprehensiue of his meaning, replied, My
Pride I bequeath to the haughty Templers and Hospitallers, who are as proud
as Lucifer himself: My Covetousness I give to the White Monks of Cisteaux
Order, for they covet the Devil and all. And as for my Lechery, I can bestow
it no where better, then on the Priests and Prelates of our times, for therein
have they their most felicity.

These proud, conetous, Lecherous, oppressing Friars and Monks did so
domineere in England in the Reign of King Henry the third, that a Cardinal
told the Pope, that England was to the Pope like Balaams Ass, which being so
often veronged, spurre-galled, and cudgelled, it was no marvel if at the
length she opened her mouth to complain: And as for themselves and their
Roman Court, they were like unto Ismael, every man's hand was against them, and
theirs against every man.

In the same Kings Reign, Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury weary of his life
here in his own Country of England, by reason that he could not redress nor
suppress the Popes detestable exactions, and oppressions, made choice of a
voluntary exile at Pountney in France, where he dyed with the honor and
opinion of a Saint.

A Senator of Rome said to Sylla, that vaunted of himself in the Senate: How
can you be a good man, that having little or nothing left you by you father,
yet in so short a time are become exceeding rich? So may we say to the Popes
Holiness, vaunting and boasting, that he is above Kings and Emperors, How can
you be a good man, who having (as you pretended) little or nothing, but went
about begging the benevolence of good charitable people, yet now are raised to
that honor and dignity, that you set your selves above your Superiors? And
we may say of all Papists in general, That they arrogate to themselves the
glorious name of Catholics, and brand their opposites with the odious name of
Heretics, as certain Heathen in old time called themselves Deists, and all
men else Atheists: and as the Turk at this day, who will needs be the true
Muselman, and all the world beside Pagans. But this their Catholic Religion,
is nothing but Catholic corruption: and Catholic Papists, Catholic
Heretics.

I will now draw toward a Conclusion, give me leave only to speak a little
of Rome, and so an end: In ancient times, M. Aurelius said of Rome, that it was
the head of vices: O Rome without Rome, which now art become Stews of vices:
not without tears (quoth he) I say, that there was never any Roman Captain,
that killed ten thousand Asians, with the weapons he brought into Asia, but
he lost an hundred thousand Romans with the vices they brought to Rome. Thy
walls are carried a great height, but thy virtues very low: She braggeth of
the number of her Inhabitants, but may rather weep, that her vices be more
without comparison; In one month a man may number the stones of her stately
Buildings, but not in many years her lewd manners. O cursed Rome, cursed thou
have been, art, and wilt be: As by thy Tyranny thou have made thy self Lady
of Lords, so the time will come, when thou with Justice shall return to be
Servant of Servants.

The like Sentence another gave of Rome, who told the Senators, that he came
out of strange Countries only to see Rome, and now he found it without Rome:
If my Judgment (says he) deceive me not, either these be not Romans of Rome,
or else this is not Rome of the Romans.

This was Rome in ancient time, and that it is still the same, may sufficiently
appear by those abuses of the Inhabitants thereof before mentioned: And
therefore I think I may safely conclude with that Disticke of the Poet: Roma
vale, vidi, satis est vidisse, reuertar
Cum Leno, aut meretrix, scurra, cynaedus ero.


Englished.

Now farewell Rome, I have thee seen,
It is enough to see,
I will return when as I mean
Bawd, Scoffer, Whore and Rogue to be.
FINIS.

