THE BETRAYING OF CHRIST.

IVDAS in despair.

The seven Words of our Savior on the Cross. WITH Other Poems on the Passion.



LONDON. Printed by Adam Istip. 1598.



TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Nicholas Walsh Knight, chief Justice of her
Majesty's court of common pleas in Ireland, and of her Highness counsel
there.
ALbeit (right Worshipful) that the art of Poesy is in sort dealt withal, as
Cacus once used Hercules oxen, when he drew them backewards up the hill: being
customarily in these days wrested and turned to the fooleries of Love, and
such like base subject of fancies abortiue births, converting Poetries
imploiment to follies use, and wit ill spent runs violent that way, with the
current of error. Yet has it a native divine offspring and issue, whereof
partaking kindly, floates with a calm tempered gale from all miscarying
wrack, to the harbor of a quiet applause. The upright and best approved
censure I presume gains your Worships virtuous allowance, to whose wisdom and
gravity associate with an heroical sprite, I dedicate affections testimony by
these unpolished lines, craving your favorable fault-shadowing view, if in the
manner any thing appear defective, trusting that as a fruitful tree the more
it is fruitladen, the more it declineth, so your plenteous accomplished virtues
will humble them in daining to accept the love I reverence you withal: wishing
your Worship Worlds prosperity, and Heavens happiness.

Yours in the best endeavors of affection. S. R.

The betraying of Jesus
EVen when no beauties of the garnisht sky
Had left the view of Heauen-makers vvonder,
And Phoebus steeds were galloped posting by
Their hasty speed had got the worlds half under,
Yea every creature that had life or sprite,
Mourned at the dark approach of ugly night:
An host of swartest sable foggie clouds,
Wrapped in fair Cinthia from her silver shine,
Mantling her brightness with their obscure shrouds
As though heavens lamp were come to latest fine,
Her cannapie of stars was eke unseen,
Where on she wonted mount, imperious Queen.
The airy vvinged people gone to rest,
Had cleared with day, not left a note unpaid,
All other creatures that might be expressed,
In caves and holes for nights repose were laid,
Of vvild, or tame, none raung'd or ran astray,
But ravenous, by dark that hunt for pray.
Thick mistie vapors were dispersed foul,
Prohibiting day-followers to be seen,
Dispensing only with the shriking Owl,
And eyes that Nature put lights hate between,
Such as were banished from the face of day,
To lurk the covert shameless night away.
Then child of utter darkness, lights offense,
Entitled: The lost son of perdition,
Hired against his Lord for thirty pence
To be a traitor under hels commission,
In this nights time, did rebel troops increase
To manage arms against the Prince of peace.
Toward Cedron brook th'accursed leader goes,
With horse and foot, vveapon'd with lance and spear,
His blessed master used that walk he knows,
Unworthy wretch had often ben with him there,
Often as a friend the place he did frequent,
But now foe-harted, treacherous of intent.
As in a garden Adam disobayed,
And there became a captive to the devil,
So in a garden Jesus was betrayed,
To suffer death for Adams former evil:
Within a garden Adams crime offended,
For which Christ was in garden apprehended.
And as in pleasures garden at the fall,
For Adams clothing, dead beasts skins God gave,
In evidence that death went over all,
And that his garment might presage his grave:
So Christ in garden tomb and dead man's shroud,
Defrayed our debts, with payment best alowd.
Over the brook, to garden they repair,
(Swift were their feet about the sheading blood)
Even to the place that Jesus used for prayer,
Where he entreated grace for sinners good,
Where he consulted to redeem and save:
Thither they came, resolved his life to have.
With easy search the guiltless may be found,
Whose quiet thoughts and peace unite in one,
A voice, Whom seek you? threw them all to ground,
A power divine, to make true godhead known.
Jesus came forth, encountered them with breath,
And they at once fell backward all to the earth.
Had then his will consented to his power,
If Justice had appeared, and mercy hid,
They had descended hell that sinful hour,
Like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram did,
Where the one was seandale to the servant done,
The other was rebellion against the son.
While Jeroboam stretched his threatening hand
(Right insolent and full of daring pride)
To stay the Prophet, giving strict command,
Judgment laid hold on him, his hand was dryde:
But these in arms, and violent enterprise,
Though thrown to ground, do unrepentant rise.
Deaths harbenger unto Damasco town,
Then bloody-mind Saint-persecuting Saul
Was with like powreful voice from heaven thrown down,
But to conversion grace employed his fall:
With greater favor, bliss can none acquaint,
Then crown a grievous sinner, glorious Saint.
But these whose hearts were hardened, sight extinct,
Haters of knowledge, children of the night,
Atvvar with God, in league with Satan linckt
Gross darkness followers, shunners of the light,
Stiff necked, stubborn, and rebellious Jews,
Contemn salvation; offered grace refuse.
Wisdoms beloved, Isreal's vvisest king,
Does say the wicked cannot sleeping rest,
Till they are pleased with some ill done thing;
The vvorser deed, the doer likes for best:
A minute spent in good, seems long loathed day,
A night of sin, but moment stolen away.
How toilesome tedious had that watching bin,
If virtue had persuaded thereunto,
But Owle-eied they became to compass sin,
Fit was the time so foul a fact to do:
That work of darkness, ioin'd with darkness power
Might meet together all in darkness hour.
When they should rest, their malice not endured it,
For malice never closes sleeping eyes,
And when they should not wake, revenge procured it,
Revenge, does hourly, some revenge devise,
Who rides the devil has no curb they say,
For malice draws, and fury spurs away.
Th'vnseemely uproar, to the night unkind,
Happening as frightfull as in fires danger,
Caused him make have that left his clothes behind,
Hardly entreated, like unwelcome stranger,
For in retire, his case like Joseph's stands,
Who left his garment in his mistress hands.
It Was no offense springing from his intent,
That did demerite violent force resist him,
Yet pawned he shirt for skin before he went,
Gladdest when naked gone that rage had mist him,
What furies guided this misguided swarm?
To bend their force against vnthoughted harm.
When traitor meets, these quaint deceits he had,
In gesture, kind imbracements with a kiss;
In words, All hail, God save thee, or be glad;
Yet murder, blood, and death, lies hid in this,
This cup of gold did poisons draught begin,
This green had serpents lurking hid within.
The word All hail, served Ioab to salute,
(Good words do often make for ill pretense,)
But Abner found a mortal stab the fruit,
While falsehood spoke, it was murder did insence:
Like that, was this of Judas false intent,
By word, God save, the deed Destroy was meant.
All hail, the Angel reverently did use,
With heavenly tongue, to holy virgins ear,
All hail, in Pilats hall they did abuse,
That scorning Christ, presented Aue there,
Highest in favor of all women gained it,
And chiefest sinner of all men, profaned it.
First word it was, Gods gracious love tv'nfold
Beginning at our saviors incarnation,
First word wherewith false Judas bought and sold,
Whose traffic turned Christ's death, his own damnation.
What profit his that all the world should win?
With soul in deaths eternal debt by sin.
Why come thou friend? what mean thou, Jesus said,
At the instant hour my prayers and tears commend thee,
To give a kiss whereby I am betraide,
And with, All hail, brings troops to apprehend me?
I term thee friend, ungrateful as thou art,
That show'st nor friend nor yet disciples part.
To call thee friend, it does thus much betoken,
No cause in me has canseld loves desire,
But they reuolting has our friendship broken,
Vnaltred I remain the same entire:
If thou with David, I have sinned, could say,
His answer thine, Thy sin is done away.
Return thee with repentant hearts embrace,
And mercy shall with justice dome suspend,
I left not thee, why do thou run from grace,
Though thou have sold me, still I call thee friend,
But if thou vvilt not be reclaimed back,
Be thou thy self thine own souls vvilfull vvracke.
When murder had saluted, treason kissed,
And bribery embraced with sign of gladness,
In which the traitors service did consist,
Then pressed the Jews on Christ with furious madness,
Like hunger-paunched wolves prone to devour
The lamb subjected to their ravening power.
Right manly valiant Peter did him bear,
When no disciple durst attempt the like,
T'vnsheath his sword, and cut off Malcus ear,
Against an armed multitude to strike,
Danger and fear are cowards turned aside
When manhood is by resolution tried.
But Jesus did no humane forces need,
That legions had of Angels at command,
And Peter had no charge to fight, but feed
The flock of sheep committed to his hand,
It was Gods will to suffer, not resist,
His power gave power, and sin did what it list.
He was content, their violent force should bind him
And lead him thence unto the torturing place,
To tear his flesh with whips to mock and blind him,
To buffet and to spit upon his face.
T'accuse him false by slanders lying breath,
To dome him sentence shames most odious death.
Judas in despair.
TErrors torment my tortured soul perplexed,
Fell furies fright, and hale me on away,
To Cayphas and the rest with horror vexed
Goes Simons son, Gods son did false bettay,
Such is my sin against that guiltless blood,
No baulme in Israel left to do me good.
They answered, careless of my vvretched state,
What Is that to us? Look thou thy self unto it,
Then vengeance I expect, grace comes too late,
Resolve no less, for that you bribed me do it,
Satan seduced, I acted the offense,
Despair is come, there lies your thirty pence*
I am perditions child, outcast forlorn,
All hail in word, but in the heart all hateful,
It had been good, so bad had nere ben borne,
That of all creatures am the most ungrateful:
Oh had I never lived, suruiuing shame
Had vnreported hid my odious name.
Base covetousness no more Gehezies sin,
My intrest in that crime does thine control,
Thou vvast but leaper of polluted skin,
My leprosy is a defiled soul:
Thou took'st a bribe against thy masters will,
But I was bribed to kiss, and kissed to kill.
Mary's good work Christ promised to commend
Perpetually in everliving praise,
But my vile act beyond all stinted end,
Shall evidence I trod the left hand ways,
My title thus the Scriptures shall record:
Judas Iscarioth, that betrayed the Lord.
Three evils in one I did commit, in this
That against the King of glory I have done:
Deceit betrayed with show of kind-ment kiss,
Covetousness incenst, that sin begun,
Impudent boldness did intrude the deed,
Ere any moved or wished me to proceed.
I knew the choice, and gainefull happy way,
That heavens gate, was straightest door to enter,
I taught the world, take heed broad paths do stray,
And yet my self the vvide-gate vvilfull venture,
Like Noah's workmen, such my state is found
They built an arc for him, themselves were drowned.
I have excluded faiths resolved trust
In him by whom the true repentant live,
Cain-like affirming naught but vengeance must
Reward my sins, mercy no such forgive:
My heart's indurate, hardened, unrelenting,
Past is the deed, the doer past repenting.
Though ' David found remorse to vvaile his sin,'
And Nathans comfort, eased his mournful task,
Distrust and horror have so hemd me in,
That might I have, I hopeless will not ask:
Fear, shame, and guilt do haunt me at the heels,
Of judgment, men, and what my conscience feels.
My dying soul, refusing living mean,
Denies with heavenly Manna to be fed
A sea of tears can never rince it clean,
Yet could one drop, that drop should never be shed.
What tears, what prayers can his atonement make,
Whose portion is in vengeance fearful lake?
Mine inward conscience does souls ruin tell,
Authenticke witness, and severe accuser,
Where I abide, I feeling find a hell
Tormenting me, that am self torment chuser:
Sound conscience well is said like wall of brass;
Corrupted, fit compared to broken glass.
More blind then those whose sight sight giver gave,
More deaffe and dumb then any that he cured,
More dead then Lazarus in his stinking grave,
When he deaths vaut till fifth days bail endured.
Not eyes, ears, limbs, tongue, body, have defect,
It is my soul, that saluing heavens reject.
If first borne man, the first of desperate mind,
By whom the first of guiltless blood was shed,
Did say, There was no grace for him to find,
But vengeance must be heaped on his head:
Let me (sins monster, mass of cursed evil)
Bid Satan vvelcome, and embrace the devil.
When Christ shall come in clouds, and sins be scand,
All Adams sons expecting rightful dome,
Ivvretch amongst the goats shall trembling stand,
The right hand sheep, afford no traitor room,
To cry Lord, Lord, this answer shall be got,
Depart you cursed, hence I know you not.
The casting out of devils then objected,
Will cease no wrath, extenuate no dangers:
Not words with God, well doing is respected,
His Citizens deeds difference from the strangers,
Me thinks I hear the judge, stern, full of ire:
Pronounce my sentence to eternal fire.
Was I not called to heavens royal feast?
I was: but came as one that little cared,
How came I? brutish like vnreuerent beast,
Wanting a wedding garment, unprepared:
Bold daring wretch in such a sacred place,
To press in sins cast suite, rent, torn, and base.
But fearful guerdon for so foul attempt,
All-seeing eyes beheld my rags bevvray'd,
And most severely thence he did exempt,
Bind him both hand and foot (his justice said)
And cast him out, no such may here partake,
The Lamb with Sion, Satan and the Lake.
Would I had never known Apostles place,
Would I had never ben messenger of truth,
Would I had never preached the way to grace,
Would I had never ben borne, or died in youth:
Who knows his masters will and does neglect it,
Sore stripes and many shall severe correct it.
I must salute Ashur and Elams trains,
To drink with Tuball of the vvrathfull cup,
Edom inuites me to the infernal pains
No time of grace, with Christ again to sup,
Now feast where teeeth are gnasht and hands are wrong,
Where Dives begs for drops to cool his tongue.
Down by the way that Corah went to hell,
Like Dathan and Abiram to descend
Where furies, fiends and damned ghosts do dwell,
And ever torments, never know an end,
Let earth divide and opening swallow then,
The most accursed of all the sons of men.
The man that from Jerusalem descended,
And happened in the hands of bloody thieves,
A pitiful Samaritane befriended
With mercy, and his hard distress releeues:
Such holy love, true charity supplied him,
Pity was present and no grace deni'd-him.
But I from new Jerusalem retired
The restfull Canaan, happiness unbounded,
For thirty pence hels iourny being hyr'd,
In Satan's snares I fell, that thief has vvounded:
And priest is past, Samaritane gone by,
Seeing me curelesse, careless let me lie.
Ah Magdalen sower sorrows turned thy sweet,
Well did thou weep to vvash, and washing gain,
With hairie towell vviping Jesus feet,
Thy true repentant tears did grace obtain:
While I thy virtues sought to have disgrast,
Tearming that holy work, A needless vvast,
But happy woman, guiltless vvast' controld,
How falsely did I vvish thy ointment spared?
How covetous said I, Better this been sold
And given the poor, vvast for the poor I cared?
Ah no, my guilty conscience does deny it.
I bare the purse, and would have gained by it.
Sampson, till Satan fierce Philistine caught me,
And in his rage put out my sprituall eyes,
Then blind in sin, to Cayphas house he brought me,
Against the pillar where all mercy lies,
I bent my force to move the corner stone,
Destruction fell, my self destroyed alone.
Like Iezabels, so my corrupted thought,
When she complotted for good Naboths ground,
Clear purchase it was, her vvile his vineyard bought;
Such seemed my bribe, I held it money found:
But see how soon sweet sins convert to sower,
I loath for ever, that I loved an hour.
These three divide my soul, Fear, Thought, and Anguish*
Their intrest is the forfaits of my fall,
But while in claim they striving let me languish,
The roaring Lion comes and seazeth all:
Insatiable serpent pleased with naught but this,
Both soul and body must be granted his.
If graceless outcasts in this world begin
To taste of second death's tormenting power,
If souls surpised by selfe-wrought murdring sin,
Turn vengeance glass to run a staylesse hour,
Then here in earnest of perpetual care,
I wear damnations livery, black despair.
Deuore'd from mercy, alienate from grace,
Reft of repentance, vvedded unto evil,
From highest calling, down to lowest place,
From chosen Twelve, a singled outcast devil;
From the holy city loved of God so well,
Within whose streets may no uncleanness dwell.
When Christ foretold intended treason nie,
By one of us his guests to be betrayed
Each straight inquired, Lord is it I, or I?
But my demand had answer, Thou have said.
I that was fed that night with loves regard,
Returned the giver treason for reward.
Dark night, black deed, blind soul, and Satan's slaves
Did fit, defile, destroy it self, did further,
With shade, with sin, with death, with clubs and staves,
Tintrap, betray, condemn, assist to murder,
The Lamb of God, the rock, the door, the vine,
The Angels brightness, heavens eternal shine.
Much worse, though Ioab-like I gave a kiss,
I pris'd my birthright base, at Esawes gain,
I putchas'd hell with loss of heavens bliss,
And in effect, exchanged joy for pain.
Oh foolish sot, vile earthly dross esteemer,
To sell true life, dead Adams sons redeemer.
Thou partial hand swai'd sword of Peter's drawn,
I should ben mangled, and not Malcus ear,
Like currish dog, it was my flattering fawn,
Did bite my master worse then any there,
Mistaken champion in thy valor swaruing,
To give his ear my treacherous hearts deserving.
I was chief actor in the Jewish spite,
I was a captain to that rascal rout,
I wrought the tumult of that guilty night,
I was blind guide, to that they went about,
They all expected notice come from me,
Till craft had kissed, they knew not which was he.
False tongue, pronounced All hail to hurtful end,
When hollow heart sequestered loves true zeal,
Heavens mildness asked, Why art thou come friend?
Straight violent hands, not words, our thoughts reveal.
Call him not friend, that sauors most offoe,
Term me thy hangman, for I merit so.
In death's pursuit, insatiate thirsting blood,
We posted thence to Priests, with rudest throng,
Where purest lamb before his shearer stood,
Pleading not guilty, by truths silent tongue,
There Is craft accusing, hate helps to devise,
And falsehood forgeth, in a mint of lies.
My impious eyes beheld without remorse,
The graceless usage of heavens gracious king,
Scornd, spit at, mocked, yet repentance force,
Sought not for shelter under mercies vving,
In all these evils I pitttied not his pain,
Til being condemned, then grieved my greeues in vain,
No true contrition had my faults defense,
Though I confessed I sinned in his betraying,
It Was desperate satisfaction came from thence,
For faith was liuelesse, should ben vengeance staying,
Wrath is gone forth, was Moses admonition,
But lights on me, that am for vvraths perdition.
What vvondrous objects have mine eyes beheld,
Deaffe, dumb and lame, the blind and curelesse, cured;
The stubborn winds with checking calmely stild,
The dead revived, death's sleep four days endured,
Five loaves, two fish, five thousands satisfied,
Yet more then much, spare crumbs were multiplied.
My taste did witness water turned to wine,
One cured that touched my masters vesture hemme,
Commanded devils forth men, to enter swine,
And in the sea destruction plunging them,
Mine ears have heard, and eyes have seen the sight
That Kings have wished, and Prophets never might.
Yet he that is called manslaier from beginning,
Deceiuer, dragon, serpent, father of lies,
God of this world, author of humane sinning,
Hardner of hearts, blinder of spiritual eyes,
Prince of the air, malicious evil sprite,
Made me hels guest, whom heavens did kind inuit.
Like as the brauing green, but barren tree
(That flourisht fair when not a fig was found)
Christ cursed with, Never fruit grow more on thee,
Because it did no good, but comber ground:
So fares the false deluding show of mine,
Green leaved beginning, withered fruitless fine.
Could sinnes-besotted, hell-path vvrandrers, see
The horrors on an outcast wretch imposed,
Or sense the inward worm that gnaweth me,
(Bondslaue to bondage never to be losed)
They would retire the flesh most fearful race,
To avoid hels jail, obtained with loss of grace.
Me thinks my conscience turns a black leaved book,
Titl'd Distrust, dedicate to Despair,
Where covetous eye and traitrous heart do look
On vengeance lines, pointed this period, Care;
The argument is shame, the subject sin,
The index thus explaines the evils therein:
A postle once, increasing Christ's eleven,
B agbearer, to the charge of purse assigned,
C alled to preach saluations path to heaven,
D estructions heir, the vvorst of wicked mind:
E nuying at good work by others done,
F aithlesse to God, false hearted to his son.
G reedy to gain on earth. with heavens loss,
H opelesse of mercy, in sin's most distress,
I udas whose kiss presaged Christ's dying cross,
K nowledge contemner, errors foul success.
L oitrer in holy harvest, place abuser,
M urdrer of life, mine own damnation chuser.
N aked of grace, the foulest ere defiled,
O ffences actor in the highest degree,
P rouoking wrath, from mercies throne exiled,
Q uenching the sprite, that erst gave light in me,
R enouncing glories race to gain the crown,
S eruant to sin, whose hire pale death lays down*
T raitor to God, that breathing earth deluded,
U nholy-thoughted, full of bitter gall,
W oes querrister, from Angels quires excluded,
X pian the outward, inward, not at all,
Y oaked by sin perpetual, Satan's slave,
Z eale in his service lost, that none can save.
This register records the race I run,
By caracters spelling my future vvoe,
A tragedy by me must be begun,
On hels black stage, for there to act I go,
Since eyes of God, and all in heaven abhor me,
I will descend, the pit has consorts for me.
Cursed be the parents that engendered me,
Cursed be the womb that bare, and paps that fed,
Cursed be the day when I worlds light did see,
Cursed be the hour my soul from grace was led,
Cursed be the time when I did entertain
Cursed affection, to accursed gain.
Retire for ever from the sweet society
Of Peter, James, and John, true heirs of grace;
Converse remain of Time, with all impiety,
No eye henceforth shall view Christ's traitors face,
End loathed days, my fact abhorres your light,
Wrap me from eyes cole-fac'd eternal night.
Saul's frightfull guest, that sense depriving sprite,
Outrageous rauing fury vvhispers, Hang thee,
What Syon tunes, or David's harp delight,
Can cease or ease the horrors that do pang me?
Then be my instrument one iarring string,
And treble vvoe, the houling note I sing.
Bush-creeping Caine, beholding for thy end
More to an arrow, then the marke-mans aim*
I do disdain blind Lamech should befriend,
None in my tragedy shall action claim:
But I and Satan we have both agreed,
To leave the world a desperate damned deed.
Not to dismount a check-cloud earthy heap,
Or make soul passage by a poinard point,
Nor to bequeath the sea a drowning leap;
But fatal cord shall crack my breathing joint,
Absolons tree, proud Hamans halter-knell,
And I the hangman, like Achitophell.
Lead on despair, confounder of my sprite,
Direct unto some nooke of hellish shade,
For shames sake, be it gloomier then that night
In which by me heavens brightness was betraide:
Blacker then death, more sable hewed then hell,
Where sulpher flames, with utter darkness dwell.
Harder then Pharoahs ten times hardened heart,
Bloudier then Abels butcher, far inclined:
End traitors life, begin a hangmans part,
Let hangmans part perform thy desperate mind,
Thy desperate mind be witness thou art accursed,
Rent heart, drop blood, gush bowels, belly burst.
Peter's tears at the Cocks crowing.
COme sharpest greefs employ repentant eyes,
Task them as bitter drops as ere were shed,
Send tears to earth, and sighs up to the skies,
This instant hour a Soul and Sorrows wed,
Sweet tears and sighs, at dolours dear requests,
Come you and yours my hearts right welcome gests.
Let eyes become the fountains of my tears,
And let my tears be floods to moist my heart,
And let my heartfull of repentant fears,
By tears and sorrows, turn a true convert;
At base objections of as base a maid,
With oths and curses I have Christ denai'd.
The vvatchfull bird that sentinels the morn,
Shrill herald to Auroraes early rising,
That often proclaims the day ere day be borne,
Distinguisher from pitch-fac'd nights disguising,
Surceas'd to heed, why nature taught him crow,
And did exclaim on me for sinning so.
O haughty vaunts resembling skie-bred thunder,
How far remote your actions stand aloof,
A coward heart keptvvords and deeds asunder,
Stout champion brags are quailed in the proof.
Weak vvomans breath has overthrown a rock,
And humane pride is daunted by a Cock.
Harken this birds rebuke; and harkning, fear:
False perjured tongue, now are thy boastings tri'de,
Christ hardest fortunes part thou vowd'st to bear,
But lo a cock does crow it, thou have li'de:
Thy deedlesse words, words vnconfirmd by truth,
Have turned mine eyes to tears, my heart to ruth.
The days approach that vvhilome nature taskes,
He chaunted not, nor meant black nights descending,
But foul faced sin, from scarffing words vnmaskes;
Plie bitter tears your suite, for vvraths suspending,
Eyes that when Christ sweat blood, secure did slu^ber,
Now shed more tears then truthles tongue can number.
Lament my soul thy state, a state distressed,
Thou art revolt from true felicity,
Sigh sorrows forth, let greefes weep out the rest,
Weep vvretched man repleat with misery,
Let never eyes give cheeks a space to dry,
Till tears regaine lost grace in mercies eye.
Weep saltest brinish tears, the more the sweeter,
Weep satisfaction, sins repentant soul,
Weep frail disciple, vvoman-daunted Peter,
Weep vveakling, subject to a Cocks control,
Weep Christ's denial, vvorst of all thy crimes,
And ouervveepe each tear ten thousand times.
O God from whom all graces do abound,
For thy assisting aid I humbly call,
Lend mercies hand to raise from sinful ground,
And being on foot, protect against like fall,
Thy favors Lord I truly do implore,
Rising to stand, standing to fall no more.
Th'Egiptians greeuing of the Jews,
And the Philistians vexing Saul,
The mockes the children once did use
To Offend Gods Prophet therewithal,
And Michols scoffing Isreal's king,
Were common wrongs, a daily thing.
Such wrongs, of wrongs usurp the name,
To those extremes to Jesus done,
The world has never known like shame,
Of that sin laid upon Gods son,
It had been just, on man accursed,
If sorrows had performed their vvorst*
But when a pure and holy life,
With spot or blemish never stayn'd,
Twixt God and man shall vmpire strife,
To be himself for guilty payn'd:
What wrongs so great, what pains were such?
Who but a God would do so much?
The seven words of Christ upon the Cross.
Pater ignosce illis, quia nesciunt quid faciunt.
FAther (our Sauiors love to sinners, cries)
Forgive them this their sin to me has done,
For they by whom my tortured body dies,
Know not they murder thy life-giuing son:
What I endure, in flesh and sprite dividing,
They do it through blind ignorance misguiding.
Oh Charity of vvondrous Admiration,
And patience far extending humane sense,
Sunshine of grace, to deed of dark damnation,
True pardoner, to pardonlesse offense,
Not craving ease for self sustaining vvoes,
But favor for his persecuting foes.
Pleading for those whose tongues did most defame him,
Soliciting for them that did accuse him,
Excusing such as wickedly did blame him,
Tendering of love where hatred did refuse him,
Their ordur'd souls seeking so to refine,
Grace might reduce them to celestial shine.
His suit imports, his holy thoughts did say,
Inflict not justice on these sinne-defiled,
Upon my flesh thine angers burden lay,
Grant nothing be to thee vnreconsiled,
Least my redemption should imperfect seem,
Or any sin I did not full redeem.
He would not have our sins ascend up so,
That they should come unto his fathers sight,
Nor yet his fathers vengeance fall so low,
That on us sin committers it should light,
But placed himself betwixt both wrath and sin,
True reconcilement, by true love to win.
For Murderers that against his life transgressed,
With meekest love he humbly craved grace
For such, as their vile sin left unconfessed,
And still spit venom in their makers face,
That pierced his heart, from which his blood abounds,
To them he gives acquittance for his vvounds.
They to the City would not back repair,
Ere cruelty have left him life-depriued,
He would not die, before his fervent prayer,
Entreats to have their dying souls revived,
His sprite from forth his body past no rather,
But forth his mouth went with it, Pardon father.
FINIS.
Amen dico tibi, hodie mecum eris in Paradiso.
TRuly I say, that am heavens glory giver,
To thee true penitent repentant thief,
This day, from a defild and sinful liver
Shall thou be Sainted in exiling grief,
With me this day thou passest to the blessed,
In Paradise, where glorious Angels rest.
Even at the vvane of life, the dying hour,
This happy thief did offer God his heart,
His days were dedicate to Satan's power,
Only remained one moment to convert
Wherein he gave his heart to him that ought it,
Preventing him that long in hope had sought it.
The hellish foe stood bold upon his claim,
Because to thieves he is misguiding guider,
But heavenly friend did countermaund the same
Being sinners father, Mercies firm prouider
No sooner did his true contrition say,
Lord think on me, but Satan lost his pray.
Caines offering was a sacrifice of corn,
Abels the Lambs, (the meekest unto slaughter)
Annaes the son that of her womb was borne,
Iepthaes his sole and dear affected daughter,
Noe weathers, Abraham doves, and David gold,
Melchisidech of wine did offerings hold.
All these did offer things of great esteem,
Yet none so rich as this poor thief presented,
An offered heart to God does greater seem,
Then what by heaven and earth can be invented,
Nothing more grateful unto Mercies throne,
Then gift of heart, due debt to heaven alone.
That debt of all the thefts which he had done,
His satisfaction rightly did restore,
Repaying in one hour to the Son,
What all his life robbed father of before,
Obtaining grace, for all deserts of strife,
To be recorded in the book of life.
His vvandring courses are retired from danger,
Unto the harbor of a Christian rest,
He lived to new Jerusalem a stranger,
But was at death free Citizen professed,
With Christ on cross, gaining in three hours more
Then Judas did in years for hours before.
FINIS.
Mulier ecce Filius tuus.
WOman true map of greefes, object of vvoes,
Behold thy son, sins heavy burden bears,
Thy weeping eyes, Sorrows right method shows,
Son bathed in blood, and Mother vvashd in tears,
A dying Son, repleat with fathers hate,
A pensive Mother most disconsolate.
Of all affections that the soul admits,
On which loves favors do most firmly build,
That love in place of supreme soundness sits,
Which is derived from parent to the child,
Then loss of that must needs prove heartiest grief,
That from the heart takes place and offspring chief.
If David loved his Absolon so well,
That he with weeping vvishd to have died for him,
Who false and disobedient did rebel,
Yet did his love no whit the more abhor him,
Or reverent Jacob, tears abundant shed,
To hear his sons but feign their brother dead*
If holy Job himself so patient bore,
To give meek ear to many a grievous cross,
Destruction of his cattle, flocks, and store,
Until he heard his dearest childrens loss,
And then his greefes extremest did abound,
Renting his garments, falling on the ground.
Needs must (in mournful sorrow's dire complaints)
The blessed Virgin far excel all other,
What soul (with dolours ever so acquaints)
As this most careful comfort wanting Mother,
To see her God, life, father, love and son,
By bitt'rest torments unto death be done.
No earthly love on such perfection grounded,
But that the same may be defective proved,
Love of the son to mother was unbounded,
Son of the mother, was the like beloved.
All power of Angels, powrelesse only proves,
To weigh or measure those vnmeasur'd loves.
Of love, with vvoes by cross shevveping stood,
There sending sighs to heaven, and tears to ground,
Of love, with pains on cross he streamed blood,
There death he conquered, hell he did confound.
Such was his love that loved when we were hateful,
To die for love, when sin was most ungrateful.
FINIS.
Deus meus, deus meus, vt quid me dereliquisti?
MY God (said Christ) when God to God complained,
My God, who am true God and perfect man,
Why have thou my distres'd estate refrained,
Thou do severe sins imputation scan,
Forsaken in this strait, thy self bereauing,
Me to afflictions cruel'st torments leaving.
Untaught (till now) was Jesus to complain,
Though infinite the wrongs he underwent,
He vvelcom'd every torment, grief, and pain,
Afflictions could not move his discontent,
All gave offense, which he imputes to none,
Only his father now accused alone.
When violence did with outrage apprehend him,
His patient yielding did most meekely bear it,
When blasphemies with taunts of spite offend him,
He silent seemed as though he did not hear it,
In all the fury they did execute,
He stood like lamb before the shearer mute.
He not complained of Peter that denide him,
Nor yet of Judas that most false betrayde him,
Nor those in Pilats hall, that did deride him,
Nor graceless Jews (his own) that disobay'd him:
But his complaint was of his father made,
Not meant to those denide, condemned, betray'de.
Gods angry wrath severely set against sin,
(The vvares that Satan sold, man dearly bought)
With loss of grace the traffic did begin,
Heavens loss, souls death, hels dome eternal wrought,
That wrath on Christ's humanity abounded,
Who only cured, what sin had mortal vvounded.
As man threw sin at God, as in despite,
And God cast plagues, on man revenge to fall,
The sin where with man against his God did fight,
And punishments God chastned man vvithall,
On Christ (that stood twixt wrath and sin) was laid,
He could not sin, yet sinners sin was made.
He laid our sorrows burden on his sprite,
When he endured his bitter agony,
He took our death on him, wounding deaths might,
When he on cross, Deaths conqueror did die.
He underwent afflictions heauiest load,
Reducing souls from hell, to heavens aboade.
FINIS.
Sitio.
I Thirst, fifth word on Cross our Savior spoke,
Concluding last of greefes he suffered,
His last complaint, thirst did for water make,
His last request for that he uttered,
His last torment was drink of bitter gall,
That cruelty offends his taste vvithall.
By travel once leaving Judea land,
With vvearie journey through Samaria,
He craved in Sichar at a vvomans hand,
Her gift of water, his great thirst t'alay,
While she on terms, delays and hinderance finds,
Delays begotten by unwilling minds.
Yet after public in Jerusalem,
He did proclaim to all with thirst at strife,
That plenteously he had to succor them,
With flowing waters to eternal life,
Inuiting come, true coming, free attain,
That which who drinks, shall never thirst again.
Such thirst-staunch rivers he to thirsty gave,
That streams of grace, heavens dew in souls did shower:
Yet for his own thirst, water he did crave
At Jacobs well, and at his dying hour,
To come and drink, he free inuites all first,
And at his last, himself complains of thirst.
As to our thirsty souls he tendereth
His grace, against all deadly thirst defense,
So to his thirst, souls duty rendereth,
The purest water of obedience,
There is in him, for which our wants do call,
There is in us, he will be served vvithall.
To corporal thirst strong Sampson once did yield,
Until the chaw-bone of an Ass supplide him:
And Sisara (that vanquished lost the field)
Complained of thirst, to her whose tent did hide him:
And holy David thirsty, water needing,
Did long for Bethlem cesternes most exceeding.
But different far souls thirst, from bodies is,
Unsatisfied with springs of vvorldly taste,
Grace gained by Christ, does only answer this,
A spiritual substance, craves the like repast,
Those foodlesse souls, famisht eternal pine,
Which are unfed by th'essence pure divine.
FINIS.
Consummatum est.
EVen when the gaul of odious bitterness
Was offered to our Savior on a reed,
The bitter drink of bitter wickedness,
The Jewish present to Christ's thirsty need,
To comfort souls his gracious words extended,
And sounding mercy, uttered All is ended.
What tongue till then durst such a speech deliver?
That all took end, which holy writ foretold,
Only the tongue of sins true ransom giver,
Was powerful his own mercies power t'vnfold,
Holy of holies most uprightly spoke,
All Is ended, ending life, sins end to make.
Not David, Esaias, Jeremy, Elias,
Could in their times affirm sin took conclusion,
They prophesied alluding to Messiah,
That he should work the viper sins confusion,
And end his life, to end foul sin, life's killer,
Of all predictions to be full fulfiller.
By whose own mouth (truths soundest evidence)
We hear sins end, the old law satisfied,
How Mercy does with Justice dome dispense,
And how the Judges son has qualified
His fathers rigor, no way to be done,
But by the obedience of Gods dying son.
The word All Is ended, notice gives to all,
By death of Christ, the Law was in exemption,
The Church began, the Synagogue did fall,
And man obtained perfect full redemption,
His reconcilement was with God effected
To glories throne, by graces hand protected.
High Mystery, and deep profound divine,
That God by man, for man should death sustain,
As strange a speech, if humane wit define,
He being man, should die and rise again.
Yet God and man, with God to end man's strife,
From life to death, from death did rise to life.
Our ulcers curing, captive state enlarging,
From Sins infectious venom, Satan's gaile,
Bonds of damnation canseld, souls discharging,
Descending heau*n, to be on earth our bail
At price of life, with blood bought and befriended,
Sealing saluations trust, with All is ended.
FINIS.
Pater in manus tuas commendo Spiritum meum.
WIth blood-spent vvounds, even at the point to die,
The last bequest of heavens high testator,
Was all eternities rich Legacy,
His soul, the soul of man's true mediator,
Unto his Fathers hands he did commit,
Yielding to Death, by Death to vanquish it.
The Princely Phrophet on his dying bed,
Gave charge unto his heir apparent son,
To work revenge on martial Ioabs head,
For murdring deed by his offense fore done,
T'abridge what nature for his date intended,
And cut him off before his period ended.
Including with revenge of Abners death,
The wrongs that Simei to his person did,
When Absolon pursued his fathers breath,
Whose ass became his hangman as he rid,
And vvretched Simei cursing full of spite,
Cast stones at David, with most wrath he might.
That testament Revenge set hand unto,
Imposing wisdoms tutored prince the task,
To execute what he was willed do
For shedding blood, blood-shedders blood does ask,
To Solomon this charge his father gave,
Let them not pass in peace unto their grave.
How different David's from our Saviors seems?
Whose will contained revenge for others act:
Christ at his death forgiues, sinners redeemes,
Solicites pardon for a murdring fact:
As David dies with, Son let them not live,
So Christ's yields breath with, Father them forgive.
First guiltless blood to God most high displeasing,
Was that just man's, which did by the hand of Caine,
First guiltless blood, Gods justice chief appeasing,
Was that most righteous, whom the Jews have stain,
And as the ones blood was a souls damnation,
So was the others many souls salvation.
The blood of Abel from earths bosom cride,
And sounded Justice, Justice, through the skies,
The blood of Jesus, at the hour he di'de,
Unto his father, Mercy, Mercy, cries,
Whereby Gods title of revenge till then,
Turned gracious father to repentant men.
FINIS.
The death of Death, sins Pardon, and souls Ransom.
O Sinful soul, the cause of Jesus passion,
Put sorrows on, and sighing view thy guilt,
Bring all thy thoughts, fix the^ on meditation,
weep drops of tears, for streams of blood christ split:
Summon thy fostred sins, selfe-hatched evils,
And cast them low as hell, they are the devils.
Seat virtue rival, where usurping vice
Had seaz'd for Satan to possess thy heart,
And though the traitor flesh from grace entice,
Yet yield thy savior his dear purchased part,
The greatest love that heaven or earth does know,
Did heavens free-loue on hels bond-slaues bestow.
He left his fathers glorious right hand seat,
To live even where his earthly footstool stands,
Unmoved thereto by our submisse entreat,
No suite of clay obtained it at his hands,
No power in us, no humane will that sought it,
It was his love, grace freely given wrought it.
O love of souls, deaths victor, true life-giuer,
What charity did overcome thee so,
To die, that man might be eternal liver,
Being thine adverse disobedient foe?
For friends if one should die, were rarely much,
But die for foes, the world affoords none such?
An ignominious death, in shames account,
Of odious censure, and contempts disgrace,
On Caluarie, a stinking dunghill Mount,
For murderers the common fatal place.
There di'de the Angels brightness, God and man,
There death was vanquished, and true life began.
Yet there began not Jesus suffering,
Nor in the garden with his souls vexation:
There he performd victorious conquering,
His life was nothing else but stintlesse passion.
From cratch to cross, he trod a painful path,
Betwixt our guilt, and Gods reuengefull wrath.
What pains, their pains to Jesus not impart?
What moment tortures want did he endure?
What anguish adds not to his grieved heart?
What minute was he sorrowlesse, secure?
What age, wherein his troubles were neglected?
What people, but his death chiefly affected?
In eyes he suffered monefull showers of tears,
His face had spittings and dispightfull blows,
Blasphemous speech vpbraid his sacred ears,
Most loathsome carrion stinckes entered his nose,
Gaul in his mouth, the holiest hands were bound,
Hands, feet, heart, head, were nailed, pierced and crowned.
From his birth-hower, until his life-lost blood,
What moment past where in he did not merit?
What minute escaped imploiment unto good,
Who did implore his grace, and he defer it?
How painfully his preaching spent the day,
How watchfully his nights were hours to pray.
Whom taught this Truth, that him for truth believed?
Though truth without his presence never was known?
With whom did he converse and was vngreeued?
How ill entreated even amongst his own?
Though fox and bird could find both hole and nest,
Where found his head, reposed place for rest?
Poverty he endured in the manger,
War with the tempter in the wilderness,
Exile in Egypt, forced by tirants danger,
And on the way o're-painfull weariness,
In all his speech and actions, contradictions
Laden with wrongs, burdned with dire afflictions.
With hungers sword food-giuer was acquainted,
And that the stone-presenting devil saw,
At Jacobs well with thirst he vvel-nie fainted,
While pinching woman stood on terms to draw:
All wants and vvoes imposed upon him still,
And his obedience suffered every ill.
Traitor-led troops by night did apprehend him,
Haling him cruel to the judgment hall,
Where all inflicted torments did offend him,
And mockeries to grieve his soul vvithall,
There Judge was judged, king scorned, priest abused,
And of all Just, the Just unjustly used.
Thence to his death, with clamours, shouts, and cries,
Thieves at his side, the torturing hangman by him,
His cross (his burden) borne before his eyes,
Hart-launcing Longius, the Centurion nie him,
His friends aloof inuiron'd round with foes,
Thus unto death, souls love, sweet Jesus goes.
Victoriously upon the dunghill field,
He managed combat with the roaring Lion,
Old serpent, death and hell at once did yield,
All vanquished by triumphant lamb of Sion,
Performing in that glorious bloody fight,
The ever conquest of infernal might.
FINIS.
The wonders at Christ's death.
THat instant hour the worlds Redeemer di'de,
And breathed out his soul upon the cross,
Heavens glorious lamp, abating all his pride,
Bewailed in black his murdered makers loss,
Turning his splendant beams of gold, to dross;
The Moon like suited in a sable weed,
Mourned for sins outrageous bloody deed.
When Joshua (Isreal's valiant captain) praid,
And in his prayer coniuring did command
The firmaments bright eye stand still, it staid*
Till he was victor of the vvickeds band,
Waighting upon Gods battle then in hand,
Yielding the richest treasure of his light,
Lengthning the want of day with day-made night.
But here, reflecting light to darkesome change,
Shaming to see what shameless sin had done,
Was more admired to alter kind so strange,
Then when he ceased his posting course to run,
Love to Gods forces, his bright staying vvonne,
But now beholding Satan's power prevailing,
He turned the day to night, in darkness vvailing.
At death of Christ, appeared four signs of vvonder,
To evidence divine and God-like might,
The first: The temples veil did rent in sunder,
Next, Sun and Moon extinguished both their light,
Affoording darkness to blind Jewish sight:
Then flintie stones dividing, part in twain:
And Saints from graves reuiv'd to life again.
What faithless Jew or graceless Atheist can
With impious tongue, sound out blasphemous breath,
Affirming Christ to be but only Man,
Whose dietie, wrought wonders after death,
Wonders in heaven, strange miracles on earth?
Of each beholders heart, fear took possession,
And taught the Pagan captain Truths confession.
Thou can not say those works were Magickes art,
From slanders charge, Christ's power divine is free,
His soul was fled, and did before depart,
His liuelesse body every eye did see,
No charming words by dead tongues vttred be,
Thou must of force confess true Godhead by it,
Or say that Malice vvilfull does deny it.
FINIS.
The Funerals of Jesus.
WHen Joseph's suite had got the Judges leave,
To take sweet Jesus from the bloody cross,
Whose blessed life Jews blindness did bereave,
To our eternal gain, their endless loss:
Christ's night-disciple aidfull did agree,
To take his body from that guilty tree.
The Virgin mother chief in mournful tears,
With holy Mary's twain that stintlesse wept,
To Caluarie both sheet and odours bears,
There must the sacred funeral be kept,
VVho^ hearts did love, him with their feet they sought,
Tears in their eyes, hands myrrh and aloes brought.
Their greefes and labors they divide in parts,
Partaking each t'affoord some needful thing,
True faith and love, was seated in their hearts,
On shoulders ladders, arms the shroud do bring,
Their hands have ointments, eyes with tears abounds,
Tears well imploi'd to wash his bloody wounds.
With tired steps they ouertooke the place,
Where store of weeping dew moistened the ground,
The Sun was hid, nights dark approcht apace,
Greefes did surprise, dolours increase abound,
Whom infidels nailed up, did pierce and crown,
Faithful, from Cross, act holy taking down.
Before the same (to sign a perfect zeal)
They cast themselves so low as earth gave leave,
In reverence of those vvounds that only heal
All feauer'd souls, blood-salue from thence receive:
Which worship well performed, they sighing rise,
And toward the cross all guide plaint-pouring eyes.
The honorable two old aged men,
Advised the rest respect what scanting time
Remained to anoint, and shroud, and bury, then
Their ladders raising, up the cross they clime;
Tears, sighs, and sobs, descend each step they go,
While eyes (wet Orators) repli'de below.
On Jacobs ladder ioifull Angels sing,
No jar their heavenly music did restrain,
On Joseph's ladder tears to top they bring,
And mournful sobs send sorrows down again,
Those heavenly quires partake no tunes like this,
Christ's bitter death, was faulty man's amiss.
When hands and feet they careful did vn-naile,
Letting the body down conieal'd in gore,
This was the object, Visage wan and pale*
Eyes turned in head, his flesh all rent and tore,
Scull boared through, thorns spurting out his brains,
Bones out of joint, and full of broken veins.
Upon the ground the holy corpse being laid,
Most reuer'nt where the shrouding sheet was spread,
His blessed Mother full of vvoes dismayed,
Renewed her plaints with showers of tears she shed:
Whom Judas sold for thirty pence alive,
To buy him dead, her pearled drops did strive.
The task of Sorrows equal to divide,
At Jesus head laments his pensive mother,
Joseph with Nichodemus at one side.
And both the Mary's place them at the other,
Thus bout the mangled corpse these mourners stands
With tears in eyes, with ointments in their hands.
Wken kneeling round, the body they enclose,
Prepared with baulme, and ready to anoint it,
Viewing blew wales, that came of Jewish blows,
Rupture of nails, wan flesh, how they disioint it:
Compassion, pity, love, with true remorse,
Invited all their eyes to wash the corse.
Their knees with humble service lowly bowing,
Their hands embaulme him, vvounded, rent and tore,
Their eyes no mangled part unwashed allowing,
Their hearts with worship, God and man adore,
Both knees and hands, with hearts and watery eyes,
All sorrow laden, tired with sighs and cries.
For deepe-made vvounds, and torturing cruel blows,
No small expense of ointments could suffice:
But bounty on that holy work bestows
Plenty of odours in such liberal wise,
Their baulme to cover him enough had bin,
And tears might serve to have baptized him in.
His glorious body shrouded in the sheet
On which to be embaulmed they did lay him,
With binding clothes, vvrapt whole from head to feet,
To be interred, his servant Saints convey him
Only in arms good Jesus dead they have,
Within their hearts he lives being borne to grave.
O mournful trod, where comforts paths are failing,
Deaths bed must have eternal life in keeping,
Joseph goes sighing, Magdalen bewailing,
There Is John laments, and Nichodemus weeping,
The blessed virgins eyes like fountains run,
Left woeful widow to her murdered son.
What pens report can tell her sorrowing heart
That saw her son, the only of her womb,
Before her eyes pay death, man's foul desert,
And with her arms assist him to the tomb?
What sorrows map like sorrow ere expressed?
What eyes like tears, what tears like greefes professed.
Her liquid eyes strove each t'exceed the other,
By sighs her moan, by tears her vvoe appears,
She vveepes, yet is the mirth of heavens mother,
Virgin in office, young in tender years,
Filled with grace, eternities Princess,
Excelling in perfections holiness.
O Sun whose shine is heavens eternal bright,
Of funeral pomp why art thou destitute,
Borne to thy grave, without one candles light,
Or Clergy, night precedent institute:
Thy birth was simple, void of worldly pride;
And in thy burial, cost was laid aside.
Oh heavens riches, mercies fountain head,
When thou vvast borne, no house thy parents have,
Thy life was poor, thy death without a bed,
Thy burial was in Joseph's borrowed grave,
Thou did endure our pains, sins purchase, hell;
Thou louedst souls, lost souls, so vvondrous well.
Though Solomon was Isreal's crown successor,
And gained his kingly fathers state and throne;
Of David's mercy seems he no possessour,
Funeral cost, or tears we read of none:
But Scriptures recommend the honor done
In Jacobs burial, by his grateful son.
The great Priest Simon caused to be made,
A monument of curious carved stones,
Wherein his body after life was laid,
And eke his brethren Machabes their bones:
But tomb for Christ was in his life unknown,
And for him dead his mother knew of none.
No earthly care, souls love to him was sweeter,
When unto John the virgin was commended,
His enemies to Mercy, church to Peter,
His soul to Father, saying All is ended:
No speech he used, nor any order gave
For costly funerals or a sumptuous grave.
With greefes, attaining to the garden place,
From which often stays to weep and wipe did let,
Pensive distressed, in most perplexed case,
The shrouding sheet all moistened, slack and wet
(Not with the dew descending from the skies)
With tears that rained from their shouring eyes.
Oh glorious herbs this garden plot did bear,
Oh holy ground trod in this iournies pains,
Not for the oil of Olives growing there,
But sanctified by blood from Jesus veins,
O earth vvhereon true love and greefes combine,
Blood from the son, tears from the mothers eyes.
The tomb prepared wherein he should be laid,
From which although great pain the stone removed,
Yet far exceed the suites entreaty made
Before his mother yields her dear beloved,
Still they solicit, still her loves deny him,
Until on knees with price of tears, they buy him.
The brothers son entreats his holy aunt,
Persuasiue reasoning humbly does beseech,
Times brevity, good Lady, mooues your grant,
Let eyes do more with tears then tongues with speech:
Upon detaining, now no longer stand,
Dark sable night leads dangers by the hand.
If foes should vvrong us, bootlesse we to strive,
How can poor three our Lords dead corse defend,
Twelve could not guard him when he was alive,
Give license this last service take an end,
Much troubles cease, when by free will is done,
That which constraint well nere dispense to shun.
Thou friend of God incline to us at length,
Let our vveake words overcome thy loves the stronger,
Our hearts want comforts, all our members strength,
Our tears are spent, eyes dri'de can weep no longer,
Sorrow that holds us for her lawful prize,
Has left not one poor tear to task our eyes.
Weary with importunity and weeping,
A most unwilling leave the Virgin gave,
Yielding her son to the sepulchers keeping,
Her sweetest love to deaths most bitter grave,
Like as from Golgotha, they brought him thither,
All help, all sigh, all put him in together.
Thus being laid into his bed of stone,
By liquid eyes, and hearts of sorrowing flesh,
Instead of earth their tears were poured on,
A last farewell greefes cesternes yield afresh:
There left they Jesus that sins burden bears,
Wept, vvrapt, anointed, bathed in streams of tears.
FINIS.

