Room, FOR A MESS of Knaves. OR, A Selection, or a Detection, OR, A
Demonstration, or a Manifestation. of four Slaves. OR, A Conviction, or a
Comiction, OR, A Combination, or a Copulation of four Varlets. OR, A
Reperition, or a Repetition. OR, A Replication, or a Recapitulation. of four
Harlets. With a Narration or a Declaration, a Relation or an Explication, of a
strange (but true) battle, fought in the little Isle (or World) of Man.

Ridentem dicere verum quid vetat. London printed for N. F. and are to be sold
at the sign of the Talbot at the West end of Paul's. 1610.

To the Reader
Having written this course discourse or rather discovery, I bethought my self
that it would not be amiss, according to the lawdable custom of pamphletters,
to Dedicate the same (how unpolished soever) unto some good patron or other,
for shelter: when straict it came to my mind that this fashoning of dedicating
books, and so to place the name of some Grand Signeor, in the forefront of an
Epistle, was for all the world, like a Vintner: who at the first setting up of
his Trade, yea and all his life after, hangs up the glorious spangled Iuey-bush
to draw good fellows to the tasting of his Outlandish Liquors which made me to
dislike this fashion of To the Right Honorable, or so, and determined To leave
it to the Printer without ane badge at all; When suddenly it came again to my
remembrance how difficult a matter it was now in these duble dealing days to
seem singular or self conceipted in any course, the whold misliking such
fellows no less then your Monopolyters, being men almost of the same kind
and condition: and therefore I must needs insanire cum alijs, and dedicated it
must be, But to whom? marry (quoth I to my self) to some great man at least,
(for its in use now to have great Godfathers* though we be never so mean) etc.

I but (quoth my self) it may be he will hold it too base S^biac for his
Honor to patronize, and unhappily one or other of his followers near to him
may find himself agreeued etc.

Then (quoth I I Will to some Doctor? surely no (quoth my self) for he in his
great wisdom and great learning, may over shoot the mark, or thinking it not
fitting his gravely or so: may

Why then may it not be, then to some Knight? oh by no means (quoth I for he
peradventure would take the matter in dudgion to have a discovery of Knaves
offered unto him, were it but for the Affinity of the names, and peradventure
(if he were one of those travailing Ks. that knows more Languages then one)
standing upon the Etimology of the word, being derived from the Dutch Knact in
Duch is a Knave.
Knact would conceive Iay med at the Knight also, (whereunto before God and the
Country I plead not guilty) and in a fume (especially if he were at his
Tabac^o) would bid me be packing and take my knaves with me, or else (and then
swears heel) etc. Put case I offer it to some great Lawyer (quoth I) in no
case (quoth my self) for if he should alter the case by misprision, and with a
writ of the Case, case or cage you up in the Counter then you were in a wise
Case, were you not? How like a Physician then? (quoth I) mary I pray God I
may never have need of them (quoth my self) Now by Mars i will to some Mounser
Capetaino.

Then by V^nus thou art madd (quoth my self) for the peace being now concluded
in the Low Countries, he in a malcontent humor (mistaking thy meaning) may
peanter plain stabbe thee, or so.

Why then (quoth I) what woodst have me do? for sooth good sir quoth my self
get you to some rich Cittezen that has broke off his Trade and so.

Now I see thou art shallow (quoth I) for think thou that he which breaks
with h^s company and creditors, and so will not break with thee?

No, I know a bette way then that: I Will alter the case and Gender too, and take
a Lady, or some great Gentlewoman that has a heart as bigg as a Ladies: Nay
that is as worse (quoth my self) for ten to one she would rather entertain one
or all thy Knaves, then thy book of their discovery, and so reward thee with
one of their cast liueryes and so.

Now would I were a Saint, if I know to whom then: I am in doubt (quoth my
self) that some one of these 4. Knaves thou writst of, came behind thee in
thy dreaming sleep and has clapped thee on the coxcombe and cract thy brainpan:
but now I think ont, I Will help thee to 4 C. for thy 4 K. to whom thou may
commend them: viz the Court, the Camp, the City, and the Country: You shot
well at Rouers quoth I, but I know an other C worth all your C. I Will stand
to it, such a C. she is, that she may be wife to the greatest Earl in Europe:
a C, of all C. a tresnoble, command^ng conquering C a courageous kind C. And
where she affects not, a full fell furious and fiery foe is she. God send me
from her frown then quoth my self: what Angel devil? what Ianus I pray thee
might she be? mary quoth I the Epitome of her great name is Signiora Madonna
Cogitatione Reina del Microsmo: O quoth my self my aude metris, A ken hur so
we will sir, A shus a blithe Less a gudfeth Sir if she be plezd, And a o fell
feend a she froune: a foul eele au hur wezan shas often guard me to grit Sir.

Well (quoth I) if I find her no worse then I left her I care not: I pray thee
Sira where lefst her (quoth my self) forsooth I left her where they shall
find her that reads on my Book, except in her Husbands absence she be gone to
visit her Niece Venus or stepdame Luna: which I know his Honor will not be well
pleased with when he coms home, but be it as it may, if she be gone abroad I will
stay til her return, or leave it entrust with some frtend near about her.

To the Right Worshipful, and my especial good friend, Sir John Lebon,
Knight.
SIr: having long requested* after a Gentlwoman of good note, one Mistress
Cogitations, I was aduisd by an extrauagant fellow (that Pretended to know
much) to go to the sign of the parret in lither lane, for there he said she
had a Chamber: thither I went, and found one of that name indeed, to whom I
tendered this little remembrance of my good will and service: She, (whose
accouterment, countenance, and conditions, was fitly resembled by her Sign,)
had scarce read my Title, but she began to tattle, and after a scornful and
malcontent manner, threw my book at me, and bade me be packing and take the
Knaves with me.

Being thus mistaken, (and studying what course was best to be taken) I was
overtaken by a good fellow of my acquaintance (well known to your Worship)
hard by the Rose and Crown to whom I imparted my mind, and how I sped with
mistress Parrat: he laughed and said have thou forgot our two old acquaintance,
goodwill, and Il-vill? why man (quoth he) thou should have asked for mistress
good Cogitations: she keeps house in Loue-lane: also she has a lodging in such
a man's house, (meaning your worships) by whom thou may have access to her:
Thus thanking my remembrance for his kindness, I am bold (Presuming on your
worships good acceptance) to render this small remembrance of my good will, to
your good Cogitations: And rest.

The 4. quarters of the day natural, Gouernd by four knaves artificial: viz.
A Melancholy knave, and a Chollericke:
A Sanguine knave, and a Flegmaticke.
THese four are brothers by the fathers fide, begotten by Sultan Satan, on
four Succubuses: the first was borne in Heluetia: the second in Tartaria: the
third in Slauonia: and the fourth in Barbaria.

THe first (which is the knave of Spades) he was borne when Saturn was in
conjunction with the moon: therefore he will prove a melancholy mischievous
knave, of the nature of the earth, which he claims for his birthright (though
he have no right thereunto:) this knave is covetous, envious, mallicious, and
treacherous: of hair thin, black, sooty. Balductus Rimarius (a late writer)
reports him to be the son of a Sexton, preferred to the ends of Court by help
of the last great sickness, An ill wind that blows no man to profit.
and so made a Lawyer: this carries some probabillity: but I am not of his
opinion, for he is called the knave of Spades, because he is always digging,
plotting, undermining, and forging (with that clubfooted Cuckolds Iourney-men,
Brontes, S^cropes, and Pyracmon) of some damned Engines of villainy. Take heed
of this knave for he is a dogged knave, and will bite before he bark: he has
under him 6. subordinate knaves, Lying, Forswearing, Backbiting, Insinuating,
and Detracting.

His devise is, a Waterman, looking one way and rowing another: his Motto is,

Mel in Ore fell in Cord.
Read what is written in the painted cloth,
Beware the Mouse, the Magot, and the Moth
And ever have an eye unto the door:
Trust not a knave, a drunkard, nor a whore
AT twelve a clock enters the knave of Hearts, he was borne when Mars was in
Coniunctio^ quadrature with the Moon, Jupiter being retrograde. This portends
that he will prove a villainous hearty knave, or a knave at the heart: he is of
complexion sanguin, bloody, hot as fire, as may appear by his red head: you
know Mack bogg fool, an Irish Historiographer, repors tthat he was St,
Patricks Lac key, but (although he be accounted like an Irish Lackey, yet I am
not of his opinion: for St. Patricke himself (as more authenticke authors
report) went always afoot, I and bare foot to, for the sins of his
countrymen: he is given by Constellation to be proud, Jealous, lunatic, and
sometimes horne-mad: his time is (though he seldom or never keep time, order,
or honest courses) to set about 6. a clock in the afternoon, and gives place
to as very a knave as himself: his 6. vicegerents are: Vainglory,
High-mindednes, Arrogance, self-loue, Masterfulnes, New-fanglenes.

His Devise, Acteon turned into a Heart, and torn in pieces by his Hounds. his
Word is,

Qualis vita, finis ita.
A silken Ciuet saucy knave,
That Is dight in many colors brave:
Who whoods and mews his wife for flying
A horne-plague hold him to his dying.
THis third knave is a Clubbish, black haird, broad backed, cole-rake knave: yet
one that will carry no coals neither: at this knaves nativity Mars was in
conjunction with Venus, in the house of Saturn, when Jupiter was retrograde:
therefore I find by my Astronomical Inspection, that he will prove a mutinous
martial knave, one that speaks nothing but powder and shot: this Caualeero
Snaphance, though he break up at midninght, yet if you move him (and he is
quickly moved I can tell you) then he will be Lord of the Ascendant, though he
be not in his own house: therefore wheresoever you meet him let him pass,
for he is hot and dry in the third degree, and will pass though it be to his
own destruction. This Don Colbrand is well known to the Watchmen of London:
when he has finished his quarter, he retires himself most commonly (but sore
against his will) to the Counter, or Newgate, and thete he studies Brooks
Cases: til he be called to plead at the Bar, Not Brook the great. Lawyer,
but Brook the Tailor.
and then to his last supper prepared by 12. bones et Legales homines. etc. His
six petty Captains are Oppression, Contempt, Swearing, Frowardnes, Impatience,
Desperation.

His devise, a Brewers Horse got loose, saltant with a broken halter upon his
head pendant. his word,

Dissolute and resolute.
A Mastiffe-dog, will never make a Spaniel,
An Horsemans saddel is no market Panel
The Devil is a knave and ever will be,
This knave like him shall walk alone for me
THe last but not the least, is your Diamond Knave: this is your only Knave
(or a Knave alone) that loves to be alone in most of his businesses. This Knave
was borne when Mercury was in a Trine aspect with Venus in the house of Luna:
a flegmaticke false knave he is that loves to be conversant in watery places:
his variable mind you may know by his variable colored hair of head and
beard, more variable in his apparel and countenance, most variable in his
lust. This fellow (for he has many fellows in these days) predominats from
midnight to morning, a night walker he is, and (as he says) is near of kin to
Oberon the king of Fayries, and it should seem^ so, for all his exercise is the
works of darkness: he is a knave in print, and takes his place with the first
that ever studies in the Academy of the seven liberal sins, To be short, he
is such a cunning baudy knave, that I can not with all my skill discover him
sufficiently unto you, and therefore I will leave him amongst you, to comment
further of him: His six undertakers are Intemperance, Shamelessness, Idleness,
Dissembling, fawning, Lying.

His devise, An old Ram-goat, stalking up and down in a Barn: his Motto,

Si non cast, tamen caute.
Rightly the moon predominats in thee,
For thou art all as changeable as she:
Lets say it is so, this echo says it is so.
And will say after you if you say no.
Knaves and Queanes draw all in one line
Vices go by couples, Newgate fashion.
1. Little and loud, 2. Long and lazy: 3. Fat and lickrish, 4. Black and gasie
5 Sad and subtle, 6. Red and rauing: 7. Pale and peevish. 8. Old and having.
A prying eye a lifting ear,
a light finger, and a prating tongue
Do consort together,
as four parts in a Song.
THere be also four Queanes of near alliance to the aforesaid 4. Knaves,
which I thought to serve in, instead of Quayles, (Rayles I might say) to your
second course (for they are corse I Will be sworn to you) but I forbear them,
for if I should put them together there would be foul rule, and I stand
doubtful how you would tax me, or so: therefore I will first see how you will
digest their comrades.

Their names are.

A Bridewell Queen commonly called a Puncke.

A Newgate Queen, commoly called a Doxe.

A Cuckstoole Queen, commonly called a Scowlde.

A Cage Queen commonly called a Bawd.

1. From a Queen of her tongue, 2. And a Queen that is lasie: 3. From a
lickorish Queen, 4. And a Queen that is gasie, Parce nos Domine. From a
filching Queen, 6. And a Queen or her tail, 7. From a mischievous Queen, 8.
And a Queen of sale. Libera nos Domine.
Astronomical il^ections briefly described for admini^^ration of Physic and
Phlebotomy.
AS in all other parts of Physic, so in Phlebotomy, you are circumspectly to
consi der, and certainly to know the cause, as when the Impatient is infected
with some naughty, superfluous, and unnatural humors, Internally and
Externally: and so the ministration of Physic is to be used: accordingly. A.
Conjunction. B. Opposition. C. a Trine. D. a Quartill. E. a Sextill. F. a
Degree.




The mischievous melancholic, you must let blood or purge in Aries and Taurus.

The cruel chollericke in Taurus and Leo, but if the diseases be not too
violent in Pisces.

The filthy flegmaticke in Gemini and Libra.

The insulting sanguin, in Capricornus, Aquarius and Pisces.

NOw as these four knaves (by usurpation) have got the government of the day:
so by my Extronomicall calculation, I find also the whole year by a
Colaterall resignation to fall unto them. For the Prince of darkness, Sultan
Lucifer, having got the Cards into his own hands (like a cunning Iugler) and
discarded the four Kings, viz: Truth, Mercy, Justice and Temperance, has
foisted in their stead, these four knaves: who for that they will never be
idle (as they will never be well occupied) have divided the twelve Months
amongst the^: and so interchangeably subdeuided them into weeks, days,
hours, and minutes, that for my life I cannot tell where to have them by my
figurative conspection, but only by their villainous effects. Sometimes I find
some of them together in a trine aspect, the sign being in Aries and Taurus:
some in a Quartile aspect, in Libra and Cancer: then all in a most ominous
conjunction ( Inter aquam and ignem) the Moon being entered the Dragons tail,
certain degrees in Virgo, Libra, and Scorpio, they conclude in an oposition
(with such a terrible combust) as though an other deluge with domes-day would
reduce the world to her old Chaos

Then hurling by my Ephemerides, Terrible tanqu^^ ^on true.
in all haste I betook me to my Prospectiue-glasse, wherein I foresaw, that (
Jupiter being even then Lord of the Ascendant, and Saturn retrograde) they are
brought Coram nobis, in Capricornus and Aquaries, (with cap and knee) with
Humilianus, and so conclude by the heels in Pisces, till the celestial
Dominator Sol appearing in his glory, Dominus Iudex.
brings to light their deeds of darkness: and so (with a writ of Co^pus cum
causa) sends some to needy Newgate; some to biting Bridewell, some to the
costly Counter, and some to the cold Cage.

But (alack the while here they stay not long, for one claymes kindred of this
great personage: another that he and his predecessors do and have served long
that great man.

The third swears he has spent his blood in his majesty's service, and (if he
can neither will nor choose) will spend it again.

And the fourth being of a more April desposition, protests like a Pewterane,
it is not the first, nor shall be the last, if they will pardon this fault. Then
altogether with a thousand sorts of lyings, and cryings, for swearings and
tearings, wringings and flingings, vowing never to do so again, that is (like
equiuocating Knaves as they are) subintellegitur (with a mental reservation)
so heed^esly.

By these and such means, with the help of their honors letters, v^z. a
nonobstant, the knaves creep out at the back-dore, and finding themselves in
statu quo prius, Plus valet savor in Iudice: qua^ lex in C^di^t.
they fall to their old trade again; but with more caution: for they will so
shuffle themselves amongst other honest Cards, that you shall very hardly
perceive them, but on the white side: so that you shall never know them till
it be upon the winning of the set, and then will they show themselves in their
kind, knaves at a dead lift.

NOw having discovered these 4. knaves in part, I will produce (like iugling
Feats, the devils Iournyman) the whole pack before you, that is to say, 52
Cards: that at the first sight you would think them to be good, honest, plain
Cards, without any Legerdemaine; yet it is but dec^ptio visus for all that; but I
will fetch them off with a hey pass and repasse, and then you shall see they
are all knaves indeed, and all their knavery too, as far as by my Astronomicall
speculation and skill, I can display them unto you.

But first, before you can well understand this mystery of iniquity, you must
observe 4. points most exactly: viz.

1. The Spades be all long, to cut long-waies.

2. The Clubs fall short, to cut broad ways.

3. The Hearts are equal, to cut both ways.

4. And the Diamonds have a principal mark on the left corner, the better to
be known, yet so as that you shall not easily perceive them, but by
observation and dexterity in cutting them.

Well (if all may be well) being thus suited, they are Cards for the devils
own play on holidayes, and for his dam a^l the week after.

You shall find them sometimes
In the Court, like Controlers: In the Camp, like Commanders: In the City,
like Cormorants. In the Country, like Constables. In the Term time, like
Pettifoggers. In the Vacation, like Promoters. In the Visitation, like Sumners.
In time of peace, like Justices of Peace. In War, like Captains or
Mustermasters In sickness, like Physicians or Surgeons. In health, like
orethwart Neighbors. In prosperity, as false friends. In Adversity, as Fell
Foes. In profession, are Pharesies. In life, Saducies. In the light Angels. In
the Night devils.
On Sundays pray with the people, and all the week after pray on them.

Yea these two are such Nigromancers, that they can with a trice Metamorfoze
themselves into a thousand shapes, and like Ignes Fatu^, with their false
light, lead you in the night, out of the way, and in the day (like Cheating
companions) deceive you in the way.

To conclude, their conditions like their coat of many colors, fitting (like
a cheuerel glove) every man's fingers.

These 4 principal knaves (as you have heard before) have under each of their
Judas dictions, 6. subordinat knaves, and those 24. have each of them one
deputy, which makes the whole pack 52. with their Cheiftaines: cum multis
alijs Rascalibus, que nunc perscribere longum est.

The names of the other 24. are Inprimis, Ambition, Presumption, Stubbornes,
Churlishnes, Bitterness, Maliciousnes, Commotion, Traitery, Striving, Fighting,
Oppression, Vexing, Cursing, swearing, scoffing, Prattling, Vnseemely-iesting,
Theeuery, Baudry, Beggary, Atheism, Hypocrisy, Curiosioty, Unadvisedness,
selfelone.

A Legion of these Packets has Don Lucifer sealed up with his privy seal, and
delivered them to his three Groom porters, Minos, Eccus, Three great Judges.
and Rh^damanth, to be foysted in with other plain Cards, with twenty thousand
bales of false dice; as high-men and low-men, viz. Gypseys and Iuglers, baudy
Constables, and theeuish boys, etc. Fex populy.


Therefore take heed, you that be ga^esters at these Comi-tragicall sports,
least you be cheated of your goods and goodness, and with the Prodigal be sent
to keep Swine, never to return home (the premises considered) but by weeping
cross, or Beggars bush.

Now having euacuated my head of these gross infectious humors, whereof it may
seem to have bin fully charged: and falling into a brown study what might
become of these Locusts, that like the Grasshoppers of Egypt did cover the whole
earth: Commanding Morpheus (like a thief in the night) came stealing behind
me before I was aware, and clapped his soft hand upon my eyes, and I dreamt: And
me thought I was (like Abacuck in the painted cloth) carried (not down to a
denn) but (up to a high hill) environed with a deep river: Microcosmo^
and beyond the river a great champion feeld, in the midst whereof there was a
fair Castle in the form of an Heart.

This Castle was beleagard by two huge Armies: the one on the South-East side,
and the other on the No^th-west.

Forthwith I heard two Trumpets summoning a parley: where unto an answer being
replied, ^ogetations.
I did behold (or thought I did behold) a goodly young Damsel upon the top
of the Castle, covered with a white veil, that I could not see her face: who
demanding the cause of their s^mmons, a dubble reply was made by two Herralds,
with my Lord, and my Lord: but the North west Herrald (whose boystrous bouldnes
like blubd-cheekt Boreas bewrayed his meger manners) cried in the Slauonian
tongue, my Lord Vycioso, base son and heir aparant to Sultan Pluto (sole
Emperor of the North, from Babylon to Egypt and so to the further part of Mare
Rubrum to Mare Mortuum, Domine factotum.
even from the Sun set to the Sun rising) does require entrance and
friendly entertainment for him and his followers: Who swears and vows unto
you (by his Horror and upon the word of a Soldier) all love and service: And
to that end (if you please) will send his commissioners with authority, to
treat with you of a perpetual league, as also of a marriage: and to conclude on
Articles and conditions thereunto belonging, etc.

All which she having heard at large, (not answering one word) turned her about
to the right side, to hear what the other would say: who to the same purpose
(though after an other manner) protested his Lords entire love and affection:
And further putting her in rememberance of a former alliance and neighbourly
co^merce held and continued between his Lord Virtuoso, and her deceassed
Father, who upon his deathbed mocioned a contract of marriage between them;
which if she would stand unto, then a large dowry should be ratified under his
hand and seal to her, and the h^ires of their two bodies for ever. etc.

His Embassy ended, she breefly thus replied: Sir you that spoke last I
answer, first thus:

I find not my self enjoined by my deceassed fathers Will, to any such
contract upon a penalty, therefore I hold myself free to mine own will.

But since both your Lords profess love (as you say) unto me, and each
offers very largely, I thank them both, And that I might know which loves
me best, I will that he that can approve himself most Puissant by the others
Conquest shall be Lord of me and mine.

This answer returned (as fast as Imagination could carry them) away they went
to their Lords: who understanding her resolution, though they were both
doubtful of their success (for the victory lay partly in her affecting) yeat
resolved notwithstanding on both sides to try the event.

Then Lord Virtuoso speedily despacht three Commissioners, Reason, Descretion
and good Remembrance to solicit her the second time: And so did Pharo Neco
Vitioso: viz. Temptation, Folly and Sensuallity to use their best deuoir to
draw her to their parts.

But Madam Cogitations stoodfully resolved to behold the fight first, and then
as she saw occation so she would conclude.

Being out of al hope on either side to obtain her favorable aspect, (which
would be very furthersom to the party affected) they prepare to the Battle:
but the night before Don Vitioso like a crafty knaua knauorum sent his sworn
servant Sinior Sensuallity secretly (like a spy) to sow his slippery seed all
over the Field, that Lord Virtuoso his soldiers should not be able to stand,
their ground should be so slippery.

Now this right worthy Lord Virtuoso very early the next morning preparing to
Battle: Thus marched forward with his whole army: himself sitting in an
Iuory Chatiot richly garnished with Gould, Pearls, and precious stones: there
attending on the Chariot four worthy Knights: viz. Righteousness, Prudence,
Strength and Temperance: Next to the Chariot Road seven Captains.

The first was Humility riding on a Lamb: on his helm a Faulcon gentill stood.

Next him followed Charity riding on a Tiger, who carried a Pelican on his
helm.

The third was Patience on a Camel, he had on his Crest a Phoenix.

The fourth was Liberality on a Dromedary, and on his Crest an Ospray.

The fifth was Abstinence riding on a Heart, on his healme a Popini^y.

The sixth was Chastity, who bestred an Unicorn, on his crest a Turtledoue was
placed.

Good exercise was the seventh who was mounted on a Panther: and a Crane he had
on his Creast.

Many petty Captains there were besides, as Pity, Meeknes, Goodness, Concord,
Unity, Patience, Honesty,, true Friendship, Simplicity, Stedfastnes,
Quietness, Peaceablnes, Helpfullnes, Discreetnes, Seruiceablenes, Meserablenes,
Orderlines, Iustnes, Contentednes, Sufferance, Foresightfulnes, Co^templation,
Reverence, Courtesy, Indifferency, Lowlynes, Affection, etc,

All these were dubd Knights of the holy cross by their General Don Virtuoso:

Don Vicioso also dubbed other 24 Knights, of the Post-haste to animate them two
to the conquest of the gilt spurs. Iuanis Ho^^^.


Cunning, also brought to the aid of Don virtuoso certain companies whose
Captains were Nigromancie, Geomancie, Magic,, Adriomancie, Phissiognomy,
Palmestry, Ornomancie and Pi^omancy: but Tresnoble Virtue (scarce thanking him
for his offer) told him that he never used (nor would) any such companions in
the wars.

Whereupon Cunning, with his consorts being thus casherd, went to Don Vicioso,
who (with all respect) gladly receiving him and his comrages, and placed them
in his rearward.

To be brief, in hearing on both sides rainged their maine Battalyons: Vicioso
Abbadono most courageously gave the first onset, discharging his great
Ordinance (which was baststerd Cannons in all his Army) which the Lord Grace
(who commanded the Vangaurd of the Prince Virtuosos Army) avoided, by help of a
rising hill on the Southeast side, and entrenched on the North east side, well
manned and maintained by right puisant Patience and heavenly Humilytie: so that
all the shot past over their heads without any detriment.

Then they drew nere their enemy scirmiging with their small shot, which the
Lord Virtuoso his party manly bore off, with their Targets of proof not
yielding one foot: Joining Battails, they fell to it pell mell, with such fury,
that many were slain, many wounded, and many taken Prisoners on both sides:
But the wicked weed that Sensuallity had sowed, made the ground so slippery,
that Lord Virtuoso his company could not stand: which Infidellety (standingon
the left side of Madam Cogitacions) perceiving, enticed her to lean to Vicioso
Apollyon^ his party: But true Faith on the right side counseled her to the
contrary: but al in vain, for she not only favored Mounser Gogmagogo
Vicioso, but took part with him also.

All which, Lord Virtuoso perceiving, in great discontent left the Field for
that time: and Signior Gracioso commanded a retreat to be sounded: that
hearing Doggodomado Viciosissimo, his Army made a great showte, and cried
follow, follow, for we shall all be Conquerers. But the Lord Grace having
recovered the entrenched Hill, with Faith and Hope; maintained the fight till
Sunne-set.

Early in the morning by the break of day, worthy Signior Gracioso (with a
heavenly Oration) persuaded his followers to a second encounter: which Faith
and Hope no sooner heard, but with a fresh courage they led forth their
Vangard, advancing their Banners in the name of Jesus, and made a second and a
sudden assault (the enemy being in their Tents) At the charge whereof, came
thrice puisant Perseverance to their aid, with a mighty Host from the Lord
Virtuoso: which Signior Gracioso, with Faith and Hope perceiving, redoubled
their courage, and cried Virtue and Victory.

The Enemy this hearing, in all poast haste trussed up their trinkets, and in a
disorderly order, as well as they could (upon such curtoll warning) defended
themselves: but most worthy Perseverance perceiving that, took the advantage,
and so well behaved himself that day, that he made his foes to fly before his
face: commanding Constancy with his courageous company, Plectrumaninims.
following close after, that it reioyst my heart to see it.

Now Madam Cogitations seeing this, (vsherd by her old servant Goodwill)
secretly stole to her Castle: Acusation compeling her
and meeting Lady Conscience at the Gate (in great sorrow) craved her counsel
how she might recover Lord Virtuoso his favor. Marry (quoth Conscience) you
must go to Humillity and Repentance: Magn^ cum (...) ^^rore.
So disguising hirself, that she might pass the better unknown, she met with
Contrition, who, with Repentance, brought her the next way to Humilities Tent,
which was placed at the foot of the Hill fast by the intrenchment: whom
Humillity seeing a far off, made haste to meet, and very lovingly embraced
and kissed them: Cogitations discovering all her intent, entreated her best aid
in her suit to Lord Virtuoso, which he most willingly condiscended unto, and
went with her to the Generals Pauilion, and there with Repentance and
Contrition, (falling down flat before his Excellency) confessed her amiss,
and most earnestly and heartely craved pardon, which he most lovingly
granting, Remorse.
lifted her up, set her on her feet before him, and most friendly communed with
her.

In the mean while Perseverance with Constancy so behaved themselves, that Don
Vitioso with all his whole rout, was undone, and clean overthrown horse and
foot: when (as the Devil wood) in rusheth a mad rogue, one Caualero
Desperatio with a Chariot (for his Lord was so sore wounded that he could not
ride) and speedily conuayed him by a secret way out of the field.

In this overthrow was taken Prisoners, seven Captains of note or notorious
Captains, viz. Envy, Wrath, Covetousness, Pride, Gluttony, Letchery, Sloth:
with a number of the Rascaldry: among the rest were my four compictious knaves
you wot of: who in hope they would change their coppies, and in time mend their
manners, were banished the Island: Spadado Mellancollico, with Caine to the
land of signifies barking.
Nodd bordering on sad Acheron: there to pick a Sallet of Rue, Wormwood,
Sorrel, and Colloquintida: Sanguinato cordato, to Mount Etna, bordering on
burning Flegiton: there to offer flesh and fuel, to that neuer-ending fire.

Fustifurato Colerato to the Torrida Zona, divided from the Mount by infectious
Stix: there to carbonado his Collops with the Canibals.

And that Flegmatico Diademono, to the land of waste, near mourning Cocitus,
never to return but upon perpetual pain of the Pox the Ghonorrhae: with the
grand consumption of the lungs and marrow: And all this to stand firm and
irreuocable, according to the law of the Medes and Percians. Some were
ransommed for others that were taken prisoners by the Enemy: others committed
to perpetual imprisonment: and some (like Hammon) were hanged for examples to
others.

There were also ordained seven special Officers for the good government of
this noble Isle of Man, Microcosmus.
for prevention of future invasions: viz.

1. Prudence, Lord Channcelor. 2. Temperance Lord Treasurer. 3. Justice, Earl
Marshall. 4. Perseverance, Leiftenant General. 5. Grace Lord Warden of the
cinque ports. 6. Reason chief Secretary. 7. Memory, M. of Requests and
Recorder.
As they were in consultation about the future good of this little common weal,
and election of inferior Officers, I heard one knock hard and hastily at the
Councell-chamberdore. And with that I wak't.

Now concerning Signiorissimo Virtuoso his parley with Madonna Cogitatio: the
articles of agreement, the marriage, her relapse, and second reconcilement,
with the secret and subtle return of your four irreligious Sadduces, to four
hypocritical Pharesies, will require an other discourse, and you shall hear
more when our old Post-maister Morpheus returns, and that I see your strong
stomachs do well digest these my homely, but I hope wholesome cates: craving
pardon for what is amiss: and if I may understand what is my error in this, I
will mend it in the next: for the plain truth is, I am but one of Dame Reasons
sculs, as may appear by my cookery and clothing. But yet I have seen good
work in my days I cantel you.

To the high and mighty Mounsier Morpheus, brother to Oberon King of Fayries:
Cousin ierman to Mercury, Squire of the body to Madam Cogitations: Leiftenant
General of the cinque ports: and Domine Fac totum of all nocturnall
negotiations in the Isle of Man.
THy devoted suppliant and Micro-cosmographer T. Goodwill: who does not only,
but also admire thy mightiness: adore thy virtue, and implore thine Excellence
(O thou Metamorphoser of minds thou that art a releaser of Captives, and a
Captiuer of the released: a comforter of the comfortles, and a tormenter of
tormenters: a Messenger to the good of gladness, to the bad of sadness: a just
Judge twixt high and low, the poor man's wealth and the rich man's woe: a
Prophet of the night, to the bad a false, to the good a right: the balm of
grief and the bane of spite) Thine Excellence I implore, that thou will
vouchsafe thy poor Goodwill a deep carowse of thy Nectar, which may infuse a
dreaming revelation into my Piamater, that so I may by way of prophecy
foreshew what will follow of these aforesaid four knaves, exiled for the
testimony of a bad conscience: I cannot think that they are dead, for they are
engendered of immortal seed but (they are Metamorphosed into some other shapes,
the better to deceive) and my spirits are kindled with a driuine fire, and thou
must not deny me as thou tendrest the favor of my good Lady Cogitations, in
whose name I charge thee, nay more, I conjure thee (mark what I say) with
Bell, Book and Candle, that thou satisfy this my request, least in my furye I
turn Renegado, and write a most lewd Ballad against thee, and that to some
filthy tune, to thy no small dishonor: but if thine Excellence vouchsafe to
answer mine expectation, I vow (by the life of Pharo) to offer upon thine
Alter; (viz, a Feather-bed and a Downe-pillowe) a Heccatomb of verses to be
hung up in thy Temple (viz. A sweet Chamber without fleas, in memorial of thy
perpetual praises: and when I awake, I Will wash my brains in Madera, and sing
Madrigals in praise of thy person and power.

Having fraught this my little Fleeboat, with such merchandise as I could meet
with in the Isle, I found a prosperous wind in the East-south-East, which made
meset sail, directing my conrse to the cape Bona Speranza, whichafter a few
days I had (a far off) discovered, but before I could recover the point, I was
chekt with a northerly wind, which perforce drove me upon the coast of the
Canaries, I Will of Dogs.
where coming to an anchor, I was boarded by a couple of copesmates (called
Zoilus and Momus) that have Authority there to search strangers: who dealt
strangely with me indeed: but it was my pride to be pryed into by them, being
forewarnd by many worthy men (whose card and compass I am not worthy to catty
after them) of their paltry dealing.

A second sort that assaulted me, was a cock-boat laden with Coxecombes, that
being not able to apprehend, would reprehend: whom after I had (with a volly
of small shot, well pelted, I pardoned: for alas they did they knew not what.

The third sort were a rapsedy of Raskals, that would frown or favor as they
saw others affected: these detracting knaves would come off with their buts,
ifs and ands, but and if I live (I will threaten nobody) but I know what I will
do.

The last were a company of the last edition, that took occasion to poue a
confiscation of my Ship and goods, producing against me such a chapter, such a
verse, against my commodities of profane jesting: etc. Assyrians.
etc. These Martinists like Salomons fools, Pro: 26. c, and Esaias. 5. they
would feign be singular, and single they are, and so I left them.

For Contempt and scorn are wits infirmity.
Wherewith disdain and scoffs keeps company.
Non mare transisset, pauidus si nauta fuisset. FJNIS.

