depiction of harpist

THE FIRST BOOK OF QVESTIONS AND ANSWERS upon Genesis.

Containing those questions that are most eminent and pertinent, upon the six
first Chapters of the same Book: Collected out of ancient and recent Writers;
Both briefly and subtly propounded and expounded, By Alexander Rosse, of
Aberdine, Preacher at Saint Mary's near Southampton, and one of his Majesty's
Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for Francis Constable, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, ouer-against the great North door, at the sign of the white
Lion. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Francis, Lord Verulam, Lord high Chancellor of
England, etc. In this Universe (Right Honorable)
THere are only two things that are the objects both of Contemplation and of
Admiration, that is, the Creator, and the creature: amongst the creatures only
two, Angels and men; in man only two parts; the body and soul; in the soul,
only two faculties, the mind and the will; in the mind, two things only; God
and his Word: the Word of God is twofold; internal and external: the
external word is twofold; spoken and written: the written word has two
parts; the old, and new Testament; the old contains two, Moses and the
Prophets; and Moses speaks of these two we formerly mentioned, which only
are the objects of our contemplations; even the Creator, and the creature: the
Creator we know via negationis, eminentiae, and causalitatis; but we know the
creatures, if they be sensible, Cognitione sensitiua; if not, intellectiua: but
properly in this life we know not God, in regard of his Essence, (for how
shall we know him, of whom there can not be framed either Species
intelligibiles or sensibiles, seeing that knowledge is per species?) yet in
part we know him, in regard we have some knowledge of his personal and
essential properties, of his effects and operations.

Which knowledge is but small, because our finite science cannot comprehend
that infinite Essence. For if a shell cannot contain the Sea, which is a
creature; much less can our souls him, that is our Creator. The cause then
why the Owl can not behold the Sun, is in the eyes of the Owl, not in the
Sun: so, that we cannot know God perfectly, is not in God, who is most
perfect, but in us that are imperfect; and quidquid recipitur, recipitur ad
modum recipientis, non ad modum recepti. Then our knowledge is so weak, that
we neither know the first effector, whose Essence is most excellent; neither
his first effect (I mean the first matter) whose existence is most impotent.

Yet a more eminent knowledge of our Maker have we than the Pagans, who only
know him by his works, but we by his words: they by contemplation; we by
inspiration: they by senseless Images, we by his essential Image: they by
painted and carved stones; we by that stone which the builders did refuse,
which became the head of the corner, which was cut out of the mountain without
hands, which brake all their Images to powder, upon which are seven eyes, even
that tried and precious stone, that was laid in Sion: by him (I say) in whom
the Godhead dwells bodily, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, have we the knowledge of our Creator; without whom, our science is
but ignorance, and our meditations, vexations.

This is that internal word, (...), by whom, and by whose spirit was spoken and
written this external word contained in the Scripture, (...) in the which
word, the Creator and the creature is only to be known, not only in all, but
in every part thereof, no less than the soul is all, in all the body, and all
in every part of the same: so is knowledge in this word. Now this external
word differs from Christ the internal word of the Father, as in us the word,
which is in our mind, does differ from that, which is in our mouth and books:
our internal speech and reason, is generated in the soul, and of the soul,
and is coetaneall with the soul: so is Christ begotten in the Father, and of
the Father, and is coeternall with the Father; but the word that is in our
mouth and books, is accidental, and the effect of our internal word; so is
that word, which is in the Scripture, and in the mouth of Christ's servants
accidental, and the effect of Christ the internal word of the Father; who is
both ratio and oration Patris, for (...) is both. Our souls, cognitione
directa, do understand many things that are without the soul, but cognitione
reflexa, she understands her self, and then, idem est intelligens and id
quod intelligitur; so God does know all his creatures, which are but his
effects: but in understanding himself from all eternity, he does beget that
knowledge of himself, and in himself, which is himself, even Christ, his
own wisdom and knowledge.

Yet there is great relation between Christ, Gods internal Word, and the
Scripture, his external word, for as none knows the Father but by the Son,
his word internal; so none knows the Father and the Son, but by the
Scripture, his Word external. As the internal word was, Principium essendi,
the beginning of the creatures; so the external is Principium cognoscendi, the
beginning of knowledge. As nothing did exist before the word internal, so
nothing was spoken before the word external. As by the internal Word the
world was created: so by the external word the world is instructed. As that
word was conceived of the holy Ghost: so this word was inspired by the holy
Ghost. As that word was persecuted by the Jews, and crucified by the Roman
Pilate: so this word has been falsified by the Jews, and wounded by the
Roman Prelate. As it was held unlawful for the people to co^uerse with that
Word: so it was held unlawful, for the Lay people to converse with this word.
As the Jews did more regard their traditions than that word; so the Romans do
more regard their unwritten lies, than this Word. As that Word was buried in a
garden, and kept sure from his Disciples: so was this word buried in an
unknown tongue, and kept close from Christians: and as this word, in despite
of the Jews, was restored to life; so this word, in dispite of the Popes, is
brought forth again to light.

This is that word, the Author, object, subject, end, and ground whereof, is
God, for verity admirable; for antiquity venerable; for sanctity incomparable;
for vtility inestimable: here is light for the blind, life for the dead, food
for the hungry, drink for the thirsty: here is the tree of life, the
fountains of living waters, Manna the food of Angels, pearls and other rich
Jewels; here is a banquet of many dishes; an Apothecaries shop with many
medicines; a sweet garden of many flowers; an Armour-house with many weapons;
here is salt to season, milk to strengthen, wine to comfort, and honey to
sweeten; here the cold may be warmed, the weary refreshed, the naked clothed,
and the filthy cleansed. If thou desire light and perfection, here is Vrim and
Thummim; if the sight of thy fins, here is the golden candlestick; if thou will wash thy hands and feet, here is the brazen lauer; will thou be purged
from thy leprosy? here is the river Jordan; will thou floorish like a Bay
tree? thou must be planted by this river; will thou bring forth much fruit?
thou must be sown with this seed; will thou sacrifice thy sins to God? thou
must kill them with this sword; will thou go to the kingdom of heaven? this is
the only way; here is the fiery pillar and the cloud to conduct thee to Canaan;
and here is the Star that will lead thee to find out the Son of righteousn,
Jesus Christ that bright morning Star, with whom we shall shine in eternity
of glory, as Stars in the firmament.

In this word then must we converse both day and night, not in curious
searching, and prodigious speculation; but in serious weeping, and religious
adoration; neither must our minds be oppressed with terrestrial and infernal
occupations: but they must be filled with celestial and supernall meditations.
Therefore if we will profit here, we must cast off all carnal affection, that
we may receive for our weary souls eternal refection: for if no beast could
touch the mountain, and hear Gods Law: why should beastly minds touch the
Bible, and read Gods Law? And in searching this Word, let us not in it search
for riches and honor to our selves, which is to seek for dirt amongst Jewels,
and poison amongst medicaments, to overthrow ourselves: but let us search for
him, who only is sufficient to content our souls within our bodies, as he was
the only efficient to present our souls into our bodies. Therefore we conclude
with Augustine, Scriptura and creatura ad hoc sunt, vt ipse quaeratur, ipse
diligatur, and qui ipsam creauit, and qui illam inspirauit.

The internal and eternal generation of the word, was not known to the
Gentiles: but was obscured with an obscure fable of Minerua, begotten of
Jupiters brain, by the which also they did signify learned notions conceived
in the mind, and expressed by word or writ.

Then, to be short (right Honorable) here I do offer to your tuition and
fruition my Minerua, not begotten of my brain, but in my brain; neither is
she armed with a helmet, aegis, and a spear to terrify Momus; and therefore
the more desirous she is to shelter her self under the shadow of your Honors
patronage, being persuaded that you are both a Patron and a pattern of
learning, the fruits whereof have not only refreshed the hearts and ears of
great Britain: but with Dedalean wings they have bin transported beyond the
Ocean; so that Rhodanus, Betis, and Rhenus, have seasoned their silver streams
with the delicious taste of your learned fruits. Then what remains, quam vt
ocior Icaro
Visas gementis littora Bosphori,
Sirtesque Getulas canorus,
Ales Hypereborosque campos?


Moreover, your Honor being a Father and Patron of justice, if any wrong be
offered to her by Momus, she may boldly fly to the Chancery for succor:
therefore, I hope, that as your Honor has permitted your glorious titles to
grace her Frontispice; so you will not refuse to beautify her with your
gracious aspect and respect. That God, which has exalted you to so great
dignities in this world, preserve your body and soul, and crown you in the
World to come with blessed Immortality.

Your Honors in all duty, ever to command, ALEXANDER ROSSE.

Ad illustrissimum Franciscum supremum Angliae Cancellarium, Alexandri Rossaei
Epigramma.
PAcis amans, virtutis honos, decor inclyte gentis,
Musarum docti gloria magna chori.
Auro Juno beat te, lauro Phoebus Apollo,
Lingua Mercurius, frontis honor Venus.
Frontis honor moritur, florescit gloria linguae,
Aurea sceptra cadunt, laurea serta manent.
Tu laurum praefers auro, Venerique Suadam,
Plus tibi luce Themis, plus tibi laud Charis.
Propterea aeternum tua fama vigebit in aevum,
Quod peritura fugis, quod vigetura petis.
En tenues nostrae mittunt tibi dona Camoenae,
Non satis ampla tibi, sint licet apta mihi.
Non Arabum messes, non Indica munera mittunt,
Aut Nili varias luxuriantis opes.
Non pictas croco aut radiantes murice vestes,
Aut aurum rutilis quod vehit Hermus aquis.
Sed tibi chartaceum mittunt cum carmine donum.
Et sterilis noster qualia fundit ager.
Accipe propterea placido pia munera vultu,
Sinceri officij pignora certa mei.
Nostram si facilis respexeris inclyte Musam,
Te redeunte die, te pereunte canam.
The Argument.
Q. Who wrote these books of Moses?

A. Himself: proof; he was the first that writ in the world. Secondly, The
holy Ghost testifies the same, Exo. 24.4. Deu. 31.9. and Christ, John 1.45.
and 5.46.

Q. When wrote he this first Book?

A. Before the Israelites went from Egypt: Reas. 1. Because then, feeding his
Father-in-lawes sheep 40. years, in Madian, he was most at leisure to write.
Rea. 2. To comfort the Hebrews, being oppressed with Egyptian servitude; for
in this Book they read the life and death of their Ancestors; their courage;
patience; virtue in affliction; Gods promises to Abraham, that after. 400
years servitude in Egypt, they should be delivered, and enjoy the land of
Canaan.

Q. How came Moses to the knowledge of these things contained in this Book?

A. Either by revelation from God, or by tradition of his Ancestors: for the
knowledge of these things Moses had from Joseph's children; they of Joseph; he
of Jacob; Jacob of Isaac; he of Abraham; and he of Shem; Shem of Noe; he of
Methusalem; and he of Adam, with whom he lived 243. years.

Questions on the first Chapter.
Question.

WAs the world created, or eternal?

A. Created. 1. There can be but one eternal. 2. Almost all the Philosophers
are against the eternity of the world. 3. They that hold it eternal, can bring
no sound reason. 4. The most ancient monuments or records amongst the heathen,
are not so old as the flood of Noah.

Q. Could God make more worlds then one?

A. Yes: for he is almighty, and he made it not of any matter: for that should
have bin exhausted: but more he would not, because he being one, delights in
unity.

Q. Why in Hebrew says Moses, Gods created? joining the noune plural, with
the verb singular?

A. To signify the mystery of the Trinity, one essence in three persons. 2.
It is the property of the Hebrew phrase.

Q. Why in the beginning of this book, speaks Moses only of heaven and earth?

A. Because by the name of heaven, he comprehends all celestial bodies, and by
the name of earth the 4. elements: for water is in the earth, and fire and
air, as witness the springs, exhalations, or earthquakes, and burning
mountains, or hot waters.

Q. Did God create the earth moveable or not?

A. Immovable, Job 38. Psalm. 93. and 104. this is understood, in respect of
the whole earth: yet it is moved in respect of parts, by earthquakes. Job 9.

Q. Of what figure is the earth?

A. Round, Esaias the 40. This figure is most perfect, capable, ancient.

Q. Is the earth under the water or not?

A. Under, because heauiest: yet Exo. 20. Ps. 24. and 136. it seems the water
is under the earth; but it is to be understood, that a great part of the earth
was made higher then the waters, for man's habitation.

Q. Why cannot the whole earth move?

A. Because he is in his natural place, which if it should move, it should
ascend: and this is against the nature of the earth.

Q. What is understood by the spirit that moved upon the waters?

A. A wind, which often in Scripture is called a spirit, or the holy Ghost, or
the power and mighty operation of God: which also is often called by the name
of Spirit: in this sense the Spirit of God is said to carry Elias to heaven;
and to have caught away Philip, Acts 8.

Q. Why is God brought in, speaking in the creation?

A. To show his absolute power, whose word is his work. 2. The second person
in Trinity, the word essential of the Father, by whom the world was created.

Q. Why was the light first created?

A. To beautify all the rest of the creatures. 2. The world was created in 6.
days, which could not be distinguished without the light and darkness.

Q. Was this light spiritual, such as God is said to inhabit, as Christ is
called the light of the world, and the Apostles light, the regenerate light?

A. No: but corporal and sensible, first, the darkness that went before, was
sensible: ergo, light. 2. By this light the 3. days were distinguished before
the creation of the sun: but they were sensible. 3. This Narration of Moses is
historical, not allegorical.

Q. Then what light was this?

A. Not the light of the elemental fire, nor of a light cloud, nor of water,
but of the sun: which was the first day diffused through the whole hemisphere:
the 4. was collected into the globe of the sun we see. The 1. day this light
had but one common property to illuminate: the 4. it had particular virtues to
bring out particular effects. 3. This light, the 4. day began to be cause of
generation and corruption, the measure of time, the cause of increase, and
decrease in the moon.

Q. How did this light before the 4. day, distinguish the day from night?

A. In moving from east to west; and from west to east, by the motion of the
1. sphere.

Q. In what place of heaven was this light created?

A. In the east, for this light returning to this same point of the east, from
which it went, made a natural day.

Q. When was heaven and earth created?

A. Before the first day, in respect of their substance and matter, but in the
six days, in respect of their form and perfection.

Q. What is meant by the firmament that separateth the waters from the waters?

A. The air, and starry heavens, with all the spheres between, which do
separate the watery clouds, from these waters below: but properly the lower
regio^ of the air does separate these waters, which are generated in the
single region, from the waters below, which low region is called by the name of
the whole firmament.

Q. What are these waters above the firmament?

A. Not Angels, as Origin, not waters properly so called, above the stars, as
Basil would have: for their natural place is below, and there is no use of them
above the stars: neither the heaven called the Cristalline, which has
neither the substance, similitude or qualities of water: but by these waters
we understand the watery clouds, above this lower region in the air. These
waters in other places are said to be above the heavens, that is, above the
air, which in Scripture is called heaven.

Q. How made God the dry land to appear?

A. By causing the earth, which before was plain, to swell with mountains. 2.
By the waters which before were spread over the whole earth, to betake
themselves to one place.

Q. Then were there mountains before the flood?

A. Yes: for the flood rose 15. cubits higher then the mountains: the
mountains are called eternal, Psa. 76. Wisdom is ancienter then the
mountains, Pro. 8. They make the earth the comelier, more fruiteful, more
commodious for man and beast: they hold out the seas from ouer-flowing the
earth: out of them springs and rivers proceed: they defend the valleies from
the raging of the winds, that without them, the earth could not be before the
flood.

Q. Is the earth or seas highest?

A. The earth: for all rivers run into the seas naturally, because they flow
downwards. 2. Men are said to go down into the seas in ships, Psalm. 107.
Again, if the seas were higher, ships should sail swifter to the land then
from it. 4. The farther we were in the sea, we should see the land the better.

Ob. But Psa. 104. and 33. it seems that the waters are higher then the earth.

A. In Ps. 104. David speaks of the springs that are generated in the
mountains, or of the watery clouds that cover the hills: in Psa. 33. David
speaks of the miraculous standing of the red sea.

Q. Were briers, thorns, and poysonable herbs created before man's fall?

A. Yes: because these are parts of this world, without which it is not
perfect: and although poysonable herbs are not fit for meat, they are good
for physic.

Q. In what time of the year was the world created?

A. In the Autumn, because the Jews before they departed from Egypt, began
their year in Autumn, and also before the stood: for the flood began in the
second month, that is, about the month of November. 2. The Jews Exodus 23. are
commanded to keep the feasts of Tabernacles in the end of the year, that is,
in Autumn, when fruits are ripe: and also this same feast in the beginning of
the year, Chap. 34. nature also shows, that Autumn is the end of the year,
by the maturity of the fruit, and falling of the leaves from the trees. It is
also the beginning of the year, as the young seeds budding out of the earth do
testify. Lastly, in the creation the fruits of the trees were ripe, and ready
to be eaten.

Q. Were the stars created the fourth day?

A. Yes, in respect of their light, motions and operations: but they were made
the 1. day in respect of their substance, for they are the thicker part of the
spheres.

Q. Why were the stars created after the planets?

A. Because God will show his power, which in producing of plants, does not
depend on the stars. 2. To keep the people from idolatry, whom he knew
would be bent to worship the stars, when they consider their beauty, motion
and operation, in producing herbs: now they are inexcusable, because this
virtue they have in producing herbs, is from God, who in the beginning did
create herbs and plants, without the help of stars.

Q. Did God create the Moon in the Full, or in the Change?

A. In the Full, because God created his works in perfection: now the moon is
perfitest in the Full. 2. She was ordained to illuminate the night, which she
does most perfectly in the Full.

Q. Have the stars their light wholly from the sun?

A. No: because they have different effects, therefore different light. 2.
There is one glory of the sun, and another of the moon, and another of the
stars, 1. Cor. 15.

Q. Why are the sun and moon called great lights?

A. Not in respect of quantity: for some stars are greater: but because they
appear to be greater. 2. In respect of their light, which is greater then the
light of other stars.

Q. Of what figure is the heaven?

A. Round: for this figure is most apt for motion. 2. The Scripture witnesses
the same, Eccle. 1.

Q. How many heavens are there?

A. The Philosophers speak of ten heavens, the Scriptures only of three, to
the which, the former ten may be reduced.

Q. Shall the heavens be abolished in the day of Judgment?

A. Not in respect of their substance which is incorruptible, but in respect of
their motion, influence, and diverse operations in this inferior world: for of
these then there shall be no need, because man shall be translated to a better
life, and other living creatures shall be abolished.

Q. Are the stars innumerable?

A. Not in themselves: for they are natural bodies, but in respect of our
ignorance. 2. These stars of greater note are innumerable: for the
Mathematicians have reduced the 1022. stars, to six degrees of magnitude:
for these of lesser note are not numbered, because not known.

Q. Is the sun hot or cold?

A. Neither: but he begets heat here below, because of his great light, and
not because of his motion.

Q. Have the stars life reasonable, because God is brought in speaking to
them in Scripture?

A. No: if they had, they should be capable of virtue and vice, life or death
eternal. God is brought in, speaking to them in Scriptures, and so he is to
insensible creatures, as the earth, seas, wind, etc. to signify our
stupidity, which are duller to hear, and obey him, then sensles creatures.

Q. Do the stars move of themselves, as it seems by these places, Psa. 19.
Job 9. Ios. 10. or are they moved by the spheres?

A. By their spheres: but the Scripture speaks rather of the stars then
their spheres, because the stars are better known to us, for the spheres we
see not.

Q. Is the heaven and the earth corruptible or not?

A. They are incorruptible in regard of their substance: so witnesses the
Scripture, Eccle. 1. and 3. chap. Psalm. 149. and therefore shall not be
abolished, but renewed to a more perfect state: for the seruent desire of the
creature waits when the sons of God shall be reueald. Those Scriptures that
speak of the destruction of the world, are to be understood of the alteration
of some qualities to better.

Q. Shall the sun and other stars move as they do now, after the day of
Judgment?

A. No: for now they move, to distinguish night and day, Summer and Winter: but
then of these things there shall be no need to man glorified.

Q. How are the sun and moon signs?

A. They are natural signs of fair and foul weather, health and sickness,
sowing and mowing, etc. and supernatural signs of Gods wrath: for there shall
be signs in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, before the last day. Luke 21.

Q Were the stars made for signs to the Astronomers, to foretell things to
come?

A. They neither should, nor can foretell by the stars. 1. They should not,
because prohibited by the word of God, Iere. 10. Deu. 18. Leu. 20. secondly,
condemned by the Canons, decrees and Councels of the Church, and refuted by the
Fathers. 3. They cannot foretell by these Scriptures, Esaias 41.44. and 47. Chap.
Eccle. 8. and 10. Chap. Prou. 27. 1. Cor. 2. Again, the most part of, Apollos
oracles were false, as witnesses Porphirius, lib. de oraculis.

Q. Why is this kind of Astrology condemned?

A. Because it euerts Gods providence, abolisheth the liberty of our will,
makes all the mysteries of Christian Religion to depend on the stars; it is
the cause of all villainy and neglect of Gods works; yea, it makes all the
miracles of the old and new testament, such as the flood of Noah, the fire of
Sodom, the birth, actions, and death of our Lord, to depend on the stars.

Q. Can the Astrologers foretell things to come by the stars?

A. No: because they know not the form, matter, motions, force and effects of
the stars in the things here below, they cannot explain the hid causes, and
properties of herbs, stones, and living creatures: yea they know not what is
doing now in other countries: and if they know not things present, much less
things to come.

Q. But if they had the perfect knowledge of the stars, could they not tell
what is to come?

A. No: because we cannot have perfect knowledge of particular effects, except
we know their particular causes: now the stars are but general causes. 2.
If this doctrine were true, then twins borne under the same star at the
same time, should be of the same nature and disposition: but this is false, as
witnesses the birth of Jacob and Esau. 3. It should follow, that all those
that are killed in the wars at the same time, should be borne at the same
time: which is most false. 4. That all those that live according to the same
laws and religion, should be borne at the same time, under the same star.
5. That all the actions of man's free will, should be known to them: which
cannot be, seeing man can alter and change his will, when he lift. 6. If men
could tell by the stars what is to come, they should be had in great
esteem: but it fares otherwise with them; for the greatest, both Divines and
Philosophers confute them, Kings and Magistrates condemn and punish them. 7.
If they can tell what befalls to man, much more can they foretell what shall
befall herbs and trees, which are more subject to the stars then man: but
this is false: for they cannot foretell how many Pears a Pear tree shall bring
forth.

Q Are not then the stars natural signs of things to come?

A. Natural signs are rather the causes or effects of that they signify, but
the stars are neither. 2. How can the stars which are still the same, be
the signs of so many innumerable accidents as fall out in the world? yet I
except Comets, which are not natural stars, but Meteors generated of
natural causes, yet they are supernatural signs of things to come.

Q. Can the Astrologers foretell nothing true?

A. Yes: oftentimes they foretell things truly, but that is not because of
the stars, but by the instinct of Satan, with whom they have commerce: and
he can foretell many things, partly, by Revelation from God, and partly,
because he is a subtle spirk, and of long experience, and he makes those men
foretell things to come, rather by moving their fantasies, or by dreams, or
by offering to their eyes the shape, or to their ears the words of those
things he will foretell, or by characters. 2. They can foretell things to come,
because God permits them, for the greater destruction of those that curiously
consult Soothsayers: so he suffered Balaam and his Ass to prophecy. 3. Men
that are of subtle spirits, may foretell some things by looking diligently
into the life, manners and dispositions of men: as one may foretell, that a
tyrant oppressing his subjects, shall be killed. 4. They may foretell some things
which may fall out true, because of the credulity of those that consult with
them; for if they foretell good success to any, this ofttimes falls out,
because of the fervent desire and using of all means to attain the same:
which does fall out, not because it was foretold, but because he to whom it
was foretold, used the means to have it.

Q. Is it not lawful then to consult with Astrologers and Soothsayers?

A. No: because in consulting with them, we derogate from Gods glory, and
honor them, in thinking that they can foretell all things; which is proper
only to God. 2. If it be unlawful to converse with an excommunicate person,
much less should we have commerce with Satan, who is excommunicated from
heaven to the place of darkness, and is the pernicious enemy of God and man.

Q. Whether are the beasts or fishes perfectest?

A. The beasts, because they have more perfect senses, beget more perfect blood
in our bodies, then fishes, have more commerce with men, and are docible in
many things; fishes are not.

Q. Why then were they created before the beasts?

A. As nature begins at that which is most imperfect in generation, so God in
the creation did keep this course: for man the little world and pattern of
all the creatures, was not created till the sixth day. 2. God keeps that
course in the 3. last days, which he did in the 3. first: in the first he
created heaven, and in the 4. did replenish it with stars: the 2. he made
the seas, the 5. replenished it with living creatures.

Q. Why speaks Moses of the creation of some particular fishes, and not of
trees and beasts?

A. Because these fishes are greater then any earthly creatures, therefore we
should the more extol Gods glory in considering them.

Q. How do the waters bring forth the fishes?

A. The waters are not the efficient cause of the fishes, but the material,
yet but in part, for fishes are compounded of the four elements,
notwithstanding the waters are the predominant matter of the fishes, not in
respect of their substance, for that is earth: but in respect of quality,
moist and cold. Secondly, The temperature of the fishes are waterish. Thirdly,
Water is the place of habitation, generation and conservation for the fishes.

Q. Why were the birds created the fifth day with the fishes, and not the sixth?

A. Because they were created of the water as the fishes. Secondly, Because of
the great resemblance between the birds, and fishes, both in respect of their
place, water and air: for both these elements are perspicuous, humid,
moveable, and easy to be changed one into the other. Secondly, In respect of
their bodies, for both are light and swift: the sins of the fishes answer to
the birds wings, and their scales to birds feathers; they both want ears,
paps, milk, bladder. Thirdly, Many kinds of birds dwell in the waters, as the
Sea-meawes, Swans, etc. Fourthly, their moving is alike: for as the fishes
swim, so the birds fly. Fifthly, They both use their tail, to guide their
flying and swimming.

Q. Were the birds created of the water?

A. Yes: but not of the thickest of the water, but rather of a watery vapor,
between water and air, therefore the birds converse in the water and air.

Q. But it seems the birds were created of the earth the sixth day, by these
words of the 2. Chapters (And the Lord having formed out of the ground every
beast of the field, and every bird of the air, brought them to Adam.)

A. If God had created them the sixth day of the ground, Moses had not spoken of
them the fifth day. Secondly, in these words alleged, the conjunction (and)
has no reference to the word ground, as though both had been formed of the
ground: but to the word formed: so the meaning is, that not only the beasts
that were formed of the ground: but the birds also which God had created, were
brought to Adam.

Q. How does the earth bring forth living creatures?

A. Not actiuely, but passiuely: for the earth is not the efficient, but the
material cause of earthly creatures.

Q. What difference is there between the beast, cattle, and creeping thing?
verse 25.

A. By behemah, in Hebrew, is understood the great beasts, as Job 40.15. By
chaiah, the wild beasts, in whom there is seen most liveliness: by remesh,
creeping things, such as have no feet at all, as serpents; and they that have
short and little feet, as Ants.

Q. Why did not God bless the earthly creatures, as he did the fishes?

A. Moses did omit this for breuities sake. Secondly, the blessing of the
fishes does belong also to the beasts. Thirdly, man is blessed, and in him the
beasts, as when he was cursed, the earth was also, Genesis 3. And when he was
punished, the beasts were punished also, Genesis 7.

Q. Why was man particularly blessed?

A. Not only for multiplication: but also because of the elect. And thirdly,
because man's copulation is oftentimes sinful, and inordinated

Q. Did God create in the beginning, imperfect creatures, as Bees, Waspes, and
such like?

A. He did not create them actually, as he did the perfect creatures, but he
created them in their causes, as he gave that faculty to the flesh of an
horse, to beget Waspes being dead.

Q. Were Mules now created, or not?

A. They were not First, Because they were found out by Anah, Genes. 36.
Secondly, They are barren: but God created all creatures with his blessing to
be fruitful. etc. Genes. 1. Thirdly; this kind of procreation is against
nature, but God created every thing according to his kind, Genes. 1. Fourthly,
This is against his own law, Leuit 19.

Q. Who was man and the cattle created in the some day?

A. First, Because they both dwell in the earth. Secondly, The earthly
creatures are more familiar with man then others. Thirdly, they are more
profitable to man then other creatures. Fourthly, They are most like to man of
all other creatures.

Q. How does Gods goodness and wisdom appear in the creatures?

A. Many ways. First, In the variety of so many thousand diverse kinds of
creatures. Secondly, In the comely order that is seen amongst them. Thirdly,
in that all things that serve for the perfection of the world, is in the world;
nothing can be added, or impaired. Fourthly, In the sympathy and concord that
is amongst some, and the discord and hatred that is amongst others of the
creatures. Fifthly, In the pulchritude and comeliness that is in every
creature, as may be seen in the body of man. Sixthly, In the admirable
government and administration of the world, in the which there is nothing so
evil (whether it be natural evil, as the defects of nature, or voluntary
evil, such as is the evil of punishment, and of sin.) but al serves for the
glory of God, and the perfection of this Universe.

Q. How is the power of God seen in the world?

A. First, By creating it of nothing. Secondly, By sustaining it with his
power, Heb. 1. Thirdly, By working many things miraculously, above the course
of nature; in which we see, that God does not work of necessity. Fourthly, He
is not tied to the second causes.

Q. Could God have made the world better then it is?

A. Yes, for his power is not limited: therefore he might have made it sooner
then he did, and larger, and fuller of Creatures.

Q. Why was man the last of all the creatures created?

A. Because God would make all things fit and prepared for him. Secondly,
Because he is the Lord and end of all other creatures. Thirdly, Because he is
most perfect: and in order of generation, that which is most perfect, is last.

Q. Wherein did man exceed all other creatures?

A. First, In that he had dominion over them all. Secondly, In that God
prepared a most pleasant place for man to dwell in, to wit, Paradise. Thirdly,
Because of his knowledge and wit, in giving names to the creatures according to
their natures. Fourthly, In respect of his holiness and innocence. Fifthly,
Because he was made immortal. Sixthly, Because God took special care in the
creating of man above the other creatures. Seventhly, Because the whole Trinity
does consult about the making of man, as about a matter of great weight.

Q Why speaks God in the plural number, Let us make man?

A. Here is the mystery of the Trinity: for, the Father does not here speak to
himself, as the Jews, nor to the Angels, as some heretics think; but the
Father speaks to the Son and holy Ghost.

Q. But how do we know that he spoke not here to the Angels?

A. Easily: Because the Angels cannot create neither soul nor body, for they
are but creatures. Secondly, There is no mention in the Word that Angels
created, but that God only created man. Thirdly, Man was created according to
Gods Image, and not according to the Similitude of Angels. Fourthly, God says,
To our Image: but the Image of God and Angels are not the same, but infinitely
diverse.

Q. Was man only created to the Image of God?

A. The Image of God does shine in every creature in part, but in man most
perfectly of all other creatures; for, he has not only existance and life,
but also reason and wisdom.

Q. Wherein does the Image of God consist?

A. The image of God is most in the soul, which has existence: secondly,
life; thirdly, sense; fourthly, reason: again, it is incorruptible; secondly,
immortal; thirdly, it is endued with understanding, will and memory:
fourthly, it has free will; fifthly, it is capable of wisdom, grace and
glory; sixthly, it has power of all other creatures: in all which consists
the Image of God.

Q. Whether is the image of God most to be seen in Angels or men?

A. In Angels, if we respect their nature absolutely: for they are of a more
excellent nature than Man; but if we respect the dignity of Man's nature (the
which is sanctified and assumed by Jesus the essential image of the Father,)
the image of God is most to be seen in Man.

Q. If man be created to the Image of God, may he not be called the Image of
God?

A. No: for Christ is only the Image of God, because he is of that same
nature with the Father, but Man is of another nature; and therefore, he is not
the Image of God, but created to the Image of God.

Q. Is the Image of God seen in the woman as in the man?

A. Yes, equally in both, if we respect their nature; yet the Image of God is
seen in man more perfectly; in respect that man is both the beginning and end
of the woman. Et finis est praestantior finito.

Q. Can the Image of God be abolished by sin?

A. If we take his Image for that righteousness wherein Adam was created,
then we say, that Gods Image was abolished by sin; but if by the Image of
God, we understand man's reasonable soul with the faculties thereof, then his
Image is not utterly abolished, but defaced by sin.

Q. Why did God create man to his Image?

A. First, to manifest his singular love and goodness to Man: secondly, that
all creatures might reverence Man the more, in that he carries the Image of
God, as his badge and arms: thirdly, that Man might love and serve God the
more, for he wears Gods Image as his Liuerie: fourthly, that Man might know
the nature and properties of God more perfectly; for there is no creature
wherein we may contemplate the nature of God more fully, than in our selves:
fifthly, that God might have some of his creatures with whom he might be
familiar, for his delight is with the sons of men, Proverbs 8. sixthly, that
man might be the more capable of eternal felicity, and more assured of Gods
love: seventhly, that Gods power might appear the more, in that he created
such an excellent piece of work, at which all the creatures may admire.

Q. Had Man before his fall, dominion over the creatures?

A. Yes: Genesis 1. Psalm 8. secondly, he gave names to them, in token of his
power over them: thirdly, Euah conferred freely with the Serpent, without
fear: fourthly, it stood with the order of Nature, that some should be
superiors, and some inferiors; and man was fittest to govern, because of his
Reason and Wisdom.

Q. Had man also dominion over the creatures after the Fall?

A. Yes: Genesis 9. secondly, because we kill them, and make them serve for
our diverse uses: thirdly, all kind of creatures were subject to Noah in the
Arc: fourthly, the Lions were familiar with Daniel, but man's dominion over
them before the Fall, was natural, this miraculous: secondly, that should have
continued, this is but a while: thirdly, that did belong to all men, this only
to some.

Q. Should not man have had rule over man in the state of innocence?

A. Yes: because amongst multitudes there can be no order, where there are not
some superiors, and some inferiors: but the subjection of man to man then, had
bin voluntary, pleasant, civil, not servile, and by constraint.

Q. Why then does not God speak of this dominion of man over man, but of man
over beasts?

A. Because the dominion of man over the beasts, is a part of Gods Image, and
did belong to all men, as men; but the dominion of man over man does not agree
to all, as they are man, but as wiser, or better, etc.

Q. Should the wife have been subject to the man in that state of innocence?

A. Yes: but this subjection of the wife should not have been unwilling,
bitter, troublesome, as is it fell out afterward by sin.

Q. Should mankind have been multiplied by ^^^nall copulation, as now?

A. Yes: but without sin, for the soul and her faculties should have been
subject to God, and the body to the soul; therefore God distinguished in man,
male and female: secondly, he says, Increase and multiply: thirdly, it is
said, They shall be both in one flesh: which is only in respect of copulation.

Q. Should man have only eaten of the herbs, and not also flesh in Paradise?

A. Only herbs: first, because Gods permission is only extended to the
herbs: secondly, the herbs were most natural and simple food for that happy
estate, and man was not made for food, but food for man: thirdly, the herbs
were sufficient, because, before the earth was cursed, there was great store of
all so^^^ of herbs; and those very powerful, and good to feed man: but after
the Fall, they lost their force and former goodness.

Q. Should the wild beasts, such as Lions, (...) fed on flesh, before the
Fall, as they do now?

A. No: but on the herbs only: first, because here is no flesh mentioned,
but only herbs: secondly, if it had been permitted to them to eat flesh
before the Flood, then those ravening beasts that were in the Arc, should have
eat flesh: but in the Arc there was no flesh for them: therefore they did feed
on the herbs.

Q. How comes it now, that these kind of beasts do not feed on herbs now, but
on flesh?

A. Because the earth does not yield such comfortable and nourishing herbs as
then: secondly, the temperature of the creature is not so sound now as it was
before the Flood.

Q. How is it understood, that all which God made, was very good?

A. All things were good: first, in respect of their substance which is
unchangeable: secondly, in respect of their perfect estate they were created
in: thirdly, in respect of their accidents or properties: fourthly, because of
their operations, which brought forth perfect effects.

Q. Why did not God see that all things were very good, till man was created?

A. Because man is the end of all the creatures: secondly, in him, as in a
little world, are to be seen all the creatures: thirdly, because Christ, who
is essential goodness, was to sanctify the nature of man, in taking upon him
his flesh.

Questions on the second Chapter.
Q. DId God create the world at the same instant, or in the space of six
days?

A. In the space of six days: first, because Moses narration is historical,
and therefore he speaks of six distinct days: secondly, Moses, Exodus 20.
and 31. urges the Jews to work six days, and rest the seventh, because God
created the world in six days, and rested the seventh: this reason had been
ridiculous, if GOD had made the world in an instant: thirdly, if we understand
Moses in this place allegorically, then we must make this whole history an
allegory: fourthly, if the seventh day had been the first (and in it God had
created the world) then how is it understood that God rested the seventh day?
fifthly, how could so many diverse kinds of creatures be created in the same
instant of time? yea then we must say, that man was created and brought into
Paradise, and was cast asleep, and Euah was formed of his rib the same instant.

Q. How then it that understood, Ecclesiast. 18. He that lives for ever,
created all things together?

A. It is to be understood of that confused mass that God created in the
beginning: out of the which afterward he created the rest of the creatures in
their distinct days.

Q. Why did God spend so much time in making the world?

A. Not because he was weak, and could not make it in less time, but that we
might the more seriously consider the order of the creation, distinction and
replenishing of the world; and in these, the omnipotency, wisdom and
goodness of God.

Q. Did God make the world of necessity, or of his own accord?

A. Of his own free will, because he made it at that time and manner he
thought fittest: secondly, because he, in crea^ing, wrought otherwise than the
course of Nature does; for he made the heavens without light, then made light:
first, imperfect; afterward, perfect: and he made the herbs before the Sun.

Q. Can it be ga^hered from hence, that as God created the world in six days,
and rested the seventh: so likewise the world shall continue six ages, or six
thousand years, and after shall be a perpetual Sabbath?

A. No: for this computation is but a conjecture, or fiction of Elias, not the
Prophet, but the Rabbin, having no ground. Secondly, If this were true, we
should know how long the world should continue, and fully know the time of
Christ's coming: which cannot be: for his coming shall be as a thief in the
night, as Lightning; his coming shall be as the coming of the flood: of this
hour knows no man, not the Angels; the Father has put in his own power the
times and seasons.

Q. Were the Angels created, or are they eternal?

A. Created, Psalm. 149. Revel. 4. and 10. Colos. 1. The Church confesses; the
Fathers confirm; and general Council, establish this point. Secondly, Only
God is eternal Thirdly, They are parts of the world, therefore created.

Q. Are the Angels real substances, or only good and bad motions in the
mind, as though the Sadduces?

A. They are individual substances. First, Their names do show this, for they
are called Messengers, Watchmen, etc. Secondly, Their actions and operations,
which only belong to personal substances: for, they serve God; come to us;
comfort us; gather together the Elect; an Angel wrestled with Iaacob;
conferred with Abraham; they were received by Lot; etc. Angels declared Christ's
Nativity to the shepherds, his Resurrection to the women. Thirdly, Some of
them stood, some fell, therefore substances. Fourthly, We shall be like them:
Ergo, they are not bare motions.

Q. What is meant here by the Host of Heaven and earth?

A. By those of Heaven, is meant the Angels, for they are called the heavenly
host, Luke 2. also the Stars, Esaias 34. Therefore the Stars in their courses
fought against Sisera, Judges 5. By the host of Earth, is meant all the earthly
creatures: therefore God is called the Lord of hosts.

Q. Were the Angels created before this visible world?

A. No: because God created all things in the beginning: ergo, Angels, and not
before, or else this had been no beginning. Secondly, They were created for
the use of man, but man was not before the beginning: ergo, not Angels.

Q. Were they created after the six days?

A. No: for God rested from all his work the seventh day.

Q. Then what day were they created?

A. The first, that they might be the beholders and admirers of Gods power and
wisdom in creating the World. Secondly, They are called Angels of Heaven in
Scripture; not only because they inhabit, but also because they were created
with the heaven the first day. Thirdly, This is manifest in Job 38. where it is
said, that the Sons of God (that is, the Angels) did sing and showte when God
laid the foundations of the earth.

Q. Where were they created?

A. In Heaven: for some of them fell from thence; And Christ saw Satan like
Lightning fall from Heaven: therefore they are called the Host and Angels of
Heaven.

Q. Why does not Moses speak distinctly of the creation of Angels?

A. Because he did accomodate himself to the rude capacity of the Jews;
therefore he does only speak here of the creation of visible creatures.

Q. What is meant by Gods rest on the Sabbath day? was he weary?

A. No: but by his rest, is understood his desisting and ceasing to make other
creatures.

Q. Did God rest from all his works?

A. Yes, of creation, but not of preservation: for yet the Father works with
the Son, John 5.

Q. Did God create no other creatures since the Creation?

A. No: for whatsoever seems to be created since, it was created before,
either in the matter thereof (as Worms, Flies, Bees, and such like) or else,
in that God gave faculty to some creatures of diverse kinds, to produce a third
kind, as Mules of the Horse and Ass; and power he gave to the Stars, to
produce some creatures of putrified matter: yet some creatures he does still
produce, either by generation, as all particular men, and other creatures that
are generated, or by creation, either ordinary, as the souls of men, or
extraordinary, as the Star that appeared to the Wise men, and the Dove that
descended on Christ: so then God rested from creating new kinds of creatures,
but not from producing the individual creatures, of those kinds that were made
in the Beginning.

Q. Why is it said here that God ended his work the seventh day, seeing they
were ended the sixth day?

A. The creatures were perfected the sixth day, in respect of their substance,
qualities, and properties; but in respect of their operation, they were not
perfected till the seventh day: for they did not begin to produce effects
till after the sixth day: and seeing operation is the end of the form, they
were not fully perfected till they began to work.

Q. How do you understand that God sanctified the Sabbath?

A. In that he separated it from the other days, and consecrated it for holy
uses, he would have this to be a Day of rest, and wherein we might wholly
addict our selves for his service.

Q. Did God inioyne Adam to keep this day holy?

A. No: but this was afterward commanded by Moses: for in that happy estate it
had not bin needful to appoint one day for Gods service, seeing every day
should have been a day of rest, and Sabbath for Adam to meditate on Gods
works. Secondly, it was not needful for man then to rest from seruill works,
because in that happiness, man's labor should not have been wearysome.
Thirdly, we read of no commandment that was given to Adam: but only one,
concerning not eating the forbidden fruit. Fourthly, if this law had been
given to Adam, it should have tied all his posterity to the observation
thereof: but we do not read, that any one of the Fathers before Moses, did
observe the Sabbath. Fifthly, if the Sabbath had been kept by the Fathers, Moses
would have mentioned the same, as a strong argument to persuade the Jews to
keep it. Sixthly, the soundest of the Fathers are of this opinion.

Q. What is meant here by the day wherein God made the heaven and the earth?

A. By the day is meant, the whole 6. days: so, often in the Scriptures day
signifies time, as the day of salvation, the day of judgment.

Q. What is meant by a mist that watered the earth?

A. Not a fountain: but a vapor, which is the matter of rain.

Q. What is meant by this, that God made man of the dust of the earth?

A. By man is understood his body: by dust, the matter of his body, to put us
in mind of humility, and of this bodies frailty: by earth, is understood the 4
elements: for man is perfectly composed of all: but earth is only expressed,
because in man's body there is more earth then any other element. Secondly, when
man dies, his body is resolved into earth. Thirdly, he lives upon the earth.
Fourthly, he takes his clothes and food from the earth.

Q. Why was not the body of man rather made of heavenly then earthly substance,
seeing the soul is so excellent?

A. Because the soul of man did require such a body as was capable of senses,
by the which as by instruments she might work in the body: but the celestial
bodies are not capable of senses: for they are not capable of the first
qualities.

Q. Wherein does the body of man exceed the bodies of other creatures?

A. First, in that the body of man is made straight: that he may behold heaven
his country, that his senses might use their function the better, his hands
might be employed in working, not in walking. Secondly, in that his senses are
more perfect then of other creatures, not in the quicker apprehension of the
sensible object: for other creatures have perfecter senses in this regard: but
that man can discern more perfecter by his senses, the differences of objects
then other creatures. Thirdly, in that man's body is more perfectly compounded
of the 4. elements, then other bodies: for the bodies of the creatures are more
earthly, or more waterish.

Q. Of what age created God Adam and Eua?

A. In the prime and flower of their age. First, because God created all things
in their perfect estate. Secondly, because God commanded them to increase and
multiply, which they could not have done, if they had not bin created of a ripe
age.

Q. Whether was the body or the soul of man created first?

A. The body: for God did keep the same course in man's creation, which nature
does now in man's generation: for first, the body is formed in the mothers
womb, and then the soul is infused.

Q. Why is the creation of man's soul called a breathing?

A. First, to show us that the soul was not taken out of the power of the
matter: but was created of nothing, and infused in the body. Secondly, to teach
us Gods power, who did as easily create the soul, as man does breathe.
Thirdly, to show the excellency of man's soul, which seems as it were the
breath of Gods own mouth.

Q. Is the soul of man, of the essence of God?

A. No: if it were, it should be either a part thereof, or the whole: it is
not a part; for Gods essence cannot be divided in parts, neither is it the
whole: for then all men should be but one soul. Secondly, if man's soul were a
part of Gods essence, then a part of Gods essence should be sinful, and
subject to the wrath of God, and pains of hell.

Q. Why did God breathe the soul, rather in the face, then in any other part
of man?

A. Because, in the face are all the senses, which are the organs of the soul.

Q. Why in the nosthrils rather than in any other part of the face?

A. To teach us, that he is the only author of our breathing: secondly, to
show the weakness of our life, which depends from the nosthrils: thirdly,
because the nose is the most commodious instrument of breathing, by which the
soul is kept in the body.

Q. Did God create one soul in man, or three?

A. Only one: first, because one body can have but one essential form:
secondly, the power of growing, feeling and reasoning, are not three souls,
but three faculties of one soul: thirdly, the Scripture never speaks but of
one soul.

Q. Were the souls of men created long before the body, as thought Plato and
Origines?

A. No: for God created all things perfect, but the soul of man, being a part
of man; without, the body could not be perfect* secondly, now in generation the
body is no sooner formed, but God infuseth the soul; the same order did God
keep in man's creation: thirdly, the souls in all that time should have either
done good or evil: but Jacob and Esau did neither good nor evil before they
were borne, Romans 9.11. Ergo.

Q. Seeing the soul does exist, after the corruption, why did she not exist
before the creation of the body?

A. She does exist after the dissolution of the body, of necessity, being
immortal: but it was not fit she should exist, before the creation of the
body, seeing she is the natural form, and essential part of man.

Q. Whether are the souls of men infused in the bodies, or are they derived
and propagated one of another?

A. By creating they are infused, and by infusing created: for man's soul being
incorporall and indivisible, cannot be propagated of any other soul, nor
multiplied, that is plain by Zach. 12.1. and Coloss. 12.7.

Q. Is the soul of man immortal?

A. It is: because a simple essence void of contrarieties, and bodily
accidents: secondly, It is created to Gods Image: and man's soul is not like
God, only in that it is capable of all sciences, and in that it has an
appetite infinite, which cannot be filled, but with God; and that it has a
will free and indifferent to all particular good: but also in that desire which
it has of immortality: thirdly, man has dominion over the creatures, which
consists also in this, that his soul is immortal, theirs are not: fourthly,
Man's soul is not produced of any matter by generation, but is induced in the
body by creation, the souls of all other creatures were procreated of the
Elements, for the earth brings out beasts; and the waters fishes: this is also
manifest by many places of Scripture.

Q. Is the soul of man immortal by nature, or by grace?

A. Internally: that is, as it is a simple immateriall substance, it is
immortal by nature: but externally, as it depends on God, has it being and
subsistence in him, it is immortal by grace.

Q. In what place of the world was Paradise?

A. Not in any other earth separated from ours, by the Ocean; nor higher than
the supreme region of the air, as some Fathers thought: but in Mesopotamia and
the bordering countries to it: for Paradise was planted on the East side of
Eden, which is in Mesopotamia: secondly, that is manifest by the Rivers Tigris
and Euphrates, which spring out of the mountains of Armenia, and flow through
the countries of Mesopotamia, Assyria and Chaldea, and run into the Persian
gulf, and these are the Rivers of Paradise.

Q. Should man have remained in Paradise only, if he had not sinned?

A. No: for Paradise was not so large as to contain all mankind, being
comprehended within the limits of these countries aforesaid: secondly, man had
power over the whole earth; and all the herbs of the ground were given to him
for food; and therefore he was to replenish the whole earth: thirdly, how
should the earth be trimmed, manured and made fruitful, if man had dwelt in
Paradise?

Q. Then to what end did God make Paradise, seeing he knew that man should
presently fall, and be cast out of it?

A. He made it, that Adam, so long as he obeyed God, might enjoy it: secondly,
that it might be a figure and type of the heavenly Paradise, and joys of the
life to come: thirdly, to put him in mind, after his fall, what great blessings
he had lost, by losing Paradise.

Q. Is Paradise yet extant, or not?

A. It is not extant: for Paradise was in these Countries of Mesopotamia,
Assyria, etc. through the which Tigris and Euphrates (the Rivers of Paradise)
did flow: but those countries are still populous, and no sign now of
Paradise: secondly, the Flood, Genesis 7. was fifteen cubits higher then the
mountains, therefore it was also defaced with the flood.

Q. Why was the tree of life called so?

A. Because it was the sacrament or sign of life, both natural in Paradise,
and spiritual in heaven: or as some think, because it had power, being eaten,
to preserve the life of man a long time, but not for ever: for man was not to
live still a natural life. Again, the body of man was corruptible, because it
was made of matter the subject of corruption, of contrary elements and parts;
as also because the natural heat of the body, by degrees is extenuated, and
the radical humor exhausted: and in these respects, although this tree had
that virtue to preserve the life of the body a long time, yet not for ever.

Q. Why did God forbid man to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil?

A. Not because it was evil in it self, or hurtful to man: but because by
this command, God would try man's obedience.

Q. Why was the tree, called the tree of knowledge of good and evil?

A. Not because it had power either to beget knowledge in Adam, or to augment
his knowledge, as the Hebrews and Josephus do think: for Adam was created
with perfect knowledge: neither can corporal fruits produce spiritual effects
in the soul: but it was so named from the event: for man knew now what was
good and evil by experience, having transgressed in eating of this tree.
Secondly, it was so named, because of Satan's false promise, who intised them to
eat of it, promising they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil.

Q. What rivers were those, that Moses calls here Phison, and Gehon?

A. They were parts of Tigris, and Euphrates, which river is sometimes named
one, because they flow together, and are joined in one below Babylon: sometimes
two, in respect of the place, from whence they spring and where they end.
Sometimes four, in respect of their four heads, whereof, two spring out of
the mountains, and other two empty themselves in the Persian sea.

Q. Then Phison is not Ganges of India, nor Gehon, Nilus of Egypt?

A. No: for Ganges springs out of Cancasus of India, Nilus out of the
mountain of inferior Mauritania: but Phison and Geho^, out of Armenia: Nilus
exonerateth her self in the Mediterranean sea: but Phison and Gehon into the
Persian Gulf.

Q. What country is this Hauilah?

A. Not a country in India, but bordering upon Palestine, and Assyria, as may
be gathered out of Gene. Chap. 25.18.

Q. What is Bdellium?

A. It is a black tree, the bigness of an Olive tree, from the which there
runs a kind of sweet gum. Plinius. lib. 12. Chapt. 9.

Q. How is that understood, that God did put Adam into the garden?

A. Either by the inward persuasion of God he was led thither, as Christ was
led to the wilderness, Math. 4. or he was caught by the Spirit, as Henoch,
Habbacuc, and Philip, or else by an Angel, in the shape of man, he was led to
Paradise.

Q. Why did not God create Adam in Paradise?

A. To let him know that Paradise did not belong to him by nature, but by
grace. Secondly, to teach him to be the more circumspect in obeying God,
considering he might be as well put out of it, as he was brought in, if he
brake Gods Law. Thirdly, that he should have no cause to accuse God of
cruelty, in putting him out of that place, which by nature was due to him;
therefore he returns to the place from whence he came.

Q. Then why was Euah created in Paradise?

A. Because Adam, out of whose side she was taken, was now in Paradise.
Secondly, she is not now properly created, but formed and framed out of Adams
rib: for when Adam was formed, she was created potentia in him, in respect the
body of Adam was the matter of her body.

Q. Should man have wrought in Paradise?

A. Yes: but not for need, and with trouble as now: but with pleasure, to keep
himself from idleness. Secondly, thereby to stir him up the more to
contemplate heavenly things. And thirdly, to try the diverse natures of grounds,
and of those things that grow on the ground.

Q. Does these words, You shall eat of every tree of the garden, contain a
precept or a permission?

A. Not a precept, but a permission: for if God did command Adam to eat of
every tree, he should have been tied to it. Secondly, man has no need to be
commanded to eat, when he is hungry: for he can do that by nature. Thirdly,
he knew that all the trees were created to that use, therefore he needs no
commandment to eat.

Q. Was this commandment of not eating the tree of Knowledge of good and
evil, enjoined to Eua also?

Q. Yes: for so she confessed to the Serpent. Secondly, If she had not been
commanded to abstain from it, she should not have sinned in eating of it.

Q. How could this precept belong to Eua, seeing she was not yet created?

A. It was first given to Adam, and then by Adam it was delivered to Eua.

Q. Why did God forbid Adam to eat of this tree?

A. First, To let him know, that he was but a creature and servant, and
therefore had a Lord whom he must serve and obey. Secondly, To let him see, that
he had free will and power both to choose and refuse any thing he pleased.
Thirdly, To exercise him in obedience.

Q. But seeing God knew that Adam would violate this precept, and bring
himself and his posterity to perpetual misery, why would God inioyne it to
him.

A. To make him inexcusable: for he made him upright, and gave him grace to
obey, if he would: dedit Adamo posse, si vellet; non, et velle, et posse.
Secondly, Although God knew that man would sin, yet he did permit him,
because he was to convert that sin of Adam to his greater good, in sending
his Son into the world. Thirdly, he suffered him to fall, that his mercy and
justice might appear the more.

Q. How is it understood, that whatsoever day Adam should eat of the Forbidden
tree, he should die?

A. He did not dye actually, as soon as he had eaten the forbidden fruit, but
now he was subject to death, and the necessity of dying is laid upon him.
Secondly, he may be said to dye actually that day, because then the
infirmities of body and soul, which are the fore-ru^ners and causes of death
actual, did seize upon him: and so mortuus est morte inchoata, sed non completa.

Q. Why did not God expressly threaten Adam with death eternal?

A. Because God in the old Testament speaks but sparingly of death eternal
and under shadows. Secondly, death corporal is better known to man (not
only by faith and reason, but also by experience) then death eternal, which
only is known by faith. Thirdly, he would speak of such a death, as did not
only belong unto him, but to all his posterity, although they did repent: and
this is the death of the body, whereof all are partakers.

Q. Why did God threaten Adam with death?

A. Because death is the greatest and most fearful misery that can happen to
man. Secondly, The name of death comprehends all the miseries and afflictions
that do befall man in this life, because they are preparations to death: Nam
vt via ad generationem est generatio, sic via ad interitum est mors.

Q. Then what death is meant here?

A. Both of body and soul, temporal and eternal.

Q. How can death corporal be a punishment for sin, seeing it proceeds of
natural causes, as of contrary qualities?

A. It is not the punishment of sin, as it proceeds of natural causes, but
in respect that God ordained Adam to live immortally, if he had not sinned: now
having sinned, death follows as the stipend of sin.

Q. Why was it not good that man should be alone?

A. Because man without the woman could not procreate children, and so
mankind could not be multiplied. Secondly, Christ could not have come in the
flesh. Thirdly, The Elect and Church of God could not have increased, if Adam
had been alone.

Q. How were the creatures brought to Adam?

A. Either by the help of Angels, or by that natural instinct which the
Greeks call (...), by the which every creature perceives what is good and bad
for them.

Q. Why did God bring the creatures to Adam?

A. First, To let him see how much he did excel them, and how much the more he
should be thankful. Secondly, Because he was the Lord of the beasts, God
would have him to see his servants. Thirdly, that he might name them. Fourthly,
That posterity might know, what excellent knowledge Adam had, in giving names
to the creatures according to their kinds.

Q. Why were not the fishes brought to Adam?

A. Because they do not so much resemble man as the beasts: secondly, because
they could not be such a help to man as the beasts: thirdly, because they could
not live out of the water.

Q. Had Adam the knowledge of all things, as seen as he was created?

A. Yes, because he was created perfect, as well in regard of the gifts of his
mind, as of his body: secondly, he was to be the Father, Teacher, and
Governor of mankind, which he could not have been without excellent
knowledge: thirdly, knowledge was a part of Adams happiness, and he could not
have been perfectly happy, if he had been at any time ignorant: fourthly, if
God prepared food and all things needful for his body; then much more, science
and understanding, which is the food of the soul.

Q. Should Adams Posterity, in the state of innocence, have knowledge
ingrafted in them without labor?

A. No: for it is natural to man to attain to knowledge by his senses and
experience, therefore the soul has received a body with senses, which the
soul may use as organs, to beget knowledge; yet man in that happy estate
should have attained to knowledge sooner, and with greater ease than now,
because the wit was most excellent, the senses more perfect, the life longer,
the body healthier and stronger, and there should have been no impediment to
learning as now.

Q. Had Adam the knowledge of supernatural things?

A. Yes, or else his knowledge had not bin perfect: secondly, without this
knowledge he could not have known God, nor the Angels, nor the end of his own
creation.

Q. Had Adam more wisdom than any man ever since?

A. Yes: except Christ. And Adams wisdom did excel ours: first, in that he
knew all natural things, we but some: secondly, his knowledge did proceed of
the causes of natural things, but ours from the effects: thirdly, his
knowledge could not be lost, but ours is often; partly through the infirmity
and corruption of our natural senses, partly by idleness and ceasing to
study; and partly by the contrary habit of ignorance and false opinion.

Q. Had Adam the knowledge of the heavens, and their operations, as he had of
earthly creatures?

A. Yes, because his mind was perfect; and knowledge is the perfection of the
mind: secondly, the power, wisdom and providence of God is seen in the
heavenly bodies as in the earthly: thirdly, Adam could not have had the perfect
knowledge of earthly things, if he had not had the knowledge of heavenly: for
the knowledge of the earthly things, depends from the knowledge of the heavenly.

Q. What were the effects of that original righteousness, in the which Adam
was created?

A. The effects thereof are many, especially these four: first, the holiness
of his will and reason, which was wholly subject to God: secondly, the
uprightness of the inferior part, that is, of the flesh and senses, which
were perfectly obedient to the superior part of the soul: thirdly, perfect
inclination to do good, and eschew evil: fourthly, a perpetual joy of the
mind, and peace of conscience, arising from this holiness.

Q. Has Christ brought us more happiness by his Incarnation, than Adam lost
by his transgression?

A. Yes: for although sin did abound, yet grace did more abound, as the
Apostle disputes, Romans 5. Therefore, Foelix fuit Ad^ culpa cuius delenda
causa, tantum habemus R^dempt ^re^^^. says Gregorius.

Q. Was Adam mortal or immortal befo^ his Fall?

A. He was immortal, not simply, but conditionally, if he did obey God, if
not, then he should die.

Q. How was he immortal?

A. Not as God, who is altogether immortal, both internally and externally,
because in him there is no mutability: nor as the Angels, who are immortal,
because they are not compounded of a matter, which is the subject of
corruption: nor as the heavens, which though they have a material substance,
yet this is not the subject of contradiction and contrary qualities, as the
sublunary and elementall bodies are: but Hdam was immortal by grace, and the
power of God, who would have preserved him supernaturally from corruption,
although naturally he was subject to corruption.

Q. Then this gift of immortality which Adam should have inioyed, was not
naturally due to him?

A. No: for if it had bin natural, it should not have bin taken from Adam: but
sin did neither abolish nor diminish man's natural gifts. Secondly, that
which is against nature, cannot be due to nature: but for the body to be
immortal, is against the nature of man's body, seeing it is compounded of
contrary qualities.

Q. Why would God form Eua of Adam sleeping?

A. That Adam should not feel any pain in losing his rib. Secondly, to
signify a great mystery: for as Eua was formed out of the side of Adam
sleeping: so the Church was reformed by water and blood, out of the body of
Christ dying.

Q. Why was Eua made rather of the side, then of any other part of the body?

A. Because the side is the middle of the body* to signify that the woman must
be of equal dignity with the man, therefore she was not made of the head, nor
of the foot, for she must neither be superior, nor inferior to him.

Q. Of what side was she taken out?

A. It is probable, that she was taken out of the left side, for the heart
inclines to that side: so man and women should embrace each other with hearty
love. And as the left side is weakest, so is the woman the weaker vessel: also
the males are conceived in the right side, the females in the left; and as the
sides are defended by the arms, so must the woman by the husband.

Q. Why was Eua made of the man, and not of the earth, as Adam was?

A. Because Adam should love his wife the more, not only because she is of that
same nature with him, that she is joined with him by carnal copulation, that
she does bring him forth children: but also because she is a part of his own
substance. Secondly, Eua was made of Adam, to show that Adam is the beginning
of the woman, and of all mankind. Thirdly, that we might learn from hence,
that mystical conjunction betwixt Christ and his Church.

Q. What is meant by the rib?

A. Not the bare bone: but bone with the flesh thereof, as Adam testifies:
Thou art bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh.

Q. How did God of one rib make a whole woman?

A. Either by rarefaction, or multiplication of the same rib, or by some
addition of some new matter: as Christ did feed 5. thousand men with 5. loaves:
for God can of nothing, or of every thing make any thing.

Q. Was this rib, whereof Eua was created, one of Adams natural ribs, or was
it a superfluous rib?

A. It was one of Adams natural ribs: for how else could he have said of Eua,
Thou art bone of my bone? or how could Eua be said, to be formed of Adam?
Neither was Adam imperfect, although he wanted his rib: for God did fill up
that place with flesh.

Q. If Adam lost one of his ribs, how comes it, that the posterity of Adam have
all their 24. ribs?

A. Although Abraham was circumcised: yet he begot his children uncircumcised;
and a retained man does beget a whole man: for nature, if she be not hindered,
retains her own force and vigor, and brings forth the perfectest effects she
can.

Q. How came it, that Adam, in losing his rib, did not feel pain?

A. Either in regard of his deepesleepe, for those that are in a lethargy, do
feel neither stripes nor wounds; or else, because God did suspend, and hinder
the act of feeling, which is in the nerves.

Q. Why does not Moses speak as well of the creation of Eua's soul, as of her
body?

A. Because her body was otherwise created, then the body of Adam: but the
manner of the creation of her soul, is all one with that of Adams, therefore
there was no need of repetition.

Q. Why was Eua brought to Adam?

A. To signify, that she was Adams companion. Secondly, a help to him to
beget children. Thirdly, that the man is not for the woman, but the woman for
the man. Fourthly, this bringing signifies, that they are now contracted and
married.

Q. Had Eua a reasonable soul as Adam bad?

A. Yes: because she was made for a help to man, which she could not have bin
without a reasonable soul: secondly, both receive a Law, upon both was
inflicted punishment for the breach thereof; both their bodies are alike:
redemption is promised too both; and both do expect glory.

Q. Why did not God create Eua as soon as Adam?

A. That Adam living a private life a while, might the better perceive the
comforts of the married life. Secondly, that he might love God the more, who
provided such a comfort to him, when he was alone.

Q. Is man and woman of the same kind?

A. Yes: for male and female make no essential difference. Secondly, if they
were not of the same kind, how could they procreate children? Thirdly, they
both have the same definition and essential properties. Fourthly, we read
that maids have become boys, which could not be, if they were of diverse kinds,
Plinius lib 7. Cap. 4. Gellius. lib. 9. Cap. 4. etc.

Q. How could Adam and Eua be married, seeing they were so near a kin?

A. The neerenesse of kin, which forbids matrimony, is that which arises of
carnal copulation, and Eua was not begotten, but created of Adam: therefore
she was not his daughter, but his wife.

Q. Why was there but one woman created?

A. Because that one woman is sufficient to be a help to one man. Secondly,
to teach posterity, that God does hate Polygamy. Thirdly, that the love of man
might be the greater to his wife.

Q. How is man and woman one flesh?

A. Because they are joined together to live one common life. Secondly, in
respect of their carnal copulation. Thirdly, in respect of procreation of one
flesh: for the child is the flesh and substance of the father and mother, and
both their flesh is united in their children. Fourthly, because of the right
and power the husband has over the body of his wife, and the wife over her
husband. 1. Cor. 7.

Q. Why was not Adam and Eua ashamed of their nakedness?

A. Because that externally, neither heat not cold, nor any thing else could
hurt their body, internally there was no inordinat affection in the soul: but
perfectly the inferior part of the soul did obey the superior. And thirdly,
because there was nothing to be seen in their bodies, but that which was
comely and decent; and therefore, Nihil putabant volandum, quia nihil senserant
refr^^andum, Aug. li. 11. de Genesis Cap. 1.

Questions on the third Chapter.
Q. What is meant by the Serpent?

A. Not the devil: for so these words should be metaphorically understood: but
this is a history, and no allegory, nor the image of a Serpent, for it was not
a picture, but a real Serpent that was cursed, neither was it a natural
Serpent that did speak: for speech and reasoning do naturally belong to men,
not to beasts: for they neither have reasonable souls, nor the instruments of
speech: but it was the devil that spoke in the Serpent, using the same as his
instrument to deceive. So then, there was both a serpent, which is proved both
by the speech of Moses, and the punishment inflicted on the Serpent; and
besides, the devil, which is known both by his speech and reasoning with Eua,
as also by the testimony of Christ, calling the devil a manslayer from the
beginning, John 8.

Why was not Eua afraid to confer with the Serpent?

A. Because the serpent (as all other creatures) was subject and obedient to
man, neither durst they, nor could they afray him or hurt him, neither was
there any place for fear in that happy estate.

Q. Why did Satan use rather the Serpent, then any other creature?

A. First, because God did not suffer him to take any other creature. Secondly,
because the Serpent, of al other creatures, is most subtle, deceitful, prone
to hurt, and deceive man: the Serpent is prudent to save it self: therefore it
is said, Be wise as Serpents, Math. 10. and crafty to deceive others, as Paul
says, The Serpent by his craftines deceived Eua, 2. Cor. 11. Chap.

Q. Seeing it was the devil in the serpent, that deceived Eua, why does not
Moses signify so much?

A. Because Moses writes a history, and not a commentary, therefore all that
is spoken here, he does attribute to the Serpent, because Eua saw the Serpent,
and conferred with the Serpent: but Satan she saw not.

Q. What do these words mean, Your eyes shall be opened?

A. This is meant of a further degree of knowledge, which Eua had not as yet:
for the eyes of the body were opened already, and good and evil is not the
object of bodily eyes, but of the mind, which is the eye of the soul.

Q. What is that, You shall be as Gods?

A. By Gods, may be understood Angels, which are called Gods in Scripture: but
here is rather meant the persons of the Trinity: as verse. 22. Behold, Adam is
become as one of us.

Q. Did not Eua see that this tree was good till now?

A. Yes: she saw before but simply, but now she sees it with an ardent desire
to eat of it.

Q. Why did God suffer Eua to be tempted?

A. That there might be an occasion for the manifestation both of Gods justice
in punishing the wicked, and of his mercy in saving the repentant. Secondly, To
show us, that although she had all happiness in that estate, yet she should
not have been free of temptations. Thirdly, That we might learn to arm our
selves against Satan: for if he durst tempt in the estate of innocence, and in
Paradise, what will he not do to us now, being driven out of Paradise?

Q. What was the first sin of Eua?

A. Incredulity, in not believing Gods threatening. Secondly, Pride, desiring to
be like God. Thirdly, A lie, saying, that God did forbid to touch the tree.
Fourthly, Gluttony, in desiring the fruit which was forbidden. Fifthly,
Scandal, in drawing Adam to the same sin. Sixthly, A foolish excusing of her
sin to God.

Q. Why was the Devil so earnest to te^^^ Eua?

A. Because he hated God, and would not have man to glorify, but to anger him.
Secondly, Because of his pride and envy: for he could not abide that man
should be in such happiness, himself being in misery.

Q. Why did Adam eat of this fruit?

A. Partly, through the instigation of his wife; partly, through curiosity,
desiring to try what kind of sin this should be, which God did prohibit: so
N^^^^ in vetit^^^ semper, cupi^^^sque nega^a.

Q. Was Adam deceived also, as the ^o^^^ was?

A. No: Adam was not seduced, but the woman, 1. Tim. 2. For Eua did not deceive
Adam, because s^^e thought all was true that Satan spoke: but Satan deceived
Eua, because he made her believe that, which he knew himself was false.
Secondly, Eua confessed that she was deceived, but Adam does not say that he
was deceived, but, The woman gave to me, and I did ^a^e.

Q. Was the sin of Adam and Eua the greatest sin that ever was committed?

A. If we do consider one sin with another, then we say, that Adams sin
was not the greatest, for the sin against the holy Ghost is greater; but if we
respect the circumstances of Adams sin; to wit, the place, Paradise, where no
occasion of sin was; the time when he sinned, immediately after his creation,
at the first encounter yielding to his enemy; the excellency of the person that
sinned, Adam, being created to Gods own Image: if we regard also that
infinite hurt and misery that has feign upon mankind, by that sin of Adam;
we must confess, that it is the greatest sin that ever man committed.

Q. Whether was the sin of Adam or Eua greatest?

A. If we consider both their persons, then Adam did sin more grievously,
because he was wiser and stronger than Eua, and he was the head of the woman:
for this cause says the Apostle, that by one man sin entered into the world,
Romans 5. yet in two respects, Eua's sin was greater than Adams: first, in that
she did believe the Serpent more than God; which Adam would not have done:
secondly, in that she did entice Adam to the same sin.

Q. How were their eyes opened after the eating of this fruit?

A. They were not blind before, nor had they now more liberty of will than
they had, or greater knowledge: but now they know evil by experience, which
before they knew by science; and their eyes are said to be opened, because they
perceive, their nakedness is ignominious, and their affections inordinate,
which before were decent and holy.

Q. Why did they cover their members, after the eating of the forbidden fruit?

A. Because they were ashamed of their nakedness: secondly, by this they
thought to hide their sin, but in vain: for none can hide sin but God;
therefore blessed is he whose sin is co^ered, Psalm. 32.

Q. Why did they cover their privy members?

A. Because their inordinate lust began most to appear here: secondly,
these are the instruments of generation, which then became sinful; therefore
all people are ashamed to see those parts, because sin comes by generation.
Hence circumcision (the sign of regeneraon) was on this part of the body,
Genesis 17.

Q. Why did they take the leaves of the Fig tree?

A. Because the leaves of the Fig tree are broadest, or else, because their
guilty consciences accusing them; and being in fear, they took of the leaves
of this tree which was nearest.

Q. What is meant here by the noise of God?

A. This sometimes signifies thunder, Exodus 9. sometimes any sound, Ezec. 12.
sometimes Gods distinct voice like thunder, John 12. here it signifies some
fearful noise and sound, by which God would signify, that now he was coming
to encounter with Adam.

Q. What signifies the wind of the day?

A. This is a description of the evening: for at the going down of the Sun
in those places, that are near the Mediterranean Sea, commonly the wind does
blow from the Sea; and as God came to judge Adam in the evening, so will he
come to judge all mankind in the evening of the world, with the sound of the
Trumpet.

Q. How did God speak to Adam here?

A. God speaks in Scripture sometime internally by his Spirit, sometimes
externally, either by Angels, or by men. Here then it is like, that Christ
spoke in the form of man; for in this form he did oftentimes appear to the
Fathers of old; and in the fullness of time, this word was made flesh, and
dwelt with us.

Q. Why did not God accuse Satan, as he did the man and the woman?

A. Because Satan was already condemned for his pride, but the other two were
to receive the sentence of condemnation; therefore he would not condemn them,
till he had convicted them.

Q. Whether did God course the Devil or the Serpent?

A. He cursed both: the Devil mystically, and the Serpent literally; the devil
as the principal agent, and the Serpent as his instrument: but this curse is
pronounced of the Serpent only; because it was the Serpent that Eua did see
and speak to, and the Devil did lurk within the Serpent.

Q. How could the creeping on the belly, and the eating of the dust, be a
punishment and a curse, seeing this was natural to the Serpent before man's
fall?

A. The Serpents creeping before was pleasant, now it is painful; then it was
comely, now it is base, execrable and contemptible.

Q. Why did God curse the Serpent?

A. To augment Satan's grief the more, who used him for his organ in this
wicked tentation: secondly, because the Serpent being Satan's instrument, was
the occasion of man's fall: as the beast with whom any man did lie, was to be
stoned, Leuit. 20. thirdly, because by this God will show, how much he abhors
sin, in punishing for man's wickedness dumb and senseless creatures; therefore
the earth was cursed for Adams sin, the beasts and fowls were drowned for
the sin of the first world, the Cities that entice the Israelites to
Idolatry, must be burnt; yea the cattle and every thing in those Cities,
Deuteronomy. 13. yea the dumb creatures for man's sin, were daily offered up in
sacrifice.

Q. What is meant by the VVomans Seed, and the Serpents seed?

A. By the Woman's seed, is meant especially Christ, the Woman's Seed, according
to the flesh; and with him, all the faithful: by the Serpents seed, are meant
both the ravenous beasts, which naturally hate mankind, as also wicked men,
which are called Serpents in Scripture, and generation of vipers.

Q. What is meant here by the Head and the Heel?

A. By the Head of the Serpent, is meant the power of the Devil, sin and
death; by which he wounds us: by the Heel, is meant the humanity of Christ
and his members, which Satan did hurt by the death of the Cross, and wounds
yet by persecuting his members.

Q. How can the multiplication of the (...) conceptions be a punishment for
sin?

A. The conceptions of the woman are a punishment, because sometimes their
conceptions are imperfect and deformed: secondly, many children, being
conceived, do perish before they come to maturity: thirdly, many children are
wicked and rebellious, not regarding the womb that bare them with anguish, nor
the pappes which suckled them with danger. These are great punishments
inflicted on women for the sin of Eua: fourthly, her conceptions are a
punishment; for many infirmities do accompany a woman that is with child, as
swimming: in the head, tooth-aches, perturbations in the mind, vitiosities in
the stomach; as to refuse good and wholesome meats, to desire to eat those
things which Nature (being sound) abhors.

Q. What is the reason that women do bring forth their children in sorrow?

A. Gods decree in punishing the sin of Eua: secondly, the narrow passage of
the belly, with a dilatation and stretching out of the internal parts thereof,
causes most sharp and sensible pains: hence the Scripture compares exquisit
sorrow and pain, with the sorrows of the childbirth, Psalm. 48. Mica. 4. Reu.
12. but this pain should not have been in the state of innocence.

Q. Whereon was the ground cursed for Adams sake?

A. In that it did not bring forth fruit of it own accord, as it should have
done, if Adam had not sinned, or at least, with little labor. Secondly, In
that it brought forth noxious, and fruitless, and poysonable herbs after the
Fall.

Q. Why did Adam call his wife Eua, the mother of living?

A. Because by this name he would testify his faith, in believing that
Christ, the Seed of the woman, should bring that life again to man which be
had lost by his sin.

Q. Did God make coats of skins for Adam and his wife?

A. Yes: but whether God killed some beast, or whether he created the skins
of nothing, or of some matter, it is uncertain; howsoever, by those skins he
did put Adam in mind of his mortality, and that he had need of clothing, both
for his body, which now was to be subject to infirmities, as also for his
soul, which now was defiled with sin, and therefore must be clothed with
the righteousness of Christ; which garment he did put on by believing that
Christ, the Lamb of God, should be killed to clothe his naked soul; (...)
this beast was killed to clothe his naked body: these skins also do signify
our mortification: for, as these beasts were killed, so we must kill our
sins; for this cause, the skins of the Sacrifices were given to the
Priests, Leuit. 7. Eli^^ and John Baptist, with many other Saints, did wear
skins. Hebr. 11.

Q. Why did God does them with skins?

A. First; to show them that it w^^ lawful for them to kill beasts, although
not to eat, yet to clothe their bodies. Secondly, To teach ^s sobriety, for
those were skins; not Silk, Purple, or cloth of Gold, which are not worth so
much for necessity, as for pride. Thirdly, that this first Adam might in same
sort, be a type of the second Adam, Jesus, for this was clothed with the
skins of dead beasts: so Christ with our dead sins; for he became sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: and so our Jacob took
our flesh and skin, and in it received the blessing for us.

Q. Was it needful that Adam should be clothed now after his Fall?

A. Yes. First, to hide his nakedness. Secondly, to defend his body from the
injuries of the air. Thirdly, To assure him, that although he was a sinner,
yet God would not quite forget him, and cast him away.

Q. Why did God say, that Ada^ was like to him?

A. By these words God would show how worthy Adam was to be scorned, who thought
to be like to any of the three persons in the Trinity, for eating of the
forbidden fruit: so this word (us) does not signify Angels, but the three
persons of the Trinity.

Q. Why did God drive Adam out of the garden?

A. To let him see how foolishly he had done, in giving more credit to his
wife then to him. Secondly, to keep the tree of Life from him, lest he should
abuse it, by thinking to have life by it, seeing he had now violated. Gods Law;
for although this tree was a sign of life before his Fall, now it is none.
Thirdly, that by driving him from this tree of Life, he might seek for a better
life then this tree could yield, even that heavenly life, which is hid with
Christ in God.

Q. When was Adam cast out of Paradise?

A. That same day he sinned: for he being now a sinner, and rebellious against
God, was not fit to stay any longer in that holy place: but what day of the
week he was cast out, is uncertain; yet it is thought the eighth day after
his creation, he was cast out, in the evening of that day: for Satan did not
suffer him to stay long there vntempted: yet I do not hold that he was cast out
that same day he was created: for so many things as fell out between his
creation and casting out of Paradise, could not be done all in such a short
space as a piece of a day; for the beasts were created the sixth day, before
man was. Secondly, in such a short time Adam could not have perceived the
pleasures and happiness of that place; therefore he was not cast out that same
day he was created.

Q. Why would God have Adam to till the ground?

A. Because now the ground was cursed, and would not yield fruit without hard
labor. Secondly, by this seruill work, he^ would put him in remembrance of
his sin, which brought him to this misery: yet afterward God mitigated his
hard labor, in freeing every seventh year from his tillage, to put them in
mind of that ease they lost by sin, which was restored again spiritually by
Christ.

Q. What is meant here by the Cherubins and the fiery Sword?

A. Not fearful visions, nor the torrid Zone, nor a fire compassing Paradise
like a wall, neither the fire of Purgatory, as Theodoretus, Aquinas, Lyranus,
and Ambrosius do imagine: but by the Cherubins we understand the Angels, which
did appear oftentimes with wings, as Daniel 1.9. and the figures of these were
wrought in the tabernacle, Exo. 25. By the fiery sword, we understand most
sharp and two-edged swords, which the Angels in the form of men did shake, by
the which shaking and swift motion the swords did seem to Adam, to glister like
fire, for more terror, left he should attempt re-entrance there. The Angels
also have appeared at other times, with swords in their hands, as we read,
Numbers 22. of the Angel that met Balaam; and of that Angel that David did
observe with a sword in his hand, 1. Chro. 21.16.

Q. Why are these Angels called Cherubins?

A. Because they did appear with wings: in the Tabernacle and the Temple they
were wrought with two wings: they appeared to Esaias, with 6. wings, who are
called in the 6. of Esaias, Seraphins, because they are inflamed with the love of
God: they appear with wings, to signify there swiftness and diligence in
executing Gods commandments.

Questions on the fourth Chapter.
Q. What is the subject of this Chapter?

A. Concerning the propagation of mankind, especially of Caine and Abel, in
whose persons were to be seen the wicked and the Church of God. Caine
signifies possession: this is a fit name to the wicked; for they seek nothing
else but possessions and honors in this world, and therefore Caine built a
City: so the wicked labors to be secure, to have rest and ease in this
world: but Abel signifies vanity and sorrow: so is the estate of the godly,
their life here is but vanity, and they account all things but vanity, their
life is sorrow, they weep for their sins, and for the vanities of this world,
and because they are persecuted by the posterity of Caine.

Q. When was Caine borne?

A. After Adam was cast out of Paradise: ^or there he remained but a short
while, neither was it fit, that in Paradise, a place holy, and the tipe of
heaven, any carnal copulation, which now was sinful, should be committed.

Q. Why did Eua say, I have obtained a son of the Lord?

A. Because she was glad, thinking she had borne the promised Seed, that should
tread down the Serpents head: but she was deceived, for he was rejected,
although he was the first borne, and therefore a King and Priest, and Abel,
whom she counted vanity, was chosen, and his sacrifice accepted.

Q. Why is it said that Abel was a feeder of sheep?

A. To signify that Abel was the figure of Christ: for as he^ was killed by
his brother Caine, so was Christ of his brethren the Jews: as Abels sacrifice
was received, so was that perfect Sacrifice of Christ accepted of the Father,
as a full Propitiation for our sins; and as Abel was a shepherd, so was Christ
the true Shepherd, that laid down his life for his sheep sake.

Q. Wherein was Abels sacrifice better then Cain's?

A. In that it was of the best and fattest, signifying that the best things
must be given to God. Secondly, it proceeded of faith and love that Abel
carried to God, Hebrews. 11.

Q. How did Cain know, that God respected the sacrifice of Abel?

A. By some visible sign, as by fire from heaven consuming the sacrifice; for
so he used to show afterward, that he liked the sacrifice by sending fire, as
Leuit. 9. Iud. 6.1. Chron. 21. 1. Kings 18.

Q. Why does God say, that Abels desire should be subject to his brother?

A. Because Caine was the first borne, and therefore, by nature, had great
privileges over his younger brethren; which words God speaks, to restrain
him from hurting Abel: for though God accepted Abels sacrifice, yet he would
not take away the honor of Caines Birthright, and the privileges that
followed the same.

Q. Why did Caine kill his brother Abel?

A. First, for envy, because God accepted his sacrifice, and therefore he
thought, that Abel should have obtained his birthright: secondly, by the
instigation of Satan, who considering the holy life of Abel, thought, that of
him should come the promised Seed; so he began already to persecute Christ.

Q. Wherein was Caines answer to God, evil?

A. In three things: first, in that it was a lie: secondly, in that it was
impious: for he lied not to man, but to God: thirdly, in that it was
vnreuerent; Am I my brothers keeper?

Q. Why is it said, that Abels blood did cry to God?

A. To express the wickedness of this sin. In Scripture four kinds of
sin do cry to God: first, murder, as in this place: secondly, that
fearful sin of Sodom, Genesis 18. thirdly, the oppression of the poor,
Exodus 3. fourthly, the keeping back of the laborers hire, James 5.

Q. What is Caines punishment?

A. First, he was accursed: that is, deprived of Gods love and favor, and hated
of all good men, and he was the first man that was cursed: as the Serpent his
father was the first creature that was cursed, because both the Devil and
Caine were murderers; Adam was not cursed, but the earth for him: secondly,
the earth also is cursed for Caines sin, and made unfruitful: thirdly, he is
made a vagabond and fugitive: signifying that he should be so troubled with the
sting of his guilty conscience that he should be in continual fear.

Q. Was Caines sin greater than he could bear?

A. No: for his sin was not greater than Gods mercy, and his punishment was
not greater than Gods justice could inflict: and so, by these words he either
accuses God of injustice, in saying his punishment is greater than he can
bear; or else he despaireth, if he say, his sin is greater than he can
bear: and so he sins now more fearfully than before: for before, he sinned
against his neighbor; here he sins against God.

Q. What means Caine, when he says, he shall be cast out from Gods face?

A. By Face, either he means his presence in the Church: and in this sense, to
be cast out from Gods face, is to be excommunicated out of the Church; or by
his face, we may understand his favor and protection, as often in Scripture:
also in this sense, to be cast out from Gods face, is to lose his love, care
and favor; as to have his face, is to have all blessings.

Q. Why was he afraid to be killed, seeing there were no more men now but
Adam?

A. Although Moses does not mention other men at this time, because his drift
is to speak only of the propagation of the Church, yet we must know, that now
when Ab^l was killed, mankind was multiplied; for he was killed the 129. as
some, or the 130. year of the world, as others do think.

Q. What it meant by the seuen-fold punishment, that they shall suffer who
shall kill Caine?

A. By this is either understood, that they shall be punished to the seventh
generation, or else, by seuen-fold is understood manifold, as often in
Scripture. So then, he that did kill Caine, should be most severely punished:
not only for murdering a man, but also for murdering such a man as was
marked by God, that he should not be murdered.

Q. But why would not God have Caine killed?

A. First, to show that he abhors murder: secondly, he would have him to live
long in bear and torment: thirdly, that by him, living so long in torment and
misery, others might be warned to abhor murder: fourthly, that he might
have the longer time to repent him for his sin.

Q. What mark was this that God set upon Caine?

A. Whether it was a mark on his body, or madness, and fear in his mind, it
is uncertain; yet it was some real and visible sign, that men might be
warned by, not to meddle with him.

Q. How is it understood, that Caine went (...) from Gods presence?

A. Here his presence does not signify his knowledge and power; for none can
flee from that, as VVhither shall I flee from thy presence? Psalm 139. and
Jonas thought to have fled from this presence, Jonas 1. But his presence does
signify here, the place of his worship, where he showed his presence, and
that is his Church; or else, he went out of Gods presence, that is, he was
deprived of Gods love and favor.

Q. Why did Caine build a City?

A. For his better security, for he was in continual fear: secondly, because
he was worldly-minded, placing his happiness in the cities and forts of this
world, and not looking for that city whose builder and maker is God: thirdly,
that he might the more securely tyrannize and prey upon other men's goods and
lands: for he is the first King and Conqueror in the world: and therefore
Kings should not delight in conquering kingdoms with blood, lest they be
counted the successors of Caine and Nimrod, that mighty Hunter; for, Magna
imperia sunt magna latrocinia.

Q. When did Caine build this City?

A. Not when Henoch was borne, for the^ there was no great need to build;
seeing there were but few persons in the world; but in his old age; for Caine
lived a long time, and now mankind was greatly multiplied.

Q. Why did he call his City Henoch, and not by his own name Caine?

A. Because his own name was odious to the world, in respect of his murder,
therefore he would not disgrace his city, and those that dwelt therein:
secondly, because he loved Henoch exceedingly; therefore he would immortalize
his name.

Q. How is it understood, that Iabel was the father of them that dwelt in
tents, and had cattle?

A. He was the inuenter of shepheardry, and of feeding of cattle, now Abel
being dead: for tents here signify such tents as shepherds do use, and not
those that soldiers do use in wars.

Q. Who were the first Inuenters of Music, and Smiths craft?

A. Not Pythagoras, Linus, Orpheus, or Vulcan, but Iubal, and Tubal-Caine, the
posterity of Caine; so we see, that in external things, Caine and his
posterity were blessed, as the wicked are generally in this life, but the
inheritance of the Saints is in heaven.

Q. Was it lawful for Lamech to have two wives?

A. No: for it was against the first institution of Marriage: secondly, against
the law of Nature, which does show, that one should be content with one:
thirdly, this plurality of wives did arise of incontinency and lust, and not
of desire to propagate to the increase of the Church, as many Saints have done.

Q. What is meant by these words, I would slay a man in my wound, etc?

A. Here Lamech perceiving that he was hated for his cruelty, braggeth to his
wives of his strength, that although he were wounded, yet he were able to kill
a man; this he did speak, to make his wives and others fear him the more:
the Hebrews think, that Lamech did kill Caine in the wilderness, thinking him
to be a wild beast; and perceiving that it was Caine, he killed also the young
man that deceived him.

Q. What means these words, If Caine shall be avenged seuen-fold, then
Lamech, etc?

A. Either he speaks this, to affray others from killing him, although he was
a murderer, and so making a derision of Gods judgment he had laid upon
Caine, as if he would say; If he that kills Caine, shall be punished
seuen-fold: then he that kills me, shall be punished seventy seuen-fold; that
is, a great deal more: or else, by these words he seems to repent for his
murder: as if he would say, Was Caine punished so hardly for his murder?
then I am worthy of a seventy seuen-fold worse punishment.

Q. Was Sheth the third son of Adam? or had (...) ^^y more besides those
three mentioned in Genesis?

A. It is credible, that in the space of an hundred and thirty years; (for in
the hundred and thirtieth year Sheth was borne) Adam had many more children
than those three, because that Adam and Eve were created perfect, and apt for
procreation. So also it was necessary that the world should be multiplied,
according to GODS Decree, Increase and multiply. But these three Moses only
names, because of all the rest, they were most eminent; Abel, the ripe of
Christ and the Church, which are Abels, that is, mourners in this life: Caine,
the tipe of the devil and his Church, and the father of the wicked; Sheth, the
origin and root of the Church, the Father of Christ: ye^ the origin of all
mankind after the flood: for Abel was killed, and Caines posterity drowned.

Q. Why does Eua say, that God has put another seed to me, in stead of Abel,
speaking of Sheth, and not of any other of her sons?

A. Because Sheth was likest Abel, of all E^^'s children, both in religion
toward God, vprightnes of life toward men, and in love and reverence toward
his Parents.

Q. What did Enoch signify?

A. Sorrowful or miserable: he also was a tipe of the Church, which is
pressed, although not oppressed with sorrow and misery in this life.

Q. Why does Moses say, that in his days men began to call on the name of the
Lord?

A. To signify, that now men began to worship God, more publicly then they
did before, to exhort the people to repentance, to preach openly: but we must
not think that God was not worshipped at all till now: for Adam did worship
God, and taught his sons Abel and Caine to sacrifice, and Sheth also was an
holy man, and tipe of Christ and of the Church.

Questions on the fifth Chapter.
Q. Why does Moses rehearse the ten generations of Adam?

A. First, to show the genealogy of Christ the promised seed. Secondly,
because he is to speak of Enochs translation, therefore he would show his
generation. Thirdly, to show that amongst these multitudes, God had his Church,
although it was then small: for God has never wanted some since the creation,
who do worship him, and call upon his name.

Q. Why does Moses say here, that God did both create and make man? and what is
meant by Adam here?

A. He does distinguish creation from making: for to be made, is to be formed
of some pre-existant matter: but to be created, is to be produced of nothing:
then both these words he used, to signify the diverse poducing of the soul and
body. The soul is created, because it is produced of nothing: the body is
made, because of some thing: and by Adam, he means both the man and the
woman, giving them one name, to signify that they are both of one flesh.

Q. How is it understood, that Adam begat a son after his image?

A. First, by his image, we understand his nature and substance. Secondly, his
reason and power he had over all other creatures. Thirdly, the corruption of
his nature: so that now Adam being sinful and mortal, begets sinful and
mortal children: then Sheth was begotten after the image of Adam, a man endued
with reason, and dominion over the creatures, subject to sin and death as Adam.

Q. Why is it not said, that Adam did beg^^ Caine and Abel after his image?

A. Because a part of this image does consist in bearing rule over the
creatures, which dominion Abel had not being taken away by untimely death; and
from Cain this power was taken away, because he was accursed, and the earth
commanded not to yield her increase.

Q. What does this name Sheth signify?

A. To be set, or appointed in stead of Abel* and as Abel was the tipe of
mortality, so Sheth is the tipe of our resurrection for Adam seemed to be dead,
Abel being killed, and Caine accursed: but in the birth of Sheth, he seems to
revive ag^ine: and as he in Sheth was revived, so we all in Christ shall be made
alive: and in that Adam gives the same name to his son that Eua did, they both
testify their faith and hope they have in the promised Seed.

Q. Why are the years of Adam and the rest ^^lled days?

A. To signify, that although our life be never so long, it shall consume as
days; for all years are composed of days: therefore every day we should be
mindful of Mortality, and think, that every day is the last: and we must
beseech God, that he would teach us to number our days.

Q. What is the cause that Adam, and the rest here named before the Flood,
lived so long?

A. First, because they lived soberly, and were contented with simple diet, not
pampering their bellies, as now with variety of dishes. Secondly, the
constitution of their bodies were better then ours, stronger, and not subject
to diseases. Thirdly, they had more experience and skill in the nature of
herbs and fruits, which they did eat, then we have. Fourthly, the earth
then brought forth excellenter herbs for the food of man, then it has done
after the Flood. Fifthly, God would have them live so long, that Mankind
might the more be multiplied. Sixthly, that man might the more commodiously
find out Arts and Sciences, which they could not do without long experience.
Seventhly, the moderate te^perature of the air was then greater. Eighthly, they
did live so long, that Adam might teach them the Creation of the World, his
happiness in Paradise, and reiection from thence, etc. that the knowledge of God
and religion, might the better be established amongst them, and propagated by
them.

Q. What kind of years were those that Moses mentions here?

A. Not the years of the Moon, which we call months: for by this computation
we should confess, that Kenan and Enoch did beget sons and daughters before
they were seven years old, and that Abraham being 17. years of age, was a
very old man: but Moses means the years of the Sun, which were equal with
our years, as we have proved in the Preface, upon the second book of our
Jewish History.

Q. Why did Moses subioyne unto every one of their lives, this particle (and
he died?)

A. First, to show the inevitable punishment and consequent of sin upon all
Mankind. And from hence we may conclude, that every one that dies, is a
sinner, even children; for death is the wages of sin. I except Christ, who
died, not because he sinned, but because he came to destroy sin, and death,
and Satan, that has the power of death. Secondly, to show the vanity of this
life, which is so short. Thirdly, to put us in mind of our mortality, that we
might prepare our selves for our end: all must die, even those are gone that
lived so long; and although that we think they lived many years, yet we may
truly say, that they did not live one whole day, for none of them lived 1000.
years, which to God is as one day.

Q. What is the cause of the great difference between the Hebrew copyes, and
the translation of the Septuagints, in the computation of the years between
Adam and the Flood?

A. We cannot say, that those seventy Interpreters, which Ptolemy did employ in
translating the Hebrew Bible into the Greek tongue, did err in their
computation, seeing they use no figures, as the Greeks and Latins do in this
computation; but they use the names of their numbers. But rather we think,
that those that copied out the translation of the Septuagints, out of Ptolemeus
Library, did err, in mistaking the Greek figures; for one letter or figure
may easily be mistaken for another: or else they were somewhat negligent,
because they thought these numbers of years not to be necessary. But we must
adhere to the Hebrew verity, or else, if we follow the Septuagints in their
computation, we must yield, that Methusalem did live after the Flood 16.
years, which is directly against the truth of Gods Word, which affirms, that
eight souls did only escape the Flood, that is, Noah and his Family.

Q. Did Henoch die, or not?

A. He did not die: so witnesses Paul, Hebrews 11. and Moses also in this
place: for he subioynes to every one of their lives that lived before and
after Henoch, until the Flood (and he died;) but of Henoch he speaks no
such thing.

Q. Why did God translate Henoch, that he should not see death?

A. First, that he might assure the faithful, of their resurrection and life
eternal: secondly, because the world did degenerate, and came, as it were, to
the height of impiety: therefore he took him away, left he had been defiled
with their wickedness, and so be made partaker of their plagues: thirdly,
because God would show the world, how highly he esteems those that walk with
him, that is, that obey, love, and fear him.

Q. Whither was Henoch translated?

A. Not to the earthly Paradise; for that was destroyed with the Flood: but he
was translated to that heavenly Paradise, whereof Christ speaks to the good
Thief on the Cross, and whither Elias was caught: now, although be dyed not,
yet his translation was in stead of death.

Q. What signifies Noe?

A. Rest: which name his father Lamech gave him, because of the comfort he
should have of him, thinking that he was the promised Seed that should tread
down the Serpents head: or rather, because that he perceived by the Spirit of
prophecy, that he should be the type of Christ. For as Noe restored the world
after the Flood: so did Christ, after the flood of his Fathers wrath, restore
the world to spiritual life: secondly, as Noe did build the Arc, so has
Christ built the Church: thirdly, as Noe offered sacrifice, whereby God smelled
a savor of Rest, and said he would curse the ground no more: so in Christ's
Sacrifice which he offered on the cross, is the Father well pleased; and he
will not be angry with his Church for ever.

Q. How was Noe a comfort to Lamech, concerning the sorrow and work of his
hands, and touching the earth which the Lord cursed?

A. By Sorrow, and the works of our hands, may be understood sin, which is
our own work; as holiness is the work of God: by the earth, which was
cursed, we understand the barrenness of the ground, and the hard labor of the
husbandmen: for the ground was cursed twice; once for Adams sake, and once for
Caines: but now Lamech comfort himself, that Noe shall be acceptable to God,
who, for his sake, appointed times and seasons for sowing and reaping, and gave
Noe the skill to find out wine that comforts the heart of man: and also, in
his time, God did sweep away the sins of this age, which did grieve Lamech,
with an universal flood.

Q. Which of Noes three sons were eldest?

A. Iapheth is the eldest, as it is plain, Genesis 20.21. Cham the youngest, Genesis
9.24. but Shem is first named: First, because in dignity he is preferred before
his brethren, Genesis 9.26. so Abraham is named before his elder brother, Genesis
11.26. Jacob before Esau, Genesis 28.5. Ephraim before Manasses, Genesis 48.20.
Secondly, Shem is first named, because of him, Abram and his posterity, the
Israelites, descended, of which Moses is purposed to speak most.

Q. Why did the Patriarchs here named, abstain so long from begetting
children, as Noe, till he was 500. years old, etc?

A. As they lived longer then we, so they were not ready so soon to beget
children, as we are: for now, when a man is 30. he is in the prime of his
years: but then none was said to come to man's estate, till he had bin a 100.
years and more. Secondly, Moses drift her is not to set down the names of all
the sons of these Fathers, but of such as Abraham, and the Israelites came; and
therefore he omits those first borne of whom Abraham came not, and speaks of
the youngest; as Matthew, in describing Christ's genealogy, speaks of Isaac,
not of Ismael; of Jacob, not of Esau; of Judas and David, not of their elder
brethren, because of them came not the Lord.

Questions on the sixth Chapter.
Q. What is understood by men, that began to multiply?

A. By men, we understand the sons of Caine, who, because they took many
wives, did increase faster then Sheths posterity; and as they multiplied, so
did their sins multiply: for the multiplication of mankind is a blessing:
but we see, the more blessings God bestows on us, the worse we are.

Q. What is meant here by the sons of God?

A. Not Angels, neither good nor bad, neither with bodies, nor without bodies:
for they being Spirits, are not moved with carnal lust; neither was it to
drown them, that God sent the flood, but to destroy man: therefore by the
sons of God, is understood men; for of them only does God speak here,
throughout all the Chapter.

Q. What sort of men were these, that are called the sons of God?

A. Some think, they were very tall and mighty men: therefore they are called
the sons of God; as the mountains of God, the Cedars of God, that is, high and
tall hills and Cedars: others think, they were the sons of Princes and
Judges, which are called gods in Scripture: others again say, that they are
those whereof Paul speaks, Romans 8. They that are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the sons of God; that they were holy and just men: but they are of
soundest judgment, that by them understand the posterity of Sheth, who
although they degenerated, yet Moses gives them that honorable title, to show
their ingratitude, in forsaking their heavenly Father.

Q. Why is the posterity of Sheth called the sons of God?

A. Because God had separated them from the rest of the world, as a peculiar
people to himself, they did serve him and reverence him as their heavenly
Father: secondly, because Sheth their father was an holy, and just man, and by
consequent, the son of God, both by adoption and imitation: therefore God
does honor his posterity, in calling them the sons of God, for their father
Sheths sake: so we see what an honor it is to have holy parents.

Q. Was it unlawful for the sons of God to take to themselves wives of the
daughters of men?

A. Yes: for those daughters of men were Caines posterity, excommunicated from
the Church: for they were the sons of old Adam, because they were not borne
again by the immortal seed of the Word. Now it was unlawful for Sheths
posterity to marry Caines daughters, being of a contrary Religion; this kind
of matrimony was forbidden afterward, Exodus 34. and Deuteronomy 7. For this
cause Abraham and Isaac would not have their sons marry with Canaanites:
secondly, they took those wives, not for multiplication of mankind, but to
satisfy their immoderate lust: therefore this copulation was unlawful, for
they should not have defiled their bodies; as knowing they are the Temples of
the holy Ghost.

Q. How do we know that these were not Angels, which are called here the
sons of God?

A. Because Angels are Spirits; not composed of any physical matter, nor
enclosed into bodies, as the souls of men; therefore they cannot be moved with
carnal lust.

Q. Some do think they have bodies, and therefore are here understood to have
taken them wives of the daughters of men; how then is it, that they have no
bodies?

A. If they had bodies, they should be either celestial or elementall;
celestial they are not; for heavenly bodies have but one kind of motion,
which is to turn round; but Angels ascend and descend, and have all other
kinds of moving. Elementary they are not; for whatsoever is composed of
Elements, is corruptible; but the Angels are not. If they say that Angels: have
in them but one element; then I would know which it is. Again, they should
grant, that the bodies of Angels are more ignoble than the bodies of men;
because in sublunarie bodies, the more elements they are composed of, the
nobler and perfecter they are: and if their bodies are baser, then their minds
are imperfecter: for there is a proportion between the form and the matter.

Q. Cannot Angels beget children?

A. No: for they have no feed fit for procreation, because they feed not: for
seed is a part of our food. Again, if they could procreate children, they
should be distinguished in male and female; for both these must concur in
procreation.

Q. What is meant by these words, My Spirit shall not always strive with man?

A. By the word Spirit, is not understood Gods providence, nor God himself
taken essentially, nor his wrath and indignation; nor man's soul: but Spirit is
taken for God himself personally, or for the holy Ghost, the third person in
the Trinity; by which Spirit, Christ preached in Noe, to the disobedient
spirits of the old world, 1. Pet. 3. The meaning then is, My holy Spirit shall
not contend always (or a long time) with sinful man, by exhorting,
conuincing outwardly, and inwardly by the checkes of conscience, because he is
but flesh; that is, fleshly-minded, walks after the flesh, and not after the
Spirit.

Q. What then is meant by flesh here?

A. Not flesh properly so called: secondly, nor as it is taken for the nature
of man, as John 1.14. Christ the Word, is said to be made flesh; but here it
is taken for the corruption of man's nature. Here then God calls man, whom he
had made to his own Image, flesh, to make him ashamed that he has so
miserably fallen from his first integrity: for Adam was made a living soul.

Q. Why says God, that the days of man should be an hundred and twenty
years, seeing that after the Flood, many did live till they were above?

A. It is true, that Sem lived five hundred years after the Flood, some four
hundred, some two hundred, and many till Moses time, lived an hundred and
thirty years. So that these words must not be understood, as though God, after
the Flood, did prolong man's life, only to an hundred and twenty years: but
these one hundred and twenty years, are meant of that time that God gave to the
first world to repent in; so long Noe preached, and builded the Arc.

Q. It seems there was an hundred years from the uttering of this speech, till
the Flood: for Sem, after the Flood immediately, was an hundred years old; and
he was borne when this speech was uttered.

A. From the uttering of this speech, until the Flood, there was an hundred
and twenty years; but this was spoken when Noe was four hundred and
fourscore years old, that is, twenty years before he was five hundred; and
before Sem was borne: yet Moses speaks of Sems generation, before the
uttering of these words, because speaking of the generation of the Fathers,
from Adam, until the Flood, he would not leave out the generation o^ Sem;
although he was borne twenty years after the uttering of these words of God.

Q. What were these Giants that are here mentioned?

A. They were men of great stature of body, and therefore strong and powerful,
as also cruel, wicked, ambitious; in Greek they are called Gigantes; that is,
engendered of the earth, not as though they were the sons of the earth; as the
Poets thought; but because of a great deal of earthly substance they carried
about in their bodies; as also, in respect of their minds, being
earthly-minded: in Hebrew they are called Nephilim, from falling, because as
Apostates they fell from God: and being cruel, they fell on men, and caused
many, by fear, to fall before them.

Q. Then is it true, that there have been such mighty men of great stature,
which we do call Giants?

A. Yes: both sacred and profane histories do testify so much. Augustine
says, libr. 15. de Ciuitate Dei, That he saw a tooth of a man, as great as an
hundred of ours. Pliny records in his seventh book, That in Creta, out of a
hill, was dug the body of a man of six and forty cubits. The Spies that
were sent to Canaan, reported that they seemed Grassehoppers, in comparison of
the Giants of that Land, Number. 13. The iron bed of Og, king of Bashan, was nine
cubits long, and four cubits broad, Deuteronomy 3. Goliath of the Philistines,
was a mighty great Giant: and many more examples might here be alleged.

Q. But were these Giants begotten of devils and women, as some have thought?

A. Seeing these Giants were of the same substance and nature that other men
are, differing only in the quantity of their bodies from others, which is no
essential, but accidental difference, they were men, and begotten of men and
women: secondly, if devils had begotten them of women, they had been neither
men nor devils, but a third kind different from both; for when two of diverse
kinds couple together, they bring forth a third kind different from both: as
the Horse and the Ass beget a Mule, which is neither horse nor Ass: now,
devils and women being much more different in nature, could not bring forth
Giants, seeing these were men: thirdly, devils being spirits, cannot procreate,
as is already proved.

Q. What was the sin of the first world?

A. Moses in the fifth verse of this. Chapter describes their wickedness, that
it was great: secondly, it was universal, and not amongst a few: thirdly, it
was voluntary, of purpose; their whole study was bent to wickedness: fourthly,
it was not for a while, but all the days of their life. So then, it was not
without cause that God sent a flood of water, to cleanse the earth from that
flood of sin, with which it was ouerflowed.

Q. How is it understood, that God was sorrowful, and repented?

A. God properly repents not, 1. Sam. 15. for it is contrary to his
prescience: neither is he moved with sorrow, because he is unchangeable, Iam.
1.17. But these, and such like speeches, are attributed to him, after the
manner of men: for man, when he repentes, changes his deed: so God is said to
repent, when he changes that which he did before; and as man, when he
destroys that which he loves, is grieved: so God is said to be moved with
sorrow, because he comes to destroy man, whom he so highly loved, and
advanced over all the creatures.

Q. Why did God say he would destroy the beasts and the fowls?

A. Not because they sinned: but because they being created for man's use, man
their Lord and master being punished, they must also suffer with him: for by
this, God will show how he abhors sin, in punishing dumb beasts for man's
sin: so the beast that lies with man, must be killed, though it have no wit,
Leu. 20.2. When man was drowned, there was no use for the beasts. Thirdly, to
augment man's punishment, and make it the more fearful, when not only he, but
all his goods and possessions are seyzed upon by Gods wrath.

Q. What mean these words, Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord?

A. That is, God was favorable and merciful unto him. So this phrase is used
of Lot, Genesis 19. of Moses, Exo. 33. of David, Acts 7. of Mary, Luke 1. Here we
see, Gods children shall not want their commendations, howsoever the world
despises them. Noe is here hated of the world: but he found grace in Gods
eyes. Secondly, we see, that God will not destroy all mankind, but will save a
few for propagation of his Church. Thirdly, there was no time so corrupt, in
which God had not some to worship him.

Q. Wherein did Noe find grace in Gods eyes?

A. In that he was preserved from the flood, when the world was destroyed.
Secondly, in that mankind was preserved and restored by him. Thirdly, in that
his dominion over the creatures was restored, as it was to Adam. Fourthly, in
that he received a larger Patent then Adam had, to eat flesh. Fifthly, in that
God did smell a savor of rest in his Sacrifice. Sixthly, in that God makes a
covenant wi^^ him, confirmed by the Rainbow, that he will never destroy the
world again with water. Seventhly, in that he was a tipe of Christ and his
Church; and many other prerogatives had Noe, which were as many pledges of Gods
favor to him. In Hebrew, Noe signifies grace, the order of the letters being
changed.

Q. What is meant here by the generations of Noe?

A. His offspring and things that befell him, of which he does not speak
immediately, but of his virtues, that he was a just and perfect man, etc. And at
these words the Hebrews do begin a new section which reaches to the 12.
Chapter: so that they divide the whole Law into 54. Sections or Lectures, which
they read in 52. Sabbaths, and Genesis is divided into 12. Chapters, or
Lectures.

Q. How is Noe called a just and perfect man?

A. Not absolutely so, but in respect of that froward generation. Secondly,
because he endeavored to be so, and made a conscience of his ways: for God
accepts the will, for the deed; and a part, for all. Thirdly, because of his
faith: for we are justified by faith; and the just lives by faith. Now. Noe
was made heir of righteousness, which is by faith, as it is in the Hebrews 11.
And this does the more commend Noes righteousness, that in such a froward age,
he was just and perfect.

Q. How is it understood, that the earth was corrupt before God?

A. By the earth, we understand men, both because they are the inhabitants of
the earth, as also because they were earthly-minded. And here, to their
disgrace, they are called earth, as before, flesh, who should have bin
spiritually and heauenly-minded (before God) that is, openly in his sight: or
Elohius may signify Princes and Judges, here: so that in the open sight of
their Judges, they wrought wickedness. Hence then we see, that it was not the
Stars, or any natural causes, that raised the flood: but only God, being
provoked by sin.

Q. Why is it said now, that God looked on the earth?

A. Not, as though he did not look before: (for all things are naked before
his eyes:) but now he is said to look on the earth, because he comes to
punish the earth. And this shows us, that God did not rashly, and unadvisedly
punish the earth, but he looked upon it first, that is, he did seriously
consider, there was great cause to punish Mankind.

Q. What is meant here by all Flesh?

A. Mankind, Synecdochice, and not the beasts also, as the Jews thought; for
they cannot properly be said to corrupt their way, because they want reason.
Laws are not made for them, they are not capable of life eternal, they are
not subject to sin, and not liable to punishment.

Q. What is meant by way?

A. Their religion and faith, as Acts 18. Secondly, their manners and course of
life; as malice is called the way of Cain, Jude, verse 11. covetousness the
way of Balaam, 2. Pet. 2.15.

Q. How is it understood, that God destroyed the earth?

A. The earth was destroyed for the sin of man: as in other particular
judgments, men's goods perished with them, Numb. 16.32. Ios. 7.15. yet the
earth was not destroyed, in respect of her substance, but of her ornaments and
fertility, which was much diminished by the salt water.

Q. Why would not God save Noe by some other means, but by the Arc?

A. Because, by this means God would have the world to see, that his
judgments were coming, when they beheld the Arc preparing; and if they would
not repent, they might, at least, be made inexcusable, who both seeing the Arc
in making, and hearing No^ preaching, did not repent. Secondly, because by this
means, he would exercise Noe's faith the more, which was very great; that
although the rest of the world did scorn him, and followed their own courses:
yet he believed that God would perform his promise. Thirdly, although God at
all times may work miracles, yet most times he works by natural causes:
therefore in the Desert he fed his people with Manna, when he might have fed
them with nothing; so he might have given them Canaan without their own help;
yet he would have them fight for it: and here he might have preserved Noe
more miraculously; but this way he thought fittest.

Q. Was this Arc like our ships?

A. No: but this was like a chest or coffin, made not to sail, but to swim;
and this form was most commodious and capable of so many kinds of creatures:
and this Arc was admirable, both in respect of the long time it was in
building, in respect of the greatness thereof, of the end, it was made to
preserve all kind of creatures, of the wonderful preservation thereof in that
dangerous Flood; as also, of many things whereof it was the tipe Concerning
this Arc, the Poets have stolen much out of this place.

Q. What kind of tree was the Arc made of?

A. The word Gopher does signify the Cedar, Fur, and Pine trees; so it is
uncertain which of those it was made of, neither is it much material: but
this word is not found in any other place of Scripture.

Q. How large was the Arc?

A. The length was 300. cubits, the breadth 50. and the height was 30. cubits:
now a cubit is the measure from the elbow, to the fingers end, containing a
foot and a half: but if the men of that time were bigger then now, (as it is
like) then the cubit was also bigger. Then we must not think with Origin,
that those were Geometrical cubits, whereof every one contains 6. common
cubits: for Moses does not speak here of any other cubits, then he does
elsewhere: and of no other kind of cubit do we read in Scripture, then of
those common cubits aboue-named, as Exodus 27. Deuteronomy. 3. 1. King. 17. etc. So
then, the Arc, by this reckoning, was six times as long as it was broad, and
ten times so long as it was high. But how so many creatures could be contained
in so little room, was not impossible for him, that miraculously sent the
Flood, and delivered Noe from the same: yet if we duly consider the bigness
of the Arc, we shall find there was room sufficient for them all.

Q. How could Noe and his three sons build so great an Arc?

A. Although they were the chief builders, yet we must think, there were many
more under them hired, who labored in building for their wages, although they
believed not, and so they perished with the rest.

Q. Was there a window in the Arc?

A. Yes: but the Hebrew word is Zohar, which signifies light: therefore the
Hebrews thought that this was no window, but some precious stone that was
hanged in the Arc, to give light to the creatures therein: yet we must not
deny, but that there was a window; for Noe, in the eight chapter, is said to
open the window, and let out the Raven and Dove: others say, that this Zohar
was a Lamp or candle, appointed to burn so long as Noe was in the Arc,
because the Sun did not shine all that time: but this is fabulous.

Q. What is this (And in a cubit thou shall finish it above?)

A. That is, Thou shall bow the roof of the Arc but a cubit, so that it may
be almost flat; but yet so, that the water may easily slide off.

Q. How many rooms or stories were there in the Arc?

A. Three rooms: the highest for Man and the Fowls; the next, for all kinds
of meat and provision for the creatures; the lowest and third room for the
Beasts. These three are only mentioned here: therefore Origin was deceived,
that thought there were five rooms. As in this Arc there were three rooms,
so in Moses Tabernacle, and Salomons Temple, were also three. The Church also
(figured by the Arc) has three states: before the Law; under the Law; and
under Christ.

Q. Why would God establish his Covenant with Noe, before the Arc was built?

A. To confirm Noes faith the more: for he had need of such a promise, that
went about such a hard and dangerous work, as the building of the Arc was.
And here we see, that God never imployeth his servants in any hard work, but
he gives them comfort, strength, and courage to perform it. And so it is our
part, to rely on Gods promises with Noe, and not to incline either to the right
or left hand.

Q. What covenant was this that God made with Noe?

A. That he would preserve him and his Family in the Flood: and this is a type
of the covenant which God has made with us in Christ. Now this covenant
belongs to Noe and his Family: so all Gods covenants to the faithful, and
their children also. As for Noe's sake, his family was saved: so for the
company of one holy man, many shall escape in the day of Gods wrath. For Paul's
sake, all that were in the ship were saved. Here, this is called Gods covenant,
because he binds himself to save us: so elsewhere it is called our covenant,
Zach. 9.11. because on our part, we are bound to believe and obey him.

Q. What sorts of creatures was Moses commanded to receive within the Arc?

A. All those that could not live in the water; as men, beasts and fowls.
fishes then and (...), that is, those creatures that can live both on the land
and in the water, were not received: secondly, the perfect creatures, that is,
such as are procreated by commixture of male and female (for the male and
female are here mentioned.) Then mice and such like as are inge^dred of
corruption, were not received. And here Moses is commanded to receive two of
every sort, which in the next chapter is better explained; for of the unclean,
two are received, of the clean, seven; three males and females for generation;
and one male for the Sacrifice. Here we see, that God for Noes sake, saves
all those sorts of creatures, extending his mercies, even to the beasts, for
his servants sake.

Q. How did Noe gather together all these creatures? did he hunt for them?

A. No: but they came of their own accord, the Lord leading them thither; and
here they are brought to Noe, as before to Adam: yet, although God brought them
to the Arc, notwithstanding, Noe must bring them within, and place them in the
Arc: Noe is the type of Christ's Ministers, who do not lead Christ's sheep to
the Church, because being moved by Gods Spirit, they come of their own
accords; yet the Minister gathers them together, and does unite them by the
Word and Sacraments.

Q. If all kinds of meat were laid up in the Arc for the creatures; then
whether, or not, was there also flesh for those creatures, that lived only on
flesh?

A. First, before the Flood, neither man nor beast did eat flesh; but this
power of eating flesh was given after the Flood: secondly, we do not read of
any beasts that were brought into the Arc, for meat, but only for generation
and sacrifice: thirdly, if there had been beasts in the Arc, for eating, and
so many as might serve for a whole year, surely there could not be room
enough for them; besides, their flesh would have putrified; and that had been
filthy and loathsome to man: therefore they did not eat flesh at that time, but
either grass, fruits, or seeds: for these they fed upon when flesh was
wanting. Besides, God, that caused them to come to the Arc, of their own
accord, and to remain so long obedient to Noe, could also sustain them so
long without flesh, only upon herbs: for those were better, at that time,
than now: and the temperature of those beasts was sounder.

Q. Why was God so careful to provide food for those dumb creatures?

A. To let us know and admire his infinite goodness, in not only creating
them for man's use, but also, in preserving them to the same end: secondly, that
by this carfulness of his, we may be induced to love him the more: thirdly,
to depend on him in our extremities: for if he had a care of them, when they
could not care for themselves: much more will he be careful of us in our
necessities: fourthly, he would not save them in the Arc, as he did the
Israelites in the red Sea: and as Jonas in the Whales belly, miraculously: but
he would have here both man and beast, to use the means of the Arc, and of
the food he gave them, for the preservation of their life: to teach us, that
we should not despise the ordinary means that God has appointed for the
conservation of our life: fifthly, to teach all Christians that have children,
wife, or family, to provide for them things that may sustain their natural
life: seeing God had such care to maintain the life of these creatures, which
are not so dear to God as men are.

Q. What is the commendation that Noe has here in the end?

A. That he did according to all that God commanded him; therefore he became
heir of the Righteousness that is by faith, Hebr. 11. Then here was his glory,
not in that he knew Gods commandments, but in that he did them: secondly, he
did not a part, but according to all that was commanded him: thirdly, his
faith and obedience was wonderful: if we should consider the circumstances
thereof; as the bigness of the Arc, the long and tedious space of an hundredth
years, cutting and bringing together so many trees, the taunts and scorns he
did endure of men, the fear he was in, for preaching they should all be
drowned, the care and sollici^ede he had, to gather together so much provision
for man, beasts and fowls: yea to bring into the Arc so many sorts of wild
beasts; and lastly, to enclose himself therein for a year, as in a Sepulcher:
all these being considerd, shall make us acknowledge, that h^^ Faith and
Obedience was worthy of eternal commendations.

Q. Whereof was Noe and the Arc a tipe o^ figure?

A. Of Christ and of the Church: for Noe was the tipe of Christ, in that Noe is
rest: so Christ is our rest, and in him we have rest for o^^ souls; our
consciences have rest from the gilt and punishment of sin, from the
condemning and commanding power thereof; and after this life, we (...) rest
from our labors, even in the bosom of Abraham. Secondly, as Noe preserved
soon from the flood, so has Christ from the floods of Gods wrath. Thirdly, as
Noe in the Arc of wood did save them, so Christ upon the Cross of wood, has
saved us. Fourthly, as out of the Arc there is no safety, so ou^ of the Church
there is no salvation. Fifthly, (...) the Arc was made of diverse sorts of
trees, so is the Church of diverse sorts of men. Sixthly, (...) the Ark was a
long time in building, so has the Church a long time in making. Seu^^hly, as
in the flood God drowned sinners, so in baptism (whereof the flood was a tipe)
God drowneth our sins. Eighthly, as the plankes of the Arc were joined
together with Pitch; so should the members of the Church be joined together
with love. Ninthly, as Noe not only built the Arc, but entered therein, so
Christ not only built the Church, but dwells therein. Tenthly, as in the Arc
were all sorts of creatures, so in the Church are all sorts of Christians.
Eleue^thly, as in the Arc were more beasts then men, so in the Church are more
bad then good. Twelftly, as in the Arc was all kind of corporal food for the
creatures, so in the Church is all kind of spiritual food for Christians. 13.
As in the Arc was a window to give light to the eyes, so in the Church is the
Word to give light to the minds. 14. As there was a door for the creatures to
enter into the Arc, so Christ is the door, by whom we enter into the Church.
15. As in the Arc were diverse rooms or stories, so in the Church are diverse
degrees and orders. 16. As the Arc was great and large for all sorts of
beasts; so is the Church for all sorts of men. 17. As there was but one Arc,
one door, one window; so there is but one Church, one Christ, one Scripture.
18. As the Raven went out and came not again, but the Dove could find no
rest, till (...) returned to the Arc; so the wicked care (...) for the Church:
but the godly, who repres^^ the nature and qualities of the Dove, can h^^^ no
rest for their souls but in the Church. 19^^ the Arc was tossed up and down
in the w^ter with the wind, yet was vpheld by Go^ so the Church is tossed up
and down (...) the sea of this world, with the winds (...) Satan, of sin, of
wicked men and of (...) flesh: yet the Lord vpholds her. 20. (...) the Arc at
last rested on the mountaine^ of Ar^^^nia; so shall the Church on Mo^^^ Sion,
in the Kingdom of glory, when the waters shall settle, and the winds shall
cease; then those that seemed to be dead in the Arc, shall come out of the
graves; and with joy shall enjoy that happy Immortality.

FJNJS.

