THREE DECADS OF DIVINE MEDITATIONS. Whereof each one contains three parts. 1
A History. 2 An Allegory. 3 A Prayer.
With a commendation of the private Country life.

By ALEXANDER ROSSE his Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Francis Constable and are to be sold at the Sign
of the Crane in St. Paul's Church-yeard

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY KINLOSS.
I Never drunk of Aganippes Well:
I never sleept upon Parnassus Hill.
Arcas I never heard, I have not seen
Jove's daughters dance in the Pierian green:
I leave the Muses and the Delphick rocks
For those that bear green bays, and wear high sockes.
I write no lofty style, I Am plain and simple
For why I'dwell far from Apollos Temple.
Yet Madam, Ipresume you will not disdain
To read these verses though they be but plain.
For they contain sweet Meditations
And Antydots against tentatious
For you alone I made them, they are yours,
Then read them when you have some idle hours.
Accept them as a token of that zeal
Which I do carry to your Honors weal.
Unto your Husband, mirror of these times,
By right I should have off^ed not these rimes
To whom I owe a greater obligation,
Then ever I did to any of our Nation,
But that I have reserved greater strains
To him who has deserved all my pains,
Whose virtues claim far more then now I will
Express to you, by this my rural quill.
Because he hates vain ostentation,
And I likewise hate assentation.
But to be brief, according to our powers
My Muse and I, will honor you and yours.
Your Honors to command, ALEXANDER ROSSE.

The First Decad.
The River of Paradise. Christ and Adam compared. Noah's Dove. Noah's
Drunkenness. Isaac offered up. Rebeccas twins. Jacobs Ladder. Jacobs
wres^ling. The fiery bush. The Cloud and fiery Pillar.
The Second Decad.
Manna. The Rock. Arons Rod, Sarah, the Virgin Mary. Ierichos walls. Gedeons
Fleece. Sampson. David and Goliath. Eliah. Gods ^parition to Eliah on mount
H^reb. Eliahs assumption.
The third Decad.
Elisha's pot of Salt, and m^ale, Moses his rod* The Sunami^es Son. The Wise
men and Star. The touching of Christ's garment. The good Samaritane. The lost
Sheep. The Prodigal. Christ's Coat parted. Ghrists side pierced. Christ and
Mary speaking togeath^r.
The commendations of the private Country life*
THE FIRST DECAD.
I. The River of Paradise. Genesis 2.

THis Garden was refreshed with that sweet River,
Which out of Eden sprang, and which did sever
His Azure channel i^ four crystal streams
Which have from diverse Authors, diverse names.
This Garden is the Church of Christ, and He
The River is, which waters every tree
Full of spiritual waters, full of graces,
And does divide these ^treames into all places.
From two maine springs this river does proceed
As God from God, as man from woman's seed.
O Well of Life, pure River, water me
With grace, that I may prove a fruitful tree.
Genesis 2.
II. Christ and Adam compared.
THe Woman out of Adams side was formed:
So was the Church out of Christ's sid reform^d
Adam did loose a ribbe, but Christ his blood
He in a Garden, Christ on a Cross of wood.
They both were cast unto a heavy trance,
Man's side was opened, so ^hrists, but with a Lance.
The Church did cause Christ's bitter death and Passion,
As Eua was the cause of man's transgres^ion,
But by a tree man from his honor fell,
Christ by a tree has daunted death and hell.
My soul Lord is thy wife, for thou did take her
Out of thy side, then do not now forsake her,
Flesh of thy flesh she^ is, bone of thy bone,
Thou art her Husband, leave her not alone.
Genesis 8.
III. Noah's Dove.
NOah, the dove out of the Arc let f^y,
To s^e if that the waters still were ^ig^.
But ^hee could find no resting ^or her ^^ete,
Because the earth was yet wi^h waters weate:
With wea^y wings she flutters in the a^re.
Then to the Arc again makes he^ repair.
God s^nt his only Son, of his mere love,
Out of the Arc of Heaven; this is the Dove
That brought the olive branch, the si^ne of Peace
And caused the waters of Gods wrath to cease.
O Lo^d my soul like Noah: weary Dove,
Can find no r^st, but in thine Arc above:
The^since she l^athes the world, when thou thinks best
Stretch out thine hand, and take her to thy rest.
IIII. Noah's Drunkenness. Genesis 9.

AFter the Flood, Noah was grieved and sorry,
To see the earth spoyld of her former glory:
He plants a vineyard, and with wine ref^esh'd,
His heart which was with so much grief oppres^'d
But being drunk he fell a sleep, the^ Cham
Vncouer'd in the T^nt his Fathers shame,
Noah perceived that he was made naked:
And cursed Cham as soon as he awaked.
But bl^ssed Sem and Iapheth who did hide,
His shame, which Cham took pleasure to deride
When sin had spoiled the world, God sent his Son
To plant unto himself a Church, which done,
He drank the red wine of his F^thers wra^h,
Then sleep'd, and on the cross gave up his br^ath.
The Jews, his wicked Sons, did laugh and scorn,
To see his body naked, wounded, torn:
But godly Joseph grieved at this sight,
Came straight to Pilat when it was nigh night,
And begged his corpse: and as it was most meet,
Washed, and wrapped it in a linen Sheet.
But when he did awake, he blessed those,
That honored him, and cursed all his fo^s,
This bitter Cup, Lord, could not pass from thee,
But thou wast forced to drink it up for me*
Iniquity like water is drunk up,
And Kings are drunk with Babels poys'ned Cup.
The Church is drunk with gall and wormwood
and thou have made proud Rome to drink her blood
But now Lord bring her, unto thy Wine seller
Stay her with Flagons, and with new wine fill her:
Give her of thy best graces a good measure,
And let Rome drink the dreggs of thy displeasure
Genesis 22,
V. Isaac offered up.
ABram upon the Mount with his own hands,
Must kill his only Son, so God commands:
Isaac did carry wood, the fire is made,
The Child is bound, and on the Altar laid.
Abram pulls out the k^iffe and lifts his arm,
To give the blow, yet Isaac had no harm:
For Abrams good intention was accepted,
And by Gods voice, the blow was intercepted.
In stead of Isaac, Abram kills a Ram,
Caught in a bush, but knew not whence it came.
Jesus, Gods only Son, upon a Hill,
Must suffer death, such was his Fathers will.
He bore the cross, as Isaac bore the wood,
And did bedew this Altar with his blood,
As God he could not die, as man he suffered,
This is the Ram, which was for Isaac offered.
The Ram was slain and burned in the fire,
So Christ as man was scorched with Gods Ire.
The same God that from death did Isaac save,
Did also raise Christ Jesus from the grave.
o thou whose sacred head with thorns was croun'd
As Abrams Ram amongst the thorns was found*
My heart is barren as the briar or thorn,
Make her of thy good seed bring forth good corn
Lord bind my sins, and on thine Altar lay them,
Pull out thy sword, and in thy mercy slay them.
Make me to offer them with like affection,
As Abram did his Son by thy dir^ction.
Genesis 25.
VI. Rebeccas Twins.
REbeccas Twins no sooner were alive,
But in her womb they did begin to strive.
And w^e^her time was come that she should bear
Her Twins, the one was redd, and full of hair.
This came our first, and afterward the other,
Who by the heel, held fast his elder brother.
The one was cunning, greedy, fierce and wild,
The other simple, honest, plain, and mild.
This was a Shepherd, and dwelt in a Cottage,
And bought the Birthright for amesse of pottage.
Esau served Jacob: for the E^omits,
We know, served David and the Is^aelits.
The Jews our Elder Brethren were Elected
Before us, yet they are to us subjected.
As in Rebeccas womb so still there are;
Strifes in the Church of Christ, and civil war.
Between rough Esau and his younger Brother,
Struggling within the belly of their Mother.
I mea^e the Sons of God and Satan's brood,
These always hunt and persecute the good.
But yet at last, Gods children shall subdue them,
And Christ out of his blessed mouth will spue them
And as Rebbeccas twins did much perplexe ^er,
So in my heart are twins which always v^xe her.
The ^lesh and spirit are concei^'d in me,
Though they be ^wins yet they cannot agree.
The flesh like Esau, is the elder brother,
But yet the Spirit does best please his mother.
The flesh is rough and r^d, and hunts for pleasure,
And romes abroad, and's cunning above measure.
The mild and simple Spirit is content
To live here in this world, as in a Tent.
O Lord command the Flesh to serve the Spirit,
Grant him the Bi^^h-^ight that he may inherit
Thy bl^ssing; lo, ^e brings thee sauoury meat,
The sins which he has ^ill'd: then rise and eat.
Command him to draw n^re to thee, and kiss him
And in the name and clothes of Jesus, bless him.
VII. Jacobs Ladder. Genesis 28.

AS Jacob trauel'd toward Haran Town,
^e stayed one night at Luz, and there lay down,
Heau^ns starry curtain over him was spread
His pillow was a Ston^, the Earth his b^d.
H^ slept, and thought he saw a Ladd^r there,
R^aching from earth to heaven in the air.
On which the Angels up and down did move,
And God stood on the top himself above.
Jacob awoake out of his sleep, and said,
How fearful is this place; and was a frayd,
This can be nothing else (quoth he) but even,
The very house of God, and gate of Heaven.
He did anoint the stone on which he lay,
And called it Bethel, then he went his way.
Chirst is this Ladder, who has joined in one,
The Earth and Heaven by his passion.
His foot is on the Ear^h, in Heaven his head,
He Is God and man, Emanuell indeed.
As God he is from Heaven without a Mother,
As Man he is of Earth, our elder Brother.
By him from God, Angels to us descends,
By him to God, Prayers from us ascends.
He is like wise the Churches corner stone,
It is on him, on whom we rest alone.
O sweet Redeemer of my soul I pray,
Seeing thou art the truth, the Life, the way.
Lead me to Bethel, to that sacred place,
Where I may sleep all night and see thy face.
Thou art the God of consolation,
Then comfort me in my tentation.
And when the night of death shall over take me,
When all my friends and neighbors shall forsake me
Be thou with me, Lord leave me not alone,
But let me sleep with Jacob on the stone.
VIII. Jacobs Wrestling. Genesis 32.

When Jacobs people over the brook were gone,
He wrestled with a Man that night alone.
And did prevail, and when it was near day,
He would not let the Angel go a way.
Till he had blessed him first, which instantly
He did, and touched the hallow of his thigh.
And then he named Iac^b, Israel,
And Jacob named that place Peniel.
The Sons of Jacob in this latter^age,
Against the Son of God did storm and rage.
They Wrestled with him, and they did prevail,
And to the Cross his blessed Corpse did nail.
But the third Morning after he was Slain,
They let him go, for then he Rose again.
He blessed Jacobs Sons that feared his name,
But such as would not, he did wound and lame.
These wrestle with him still, and still they halt.
O Jew, yield to thy Lord, conf^sse thy fault.
Stick not, so closely to the Laws dead Letter:
Believe the Gospel, for that is much better.
My Soul like Jacob is afraid of Esau,
I mean the Flesh, then comfort her sweet Jesus.
For now she is alone, now it is night:
She trauells homeward, let her see thy light,
Thou wrestles with her still, by fears and cares;
And she again does wrestle with thee by prayers.
Lord grant her faith, and then she shall prevail,
Pray to thy Father, that it may not fail.
Weaken her carnal lusts, and make them lame,
Bless her before thou go, then change her name.
Mark how she holds, and will not let thee go,
Until thou give her strength against her foe.
Lord make thy Church a Peniel, or place
Wher^in my soul may see thee face to face.
Exodus 3.
IX. The Fiery Bush.
MOses upon Mount Horeb saw a flame
Which burned the Bush, but not comsum'd the same.
To which when he drew near to see the wonder,
From thence he heard the voice of God to thunder.
Moses put off thy shoes, and hide thy face,
I am the Lord, this is a holy place.
He troubled at the splendour of Gods presence,
Straight hid his face, and did him reverence.
The Church is like this Bush: fire may annoy her
The Cross I mean, but it can not destroy her.
For why? God dwells in her, he is her defense,
She needs not then to fear fires violence.
O Lord be thou my help and sure protection,
Make me to cast off every foul affection.
Make me to walk in fear as in thy sight,
And in the amidst of darkness be my light,
When thou with fire shall try me, I presume,
Although I burn, yet I shall not consume.
X. The Cloud and fiery Pillar. Exodus* 1^

FVll forty years in fear and pensiveness,
The people wandered in the Wilderness,
Until ^hey came unto the holy Land,
Which God did give them, by his mighty hand;
And all the while, because they knew no way,
Fir^ wa^ their guide by night, a Cloud by day.
Christ Jesus is ^ ^hadowie Cloud to those
Tha^ l^ues him, but a fire unto his foes.
He is to al^ the Children of the day
A Cloud to cool and guide them in their way;
Between them and the Sun, their great Creator,
He is a Hedge, a Cloud, a Mediator;
But to the Sons of darkness there is a fire,
And will like chafe consume them in his ire.
This Cloud was not begot of Sun or showers,
Neither was Christ's conception like ours:
But he was formed of the Holy Ghost,
As this Cloud was by God, to guide the Host.
O thou who on Mount Sin in clouds descended,
And on Mount Olive in a cloud ascended:
Who rides upon the Cl^wdes as in a Waine,
And in the Clouds will come to us again^.
Be thou my Cloud, my shelter, and defense,
Against Gods wrath, and Satan's violence.
And to that heavenly Canaan be my guide,
Where I with thee for ever may abide.
The Second Decade.
Exodus 16
I. Manna.
WHen Israel had thought themselves nie lost
God rained Man from heaven upon the host
With which for forty years he did them feed,
In form it was l^ke Coliander seed:
And that this wonder might not be forgot,
Some of it was kept in a golden pot.
Christ is this Man: which in a mist did fall
On Mary, for his birth was mystical.
This is a better bread then that white hoare
Which fell upon the Desert in such store.
He shall not dye that eats of this bread,
By Faith, but shall be raised from the dead.
Lord with this Manna feed my soul therefore,
That I may never hunger any more.
Then I will not forget this mercy, but
My mind shall keep it as the Golden Pot.
Exodus 17.
II. The Rock.
THe Rod of Moses gave the Rock a blow,
Which caused Crystal waters thence to flow.
The Churches Rock received in his side
A wound, which caused gently thence to glide
Water and Blood, a double Sacrament
Of Christ's last Will and blessed Testament.
I Am faint and foul: then feed Lord and refresh me,
Feed with thy Blood, and with thy water wash me
III. Arons Rod, Sarah, the Virgin Mary. Number. 17 Genesis 21. Luke 1.

THis wither^d rod brought forth fruit, leaves, and flowers
Without the help of Sun, or dropping showers
It was as great a wond^r that a Maid,
Should bear a Child without Man's h^lpe and a'de
Sarah though Barren, though her Lord was old,
Yet had a Child at last as God foretold.
As great a wonder on my soul as these,
Thou can perform O Lord, if so thou please,
She is a Maid she is a Withered Rod,
She is a Barren Sarah: then O God,
Give Children, or with Rachel else she dies,
Mark how with Hanna for a Child she c^ies:
Make her a fruitful Mother of good actions,
Make her to bud with clean and sound affections.
IIII. Iericos Walls. Iosuah 6:

NOt men of war but priests did tumble douw
The lofty walls of this most wretched Town
In stead of Engines they did use the sound,
Of Rams-hornes which did beat them to the ground
The preaching of the Gospel is these Horns,
A silly means and which the world scorns.
Yet by it God exhalteth hum^le ones.
And does cast down the mighty from their thrones
When Gods most blessed wordbegan to sound,
Then Satan's Kingdom fell flat to the ground.
Lord let us hear continually this Trumpet,
Sounding against the Babilonish Strumpet.
Beat down her lofty walls, and we desire,
That thou will burn up her Town with fire.
Destroy all those that would this whore adore,
And let their flame asc^nd for evermore.
Judge. 6.
V. Gedeons Fleece.
When all the Earth was dry then dew did fall
Upon the flee^e, but afterward when all,
The Earth was wet with dew, the fleece was dry,
Which is to Jews and Greeks a mystery.
The Jews that little fleece was wet at first,
With dew of Grace, but now they are a thirst.
The Gentiles who atfirst were dry, are now,
We^e with this grace, they know not why nor how
But that it pleased God some for to choose,
Of his free grace, and others to refuse.
O thou whose hair is full of dew, whose locks,
Are wet with night drops watching over the flocks
Water thy Church with grace from heaven still,
As thou wast wont with dew high Hermon hill.
Or as proud Babels king with dew was wet
When he was forced with Oxen grass to eat.
Let Jacobs bl^ssing fall upon her, even
The fatness of the earth and dew of Heaven*
VI. Sampson. Judge. 14.15, 16.

AS Sampson went to see his Wife one day,
He kills a Ramping Lion by the way.
His Wife was fair but yet she was a stranger,
And brought her Husband oftentimes in danger.
And by her means the riddle was expounded.
Which Sampson to the Philistims propounded.
Their corn and fruits he burned up with firebra^ds
And break the cords a sunder from his hands,
And with an Asses iaw bone which he found,
He knocked a thousand of them to the ground.
But this same bone which had so many killed
Did unto thirsty Sampson water yield,
He bore away Azzas posts and door,
And was at last betrayed by his whore:
Who cut off Sampsons hair, and so at length,
He lost his eyes, his liberty, and strength.
But being led to Dagons house, he cries
To God for strength, for to revenge his eyes.
God heard his prayer, then Sampson laid his hand
Upon the Posts on which the house did stand:
And so to make an end of all his woes,
He pulled down Dagons temple on his foes.
Thus by his glorious death he killed far more,
Then he had done in all his life before.
Jesus that blessed Nazari^e did tarry
Here with the Church a while, whom he did marry,
He took her though a stranger for his Wife,
And for her sake, he did forsake his life.
Death was the Lion which he ^ill'd by death,
By it he g^ue the Church spiritual breath;
From this strong eater, he brought out sweet meat.
The bread of Life for every soul to eat.
This Riddle to his wife he did impart,
And likewise all the counsels of his heart.
He will with fire all Her^ticks devour,
Which with false doctrine would his Church deflowre.
The wicked do account his word, alas,
No better then the Iawbone of an Ass.
Yet this same word does many thousands kill,
But is to thirsty souls a springing well.
Christ slept a while within deaths gates, but rose,
Again betimes in despite of his foes.
He bore away deaths mighty posts and doors,
He spoiled principalities and powers.
His followers which then were bu^ aleauen,
Did see him from the Mount, mount up to Heaven
The Romans over the Jews did rules as Lo^ds,
At whose command they bound Christ's hands with cords
They cut his hair and head with thorns, and cast,
Him in the prison of the Grave at last.
Christ pulled the T^mple of his body down,
But raised it up again with great renown.
Which Sampson could not do: he loosed the bands
Of cruel death from off his feet and hands.
O happy day wherein that Temple f^ll,
Which by the weight thereof crushed death and hell.
The Philistines O Lord my sins, do bind
My soul with cords, lo how they make her grind.
Here in this body as it were in prison,
They have pulled out her eyes of wit and reason.
Lord give her strength again, and hear her cries,
That she may be revenged for her eyes.
These Philistines to my great grief and shame,
And to the great dishonor of thy name.
Are met within the Temple of my breast,
Where at my wretched soul they laugh and ies^.
Lord shake the pillars of this house, and bury
These wicked sins in thy just wrath and fury.
VII. David and Goliath. 1 Samuel 17

WHen none of all the people durst encounter
With great Goliath, David did adventure:
Though younger, though a Shepherd, though in stature
But little, and effeminate in feature.
Though Eliab dehorts him, yet he fears not,
And for the greatness of Goliath cares not.
Thither he came by Iesses own direction,
And was assured of the Lords protection.
Before he killed a Lion and a Bear.
Then why should he that boasting Giant fear.
Saul's Armor and his Raimeut he refuses,
And five smooth stones out of the brook he chooses.
Then runs unto the Camp and with his sling,
A Stone against the Philistine did fling,
With which he smote the Giant in the head,
Who with that blow fainted, and fell down dead:
Thus little David without sword or spear,
Did kill the Giant as he did the Bear.
Christ by his Fathers will came down to see,
His Brethren which lay long in Misery,
Under the fearful slavery of the Devil,
And k^ew not who would free them from the evil,
Till Christ the Sheepe-heard, and that little one,
By his Almighty power, and with a Stone,
Had killed the Giant, and had set us free,
And by his death had slain death on the tree.
Death was the Giants Sword, but Christ indead,
Has with this Sword cut of the Giants head.
The Jews our elder Brethren were right sorry,
That Christ by death should get us life and glory,
What is there done ^ Jew, was there not cause
That Christ by death should save us from deaths jaws
O Son of David! Satan's in the field,
Armed against my soul with spear and sheeld.
She Is almost brought to desperation,
So grievous Lord is her tentation,
Come down and help her then, thou art her brother
You both have but one father and one mother.
Knock down this boasting Giant to the ground,
Pull out thy sling, give him his deadly wound.
Cut off his head, and let him rise no more
To vex my soul as he has done before.
Then shall my soul acknowledge thee her King,
If thou will kill the Giant with thy sling.
And she shall praise thee as it is most meet,
For thou can tread down Satan under feet.
VIII. Eliah. 1 Kings 17.18, 19

ELiah from his Queen and Country fled,
And was by Ravens in the Desert fed.
To God upon mount Horeb he complained
Of all his wrongs which there he had sustained.
To the Sidonian widow God did send him,
And from his raging foes did still defend him:
He raisd the Widows son, increasd her meal,
And killd the Priests of Baal in his zeal.
By his incessant prayer he did optaine
From God for three years space, and six months, rain.
He built an Altar upon Carmel hill,
And to the Lord a Bullock there did kill.
Fire on the Beast, fire on his Foes descended,
And he on wheels of fire to heaven ascended:
Christ the great Prophet did re^^ct the jews
His Country men, because they did refuse
To hearken to his voice; from them he fled
Unto the Gentiles, and by them was fed.
These were at first blacks as the Raven or Crow,
But now by grace they are made white as snow.
The widows house Christ's church does represent,
To which this great Prophet for harbor went.
Her children all were dead, but he reuiues them,
And with increase of graces still releeues them.
Three years and six months he did preach with pain,
His words fell on the Jews l^ke drops of rain.
He by his mighty word false Prophets slew,
All heathnish Priests and rites he overthrew.
The work of pure redemption being ended,
On white bright clouds our Lord to heaven ascended.
I am a Widow Lord, I am alone,
Come make my soul thy habitation.
Increase my meal and oil, O Lord increase
My faith and love to thee: grant me thy grace.
Revive my Son, my works are dead I know,
Then raise them up, that they may live and grow.
Pray to thy Father Lord that he may power
Upon my barren heart a heavenly ^howre.
Cut off false Priests; send fire from heaven O Christ,
And burn my sins, I humbly thee request.
IX. Gods aparition to Eliah on Mount Horeb. 1 Reg. 19

ELiah on Mount Horeb could not find
The Lord in fire, earthquake, and whirlewinde:
But in a soft and still voice him did hear,
And then to God with reverence drew near.
Thy Spirit Lord dwells not in violence,
Thou dwells in mercy, mildness, innocence.
Lord make me mild, take from me strife and malice
Then dwell in me, my soul shall be thy Palace.
X. Eliahs assumption. 2 Reg. 2

Fiery Eliah in fire and whirlewinde
Went up to heaven, but left his cloak be^inde;
So Christ our Lord ascended up on high,
But left behind him his mortality.
Lord let my soul on fiery wheels of love,
And whirlewinde of zeal still mount above.
Teach me to shake off care of worldly things,
For that's the cloak which still about me hangs.
The Third Decade.
^ Kings ^. and 4. ^ ^xod. 15
I. Elisha's pot of Salt, and Meal. Moses his Rod.
THe bitter waters, and the barren ground,
Were by Elisha's Salt made sweet and sound.
So did the same Elisha strangely heal
The noisome Pottadge with a little meal.
So Moses sometimes with a piece of wood,
Did Marahs waters sweeten and make good.
O Lord this Wood, this Salt, this little Flower,
Do show that thou can bring sweet ont of sour.
This Wood did sweeten Marah; So that Tree,
On which thou diedst, has given life to me.
Lord season my afflictions, heal my fault,
Either with sweet or sour, with meal or salt.
2. King. 4
II. The Sunamites Son.
GEhazi from the Mount came down apace,
And laid the Staff upon the Infants face.
But that could not restore to life again
The Child, therefore Elisha must be feign
To come, who over the Child himself extends,
And ioynes his mouth to mouth, and hands to hands
Then presently the Child began to sneeze,
And on the Prophet lifted up his eyes.
The world was dead in sin, but thou, O God,
Did send the Prophets with the Word, thy Rod.
But they could not to the dead Child restore
Spiritual life, thou camst thy self therefore.
Thou kissed us, thou assumed our stape and feature,
Thou did enjoyne thy self to our base nature.
Lord join thy hands to mine, join eyes to eyes,
And mouth to mouth, that I from sin may rise.
Neither the staffes nor servant can give breath,
To my dead soul, but thou by thy sweet death.
III. The Wise Men and Star. Mat. 2.

THree wisemen came to Bethlem from a far,
They were conducted thither by a Star.
To Christ Frankincence, Myth, and Gold they bring
To show he was both God, and Man, and King.
The Gentiles once far off do now begin,
To draw n^ere to the Church, and to come in.
The Church is Bethl^m, or the house of bread,
Where Christ the Bread of life is borne indeed.
This Star shined all the way that these men came,
But did not shine upon Jerusalem.
The Gentiles saw it, though thy dwelt so far,
Yet Jacobs Sons could not see Jacobs Star.
O wretched Iewe^ you have been ever blind,
You groope at noone, yet Christ you cannot find,
On you he shined, and you could not perceive him
Yet strangers whom he knew not, did r^ceiue him.
Lord bring me unto Bethlem and protect me,
And with thy word as with a Star direct me.
Sweet Babe accept the gifts which here I offer,
To thee out of my heart, my choicest coffer.
Not gold, but love; not incense, but good actions;
Not Myrrh, but all my mortified affections.
IIII. The touching of Christ's garment.
Thousands did press on Christ, both poor and rich
But only one poor woman did him touch.
Her touch was faithful, but the peoples pressing,
Was carnal, therefore they rec^iu'd no blessing.
She by the faithful touching of Christ's garment,
Was cured of her twelve years grief and torment.
The faithless Papists in their carnal mass,
Touch not Christ's hem, but rudely on him press.
Faith, faith is it* which only does him please,
Lord grant me faith, and then I shall have ease,
For till I touch, till to my soul thou say,
Be of good cheer, my grief will not away.
V. The good Samaritane. Luke 10.

THe Priest and Leuite did not help the man
Whom thieves did wound, but the Samaritan
Who powered in his wounds soft oil and wine,
Do thou the like sweet Jesus now to mine.
Spiritual thieves, my mortal sins have hurt me,
Then with thy grace and mercy Lord support me.
For men and Angels neither will nor can
Cure me, but thou O sweet Samaritan.
Power in my wounds the oil of thy good Spirit,
And wash them in the new wine of thy merit.
Then bind them up with love, and bare my sin
Upon thy flesh, then bring me to the Inn,
I mean thy Church; speak to the hoasts thy preachers
That they will be my comforters and teachers;
Till thou return again, for then I know
That thou will pay the debts which I do owe.
VI. The lost Sheep. Luke 15.

THe man that has a hundredth Sheep, forsakes
Ninety and nine, to seek out one that lakes
And goes after still, until he finds
That sheep, and then rejoices with his friends.
Christ left his Angels, and without delay
Sought out mankind, that had gone long astray,
And finds him out the same d^y of his birth,
Which caused in heaven and earth great joy and mirth.
Old Simeon, and Ann, and Mary sung,
And heavens bright roof with songs of Angels ^ung.
Sweet Shepherd of my soul I humbly pray,
Seek out thy sheep, for she is gone astray:
Anst bare her on thy shoulders, as sometimes
Thou did thy cross, bare all her sins and crimes.
And through the dangers of this life conduct her,
Be thou her food, and with thy word instruct her.
Then bring her home, and when she is come thither,
Call all thy Saints and Angels straight together.
They are thy friends, make them rejoice and sing
All Halleluiah to their Lord and King.
Who sought me up and down with grief and pain,
And did at last find his lost sheep again.
Luke 15.
VII. The Prodigal.
Having spent all, and being in great want,
His former course of life he did recant.
Home he returns, and his fault confesses,
His father meets him, and his son embraces.
The best robe was brought forth at his command,
Shoes for his feet, a gold ring for his hand.
Then sent for music, and caused kill the Calfe,
Which made the elder brother fret and chafe.
The Jews did murmur at the Gentiles calling,
Therefore the Gentiles rising was their falling.
My soul has left his native soil, and lives
Here in a strange place full of whores and thieves;
To spend his heavenly portion they bewitch him,
With which sometime his Father did enrich him.
Lo^ all is spent, and now he is forced to serve
Under a Merchant, where he is like to starve:
Satan I mean who feeds him with his swine,
Whose cheer was wont to be oil, milk, and wine.
For all the dainties of this world are
But husks with Gods chief blessings to compare.
My soul then being in this woeful case,
Begins to call to mind his wonted grace.
His fathers house, his cheer, his wealth and treasure,
His hired servants with their ease and pleasure.
Sweet Father lo thy prodigal returns
Naked and torn, mark how he sobs and mournes.
He does confess the faults that he has done,
That he is unworthy to be called thy Son.
He has offended heaven, and thee, yet make him
Thy servant Lord, and do not now forsake him.
Meet and prevent him with preventing grace,
And by a kiss make him enjoy thy face.
Cloth him with thy best robe of innocence,
And give him shoo^s to run with patience
His race. Put on a Ring and make him free
From ^inne, and death, and Satan's tyranny.
Then set him down, and let his soul be filled
With that fat Calfe, which for his sins was killed.
Come in O brother Jew, do not disdain,
My soul once dead, but now alive again.
John 19.
VIII. Christ's Coat parted.
O Thou whose life the wicked Jews derided,
Whose seamlesse Coat by Soldiers was divided,
Thy church was once a coat without a seame,
But now she is divided to our shame.
So is that coat of perfect holiness
Which thou lent me to cloth my nakedness.
My cruel sins to my great grief and scorn
From my poor soul this blessed coat have torn.
And now to me it is both shame and torment
To see my naked soul without this garment.
Fig leaves of merits will not hide my sins,
Nor yet that coat which Adam had of skins.
But I am counseled by the Church my mother,
To put on thy fair clothes dear elder brother.
That I may in thy name, and clothes, and savor,
Receive my Fathers blessing and his favor.
John 19.
IX. Christ's side pierced.
O Lord thy heart was pierced with a Lance,
It was for mine, but not for thine offense.
Pearce then my heart with sorrow for my sin,
And bath it in the blood which thence did spin.
For here is Jacobs Well, there flows from hence
These waters which can wash my conscience.
Here is the door of life, and heavens high way,
Then let me enter Lord while it is day:
And suffer me with Thomas for to hide
My sinful hand within thy wounded ^ide.
X. Christ and Mary speaking together. John 2^.

C. Touch me not Mary.


M. Why dear Jesus? why?


C. I am not yet ascended up on high.
Thou comes to touch me with thy carnal hand,
It is not hands but faith that I demand.
But now, thou art ascended, thou art gone
To sit with God thy Father in his Throne.^
Permit me then by faith O Jesus sweet,
To touch, and kiss thy wounded hands and feet.

The commendations of the private Country Life.
O Hills and dales, woods, groves, and crystal springs,
The best delight of transitory things.
I more esteem your Tempe shades and flowers,
The^ Princes Courts, proud towns, and lofty towers.
Here may the mind talk freely with her Maker.
She needs no help of Priest or Romish baker.
To bake or make him of a piece of bread,
His body is in Heaven, so says our Creed.
His spirit every where that may be seen,
In every bush, in every meadow green.
Here may the mind with admiration,
Contemplate every constellation.
That Heavenly host of Stars, their restless motion,
There light, and might upon the Earth and Ocean.
And higher yet she soars with faiths swift wings,
Above all Heavens unto the King of Kings.
She hears not Trumpets sound, nor Cannons roar,
She fears not Neptune beating on the shore.
For those the birds in Parti-coulerd cotes,
Sound in her ears variety of notes.
She scorns the Courtiers life, his sweet perfumes
He cl^t^es, his curled hair, his shaking plumes,
To see the meadows spring, the Rivers glide,
Do more delight her then their painted pride.
She needs not walls and forts for her defense,
But shades of trees and peace of conscience.
Here is not to be found that misery,
Which reigns in Cities, I mean Vsery.
No envy here, no wrongs, no vanity,
No treason, slander, pride, nor flattery.
But innocence, truth, and a quiet life,
Are found in woods; in Cities care and strife.
Sound bodies men have here contented minds,
Which seldom in great Cities any finds.
Here no corruption does infect the air,
Men are content with unbought simple fare.
With many sins great Cities still are tainted,
With many cares rich Merchants are tormented.
But here the harmless, careless merry Swain,
Sits singing, whistling, piping on his cane.
By day he leads and guides his silent sheep,
By night no cares disturbs his quiet sleep.
Thus lived our Fathers in the golden age,
They spent in woods and caves their pilgrimage.
FINIS.

