(...) the mete was ready: and the time of the day was come to go to dinner / the
fader came with a basyn and an ewyr. and the mother with a towel saying sir. Sir
all thing is ready / please it you to wasshe: and when the king saw that: he
smyled and said to him self Now is the song of the nyghtyngale true. for my
fader and my mother should gladely fulfille as I said: if I my self would there
/ to consent and suffer them. But he would not suffer them to do him that
service: saying / your age is to be honored: and therefore I wol not of it.
and called unto him one of his servants the which served him thereof. Than
said the knight / ye wol not suffer us to do it to our honor: for we are
not worthy thereto. The king said. Have not I said that for the honor of
your a / ge I forbere it: when the king was set at the table. he set his
mother on the right hand of him / and his fader on his left side. and they
asmoche as they might beheld his up sage and countenance. The dinner ended

the king entered in to a chamber / and made the knight with his lady to coome
in to him: and commanded al other to a void and go out / and when they were
thus a / lone: the king said unto them. have ye no children. They answered
we have neither son ne daughter. And the king said had ye never none. The
knight answered we have had one son: but he is long a go deed. The king
asked of what death dyed he. The knight said: a natural death. Tho said the
king. if I may otherwise know that he dyed. than are ye found with a
defaute. Tho asked the knight. My lord wherefore inquere ye thus after our
son? The king answered. that do I not with out cause / and therefore I
wolle know of what death he dyed: and if ye wolle not tell me I shall cause you
to dye a shameful death when they herd that they fill to ground up on there knees
before him and askid him mercy and foryeuenes of their lives. The king would not
suffer them to knele / but shortly took them and said. To that intent came I
not to your house to ete your bread and to betraye you / but say me the
truth and ye shall be saved. for it is yeuen me to understand that ye have put
him to death. and if that come in judgment ye must dye a shameful death. Than
said the knight. forde pardone me of my life and I shall show you the
verraye truth. The king said: fere not / for I shall do you no harm. Tho
said he. Soueraygne lord we had a son only that was wise and lettryd and
right well understand. And upon a time as he stood before us and served at the
table. There came a nyghtingale that right swetly sange whoos song he began to
interpret and tell us what it meant / and said. This bird syn / geth that I
shall be come so great and mighty a lord that it shall be to your honor and
aduaunsement in such wise: ye ye my fader shall be glad to hold the basyn with
water to wasshe in mine hands. and my mother ye towel if I wolle suffer it. And
when I herd that: I was fore meuyd and took and cast him into the sea for to
drown. Tho said the king: what evil might have come to you / if he had been
made so great and mighty / me thinks it should have been your honor and
proufyt. The knight said lord it was no reason but a woodnesse. The king
answered: that was a great folisshnes of you that ye would do ayenste the
ordenau^ce and will of god. But now ye shall know for troth that I am your son
that ye cast into the sea / and god of his great mercy and goodness has
sauyd me: and by his grace has brought me to this state and dignyte. And the
fader and mother herynge that with fere and joy replenysshed fill flat to the
ground: whom he friendly and loving / ly took up / saying fear not: butt
rather be glad and joyous / for ye shall no thing suffer / but my evaltacion
shall be your glory and joy and proufyte for euyr / and kyste both his fader
and mother with great joy and gladness. Tho began the mother to weep. Than
said the king weep not / but be of good conforte and chere. for in my realm
shall ye be taken and honored abooue me during my life: in all things. and
took

(...)
