LECTVRES, UPON THE HISTORY OF THE PASSION, RESVRRECTION, AND ASCENSION OF OUR
LORD JESUS CHRIST. Beginning at the eighteenth Chapter of the Gospel,
according to S. JOHN, and from the 16. verse of the 19. Chapter thereof,
containing a perfect Harmony of all the four Evangelists, for the better
understanding of all the Circumstances of the LORDS death, and Resurrection.

PREACHED BY THAT reverend and faithful servant of God, Mr. ROBERT ROLLOCKE,
sometime Minister of the Euangell of JESUS CHRIST, and Rector of the College
of EDINBVRGH.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HEART. ANNO 1616.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, THEIR MOST LOVING FRIEND IN THE LORD, MASTER WILLIAM
SCOT, OF ELI, Grace in this life, and Everlasting Glory in the life to come.
RIght worshipful, albeit that the true knowledge of Christ crucified, of all
other, be the most worthy and excellent: and albeit that in him be the only
and full matter of man's gloriation: yet few there be who strive to know him as
they should, and to make him the matter of their rejoicing. For to speak
nothing of the Gentiles, who count the preaching of Christ crucified to be
foolishness, or of the Jews who count it a stumbling block, 1. Cor. 1, 23.
or of the Turks, who will not acknowledge him to be their Redeemer: even they
who have been baptized in Christ, and profess outwardly his word, and true
doctrine, if they remain in nature, and be not prevented by the spirit of
adoption, whereby they may see their own misery, their sins, and the
terrors of the wrath of God for sin, in the mean time that they profess
Christ, they in heart scorn the Cross of Christ, his wounds, and his blood,
they account the knowledge thereof of little value: yea, they will prefer to
it the knowledge of any thing here beneath, and they will seek the matter of
their gloriatio^ not in it, but either in themselves, or else into the creatures
of God, which in themselves are but transitorious shadows. The natural man
will never think, that he can find greater things in Christ crucified, than
he will find, if he obtain the object which most he desires, likes and longs
for. The ambitious man will not think that he can get greater honor, than to
be called the son of a King or Emperor: he will not refuse with Moses, to be
called the son of Pharaoes daughter, that he may be called the son of God,
Heb. 11.24. The sensual man cannot think that he can find any greater
pleasure, than in his sinful lust, and he will never choose, rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin. The
covetous man can never think, that any greater happiness can be, than here on
earth to have gold, silver and treasures: he will never with Moses esteem the
rebuke of Christ greater riches, than the treasures of Egypt. Only that man
whom God preuents by his Spirit, and calls effectually from the kingdom of
darkness to the kingdom of light, will account duly of the Cross of Christ,
and will say with the Apostle, God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14. and, I decreed not to know any
thing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2: that man will call it
the supereminent knowledge of Jesus Christ, Philip. 3.8: and he only will make
Christ crucified to be the matter of his gloriation: for he will see, that God
in him, as in a storehouse has placed all treasures, and that in him dwells
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9: he will thirst to be woompled in
the wounds of Jesus, and washed in the blood of Jesus: yea, that man will see,
that God has manifested in Christ our Savior, and in his death and
resurrection his glorious properties more clearly, than in the work of our
creation, or any other of his works whatsouer: (for he is called, the
brightness of the glory, and the engraued form of the person of the Father,
and the Image of the invisible God, Heb. 1.3.) and that man will see, that
there is nothing, which the soul of man inlakes, stands in need of, or can
desire, but he will find it in Christ. Would thou see the glorious
properties of God? consider first, his power: albeit in the work of creation
his power appeared to be incomprehensible and omnipotent, when by his word he
formed all things of nothing, and called these things that are not, and made
them to be yet in the work of the Redemption he manifested greater power: for
notwithstanding Satan, the power of darkness, the sins of the Elect, which
Jesus bare, death and the grave were against him, yet powerfully he raised
Jesus from death, Ephesians. 1.19: there is a great power: and whereas in the
Creation he formed to Adam a spous out of his own ribbe: in the Redemption, he
formed the Church of God out of the blood of Christ: there he gave life, in
commanding that to be which was not: here he gives life, not by life, but by
death, and by the death even of his own Son. Albeit in the work of Creation
great, and more than wonderful does his wisdom appear, in making this
glorious and beautiful fabric, and in making all things, even contraries, to
agree in such an harmony: yet in the work of Redemption, God by finding out a
way, which no creature, neither man nor Angel, could invent, how that justice
and mercy could stand together, has showed greater wisdom: his wisdom is
such, that the Angels admires, and desires to look in it, 1. Pet. 1.22. Albeit
great anger and wrath did the Lord utter many times against sinners: as in the
old world by the Flood, and on Sodom and Gomorrhe, by raining from heaven
brimstone and fire, he destroyed man, woman, young, old, rich and poor
without exception: yet more clearly was his anger against sin seen, when
for the sins of the Elect he spared not his own well beloved Son, on who^ they
were laid: but made his wrath so fearfully to pursue him, that he cried, My
soul is very heavy, eue^ unto the death, Marc. 14.34: and, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Matt. 27.46. And albeit great love did the Lord show
toward men, and gave many testimonies thereof, in giving them life, and breath,
and all things, Act. 17.25, in making his sun to shine on them, his rain to
fall on them, giving them fruitful seasons, and filling their hearts with food
and gladness, Act. 14.17: yet never such love showed he, as when he sent the
Son of God to be the Son of man, that the sons of me^ might be made the
sons of God again: and when he made him to die, that men might live. Herein
(says Ioh. 4.10) is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be a reconciliation for our sins: here only is an
incontrollable testimony of an undoubted love: and if ye will duly consider
all the rest of Gods glorious properties, ye shall find them all most clearly
manifested in the person of Jesus Christ. Now would thou know that in him
thou shall find all things that the soul of man stands in need of, and can
require? What can the soul of man require? Desire thou honor? If thou
beleeuest in him, he shall grant thee that power and prerogative, that thou
shall be the Son of God, Ioh. 1.12. Desire thou riches? He was made poor,
that thou through his poverty might be made rich, 2. Cor. 8.9: not with
transitory and corruptible riches, but with riches and treasures incorruptible
and permanent: desire thou food, meat, drink to thy soul? He is that bread
of life, he is that water of life: desire thou wisdom, sanctification and
redemption? Christ is all these unto thee, 1. Cor. 1.29: Ioh. 8.12: Desire
thou light? He is the light of the world, Ioh. 8.12. Desire thou life? He is
thy life, Col. 3.4: What ever he suffered, it was for thee: for by his stripes
we are healed, Esai 53.5: He was burdened with shame, that he might redeem
thee from shame, and cloth thee with glory: he was taken and bound, to set thee
at liberty, who was bound with Satan and sin: he was mocked, and was dumb
before the earthly Judge, that thou whose mouth before was closed through the
guilt of sin before God, might have boldness and peartnesse in thy prayers
and supplications: he suffered-anguish and grief, that thou might find
comfort and joy* he drank the gall, that thou might drink of a sweet and
joyful cup: he was naked, that thou might be clothed: and if thou will go
through all the points of his suffering, and apply them to thy broken and
casten down soul, thou shall find, that every one of them shall furnish
comfort unto thee: yea, if thou be a true penitent sinner, and beleeuest in
him, thou shall find all these miracles to be wrought and performed in thy
soul, which ever the Lord in the days of his humiliy wrought on the body of
any: thou shall find life to thy dead soul, eyes to thy blind soul, ears to
thy deaf soul, limbs to thy lame soul, a new tongue to thy dumb soul,
etc. Therefore, as we should take pleasure and delight in reading the whole
parts of the Scripture (for it is all by divine inspiration, and is profitable
to teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, 2. Tim.
3.16) so chiefly, that part which co^taines the history of the passion and
resurrection of Christ: for of all there is none more profitable, none more
necessary, none more easy to be understood by the simple, none more easy to
be kept in memory, none more forcible to move the affections, either to
admire the incomprehensible and infinite love of God toward sinners, or the
fiercenes of his wrath for sin, or the severity of his justice in seeking
such exact satisfaction, or to move to detest and abhor sin, which made the
Son of God to be made so unworthily always handled, and at last to be so
shamefully crucified, or to rejoice for these incomprehensible benefits that
Christ has acquired to us, our effectual calling from the kingdom of darkness
to his marvelous light, our justification in pacifying the wrath of God, in
satisfying for sin, in absoluing us from guiltines, in dying that we might
live, in bringing peace and joy to the conscience, etc. our sanctification,
whereby we are repaired to his own Image. Nothing serves more for the
mortificatio^, nor when we consider how Christ hang upon the Cross for sin,
nothing will move us more effectually to conform our selves to him as an
ensample in his humility* patience, obedience, love: and finally in offering
our selves to him, as he offered himself for us, nor when by faith we behold
Christ on the Cross crucified for us.

Now this history of the death and resurrection of Christ have many worthy men
learnedly and co^fortably handled and exponed with great painfulnes, and no
less co^mendatio^: amongst the rest, that reverent and faithful man of God, M.
Robert Rollocke of blessed memory for his learned and judicious exposition
thereof, and for his manifold other graces which God vouchsafed on him,
deserves with the first to be co^me^nded: for God in him, as in a vine
ensample, gave us a show of such qualities and co^ditio^s, as are required to
be in a Bishop of Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 3. In him learning and godliness strove
together, knowledge and conscience, art and nature, a profession and an
answerable conversation: he was faithful and painful in his calling, and his
calling did he decore with an holy and harmless life: for between these two
there was such an harmony and consent, that in reading his writtings, any man
might see the manner of his life: and in seeing his life, he might also therein
read his writtings: for his life spoke what his pen wrote and his person was a
pattern of his written precepts: he was never idle, but ever doing the office
of a Minister of Jesus: either did he read, meditate, pray, comfort, preach or
write: no travel did he refuse that he might glorify God, who sent him,
enlarge the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and acquire miserable souls from misery
to felicity, from darkness to light, and from death to life, that so at last he
might finish his course with joy: that was his meat and his drink, the delight
and pleasure of his soul. Great graces did the Lord bestow upon him, excellent
knowledge, great humility, fervent zeal, charitable interpreting of all men's
doings, compassion toward all sorts of sinners. Who in co^ceiuing was more
quick? in judgment more solid? in memory more steadfast and sure? in delivery
more pithy, in conuincing more powerful? who with learning had greater facility
and easines in declaring his mind, and resolving ye text of Scripture? greater
clearnes in raising ye grounds of doctrine? greater power in applying, greater
wisdom in furnishing consolation, and greater dexterity in loosing of things
obscure and doubtsome? In one word we may be bold to say of him, that which
Nazianzene spoke of Athanasius, that his life was a good definition of a true
Minister and preacher of the Gospel. But we need not to insist in praising
him, seeing so many: even all that knew him by face, or heard him, do praise
him for the singular and excellent virtues and graces, that God bestowed on
him: yea, they who never knew him by face, but by his learned and judicious
writtings dwelling afar off, have highly commended him, and the posterity
whose profit so much he regarded in his labors, we doubt not, shall know
and praise him, and we had rather be silent, than to speak too little.

Now, Sir, because we thought, that these Lectures on this history of the
passion and resurrection of Christ in it self: for the matter so moving and
alluring, would profit and edify many, if not of the most learned, at least,
of the simple sort: and that other Sermons that were delivered by him, and set
out by us of before, were well liked of by many, and that sundry hearing that
they were in hands, longed to see them come to light, we have taken some pains
in reuising and correcting them, not only for the love and duty that we ought
to that faithful and reverend Author of them, who was our master: but also
that with the greater liking and profit they might be read by all them that
desire to be edified. And what our pains herein has been, few can well judge,
but those who have been acquainted with such cases: we have endeavored to give
the true meaning of the Author clearly, to make his method plain: we have
omitted many superfluous repetitions: we filled out imperfect sentences: we
cleared things obscure: we rectified the sentences which were inuerted: we
endeavored so far as was possible, to give out his own phrase, style and
matter. As for the matter, this we may boldly affirm, that it is fully set
down, and that it is as good at least, if it be not better than his Latin
Commentary set forth by himself: yea, we doubt nothing, but the matter shall
satisfy all men, who crave edification: but as for the phrase and style, we
dare not say, that it will be found so absolute and exact in all things, as if
it had been finished by himself, before he ended his course, neither as we
would wish, and other men would require: And what marvel? seeing neither did
he deliver them of purpose to be printed, neither did he ever see them
thereafter, neither were they received by his Scholars upon that purpose: but
only for the helping of their own memory: yea, and at the first time after,
that upon your request, Sir, we took pains upon them, we found such hardness
and imperfections, and that his own phrase and elegancy was not observed, that
we feared to hazard the name and credit of the learned and judicious Author,
who deserved so well of us, yea, of the whole Church of God, and had left off
the work as imperfect, if the earnest request of you, and of some other of the
learned, (whose judgments are to be reuere^ced) had not encouraged us thereto.
Yet we trust, that the style shall not be much blamed, except by those, who
being delicate eared, regardes language more tha^ matter: for there is here an
easy method, with a familiar style condesce^ding to the capacity of the
meanest, and answerable to the matter entreated, to wit, the cross of Christ,
which refuses to be decored with humane eloquence, that ye matter be not
obscured by the style, but may appear above it, as often times M. Rollocke
himself was wont to speak. Yea albeit it may be, that the style in some few
of the first Sermons be somewhat hard and unpleasant, which we might easily
have amended, if we had not thought it unmeet to have set out his matter in
our words: yet if any will read forward: especially, from that part where the
Harmony of all the Evangelists is taken in, and all the four are in such sort
conferred together, that no circumsta^ce of the history of Christ's death and
resurrection is omitted, he shall ever find more and more conte^tment in all
things. And as we have taken pains for the profit and edificatio^ of many: so
we doubt not, but the success and event shall answer to our desire. For to
speak nothing of the history it self, which is so plesa^t, sweet, plain,
easy and forcible to move all the affections of the soul: here ye will find,
how every clause and sentence of every one of the Eua^gelists are linked
together, and depend one upon another; according to the order of nature: here
ye will see a plain and an easy method: here ye will see how clearly the
doctrine resultes off the doctrine laid down: here ye will see fit applications
to these times: and here ye will see, when occasion offers, how the enemies of
the truth of God, are pithily convinced and confuted.

And now, if we would presume to dedicate this work and our labors therein to
any other than to you, Sir, whose deseruings have bin so great, both toward
the Author himself, and us also, we might be justly blamed, and could have no
show of reasonable excuse: for first, who knew M. Robert Rollocke, but they
also knew what entire affection you carried toward him, and how careful you
were in all things to please him: even from the time that first your
acquaintance began, till the time that he finished his course: none loved him
more te^derly, none used him more familiarly, none delited more to confer
with him privately, and to hear his preachings publicly, none showed greater
gratitude toward him: for it was known by many, that it would have been your
pleasure, if from your hand he would have received a testimony of your love, as
a fruit of your faith wrought by his Ministry: yea, he himself did
acknowledge, that none was to be compared with you for gratitude and goodwill
toward him: but chiefly, you declared your love toward him* when in his last
disease you would have him to come to your house, where you entertained him
(and for his cause many that came to visit him) liberally and honorably to
his last breath, without any regard of expe^ses, even as a loving son
entertaineth his father. Next, seeing the will of the Testator should be sacred
and inviolable: and in his testament he ordained, that whatsoever of his works
should see the light thereafter, should be dedicate to you, with these solemn
words, expressly dyted by himself, GVLIELMO SCOTO in perpetuum testimoniu^
amicitiae nostrae dedico, co^secroque (that where ever his works were read,
your kindness and affection toward him might be known, and your memorial
might endure to the posterity) who can justly be offended, that this work be
dedicate unto you? who can envy your praise herein? thirdly, if there were no
more, this one cause may be more than sufficient, to make this work to come
out under your patronage and protection, that you have been the only instrument
to make it to see the light: for through your great care, earnest endeavor and
large expe^ses these Lectures were collected and gathered from all the parts
of the Country, East, West, South, North, how far distant that ever they were,
from the hands of his scholars, who wrote them from his mouth: by your dealing
and procurement they were written over and over again, reuised, corrected, and
now made apt for the Printing: so that by your means they now go abroad in the
hands of me^, we trust, to the comfort of many: lastly, we for our own parts
offer our travels in this work unto your patronage, as a monument, that we
acknowledge our selves to be more obliged unto you, tha^ we can requite: and of
minds desirous not to be found unthankful for the undeserved favor you showed
to us particularly: to speak nothing of the testimonies of your love, which
you showed many ways toward them who^ the Lord has set in his service, both
far and near, which they themselves do acknowledge and profess. We offer
therefore these Lectures, and our labors therein, unto your patronage and
protection, not only as a testimony of the Authors great liking and gratitude
toward you, but also as a monument of our tha^kfulnes for your kindness showed
unto us: finally, Sir, as God has prevented you many ways with his blessings,
and has made you se^sible of his love, and has given you an honorable
account, and estate in this world: so continue in the honoring of God, and
doing good unto his Saints, for his sake, and the Lord shall perform the
fruit of his promises in you, which his Saints find by experience, his mercy
shall never leave you, until the time that he accomplish the work he has
begun, and he crown his grace with glory. Now, the God of all grace and peace,
who is able to do all things exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask
or think, grant to you, Sir, according to the riches of his mercy, a long,
happy and peaceable life here, to the comfort of his Church and Commonwelth,
and that you may abound in every word and work, and that you may fight
constantly the good fight of faith here on earth, that when your course is
finished, ye may be assured to receive that crown of glory in the heavens,
which Jesus has acquired to them that love him: To whose gracious protection
we recommend you in body and soul, with all the actions you enterprise
according to his will, for now and ever, AMEN.

Yours in the Lord, H.C. W.A.


THE FIRST LECTVRE OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON CHAP. XVIII. WHEN JESUS had spoken these things, he went forth, with
his Disciples over the Brook Cedron; where was a Garden, into the which he
entered, and his Disciples.

Judas, who betrayed him, knew also the place: for JESUS often times resorted
thither, with his Disciples.

Judas then, after he had received a band of men, and officers of the high
Priests, and of the Pharisees, came thither with lanterns, and torches, and
weapons.

JESUS, knowing all things that should come unto him, went forth, and said
unto them, Whom seek ye?

JESUS of Nazareth. JESUS said unto them, I am he. Now Judas also, who betrayed
him, stood with them.




UNTO this part of this GOSPEL (beloved in the LORD JESUS) the LORD has done
the office of a Prophet and Doctor, going about to instruct the people of the
JEWS in the way of Life and salvation, and to instruct and comfort His own
Disciples especially in these last CHAPTERS. Now in the eighteenth and
nineteenth CHAPTERS following, He does the office of a Priest. Ye know the
LORD he is a King, a Priest, and a Prophet: He plays the part of a Priest, in
offering up himself: He offered up none other sacrifice than his own body
for the world, and for the redemption and salvation of mankind. As concerning
his passion and suffering, which is rehearsed in these two CHAPTERS, the
history divides it self very clearly: First, we have his Passion and
suffering in the Garden: Next, we have his suffering in the Hall of Caiaphas
the high Priest: Thirdly, we have his suffering before Pontius Pilate the
Judge: Fourthly, we have his suffering in the place of Execution, which is
called Caluaria, or in Hebrewe GOLGOTHA, where he was crucified: And last, in
the end of the nineteenth Chap. we have the last poinct of his suffering,
standing in his sepulcher and burial, which is the last part of his
humiliation. Now this day we shall speak somewhat, as the time shall serve,
of his suffering in the Garden.

In this first head of Christ's suffering in the Garden, first we have the
part of Christ, offering himself to be taken and bound willingly, and of a
set purpose: Next, we have the part of Judas, in coming out with a company of
men of war against him, to the same Garden: he knew the place well enough,
because the Lord, with his Disciples, were wont to resort thither: In the
third place, we have the communication betwixt the Lord and them that came
with Judas to take him: And fourthly, we have a fact of Peter, who will show
his love toward his Master, and his manhood, by cutting off the ear of
Malchus, the high Priests servant: And last, the taking of Christ, offering
himself willingly, his putting into the hands of his enemies, and his binding.
These things are set down in the first part of this history, Of the Passion
of the Lord, concerning his suffering in the Garden.

Now to come to the words, and first to Christ's part: It is said, When JESUS
had spoken these things, he went forth, with his Disciples, over the Brook
Cedron, where was a Garden, into the which he entered, and his Disciples.
There is Christ's part: of very purpose he casts himself to that place,
which Judas knew, and where he knew that he was wont to resort: of very
purpose he went thither, because the hour of his death was at hand. The time
is well to be noted when he does this, when he had spoken these things, that
is, when ^ee had sufficiently instructed and comforted his Disciples, and made
that prayer for them, and recommended them to the Father, to keep them in his
absence: then he makes himself for death, and purposely he went to that
place to be taken. Here is a plain lesson offered unto us in the person of
Christ: when he had discharged a duty, especially to them who were
concredite unto him, after that he had instructed them, and after that by
prayer he had commended first his own self, and then all his own to God:
then in security and peace he goes on to death: he goes not to die before
he discharge a duty to them that were committed unto him: then willingly he
addresseth himself to death. Ye know the lesson. When a man or a woman has
discharged their calling faithfully toward them that were committed unto
them, and done their duty to them to whom they are addebted, then in peace
and rest, and with a good conscience they may offer up themselves at the
pleasure of God, to lay down their life, and to die: therefore, whosoever
they be that would die in rest and peace, (and alas, when should thou have
rest, peace, and quietness to thy soul, if in the hour of death thou have it
not?) Let them take heed before they go to die, that they have discharged a
faithful duty: and then having been faithful, when they go to die, they
may lie down and rest in peace, and in a good conscience. But ye know again
one folly in this poinct, and this is the common fashion of men, when they
have their health, before the Lord call on them they are so sloathfull in
discharging their duty to them to whom they are indebted, that when the
soul is to depart out of the body, they are most occupied with business, and
most troubled in making their Testament, and I know not what: Now make thy
Testament before hand, and discharge thee of all things, and denude thine hand
of all worldly affairs, that in that hour thy soul may rest on God, and be
delited on heavenly things, and on that life which thou art going unto by death.

But to come forwards: It is said, He went over the Brook Cedron, with his
Disciples: This Brook Cedron was a water, which ran between Jerusalem, and
the Mount of Olives, in a little and low valley: (Luke 2. Sam. 15.23.) and it
was a little streape that ran when it was rain, but in time of drought it was
dry: Now here was a Garden, into the which the Lord entered, with his
Disciples; to the end, that even as in the Garden (to wit, the Garden of
Paradise) the salvation of mankind was lost through the fall of Adam and Eve;
Even so in a Garden, the salvation of mankind should begin to be recovered.
Christ began his agony and passion in this Garden. There are sundry things
concerning the suffering of Christ in this Garden of purpose omitted, and left
out by John, which is mentioned and set down at large by the rest of the
Evangelists, by Matt. in his 26. chap. and 36. verse. Mark. 14.37. Luke 22.9.
Only John speaks of his taking and binding in the Garden: the rest speak of
that agony and conflict that he had with the wrath of his Father in the
Garden. They who are desirous to have these things more at large, let them
read the rest of the Evangelists: only I shall touch that battle and agony
that Christ had in his soul with the terrible wrath of his Father before any
laid hands upon him. When he enters into the garden, the first thing he
does, he choosed out three of his disciples, Peter, John, and James: and he
calls them aside from the rest, to the end, that as these three were witnesses
of his glory, in that his glorious Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor, when
Moses and Helias appeared unto him, Matt. 17.1. Even so, the same three should
be witnesses of his humiliation, and that dejection in the Garden: and he
commands the rest to sit down together. So these he calls apart, Peter,
John, and James, by name: and in their sight, first he begins to enter into
that combat, and he begins to shiner and quake, and to be exceedingly
heavy: and he cries out with a loud voice in their audience, My soul is
heavy on all sides to the death. There begins he his agony and conflict
with the wrath of the Father for our sins, wherewith he was burdened. After
that, he went from these disciples, about a stone cast, and he prayed to the
Father with a loud voice, saying, Father, if it be possible remove from me this
cup: that is, this cup of wrath and death, but not my will, but thy will be
done. Thirdly, he goes forward in that conflict and battle with the wrath of
his Father: he feels the wrath of God to increase, and he cries again that
they might hear, Father, if it be possible, remove from me this cup. Then
again the battle increases, and the agony grows, and then the third time
he prays the same words, Father, take this cup from me: that is, the cup of
the heavy wrath of God: at the which time an Angel came from heaven, and
comfort him. Yet the battle holds on, and he is in a greater agony with
his Father than ever he was in before, and he prays at greater length, and
more ardently and vehemently than ever he did of before: So that in his agony
the drops of purple blood fell down from his face to the ground: such a thing
was never seen, nor never befell unto any man since the beginning of the
world, as to sweat blood: no man was ever under such a terrible and horrible
wrath of God, as Christ was for our sins, and for the sins of the whole
world.

Now in all this mean time, he is not forgetful of his disciples, who^ he
brought with him to be witnesses of his suffering, he is ay going to them, and
from them, to hold them waking, and do what he could do, they are ay
sleeping, the Devil is busy with them, that in the suffering of CHRIST (they
being then sleeping) they should bear no witness of the suffering of Christ,
the Devil was as busy to cast them in a sleep, as the Lord was busy to hold
them waking, to bear witness of that agony and conflict. I will not insist
in this matter, read thereof in Matthew. 26. and in Luke 22. and in Marc. 14.
and ye shall get this History at large: only we have thus far of the
suffering of Jesus Christ in the garden: first, how heavy ^ weighty a thing
sin is, all this was not for his sin, but for our sins, for the sins of
the world: Next, ye see how heavy a thing the wrath of God is, that follows
on sin, for as Jesus Christ took on his back the burden of our sins, so
did he also the weight of the wrath of God, and the punishment that follows
upon sin: if ye know not this, ye know nothing of Christ. Thirdly, ye see
the greatness of the love of CHRIST to man, that first took on his back so
heavy a burden of sin, and secondly, so heavy a burden of wrath, and all
for mankind. If CHRIST had not suffered, never a man had been safe, but these
burdens had pressed them down to hell, never a soul had been saved from
Adam to the end of the world: Look then what love he has showed to us: and
last, this agony and suffering in the garden lets us see that the Son of
God, as he is very God, so he is very man also, and that he has the body of a
man, and the soul of a man, for this suffering in the garden was especially in
the soul: in this battle the soul of Jesus Christ was especially set on by
the wrath of the Father. There was none, touching the body of the Lord at this
time, but the wrath of the Father was fighting with the soul. But to leave
this, and to mark the purpose of JOHN, his purpose is only to let you see,
that when Jesus Christ died, he died with a great willingness and readiness,
that willingly he goes to death, and is not drawn out against his will, but
knowing that IVDAS would come with a company of men of war to that place
where he was wont to walk and pray, of set purpose that he should be taken*
he resorted thither. So this is the purpose of JOHN, to let us see that JESUS
CHRIST offered up a voluntary Sacrifice for the sins of the world, for
except He had offered up a voluntary sacrifice, His suffering had not been
obedience to the Father, He had not been as is said, Phil. 2.8. obedient to the
Father. So the Lord died, and he died to be obedient to the Father, that is,
He died willingly at the good will and pleasure of the Father. And if He had
not been obedient, His sacrifice had never been a satisfaction for the sins
of the world, and then what good had the sacrifice of CHRIST done to me, or
thee, or to any man: and therefore hereupon is our faith grounded, that we
know the LORD JESUS, not only died, but also, that He died willingly; and so
willingly, and with such a readiness to pleasure his Father, and to satisfy
the wrath of the Father, as no tongue of man nor Angel can express. And when
ever thou settlest thine heart on the death of CHRIST, look that thine heart
settle it on a willing and obedient death: for if thou think not that He died
willingly and chearefullie for thee, thou can have no comfort.

Now to come to Judas part: Judas knows the place where the LORD was: he
knows the Garden well enough, because JESUS oftentimes was wont to resort
thither with his disciples, and Judas was one of them: for many times he was
there with the rest of his disciples, and he knew, that commonly the LORD was
wont to resort thither with his disciples, and on this he takes occasion to
betray Him: and when he has gotten a band of men of war, and the servants
of the high Priests, and Pharisees, he as a Captain to them, and they as a
guarde with swords and staves enter within the Garden to take the LORD JESUS.

Well, Brethren, it is the acquaintance and familiarity that Judas had with
CHRIST, and with the place where He was wont to resort, that was the occasion
of the betraying of the Lord. If Judas had not been acquainted with Christ,
Judas had not come to this place to take Him. It is familiarity that makes
traitors: he that will betray a man, must be a domesticke and a household man
to him. Will every man betray Christ? No: not every man, he that will betray
Christ, must be one that knows Him, and His truth in some measure. Then thou
that know Christ, take good heed to thy knowledge, and to thy familiarity,
take good heed that knowledge of Christ be in sincerity, and that thou be not
an Hypocrite, but be a friend indeed, and not outwardly, otherwise, if thy
knowledge be but in hypocrisy, and if thy friendship be colored, thou shall
be a traitor, and in the end thou shall make apostasy with Judas, from
Jesus Christ. What is the cause that men become Apostates and traitors, and
after that they have professed and subscribed, they fall away from Jesus
Christ? what? but because they were never true nor sincere friends to Jesus
Christ: All was but dissimulation, and shall end in persecution of Jesus
Christ, and his members, and they shall end in destruction, as Judas did: for
after that he had once made apostasy from the Lord, and betrayed his Master,
he never took rest till he hanged himself. If ye will mark well, ye will
find in the company of Judas two rancks and sorts of men: The first is a band
of men of war of the Roman Deputies, that was one part of the guarde: The
other was the officers and ministers of the high Priest, they make out the
other part. Then the third guarde is partly of Gentiles, and partly of Jews.
How came they? They came with lanterns and weapons and lights on a naked man
with fear of war: they needed not. What needed all this company* the Lord
Jesus being a naked man in the Garden, not minded to fight: What needed Judas
to bring such a guard with him? The Spirit of God marketh in this Narratiue,
that Judas in doing this, had an evil conscience, through his evil doing.

The man that takes an evil or a wicked deed in hand, will think that he
can never get men enew to do it with him, he shall fear for no cause: if ye
should guarde him with all the world, scarcely shall he be in security: for
he wantes that peace of GOD. Paul to the Philippians calls it that peace that
passes all understanding, and that guardes the heart of man: for peace is
nothing, but a good conscience, and he who wantes this good conscience which
is the inward guarde, that man can never be saved with an outward guarde: if
all the world should stand about that man, he will ever be in fear, and
albeit he were in the mids of an army, he will tremble and quake, but a good
conscience will rest in peace: as David says, Although I were helmed about
with ten thousand men, yet would I not be afraid, for I know assuredly that
thou will be with me. That heart is well guarded that has a good conscience,
for it will have peace inwardly, and will not seek that outward guarde. The
same thing is set out in the manner of his coming, he comes with lanternes,
and he comes with lights, and in the night. This coming in the night
manifests* that he had an evil conscience: for he that does evil, hates
the light. What needed all this company? Was not the Lord Jesus daily going in
and out in Jerusalem? And was He not daily teaching in the Temple? and yet
they laid not an hand upon him. The very season and time of his out-co^ming,
testifies, that he had an evil conscience in doing of it, and therefore he
came not in the day light. He that has an evil conscience fears the Sun,
he dreadeth the light, and he seeks to execute his purpose in the night.
The night makes an evil man impudent. All these things manifest unto us, that
Judas had an evil conscience, but it was not well wakened, but when it was
wakened, then he despaired, and he had Hell in his soul, and got no rest, till
he had hanged himself.

Now I go forward to the communication betwixt the Lord and the Guarde: Ihon
says, The Lord knowing all things that should happen unto him, and that were
to come unto him, he comes forward, he flees not away, he hides not
himself, he is not drawn out of an hole, as men who have done an evil fact,
but unrequired he comes forth unto them, and upon his own free motive he
offers himself unto them: then he tarrieth not till they begin to talk,
but first the Lord speaks, and says, Whom seek ye? and they answer (not
knowing him by the face) they say, JESUS of Nazareth. He answers, not
denying himself, I am he: he confessed himself. Will ye mark these
things: when he says, he knew all things that should come unto him, John
would let you see that the Lord Jesus willingly and wittingly offered Himself
unto the death. This taking and laying hands upon Him, comes not of
hap-hazard: No, the Lord knew well enough all the things that should come to
Him: He is taken wittingly: and as He is taken wittingly, so is He taken
willingly: and He is readier to offer Himself to be taken, than they are to
take Him.

But to come to the words: He says, Whom seek ye here? and when they
say, JESUS of Nazareth, then He answers, I am he. These words do
testify, that wittinglie and willingly He offers Himself to be taken.
And if ye mark, ye shall see in His answer such mildness as is
unspeakable: He begins not to speak in wrath: and when they say, JESUS
of Nazareth, He gives not an answer scornefullie: So that as He offers
Himself willingly, so ye see also such a mildness in Him, when He is taken,
(even as the Scripture spoke) as He had been a Lamb. So that ye see that
neither in word nor deed, he utters any thing to hinder his obedience to
his Father: this then is the thing that JOHN recommendeth unto us, and lets
us see, even that Jesus Christ was willing to die. And this lesson we should
all learn, if it shall please GOD to call any of us to suffer for Jesus
Christ's sake, that we suffer with such willingness and pleasure, that we run
to death, and embrace it with our arms: let this mildness utter it self in
all thy doings: away with that scorning: if thou would be like Jesus Christ,
die in peace, and willingly; look not to the instrument, nor the Hangman who
puts hands in thee, but lift thine heart to the God of heaven, and say, O
LORD, seeing that it is thy will that I die, mine eye is on thee, and as JESUS
CHRIST offered himself willingly, to be a sacrifice for the sins of the
world: even so am I willing to obey thy will: It is noted that Judas was
amongst the rest, and no question the eye of the Lord is on him, but never a
word he speaks to him. Now I think that this standing of Judas is
mentioned, to let us see two things, the first is, that patient suffering of
Jesus Christ, he begins not to vpbraide him, and to speak angry words to
him, or to look to him angrylie. Some would have thought, that the LORD seeing
Judas, might have said to him, Well Traitor, art thou there who have betrayed
me: No: he gives him not an angry look, he is even a very Lamb, as the
Prophet speaks of him: a Lamb without anger either in look or in word, but
in suffering he uses such a mildness and patience as is wonderful: Next, to
let us see that impudency of the traitor Judas, how durst he face the Lord
JESUS whom he betrayed? a traitor is ay impudent and shameless, he has ay
an hard heart, and then a brazen face to the man whom he has betrayed. Ye see
how dangerous a thing it is once to harden the heart against Christ, and once
to begin to do evil against conscience: if thine heart begin once to be
endured, thou shall not come back, whilst thou come to extreme induration,
and at last, to perdition. Judas could never come back, after that once his
heart was hardened against the Lord, but past forward, till he came to that
final induration and hardness of heart. Therefore far be it from us once to
begin to harden our hearts against the LORD: If thou beginnest once, thou
shall grow in hardness, till thou come to that final induration. Lord save
us from that sin, the hardness of heart against the truth, and against
Jesus Christ. It is to be feared, that these men, who with the betrayers of
Jesus Christ have set their faces against Christ, and His true religion, and
against their native country, and go forward in such induration and
obstinacy of heart, that they shall come to that part of Judas. And it is a
rare thing to see a man who has gone so far forward in induration, come
ever back again to grace. Now we have the effect that follows on this word
that He speaks, I am he: for these words are no sooner spoken, (albeit they
be few and gentle) but they are all amazed, tremble, and fall down backward to
the ground. It is an admirable thing, that one word (and that so mildly spoken)
should have wrought such an effect: for it is such a word, as they would have
wished for. It is very wondrous, that such a gentle word should as a
whirle-winde, or as a flashe of fire, so have stricken them. No question, this
is to let them see, that the Lord needed not to have been taken with them,
except it had been His own will: No, it was not possible for them to touch
one hair of His head: for He says Himself in the 10. Chap. and 18. verse. of
this Gospel, No man takes my life from me, I have power to lay it down, and
to take it up again. So the Lord, by this wonderful effect of that word, I am
he, will let them know, that they had no power to lay hands on Him, if it had
not been His own will. And no doubt, He has had a respect unto them, howbeit
they were enemies to Him, yet He wished the^ well. And by the striking of them
to the ground, He would let them see, that if they encountered with Him, they
would die: and He will let them see His power, that He might cause them to
repent, or else to make them inexcusable: and to let them see, that He was the
Lord of Glory, and that they put hands to the Lord of Glory, and slew the Lord
of Life. We may gather of the effect of this word, that if such a sober and
gentle word, coming out of the mouth of Jesus Christ, did drive them upon
their backs, and cast them to the ground, what if Jesus Christ had spoken an
angry word? what force would that have had? If the bleating of a Lamb had
such a force, what force shall the roaring of a Lion have? Where shall the
wicked stand? And if the voice of the Lord Jesus, humbly and like a Lamb,
standing before them Himself alone, and speaking with such gentleness, had
such effect, as to throw them down upon the ground, what effect shall that
roaring, full of wrath and indignation, at that Great day: not out of the mouth
of a Lamb, nor of an humble man, Jesus of Nazareth: but out of ye mouth of a
lion, out of ye mouth of Jesus Christ, the Judge, sitting in His Glory and
Majesty, and saying to ye wicked, Away ye cursed to that fire which is
prepared for the Devil and his angels, Mat. 25.41. What effect then shall that
voice have? Whither shall that voice drive them? And further mark: If that
voice had such an effect, being no threatening, nor boasting, but gentle and
mild; now what effect shall this voice have, whereby He threatens the
world, by His servants, with His judgementes? If the mild speaking had such
a force, what effect shall these terrible threatninges have against the wicked?
for it is another thing when Christ threatens in wrath, and when He
speaks meekelie. Now, as certainly as this word that Christ Himself
spoke, wrought such an effect: As certainly also the word of Jesus Christ,
which He puts into the mouth of His faithful Teachers and Pastors, here
in this world, shall be effectual, either to thy life, or to thy death: and
as certainly the same word shall have effect to drive the wicked men upon
their backs: as Zachary says, Chap. 1. verse. 4.5.6. When the men are dead
that have spoken that word, after it has been spoken, it shall be found
living: and that same voice shall have effect when we are dead. It is true
(says the LORD) my Prophets died with your fathers: but my voice, which I put
into their mouths, died not with them: and your fathers knew, that that word
which I did put into their mouths, was living, and never left them, until it
brought on judgment upon them. The LORD grant, that every soul may
reverence the word of JESUS CHRIST: for it shall be found, that either it
was spoken to thy salvation, or to thy damnation: And, Heaven and Earth shall
vanishe away, before one jote of that Word pass away without its own
effect.

But now let us see what they do after they are fallen down upon the
ground: Leave they off? No, no, they rise again, and the LORD JESUS stands
still, and lets them rise again: and when they are risen, they speak
nothing: but He speaks first, and He says, Whom seek ye? and they
say, JESUS of NAZARETH. And He answers, I am he. Now this is a strange
thing: Who can think, that these men, who found so great a power proceeding
out of the mouth of the LORD JESUS CHRIST finding such force, should have
meddled with Him again. But left they Him for all this? No: but they get up
again, and pursue Him, and take Him, and bind Him. It is an hard matter, to
be given over to a reprobate sense: that is, to want feeling, when the Lord
takes out of the soul in His judgment all sight and sense, that person is
miserable: and if thou be once stricken with that senselessness of the soul,
albeit thou be thrown down upon thy back, thou shall get up again, like a
drunken man, and fight against the Lord* and that man is worse than any beast,
horse, or mule: for once strike a Horse down, and he has a feeling thereof,
and he will beware of the like peril again: But a man, who should have
reason, after that the Lord has once stricken him with senselessenesse, there
is no beast so senseless as he is: and as he is senseless, so he shall not
leave off from evil doing: and he shall count no more of the power of God,
than of a flee: for they feel not the hand of God, they are so astonished: and
they will up again, after they are casten down* and they will assaye His
power again, and will not leave off till His wrath destroy him. Strive
therefore, ever to keep the soul in a sense and feeling and let not that
miserable scroofe to go over thy soul: but have still a feeling of the power
of God, and mercy of God in thy soul, and always have a wakened conscience:
for if thine heart come to that extreme senselessenesse, thy soul shall
ouer-grow with such a fatness, that thou shall have no more sense, than a dead
stock: and thou shall be like an Ox fed to destruction: thou shall neither
have feeling of mercy, nor of judgment. To end with this: ye see that Jesus
Christ, albeit he was but himself alone, a simple man to look to, and without
armor: yet He provoke them, and speaks to them first: He discharges
them to stir Him, until first they entered into a condition with Him, That
His disciples should pass free, there is not such a thing that one of them
could have power to put out their hand to take Him. And if there were no more
but this, that they had no power to stir him, they might see more in Jesus
Christ, than in a common man: they might see power in Him to keep Himself:
yet their senselessenesse is so great, that they cannot see this. The Lord
keep us in sense and feeling of Him, that when He has ado with us, we may
feel Him, and see Him, that our conscience may be wakened, and our hearts
mollified, through Jesus Christ: to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit,
be all praise and honor for evermore, AMEN.

THE SECOND LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON. CHAP. XVIII. JESUS of Nazareth. JESUS answered, I said unto you, that I
am he: therefore, if ye seek me, let these go their way. Simon Peter, having
a sword, drew it, and smote the high Priests servant, and cut off his right
ear. Now the servants name was Malchus. JESUS unto Peter, Put up thy sword
into the sheath: shall I not drink of the cup which my Father has given
me? Jews, took JESUS, and bound him.


THE last day (beloved in the LORD JESUS) we divided the whole History of the
Passion and suffering of Jesus Christ, which is contained in these two
CHAPTERS, to wit, the XVIII. and XIX. of this Gospel, in these parts: First,
we have his suffering in the Garden: Then we have his suffering in the Hall
of the high Priest: Thirdly, we have his suffering before the Judge Pontius
Pilate: Fourthly, we have his suffering in the place of Execution, in
Caluaria, otherwise GOLGOTHA: And last, we have the last part of his suffering,
which is his Burial. The last day we entered into the first part of his
suffering, which JOHN in this Chapter sets down to be this: The Lord Jesus
being in the Garden, is taken captive, and bound: John passes by all that
agony and conflict that the Lord had before his taking in the Garden, with the
heavy wrath of his Father, for our sin, which he did bear. As concerning
his taking* we have first the part of Jesus, who of purpose, wittingly, and
willingly, came to this Garden to be taken: which Garden was known to Judas
the Traitor. Then we have the part of Judas, he knowing the Garden, comes
forward, (because the Lord used, with his Disciples, to resort thither)
accompanied with a band of men of war, with the officers, and servants of the
high Priest, to take* and apprehende, the Lord. In the third place, we have
the communing that fell out betwixt Christ, and them that came to take him; he
knowing all things that should come unto him; he takes not the flight, nor
seeks not to go his way, as he might have done, because it was night: but
he comes out unsought, and begins the speech, and says, Whom seek
ye? They not knowing him by face, answered, JESUS of Nazareth. He answered
again, not denying himself, I am he: as he would say in plain words, I am
the man whom ye seek, why seek ye any further? to let us see how
wittingly, and willingly, how joyfullie, and gladly, and how patiently he
offers himself unto death for our sins. Now he has no sooner spoken this
one word, I am he, which is a gentle word, but as soon they start backwardes,
and fall to the ground: whereby the Lord would testify unto them, that they
had no power to take his life from him, as he said before himself, he had
both his life, and his death in his own hands, all the power in heaven and in
earth was not able to cause him to die, if he had pleased to have lived.

But to come to this Text: When he has stricken them to the ground, they
leave not off: but when they are risen, they are as bent as they were before.
It is a marvelous thing, for if it had been his will, he might not only
have stricken them to the ground, but he might have stricken them through the
earth, into hell: yet he lets them rise again: but they are all senseless
of that divine power, wherewith they are stricken. The Lord begins the
speech, and he says, Whom seek ye? They answer, not knowing him, JESUS of
Nazareth. He replieth again, I said unto you, that I am he: he denies not
himself, but in a manner provoke them to dispatch that business which they
were about: yet he enters into a condition with them, Take not these that are
with me, stir not my Disciples: he gives them a charge that they stir
them not: and indeed none of that whole company had any power to lift up
their hand against them. The words are plain: ye may easily perceive the note
that rises of this: It is a marvelous thing, that a naked and a simple man,
(who was baser than the King of Glory was in the earth?) a man naked without
armor: he is standing before them, who are like as many Tyrants, or tigers,
and yet none of them had power to lay hands upon him, till he give them
power: and more, he will not let them stir him, till he make a condition
with them, That they handle not his disciples: He imponeth laws unto them, and
without this law, that they meddle not with his Disciples, he will not yield
himself unto them. So, Brethren, this is to let you see first that divine
power which was in the Lord Jesus: Behold it, for it is a comfortable thing
for Christians, to know that divine power that is in Jesus Christ: for
although he never touched one of them, yet that divine power did so bind fast
their hands, and so restrained that pride of their hearts, that they had no
power once to move against him. Next, behold a miserable senselessenesse in
them; for it is a wonderful thing, that they cannot perceive nor feel this
power that was in him. If they had had any sight of the Godhead dwelling in
him bodily, would they not have ceased from such a wicked enterprise?
Brethren, it is an hard matter for any man or woman once to be given over unto
a reprobate sense, and to be stricken with blindness and hardness of heart:
And if God in his just judgment give thee to blindness and hardness of
soul, albeit he would make judgment after judgment to cease upon thee,
and albeit he would strike thee and beat thee upon thy back, thou will not
be the better: but thou will get up again, like a drunken man: and if thou
be once given over to thine own self, it is as sure a thing as is in the
world, that except the Lord let thee see with his power a sight of mercy, thou
shall ever become worse and worse: and except the face of Jesus shine into thy
soul, all afflictions shall harden thee like iron, that is often stricken
upon: and the greater the afflictions be, except that mercy shine into thine
heart, thou will be the more endured. Paul says, When the heart is converted
to the Lord, the veil is taken away, 2. Corinthians. 3.16. Without conversion of
the heart to the face of JESUS, that that merciful face may shine into the
heart, all the things in the world will not be able to mollify thine heart:
Therefore, whenever the Lord afflicts thee, pray for mercy, that as the
power strikes thee, so the mercy may be powerful to convert thee: Yea, cry
aye for the mercy, or else the power shall work a further induration in thee,
and make thee worse.

To go forward: Ye see how careful He is of his disciples: men would think,
that He being so hard straited, and so near the death, should have forgotten
his Disciples: for this is our fashion, but the Lord does not so. And
Brethren, this is a true note and token of a true Shepherd: he will forget
himself, and his life, and he will remember his flock: and when he is
adying, he will be careful of his flock: and when the Wolf is worrying him,
yet he will do what lies in him, that his flock, and every sheep thereof,
may escape: and he will give his life for the safety of his flock. This is a
good pastor. So we see the viue image of a faithful Pastor, in the Lord
Jesus: he will give his life for his sheep, as he says himself, He is but
an hyreling, that will not for the love of his sheep lay down his life. And
this is the thing that I note chiefly here: When the Lord becomes weak in
himself, through infirmity, yea, voluntary infirmity (he needed not to be
infirm: what need had the God of glory to be infirm?) he suffers
himself to be bound till he become infirm. In the mean time he is strong
and powerful in his Disciples to their safety: for although these that were
in the Garden would never so feign, yet they could not get their hands laid
upon his Disciples. The Lord Jesus, when he was hanging upon the Cross, the
Jews scorned him, and tauntinglie said unto him, Thou who sauedst others,
come down and save thy self: meaning he could not save himself, because he
was crucified, as if he had no power: but they are deceived, for that same
hour that the Lord was upon the Cross, and that same very time that through
infirmity he died, and when he was hanging dead upon the Cross, that power
went out from him that kept his D^sciples, and all the faithful in the world:
For except that the Lord had kept them then when he was hanging dead, they had
been a preye to the Devil. For this is our nature and infirmity, we cannot
stand a moment in this world, except it be by the power of Jesus Christ.

Well then, Brethren, if Christ Jesus crucified, and crucified (as the Apostle
speaks, 2. Cor. 13.4.) through infirmity, and so weak in himself in his
humane nature, had so great a power to save his Church, what shall we say
then? What a power is that which proceeds from Jesus Christ glorified? and
comes down now from the Heaven, and who lives now (as the Apostle says
there) by the power of GOD, and lives now in glory at the right hand of the
Father. How great a power must this be, that proceeds out from Christ
glorified! Alas, if the world saw this, if the blind men saw the thousand
part of that terrible power that comes from Jesus Christ glorified, think
ye, that for all the world, they durst confederate with the King of Spain, the
Pope, and his power, and enterprise any thing against Christ and his Church:
but, alas, this blindness and induration lets them not see nor feel, but
in the end they shall feel it (if the Lord in mercy convert them not) to
their everlasting shame and confusion.

Well, to go forward, JOHN to this purpose alleges an old prophecy which
was prophesied before of Jesus Christ long before he came into the world; and
this is the prophecy: Of them which thou gave me, have I lost none. Now
John draws this prophecy to the preservation of Christ's disciples at this
time, because the disciples that were concredite unto him, escaped at this
time. Mark, Brethren, It is true indeed, that the prophecy properly is to be
understood, not so much of a safety in this life presently, as of a spiritual
safety to life everlasting: this is the meaning: Yet it has pleased the
Spirit of God, to apply this prophecy to this bodily preservation: the cause
is this, At this time the bodily safety of his disciples, imports that
spiritual safety and the life to come: as by the contrary, the indangering
of the present life, endangered the life to come. If the disciples had been
taken at this time, to have suffered with their Master, they had all revolted
and denied their Master: We may see the proof of this in Peter, and so they
had hazarded not only this life, but also the life to come, because that the
disciples were as yet but children in Jesus Christ, and were not strengthened
enough with the power of Christ: and woe is to that soul that will deny Jesus
Christ, and chiefly in death. There is not one who will suffer their little
finger only to be burnt for the cause of Christ, except he be strengthened with
the power of Jesus Christ, and there is not one that will now suffer affliction
but they who are guarded with the power of God, and therefore ye see here
Gods mercy toward his disciples. This is the merciful dealing of God with
his own, he will never let one of his own be tempted, but he will give
them power to bear out the temptation, and He will never suffer them to be
tempted, till He give them ability: and when He has given them strength,
then the LORD will lay on the burden. It is a wonderful thing, the heavier
the burden be, that the Lord lays on his own, the greater strength He gives
them to sustain it. The world has wondered at the Martyrs of God, who had so
great comfort in the time of their burning in the fire, and how in suffering
they would sing Psalms unto their latter breath. The world wondereth at this:
The heavier that the death has been, the greater has the power of God been,
and the greater has the life of Jesus been in the Martyrs. And these
disciples whom he spared now, when He saw that they were ripe, Spared He them
then? No, no, what was the whole lifetime of the disciples, after that Christ
departed out of this world, but a perpetual suffering, till the life was taken
from them, they died all by persecution, and then by the lossing of this life,
they got life everlasting, in dying they died not, but in dying they entered
into a more glorious life: So this is that merciful power of God. It appears
that in this country there is little ripeness, because of this little
suffering: and therefore the Lord has dealt mercifully with us, and in great
mercy has holden men's hands off us: therefore we should pray, if it shall
please him to bring any to the trial, to suffer for his glorious Names sake,
Lord, I am not able to behold the sight of the fire, much less to suffer the
cruelty of the fire: therefore if thou will have me to suffer, give me
strength whereby I may be able to suffer. Now I go to Peter's part: he sets
down his action, and certainly, it is worth nothing, albeit it seems to be
very zealous. What does he? he has a sword about him, and he seeing them
rush on his Master, shows his manhood. And he strikes the servant of the
high Priest, whose name was Malchus, and he cut off his right ear. The rest of
the Evangelists, Mat, 26. Mark 14. Luke 22) speak of some thing that was done
before this: When the Lord was communing with them that took Him, then comes
the traitor Judas to the Lord, and cries, Rabbi, Rabbi, Master, Master, and
with that he kisseth Him: now this was a sign that he had given unto his
company, that that man whom he should kiss, was the man that they should
take. Now what does the Lord, He makes no sign of anger, and there is none of
us, but we think that He should have uttered great anger to the traitor (fie
on thee, traitor, for of all men he is most detestable) but the Lord in
mildnes and meeknes of Spirit (for all this whole time He takes purpose to
suffer patiently: as Esaias says: He was as a Lamb before the shearer, and as
a sheep led to the slaughter, and opens not his mouth) He says, friend,
betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss, He assayeth if the conscience
will be brought to remorse: There is a wonderful patience of God to the most
vile sinner, and when he has given them a sign, the whole company russhed
upon Him. Then the disciples said, Master, shall we defend thee by the sword,
but Peter not staying upon an answer, he was hardy, and strikes off the ear
of Malchus the high Priests servant. Now, Brethren, albeit that this Malchus
the high Priests servant, deserved, that not only his ear should be cut off,
but also that the head and the life should be taken from him (for he was in a
very evil action: indeed he was cled with authority, but with an evil
authority: if thou had the authority of all the kings in the world, it will
never excuse thee before God, if thou should get a subscriptio^ to do evil
against an innocent man, the Lord shall not allow thee, but His judgment shall
overtake thee) and whether Peter did this of zeal, for no doubt he loved his
Master exceeding well, and he would have had his Master out of his hands: yet
for all this, the Lords own words testify, that this fact of Peter is to be
condemned. If ye will examine the zeal, it is a very preposterous and
unskillful zeal: the zeal is nothing worth if a man go beyond the bounds of
his calling. What was Peter but a private man, and this company being sent by
the Magistrates and superior power, Peter ought not to have resisted them, and
to recompense this injury by reason of his calling, albeit it was the greatest
injury that ever was done in the world. Then the words of Christ do declare,
that he did it of blindness: for he did that lay in him, to stay the work of
the redemption of the world, he took no heed to his hand. Now to mark
something: There is nothing more common to men, than this, to cloak their
actions with the pretense of zeal, and he or she will say, I did it of zeal,
but the Spirit of God in this place, (and mark it) lets thee see, if thy
zeal be a naked zeal, and if it go beyond the bounds of thy calling, albeit
it be in a good cause, yet thy zeal is worth nothing: if thy zeal be with
ignorance, and if thou have not the warrant of this word, thy zeal is of no
value, it will not warrant thine action: if ye would have surer rules of
actions nor zeal is, take heed to th^se two things: First, to thy calling:
Look that thou go not beyond the bounds of thy calling. Shall thou that art a
private man, strike with a sword? Is that thy calling? Then next, to Gods
word: What avails it unto a man to go forward in blindness? if he be not
illuminate with the light of God, it is but a blind zeal: and if thou
would have thine actions well ruled, then take that lantern of the word
going before thee, to warrant thy conscience in all thy proceedings: for of all
graces this is one of the greatest, to have the word of God thy warrant in all
thine actions. As for zeal, I cast it not away, (it is over rare to be casten
away) for it is a special grace of God: but take heed, if thou would have
zeal, look that it be moderate, and pass not the bounds of thy calling: and
then look that thou have a warrande of the word of God: look that the eye of
thy soul be illuminate: Join these two together, and then go forwards to
the work of the Lord. Certainly* experience has taught us* that this zeal
has had an evil success: no man by this zeal did ever get commendation of
God. It may be, that men will run forwards rashly in zeal, and will have a
good entry: but the end will tell thee, that it was but foolish hardiness,
and it will forthinke them. And no doubt, Peter, when he got this answer of
his Master, he repented. No man has need to find fault with men of this age:
for there are few Peter's now adays: where ye shall find one like Peter, who
has zeal, ye shall find ten, who have none. The zeal of God is away, that
did eat up the hearts of the men of God of old. Then again, ye shall see in
this fact of Peter's, Peter was a good man, and one who loved Jesus Christ very
well, and he was loath to leave Him: and when as the Lord said to His
disciples, Will ye depart also from me? Peter answered, and says: LORD,
Whither shall we go? thou have the words of life: he was very loath to
depart from Him: And this action also which he has in hand, is a good action
and in the defense of Christ. Yet for all this, in this good action, and in the
cause of God, see how he is miscarried, and the Lord finds fault with him.
Well, this is our nature, that when we would do the work of the Lord, our
corruption defiles it, and oftentimes in doing it we will sin, and we will
blot it with some foul blotte. And Peter doing this, with some preposterous
zeal, he is not allowed: for an unclean man, as he is unclean, so he shall
make the work of the Lord unclean. So the chief thing that a man should be
exercised withal, is prayer, that ye Lord would sanctify the person, that the
work that ye Lord has employed him in may be holily done: and mark again,
the greatest default that was in Peter, was his too great zeal. We need not to
be afraid for this in this land: Nay, we may be afraid for default of it
that the work of the Lord should perish, and we are to pray, that the King,
and those whom he has employed in this work may have an upright heart, and
such an heart, as David and good Ezechias had, an heart loving God, and hating
Gods enemies, I would not doubt then, but the work in his hand should take a
good end, and he should report honor and glory. Now the Lord seeing what
Peter did, He forbids him, and shows a greater anger against him, than
against Judas: He spoke not so angrylie against Judas, or any of them that
pursued Him, as He did to Peter, and He says: Put up thy sword into the
sheath: and then he subjoyneth the reason: Shall I not drink of the cup that
my Father has given me, Thou do what lies in thee, to hold off the cup,
I will drink of the cup that my Father has given me, of necessity I must
drink it: for it was preordinate before all times, that I should drink it:
and seeing it is so, I will drink it. Shall any thing be enjoined to us to do
of necessity, and shall we not do it willingly: The Father has propined unto
me a bitter cup of affliction, and I shall drink it out, dregs and all.
Matthew in his 26. Chapter, gives mo reasons, wherefore the Lord disallowed
Peter, and this is one: He who strikes with the sword at his own hand, whom
the Lord has not armed to strike, he shall be stricken with the sword. It is a
dangerous matter to slay, if the Lord put not the sword into thine hand: then
he gives another reason, will I be defended with the arm of man: No, if I
would pray to my Father, He would send me twelve legions of Angels: and
lastly, says He, Shall not the Scripture be accomplished of me, Shall I
make the word of the Lord false, which has foretold of my suffering: and
therefore stay thy rashness. And note what Luke says in his 22. Chapter, verse
51, He takes up the ear, and puts it on again: Ye may see here, that the Lord
will have no man hurt in his taking, the Lord will have no unjust defense,
Jesus Christ will not be defended with unlawful means, He will not be
defended with Peter's sword: for he had no power given him of the Lord, for to
strike, He will not have injury repressed with injury: Nay, He will not have
the man that has the just cause to repress an authority. This guarde came
from the authority, from the Roman empire, and Christ will not have Peter a
private man, to meddle with the superior power* He will not have him to defend
Him against the authority. It is a dangerous thing to resist authority,
albeit it be unlawfully used, and chiefly, a private man: and albeit that the
authority had done wrong, yet a man who has not authority, should not
repress the injury done by the authority, the Lord will not allow it, the
Lord will not have injury repayed by an injury. Well then, if the Lord will
not have a wrong defense against injuries, He will not have a wrong to meet a
wrong. What damnation lies on these men, who do an injury, and do delight to
oppress the innocent. If Peter got such a reproof for the defense of Christ,
against his enemies: What damnation shall these murderers get, who oppress
the innocent man, the damnation of these men shall be great: I denounce an
heavy damnation against thee: Let the King, the Magistrates, and all the world
wink at thee, the hand of the Lord shall light on thee, this shall be thy
recompense. Thou who take pleasure in oppression, shall be oppressed* the
Lord shall thrust down thine head, and bloody hand, and shall press thee
down for ever: the Lord save us from this judgment: woe to them that oppress
their neighbor either in word or deed. Now to go forward: Shall I not drink
of the cup that my Father has given me: By the cup is understood a measure
of affliction, that the Lord will lay on any man: as a cup is a measure, so
the Lord has a measure of affliction to lay on his own: as the Master of a
family has a cup and drinks to his family, and says, Drink thou this,
and drink thou that: even so, the Lord is the Master of this world, and He
will fill the cup of affliction, and He will say, Drink thou this, and
drink thou that: and if He propine thee a cup, He will cause thee drink it:
all the world cannot save thee, but if the Lord bid thee do it, thou must
drink it, He has commandment over his creatures, and good reason that we do
His will, either to live or die as He pleases: if the Lord propine thee with a
cup of affliction, if thou drink it not willingly (here is the danger) thou
shall be compelled to drink the dregs thereof, to thy destruction. Woe is to
the soul that will in no measure lay down his neck to that burden: but
again if thou take that cup gladly, as the Lord Jesus did (He drank the
dregs of the bitter cup of the wrath of the Father: yea, He received it
gladly, and thanked Him for it) albeit thou had bitterness in the beginning,
yet in the end thou shall find joy and sweetness. What followed on that
cup? Glory: the more that thou suffer, if it be patiently, the greater
glory shall be to thee. Then seeing that we must also suffer in this world:
for it is nothing but a suffering life (and woe is to thee, that wilt make thy
heaven into this world, thou need not to look for an heaven in the world to
come,) What ever we suffer, let us strive against our rebellious nature (for
it is full of rebellion) and strive to get patience, and say, Lord, I have no
patience in mine hand, Lord give me patience and contentment, let this be our
prayer in distress, and they who will seek this, I will promise them, the
most glorious issue that ever was, the bitterness of the affliction shall not
stay that glory. In this world we are all as it were on a Skaffold to try our
faith, and to try our patience, that afterward all our afflictions may be
turned in joy and glory, and all the tears that will gush out of thine eyes,
the Lord with his hand shall wipe them away (will thou awaite to see this end)
and thou shall never again see dolor nor displeasure. Now remains one thing
of the taking of the Lord, then says he, Then the band and the captain, and
the officers of the Jews took Jesus and bound him, He gave them good leave,
or else they could never have bound Him: but will ye mark how particularly
they are named that took Him: there is the band of the men of war, and the
captain, and the servants, to let you see, that there was no man that was
there, and was partaker of that doing, but the eye of God was on him and the
holy Spirit recounteth them. Beware ever to be in evil company, if there were
never so many in that company: yea, if there were ten thousand with thee, the
Lord shall see thee, and judge thee, whether thou be a Captain, or a single
soldier, or a gudget, beware to be in evil company, Say not, I am not a
principal man, but a servant, I must obey the authority, and I must follow
my Captain: No, that shall be no warrant to thee, for if thou shall be in
evil company, the eye of the LORD shall be upon thee, to judge thee, let
none of these worldly excuses move thee, but say, Lord, thou see whither I
go, and with whom I come, and what I come to do, or else thy conscience shall
terrify thee, whether thou be highest or lowest in doing an ill fact, the
judgment of the Lord shall fall on thee. Now to come to his taking, the Lord
is taken willingly, and resistes not, and when they bound him, he put out his
hands to be bound: look how he points out the suffering of Christ, First, he
says he was taken, and then he was bound: think ye this is for no purpose
There is not a word or a sillabe lost here: the taking of the Lord, and the
laying hands on him, was for our cause, who lying under sin, the devil, and
death, and this taking recounters, and meets our taking by the devil, and
death: Every thing in Him and His suffering behooved to meet us, and our
suffering, He that should redeem us, as we were taken: so it behooued Him to
be taken, and as we were bound, so it behooued Him to be bound, and if His
taking and binding had not answered to our taking and binding, He had not
been a meet redeemer for us, and if he had not been bound as we were, we had
not been delivered from the bands of sin, albeit it is hard to Him, yet to
the sinner it is joyful, and if thou find thine hands bound hard: thus the
Lord Jesus was a captive bound for thee, it would be the joyfullest tithings
to thee that ever was. Who is he, or she that feel the bands of death and
damnation, but this will be joyful tithings to them, and because we feel not
this, when we hear word of His taking, we take little thought of it, and are so
little moved therewith. Therefore, Brethren, I recommend this lesson to you,
and my self, seeing we are all sinners, lying under sin, and death, that we
strive to be found in Jesus, that by faith in Him, we may find his passion,
and all the parts thereof to be forcible and effectual to freee and deliver
us from the bands of sin and death, and so may be made partakers of life and
glory, through Him. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all
honor, praise and glory. AMEN.

THE THIRD LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON CHAP. XVIII. Annas first (for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was
the high Priest that same year.) Caiaphas was he, that gave counsel to the
Jews, that it was expedient, that one man should die for the people. Simon
Peter followed JESUS, and another Disciple, and that Disciple was known of the
high Priest: therefore he went in with JESUS into the Hall of the high Priest:
Peter stood at the door without. Then went out the other Disciple, which was
known unto the high Priest, and spoke to her that kept the door, and brought
in Peter. Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's Disciples? He said, I am
not. Peter also stood among them, and warmed himself.


WE have heard (Brethren) the first part of the suffering of Christ, which
was in the Garden, by the Brook Cedron, into the which the Lord, as he was
accustomed, entered, with His Disciples. In this Garden, after that a
co^muning passed betwixt Him and them that came to take Him, the Lord Jesus is
taken, and bound. This is that outward suffering in the Garden, besides the
inward agony in the soul with the wrath of the Father, for our sins,
which He did bear.

Now, Brethren, to pass by all things which we have already spoken, we
enter into the second part of His suffering, which was in the Hall of the
High Priest Caiaphas. It is said, when He is taken and bound, they lead Him
away, first to the house of Annas, who was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was
high Priest for that year. The rest of the Evangelists, before they come to
his part, they report some things done before: and namely, they make mention
of a gentle reproof which the Lord gave to these that took Him, and handled
Him so roughly, being the justest man in the world, He says, What needs all
this, that ye should come out against me, as a thief and an enemy? Might ye
not have had me daily whilst I was teaching in your Temple in Jerusalem? for
I auowed my doctrine before the world. Then He advises Himself, and says,
Whereto should I speak this? this is your hour, and this is the time that
the Father has granted to you to work the work of darkness for a time, and
as the Lord has ordained, so it must be. But say what He would say, the
miserable creatures are so blinded, that they go on furiously against the
Lord. Another thing likewise they report: In the mean time that they were
binding the Lord, the disciples are scattered and fled. Another thing also, (
Mark 14.51.52.) whilst they were leading Him to Jerusalem, there followed a
young man, clothed with linen upon his bare body: and certain of the young
men followed him, and sought to have caught him, but he left his linen cloth,
and fled from them naked. This seems to have been one, who in the night
being in his b^d, and hearing a noise and a dinne, comes hastily to see what
it was. Ye see here the insolency of these men who will run upon the Lord,
they will take all the world if they might: they spare none. Now to come to
our matter: They lead the Lord Jesus to Jerusalem, and they bring Him first
to the house of Annas, because perchance it was the first house in the way that
they came to, that was an house of estimation: and again, because Annas was
father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was High Priest that year, and they would
gratify him to see this miserable spectacle, for he was a wicked man: Woe is
them that delight to see the bands of Jesus Christ. They led Him before ye world
to an open spectacle, after they had once caught Him. In these words (to speak
this by the way) ye may mark and perceive a great corruption at this time in
the Church of ye Jews: for before the coming of Christ, immediately all the
estates of Churches and commonweals were confused and troubled: and the
estate of ye High Priest being a most notable estate among them, was corrupted.
By ye law of God it was appointed, that only one High Priest should be at
once, and he all his days should brook it: yet such was ye corruption then,
that they chose more high priests together: and every one of these served their
course about in the office: and this was yt year that Caiaphas served: but it
had been better for him he had never served: for in his time ye most
mischievous fact was done that ever was in the world, to wit, ye crucifying of
Jesus Christ, ye God of glory. So it was not for his good ye he served. I might
tell you more corruptions in the hie priesthood among the^: the high priest was
wont to be chose^ by the people, and by the mouth of God: this power was taken
from them, and given to Ethnic princes, and presidents that ruled the people,
they chose the^. And the^ the high priests were wont to be chose^ of the tribe
of Leui, and posterity of Aaron only: but then any man was taken in by bribery,
it was bought and sold: and when they would shoot in one, they would shoot out
another: this was the co^fusio^ of the hie priests estate immediately before
Christ came. There is nothing mentioned what was done with Jesus in the house
of Annas: they took Him in here to drive over a piece of time, till Caiaphas
should gather his counsel, before vvho^ Jesus was to be accused: and it
appears here, that there He was bound more straightly than before: Annas sends
Him to Caiaphas his son-in-law, straiter bound than He was in the garden. It
is marked what Caiaphas was, not to his praise, but to his shame, This
Caiaphas was he that gave counsel, that one should die for the people: ye
heard of this in the 11. Chap. and 49. verse. This was both a prophecy and a
counsel. When the Scribes and Pharisees were in doubt what to do with
Christ, he says, It is expedient that one should die for the people. In
giving counsel, the Lord guides the foul tongue of him, as He did Balaams
tongue: for when Balaam was purposed to curse Gods people, the Lord made him
to bless them: Even so the Lord used the tongue of Caiaphas: he shall never
have commendation of that prophecy: he was seeking the blood of Jesus Christ:
yet the Lord ruled the tongue of him to prophecy of that which came to pass.
But whereto is this repeated here, that Caiaphas gave them counsel? These
words are not in vain: John would let us see by this description, that they
who took the Lord, they brought Him to the greatest enemy He had, to him that
gave counsel that He should die: all me^ would have their counsels put in
execution: and namely, a wicked man, if he give counsel, he would gladly have
it put in execution, albeit it were never so wicked, if he should do it himself,
he had rather hang himself than it went back, as ye may see in Achitophell.
John, the writer of this history, leaves Christ, and he returns to Peter,
and makes rehearsal of a thing that befell to Peter in the mean time, of that
foul fall of Peter, who boasted so fast of his strength, to be an example to
the whole posterity never to trust in the power of man: he got a worse fall
tha^ any of the rest of the disciples: for he denied the Lord with an
execration, the rest fled only. In this fact of Peter's, we have first, how he
tempts God: then next, because he tempted the Lord, the Lord tempts him again:
he who tempts God, God will tempt him: thirdly, we have the foul denial of
Peter by a light temptation. Then Peter first tempts the Lord: for when as they
led away the Lord to the Hall of the High Priest, there followed him Peter
(albeit the Lord had forewarned him of his weakness) but afar off, as
Matt. 26.58. Mark 14.54. and Luke 22. 54. do note, and another disciple. What
this disciple was, his name is not mentioned: some think it was John, for
John, when he speaks of himself, he uses commonly to suppress his name, as
ye see often in this book. Others think it was not John, nor any of the twelve:
but some other godly man, who loved the Lord Jesus well, to see what issue
should follow upon that taking; and this is more prooueable: for I think John
had not such an acquaintance and court with the High Priest* being but a simple
man, a poor fisher, namely, a disciple of Jesus Christ: but whosoever it was*
it is not much to the purpose. When they come to Caiaphas Hall, the Lord is
taken in: amongst the rest, this other disciple gets in, because (says
John) he was known to the High Priest. As for Peter, because he was not
known, he stands at the door, which was straightly kept at this time. The
other disciple pitties Peter's case and estate, (but it was a preposterous
pity) And he entreats the doore-keeper to let in Peter. Take heed to
friendship: and look that in pleasuring thy friend, thou be not an
instrument of his destruction. Now Peter comes in, and warmeth himself
amongst the rest. This for Peter's tempting of GOD: Now let us examine here
what is commendable, and what is not. Indeed, there is no man that will not
like of this love which Peter did bear toward his Master CHRIST JESUS, and
of this zeal, and of this his unwillingness to depart from his Master: for
he loved Him so well, that he would follow Him to the death: and would to
God in this cold age, there were but a piece of this zeal in us, that Peter
had: we have no zeal: and if it were but this inco^sideratiue zeal, yet it
is better to have it, than no zeal. So this love is commendable: for albeit he
did well to love his master, yet he fails in this, that in receiving
advertisement out of the mouth of the Lord, that he was not able to suffer for
Him, yet he would go forward: and when Jesus said to His takers, If ye seek
me, let these go their way, Peter might have perceived by this, that he was
not able to suffer, he might have retired to some private place with prayer
and mourning, but he would step forward, and would not accept of that, that the
Lord said to him, thou art not able: so he falls here very far. We all have
our lesson here, the day of our trial may come: let us therefore ever have our
eye on the will of God, and that which He will have thee to do, that do thou,
and what the Lord requires not of us, that do not. Thou can do nothing
better than this, to take up thy Cross, and to follow Christ: but if the Lord
bid thee not do it, do it not, if he require not at thine hand that thou
suffer, enter not to suffer, if he forewarne thee that thou art not able to
suffer the fire, go thy way, step aside, and let it be. But one will say, How
can I get advertisement? Peter had the mouth of the Lord: how shall we be
advertised by God, whether we shall offer our selves to the fire or not? Jesus
Christ is not amongst us now face to face. I answer, The only way to know
this* is this: Ere any man offer to put his hand to the Cross of Christ, look
what he is able to bear: look what strength of God he has: if thou werest
like a Giant, thou will not bear the Cross of Christ, with man's strength: if
thou find in trial yt thou have not strength enough, take it for a warning
from heaven, and draw thy self away to prayer and meditation, and then being
furnished with strength, come out and suffer, and then if thou have strength,
step forward and suffer. Another fault in Peter, when he comes to the door
of the high Priest, and finding it shut, yet he stands, whereas by the
shutting of the door he was commanded to leave off, at least, to try whether
the deed in hand was lawful or no. It was by the providence of God, that the
door was shut: he got a warning there to leave off, yet he would not. These
impediments that are casten in, when we are of purpose to effectuat or do any
thing should not be idly looked on, but they should make us to enter into a
careful and earnest trial of that deed, to see whether it be lawful or not:
for nothing is without the providence of God: and when thou have considered the
work, and find it a good work conformable to Gods will, and that thou art
able to do it, then go forward in despite of the Devil, and the world; but
if thou find after trial otherwise, either that it is an evil work, or
else a good work, and yet that thou art not able to do it: then stay, and
leave off: for if thou do not, thou shall think shame in the end, as Peter
did: Therefore, let no man look lightly to such impediments as they shall
find to be casten in, in doing any thing. Well, ye see Peter's fall in these
two poincts: First, he will not receive aduertisment: Secondly, he will not
go from the door, till he get in. Search the ground of his doing, and ye
shall see, that albeit Peter was a very weak man, yet he saw not his own
infirmity: and when he thought himself strong enough in his vain conciet, he
was blinded: he saw not his own infirmity, and this is the ground of his
fall. It was the strength of flesh and blood that was in Peter, and an humane
spirit, such a courage as the Roman vvarriours had. This courage of flesh
and blood will carry men a good piece forward in the cause of Christ, and will
make them take up and lift the cross on their shoulders, and to go to the
Hall of the High Priest, and to come to the fire: but there it leaves them,
for they will not put their hand to the fire: and in end, this humane courage
will leave thee in the mire: for thou will neither die, nor put thine head
under ye axe: therefore, if thou find boldness in thee, look whether it be throw
ye spirit of Jesus Christ, or of manly courage: whether it be spiritual or
humane: and if it be of man, thou shall fall, and if it be of God, thou shall
know it. He who is strong in Jesus Christ* he is strong in infirmity: and he
who has greatest faith in Jesus Christ, he has greatest sense and sight of
his own weakness: and when he finds Christ living in him, he will find himself
dying in himself: if thou find thy self nothing, thou have strength in God:
if thou take a conceit of thy self, and boast of thy power, thou have no
power in Jesus Christ. Our Lord said to Paul, My grace may suffice thee only,
for my power is made perfect through weakness. The Martyrs have confessed in
ye hour of death, that they had no strength in themselves, but that they were
strong in Christ: if thou have strength of thy self, and not of Christ, it
shall leave thee in the end. Now when Peter has tempted God, God meets him,
and tempts him again: he comes in, and who is ye instrument that the Lord
uses to tempt him with? even she that would gratify him to let him in: he
bought his coming in too dear, with the denial of his Master: And she says,
Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? First mark this well, ye will
think this to be a light temptation. Who is the instrument that temptes him?
who, but a silly damsel? if it had been a man of war, or a man, it had bin
thought he had had some occasion to fall back. And what s^ies she to him? not
boastingly, Art thou one of this seducers servants? but in simplicity and
gentleness, Art thou one of this man's disciples? So, whether we look to the
tempter, or to the temptation, it is very light: and therefore, the greater is
his fall and shame: thou gettest a foul shame, who for a light temptation
fallest abacke. Behold how the Lord will humble the vain and proud
confidence of man: Peter was too proud: and the Lord will raise up the
silliest of all His creatures, to tempt that man that is proud. All this
natural boldness is nothing but weakness, and He will not encounter it with a
great strength, but with a silly instrument: that man may see, that his own
strength is nothing. Beside the fall of the proud man, there is shame with it,
that shall pearce the heart more, than the hurt, that it should be smitten to
the dirt with such an instrument. He will not raise up a champio^ against the^,
nor He will not enter Himself with the^, but He will stir up a thing of nothing
to beat down carnal courage. She says, Art thou a disciple of this man's? He
says, I am not. Is this he, that bragges and says, I will not leave thee
Lord, though al should leave thee? is this he that denies his master? By this
example we have a lively image of the vain pride and strength of man. The Lord
will cause a girl to cast thee down and it both: yea, the very shaking of a
leaf, shall make thee tremble: and vain fantasies and imaginations shall
terrify thee, although there were nothing out with thee: for whosoever has a
confidence in himself, the Lord shall cast such terrors into his heart, as
shall ouer-throw him. The terroures of his mind, though all the world should
let him be, shall trouble him, and cast him down, so that he shall get no
rest. Therefore, be never strong in the power of man: for if thou had all the
world, yet the basest thing in the world shall cast thee down. But he or
she, that would take up the cross of Jesus Christ, should strive to be strong
in God, and care not how weak thou art in thy self, for that strength of God
will hold thee up. Paul says to Timothy, Be partaker of my affliction by the
power of God: and ground thine afflictions upon this power, for it is ye
strength which will hold thee up: and this is the thing that will bear up the
cross through all temptations manfully to the end. In the next verse. the
Evangelist tells where Peter is standing, and sets down the place, and a
certain occasion of his temptation, He is standing with a company of the
servants and officers of the Priests and Pharisees, who had made a fire of
Coals, for it was cold, and they warmed themselves. And then the Maiden
comes unto him: he was gone in too far: for it is not good to enter over
far into the houses of wicked men: neither is it good for thee to warm thy
self in the company of wicked men, nor yet to be at their table: it were
far better for thee to abide the cold: for if thou accompany thy self with
them, and take pleasure at their fire side, then a tempter shall come unto
thee, either a Damsel, or a Boy: And therefore, let every man and woman
beware, and as they would be free from temptation, so let them eschew evil
company. He is well worthy to be tempted, who knows his own weakness, and
yet will not tarry out of the company of the wicked: And it is Gods just
judgment, that our men make Apostasy, and come home foul Apostates, and
Atheistes, who will not tarry out of FRANCE, and SPAIN, where all is full of
temptation: It were better to sit at home, and serve the LORD: for it is hard
to know, if ever thou shall get grace to take up thy self, as PETER did. The
rest of the Evangelists say, that PETER had scarce said that, (when as the
Cock crew, even as the Lord had fore-tolde him) but he gets the warning,
that he had made defection. Now after sin, there comes commonly an
induration and blindness; and in sinning the conscience sleeps, yea, it
sleeps so sound, that when it gets advertisement, it cannot be vvakened:
but the third time it was vvakned: for PETER denied his Master once, twice,
yea thrice, but at length he vvakeneth; and yet not so much for the crowing of
the Cock, as for the look of his Master; whereof LVKE makes mention, CHAP.
XXII. VERSE. 61. And PAVL says, When the heart shall be turned unto the LORD,
the veil is taken away, 2. COR. CHAP. III. VERSE. 16. This is my lesson: When a
man commits sin, the conscience will be asleep, and will not be
vvakened: and this falls not out in the wicked only, but also in the
godly: Ye read of DAVID, after he had committed adultery, his conscience
sleeps still; and after the adultery, he falls out in murder, and yet
he is not vvakened, till the Prophet of the LORD came unto him. The longer
that thy conscience lies still in sin, the bitterer the vvakening will be.
A reprobate will get an hard vvakening, Judas got a sore vvakening, he was
asleep vvhilest he kissed his Master, but when he vvakened, he hanged
himself. But the Lord deals otherwise with His own, He will vvaken them
in mercy: and in the heauiest displeasure, they shall have the sweetest joye:
and in the greatest abundance of tears, the greatest comfort.

Of all the things in the world, take best heed to the conscience: for it
is always very ready to fall asleep, and of all judgementes, a sleeping
conscience is the greatest: and therefore let us strive night and day to have
a waking conscience, which may round in our ears, when we lay us down at
Even, what we have done all the day: if thou have done good, then thou
may sleep with a sound conscience: but if thou have done evil, it is
better a thousand times, to weep with tears, and wake in mourning, till
thou find thy self to be reconciled to God again, than to sleep. We
should never let the conscience sleep, but ever hold it waking, to tell us
when we do evil, that we may have dolor: and when we have done well,
we may have joy, through Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, for evermore: AMEN.

THE FOVRTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON CHAP. XVIII. JESUS of his Disciples, and of his Doctrine. JESUS answered
him, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the
Temple, whither the Jews resort continually, and in secret have I said
nothing. JESUS with his rod, saying, Answerest thou the high Priest so? JESUS
answered him, if I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil: but if I
have well spoken, why smitest thou me? Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas
the high Priest.) Simon Peter stood and warmed himself, and they said unto
him, Art not thou also one of his Disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.
Peter smote off, said, Did not I see thee in the Garden with him? Peter then
denied again, and immediately the Cock crew.


BELOVED in the LORD JESUS, we have heard the first part of the Passion of the
LORD, which was in the Garden; beside that inward agony with the wrath of His
Father, that He felt in His soul, outwardly in the Garden, where He was
taken like a thief and bound: He was taken to deliver us from that captivity
and bondage of sin and death. And then after we entered into the second part
of His suffering which was in the Hall of Caiaphas: being taken and bound, He
is led away to Jerusalem. The first house that He is brought unto, is the
house of Anna^, the father-in-lawe to Caiaphas: and there He tarrieth a
certain time, till the Priests, the Elders, and Scribes were assembled in the
house of Caiaphas: and then Annas sendes Him bound to Caiaphas the High Priest.

Now we heard the last day the History of Peter, how he denied his Lord and
Master: Peter, upon a vain confidence, notwithstanding of an admonition of the
Lord, he will follow Him to the house of the High Priest. Now the Lord
enters in, and the other disciple who knew the High Priest, and Peter was
stopped at the door: this might have been an advertisement for him to have
left off, but yet he would not: and the other disciple, thinking to gratify
him, he desires the maiden that kept the door, to let him in: and being no
sooner entered in, but that same servant woman tempts him. This temptation
is by a sober instrument, neither uttered she any reuiling words unto him:
yet nevertheless Peter falls: whereby ye may see whereunto the
confidence of flesh and blood turns, for the lightest assault will throw
him down who trusts in it. He is standing vvarming himself with evil
company: and being standing securely, he gets his reward: he dear bought
his vvarming there: for he is tempted, and denies his Lord and Master.

Now to come to this Text: There are two parts of it shortly: the first
contains the suffering of the Lord Jesus in the Hall of the high Priest: the
second contains the second and third denial of Peter. As for the first, it is
said, that Caiaphas the high Priest begineth to ask of Jesus concerning his
doctrine and his disciples: he lays not down first such and such particular
points of false doctrine, because he had none to lay to the charge of the
Lord, and therefore this was no formal proceeding and dealing, to draw a man
before a judge, and then not to have one word to lay to his charge. Should not
the dittay be made before the man was taken: ye may see the malice of this
persecution. Well then, to examine his words, he enquireth about his doctrine,
and then for his disciples, whilst he asked him of his doctrine, he would
mean, that his doctrine was not allowable, and that it might not abide the
light, and that He teached lies, and whilst as he speaks of His disciples,
he would mean, that the Lord was a seducer, and had seduced so many among the
people: the Lord answers, The thing that I have teached, I have teached openly
before the world: and therefore, why ask thou me of my doctrine, as though
it were not allowable, and as if I had teached in secret holes and caves: then
he appealeth to the witnessing of his enemies, ask of these men, who have
heard me, I will be judged by them. This is the effect first, of the question
of the high Priest, and next of the answer of the Lord. The first thing that
we mark here, is shortly this, Behold in the person of Caiaphas, the malice
of the enemies of the truth in their hearts, they know the truth, and yet
they will seem that they know it not: CAAIPHAS knew the truth, but he
seems not to know it, the enemies will count light darkness, albeit the
truth should shine in their faces more bright than the Sun in the noone-tide
of the day, yet they will say, Light is darkness: But to come to Christ's part,
as the truth loves the light, and desires not to be hid, neither to be
teached in secret holes and caves: so the truth (so far as is possible) is
publicly to be teached, in the presence of the world, it would have all men
to know it, it would ever be heard, and the light would ever shine through the
world. The Ministers of the truth should ever strive to preach in public,
that all the men and women of the world may hear, even to preach in the most
public places of the world, and if it were for no other thing than this: that
thou may answer to the Lord, if it fall out that the light come to be
challenged for darkness, the^ thou may appeal and say, We have teached
nothing in holes, and that the enemies of the truth may be convicted in their
conscience, and compelled to bear witness of the truth: I mean not, that at
no time it is lawful to preach in secret places, and as though the truth of
God had ever a free course, and were publikly preached: for experience has
teached, that the truth of God has fled to the wilderness in time of
persecution, and the Saints of God have been glad to go to holes, to get the
comfort of the word: but I mean this, that so far as possibly can be, is to
be preached openly, and if that liberty of the truth be restrained, let us
be content to suffer, and deliver in secret consolation by the word. Then
mark again in Christ's answer: albeit the Lord suffers willingly, offers
Himself to be taken, and gives his hands to be bound, yet ye may see, that
the Lord will not yield to the enemies, that He is a false teacher, or that He
is a seducer, or that that light is darkness, or that the truth is a lie. It is
true, that if it please the Lord, that we suffer for the trueths sake, we are
bound to suffer patiently and willingly: but look to this again, let never
the truth of God be said to be a lie, never yield to the enemies that the
truth of God is false, for all the torments of the world: Peter says, Let us
suffer for a good cause, and not as thieves and murderers, 1. Pet. 4. 15, 16.
It is a pain to suffer for an evil cause, so long as the Lord gives us a
mouth, let us protest that the truth is truth. Paul says, 2. Tim. 2.9. I am
in bands, and I am afflicted in bands as though I were an evil doer: yet the
word of God that He has put in my mouth is not bound, and all the enemies in
the world, so long as I have a mouth, shall not restrain it. The Martyrs were
never brought to this, to confess that they suffered for an evil cause:
albeit thou yield hands and foot to any torture, beware of this, that thou
never confess that it is an evil cause, wherefore thou die; let ever the
verity be free in all our suffering. When the Lord makes this answer, One of
the officers which stood by, smote Jesus with his rod, and said, Answerest
thou the high Priest so? Meaning* that the Lord had not answered him so
reverently as He should have done. The Lord answers, If I have evil spoken,
bear witness of the evil, but if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me.
Always, whether He had well or evil spoken, He finds fault with him, that
he should have smitten Him so rash^y: so, brethren, this is another part of the
suffering of Jesus Christ: He suffers not only of the high Priest, but of his
servants also: He suffers of all men, all this was done without any order of
law. The high Priest speaks to Him against order of Law, and the officer
strikes Him against order of Law: he fails in this, because he strikes Him for
well doing, for He maintained the truth of His father. The^ again, why should
he have stricken Him, till He had been judged? and then, if He were judged, yet
it was no place to punish a man in judgment, though he were never so evil. So
ye see in how many things these men fail. What shall I say? Ye shall commonly
find the most innocent man, who has been brought before evil men, and
corrupted judges of the world, of all sort of men have been handeled most
vnformally, and unreasonably. A thief, or a murderer has not been so evil
handeled, as the most innocent: for they will let a murderer, or the
wickedest man in the world, tell his tale in patience: and they will delay
striking of him till the place of execution: but experience has taught this,
that when an innocent man is judged, all the proceeding is without order: as we
see in this example of Christ, the most innocent man that ever was. And such
like in the Martyrs of God; never thief nor robber was so unreasonably handled
as they. What is the cause of this? Even this, the malice of the heart of man
was never so bent against an evil man, as the wicked man is against the
innocent: yea, a just judge hates not so much unrighteousness, as a wicked judge
hates innoce^cie. And therefore, it is a wonder that the judgeme^t of the wicked
proceeds unorderly against the godly: the Lord answers, If I have spoken
evil, thou should not strike me without order, and if well, why smitest
thou me. The Lord binds him that he has done wrong, howbeit He suffered most
willingly and patiently: but He strikes not again. Yet mark, in this patient
suffering He will have wrong appear to be wrong, and that which is unjust to
be unjust. In all our patient suffering let ay right appear to be right, and
wrong to be wrong. Let not a man yt suffers be so dumb that he say not that
wrong is wrong. No, let them speak, that the conscience of the wicked man may
be convict, and brought to some remorse. The Lord no doubt pities this man that
struck Him, and would have had his conscience co^uict, yt he might repent. So
let the wicked see, that wrong is wrong in the most patient suffering, that the
wicked may be convict, and God glorified. Now is subjoyned, that Annas had
sent Him bound to Caiaphas. He returns to the ground of His accusation: and
the ground is this, Annas sent Him bound unto Caiaphas: howbeit in the house
of Annas the Lord was not strucke^, yet Annas was not blameless: for these
words are registrated to his everlasting shame, that he sent such an innocent
man to such a burrio, and this makes him guilty of the blood of the Lord
Jesus. Meddle nothing with the suffering of an innocent man, for if once thou
seem to consent to his death, thou art guilty, and if thou rejoycest in the
wrack of the innocent, for if thou shall once consent unto it, thou art
guilty of all the innocent blood, from the blood of Abel that was shed, unto
the end of the world: for whosoever will consent to the blood of an innocent
man, he may easily be brought on to consent to the shedding of the blood of all
innocents yt ever was: keep therefore thine hands, thine eyes, and thine heart
clean from any assent to the wrack of the innocent. Now to come to the second
part of our text, which contains the two denialls of Peter. All this time,
Peter is standing warming him with the officers of the High Priest: on this
rises another temptation, Some say, Art thou not one of his disciples, there he
denies, saying, I am not. First, ye have the occasion of the temptation,
Secondly, the temptation it self, Thirdly, the second fall, and denial. The
occasion is, he is standing warming him in such a company, the words import a
great security in Peter, he is so far from a remorse, that is, careless:
think ye not, that having denied his Master once, that he should have gone
aside and mourned and wept bitterly, but ye see he did not so. Sin when it is
committed, brings on commonly a careless security: when a man has fallen
into a great sin, he will commonly ly still in a deadness and senslesnesse,
and as a man who falls down from an high place, for a certain space lies
without sense, and is dammished with the fall: even so* (what is sin but a
fall from God) after that once we are fallen from God, we are senlesse
altogether, we ly without sense or motion, and the greater always that the
sin be whereinto we fall, the greater is the senslesnesse: but above all
sins, the denial of the Lord Jesus, and of His truth, bringes on most
fearful and deadly senslesnesse, especially if that sin proceed of a
malitiousnesse of the heart, as that sin of Iuda^ did: he was senseless, he
was so impudent in sinning, that he kissed His Master, to show Him to his
takers. It is true, the sin of Judas, was of the hatred of the heart, but the
sin of Peter was not of malice, but of infirmity, yet he falls into a
deadness and sleep: So, Brethren, ever beware to fall, for after a fall comes
a security. The estate of security is the most dangerous estate that ever
was, better to be mourning day and night, than to be in this security: so then
falling, he lies still senseless But look what follows, lying still in
security, another tempter comes again, to wit, One of the servants of the
high Priest, his cousin, whose ca^e Peter smote off, said, Did not I see thee
in the garden with him? look what the estate of security bringes on it, never
wantes temptation, and if thou shall be put to that pinch, that thou should
deny thy Lord, let a man ly still in security from hour to hour, he shall
never want temptation: when the devil lulles thee asleep in security, then
he thinks that he gets his will. Peter says, I am not his disciple: the
temptation is but light, yet for all the lightness of it he denies his Lord: for
denying Him to be his disciple (albeit he spoke slenderly) he denies Christ to
be his Master: and in effect he denies the Messiah: then, Brethren, a man or a
woman lying in security, the least thing in the world, will draw him away, as
a sleeping man with a small motion will fall: so when thou art sleeping, if the
devil comes, the least finger of the tempter will put thee over: above all
things in the world, keep thee from security: for the smallest temptation
will put thee away from thy God: so men in this life should ever be groaning
under the burden of sin: had Peter been groaning after his first denial,
he had not been so easily overcome. Now to take it up in one word, sin
bringes on security, and when one lies in security, the devil is busy to
tempt him, and that person is easily put over: so beware of sin, and strive
to get a waking conscience, that thou sleep not in security: for the end of
security is death everlasting* when he is crying peace, peace, then comes a
sudden judgment, like the pains of a woman in travel. Now come to the last
denial of Peter: he has denied the Lord twice: after his second denial, he
is no more touched, than he was of before: and the second fall bringes on a
greater senslesnesse, than the first fall: the oftener that a man or woman
falls, they are the more senseless, and once falling, and falling again, thou
contractest the greater security. There is not a man or a woman that continues
in sin: but after the second fall, that person shall be more senseless, than
after the first: so growing in sin, bringes on a growing in deadly security,
and continuance in a dead sleep, thou shall find thy self after the second
sin more senseless than after the first: Well then, Peter conti^ues in a
security, and as Luke notes, there interu^enes one hour between the second
and third denial: yet he is without remorse, and he is not moved* so
continuing in this dead sleep of security, comes on the third temptation,
by a cousin of Malchus, whose ear he smote off: if thou sleep in
security, thou shall not want new temptation: when thou sleep, thy tempter
is busily waking about thee: the more thou sleep, and lie in security,
the more busy is the devil to tempt thee: albeit thou feel it not. Now when
Peter has denied Him once and twice, and as the other Evangelists do note,
he puts to a curse: Mark, as continuance in security brings on
continuance in temptation: so continuance in temptation brings on continuance
in sin. Now, I think, if the Lord had not stayed him in the end, he had
denied Him a thousand times: even so often as they had asked of him. So there is
never an end of tumbling over and over, till the creature tumble in hell,
where there shall be a black wakening: for if thou deniest the Lord once, thou
shall deny Him again and again: it is noted when he denied the third time,
Then the cock crew, and Luke notes, even as the cock crew, the Lord looked
over his shoulder: there goes two things together, the crowing of the cock,
and the looking of the Lord. S. Mark notes, the cock crew the second time:
well then, does Peter waken at the crowing of the cock? began he to get a
remorse by it? No, all the crying and crowing of the world, will not waken the
soul out of sin, except the Lord look in, by the beams of his countenance,
and strike in to the heart, if the gracious beams of the Lords face had not
stricken on Peter's heart, he had never wakened. This is to let you see, how
hard a thing it is to raise a dead body that lies in sin: what crying in the
world will raise a dead body: and so there is no crying, or remedy in heaven or
in earth, to thy dead soul, except Jesus Christ look favorably unto thee, and
make his gracious countenance to shine in thy soul: who would have that
remorse of sin that Peter got, and that waking conscience, let that person
strive to turn the heart to Jesus Christ: when the heart is turned to the
Lord, the^ the veil shall be taken away: all the light of knowledge is in the
face of Jesus Christ: no heat in the world is able to mollify thine heart,
except that heat that comes from the face of Jesus Christ: so, hold ever
thine heart up to the face of Jesus Christ, that thou may have a continual
remorse: for in the bitterness of sin, is the sweetness of joy: Now to
make an end, and shortly to examine this fall of Peter's. Certainly, there are
many faults in this fall: First, he is carried away with a vain confidence of
flesh and blood: he will take up his cross and follow the Lord, albeit that
the Lord advertised him that he was not able: and then the door was shut upon
him, to advertise him, and put him in mind, yet he would not stay: then when
he is let in, alas, he denies his Lord once, he denies Him twice and thrice,
till the LORD did stay him: I dare not say, but all this time Peter carried a
good heart toward his Lord, and a spunke of faith, and a spunke of love in the
heart, albeit his faith and love were choked: it was suppressed with
infirmities of the flesh, and namely with fear: then when he is entered in and
come unto the fire side, if that faith and love was suppressed before with his
nature, then it was far more suppressed, and this little spunke of love in the
man, was smoothered, and there falls such a weight of infirmity on it, that
it was pressed down under the burden of corruption, and under security: if
thou be sleeping in security, albeit thou have a spunke of love, it will be
smoothered, and this is most true, that this spunke of love was so smoothered,
yea, I say more, it was pressed, that except the Lord had looked over his
shoulder, with the eye of his mercy, and wakened that spunke of love, it had
died out. In Peter we have a clear example of the weakness of the godly men,
into this life: albeit we have faith, and love, yet in the example of Peter we
see, that the spunke of grace will be choked with corruption and infirmity:
and then will ye come to God: Peter is one of the chief examples of the mercy
of God in Jesus Christ: Paul to Timothy countes, that he was one of the
greatest examples of mercy in the world: but if ye look to the sin of
Peter, ye will find that it was greater than the sin of Paul: for Paul did
all of ignorance, and so if Paul, as he says, was made an example of the
mercy of God to sinners: surely this example of Peter, ought much more to be
an example to all sinners: let no sinner that looks to him, despair of
mercy, how burdened so ever he be with sin: for that same Jesus Christ,
who was merciful to Peter, has store of mercy for all them, that it pleases
him mercifully to look upon: To Him therefore, with the Father, and holy
Spirit, be all honor and glory, AMEN.

THE FIFTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON CHAP. XVIII. JESUS from Caiaphas, into the common Hall. Now it was
morning, and they themselves went not into the common Hall, lest they should
be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover Pilate then went out unto
them, and said, What accusation bring you against this man? Pilate unto them,
Take ye him, and judge him after your own Law. Then the Jews said unto
him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. JESUS might be
fulfilled which he spoke, signifying what death he should die.


IN the eighteenth and nineteenth Chapters of this Gospel (Brethren) is
contained the History of the Passion of the Lord Jesus Christ; and it is
divided in these parts: The first is the suffering of the Lord in the Garden:
The next, is the suffering of the Lord under the High Priest Caiaphas, the
Ecclesi^sticall Judge: The third, is the suffering of the Lord under Pontius
Pilate, the Civil and Roman Magistrate: The fourth, is the suffering of the
Lord in the place of Execution: The last, in the sepulcher. We have spoken of
ye first part of His suffering in the Garden* besides the inward conflict He
had with ye wrath of His Father for ye sins of ye elect which He did bear
upon Him. The* Lord is taken like a thief or vagabond, and bound, and led to
Jerusalem. We heard also the suffering of the Lord in ye Hall of the High
Priest, whose name was Caiaphas. When the High Priests and Elders are set down
in counsel. He is brought in before them: and being brought, they have not a
word to say against Him, howbeit they bound Him, and brought Him to judgeme^t.
This was an vnformall dealing: therefore the hie priest demands of Him His
doctrine, and of His disciples, to catch a word out of His mouth, whereupon he
might make his accusation: when they prevail not this way, the rest of the
Eua^gelists note, that they begin to suborne false witness: but they get no
vantage that way neither: for they cannot agree together. The^ the hie priest
begins in wrath to adjure Him, to tell him, whether he be that Christ or no?
The Lord denies it not, but says, Thou have said it: He gives him a fair
testimony of this: after this He says, Ye shall see the son of man sitting
at the right hand of the power of God, and come in the clouds of heaven. Then
the high priest rent his clothes, as though He had blasphemed, and said What
have we more need of witness? behold, now ye heard His blasphemy, what think ye?
Then he, and the rest of the council, concluded, yt the Lord was worthy of
death, and so the counsel departed. In the mean time the Lord is kept still in
the Hall of the hie priest, and the officers are al about Him, working all kind
of injury against Him: ye rebukes yt should have befalle^ to us, are laid on
Him, as the prophet said of Him, Psalm. 69.10. Some spitted on Him, some put a
veil on His face* and smote Him, saying in scorn, Prophecy Christ, who it is
that strikes thee: nothing in the Lord but patience, He spoke nothing He made
no more resista^ce than a silly la^be before the shearer: when it is begun to
become light in the morning, the Priests and Elders begin to sit down in
council: and the hie priest asked of Him the same again, whether he was that
Christ or no? He answers, If I should tell you, ye will not believe me (what
auailes it to speak to an endured heart?) and He testifies again, Thou have
said it: and he gives an argument of this, hereafter shall the son of man sit
at the right hand of the power of God: Then the hie priest and the Elders, the
second time, concludes Him to be worthy of death, and adjudges Him to die:
the^ the council arises: and the first thing they do, they lead Him to
Pontius Pilate the Roman deputy to the judgeme^t Hall, to him to execute yt
sentence they had given out. In this Text we enter into the third part of the
suffering of Christ under Po^tius Pilate, the Roman governor. First, in the
Text we have read how the Lord is led into the Common Hall of Pilate: then
we have what conference was betwixt Pilate and the Jews, concerning Christ.
Then it is said, They led him into the common Hall: which is, as we call it,
the Session-house, where the Roman Governor sat for the time, and
ministrated judgment. Now Brethren, it would be well marked, when it is that
they led Him to Pilate: it appears plainly in the writings of the
Eua^gelists: namely, Mat. 26.59. Mark. 14.55. and Luke 22.63. that they led Him
in after they adjudged Him to be worthy of death. They led Him not in
thinking that Pilate should sit down and try whether He was worthy of death
or no: but that Pilate upon their word should give out the sentence of
condemnation against Him. Mark and consider how they abused ye judge a man
better tha^ themselves, they make him but a torturer, and the best is, a damner
to give out the sentence. Ye may see here a lively image of him who will be
called the hie priest in ye Kirk this day: I mean that beast of Rome, the
Roman antichrist. Indeed, this day, there is no hie priest, but Jesus Christ
only, who did put an end to that office among the Jews: there is no hie
priest, or small priest, great or small in the world, all is but usurped
authority, He is that only hie priest according to the order of Melchisedeck,
who endures for ever. But he who falsely takes upon him that style, follows
the fact and example of Caiaphas, first condemning Christ, and then giving Him
over to Pilate to execute the sentence: for he will sit down in his council,
and adjudge the innocent to death* as Caiaphas did Christ, and then he will use
the power and arm of the Emperor: for what is the Emp. and so many kings, who
have given themselves over to his slavery, but like as many hangmen to the
Pope? What is the king of Spain, but a Burrio to the Pope? he dare not but
execute the decree of the inquisition: was he not compelled to pleasure the
Pope and his crew in putting his own son to death? Ye saw never two things
liker to other, than the Pope and Caiaphas. The time is noted when the Lord
Jesus is led to the Common Hall: first it is in the morning, after the rising
of the Sun, and after the council of the hie priest, and of the Elders was
loosed. The manner of the delivery is noted: when they come to the place of
judgment, the Jews will not enter in, because they will not defile themselves,
if it were with the touching of a profane ethnik, or the walls of an house. O
hypocrites! The cause is set down, They were in a preparation to eat the
passover yt same night: now will ye see these holy folk, they will not be
polluted with the touching of Pilate: they had polluted themselves miserably
with touching of Jesus that innocent, and polluted both hand and heart, in
taking him, and leading him to the judge, accusing him, and abusing him: yet
when they have done all this, they will not be defiled with Pilate: they are
profane in the greatest thing in the world, to slay the Lord Jesus: they are
religious in a light ceremony of their own invention. Look the nature of
Hypocrites, Paul Ephesians. 5.12: It is ashame even to speak of those things which
an Hypocrite will do in secret: and if ye will come to ceremonies and outward
observations, no man is so precise, and will seem so holy as they, the
faithfullest creature will not be so holy in bodily exercise as they: yea, I
say unto you, if there be no more, but this bodily exercise, and keeping of
ceremonies, the Lord countes all but abominations, as ye may see in Esaias Chap.
1. Preaching and hearing, speaking, conferring, the Lord countes no more of
them, than if He had never ordained them, if there be no more but this outward
action, and as before, even so now I say, we have a viue image of the
deceivers of the world. The Popes religion is nothing but a deceiving of the
world, by keeping of vain and unprofitable ceremonies invented by him: will
ye come to trifles, of their own inventions, they appear to be very
religious, and exceeding holy, touch not, handle not, taste not, but their
Cloister Monks are so defiled, that they defile the world: offer him gold, or
silver, he will not touch it, and if a woman come into their Cloister, all
must be purified with fire, after that she is come out, though she were a
Queen: there is the lounes religion. I pronounce that in Popedom there is but
a show of godliness, and have denied the power thereof: follow the Papists
who will, they have nothing almost but trifles, and their own inventions. Well
then, come to the conference between the Jews and Pilate, Pilate yielding to
their vanity, and superstition, not so much to their religion, He comes out
to them, and seeing he must judge the Lord, He asks if they had any
accusation against Him, because they would not come in. It is not enough to
judge a man, except the pursuer have an accusation, and Pilate would not sit
down to judge, except he saw the accusation: indeed, the Jews took him,
bound Him, and in the high Priests hall handled Him unworthily, before they had
any accusation against Him, and they bring Him in judgment, but Pilate an
Ethnicke and a sinner as they called him, will not proceed that way, he is more
formal, he will not sit down in judgment, till he hear the accusation, an
Ethnicke who lives without God in the world and without the promises, as Paul
speaks, he is more just and formal in judgment, than all the Jews who
professed the true God. This falls out oftentimes, that a ^urke or Pagane who
living without God in the world) will deal more uprightly in judgment, and
especially with Christians who are persecuted for the Name of Christ, than they
that take upon them the name of the Church. It is better for a Christian to
fall into the hands of the Turk, than of the Pope* or of the Inquisition of
Spain, let them assay it who please. Well, Brethren, there is no cruelty or
vvrong comparable to the cruelty of these who take upon them the name of the
Church: Experience has proved this. Now he requires a vardict of the Jews:
but what answer they? If he had not been an evil doer, we had not
delivered him unto thee. They answer presumptuously, What need thou to
doubt of his deserving? or of us? Think thou, that this man would have been
condemned by us without a sufficient cause of death? So ye see, it is not
that he should sit down, and try whether He were innocent or no, that
they brought Him to Pilate, but that upon their words he might give out the
sentence: Yet there is some accusation here, that he is an evil doer. Is that
sufficient, when a man is delivered to the Judge, to say, This man is an evil
man? No, he must qualify it in particular, wherein he is evil, and has
failed: if they had found any, they would not have passed by it: in their
own judgment seat they could get nothing to say against Him. Now when they
came to the judgment of Pilate, and striving to accuse Him, they can say
nothing, but in general, This is an evil man. Then this I mark through this
whole process, that the Lord will always have these two things to be seen
manifestly: First, the innocence of Christ, for (look the whole process,
yea, when He is slain and dead upon the Cross) His very enemies themselves
are constrained to testify, that He is an innocent man, as the Centurion did:
The next is the wrongful dealing of the Jews against their consciences.

Now Brethren, as it was in this matter of Jesus Christ, so it has been since
in all the Martyrs: The Lord has made both the innocence of the Martyrs to
appear clearly, and also He has made the cruelty and tyranny of their
enemies to appear. Read the books of the Martyrs, and ye shall find these
two. So Brethren, it is well for them that will suffer for a good cause, and
chiefly, for the cause of Jesus Christ: yea, although it were but in this,
That the Lord will have their innocence appearing. What and if all the world
condemn thee, so the Lord Jesus justify thee? for albeit thou die, yet thine
innocence dies never. And this is our comfort indeed, that albeit this body
should be burnt* yet the day shall come that our innocence shall appear:
for at the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus, thou, and thine innocence shall
stand up to shame the Tyrants of the world: Thus for their answer. Pilate
says again, Ye have a law, take and judge Him after your law. Albeit
Pilate seem to speak these things tauntingly, to mock the Jews, speaking
one thing, and thinking another, to repress their pride: yet the Text
following, testifies, that he spoke it in earnestness, as he would say, Before
that I should condemn any man this way without an accusation, for your
pleasure, I had rather renounce of my right, and permit judgment to you,
condemn and do as ye will. Well then, it is to be marked: I see here, that
ere Pilate had judged the Lord wrangously, he had rather have given over his
right, and the judgment of Capital crimes: and well had it been for Pilate,
if he had stood to this sentence, and it had been better that he had given over
his right that the Romans had, albeit that he should have immediately been
taken and hanged by the Emperor for it. Alas, the miserable man lost himself
by the malitiousnesse of the Jews: yet albeit he be an Ethnicke, he is a man
of better conscience than the Jews were: The light of a natural conscience in
this Pilate surpasses all the knowledge of the Jews: And the Lord at this time
did set up that light of Pilates on a Skaffolde, as a lantern and light, to
condemn these Jews that had no conscience. The very words of Pilate are a
lantern to let the Jews see, that they had no conscience: God in his wisdom,
from time to time uses to do so, He will make the Paganes to stand up like
light, to shame the professors of the Gospel, whose conscience is as it were
burnt up with a hot irone. Is it not a great shame to thee, when the Lord will
raise him up to be a light unto thee, who should be a light to him: and as in
this world He will make men without God, to stand before the Professors in
this world to shame them: So in the world to come, He will raise them up to
shame, and to condemn them: Sodom and Gomorrha shall rise up to the judgment
of many in this age who profess Christ. Ye shall see how Pilate, although he
was a very evil man, yet he pities the Lord Jesus, and will not for their
importunity consent to his death: They say, It is not lawful for us, to put
any man to death: They require not that power to be given them* that the
Romans had: for forty year before the destruction of the town and Temple
of Jerusalem, they lost all authority to judge on Capital crimes: they spoke
truly; And here they would appear to gratify Pilate, when they would
acknowledge him to judge in capital crimes: but in effect they take the power
of a judge from Pilate, when upon their sentence only, without accusation,
trial, or verdict they will have him to condemn Christ: But better had it
been a thousand times for Pilate, that they had taken that power to
themselves: for they inuolued the man in their guiltiness by condemning Christ
Jesus. And I say more, it had been better for the Priests, that they had taken
the whole judgment unto themselves, because that blood of Pilate lies upon
them. This is a true thing; the moc thou drawest to communicate with thy sin,
thy damnation shall be the greater. It were better for the Princes of this
world, who are like as many slaves to the Pope, the Emperor, the King of
Spain, etc. to renounce all the right they have of judgment to the Pope, when
he and his crew have condemned on innocent of Heresy, to execute him; rather
than to be the Popes Burrio. It had been better for Sigismundus the Emperor,
that he had resigned all authority to the Pope in burning John Husse, and
Jerome of La Prage, than breaking promise and oath, to have executed the Popes
malice upon them: it had been better he had never seen that council: and one
day the Princes of the earth shall curse the time, that ever they were
executers to the Pope. And it were good for the Pope also, that he inuolued
not these Princes in the same guiltiness, for their blood lies upon him. Would
God their eyes could be opened, to see that deceiuer.

To return again: It is not they that must condemn the Lord: no, but it must
be Pilate, he must do all, that they may be clean: and when the Lord is
slain, are they clean? no Brethren, let Pilate condemn Him, and put Him to
execution, yet the Priests and the Jews are greater murderers of Jesus
Christ, than Pilate was: indeed Pilate has his part in that woeful action,
and woe unto him that ever he meddled with it, and now he finds that he has
his part therein. But those High Priests, and those Jews, are the greatest
murderers of Jesus Christ. Ye know the Papists use to say when a man is put
to death, It is not we yt slay the man, it is the civil sword of the secular
power. Who burnt John Husse, and Jerome of Prage, but the Emperor? The Pope is
holy, and his hands are clean, and these sins hurt him not which are done
by the hands of the Emperor. Who executes them in the Inquisition? The Kings,
the Popes holy hands are clean of all. Excuse as they will, I pronounce (and
the Lord shall ratify it in that Great day) that they are greater murderers
than the secular power. Away with their vain excuses. When they have murdered
the man, they will put the fault in the Magistrate. Will God accept such
excuses? In the next verse. John subjoynes wherefore ye Jews would not take upon
them to judge of ye life or death of Jesus Christ, and says, that they
answered so, that that might be fulfilled, that the Lord spoke, signifying what
death he should die. When He was conversant with His Disciples, He foretold
them, that He should die upon the Cross. Now the Jews will not take upon them
the right of the judging Him, that these words might be fulfilled. If the Jews
had taken it upon them, they would not have crucified him, because it was not
usual among the Jews: they used to stone a deceiuer or blasphemer to the
death, according to the law, as they did Steven afterward. This death of the
Cross was familiar, and usual among the Romans. Then Brethren, we see here,
the God of Heaven is the disposer of the whole action of the persecution and
passion of Christ, what ever be man's part. There is not a word uttered, nor an
action done, either by Pilate, or any of the Jews, which the Lord did not
dispose. All that Pilate did, and all that the Jews did, as that spitting and
buffeting of Christ, were all disposed by the Lord, And this is it that ye
read in that prayer in ye Acts of the Apostles, cap. 4. verse. 28. The princes
of the earth are gathered against thine anointed, Herod, Pilate, and the
Gentiles. Whereto? That they should do that thing that thine hand and thy
council has ordained. Neither Herod, Pilate, nor any of the Jews or
Gentiles, did any thing in this execution, but that which God appointed. The
understanding hereof serves to this, that there was nothing done to our
Redeamer, but that which His father appointed: they were but persecuters
appointed by God, even as the hangman: the Jews, and Pilate and Herod, were
like as many hangmen, to execute that decree of God. This would seem a very
light word that the Jews say, We have no power to sit over the life or death
of men: yet this is a mean whereby the Lord bringes to pass that form of
Cursed death. Brethren, we may speak as lightly of things as we please, and
many times to little purpose: but there is nothing that passes GODS decree.
Look to that providence that GOD has in His creatures. The LORD disposes the
lightest words that thou speak, and He rules thine hand so, that whatsoever
thou do, He makes al to effectuate and produce that which He has decerned:
the thing that thou will speak or do, it will serve for some purpose to Him,
how beit little for thee. In the mean time, let no man think, that when men
speak or do evil, that they shall be the more excusable: for if there were
no more but this, it shall make thee inexcusable: because in speaking evil,
and in doing evil, thou have not the LORD before thine eyes. Thou do it not
for obedience to His will. Take this lesson: Let every man and woman take
good heed, that they be well exercised: and if our GOD employe us, let us
take good heed, that we be in a good service, in speaking good, and doing
good: Lend not thine heart, thine hand, nor thy tongue to the Devil in
unrighteousness: And seeing thou can not sleep from morning to evening, but
must be speaking and doing; pray, that the LORD may employe thee to do
well, and to speak well; and say, LORD, let me be an instrument to do
well: And more, in doing well, be not content of the outward face of the
action: but in doing, whether it be little or much, go ever to the heart,
and see the disposition thereof: and look thou do it in sincerity, having
regard to GOD. Think it not enough, and if the LORD work a good work by
thee as an instrument: but look still, that He work in thee, that thou
may find a good motion in thine heart: For alas, what avails the
outward action, if the heart be foul, which defiles all? Indeed we may
not think, that there is any perfection in us, or in our actions in this
life: but this is the perfect ground that makes that action to smell sweetly
in the sight of GOD, to wit, Faith in JESUS CHRIST. If that thou find that
thou have JESUS CHRIST in thine heart by Faith, albeit with great weakness
in thy self, yet in CHRIST all the imperfection and weakness is hidden: and
when the action comes before the LORD, it is pleasant and acceptable to Him.
All things are pleasant that come to the Father through the Son: there is
the ground of all grace and acceptance. Stick to the LORD JESUS, and have
Him not in thy mouth only, as the Hypocrites do: but let Him also be
enclosed in thine heart, and dwell therein: for then thou shall be acceptable
to GOD, through Him: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all
Praise, Honor, and Glory, for ever and ever, world without end: AMEN.

THE SIXTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON CHAP. XVIII. Pilate entered into the common Hall again, and called
JESUS, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? JESUS answered him,
Say thou that of thy self, or did other tell it thee of me? Pilate
answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation, and the high Priests, have delivered
thee unto me. What have thou done? JESUS answered, My Kingdom is not of this
world: if my Kingdom were of this world, my servants would surely fight, that
I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my Kingdom not from
hence. Pilate then said unto him, Art thou a King then? JESUS answered, Thou
say that I am a King: for this cause am I borne, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: every one that
is of the truth, hears my voice.


THE last day (Brethren) we entered into the suffering of Christ under Pontius
Pilate, the Roman Governor, and Civil Judge in Iudeae for the time. Jesus is
led into the Common Hall to the House of Justice, as ye heard, where Pilate
sat. Now Pilate is not rash in judging: but before he sit down to judge, he
will have an indictment, and will see what things the Jews have to lay to the
charge of the Lord: He saw the accusers of Him, the Jews in multitudes: he saw
no accusation: therefore he goes out unto them (because they would not come to
him) and asks, what accusation have they against Him: he receives little
answer, or at least, little to the purpose: for they answer presumptuously,
If he had not been an evil doer, we had not brought him unto thee. The thing
they delate is very general: it is a sober indictment to say, He is an evil
man, that must be qualified, and Pilate thinks this of no valor, and castes
it off: at the last, after many words, he throws another accusation out of the
Jews: the accusation is this, as may be gathered of the Text: he calls Him a
king, and king of the Jews, and an enemy to Caesar, who would reaue the
kingdom from him, and a traitor, and guilty against the Majesty of Caesar.
The rest of the Evangelists have this accusation more plainly, and at greater
length. The Jews say (Luke 23.2,) We have found this man perverting the
people, and forbidding the people to pay tribute to Caesar, saying, he is
Christ and king. So howbeit in this Gospel of John is not mentioned, that the
Jews gave up this poinct of accusation, but that Pilate inquires, whether He
was a king or no? It is manifest, that they were delators of Christ to Pilate:
and Pilate knew not this of his own head, as the Text following declares. Let
us examine this more deeply: The Jews that persecuted Him, they delate Him
not before Pilate, for blasphemy, they had adjudged Him already worthy of
death in their own council for blasphemy: but when it comes to the Roman
judge, He is deleated of treason against the Emperor. This is a piece of
craft, and of the wisdom of the children of this world: they knew the judge
to be a profane man, who counted of religion, but as of a trisle, and knew that
he was deputy to Caesar, and that he would be loath to see Caesar's hurt:
therefore, they apply well their accusation to the honor of the man, and
delates Jesus, as one who had committed treason against Caesar. Ye shall then
note here a piece of craft in this their doing. Yet consider it more deeply:
The thing that they deleate to Pilate of Jesus, was a lie: for Jesus was so
far from that, to accept a kingdom in this world, that when the people
assembled to make Him a King, He conuayed Himself secretly away to the
Wilderness: (JOHN CHAP. VI.) and whereas they say, that He forbade to pay
tribute unto Caesar, that was false also: for He paid tribute unto Caesar for
Him and Peter, and gave commandment, to give unto Caesar, that which was
Caesar's. So this poinct of accusation is nothing else, but a calumny, and a
false accusation.

Yet let us look something further here. The JEWS would seem to be
careful for CAESAR'S kingdom, and take delight to have CAESAR to reign over
them: but indeed CAESAR was the only man in the world that they loved worst,
and hated most: and the thing that moved them to give up this accusation, was
an hatred they had against Christ. They flatter the Judge: and as they are
crafty in their accusation, so they are flatterers, and all to get the
innocent blood shed: they have an evil action in hand, yea, the worst that
ever man had: and so they care not by what evil means, craft, calumny, or
flattery they bring their purpose to pass. If thou once take purpose to do
an evil turn, thou will not care by what unlawful doing thou bring it to
pass: and to speak the truth, if once a man take an evil action in hand,
then he will of necessity be compelled to follow out evil means: for an evil
turn cannot be done but by evil means. If a man once set his mind to pursue
innocent blood, of force he must use flattery, calumnies, and evil means.
Therefore, as ye would eschew evil doing, eschew evil purposes: for thou will not care to get thy purpose, by all unlawful things. Now to come to
Pilates part: when he has gotten this inditeme^t, he enters into the Common
Hall, and calls on Jesus, and says, Art thou the king of the Jews? no doubt,
they thought, that they having accused Him so, that Pilate should not have
looked on Him, but incontinent should have given out the doom: for treason
against great Caesar was no small matter, yet Pilate was so far from that,
that he speaks not a rough word to Him, he says not, What traitor, art thou
seeking the empire of Caesar? but modestly, Art thou the king of the Jews? A
fair example of modesty and equity, to be in such a man, a profane Ethnic.
Christian Judges may learn at Pilate, what modesty and equity they should
use in judgment. This tells us plainly, that the mind of Pilate was void of
such affections as makes Judges to pervert judgment: he shows he was void
of hatred, he carried no hatred against Christ, neither sought he His blood:
the man is evil abused by the High Priests and the Jews: he does all his
endeavor to get Jesus absolved. Look this whole discourse. So Pilates mind
is void of these affections, of hatred, desire of revenge, and seeking of
innocent blood: for Brethren, we know it is these affections that peruerts
judgment. The judge who hates and enuies the person accused, he will have
him slain, though he were as innocent as Jesus Christ Himself. Therefore,
let Judges learn this lesson* To be void of hatred in judgment: I suppose
the man be the vvickedest in the world, yet seek not the destruction of the
creature, but hate his crime, and look that thine affections slaye not the
man, but look that justice slaye him: for if thou seek the blood of the
man, thou shall be guilty of his blood in the latter day. The Lord answers,
and He answers not at the first time to the point: but first, He says to
Pilate Ask thou that of thy self, Is that crime that thou layest to my
charge, of thine own head: Or has any other told it thee: There is the
meaning: So ye see, before the Lord will answer, He will understand who is
the inuenter of this accusation. Well, Brethren, I see this through all this
History, that the Lord will have every man's part known in the action: He will
know, who is the delator, and who gives out the verdict: He will have Herodes
part, Pilates part, the Jews part, Caiaphas part, all their parts distinctly
known, what each man does: the Lord has a great eye to this action, as it
were the greatest in the world: and when all is tried, ye shall see that the
burden is laid upon the Jews, and especially upon the Clergy, to speak it
so: Pilate had his part, Herod had his part, and both were guilty of the blood
of Jesus Christ, but the sin of Pilate is laid upon the Jews, and of his
blood they are guilty. So Pilate this day may curse the Jews, that ever he
was governor of Judea. Let the Papists say what they will, and extenuate
their martyring of the Saints, and say, that it was the civil sword that
slew them: I affirm in the presence of God, that the whole blood of the Saints
shall be required at their hands, and the sins of the Princes, whom they
have abused, shall be laid to their charge, and the blood of those who perish,
shall be required at their hands, and we shall see, that the blood of all
that have been slain from Abel the just, shall be laid upon the back of the
Pope, and his Clergy. The Lord save the Princes of the world from them.
Another thing I would mark here: Jesus would have Pilate to take heed, not to
the delation only, but to these also, who gives it up: He would have him to
look to the Jews, and to their disposition and affection. It is not enough to
a Judge, to look to the crime, but he must look to the accusers, and try
their disposition: for if the accuser seek the man's blood, he will be a
calumniator. There is not a Judge who is set on life and death, but he is bound
to set his eye on the delators. Take heed to Pilates answer: when Jesus has
demanded him thus, then Pilate grows somewhat angry, that Christ should have
meaned that that sentence should have proceeded from him: So this is a sure
argument, that Pilate very gladly would have kept his hands free of that blood
of Jesus: for he saw that He was an innocent man, and that it was a false
accusation which was laid against Him. Am I a Jew, says he, Thine own nation,
and the High Priests have delivered thee unto me. What have thou done? First,
he cleanses himself, that he was not the author thereof, because he was not a
Jew: and therefore knew not perfectly His doings: Next, he shows who was ye
author, to wit, His country men, and namely the High Priests: for in
conscience he was persuaded, both of Christ's innocence, and of their
calumny: and therefore cleanses himself* but he was far entangled in this
judgment, that he could not get himself free: he had done well, if he had
said, I will have nothing to do with thee, or if he had delivered Him from
these Jews, by his power, but putting his hands once to judgment, he could
not get himself free. Look what it is, once to begin to judge the innocent:
when the Judge begins to satisfy the appetite of wicked men, he can not well
quite himself, till he defile himself with the blood of the innocent, albeit
he would absolve the man, yet his mouth shall condemn him. So, for no man's
appetite let not a Judge enter in judgment against an innocent man, whom he
knows in his conscience to be innocent: And if thou enter in judgment with
him, absolve him, under the pain of thy life, or else thou shall be guilty of
his blood. This is a corruption sometime of the judgment of SCOTLAND, how the
Judge will say, I behooued to do it, I did it against my will, I was compelled
to do it. Well, that shall be none excuse to th^e, for if thou do it, thou
shall be condemned for it: it is no small thing be a Judge. We have heard
Pilates cleansing of Christ, he is so touched in his conscience, with the
innocence of Jesus Christ, that he is compelled to cleanse himself first to
Jesus Christ, before that Jesus cleanses Himself to him. Now follows the
answer of Christ to this calumny: My Kingdom is not in this world: Thou
ask at me, if I be a King: I answer, My Kingdom is not in this world* he
denies not absolutely that He was a King: for the Lord Jesus is the most
glorious King that ever was, or shall be, but He denies yt He was an earthly
king. As the Jews accused Him, He gives a reason, If my Kingdom were of this
world, my servants would fight for me: he who aspires to a kingdom* he will
fight and all yt may do for him to the very death: if he had been seeking a
kingdom, He would not have stayed Peter from fighting as He did. Now to
examine Christ's answer, First, He denies not yt He is a king, Next, not
denying yt He is a King* comes to a distinction, I am a King, But what a
King? Not an earthly, but a spiritual King, that is true, the Jews lay to my
charge, yt I affect an earthly Kingdom yt is not true. Now, Brethren, this is
to be marked, He tells him indeed, that his Kingdom is not of this world,
but He tells him not where His Kingdom was: He says not* My Kingdom is in
Heaven, He says not this, My Kingdom is in the conscience of men and women
in the world: He teaches not Pilate: this. Some would think, that He should
speak more clearly of this matter to Pilate, but Christ entered not into the
common Hall to play the Doctor, and to teach: but the Lord Jesus set Himself
to play the Priest, and to suffer patiently, yt part of teaching was ended but
knowing that the hour of His suffering was come, and that Pontius Pilate
should be his judge, He would not stay him: And therefore He would not enter
in doctrine, because the time of teaching was past: if Pilate would have been
taught, he might have heard Jesus teach before, but he would not hear Him: He
teaches Pilate as much as might make him inexcusable. Then, Brethren, I see, as
Christ has a time of teaching, wherein He will teach men, yea, his very
enemies, as He utters, when they would have taken Him* and sought his life:
so He has a time of silence, when He will not open his mouth, He speaks
some thing, albeit little to Pilate, but He speaks not so much as one word to
the High Priests, because He would have rather had him safe than them, because
they were malicious. Christ has not as yet shut his mouth in this land, but
He teaches, not sparingly nor scantly, for to speak it so: The rain of the
word of God, is powered abundantly out of Heaven, to water the thirsty souls
of men: and if thou spendest thy time, and wilt not use it well, I warn thee,
that the day will come, when thou shall not get one word to thy comfort: will thou always have the blessed Euangell, and the ministry thereof? No, as
Christ had but one time, and when that time was past, He would teach no more:
so has his ministers: all their teaching shall end as His did: I say, GOD
shows grace on the persecuters of this Land, when as yet He offers grace to
them: but I denounce, as the Lord lives, if they repent not in time, they shall
not get so much as one good word to comfort them. Wherefore, let not the
opportunity slip, and whilst it called the day, let us not harden our hearts.
Thus far ye Lord has purged himself, and has teached Pilate, what a King He
was, not an earthly but a spiritual King. I will not digress here, to speak
of the kingdom of Christ, and therefore I come to Pilates answer, Art thou a
King? well then, would Pilate say, thou deniest not that thou art a King: he
should have asked what a King He was, and where his kingdom was, that He might
have gotten a part of it: there is ye confession that Jesus gave under Pontius
Pilate, as is said 1. Tim. 6.13. Pilate should have bin inquisitiue of these
things, and followed out that purpose about his kingdom: but he breaks off
the conference, by an accusation of Jesus. An earthly hearted man knows not
things heavenly, and so he cannot speak of them, but rather he will stay an
heavenly purpose: Ye see earthly hearted men, when one will begin to speak of
heavenly things, has no more pleasure in them, than Pilate had: begin once to
speak of heavenly things to a profane man, then he cannot keep purpose with
thee, but he will break off purpose, and speak of earthly things, Paul 1.
Cor, 2. sets down the ground here: The natural man, says he, knows, not the
things of the Spirit of God: yea, he will wonder what that means, when thou
speak of Heaven, yea, he has no power nor spiritual sense: for they are
but foolishnes to him: the most wise things of God, are but foolishnes to the
natural man, he delites not in them, because he has not tasted how sweet the
Lord is: So Pilate interrupteth Christ, Christ answers, and He says, Thou
say that I am a King. In the which answer, the Lord denies not that He is a
King, but He takes the mouth of Pilate to be witness that He was a King. Then he
lets us see for what cause He came into the world: not to be an earthly King,
Came I into the world: but that I might bear witness of the truth: I came
not to be an earthly King, as other Kings are, but I came from the throne of a
King, and a glorious Kingdom, that I may play the part of a servant in bearing
witness to the truth. Jesus Christ, was God, equal with the Father, and
thought it no robbery, but He made Himself of no reputation, by taking on the
form of a servant, Phil. 2.6. As though he would say, I came into the world,
and took on the flesh of man to be a servant to my Father, and to be a witness
to the truth: then He subjoynes, lest that Pilate should think that office of
little effect, and that He labored in vain, and says, They who are of
verity, to wit, begotten of the word, the immortal seed of the word of God:
(for by verity here is meant the word of verity, as Chap, 17. verse. 17.
preceding, They hear my word. He draws ne^re unto Pilate: if thou be such
an one as is begotten of the truth, thou will hear my word: albeit Christ be
stayed from speaking* and Pilate would have put Him off. He leaves not, but
speaks again to Pilate: He would have win Pilate it had been possible.
Albeit we be interrupted when we speak of heavenly things to profane men and
women, we ought not to leave off, by the example of Christ: but howbeit we
be interrupted, we should return again, and follow out the thing we have
begun, to see if some words will sink in their hearts: or if they will not
return, that they may be inexcusable. Speak of Christ, and of Heaven, it
shall never be in vain, but as Paul says, 2. Corin. 2. it shall be a sweet
odor to God, either to their salvation or damnation that God may be glorified,
either in mercy in winning of them, or in justice in their perdition. And
therefore, it is good to speak of things Heaue^lie, the soul is nourished
thereby. A man that redresses himself to a kingdom, would ever take delight to
speak of it: if thou have no pleasure at no time to speak of Heavenly things,
it is a sure token that thou have no part of that kingdom, thou have never
tasted the sweetness of it: for they who have tasted thereof, will have sometimes
a delight to speak of things Heavenly, and will desire that sincere milk of
the word, as Peter speaks. So if thou find the word of life sweet, why
should thou not desire it continually? for it is that only food by the which
ye life of God is nourished within thee here: and one day it shall present unto
thee such satiety of all pleasure and joy in the face of God, as the heart
cannot think of now, howbeit thou gettest but scant in this world. Alas, that
we should let such a joy pass away, for fault of feeling and tasting! What is
the verity, says Pilate? he asks this not with pleasure, but loathing and
disdaining, and taries no answer, but goes his way: His stomach loathes
Christ. Then in Pilate we have an example of natural men: if any will speak
of things Heavenly unto them, of Christ, and of His benefits, they will stay
the speech so far as they can: and if thereafter any will insist, and yet
speak on, then at the last, if thou will urge them, they must speak
something, but they will speak as Pilate did, lightly and disdainfully: and
when they have asked, they will leave off, and will not care for an answer but
asks for the fashions cause, when they are constrained thereunto. We are by
nature like to Pilate, either we will not speak one word of things Heavenly,
or else if we be compelled to speak, and words be thrown out of us, we
will speak with a loathing, and disdaining of the heart. There was never any
thing in the world that could move the natural man more to loathing, than ye
word of God, he will hear it with such disdain, that when one thing is said
in word, he will say another in heart, and he will think him who teaches
him the most foolish man in the world. And he who is vvisest, if he be not
regenerated and renewed, he shall count Christ, and things Heavenly, most
foolish. A simple body is sooner vvonne, than he who is wise in his own
conceit in the world. If thou would be an hearer or speaker of Heavenly
things, strive always to get a reformation of thine own corrupt nature, and
let thy meditation and prayer be thus, Lord, reform mine heart, that thy word
may be fruitful in me, so that both I may hear with pleasure, and also
that the words come not from the teeth forward, but from the deepnes of mine
heart, when I speak of Thee, and things Heavenly, that so thy word may edify
both me and others. It is a more dangerous thing, to come to hear, if we be
not duly prepared, than to tarry away: and better not to speak at all, than
to speak of things Heavenly without the inward sense of the heart. Now the
Lord grant us grace, that in hearing and speaking of things Heavenly, we may
have this Heavenly disposition in some measure, for Christ's sake: To whom
with the Father and Holy Spirit, be all Praise, Honor and Glory, both now and
evermore: Amen.

THE SEVENTH LECTVRE OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON CHAP. XVIII. Pilate said unto him, What is truth? And when he had said
that, he went out again unto the Jews, and said unto them, I find in him no
cause at all. Jews? Barabbas: now this Barabbas was a murderer.


WE heard these days past (Brethren) of the suffering of the Lord, First, in
the Garden, Next, under Caiaphas, the High Priest for the time, and then we
entered into the third part of His suffering under Pontius Pilate, the Roman
governor, who abode in Jerusalem for the time. We heard the accusation that
the Hie Priests and the Jews allege to Pilate the judge, where he sat in
judgment against Jesus Christ: the accusation was not blasphemous against God,
for when the Priests thought Him before in their own judgment seat worthy of
death, but treason against the majesty of Caesar, he calls himself, say they,
the king of the Jews, as though Christ had come into ye world to be an earthly
king, and to take the kingdom over Caesar's head. When Pilate had posed Christ
about this, after one or two answers, he finds this accusation vain, false,
and fained. And therefore, Brethren, first in this Text we have read this day,
we have the purgatio^ of Jesus, and yt out of Pilates own mouth: Next, how he
seeks by all means to get Him out of the Jews hands: Thirdly, we have the
part of the Jews, how they seek maliciously the life of the innocent, and
preferres Barabbas (a murderer) unto Him. As to the first part, it is said,
that Pilate went out again to the Jews, out of the Hall, and professed before
them all, that he found no fault in that man worthy of death. Then Pilate,
after his inquisition, finding Jesus Christ, who was accused before him, free
of all affectation of Caesar's kingdom, yet finding that He denied not but
that He was a king: and that was that good witnessing that Christ gave
under Pontius Pilate, as Paul (1. Tim. 6.13.) says: but He was no king of
this world. Then Pilate thinks there was no crime in Christ Jesus: as
concerning the other kingdom, Pilate thought it but an imagination and
fantasy: therefore, thinking that Jesus made Himself to be a fantastic
king, and sought not Caesar's kingdom from him, he would not count Him
vvorthie of death, but he clenses Him. Politic and profane hearted men in
this world, who smell of nothing, but of the earth, and have no sense of
Heavenly things, if ye will but leave them the things of this world, as
Caesar's kingdom, the glory, the honor, the riches, and the pleasures of this
world, unto them, they care not what men speak of God, or His kingdom, or of
Jesus Christ, or of matters of religion: howbeit that they would say, that they
would climb up to the Heaven, and rave it from God: they care not for it, as
Paul says, The natural man countes heavenly things but foolishnes: speak to
them of heavenly things, all is but imagination, and Heaven is as dream to
them. Lysias the chief Captain who was in Jerusalem after this man, under the
Governor Felix, when Paul was persecuted in Jerusalem, ye remember what he
wrote to Felix, They accuse him of trifles, and of questions of their law, but
I find no thing in the man worthy either of death, or of bands, Acts 23.29.
Wordly men countes it not a crime, or a thing worthy of punishment, to
derogate from Gods glory. Well, let men spend their time, one day they shall
feel it to their grief, that religion is the most earnest and excellent thing
that ever was: and they shall curse the time that ever they esteemed any thing
excellent, but religion. Yet this is commendable in Pilate, that he gives so
fair a testimony of Jesus, a Ethnicke, who had no knowledge of God, nor sense
of the life to come, to stand up in ye face of them, who should have known
Jesus Christ, and to purge the innocent, might have made the High Priests and
the Jews ashamed. Yet, will ye mark this more narrowly, albeit his purgation
be fair, yet he fails far, for in purgation he utters a profane
heart, whilst he purges Him in words, he scorneth Him in his heart, and
condemns that Kingdom of His, and that truth whereof He spoke, as a fable.
Profane men, who have no part of sanctification, when they speak fairest, and
when they seem to do best, they do nothing but sin: Why? because in the
mean time when they speak fairest, their heart is full of vanity, and in
their heart they scorn God: Albeit thou stand up and speak much for the
defense of Christ, and seem to be angry at the Jews, as Pilate did: if in
the mean time thine heart believe not in that Jesus, thou art but a scorner,
and all thy speech serves for no purpose to thee, if thou beleeuest not:
therefore in speaking of Heaven, and of religion, and of Jesus Christ, we
should take heed to the heart yt it be sanctified, and remember, yt while the
mouth speaks God sees the heart, and when thou speak of that Name of Jesus
Christ, let tihne heart grippe into Him, and so thy speech shall be edifying and
gracious. Now when he has cleansed Him by word, thereafter by deed he seeks
to get him loose; And it is subjoyned that Pilate says: Ye have a custom that
I should deliver you a prisoner loose at the Passover, Will ye that I let
loose the King of the Jews. The rest of the Evangelists, Matthew 27.12. Mark
15.3. Luke 23. sets down another accusation that past in order before this
immediately, which I shall touch shortly: the High Priests seeing that they
obtained nothing by the first accusation, wherein they accuse Him of treason
against Caesar, yet they will not leave off, but delates to Pilate many things,
and heaps calumny upon calumny, and oppresses Him with accusations, as for
Jesus, He made none answer: Pilate seeing this, he vrges Him once and twice
to speak: He will not speak: Pilate wondereth at his great silence: the High
Priests insist, and at last they accuse Him of false doctrine, which He had
uttered from Galile unto Jerusalem. When Pilate understood that He was a
Galilean, he sendes Him to Herod, who was Tetrarch of Galile, thinking to
gratify Herod, that being at variance, friendship should have been made:
Herod rejoiced at his coming, and hoped that he should have seen some
wonders of Him: for both Pilate and Herod thought to make a Iugler of Jesus:
but Herod gets not one word of Him, much less a sign or a wonder: then
Herod begins to mock Him, and puttes on a garment on Him, in token of
derision, and sends Him to Pilate: then Pilate the second time with his own
voice cleanses Him. Some will marvel, what moved Jesus to keep such a silence
to them all: and some may think that this proceeded from stubburnenesse in
Jesus: No, Brethren, in this He was so far from disobedience either to God,
or to the Magistrate, that the Lord Jesus uttered a great obedience to God, and
the Magistrate, and a wonderful patience, in that He will not repine in one
word, knowing well, that it was the will of his Father in heaven, the hour was
come: and therefore the hour coming, He will not help Himself in one word:
so pleasantly and willingly He offers Himself to the death. This was
prophesied of Him in the 53. of Esaias: He makes no more repining, than a
sheep or a lamb that stands before the shearer, He opened not His mouth, not
for stubburnesse, but He was patient. Brethren, some would marvel of the
boldness of the Martyrs when they suffered (O the boldness that they had in
answering, eue^ in the fire) they suffered not one word to sl^p, but they
answered for Gods glory, and well of them that stood by: O! but the Lord kept
silence. Some would think that Jesus Christ in this point was inferior to the
Martyrs: but this is the m^tter, Christ was silent, that the Martyrs might
speak: for except He had been silent, they in persecution should not have
opened their mouths: He was dumb, that we might speak: and was made nothing
that we might be some thing. Now to return to our text again: Pilate uses
all means to get Jesus loose: he uses the present occasion to that purpose,
knowing the use of the Jews, he would have been glad to have had Jesus set
at liberty, above all the prisoners. To speak somewhat of this custom: they
had this custom, to get a prisoner set at liberty at festival times, to the
honor of their Feasts: the Passover was a Feast, in rememberance of that
deliverance out of Egypt, now as they were delivered, so they would have a
prisoner delivered, but therewith they dishonored God: is that to honor God,
to break His commandment? this custom was not from the beginning, but entered
in, when the Roman Emperor entered in, and this manner of doing wanted not a
fair pretense, it had a pretense of clemency and mercy of the Governor: we
know this, there is nothing wherein a Prince resembles God, more, than in
clemency: but it is a sin to let a wicked man escape, or that the Emperor
should let him go: for Gods Law says, Deuteronomy 11.12.13. Thine eye shall not
spare the murderer, neither look upon him with a pitiful eye. Will ye see
what things these men have for them, who think, that Princes may give men that
are convict of Capital crimes their lives. Some will say, has not a free
Prince license to give him his life, albeit the Law of God say, The murderer
shall die the death: well, I say, and it is the truth, that were as much, as
to give him an absolute power, but all the world shall not give him such a
power, he may well usurp it: but not an Angel in Heaven has absolute power
over a beggar, to put him to death, and to keep him alive at his pleasure:
much less a mortal man: only the great Creator (whose will is the rule of all
righteousness) has this power over his creature. It is true indeed, a Prince
should be loath to put out that life yt God has put in, and should beware to
judge rashly in Capital crimes: It is no small matter, to make a crime
Capital, but if the crime be Capital and deadly, the Prince has no power to
hold his hand abacke from execution, and to forgive. Indeed for weighty and
great considerations a Prince may mitigate the punishment, but to say, he may
let the man go free, he has no power: but yet they will insist further and
say, Is not this one of the judicial laws, that was given to the Jews, then
what have we to do with it. I answer, these laws, seeing the Jews and their
Commonwealth, and laws politic, are abrogate, in so far as they concerned
that people, we have nothing ado with them, they are abolished, but for
as much as they are grounded upon nature, and natural law, we have ado with
them: as for this law, it is natural. Ye know that natural men, Ethnickes,
who had never the law of the Jews, they executed the murderer: but yet they
insist, and they will bring in the example of good kings, who forgave Capital
crimes committed against the very universal and natural law: and namely of
David: forgave he not Joab for slaying of Abner and Amasa? and Amnon for
committing incest: and again, forgave he not Absalom for slaying of Amnon his
brother: but I answer: We are bound to live by Gods laws, and not by
examples: as for David if he had power to have punished those men, he failed:
but it lay not in the hands of David: says he not of Ioab, the sons of
Seruia, are too strong for me, 2. Sam. 3.39. Ye know what he left in his
Testament to Solomon concerning Joab? 1 Kings 1. Ioab was a great man, if David
might have punished, he failed: sin cannot be excused, albeit he punished it
not. Some will say further, Should not, and ought not each private man forgive
a private offense: is not that Gods will and commandment? Hereupon they would
conclude, and make it to follow: A Prince may forgive a wicked man for Capital
crimes: but I say and affirm, that there is a great difference between a
private man and a King: When a King forgiues a Capital crime, he forgiues
Gods right, he is free in another man's right: indeed there is a difference
between these crimes that are Capital, and the crimes that in their own
nature are not Capital, but by the laws of Princes are made Capital: for
upon just considerations the Prince has power to dispense with them: as for
Example, It was not deadly of ye own nature to Simei, to go out of the Ports
of Jerusalem, but because Solomon forbade it, it became deadly. Like as it is
in the hands of Princes, to make and to change such special laws: so it lies
in his hands to forgive such a man, tra^sgressing them upon weighty and great
considerations. So to return, these crimes that are Capital by natural law,
a Prince has no power to remit them, albeit he were ruler of all the world,
he derogates to Gods glory: and secondly, if there were no more to let us
see, that God has not given that power to forgive Capital crimes, against
Gods Law and nature, the Judgments of God, which ceazed on such men and their
posterity, were sufficient to show it: for if thou forgiuest a thief, he
would hang thee on the same gallovves. That sad example of the Judgment of
God upon Saul, who against Gods express commandment, spared Agag king of
Amaleck, might terrify other Princes to remit such persons. Some will come
forth, and his remission to his abominable murder and crimes in his bosom,
upon whom the sun is not worthy to shine: God forgive them, who gives or
purchases such remissions: the King of Heaven will not have any to usurp His
authority.

Now, let us return, and consider Pilates part: Pilate is careful to get
Jesus the innocent let loose, and at liberty: and herein he is worthy of
some praise. They who should have saved Him, are persecuting Him: and yet mark
well, and ye shall see, that Pilate in thus doing and speaking sins. When he
is of purpose to set Him free and at liberty: he cares not, albeit Jesus was
most innocent, that He were counted nocent and guilty: he cares not, although
He pass free as one worthy of death, and he compares Him with Barabbas: and
when he does the best he can, he does but evil. Mark the duty of Judges,
It is not enough to seek to set the innocent free and at liberty only: No,
but also thou must see that the innocent be set free as an innocent man, albeit
that all the world should speak against it. The will of that great Judge is,
that not only the innocent should escape with their life, but also that they
escape as innocent, that their innocence may serve to the glory of God: thou
suppresses the glory of that great Judge, if thou clea^sest him not as an
innocent: it were better for an innocent to die the death innocently, than to
take on him a crime which he has not done, or to take a remission of a crime
whereof he is not guilty. To come to the part of the Jews, Pilate goes far
beyond them, albeit he does evil* yet they do ten times worse: Alas, the
judgment of Pilate in that day shall be nothing to the judgment of the
malicious Jews: in doing of this, that he compares Him with Barabbas, and
albeit he compares Him with him, yet he countes Him an innocent: but he
compares Him with Barabbas by a policy, to pleasure the Jews: they will not
only compare Him with Barabbas, but will prefer Barabbas to Him: Pilate
compares, they prefer. Brethren, an ungodly man will hate more extremely
virtue, and grace in a good man* than vice in an evil man: as concerning the
wicked man, because he is wicked himself, he will not hate sin as it is
sin: the pleasure that a wicked man has, is to see the GOD of heaven
displeased, that is his meat, that is his drink: if he do hate vice, it is
not for the vices sake, but because the vice troubles him, because of some
skathe and shame that follows it, and because he would have an easy life.

But to come to the ground: An ungodly man hates virtue, because it is virtue,
and because godliness is of GOD, he hates it; and he hates a godly man,
because he bears the image of GOD: the extreamitie of his hatred is against
GOD: he will rather suffer a wicked man, than an innocent or godly man: but
he never hates v^ce, because it is vice. The Pope will suffer Sodomites to
dwell beside him, and Bordels: but he cannot hear of a godly man, but will
persecute him who will profess to teach Christ truly: yea, he will pursue
him to the death. There is greater hatred in the heart of an obstinate Papist
against a Christian, than in ye heart of a Turk: and the greatest hatred, is
ever under cloak of religion. So there is not one that hates a godly man so
greatly, as they who clokes all things under the name of the Church: The LORD
save us from them. I say, I had rather fall into the hands of a Turk, than
into the hands of a Papist.

What is CHRIST'S part? there is nothing but shame for Him: Where was there
ever such an ignominy as this? Barabbas is preferred unto that just one: (if
thou be an innocent man, and art counted worse than the wicked, it is a great
shame:) and then not only is he preferred unto Him, but in hanging upon the
Cross, He is put between two thieues, to testify, that they counted Him
more vvorthie of death, than they were. And then, besides the suffering of
that pain, He suffered pain in that they blasphemed Him, and held Him in
derision. What ever was the part of the Jews, and of Pilate, the Father of
JESUS CHRIST has His part also: there was not a word spoken, but that which
He directed: the Jews spoke not this, but by the Lords disposition, who ruled
all this action: they did nothing, (as ye may read, Acts 4.28.) but that
which He had appointed from all eternity. Now, His dispensation was for thy
weal: the dispensation of His shame was for thine honor, and, if He had not
died in this ignominy, thou had died ignominious everlastingly, and He had
not been a perfect Redeamer, if He had not suffered this: and as the Lord
dispensed all this, how ever it be that they did vnjustlie, yet it is all
turned to our weal. See the wonderful just dealing of GOD, when they are
doing unjustly, He burdens His Son, with no burden either in body or
soul, but that which our sin (that JESUS CHRIST did bear upon His back)
procured and deserved. He was most innocent in Himself, and altogether
without sin, but our sins were laid upon His back: for He who knew no
sin, was made sin for us, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.21. Look to
these sins that Christ had upon Him: they were a thousand times greater than
the sins of Barabbas: for He bare upon Him the sins of all the world, many
murders, many adulteries, the LORD JESUS bare them all. So there is nothing
that falls to JESUS CHRIST, but that which we procured unto Him. What ever
CHRIST sustained, the reproaches, shame, and blasphemies, the pain, and
extreamitie of pain in soul and body, it is thy sin that procured all
this. Brethren, mark this well: When men either hear or read this History,
they turn them to the Jews, and will defy the Priests, and the Pharisees,
and Pilate, and in the mean time they look not to themselves: but look not
to others, but to thine own self, for it is thy sin also that pierced Him
through: and, if thou would weep, weep for thine own sin. I mean not
this, that any man should think to take his sins away from Christ, and lay
them upon his own back: for there is no body that is able to bear so much
as an evil thought: then let thy sins lie upon Christ, for He is able to
bear them all: And as thou layest thy sins upon Him, seek to be cladde
with His righteousness: and as He is made sin for thee, look that thou be
made righteous before God in Him, for if thou be clothed with that everlasting
righteousness in that Great day, thou shall be counted just, and get that
life of JESUS. Wherefore, to end here, let us so abhor the malice,
indignity, and cruelty of the Jews against CHRIST the innocent, that upon
the other part we may with our whole heart reverence and embrace that
most just dispensation of GOD upon Him as guilty in us, and for our cause:
and let us give Him thanks and praise continually, because He has given His
only Son for us, and He has made Him sin for us, and He has made Him
subject to all shame, ignominy, dolor, and pain, both of body and soul,
for our sakes. To Him, therefore, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be
all Praise, Honor, Power, and Glory for ever and ever: Amen.

THE EIGHT LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XIX. THEN Pilate took JESUS, and scourged him. Jews. And they
smote him with their rods. Pilate went forth again, and said unto them,
Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know, that I find no fault in
him at all. JESUS forth, wearing a Crown of Thorns, and a purple garment.
And Pilate said unto them, Behold the man. Pilate said unto them, Take ye
him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.


Now Brethren, we insist further in the suffering of CHRIST, under Pontius
Pilate, the Roman Governor, who abode in Jerusalem. We have heard of two
accusations that were laid against the innocent Jesus Christ: The first was,
that He called Himself The king of the Jews, and so was guilty of treason
against Caesar. Ye heard the effect of this accusation to be nothing: and
therefore he goes forth, and with his voice before them all, purges the
innocent. In the next accusation, there were many things laid to His charge:
and this chiefly, that He had corrupted the whole Country, from Galilee to
Jerusalem with false doctrine. Now when this was tried, Pilate yet holds Him
innocent, in testifying His innocence: and therefore, he seeks yet to get
Him set at liberty out of the hands of the Jews: and considering that the
Jews at the Passover were accustomed to seek the liberty of a prisoner, who
was guilty of a capital crime, he uses this opportunity, and asks of them
whether they would have JESUS or Barabbas set at liberty? We heard the
answer to this proposition, to wit, they cry, they will not have Him
delivered, but Barabbas. Now the other Evangelists do insist more largely
in this purpose, and write more of it: and they report, that Pilate, when he
heard this word, he asks, What shall I do with Jesus? They cry all with
one voice, Crucify him. Pilate the third time hearing this, he cleanses the
innocent. Yet they report more, that whilst Pilate was sitting in judgment,
there comes a messenger from his wife, and says, Have nothing ado with
this innocent man: Why? for I have been troubled for Him in my sleep. This is
an advertisement sharp enough unto him, and the LORD vvanted not His own
work therein: for the LORD brought this to pass, partly in respect of JESUS
CHRIST, that His innocence might clearelie appear before the world, and
that He might receive a testimony of His innocence from them who had little
regard unto it: for, had not Jesus been innocent, we had been little the
better of Him, for He could not have justified us: for, ere our faith rest on
Him, we must have the full assurance of His innocence: partly in respect of
Pilate, that he should be converted, or made inexcusable, if he would go
forward. The working of the Lord is wonderful in the reprobate: for ere that
decree of their reprobation be put in execution, the Lord assaies to bring
them to repentance. Romans 9.22. He suffers with a long suffering the vessels of
wrath. Romans 2.4. He inuites the reprobate to repentance: Yea, ere He put them
in Hell, He will inuit them to Heaven: There is not a reprobate that perishes
in the justice of God, but ere He utter His justice toward them, He will
utter His mercy in warning them to repent. We come, Brethren, to our Text: He
follows out the suffering in these words which we have read: He tells us how
earnestly Pilate seeks the liberty of Jesus: and he lets us see the means
that Pilate uses to set Jesus at liberty: first, he takes Him out, and
scourges Him, and puts Him out to be mocked; thinking that this would satisfy
the Jews; and then the fourth time, he professes His innocence: Then he
bringes Him out to them with a crown of thorns and a purple garment, thinking
that he should have contented and moved the Jews to pity, but all was in
vain. It is said, Pilate took JESUS, and scourged him, and not content with
this, commanded His soldiers to put a crown of thorns upon His head, and a
purple garment on Him, to scorn the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: and then smites
Him with rods. Ye see, the Lord suffers mocking, and pain in body: the Lord
of glory is put to ignominy: consider well and let it never go out of thy
mind, that the Lord of Glory suffered such shame for thy cause: But to
examine this fact of Pilates, this is commendable, that he speaks so, to get
the innocent Jesus set at liberty, but in the mean that he uses, he fails
very far: Ye shall mark this, in profane and ungodly men, that one of
these two things falls out, if not both: Either they shall not take in hand a
good and godly purpose, or else, if any time it falls out, that they enterprise
any good deed, that they shall choose ungodly and unlawful means to
affectuate it, they shall do evil, that good may come of it. Cast your eyes
upon this Land, and ye shall see this to be true: Yet let us search up the
ground of this proceeding of Pilate: It cannot be denied, but that he has a
good purpose and deed in hand: but it is as true again, that as he has a good
deed in hand: he looks not upon it with an upright eye, he has not God, nor
his Glory before his eyes: for his conscience rather than any regard to Gods
Glory, or His will moved him to purpose to loose Him. Thou must not propone
only to do good, but also thou must propone it, for Gods cause, and for His
glory, Pilate having no respect to God, goes astray, and out of the way. This
is certain, Brethren, if the purpose were never so good and if thou have not
the Glory of God before thine eyes, thou shall waver: but by the contrary,
that man that has respect unto the Lord, he shall not readily waver, but the
Glory of God shall glance before him as a lantern into his way, until he
prosecute that deed. Blessed is he that has the Glory of God before him:
there is no light to bring us through this thornie way, but only the Glory of
our God. Next, I see in this fact, in following out the means, that he would
have had the innocent loosed, but so, that it were with contentment of the
Jews, he would please all parties,, and for their pleasure, when he would
cleanse the innocent, he punishes Him as a nocent: seeing then that he
depended upon the appetite of ungodly men, it could not be possible, that he
could bring a good action to pass: yea, whomsoever dependes upon the lust of
malicious men, can never affectuate any good thing: or if they do any thing,
they do it by evil means, and so fail greatly: let us therefore ay study
to please God, let us, if we should die in the mean time, do that which is
pleasant unto God, setting aside the pleasure of men. Mark Pilates form of
doing, he uses worse and worse means: The first mean is evil, in comparing
Jesus with Barabbas the wicked man, the murderer: yet he thought by that
means to set Jesus at liberty, but now he scourges Him: this is a higher
degree of evil, and now he fails further: begin once to do against
conscience, for pleasuring of wicked men, as Pilate does all this against
conscience: if thou had never so good and so fair a pretense, thou shall be
compelled by process of time, to do a greater evil, albeit thou begannest
with less evil, and thou shall not speed at last: It is true, Pilate would
do a less evil to get a greater Good done: but when he has once or twice,
against his conscience most unworthily abused the Lord Jesus: thou shall see
the end of it, he prevailed not. Thus for Pilates part: The men of war under
him, have their part of this action, they platte a crown of thorns, and put
it on His head to his scorn, and to his pain, and they clothe Him with a
purple garment, and smites Him with their rods, and then they go before Him,
and say, Hail King of the Jews, and this they did at the commandment of
Pilate: Lamentable is the estate of the subjects, when the Prince is ungodly,
and it is a sore thing for the officers, when the Judge is unrighteous, yea,
all the inferiors, even to the Hangman, may curse the wicked Judge. This
commandment excuses not the soldiers: they lend their hands the members of
their body, to be weapons of unrighteousness: and this shows that there was
some malice in their hearts: there is none that lends the members of their
body to be weapons of unrighteousness, but they will be condemned: thou
may not say, It was my masters will and commandment, and therefore I
behooued to do it: the commandment of thy master will not excuse thee for no
man's pleasure do evil, for his commandment shall be none excuse to thee at
that great day: ye shall find that these soldiers were worse inclined than
Pilat was: this falls out, if the master command them to do one evil deed,
oftentimes the servants will do two: they desire but one word, or one wink to
set all the country in a fire. Look the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 4. verse.
27, Every man in particular who had part in this work are counted: Herod
first, and next Pilate: leaves he the part of the men of war: he calls
them the Gentiles, and next the people of Israel. This witnesses that the eye
of the Lord was on them that did this fact, and not one of them all shall be
excused: and if it were but a common soldier that is in an evil fact, he shall
die at that day. Vain therefore is the opinion of silly ignorant bodies, who
think that the commandment and will of their master will excuse them, for
they shall die for their own sins, but their blood shall be required at the
hands of their masters. Christ has his part, Pilate is a worker of evil, and
the men of war also. Now let us consider the part of Jesus the innocent. He
is the sufferer, He suffers dolours and shame, and many unworthy things, and
that by the most just dispensatio^ of God: and being our surety, he bare our
sins and iniquities: therefore the wrath of God ceased upon Him most
vehemently. There is not a deed done here, or a word spoken, but the Lord
decreed it from all eternity, and dispenses it in time, and on his part all
was just, because Jesus had taken on Him the sins of the Lord, therefore this
pain and shame follows that burden. See the weight of the wrath of God, that
lies on Him who had no sin in Himself: and further, the wrath of God, lies
not on a common man, but on His only begotten Son our cautioner. The Apostle
to the Hebrews Chap, 5. verse 9, says, Although He was the only begotten
Son of God, yet He learned obndience through His suffering, that is, He
learned, what, and how good a thing obedience was, and what wrath and damnation
follows disobedience: And there is not one of the Sons of God, but by
afflictions they learn the same thing that the first begotten learned, how
good a thing it is not to sin: It is good therefore that God humble us, that
we may say, Now I learn what is wrath, and how good a thing it is to serve
God, and to bestow my life for Him: and the godly when they feel a portion of
this wrath, they will take up a better course, and will say, What if this God
would power on His whole wrath, on me, it is no childrens play to play with
God, and make a pastime of sin, and then cry peace, that wrath shall come upon
thee like a mountain, and then thou shall cry, Cursed be the time that I have
disobeyed God, for now I shall feel that infinite wrath. If ye will mark the
Text well, ye will see in the whole passion of Christ, that the Lord endeuoures
to manifest two things, and things contrary the one to the other by
appearance. By appearance He will have Him appear before the world the most
innocent man, and the most guilty man in the world: How can these two stand?
The Lord thus wise will have Christ to appear, in Himself the most innocent
man, and in us the most guilty man in the world. Hereupon it comes to pass,
that Pilate absolved Him as innocent, and yet punishes Him as nocent: for Jesus
Christ bare the sins of the whole faithful: and it is for this purpose, that
we seeing these two things in Him, that we should account Him a meet Mediator
for us, and our faith should rest on Him: Come to Experience, Except I
understand that my Redeemer be innocent in Himself, I will never believe,
that He can be able to bear my sin, and to redeem me: for He could not
be able to bear his own sin, much less another man's sin, except He were
innocent, Heb. 7.26: such a Priest it behooued us to have, which is holy,
harmless, undefiled, and separated from sinners: Next, except I understand
that my sins are taken off my back, and laid on His back, and that He has
taken my guiltiness on Him, the consideration of His innocence will never
move me to account Him my Redeemer: for without this, what is His innocence
to me. But when thine heart is persuaded of these two things, ye would marvel
what great and marvelous effects will follow in the heart of a faithful man:
when I look to His innocence, I will be moved with commiseration toward
Him, I will pity Him: As the women followed Him out of Jerusalem weeping and
pitying His innocence, Luke 23.17, and when I see, that He being most
innocent in Himself, is become guilty for me: then arises in mine heart a
dolor and displeasure for that, that I should be the cause that He suffered
innocently, I am moved for that, that I should have pierced the Lord through
with my sins: I will be moved with sadness, as it is said in the first
Chapter of the Revelation, and seventh verse. They shall wail before Him whom
they pierced through: Then again, when I find my self disburthened of my
sin and guiltiness through His guiltiness, mine heart will be filled with a
joy unspeakable: it is a wonder what a joy will be mingled with the
displeasure, that the world would wonder that these contrary effects should
be in the heart of a Christian, this is the effect of repentance, if any man
has felt it: Again, when I see, that He has loved me, mine heart will melt
with love to Him again, as Paul says in the 2, Epistle to the Corinthians,
5.14, 15. The love of Christ constraines me, and binds up fast my senses,
because that once we know that we were dead, and He has died for us: And, he
to whom much is forgiven, loves much. (LVKE CHAP. VII. VERSE. XLVII.)

Brethren, ye that have heard of the History of that notable Martyr JOHN
HVSSE, who was burnt for the love of CHRIST: now when he was brought forth
to be burnt quick, then his executers put a paper upon his head, whereupon
were pictured three Devils, with this title set over their heads, HAERESIARCHA:
the which when he saw, he said, My LORD JESUS CHRIST for my sake did wear
a Crown of thorns; why should not I therefore for His sake, wear this light
crown, be it never so ignominious? Suffer on: thou shall not suffer the
extremity: thou who wilt suffer pain or shame for Him, thou shall be
partaker of glory with Him.

Now I go to the rest of the means that Pilate uses. Pilate, when this is
done, he goes into the Common Hall, and comes out himself, and the fourth
time he witnesses of the innocence of JESUS, that he could find no fault
in Him. I see this, and it appears well by the testimony that he gives to
Jesus, that all that Pilate did to Jesus, was against conscience: for would
he immediately after he had scourged Him, have cried out to cleanse Him, if
his conscience had not told him that He was just? He did it to a good end to
deliver Him from death. This is the doing of ungodly men, who are not drawn
out of the puddle of nature: they will do a smaller evil, for a greater good,
as they think against conscience: they will not start at a straye; but behold
the end; it may be that a good thing may follow thereupon: yet thou shall
have no reward for it. Beware to sin against conscience, and when thou
go about to do any thing that thy conscience forbids thee, leave it off,
and let it be, or else thou shall go forward, till thou crucify Christ, and
make shipwreck of Faith: Therefore, do nothing against conscience, yea,
albeit it were a good deed.

The third thing: he caused JESUS to be brought forth before the people,
with a Crown of Thorns, and a purple Garment, to see if the Jews would
pity Him: To see an innocent man so handeled, it would have moved any man to
pity: then he says, Behold the man, I have done enough unto Him, ye may
be satisfied now. I see here, that even during the time that he saw Jesus
misused so sharply, this doing shows that he was moved with some pity of
the innocent: for his conscience told him, that He was innocent: and not only
did he this against conscience, but even against natural pity: and yet he
went forwards to examination. If a man have but a natural pity, nature, and
all the power therein will never hinder him to do a mischief.

Then Brethren, let us always seek night and day, to be raised up above
nature, for if we have but the power of nature to hold us from sin, we and
our nature both will go to Hell. Albeit that nature move us to pity men,
yet if there be no more but nature, the malice of the heart smoothers it, and
ouercomes it: only, the Spirit of GOD is able to fight and prevail against
nature. Otherwise, albeit the light of nature were never so great, the worse
shall prevail. Therefore, as ye would be saved from evil, strive to get
the Spirit of grace, and say, Lord, give m^e Thy Spirit, that by his power I
may strive against the corruption of nature. This should be our exercise, if
we would be partakers of Heaven: for never a soul shall see Heaven by
nature. Look what effect this works in the hearts of the Jews: nothing can
satisfy them but the blood of the innocent: they cried, Crucify him, crucify
him. When men are given over to cruelty, nothing will satisfy them but the
blood of the innocent. Pilate by all means assayed to set Jesus the innocent
at liberty, yet all in vain: for nothing will satisfy them, because malice
possesses their hearts. Indeed it is true, that by the eternal decree of God
it behooued Christ to die: but in the mean time they are inexcusable: for they
did all of malice. If ye will compare them with Pilate, they did worse than
he: he is to be preferred to them a thousand degrees: they had the light of
the word of God to have instructed them, which Pilate wanted: when Pilate got
sundry warninges, and last a sharp warning from his wife, he in a manner
gainstood them not, but he had a conscience of the innocence of Christ, and he
had a natural pity in his heart, and feign would have delivered Him, yea,
four several times he preached to the Jews, that Christ was innocent. But
as for the Jews, for as often as they are told of Christ's innocence, yet
their conscience is not wakened, neither can they be moved so much as to a
natural pity. So if ye speak of want of conscience, of induration, there is
no comparison betwixt Pilate and the Jews. Think not that there is any man
in the world that will have less pity in their hearts, than they who are
liars against the Truth, and than they that say they are Churchmen, Holy
men, and Defenders of the Truth: And I say, that the Pope makes less
conscience of evil, than the Turk: And it were better for an innocent person
to fall into the hands of a Turk, than into the hands of the Pope, and those
silly souls that lie in the Holy house would exchange the one with the
other. The judgment of GOD is lying upon these doers, on HEROD, on PILATE, on
the High Priests, and upon the JEWS: yet PILATE gettes this grace, that he
has some conscience, and it is holden waking, and sounding in his ear, and
staying him from that wicked action; and then Pilate gettes a pitiful heart.
But come to them, to wit, the Jews and High Priests, the judgment of GOD
lies so upon them, that they proceed from degree to degree to fearful
induration, till the action be finished, and the hearts of them are locked up
from all pity, and their consciences are blotted away; so heavy is the
judgment that lies upon the Jews. Therefore, think not that we are free
from judgment, when we are sitting in ease, eating, and drinking, in wealth,
honor, and glory: for I affirm, that the heauiest judgment that ever GOD
lays upon any creature, is a senselessenesse: For, when as a man or a woman
is doing evil, and has no sense of that their evil doing; O! that is the
most miserable estate that can be: for it is a sure forerunner of eternal
damnation. No outward cross, neither sickness nor poverty, is so sure a
token of GODS judgment, as to be rocked up in security, and to be lying
sleeping in sin. Senselessenesse is a sure token of a sore judgment which
shall overtake thee, so that thou shall not be able to open thy mouth, to
say, GOD help me: and therefore, beware of senselessness. Now the LORD hold
our consciences waking, although it should trouble us, that we may cease from
going forwards in sin, for CHRIST'S sake, To whom be all Praise, Honor,
and Glory, for evermore:

AMEN.
THE NINTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XIX. Jews answered him, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought
to die, because he made himself the Son of GOD. Pilate then heard that
word, he was the more afraid, JESUS, Whence art thou? But JESUS gave him none
answer.


WE heard in the beginning of this CHAPTER (Brethren) how Pilate the Judge
insisted earnestly to get JESUS (whom his conscience dited to be innocent)
set free and loosed: and therefore, first he commandes Him to be taken and
scourged, to be crowned with a Crown of Thorns, and clad with a purple
Garment, in derision of His kingdom; thinking thereby to have satisfied the
Jews. Then, when he had done this, he comes forth himself, and in presence
of all the people, protestes the fourth time, that He was innocent. Thirdly,
when he bringes Him forth with a Crown of Thorns, and with a purple
raiment, he vtters a pitiful voice, saying, Behold the man, to move the
Jews to be content: but their malice could not be satisfied, but the Jews and
Priests cried out, Crucify him crucify him. Thus much we have heard
already. Now in the beginning of this Text, we have the reply of Pilate to
the Jews, and the communication betwixt him and them: Take ye him (says he)
and crucify him, as for me, I find no fault in him: He answers indeed with
an anger for he is commoned with the obstinacy of the Jews, because nothing
would move them, but still they cried out, Crucify him: but he says, If ye
will take it on your conscience, crucify ye Him, as for me, albeit I have
right to crucify Him, I had rather give my right to you, than to de^ile mine
hands with the blood of the innocent. Ye heard, when they urged Pilate, to
condemn Him without a verdict: he answered, on this manner, Ye have a law,
judge Him according to your law: Before I judged a man without a crime, I had
rather resign my right to you. Ye see there, Pilate had rather give over his
right, that he had of the Roman Emperor, in judging and executing, before he
had condemned an innocent man: this had been very commendable in this Ethnicke
man, if it had not been forced out of him by the guiltiness of his
conscience: his conscience cried within him, Jesus is innocent. So this is
forced out of him: for Brethren, ye shall understand, that men do things in
conscience two ways: either against their will, when they are compelled
violently to do it: or else, with their will, when they do any thing
willingly, when the heart is as ready to do it, as the conscience charges.
When a man does a thing upon constraint, he gets little praise before God:
when a man does willingly, then there is matter of true praise* if ye compare
Pilate with the Jews, who had lost their conscience, he has his own praise:
for it is better to be commoned on conscience, to do any thing, than to do
against conscience: But let him who would have the true praise: not do any
thing on co^straint of conscience only, but also with a willing heart, as the
conscience requires, that he do it: so let him be as glad to do it. Natural
men will have a conscience, and do upon conscience, albeit they were never so
profane, but if the heart agree willingly to do God service, there is more
than nature there: if thou would have praise of God, take not only heed to
thy conscience, but look also that thou have a joy in thine heart in well
doing. Will ye mark through this whole discourse, that the Lord lets not the
conscience of Pilate sleep (Judges now who will be counted Christians, have
not such a conscience) and as it is waking, so it lets him not rest, but causes
him speak: if thy conscience be wakned, thou shall be speaking, and shall be
compelled to say, the good cause is the good cause. But look to the High
Priests: there is as great difference between them and Pilate, as it between
the heaven and the earth: ye shall see nothing in them, but the conscience
sleeping and locked up in a sound sleep: and the more that Pilate testifies of
the innocence of Christ, they are the more hardened. This is a wonder, Pilate
was but a natural man, who had none illumination, but through the light of
nature: and ye must know that it is knowledge that makes a conscience. As for
the High Priests, they had light by the word of God, yet come to the
conscience, Pilate had a better conscience than they had all. Would ye search
the ground of it: the High Priests, albeit they had the word of God, and light
and illumination there through: yet the malitiousnesse of their hearts put out
that light, corruption blotted it out: and when once a man is illuminate, and
then begins to extinguish that light, it comes by the just Judgment of
God, that the light of nature is put out, and then all conscience is scraped
out, and then he becomes like a beast, and so falls into a reprobate
sense: keep the light that ye have gotten by the word of God, and by that
Spirit, as ye would see life: and if ye put it out, the Lord shall make you as
senseless as a beast. They cried both, but Pilate cries, Judge ye him, They
cry, crucify him: Pilate cries, I find no fault in him worthy of death. What
ever be Pilates part, who was a judge: what ever was the part of the Jews the
accusers, the Lord has His part also in it, and he appointes it by His
eternal decree: the hour was come, and He will have His only begotten Son
to die for the sins of the world, and He will be glorified in His death at
this hour, and He will not have Him to die as one worthy of death in
Himself, but like an innocent in the sight of the world. Now look to this
wisdom, that his innocence should appear: He will have the Judge protesting
His innocence oftentimes, before He should die. On the other part, He will
have the conscience of the High Priests scraped out, and He will have them
getting His blood: if the High Priests conscience had been wakned, Jesus had
not died at this time for the sins of the world: and therefore to the end
that He should die, He hardened the hearts of the accusers. When any innocent
man suffers, and chi^fly for Christ, the Lord has disposed the world so, that
He has made some to testify of the innocence of the Martyrs, and some has
He hardened to seek the blood of the Martyrs, that He might be glorified.
Look to Daniel, Darius had a conscience of his innocence, but the Princes had
hardened hearts, Daniel 6.1. Look when Paul was accused, the Roman
Governors, Lysias, Felix, and Festus, had a conscience of the innocence of
Paul: but the High Priests persecutes Him to the death. When a malefactor
sufferes, the Lord will not use this manner of doing: He will not have the
Judge to testify the man's innocence where there is none, but he willl let him
die and suffer, like a murderer, an oppressor, or a blasphemer, as he is in
very deed, he will have Judge, accusers, and all men conspire together to take
away such pestes from the earth: Therefore, if there were no more but this, if
we must die, it should move us to die in a good cause, and the best cause is
the cause of Jesus Christ. Take heed, that thou suffer not like a nocent, and
guilty person, but like an innocent: so thy death shall be glorious: it is a
pain to die, and a greater pain to die for an evil cause. Now the Priests
answer: We have a law, and according to our law He merits the death: they
challenge not a law to crucify Him, or any power to punish Him capitallie:
for all power of this was taken away from them by the Romans, yet for all
this, they forget not the right of their law, That the blasphemer should die
the death: according to this law they affirm Him worthy of death. So,
Brethren, What ever Pilate can do, or say, to mitigate and to assuage their
malice: speak what he can speak, they continue in hardness against Christ:
look what blindes them: The word of God that should make them to see it, it
blindes them, and they use it to their blinding. All the things in the world,
yea, the best things: the very word of God serves to wicked men for nothing
else, but for their farther induration: the more they seee, the blinder they are,
they will read, but the more they read, the blinder are they: for why? they
abuse the word, they will not make it a rule to direct their affections and
actions: but they abuse it to their fantasy, and makes a slave of it. Look to
the Papists this day, they abuse the old and new Testaments, they make them to
serve their appetites, they interpret, expone and apply the word as they
please, they make the word of God the author of their lies. I affirm, that the
word of God does nothing to the Papists but blind them: it had been good for
them, that they had never seen, heard, nor read the Scripture of God: Write
on, say on, this shall be verified one day: but let us consider their
reasoning: The law ordaines, that the blasphemer shall die the death, but so
it is, that this man is a blasphemer: for He has made himself the Son of
God: therefore He should die ye death, If ye look the ground, and the general:
No man can find fault with it: for it is set down in ye Law, Leuit: 24.14* but
come to the application where they subsume, Jesus is a blasphemer, there they
fail for Jesus was, is, and shall be that only begotten Son of God: and
therefore the conclusion is false, that He ought to die the death. So ye see
the general is true, but the assumption, and the conclusion, is a lie. In
wicked men ye shall find this, that no man will lay down fairer generalles
out of the word of God than they, no man will do that better: but come on to
the application, there they go astraye, they apply not right, but they apply
either to this affection or that: As for example, The murderer should die the
death: if there be an hatred in them against the man, they will apply it unto
him, but by the contrary, if he be a kinsman or a friend, they will say,
this man is no murderer, howbeit he be as great a murderer as Barabbas was,
and therefore, he should not die. Take heed to thine heart, and think it not
enough to know the general to be true, but take heed to thine heart, and to
the affections thereof, that they may be sanctified, and chiefly thou who
art a Judge: look that thine heart be free of hatred, and of perverse love:
or else thy love, thine hatred, and thy perverse affections shall be poison to
thee, and shall blind thee, and shall make thee pronounce false judgment.
For, what auailes knowledge, what auailes it thee to have a great light in
thine head, either through nature, or yet through the word of God, if thou
want reformation and sanctification to thine affections? all is for nothing.
True Christianity stands in the reformation of the heart, and without this,
all the knowledge in the Scripture shall poison thee to the death: for except
thou be reformed, it had been better for thee that thou had been ignorant,
and never seen the Scripture. Now to go forward: When they have answered
Pilate, he continues: and it is said, when he heard that that man was the
Son of God, if he had a conscience before, now he has a greater conscience:
Even, as whatsoever Pilate can speak to the hie priests, did no more but
harde^ them on: so all the words they use to put out his conscience, stirs
it up, and wakens it the more: Indeed they sought by all means to blotte out
his conscience. And all the doing of a consciencelesse man is to blind thee,
and put out thy conscience, like as his conscience is put out, and such a man
is dangerous company: But the Lord, who only has power over the conscience,
disappointes their purpose. The Lord has such power over the soul and
conscience of man, that when He will have it blinded, all ye doings in the
world will not waken it: by the contrary, when God will have it wakened, all
the world shall not still it: the more means thou use to still it, it shall
be the more aloft: None has power of the conscience, to waken it, or to still
it: No, not a King, nor an Emperor, no, not all the world has power of the
conscience, but only God: He has His throne in the conscience. Yet let us
examine this better, When Pilate heard this, he was the more afraid. Pilate had
no knowledge of God, but so much as nature furnished him: he was a man who
lived without God in the world, yet at the Name of GOD, and at the Name of the
Son of God he is terrified, and his conscience abhors to do any thing
against Him. Albeit thou never heard of the Scripture, nor never saw one of
Gods works, there is one thing within thee, that will tell thee, that there is
a God, whom thou should fear and honor: that is, thy conscience, and if
thou honor not that God, thy conscience shall stand up and judge thee: I say
more, this conscience is very powerful: for if it serve not to thy salvation,
it shall serve thee to thy damnation conscience natural abhors to violate
that Majesty, it tells thee this, honor this God, if thou dishonourest Him,
thou shall die, albeit thou never saw the Scripture, and if there come a
wicked thought in thine heart, the conscience will stand up to challenge it,
and like an armed man to sl^y thee, and if thou werest but a natural man, ere
ever thou get that Majesty violate, thy conscience shall stand up to plead for
God, and to guarde Him from thine injuries, and ere thou get Him dishonored,
thou shall tread upon the belly of thy conscience. It is true indeed, albeit
this natural spunke of light of conscience in man be as a precious rain to
bridle man from sin, that the Lord has left him after his fall (He has left
it of mercy) for if it had bin taken away, men had been more miserable than
beasts) yet it is very weak, there is nothing perfect in us, and there is
nothing in us by nature, that will be able to hold us in the fear of God.
This natural conscience for a time will brangle and stand up against the
malitiousnesse of the heart: and if thou have no more, thou may stand for a
while, but in the end thou shall give it over and succumbe. It is a pity to
see, how Pilate strives, and then how in the end the conscience fails, and
against conscience, he gives sentence against the innocent, and gainstanding
the conscience, he overthrows it. Trust not to nature, but strive to get
grace: nothing is able to overcome nature, but the Holy Spirit, for it strives
and gettes the victory in the end: Therefore as we would be safe in that
great day, let us strive to get that Spirit to pingill out, and get the
victory against this canker in the heart. I see some thing more in Pilate: he
gets not only a sight of God, and so is terrified: but he comes forward, and
his conscience gets advertisement of that same very man, who was standing
before them all, that that same very man was God, not only that He was an
innocent man, but that He was the God of heaven, he gets a supernatural
knowledge, that that silly man was God: the reason is: if he had not gotten
that advertisement, that that man standing in such contempt before him a
glorious Judge, was God: would his conscience have accused him, would he have
been so terrified, and would he have desired to absolve Him, if he had not
gotten advertisement, that Jesus Christ was the God of glory? It is a natural
thing to the conscience to speak of God, but not to speak of Christ, that He
is the Son of God: Pilate was more afraid for Christ, who stood before him,
like a poor silly man, than Christ was for him, albeit he was a glorious
Judge in the eyes of the world, but this sight was like the glance of a flash
of fire that went over the conscience of Pilate. The Lord will give the wicked
glances and tastes of Heaven, but all is but in vain. Ye see of Agripp^
Acts.26.28. When Paul was speaking to him, he says, Thou perswadest me almost
to be a Christian: his heart was almost bowed, and was beginning to be
persuaded, he scarcely begins to have this persuasion, when it euanishes: the
Lord will furnish to wicked men glimmerings of that life, but they euanish
away: thou will dream of happiness, but this is happiness, when the Lord
gives thee a light, and bows thine heart, and establishes grace in thee and
grace bides with thee, there is thy happiness. This glimmering is not for
nothing: it serves for this, to make Pilate inexcusable, and if it were no
more: When Pilate shall appear before that Judge, this same blencke shall be
a testimony against him to his everlasting damnation. If thou gettest a
blencke of Heaven, pursue it, or else better it had been for thee, if thou
had never seen it, or never to have seen Christ, or to have read the
Scriptures. Again this glimmering that Pilate got, shall stand up against the
High Priests, and give sentence against them, who had not only nature, but
the word to guide them. Pilate looks in through that baseness, and gets a
sight of that glory, that was in our nature in Christ, they cannot look in
through that baseness: And if there were no more, Pilate shall stand up like a
Judge to condemn all the Jews, who by the word was informed, that CHRIST
should come in baseness and humility, Esaias 53.2. I come nearer: And if there
were no more, but that light that Pilate got, it shall condemn all them that
do stumble at the ministry of the Gospel. The LORD will not have the Gospel
with an outward glory, He will have it to shine in baseness: and if that
outward baseness stop thee to look into it, thou shall perish, and if thou
get not a fight of that glory, therein Pilate shall condemn thee one day:
yea, Pilate in that great day shall stand up against all men, who are offended
at the voice of Christ: if thou contemnest ye base ministry, I promise thee,
yt thou shall never get life by that Gospel: if the Gospel be base, humble
thy self under it, and strive to get thine eyes opened, to look to that
glory of the Gospel, Look not to men, who do preach, and be not offended at
the outward face of the Gospel, as thou would be saved: Blessed are they
who are not offended at the baseness of Jesus Christ. Now Pilate being
terrified in conscience, and getting little blenckes, immediately he goes in
again to the common Hall, and takes in Jesus Christ, and he says to Jesus,
Whence art thou? Art thou the Son of God: he had no certainty of this: this
is worthy of commendation, that he getting a blencke, he will follow it out:
who will say? but this was worthy of commendation in an Ethnicke. If it shall
please GOD, to give us a blencke any time, let us strive to follow it forth,
and let that glimmering move thee to follow it out further: for all the joy in
the world, is in the sight of GOD, thou never knew what joy is, who have
not tasted of the pleasure of Heaven: fie on thee, who have not tasted of this
joy.

So, if it shall please the Lord to give us a glance of Jesus Christ, Pilate
learnes us to follow it: albeit it go out of thine eyes for a time, rest
never till thou gettest it again, although men would give thee all the
pleasures in the world.

Now, Brethren, we must not think that it was the love of the truth, that
moved Pilate to ask this: No, it was rather the fear of danger, that moved
him to ask it: for he feared some danger to come unto himself, when he
heard that he was the Son of God: therefore partly for this cause, and
partly, because Christ knew that Pilate disdained Him, and all spiritual
graces in Him: He gave him none answer. But let us follovv out the knowledge
of CHRIST once begun upon the love of the truth, then we may be assured,
that according to His promise He will hear us: for He says, Verily,
verily, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, that shall he give
you, IOH. XVI. 23. Thou who have that sweet promise, Knock, and it shall be
opened, should thou not be instant to make inquiry of JESUS, who offers
Himself so willingly, and says, I am the Light of the world: and, Come to
Me to get the water of Life: Alas, that thou should perish for default of
seeking of grace! Ye vvoulde marvel, that JESUS answered not a word: I
spoke of this somewhat before I shall say only this for the present: The Lord
He knew His hour was coming that He should die, and He knew it was
His Fathers will: therefore He would not utter so much as a word to stay
and hold back His death. If He had given Pilate evident and sure information
what manner of person He was, then happily He vvoulde have stayed, and
vvoulde have proceeded no further, and vvoulde not have slain Him: but he
knew not with whom he dealt, when he gave out the sentence of death
against Him. But it may be asked (with reverence we speak it) Was not
this an hard matter, that Christ would not do so much as to tell Pilate that
this was Gods work, and that He Himself was the Son of God? was it not
an hard matter so to hinder this man's salvation? But I say, What reckoning is
to be made of Pilate, and all the creatures in the world, Angels, and men,
so that God be glorified? We are all made to glorify Him, and except He had a
respect to His own glory in the creature, He would never have made man nor
Angel: If it please the Lord to be glorified in thy damnation, hold thee
content: Has not the Potter (says Paul) power of the claye, to make of the
same lump one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor. Roman. 9.21. I say
more, God in that his great sa nilie, has some vessels of honor, and some of
dishonor. 2. Tim^th. 2.20. If that thou find thy self to be one of the
vessels of honor, thou have no cause to complain, and to say, Wherefore was
this man made to shame? for thou have enough: if thou have gotten mercy,
thank GOD, that of His free will He has put a difference betwixt thee and
him. There are none who are ordained to be vessels of honor, but they will
seek the honor of God, eue^ suppose it were by their own destruction, as ye
may read of Moses. This is the nature of all them who have gotten some
assurance of GODS favor in JESUS: and if thou have this assurance in thine
heart, certainly thou art an instrument of glory.

Now to end: Ye see, Brethren, in this whole action the pitiful estate of
Pilate: he is tossed to and fro betwixt two parties, his own conscience on the
one part, vrges and forces him to stand and plead for Christ; and on the other
part, the desire that he has to pleasure the vnportunate Jews, and the fear
that he has to offend Caesar, moves him to go on in that process against
Christ, till at last he pronounces sentence against Him. Judges by his example
are to take good heed to their proceedinges in judgment, and to keep their
hands from evil; and that they sit not in a wicked judgeme^t. Be not Judge
against the innocent: Pilate sat in judgment doing wickedly, pronou^cing
sentence against the Lord of Glory. If thou sit in judgment, pronounce not
sentence against ye innocent, either leave that judgment, or then absolve the
innocent in despite of the world. It is no small matter to pronounce sentence
of damnation. The Lord grant us this conscience, that whenever we shall be
employed, we may be employed in doing of good deeds, and in glorifying God,
that we may have that assurance of grace in Jesus Christ: To whom with the
Father, and Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Praise, for ever: Amen.

THE TENTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XIX. Pilate unto him, Speak thou not unto me? Know thou not
that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to loose thee?

JESUS answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were
given thee from above: therefore, he that delivered me unto thee, has the
greater sin.


IN this whole History of the suffering of JESUS CHRIST under Pontius Pilate,
we see a continual strife betwixt the Judge Pilate, and the accusers. Pilate
labors by all means to get the innocent set free: The Hie Priests be ye
contrary endeavor themselves to get Jesus Christ crucified. Pilate seeks, if
it had been possible, to follow his conscience: they seek by all means the
contrary, to harden the heart of Pilate. The last words as ye heard, the
Jews rose, and said, We have a law, by the which he ought to die, because
he made himself the Son of God: These words of theirs are so far from
that, that they take away the conscience of Pilate, that by the contrary, by
these words the conscience of Pilate is more wakened than before, and he begins
to fear JESUS CHRIST, and humbles himself more than ever he did, yea, in
such sort, that when as he hears tell, that JESUS was the Son of GOD, he
demaundes of Him, Whether He was the Son of GOD, or no? but he receives no
answer: for the LORD JESUS had concluded to suffer in all patience, and to
obey the Heavenly will of His Father. Now in this Text that we have read, we
have heard how Pilate in anger speaks to Jesus, thinking that He had not
known him, and that He gave him not his due honor, and says, Know thou
not, with whom thou have to do? and that I have power to crucify thee, and I
have power to loose thee? The Lord answers, No, thou would have no power,
except it were given thee from above: he therefore, who has delivered me unto
thee has the greater sin. In the first part of this Text, we have the
conference betwixt Pilate and Jesus. To speak of this demand of Pilates, ye
may see by his words that the warning that he got a little before, that Jesus
was the Son of God, that fear and reverence of Jesus Christ, wherewith the
heart was touched, it was but vanishing. We may mark here the instabilitie
of Pilate: first, he has no fear of JESUS, and then of a suddaintie he is
moved with a reverence and fear: and last, this reverence is scarcely
entered into his heart, when it euanishes away: and being angry against
CHRIST, he falls out in blasphemy against GOD. And this is no new thing,
for we see this same in men now adays: Ye will see men who have lived very
loosely, taking their pastime, and upon a suddaintie ye shall see them have a
kind of repentance and reverence, but ere ye look about you, all shall
euanish. This is too plentiful in great men and small. The ground is this, the
heart was never truly renewed, but in the mean time of the fained repentance
the heart was full, of the gall of bitterness, as Peter speaks to Simon
Magus. The reverence or repentance, was but like a scroofe of honey rubbed on
venom, and then when the venom breaks out, the scroofe goes away, as the
morning dew before the sun. Then, if thou would have the fear of God to
abide in thine heart, thou must always be deluing and digging down into the
heart, there is an infinite deepenesse of malitiousnesse in it. Therefore, he
who would have stabilitie, let him see, that that ground be honest and good,
and be not content with the dregs, look that the heart be sound. There is
nothing so deceitful as the heart of man, Ierem. 17.9: it will not only
beguile another man, but it will be guile a man himself, and if that fraud
bide in thee, it will not leave thee, till it bring thee to destruction.

Now, let us mark the words of Pilate, Know thou not that I have power to
crucify thee, and to absolve thee. Brethren, wl at else is this, but to claim
to himself an absolute power, either to slay the innocent, or to let Him go
free, as he pleases: this is such a power, as only the God of Heaven has: He
has not given this power to no creature, neither to man, nor Angel, this is
only proper to the great God. We see by the example of Pilate, that this is
natural to Magistrates and Princes, to think that their power cannot be
restrained or limitated by any law, to slay, or save by the law, but to do
with the law: as they please. Albeit Princes or Judges will seem to be very
modest, and to claim nothing, but that which is right, and agreeable both to
Gods Law, and man's law. Pilate said a little before, I will not crucify
Christ, because he is innocent: yet for all this modesty: provoke them once,
make them angry once, they shall utter suddenly in wrath, what they think and
esteem of their power, they will then blaspheme, and and say that their power
is absolute.

Experience may teach this, that of all men in the world, the estate of
Princes, Judges and Potentates is most dangerous. The more that a man have of
power, of riches, or of the goods of this world, his estate is more dangerous.
There is nothing more dangerous, than to put a sword or a scepter in the hand
of a natural man: for, Brethren, to put power in the hands of a natural man,
is as much as to put the sword in the hands of a mad man. Paul the third
Chapter to Titus, and third verse, calls a natural man a mad man, albeit he
were never so discreet, he is mad. We were all mad, says Paul, as they
are. A mad man will slay others, and lastly, he will slay himself in the
end, and so shall he who has power, if he be no more but a natural man.

Would to God, that Princes and Magistrates, would take heed to this, it is
required that all estates be renewed by the Spirit. Woe is to the King, and to
the subject, the rich and the beggar, who is not borne again. In the Euangell
according to John, Christ says to Nicodemus, Except a man be borne again,
he shall not see the Kingdom of GOD. But it is most requisite that these men
who are set in high rooms, and have gotten all the pleasures in the world at
their will, that they be renewed: for without sanctification, all outward
things will make thee worse: As great riches, and honors, as great tentations
to make thee to forget GOD. All thy pleasures shall bring to thee as great
displeasure: yea, they shall work damnation to thee in hell, except the LORD
give thee His Spirit. There was never a King so wise, great and high, but if
he got not regeneration, he shall kill himself with that same power he got
in his hand.

So let us all seek this regeneration, and chiefly Kings, who think, and will
say, Who should be renewed but poor silly persons: they think it lawful for
themselves to commit all uncleanness, fornication, blasphemy, etc. and to
sell themselves to all sin: No, if thou, who have gotten honor be not
renewed, thy damnation shall far exceed the damnation of the beggar.

Let us weigh the words: This is a marvelous thing Pilate stood up before and
protested that Christ Jesus was innocent: Now he stands up again, and says,
That he has power to do with him what he pleased. How can these stand? what
can be gathered of these two voices: Even this, that notwithstanding of His
innocence, he might crucify Him: for it is as much as this, Jesus, for all
thine innocence I have power to crucify thee.

Who will s^and up and say, that he has power over an innocent man, to slay,
but only he who is a murderer: So Pilate in effect professes himself to be a
murderer, for it is as much as he said, I am a murderer, and will take thy
life from thee, albeit thou be an innocent. Is not this a great madness to a
Magistrate, who is placed in power above others, to call himself a murderer?
The ground of this, is pride against God in the heart: a proud man is ever a
mad man, for pride is against God, and it makes a man mad: and therefore as the
heart is proud, so the mouth is foolish: the most proud man is the most foolish
in talking: Look and consider the proud man when thou hear him speak, and
thou will say: Yonder man is a foolish man. And this proceeds of the Lords
just and wise dispensation: the proud man in his heart dishonoures the Majesty
of GOD. (Thou who art proud have ado with God, and not with thy fellows)
Therefore the LORD in His just Judgment will cause thy mouth to speak to thy
shame to accuse thy self: He will cause thee who art a proud King call thy
self a murderer to shame thy self, and to be revenged of thy proud heart.
Thus much for Pilates demand: which contains a blasphemy against that
Majesty: and therefore JESUS will not let him go away unreproved: He says
to him, Well, Thou would have no power over me, except it were given thee
from above: as for them who have put me in thine hands, woe is to them. their
sin is the greater, and their damnation the more: to wit, the Priests and the
Jews. There are two parts of this answer: The first concerns the Majesty
of GOD, the second concerns the High Priests, and the Jews: for the LORD
has ado with two sorts of persons: for there was two sorts of persons who
put Him in the hands of Pilate: The first was GOD: The next was the Jews* who
delivered Him to be condemned: As for GOD, Look what He speaks of him, and
how reverently, Thou would have no power, except it were given thee from
above: As for man, He accuses him of sin. Now let us examine every part of
these: Thou would have no power over me, except it were given thee from
above: Thou gloriest too much of thy power, as though it were of thy self, and
not of GOD: for if thou forgettest that heavenly providence, without the which
nothing can come unto me: But I tell thee, Pilate, if thou should have had
power over me, if it were not given thee: this is spoken for two respects:
First, because all superior power is of God: Next, in this respect because
when a man has gotten power over others, he can do nothing to them, nor
stir an hair of their head, but by the providence of God: Pilate was
ignorant of both these, he believed he had his power of Caesar only, but Christ
lettes him know that there was one higher than Caesar, from whom he had his
power: he was ignorant of Gods providence, he uttered him to be a blasphemer
of God: and therefore the Lord hearing this blasphemer, albeit He held His
tongue before, now He speaks when He hears His Father dishonored: for all
His suffering was for the honor of His Father: therefore He will now reprove
Pilate: how far are we from thus doing, we are clean contrary to this: the
very silliest of us all, if we hear any thing tending to our own reproach,
then there is such anger in us, that we cannot be pacified: but who is angry
to hear God dishonored: Where shall the Lord find a zealous man in this
Land, few in Court, or Council has that zeal: they who are greatest
blasphemers, and greatest enemies to God, by conuoyes are most advanced: the
zeal of God is out of the hearts of men for the most part so that by all
appearance, certainly a judgment shall light upon this Nation, for albeit we
were created and redeemed for Gods glory, yet we have no care of it, all that
is away: wherefore serves our creation, it had been better we had never been
created, if we set not our selves to glorify Him. Yet to weigh the words
better, we see this plainly, albeit a man be in the hands of a superior
power, whether he be an innocent man, or wicked, yet he is in the hands of God:
and there is not a King in the world that is able to open his mouth against a
man, but by the special dispensation of God: so that the life, or the death of
the man hangs not so much on the sentence of the King, as it does on the
decree of God, the life of man hanges more on that decree of His, than all the
decrees of Kings. There is great blindness and beastliness in us, that we see
not that providence: therefore now and then the Lord will let men see, and
feel, that the life and death of men hanges not so much on the sentence and
decree of the Prince* as on that eternal decree and sentence of God. 1. Sam.
Chap. 14. When Saul had given out the sentence that Jonathan should die, and
that for breaking of an unlawful law, it lay not in his hands to slay him: and
then in Chap. 15 when he ordained that Agag should live, the Lord stirred up
the spirit of Samuel, and hewed him with a sword. The Lord will let us see,
that the sentence of Kings makes not a man to die, or live, but His eternal
decree. This is not to be passed by: Jesus warns Pilate of two things: First,
that he has his authority not of Caesar, He sends him to the heavens above
Cesars throne, to Gods Throne: Next, whatsoever he did in his office and
authority, he did it by the dispensation of God. So we have first this
lesson: to wit, it appertains unto Princes to know, that the authority
which they have, it is of GOD: Monarchs should understand, that they have
that power of GOD, and so should inferior Magistrates, how beit they should
acknowledge the superior. Know ye not how Nabuchadonezer learned, that all
the power was of God, he was sent forth like a beast, to live seven years
among the beasts, to learn this lesson, that all the power he had was of God,
Dan. 4. Next learn, howbeit Princes have gotten that power of God, yet God
will not denude Himself of power over them: but He so rules them by His
providence, that they cannot stir without His will. Then Princes should look
to God, seeing they can do nothing without His blessed providence, Esa^. 10.
When Assure boasted, that he had done all things by his own hands, and his own
wisdom, ye Lord is more angry at him for not acknowledging of his power to
be from God in that persecution, than He is for the persecution it self. He
pronounces the sentence against Him, What art thou but an axe or a saw, in the
hands of the sawer? It is a vain thing for a king, to ascribe power to
himself, and not to God: woe is him! it is a sore thing to match with God. Then
again, when Jesus was in the hands of Pilate, denied He the power of Pilate?
No, He acknowledges his power, but He acknowledged it was of God, and
therefore He willingly submits Himself unto it. Wherefore, all subjects should
learn this lesson: When they look to their Princes, or to their superiors,
not to look so much to the man as to God, who has armed him with that power:
he is foolish that thinks not that the power yt the Magistrate or Prince has
gotten, is of God: and this should be the ground of obedience, when I see the
image of God in him, when I see him armed with ye power of God, I ought to
obey him for the conscience of God. Then a game: mark in Jesus Christ, when
Pilate the earthly Judge has to do with Him, He looks not so much to
Pilate, as to His Father. Jesus Christ all this time when He is pulled here and
there, sets not His eye so much upon men, as upon His Father, and upon His
providence. This teaches a lesson unto all men, but chiefly to them who fall
into the hands of men of authority and power. They ought not so much to set
their eyes upon this or that man, as upon God and acknowledge, albeit it were
in the midst of all torments, it is not man that deals with me, it is not
so much any person deals with me, as it is my God. The King has not an hand
to move, or a word to speak against me, if my God give it not to him: he who
is in the hands of men, and looks not to this, is worse than a beast. This is
a chief point, whereby thou glorifiest God, to acknowledge His providence, in
suffering or in torment* none can have consolation, but he who sees this,
there is the matter of consolation, and patience in torments, to see, that when
he is in the hands of a Tyrant, he is in the hands of a mercifulll Father,
and to say, Albeit these torments be sore and grievous, and albeit men deal
with me, it is my Father that deals with me in mercy. Let thee be torn
and rent, yet acknowledge this, thou shall find joy that shall exceed all thy
torments: Look to the Martyrs, So, Brethren, it is no small comfort to a man,
for to set his eyes always upon God, and especially when he is into the
hands of a Judge or Tyrant. Now thus far the Lord has given an answer to
Pilate: and has challenged the glory of that Majesty. Would to God, we could
learn that lesson, to defend the glory of God, which is blasphemed in this
world. Come to the other part it is in respect of the High Priests: they were
the instruments of God, working by his providence, to put Christ in his hands:
Pilate, thou gloriest over me, but woe is to them who have put me into thine
hands. Woe is to them who put an innocent man in the hands of a Tyrant. Mark
this: There is nothing spoken of Pilate, that he sinned, albeit he sinned,
but He speaks of the sins of the Jews, and of the High Priests, this lets
us see, that albeit Pilate sinned, yet they sinned more, and their damnation is
greater than his: he that begins mischief, the wrath of God shall
especially overtake him, and if there were no more but the example of Judas, it
may tell us this, that Judas was the first that began this work, Judas put
Him first in the hands of the High Priest: On whom strikes the wrath first?
What befell to Judas? Whilst the Lord Jesus is so handled, the traitor Judas
is put to the torture, and the Lord rents the soul of him in pieces: the
miserable Catiue to be free of that torture, he hangs himself: Did the wrath
of God light first upon Judas, who was the first traitor: the wrath of God
lights first upon the traitors, yet the Jews are sleeping, they thought they
were free of judgment, but still the wrath prosecutes them to induration.
Think ye that these traitors are free of wrath, No, no, the dolor and
vengeance in its own time shall overtake them, and they shall not have a word
to speak. The Papists, when they have caught a Christian, who confesses
Jesus Christ, when they have tried Him, they will put Him into the hands of
the Emperor, or King of Spain, they will wash their hands as clean of the
blood of the innocent, and who took his life, but the King of Spain? O! but
the wrath of GOD persecutes them, and all the blood of the innocent lies upon
them, because they delivered them into their hands to be tormented by them.
The judgment of that Antichrist, and of that accursed crew, shall be heavier
than the judgment of the Kings, who execute their malice. I denounce this IN
THE NAME OF GOD: and therefore, let every man and woman beware that they be not
partakers in the murder of the innocent: yea, if the Hangman know that he is
innocent, (albeit he thinks howsoever the matter goes, he is free) let him
not touch him. Read ye not in the History of the three Children, Sidrach,
Mesach, and Abednego, who being taken and casten into the hot fiery furnace
at the commandment of Nebuchadnezar the King, that the men that cast them
into the furnace were slain with the flame of the fire? Yea, if it were but in
a thought, take heed thou consent not to the death of the innocent.

Now to end in a word: Ye see here, when Jesus speaks of His Father, and
of His doings, He blames Him not, but He speaks in all submission of Him:
but when He speaks of the Jews, who were instruments of this work of God:
He rebukes them shamefullie, and imputes sin unto them. This is a wonder,
and yet it is the work of God, and they are instruments ruled by God: yet the
Lord is Holy, and they are unholy and wicked, Act. chap. 2. verse 23. They
crucified Him with wicked hands: now the Lord was clean, and the Jews hands
were unholy. How was this? The cause was, because in all this doing there was
not such a thing as that any of these wicked instruments looked unto God:
they are satisfying the affection of their hearts, and drinking up the
innocent blood maliciously. Mark this: Whatsoever thou do in this world,
whether thou go out or in, eatest or drinkest, set always thine eyes upon
the Lord, and do it all to His pleasure, and say with thy self, I do this
to pleasure and to glorify thee, O Lord, And I advertise thee, that albeit
thou do any thing agreeable in it self to the will of GOD, yet if thine
heart be not set upon GOD in the doing, that work is unholy in thine hand.
There is nothing to sanctify thy soul, if thine eye be not set upon GOD: for
when the eye of the soul is set upon the LORD, there comes light down from
Him, that sanctifies the heart. And this is it in a word that I vvoulde
say: Be never at the end of an evil thing: if thy conscience tell thee in
thine ear, that thou art at an evil turn, do it not: I appeal you, when
ye do any thing in secret, if your conscience will not say, O catiue, that
which thou do will bring thee to destruction? Many men in this Land,
think themselves never well, but when they are at an evil turn: But I
forewarne thee, as thou would be safe, and find mercy at that Great day,
to hold thine hands clean from all evil turns: and chiefelie, from the
blood of the innocent. Whatsoever thou do, look that thou have a vvarrande
of that revealed will of GOD. And think it not enough to be an executer of
the decree of GOD: but see thou be assured of this revealed will. And yet
more: Be not an Hypocrite in thy doing, but do all things with sincerity,
and not for man's cause, but for GODS cause, that thou may be partaker of
that everlasting glory with JESUS: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, both now, and forever, AMEN.

THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
JOHN, CHAP. XIX. Pilate sought to loos^ him, but the Jews cried, saying If
thou deliver him, thou art not Caesar's friend: for whosoever m^k^th himself a
King* spe^keth against Caesar. Pilate heard this word, he brought JESUS
forth, and sat down in the Iudgement-seate, in a place called the Pauement,
and in Hebrew GABBATHA, Jews, Behold your King. But they cried, Away with
him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate said unto them, Shall I crucify your
King? The high Priests answered, We have no King but Caesar.


YE have heard (Brethren) that in this whole History of the suffering of
JESUS CHRIST, under Pontius Pilate, the Roman Deputy, we might clearlie see a
continual strife and debate betwixt the Judge Pilate, and the accusers, Pilate
ever striving to get Jesus, that just one, and that innocent (for his
conscience told him that He was innocent) set at liberty: The accusers on
the other part, strive to blotte out the conscience of Pilate, and to get Jesus
crucified: and as we have found this debate in the whole History before, so
also in these words which we have read, we find the same strife: And, if
Pilate before was earnest to get Jesus set loose, he is far more earnest
now than ever he was: and with all his might he seeks to get Him set at
liberty: but look how earnest Pilate is to have Him loosed, the High
Priests and the Jews are as earnest to have Him crucified: In end, as we
shall hear, the victory inclines to the accusers: Pilate gives it over, and
sits down to condemn the innocent.

Now to come to the words, they are plain, and offer very plain and easy
doctrine, therefore we shall be also plain by Gods grace. It is said
concerning Pilate, that from that time when he had heard these last words of
Jesus, accusing Him for that blasphemy against His Father, then he took a
greater fear, and from that time he studied more and more to absolve Jesus.
Brethren, we see here through this whole History, that the more Pilate
hears of Jesus, and the more that Jesus insistes with him, continually the
conscience is the more wakened: and the more that it is wakened, the more
earnestly strives he to get Him set at liberty. So it is a wonder, to see an
Ethnic, without God, to have such a conscience of the innocence of Jesus: and
then, that such a man should labor to get Him loose. I know not if many of our
Judges now adays, will have such a conscience, and would be so earnest to have
the innocent set at liberty. So when I look to the vigilantnesse of his
conscience, I am compelled to say, that this man had a special grace in this
poinct: for one of the best blessings of a judge, who sits on life and death,
is to have a vigilant conscience: By the contrary, a Judge wanting conscience
of right and wrong, of all men he is the most accursed. Then, Brethren, if ye
will look to this matter narrowly, ye shall say, that Pilate had a great
vigilantnesse in his conscience: but alas, he falls at the last: for
certainly, this conscience had been a blessing, if he had obeyed this
counsel of the conscience: but because he falls in the end, and obeyes not
his conscience, that which was given for a blessing, becomes a cursing unto
him. If God give thee a blessing, as a vigilant conscience, if thou abuse it,
and refuse to hear thy conscience, the blessing shall turn to a curse, and
that conscience, which was a counselor, becomes a sore tormenter, and vrges
thee to put hand into thine own soul, and tear it in pieces. Pilates
conscience so judged and tormented him, till he was feign to put hand in
himself, that was his end. Now, what do Christ's accusers? look how b^sie
Pilate can be to get the innocent set at liberty, as earnest are they to get
Him crucified: and now they begin to handle Pilate more sharply than before.
The greatest arguments they used before was taken from a crime laid to the
charge of Jesus, from Jesus treason against Caesar the Emperor, and from His
blasphemy against God. Now they leave off such accusation, and they lay
treason to Pilate, and accuse him of treason against his Master Caesar, If thou
let this man loose, thou art no friend to thy Master Caesar, thou will
endanger thy self, and make thy self guilty of treason: and more, this man
will pull the Crown from Caesar's head: so if thou let such a man loose, thou
shall be guilty of treason as well as he, and thou shall be the friend of the
enemies of Caesar: The effect of the accusation is this, They accuse Pilate of
treason against Caesa^: now Pilate heard not the like of this all the day
before: and as he studies to keep a good consci^nce toward the innocent
JESUS, so the temptation gro^es on. Now, it is not possible to keep a good
conscience without temptation both inwardly and outwardly, and aye the better
conscience, the greater temptation, and the last the worst. The Devil and his
impes begins softly with ^lluring but in end, if thou yeeldest not they will
threaten thee, and say, Thou shall either loose thy conscience, or else thy
life. Then ye shall mark what is the forest temptation that the devil and
evil men c^n use against men who have a conscience, Either do or die, as
though one took a dagger, and held it to thy breast, and said, Do, or die,
either renounce thy conscience, or die: there is a sore temptation: but to whom
is this a grievous temptation? even to such a man as Pilate was, whose God was
Caesar, a man whose Heaven was in the honor of this world, a man who saw no
better life than this present life. And mark the craft of Satan and his
instruments: when they go to tempt, there is not a mediciner who can apply
their medicine better than they: ere they tempt, they will see the quality of
the person. So that if they find a man only wordly hearted without God,
without hope of life, as Pilate was, then they can well bring against him
tentations from worldly things, if thou will not do it, thou shall loose the
world, and thy self. But if thou do as I bid thee do, thou shall have the
world. By worldly things he will allure the natural man: and by the loss of
them, he will terrify him, and make him to yield. This is our lesson. Let
never any man again after Pilate trust to a natural conscience, except he
find the conscience propped up by faith, and with better things, and higher
things, than the things of this world: and if this conscience be backed with
hope of that life, it will be a wonder to see how a man will stand to the
end: No Crown, but to him who stands to the end. He who is so backed,
he will stand against the Devil, and he will say, I care not for this
life, when the Devil tempts him, if I loose this life, I shall get a better,
if I loose the king. I shall see a more glorious king, if I loose this world,
I shall find a better: happy is that man, who has his conscience backed
with faith in Jesus Christ, and has a sight of Heaven, and of God: It is
only this man and woman that can stand in temptations against the Devil, and
the world.

Now let us see the effect: Alas, this assault was sore to Pilate: we shall
see how by little and little he looses his conscience, and inclines to
pronounce ye sentence of damnation against the innocent: as soon as he hears
these words, he is astonished, and in all have he brings forth Jesus, and
comes out in sight of the whole people, and sits down in his tribunal: he
calls it The Pauement, in Hebrew GABBATHA: we call it an high seat or loft
where the Judge sat: The time is noted when he goes to that vvoefull
judgment, to wit, when as the Jews were in a preparation to the Passover:
the hour is noted. The sixth hour, which in our account is the twelft hour:
the Lord Jesus was condemned, and delivered to the men of war. I need not to
speak of the calculation of the Jews; they divide the day and the night into
twelve hours, six hours before noone, and six after noone. The time and the
place is so particularly noted, that we should give greater credit to the
History. But to come to ye matter: Ye see clearly, that this last temptation
had the greatest force, and astonished Pilate, and that conscience that had
stood so long, it began to sail him, and he begins to decline. Then Brethren,
note the force of such temptations, what force they have in respect of natural
men: It is impossible for a man, who has nothing but nature, without any
portion of grace in him, to abide the force of such a temptation: When he is
straited with these, either to loose conscience, or else to loose honor,
riches, life, etc. and so to die the death, it is impossible for him to keep a
natural conscience, and he will think that man to be a wise man, who will
redeame his life by the loss of his conscience, and will think him a fool,
who will lay down his life ere he want his conscience. Whereto should we insist
in this point? O fool! what is thy life when thou have lost sense and
conscience? the senses, whereby men properly live, are not so much these
outward senses, as tasting, touching, seeing, hearing, and smelling, as the
fealing of that inward conscience: So if once thou loose that inward feeling,
thou art no better than a beast, for they have all these outward senses. What
better art thou than dead? No, the carrion is not so dead as thou, when thou art
past feeling: but yet there is worse: well were it for a senseles man to live
in security, that that conscience should sleep: but mark that same conscience
yt before was a cou^seller, telling thee what was right and wrong, what thou
should do, and what thou should not do, (it is the faithfullest
counselor that a man can have, for it will counsel thee night and day to do
good, and leave evil) after once thou have hardened thine heart against
conscience, suppose thou lay it asleep, and pass thy time, yet it will not
sleep for ever: I forewarne all that have a sleeping conscience, that it shall
not sleep aye, but it shall come with the terriblest face that ever was, ere
all be done. The face of the Burrio was never so terrible as thy conscience,
when it comes again to tear thee, rent thee, and draw in pieces thy miserable
soul. Howbeit wicked me^ for a while will be busy, playing, riding, and
running, to get the tormenter at rest: yet I tell thee, that if the LORD have
not mercy upon thee, it shall vvaken so, that it shall never sleep again,
and never let thee rest. Of all the torments in the world, the worst is the
torment of the conscience, driving thee before the terrible tribunal, to cling
in thy soul, and dry it up with the fire of the wrath of God: No peace for
the wicked* sleep on as they will, they shall be wakened. Now, Brethren,
beside the force of this tentation, there is an inward malice of the heart
against the conscience: Certainly, a conscience in a natural man is good, and
it is a remnent of grace after the fall, but there is as evil a thing that
dwells in thine heart, since that fall, and that is a bitterness and malice
of thine heart, there is such a gall of bitterness, that if there were no more
to slay them, it is enough. It is not this outward tentation only, that
draws Pilate so far back, but also the malice of the heart: when the
conscience sounded in his ear, and said, Pilate do not this, the malice of
the heart carried him against conscience. I say again, albeit that there were
nothing without thee to move thee, there is too much within thee. These men who
run headlong unto blood, to wrack religion, and their country, think ye
not, but they have aduertisment in the mean time, by their conscience, and
they know that they do wrong: But, alas, such is the gall of bitterness, such
is the malice of their heart, against conscience that it caries them as mad men
with a fury, over the belly of their conscience. Now, Brethren, this is well
to be marked, When Pilate is set down in His tribunal, albeit he be carried
away by his conscience, will ye look, ye shall see a privy battle between
the spunke of the conscience he had, and the malice of the heart. When he sits
down, he has a doubt in his heart, that conscience draws him back, that he
dare not at the first pronounce the sentence, but he says, Behold your King.
He says scornefully of His Kingdom, yet he means in his heart, to have Him
loose: as if he had said: Is this the man? Alas, he is little likely to be a
King, a poor miserable silly poor man: this is his meaning, that he might
move them to let Him live: So, as I marked before: the force of the tentation
outward, and of the inward malice of the heart against the conscience. So I
cannot pass by this, but in these words, I must mark the striving of the
poor conscience, albeit it be once dumb, yet it will come again and say, O
miserable man, thou art gone too far in this evil action, repent, As the
natural conscience is a continual torture, so it will cleave unto him, and
will not leave him. Brethren, as the conscience is an admonisher, so it
cleaves fast, and no man will get it extinguished, albeit the loune will
strive to shake it off, yet it will stick to him, and whisper again to him:
but after it be once changed from an admonisher to a tormentor, when thou have
tempted it, if it stacke to thee before it shall stick an hundredth times
sorer, and shall fasten it self in thy miserable soul; so that if thou
would hang thy self to escape, yet the torment shall never die out. Well
shake on, and contemn her, she shall come, and be the terriblest sight that
ever was: and, if thou g^ttest no mercy, she shall be thine everlasting
tormentor in the Hell for ever and ever. Thus far for Pilates part.

Now we come to the Jews: They would have nothing but the death of Jesus,
and that a most ignominious death: they seeing Pilate yet striving, howbeit
they had his head down, (for now they had him at the downfall and sweruing
from conscience) they had him down with mightier force than before, and they
double their temptation: they speak no more modestly, but for speaking they
shout in his ear, that he cannot hear one thing or other, and double the
shoutings and cryings. Away with him, away with him, Crucify him, crucify
him. Take heed to this: if once the devil have gotten thy head down, that thou
sweruest, then he will come with a double force and he will cry and deaffen
thine head: and howbeit the conscience would cry to thee, he will make thee so
dashed, yt thou can not hear the conscience. Ye know (2. Chron. chap. 28)
concerning the idolaters who took their sons and burnt the^ quick in a valley
near Ierusa^e^. when the children wept, they caused timbrels to sound, that
they might not hear yt pitiful voice: So it is yt when the devil has gotten
thine head once down he shall make it so dumpish, and so dash thee with double
forces that he will make thy conscience to have no place: therefore, let every
man with all his maine fore resist, and let no te^tation sunder thee from thy
conscience: for once down, and aye down: when a man once stumbles on the head
of a bank, he will never stay til he go over the mountain: close once the
ear of the conscience, and the devil will deaffen thee, and shout so in thine
ear, that thou shall not hear again a word of thy conscience: there is none
of us* but we may find this by experience. Now come to Pilate: when they shout
and cry, he says, Shall I crucify your king? yet he gives not over, he ha^h
a doubt in the heart, and a strange fighting: as he would say, Call ye it a
well favored thing that I should crucify your king? this he spoke somewhat
scornefully, half in jest, and half in earnest. This is a voice of the
conscience, but of vveake and decaying conscience, he speaks doubtfully now by
an interrogation putting it in their option: now the conscience is drawing its
last breath, and after that speaks not a word. There are two voices in the
conscience: one voice that will say resolutely, I will not do evil, I will
not do against my conscience for all the world: that is a token of a strong
conscience: The other is, which will say doubtfully, Shall I do this or not?
that is a weak conscience, when a man will say, Shall I slay? shall I strike? I
will say, that man has done with his conscience. The voice of a strong
conscience will say, I will do this, if God will give me grace, and for the
world I will not do evil. Come to their part again, We have none other king
but Caesar. Alas! woe woe to them that renounce such a King: He, and Caesar
might both have been their king: Caesar was but His lieuetennant: and the
wickedest men that now most repine against Him, shall confess Him once to be
their king. Alas, Caesar is casten in the poor man's teeth, because he had none
other God: and all the care he had, was to pleasure Caesar. But mark the
hypocrisy of the Jews: they say, they have no king but Caesar: but loved the
Jews Caesar? No, there was nothing yt they would fainer have been quite of,
than of him, yet they pretend the authority of Caesar to slay the poor man's
conscience, and to crucify Jesus Christ. This is hypocrisy, they loved not,
ye king, for they who loves not God, love not the King, nor the Kirk. Look
the form of Hypocrites: Papistrie is but Hypocrisy: the Pope is an Hypocrite,
and all that rabble, haters of God, of Caesar, and of the king: they desire no
king, but the king of Spain, because he is their Burrio: and, if he would
refuse to be their Hangman, they would hate him as they do others. They
pretend the authority of Caesar to slay Christ, when they would have the king
slain, and they will pretend God and religion, to murder the king of France:
Fie upon these lownes, let never king credit them, woe shall be to him. What
do our men pretend? Religion. Our Earls pretend Religion, and Reformation.
What is this? a pretense to destroy Religion and the King: Shame and confusion
shall light on all, and first on them, if they get their intention. The Lord
give every man and woman grace to take heed, that they have no meddling with
such men, who under the pretense of Religion seek to spoil Religion, the
king, and the Country for Christ's sake: To whom with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, both now and evermore: AMEN.

THE TWELFTH LECTVRE. OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. Pilate saw, that he auailed nothing, but that more
tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just man: look you to it. Barabbas
loose unto them, and scourged JESUS, and delivered him to be crucified.

JOHN CHAP. XIX. JESUS, and led him away.


WE have heard (Brethren) that Pilate the Roman Governor has striuen very
long against the importunity and obstinacy of the Jews and High Priests, to
get the Lord Jesus, whom his conscience told him was innocent, set loose and
at liberty, but all in vain: for they are as earnest to have Him condemned,
as Pilate was to have Him absolved. At the last, when they could prevail
nothing at the hands of Pilate, by any delation, or poinct of indictment
against Jesus, whether treason against Caesar, or blasphemy against GOD, they
come more roundly to the matter, and come to the accusation of Pilate, and lay
treason against him, If thou let this man go (say they) thou art not Caesar's
friend: This is the greatest temptation that ever Pilate got, he had no God
but Caesar, he sought for no honor but in this world, he saw no life but this
life: therefore, hearing treason laid to his charge he begins to faint and
fail, and then quickly he enters into judgment, and comes out, and
brings out Jesus, and comes to his tribunal, in a place called the
Pauement, an open place, and there sits down to give judgment against the
innocent: yet he has a doubt in conscience: yea, when he is running to
pronounce sentence of damnation, he says, Behold your King, to move them yet
to suffer the innocent to escape, but he preuailes not: for once getting Him
under, Priests and people begin to shout in the ear of the miserable man,
so that he could not hear his conscience crying, Jesus is innocent yet for
all this, yet he has a doubt and stir in his conscience, and says, Shall I
crucify your King. They answer, We have no King but Caesar: Woe to them that
made such change, and they find it in experience. Now, brethren, John in his
Gospel, Chap. 19. verse 16: he subjoynes that Pilate delivered Jesus in the
hands of the men of war, to be crucified, and that they received Him, and led
Him to the place of execution, But Matthew, as ye heard read, reports of some
things that interueened and there are three things in special (as he
records) that passed before the leading of Jesus to the place of execution:
The first thing, Pilate by a ceremony of washing his hands, cleanses him of
the innocent blood: and as he disburthens himself, so he burthenes the Jews,
as guilty of the most innocent blood, that ever was, or shall be shed: And
they are more glad to take on the burden, than he is to lay it over on them:
for with their own tongue they bound the blood of the innocent on their own
back, saying, His blood be on us, and on our children: The second thing that
Matthew rehearses, is, after that he has exonered himself, as he thought (a
vain thought* he was never quite of it, nor never shall be) when he thinks he
is exonered, then he goes quickly to work, then he begins to serve the foul
and cruel appetite of the Jews, he lets loose Barabbas, a foul murderer:
Then as Luke, marks, he gives out the sentence of condemnation against the
innocent, then he takes Him, and scourges Him the second time, and lastly, he
puts Him in the hands of the Burrio, this is the second thing: yet there is
one third thing: when they get Him, they lead Him not incontin^nt out of the
Ports, to that filthy place of execution: but to satisfy the malitiousnesse
of their hearts, they led Him to the common Hall again, and there mis-vse the
Lord of glory. When all this was done, they lead Him out to the place of
execution.

We shall speak of these things according to the rehearsal of Matthew: As
for the first, Matthew says that, When Pilate saw that he could prevail
nothing at their hands, but that more tumult was made, he cries for water,
and washes his hands, and makes a protestation, I am innocent of the blood of
this Just man: And as he protests that he is clean, he turns it over upon
the Jews, saying, See ye to it: ye shall give an account for this days
work, it shall be the dearest work that ever ye wrought: They say, Let His
blood be on us, and on our children. First, we shall mark somewhat on the
part of Pilate, Secondly, on the part of the High Priests, and the rest of the
Jews. The History is very plain. This miserable man Pilate has fought on a
reasonable space: yea, a long time for the Lord Jesus Christ, against the
obstinacy of the Jews, at the last, when he is charged as guilty of treason,
when he sees, he cannot prevail, and finds him so straited with so great
incommodities, he is compelled to yield, and he thinks that this necessity
should excuse him for his part well eneugh. Brethren, this is the lesson: Men
commonly, and especially, such as Pilate was: men without God, natural men,
that see not another life, that see not another world, they will strive, and
they will strive wonderfully through the instinct of nature, to keep a good
conscience: but at the last if they be importunately straited with great
incommoditie, and fear of dangers, they will yield and give over. Alas,
nature, and all the benefits thereof is but a weak ground, at the last they
will yield: and that good conscience that they contended to keep they bid
farewell, and at the last they will yield to a mischief: and when they have
done, they will think that necessity, wherewith they were straited: that
importunity of men that compelled them, will excuse them for their doing
sufficiently: they will think, that albeit they put to their hand, to do the
most wicked action in the world, that that necessity will disburthen them:
This is the judgment of natural men: But this is as true: What ever he or
she be that perseueres not to the end, shall never get the crown. Take the
sentence: Albeit thou have begun well, if thou go^st not on to the end, thou
shall nor get the crown of glory, and the Lord shall never account of thy
former well doing, more than if thou had never done a good action. Indeed, I
grant, that necessity which is without the consent and forces and compelles men
against their wills: As for example: When our bodies moved with external force
and violence, without consent, or voluntary moving of the members thereof
hurts another: I say, that necessity excuses a man, but as for that
necessity, which for fear of inconveniences and great dangers to follow,
makes a man consent to an evil action, it excuses not. Some will say, I was
sore straitted, and I behooued to do, or die, I strove so long as I might: and
I saw I could not escape, if I had not done it: But I say, that kind of
necessity, and com^ulsion, that draws on an evil action upon thy conscience,
shall neu^r excuse thee albeit all the King^ of ye world should threaten thee,
and terrify thee with the fear of torture, and if thou once consentest, all
that shall never excuse thee: No, if we once consent to an evil action, which
may hurt the conscience, we should rather suffer to be beheaded or hanged, and
die ten thousand deaths. The Lord of life, can and will give thee life, if
thou die in his fear: but miserable shall that life be, that thou shall
live, when thou have done against the Lord, and a good conscience. Pilate
calls for water and washes his hands: then mark what he says, I am
innocent of the blood of this just man: See ye to it. Well, is this out of his
own mouth: both the speaking and doing of Pilate testifies, that Jesus was
innocent: he confesses, that he was going to condemn an innocent man: so I
see, that the conscience of the innocence of Christ, never leaves Pilate: I
doubt not, but he would gladly have wanted it. It is a marvel, that during
all the time of the suffering of Jesus Christ, the Lord will have the
innocence of His dear Son to appear in the beginning, in the mids, and in
the ending thereof. All the time of His accusation, Pilate preaches His
innocence, when it comes to condemnation, the Judge both by word and deed
testifies that He was innocent: it is not a common person, that protestes this
but the Judge himself: then again, look to the end of this work, when Jesus
is lifted on the cross, then the Father from the heaven testifies, that He was
innocent, then the Centurion with the burrio and the men of war, seeing the
wonders, are compelled to say, this is the Son of God, and the people seeing
this, go home thumping on their breasts, and say, alas: and so they had cause:
so the innocence of Jesus Christ is declared all this whole time out of the
mouth of the Judge himself, and of many others. What means all this? No doubt
but ye Father herein had respect to ye honor of His Son, for indeed the most
honorable death, is to die as an innocent, and if thou would die
honorably, die not as a guilty person, but die innocently: And this was to
aggreadge Pilates damnation, and the damnation of the Jews: But brethren,
there is another cause that pertaines more to us, and serves more to our
comfort, even, that we should have faith in this Mediator the Lord Jesus: for
except He had died as an innocent, I would never lay my sin on Him: the thing
that makes me to believe, that He has made satisfaction, is because He
suffered innocently, and had no sin in Himself, Heb. 7.26. and as Peter
says, He bare our sinnnes, because I am persuaded, He bare my sins upon
Him, I believe in Him: so this redounds to the comfort of the members of the
Church of God. Yet I see more here, Pilate he has not only the conscience of
the innocence of Jesus, but this same very conscience, it makes him to turn
to the Jews, and to summond them before that terrible tribunal. See ye to
it, says he, I tell you, ye will give an account of this days work: so this
is a citation of the Jews before that terrible tribunal, and they have found
it, and shall find it: No, Brethren, take heed, thou shall never want
summonding: let Kings, and them who are in authority, cease to summound thee,
let thine own conscience never speak a word to thee, nor charge thee, the
Lord shall not let thee be without a citation: if thy conscience will not
waken thee, He will waken the conscience of a Turk or a Pagane, and he shall
charge thee to appear before that terrible Tribunal. Thou think when thou
sleep, and thy conscience accuses thee not, that all is well, no, the Lord
shall raise up the conscience of a Pagane to summound thee, and I say to thee,
albeit thou think thou art at rest, when thy conscience is sleeping and wilt
spend thy time, thou will eat and drink be merry and take thy pastime, yet it
is one of the most heauiest judgments yt ever God laid on any: and then, when
He has raised the conscience of another man to warn thee, it is a sore
warning that if thou sleep on, and repent not* thou shall be wakened, that
thou shall not get leisure to say, God be merciful to me. This world knows
not what it is doing. Yet mark further, Notwithstanding all this conscience of
ye innocence of Jesus: Alas, I s^e not this, that his own conscience accuses
him, or says to him, Woe to thee, Pilate, thou art going an evil way, thou will make thy self guilty of that innocent blood, that will burden thee
everlastingly: his conscience is busier to accuse the Jews as himself: he
should not be so busy to accuse the Jews, as himself: for if his
conscience had accused himself sharply, had he ever said, Thus I am clean of
the blood of this just and innocent one? By the contrary, it had urged out
another confession and sentence, There is nothing but damnation for me, for the
co^demning of the innocent. What should have been the cause of this? He was
bu^ a silly natural man, and his conscience was wrong informed concerning that
thing: and he thought himself well enough, seeing he had stri^e^ so long, and
yielded through necessity. All this sluggishnes of his conscience came of a
wrong information, he knew no better. The more thou know, the better
informed conscience thou have. Strive ay to get knowledge. Alas, that blindness
that man lies in by nature, that makes thee think, that sin is no sin: that is
deceit. Strive ay to get a clear mind, and a well informed conscience, whereof
thou should excuse thee, and whereof to accuse thee. Get this out of the word
of God, which is the only rule of our life and of all our actions, from that
light that comes from Heaven, for the light of nature will beguile thee, and it
will say, that thou art blessed, when the malediction of God is upon thee, and
it will say, Thou do well, when thou do evil: Therefore, get that light
that comes from Heaven to make thee to see. This for Pilates part. Now let us
come to the part of the Jews: Their part is far worse. This is a great
deformity, when these who have the Oracles of God, are warned by Turks and
Paganes: This is to turn the vp-side of the world down. Look how ready
Pilate is to lay off the burden from himself upon the Jews; as ready are
they to lay it both upon their own backs, and upon their posterity. If this
exoneration of himself when he disburthens himself of the blood of Jesus,
testifies, that he had a conscience of His blood that was innocent: It must
follow, if the Jews were ready to take on this burden, then they had no
sight of His innocence, neither were they touched therewith in conscience:
and therefore, like blinded bodies, seeing nothing, with an imprecation, they
translate the burden from Pilate, and lay it upon themselves. Ignorance is
ever temerarious: the blinder the body is, the more rashly will it endanger
it self. A blind body without knowledge, will run it self speedily and
without remorse into Hell, and will take on such a burden that it shall never
be able to lay it off again. What means all this running so speedily in
wicked courses, but that men want conscience, and their own corruption has
blindfolded them: Is there any man that has light, that will run on to their
death, to dash themselves on the sword to devour them? It is a miserable
thing to want the light of the soul: so the Jews saw not with whom they had
to do they had no conscience, as Pilate had, and therefore being through
malice and appetite of revenge, incensed against the Lord Jesus: blindfolded,
they regard not what imprecations they utter, for they saw not Hell: or else if
these Jews had a light of conscience, they did so rashly against Jesus with
knowledge, which is most likely: the^ it follows, that they were marvelous
malicious: as ignorance is hardy, so is malitiousnesse more hardy, albeit
such a man should see, yet against the light, his malice will make him to run
over the belly of his conscience. Ye know the voices of profane men, Ere I
were not revenged of him, I had rather be in Hell: this comes of
malitiousnesse, to get the soul spirit within him satisfied: but if thou felt
one twitch of Hell, thou would recant these words: for it would cause thee
shoute, and squeele hiddeously: and I incline to this judgment, that this
wicked action is more to be ascribed to malice than ignorance: the Jews and
the High Priests had the word of God, and the Prophets, whereby they might
have known the Messiah. When I read of the Prophets that speak of induration
in the time of Jesus Christ, I say, it has come of an hardness and induration
of heart: And when I see the words of the Apostles, that say, O stiff necked
people, I think that they put their own fingers in their eyes, that they
should not see. The Lord save us from malitiousnesse, and namely from such
malitiousnesse as is not without knowledge: when a man sees, and will pull out
his eyes. Compare the Jews with Pilate: now Pilate sins, he k^lled
himself in the end, and the Lord made his own hands to be his burrio* No
doubt, he sinned, who can excuse him? he sinned maliciously he had a
conscience, and goes against it maliciously. But Brethren, to speak the
truth, it was not so much malice that pushed him forward, as great infirmity
and fear for first, he fears to be accused of treason against Caesar: it was
no marvel to such a man to fear, who had no God, but Caesar: ^hen he saw
appearance of great tumult to rise amongst the Jews. What necessity was laid
on them to have the blood of the innocent So I see nothing in them but malice,
if it were but in this respect, that the sin of the Jews weighs down the
sin of Pilate, and their damnation is a thousand times greater. What had this
man? He had nothing but nature: The contrauension of the light of nature will
never make up the sin against the Holy Ghost, which gets no mercy: but come
to them. They had the light of nature, and the light that comes from Heaven:
they had the word of GOD amongst them, they contraueened an heavenly light
that came down from Heaven, and was wrought into their hearts by the Spirit.
Steven says in the 7. Chapter, and 51. verse of the Acts of the Apostles, Ye
have always resisted the Holy Ghost, as did your fathers, so do you, that is
not a natural light but a light that came from above. There were some of these
men who sinned maliciously against the Holy Spirit. What marvel was it then,
that they got no grace to repent: for of all sins the sin against the Holy
Spirit, is the most dangerous: they that commit this sin, have no grace to
repent, and therefore no mercy to them, the Lord strikes their souls with
impenitencie: so that soul is everlastingly hardened: and so being stricken
with impenitencie they got never grace to say, God be merciful to me. Seeing
then their sin against Christ, was so great, seeing it was not so much of
ignorance, as of malice: it was not only against the light of nature, but also
against the illumination of the Holy Spirit: what marvel was it, that such a
terrible Judgment ouertooke them, as never lighted on any nation. The Jews
found this innocent blood in experience laid to their charge. Joseph that saw
all these things with his eyes, writes, what heavy vengeance and judgment
fell upon Jerusalem and the Jews: for he testifies, that there was slain at
the siege of Jerusalem eleven hundredth thousand, beside ninety thousand that
were taken captives: thereafter the town was lamentably destroyed and sacked.
So the blood of the innocent never left them: and these yt remain, yet feel
the judgment of the blood of the innocent: for according as they desired yt
His blood should be upon them and their posterity: so the wrath of God came
upon them to the uttermost 1 Thessalonians: 2.16. It is a wonder that a Jew should be
safe, and if ye hear of a Jew to be converted, think it to be a great mercy.
Now to apply this shortly to us, if it were but this terrible example of
vengeance which followed the Jews, it should terrify to the end of the world,
all souls to take on the blood of the innocent, take on one, and take on all:
if thou take on the blood of one servant of God, thou shall take on all the
innocent blood from Abel, to that man whom thou have slain. Fie upon foul
butchers who are more meet to be butchers dogs, than men. What care they to
wash their hands in innocent blood. But I say to thee, if ever thou gettest
grace it is a wonder: fie upon the butchers of Scotland: No, if the Lord would
waken thy conscience to torment thee, and present to thee the sight of Him of
whose blood thou have shed, it would be so terrible, that it would make thee
to curse the time that ever thou did it, and one day fearfully without comfort
it will torment thee: when will these bloody men leave off ye sheading of
innocent blood, in this bloody and barbarous nation: o^ all nations it is the
most barbarous and bloody. Above all things dip not thine hands in the blood
of Jesus Christ. Thou who sheadest innocent blood, and is a persecuter of the
servants of Jesus Christ, and who resistest the truth, thou will say, If thou
had been in Christ's days, thou would not have consented to His death, but
thou who say so, if thou had fallen in these days, thou had maliciously
been partaker of the death of Christ, and had put hands in Him, thou want
nothing but time: I will tell you, who is it that sheds the blood of Jesus
Christ, and takes His blood on them, what ever he or she be that will resist
this known truth of Jesus Christ, and persecute the professors thereof, I
affirm, they are as guilty of the blood of Christ, as the Jews and the High
Priests were, and that same blood shall be laid to their charge in the great
day of the Lord* Read ye not in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 6. and 10.
of them who have repined, and have begun to cast off that heavenly power, and
so go like dogs to their vomit, and spues out the light they had received,
they are as guilty of the blood of Christ, as Pilate, and trampe the blood of
the Covenant under their feet. Woe to them that resist the Gospel, woe to the
apostate Lords of this Land, for thus resisting the light: there is no light
but this, to lead thee to heaven. I denounce woe to them if they continue, the
treasure of wrath, and woe shall be heaped on them, they shall be as guilty
as Judas, or Pilate, or the Jews: hasty and sudden shall be their judgment,
except the Lord prevent them with repentance, they and their posterity shall
be cursed, and underly a terrible vengeance: Woe to their friends, who will
join with them: Separate thee from them, as thou would see salvation: Away
out of Babylon. Ye would think this a light word, Let his blood be upon our
head: As they wish the blood of the innocent to light on them, so it never
leaves them, nor shall never leave so many of them as repented not, the blood
of the innocent shall lie upon their backs everlastingly. This should learn
us to take good heed to our words: it was but a word to cast off the God of
glory, and to take on a Tyrant: They got Caesar to be their King, and he
spoiled them: Take good heed to thy words, for thou who use against thy
self imprecations and cursings, and wilt say, God plague me, Gods vengeance
light upon me, I give my soul to the Devil, if this or that be not. Well,
have thou given thy soul to the Devil, he shall get it: have thou taken a
curse upon thy self, thou shall be cursed: it is a wonder that the earth
should not open to swallowe such men. The Lord makes these things to come to
pass: now and then He makes the cursed creature that uses such speeches to
be a terrible example. And if thou be a profane person, who wilt say, I give
my soul to the Devil, I say, and if the Devil get thee not then, and thou
be not thrust into Hell, but gettest repentance, it is a wonder. Such is the
judgment of God, that often times He will let no reuersion be, except that
earnestly thou seek for grace and mercy, the Lord, I say, shall make that
word which thou sakest to have no reuersion, will thou, or will thou not: but
like as thy foul mouth spoke it, so thou shall be given to the Devil: for
there is nothing more effectual to a man's destruction, than the words which
proceed out of his own mouth.

Well, Pilate is lying in security, and he thinks himself well enough: when
he has once disburthened himself, he sits down, and gives out sentence, and
absolues a seditious vagabonde, He lets Barabbas loose unto them. Woe to
them, who will absolve a seditious lowne, and a murderer. The next thing is
more woeful, he begins to give out the sentence against the innocent, he comes
on and strikes Him, he scourges Him: this is the second time, and when he
has done, he gives Him into the hands of the Jews, to satisfy their
wicked appetite. As long as thou have a wakened conscience, and so long as it
tells thee, This is good, and this is evil, thou will not go so boldly and
forwardly in evil. (Well is that body who has a wakened conscience, suppose
it terrify thee, and hold thee waking) But after it be once lulled in a
sleep and security, then thou runnest on, as the arrowe does out of the bow,
to a mischife: there is nothing to hold thee, but thou runnest swiftly to
mischief. Ephesians. 4.19. After they once lost feeling, they ran out to all
wantonness, commiting all uncleanness, with griedinesse. There was never any
creature so griedy of any thing in the world, as men who live without
conscience will be of filthiness. As thou would keep thy self, so keep
feeling in thy conscience, and count it more precious than all things in the
world. Nothing can guarde thy soul from Satan, but the approbation of a
feeling conscience. Thou will come out with thy Pearls, and with decked
clothing: but if thou want this conscience, thou art a preye to the Devil. Fie
on these men, who lie in such a senselessness, shame and confusion shall light
upon them. Was there ever such a dead and senseless Generation as this? It is
a token that Hell is ouer-taking them, seeing they lie all in such a senseless
security. Mark notes a word here that would be considered, Chap. 15. verse.
15. Pilate did this, to gratify an evil people: he would not displease the
Jews. This is the common fashion of Princes, to seek to be populare, to seek
the favor of the people. Look that a Prince seek not by evil means the
favor of the people: for he will hang an innocent man, and let a murderer go
free, for the favor of the people: thou buyest it too dear, with the loss of
the favor of God. Woe be unto the man, though he were a King, that
mischieuously falls abacke from the Truth, and so looses the favor of God,
for the favor of Idolaters. But will ye come on yet? Got Pilate the favor of
the people? No: they persecuted him to the death, they delated him to the
Emperor, and he was banished: and for fear of greater shame, he put hands
in himself, and slew himself. Yea, if he were all the kings in the world, who
seeks to gratify a wicked people in an evil cause, namely, in Idolatry, and
if the LORD have not mercy on him, that same people shall be his destruction.
The Lord grant Kings and Princes to see that howbeit they have the favor of
the people by unlawful means, and want the favor of God, that all the favor
of the people that they can have, without Gods favor is nothing: that they may
seek Gods favor above all things. And the Lord be merciful to our King for
Christ's sake: To whom be all Honor and Glory, foreuermore.

AMEN.
THE XIII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII. JESUS into the common hall, and gathered about him the
whole band. Simon: him they compelled to bear his Cross.

MARC. CHAP. XV.

Simon of Cyrene (who came out of the country, and was father of Alexander and
Rufus) to bear his Cross.

LVKE XXIII. Pilate gave sentence, that it should be as they required. JESUS to
do with him what they would. Simon of Cyrene, coming out of the field, and
on him they laid the cross, to bear it after JESUS. JESUS turned back: unto
them, and said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your children.


WE have heard (Brethren) these days past, the whole accusation of Christ
before the Judge, and the Roman Governor Pilate. Last, we came to that
woeful sentence of damnation, pronounced against this innocent. Now Jesus being
condemned to die, and to die the ignominious death of ye Cross; it rests, that
we should come to His suffering on the Cross; but before we come to it, we
have to speak of these things, namely, which we have read unto you, partly
out of MATTHEW, and partly out of LVKE: Then first we have to speak of the
delivering of Jesus into the hands of men of war, to be crucified at the
pleasure of the Jews; and how they received Him: and then we shall see
what they do with Him, being received: they bring Him back again being
received, to the common Hall, to a secret part thereof, and misuses Him at
their pleasure: therefore, we shall come to the leading of Him out: with the
Cross, out of the ports of Jerusalem, to that vile place where He should
be crucified. We shall speak of the manner of His going out; how he goes
out to suffer the death of the Cross: and last, of two incidentes that fell in
by the way, as they were leading Him out: The one how He met with a man,
named SIMON of CYRENE, whom they compelled to help Him to bear His Cross:
Another, the multitude that followed Him: and as all Nations resorted to
HIERVSALEM at the Passover, they followed Him, and women followed Him
weeping, He turns, and answers them, as ye will hear.

It is said then, that Pilate delivered JESUS, when He was condemned, to
the Souldioures to be crucified: and it is said of them, that as he delivered
the innocent unto them, so they took Him to the common Hall: they are far
readier to receive Him, and to crucify Him, than He was to deliver Him. The
lesson, Brethren, is very easy, and many experiences teaches it daily: There
was never yet a wicked Judge in the world, so ready to deliver the innocent to
suffer, or to desire an evil action to be done, as he will find wicked
executioners under him, to put his wicked sentence in execution: the good
Judges could never find good officers under them so readily to execute an
evil action as the wicked Judges find for an evil action.

Saul, when he had Achimeleck, and the Priests of the LORD to slay, he found
Doeg the Edomite the knave ready, and he slew fourscore five Priests of the
LORD, 1: Sam. 22.18. But David the good King, when he had to do with Ioab,
who had committed many foul murders, could not put in excution his will,
therefore he laments, and says: I am this day weak, and newly anointed
King: and these men, the sons of Seruia are too strong for me, me, 2. Sam.
3.38, 39. This is often seen of good men: that there are very few good
counselors in the world, to help a good King in a good action: and where ye
shall find one good, ye shall find four evil: Evil men and wicked
counselors are very rise: a wicked King shall not want, but shall get more
than he desires: the devil has many servants in the world, but GOD has
few: Our own Country may speak of the experience of this.

But to go forward: When he has delivered the innocent Jesus to the
soldiers, and they received Him: Take they Him to the place of execution? No,
but whilst all was in preparation, whilst the place, and the Cross, was in
preparation, and whilst all things were making ready, in the mean time the
soldiers, with the malicious Jews could never get their heart satisfied with
CHRIST, They bring Him to the common Hall, to the Session house, to a secret
part of it, and uses Him more cruelly, than they did before: and there They
being gathered, like as many torturers, there is not one of them, but they
abuse Him: First, They put a crown of thorns upon His head: This is the
second time: Next they take off His own clothes, and clothes Him with
Purple, and they put a reed in His hand, and they kneel before Him, and
mockes the King of Glory, saying, Hail King of the Jews: Then they take the
reed, and strikes Him with it, and in despite spits on His face: When they
have done this, they take off that Royal raiment, and lead Him out, to
crucify Him. Ye would wonder at this, for a man, though he were never so
wicked, a thief and a murderer. yet after he be once condemned, men will
give him peace till he die, and men will strive to comfort him before he die
against the terroures of death, that he may die in peace: yea, his very
enemies will think they have gotten enough, when they have gotten him
condemned, and they desire no more: But behold the enemies of our LORD and
SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST* they can never get their hearts satisfied upon Him,
they cannot suffer Him to rest or breathe, their insatiable wrath cannot be
satiated. The malice of men against wickedness will end, but the malice of
men against an Innocent, will never end, and namely against him who suffers
for CHRIST'S sake: there is no measure of their cruelty, there is nothing that
can satiate their bloody hearts: for the children of darkness do deadly
hate the children of light: the suffering of the Martyrs has ever proved
this, that the Antichrist could never be satisfied in drinking of their
blood. The persecuters of the Truth will never be satiate, there is no
satietie of the malice of the haert of ye child of darkness against the child
of light. If thou had slain a man's father, it may be he would have forgiven
thee: but and if thou be the child of GOD, and if he be the child of
darkness, he will never be satiate, till he get thine heart blood. The
JEWS and the Soldiers could never be satiate, till they had gotten the
heart blood of the Innocent.

But Brethren, we must look up higher: for it was not so much with these Jews
and Soldiers that JESUS has to do, as with an angry GOD* and that because
He bare the burden of our sins: these torturers were but instruments of
that terrible wrath of the Father upon the Son: It was not so much their
wrath, as the wrath of the Father that pursued Him so ardently. After He was
once delivered into the hands of these Hangme^, wrath begins so to be powered
forth on Him from Heaven, that He got no rest till He was crucified and dead
on the cross. It is a terrible thing for a sinner, yea, if he were a king,
who is not in Jesus, and partaker of His suffering, to fall into the hands of
an angry God and a consuming fire: if thou be out of Christ, thou shall feel
it the terriblest sight that ever was, howbeit wanton men and women make their
pastime to anger that great Judge, going to murder, defiling their bodies and
souls by harlotrie: it may be for a time, that they get rest: but after that
once that righteous Judge put hands in thee, I promise thee, that thou shall
never get rest: The very reprobate when they shall see that there is none end
of wrath, shall cry: O Lord, shall never this wrath have an end: if thou go
to Hell, thou shall find none end of wrath. Now blessed is that sinner that
gets grace to have recourse to Jesus Christ, and to lurk under His suffering.
When they have used Him so unworthily within the common Hall, and when all is
made ready: Then they lead out Jesus, and caries Him out of the Ports of
Jerusalem, to an ignominious death: and as they lead Him out: so Jesus Christ
goes out willingly to suffer, at the good pleasure of His Father, knowing that
now His hour was come. God forbid, but that we should think that Jesus
Christ suffered willingly: No, Brethren, in this example of Jesus Christ the
innocent: and that His willing going to death, we see, that it is the innocent
who go to death willingly, and namely, they who are innocent in the blood of
Jesus Christ, that have their conscience sprinkled with the blood of the
immaculate Lamb: As for men, who are not cled with this innocence, alas for
them, It is not possible, that these can have consolation, or can with
gladness offer up their lives: it may be, that some will pretend
willingness, but that is but a show: Again, it may be, that there be some
senseless bodies, that knows not how terrible death is, and what evil is in
it. O! death is terrible for either Heaven or Hell follows on the tail
thereof: and will thou count little of that port, by the which thou passest from
this life to eternity. So, some may be senseless, as a Kow goes to the
shambles: and some may have a false conscience: but if thou have not an
assurance, that thou art washed with the blood of Jesus Christ, Woe shall come
to thee, wrath shall light on thee. There is no consolation in death to any,
but to these who die in the innocencencie of Jesus Christ. I mark the manner
how He goes out: He goes out, bearing His own Cross: or rather drew it after
Him: this was after the manner of the Romans, that the man whom they
condemned to die this death, they commanded to bear His Cross, and therefore
they were called Furciferi, gallows bearers: now they practice this on the
innocent Jesus.

Now to come to it, that falls out whilst He is bearing His Cross. As they
are going out, They meet a man by the way whose name was Simon, the father of
Alexander and Rufus, a man in a town of Africa, and the town was called
Cyrene, a laborious man, retu^ning from the Country, to Jerusalem, they meet
the poor man, and compelles the man to take up the one end of the Cross
Jesus goes before, and he goes behind: they would not have Jesus relieved: No,
they pitied Him not, but they would have Him formest in the burden. Think
not, Brethren, that this re^ieuing was of any compassion they had to Jesus: No,
they had no pity upon Him: but it came to p^sse, because Christ Jesus was
faint, weak, and we^ried under the burden: and no wonder, He was a man: He
took on our nature, and all the infirmities thereof, that we might be made
strong. After that once the Lord had fallen in their hands, He got no rest,
He got no sleep that night, He fasted, and His soul was vexed: and then all
that night, and all that day following, from the morning to the noone-tide, he
got no rest, but was twice scourged, and buffeted: As for the soldiers, they
thought themselves too gay: As for the Jews they thought themselves too holy,
and in end He was made a curse (but for our cause) And therefore meeting with
this Gentile, Simon, they compelled him to help Him. This wants not a
Mystery: This Simon was a figure of the Gentiles, and this calling, albeit of
compulsion, signifies our calling, being Gentiles, to take up our cross, and
follow Jesus out of the ports of Jerusalem. And as the Apostle to the
Hebrews Chap, 13. verse 13. says, Go forth of the Ca^^^e bearing His
reproach: for here we have no continuing city: but we seek for one to come.
As for the Jews, they would neither touch Christ, nor His Cross with their
finger, because they judged Him accursed. Indeed, I grant, GOD made Him
accursed, but He was made a curse, that we should be the blessing of GOD,
through Him: As Paul says to the Galathians, Chap. 3. verse 13. Would thou
know thy felicity in this world, and in the world to come: it stands in
joining with that man that was accursed, and whosoever thou be, yt shall not
join with this man who is accursed, I give thee this doom, Cursed shall thou
be everlastingly, vengeance and malediction shall lie on thine head
everlastingly. We are Gentiles, not Jews: let us the^ with this Simon of
Cyrene take up ye Cross of Christ, and follow Him out of the ports of
Jerusalem, to bear His shame, yt we may be partakers of His glory: if thou be
not partaker of His ignominy and shame, I denounce to thee, thou shall not be
partaker of His glory: thou who wast not humbled with Christ, thou shall never
be exalted with Him: this for the first incident. There is another thing that
falls out, whereof we read in the 23 Chapter Luke, as He goes to the place of
execution, it is said, that the multitude followed Him: This multitude was not
only of the Jews, but also of all Nations who resorted to Jerusalem, at the
time of the Passover. Now this multitude followed to see what should become
of Him, as men who are inclined to see wonders. S^e on what mind thou
followest a man to death, these spectacles are spectacles of thy misery: they
follow to see the fashion: but surely this following of Christ, and this going
of Christ to His suffering with such a multitude, learneth us a lesson: it
pleased the Father, that Jesus Christ should suffer an open shame: He would not
have Him stolen down, or secretly executed in the night: He would have Him
accused publikly before the great Judge, who represented Cesars person: Then as
He went out, He would have all the world to see Him: and then He would have
Him mounted up, and nailed upon the Cross in the face of the world: in a
word, the Father would have the Son who became surety for us, to die; and
not only to die, but also to be pined: and not only pined, but also to be
pined shamefully. There is not a sin in the world, (let wanton men take
their pastime in sin, albeit it were done never so secretly, go to thy
chamber and do it, do it in the night, go to holes and most secret places
and commit wickedness) but the end thereof, how secret so ever it was, shall
be with open shame: I denounce against secret sins against God, thy secret
sins shall bring an open shame to thee, if thou have not recourse to the
shame of Jesus: either of necessity thou must suffer in thy person eternally,
and drink out the full cup of the wrath of God: or else, thou must have
recourse to the shame of Jesus Christ: and this is our comfort, that we have:
Will thou first of all repent thee (an impenitent man will never get the cloak
of Christ's righteousness to cover his shame) and turn and believe in Jesus
Christ: Will thou have recourse to Him, and loure under His Passion: I promise
thee, that thou shall never come to an open shame: it my be that men come to
an open shame for sin in this world, but in the world to come, I promise
thee, thou shall not suffer any shame, in that day thy sins shall not come
to the light, neither man nor Angel shall see them. But if thou have not
recourse to Jesus, thou shall be roo^ed out like a thief out of a hoale,
before millions of millions of Angels, and before all the world, and the
secrets of thine heart shall be reueiled, and heaps of the wrath of God,
shall be powered on thy miserable head: Hell stands not only in pain, but in
shame and confusion: thou shall go down to Hell with a fearful shoute, from
the sight of this world, at that judgment.

Now to come to these women: amongst the rest there follows Him certain women
out of Jerusalem: there is a great difference between them and the multitude:
women often times shames men. The soldiers pities Him not, their pleasure is in
His misery: we see not here, that any of the multitude mournes, but it is
said, that the women of Jerusalem that followed Him, wept for Him. This was
done of the Father, to testify His innocence, the Father at all times, will
have the innocence of His Son witnessed: during the time of His accusation,
the Judge preached His innocence: and as he was giving out the sentence against
Him: he both by deed, in washing of his hands, and word, testifies His
innocence: And now whilst He goes out, He makes these women to bewail Him.
No question all this was done by the Lords providence, Jesus the innocent He
was lamented for. Will thou be innocent like to Him, thou shall not want
bewailing: ye see this, if he be a thief, and he be penitent, and have
recourse to Jesus, and seek to be innocent with that innocence of Jesus
Christ, men will pity him: but especially in that great day, if thou
appearest innocent in the innocence of Jesus Christ, thou shall get such
pitying of God, and of all the Angels, that thou shall never die, but shall be
received to glory: and if thou appearest before Him without this innocence,
thou shall not be bewailed: none shall pity thee, neither God, nor Angel, but
thou shall go to destruction: and when thou art going to Hell, thy father nor
thy mother shall not weep nor lament for it, but shall rejoice and approve
Gods judgment. Ye see then, how good a thing it is to be innocent in the
innocence of Jesus Christ, albeit we be not innocent, but guilty in
ourselves. When Christ hears the lamentation and mourning of the women, He
looks over His shoulder, And beholding them, He stands, and speaks,
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for your selves, and for your
children: and He gives the reason wherefore they should weep so, because of
that fearce and terrible judgment which should ouer-take Jerusalem, and all
for this innocent blood, and for the refusal of that innocent One: For
behold, the days will come (says He) when men will say, Blessed are the
barren, and the wombes that never bare, and the pappes that never gave suck.
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us: and to the hills,
Cover us. And under the destruction of Jerusalem, He understands and
adumbrates that terrible judgment and wrath in the latter day, and that great
destruction that remains for the wicked: and He confirms this judgeme^t which
He threatens, by an argument taken from the greatest to the smallest, If they
do so to a griene tree, what shall they do to a withered? what shall they do
to you? By the green tree He means Himself, who in Himself was fresh,
sappie, green, and fruitful, albeit for us He was like a dry tree, because
He was guilty for us. And by the dry tree He means us, who are unfruitful
in our selves, and meet for nothing, but for confusion, to be casten into the
fire. Mark here shortly of this: It is the sense of misery that makes any
body to weep: No doubt when one weeps sore, the heart has a sense of
misery: and this sense is either of a man's own misery, or for a sympathy of
the misery of another. They who have a sense of the misery of others, they
will mourn. I see few of this sort in these days. There are few now that
will weep for the misery of another. All sympathy is out of the world, and
the pleasure of men is in the pleasure of others. Indeed I think that Jesus
condemned not this compassion. Certainly, compassion upon the estate of
another is good. Away with a pitiless heart, for it has not felt the mercy
of God, and bowels of His compassion. But this is Christ's will, that the
ground of their lame^tation should not be so much His suffering for them as the
sense of their own misery and sin, which brought Him to such a misery. The
Lord would have the women considering the greatness of their own misery,
which made Christ for their cause to be so miserable: that should have been
chiefelie the cause of their mourning: that should have been the cause of
their dolor: for as John says out of Zachary, They shall see Him whom they
pierced. Our sins have pierced Him. The godly in the latter day, when they
shall see Him, they shall mourn. It was not so much the Soldiers that
pierced Him, as thy sins. Have not therefore thine eye so much on Pilate,
Herod, or the Jews, or on the men of war, or Hangman, as on thy self, and
on thine own sins: for it was thy sins that pierced Him through: and in
the latter day, when the godly shall see Him, whom they have pierced, they
shall weep. Turn thine eyes on thy self, and let the ground of thy weeping
be for thine own sin, that pierced the Innocent.

There is another thing here worthy to be considered: I see it is a good
thing to be in heaviness: and ye see that the LORD speaks nothing to the
men of war, nor to any others in the way, but only to the poor women who
were weeping: He comfortes them, and instructes them, He leads them to the
ground of their weeping, to the end that they should repent, and have
recourse unto Him. The best estate of men and women, is to be sad in heart,
and mourning, either for their own misery, or the misery of others: for the
Lord says, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. And,
GOD dwelles in a coutrite heart, ESAIAS. CHAP. 66. VERSE. 2. PSALM. 51. VERSE. 19.
Thou who laughest, thou need no comfort. Thou who art mourning for thy
sins, and the sins of the world, the Lord He shall speak to thee, and
give thee consolation with His own mouth. Nothing becomes a Christian
better, than sadness, and to have his sins before his eyes, and to be sad
both at noone and at Even: for all this joye that a true Christian has, is
sadness. Away with wantonness, mocking, and jesting, there is no true joye
there: and the Lord uses not to comfort such, nor speak to such, for they
need it not. I fore-warne thee, that thou shall never get the taste of that
joye, but in tears: and then when the heart is broken, and casten down, then
the LORD is mighty to raise thee up, and to comfort thee. The Lord therefore
give us grace, when we look to the death and passion of CHRIST, that we may
get a sense of our own misery: and that we may be in sadness, and
mourn, that our sins pierced the sides of the innocent, who was the GOD of
Glory: and that we may have recourse to this suffering, and get grace in
our LORD: To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor,
Praise, and Glory, for ever and ever: AMEN.

THE XIV. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.

MARK 15.

LVKE XXIII.

JOHN CHAP. XIX.


Now ye have heard (Brethren) of the accusation of CHRIST before the Judge
Pontius Pilate, and of His condemnation out of the mouth of the Judge Pilate,
and then we heard that after the sentence of damnation was pronounced, he
delivered Him into the hands of the Jews to be crucified, they take Him, and
first of all they lead Him in again to a most secret part of the Common
Hall, and there they handeled Him more freely, yea, more vilely than ever
before, seeing He was a condemned man: and when they had used whatsoever
indignity they pleased against Him, they lead Him to the place where He
should be executed. In the History we have marked three or four things that
fell out in the way: First, how the Lord is bearing His own Cross to the
place of execution: Next, He being wearied under the burden, one Simon of
Cyrene coming from the Country to the town, is compelled to take up one end
of the Cross, to help him: So Jesus goes before, and bears the one end of
the Cross, Simon of Cyrene follows, bearing the other end thereof: The third
thing: the multitude follows, men of all countries, that were conueened, and
come out of Jerusalem, at such a solemn time at the Passover: Amongst the
rest, there were women of Jerusalem, better than the rest of the multitude, who
followed him, and wept for him. We have heard what answer the Lord gave them,
and how he instructed them in the right cause of their weeping. Now the last
thing that is marked: it is this, that we have read out of the Gospel of Luke,
there were led out two thieues with him. Then in this days exercise, we shall
hear of these points: The first, concerning the two thieues that were led out
with him: The next is concerning the place: The third is concerning the sour
and bitter drink that they gave him to drink: The fourth, concerning the act
of the suffering, and fifthly, concerning the hour.

To return to the first: As he goes out to the place where he should suffer:
There are led out with Him two thieues, to suffer with him in that same
place: Jesus is led out to the place of execution like a thief, being
innocent, and led out with thieues to suffer with thieues. Amongst all the
rest of the things that Jesus Christ suffered, beside the pain that he
suffered in soul and body, he suffered extreme shame, as we say, he was
shamed and shent: I showed to you, that shame followed always upon sin.
Jesus Christ took upon him the sins of the world, and therefore he behooued
to suffer shame before the world. The Lord Jesus Christ was ignominious in
respect of the painful and ignominious death: for he was mounted up upon the
Cross, in presence of them all: and in respect of the multitude, all the
world was gazing upon him: and in this respect, when he goes out to suffer,
he is counted a thief among the thieues, and the Lord was also ignominious in
respect of the place.

Brethren, in this matter, I look not so much to the Jews, or to the
soldiers, as I look to his Father in heaven: who was the disposer of this
whole work. There was nothing done, but that which GOD the Father had decreed
to be done, and what He does concerning His Son, He does it most
justly: for JESUS became surety for the sins of the world, and He bare
the burden not only of murder and theft: but of all the sins of the
Elect. And as He goes out with the two Thieues, He bare the burden of one of
them, and relieved him of his sins: and the one of them that same night
supped with Him in Paradise: Therefore, say I, whatsoever was the part of the
Jews or of the Souldioures* yet the doing of the FATHER to the SON was most
just. And when we read of this, let us bless the FATHER of JESUS CHRIST, for
we have good cause so to do: For in this justice He shows great mercy
toward us: and, if He had not done this, woeful and miserable had the
estate of man been. Now I come to the place, which in Hebrew is called
GOLGOTHA, that is, a place of dead men's skulles, or brain pannes. This place
was without the ports of the Town of Jerusalem. And no question Jesus like
an unworthy reprobate was carried out of the ports of Jerusalem to suffer,
and this was figured under the Law. The beasts that were to be offered were
carried out of the camps of the people, and there were burnt, and afterward
their blood was carried into the Sanctuary, to be a typical propitiation for
the sins of the people, and the people were sprinkled therewith: Even so,
JESUS CHRIST, that eternal Sacrifice, was carried out like an outcast out of
the ports of the Town, to suffer that ignominious death, that when He had
suffered He might enter in with His precious blood into that Heavenly
Sanctuary for the sins of the world by that eternal propitiation, HEBR.
CHAP. XIII. VERSE. 11. and 12. Concerning the name of the place wherefore it is
so called, there is great controversy and doubting: Some think that it was so
named, because the skull (or brain pan) of ADAM was delued up out of that
same place where the Cross was set, and where JESUS suffered. But I count
this but a vain fable of the vain Papists, for their Lege^ds are full of such
like fables. And again, some think that it was so named, because in this place
were used to be casten heaps of skulles, and dead men's bones to be kept,
which use may be seen in sundry parts, and this is more likely. And last,
others think that it was so named, in respect of the figure and shape of the
place: It was a round knoll, like a man's head, rising up, and round at the
height; also, it was high, that these who were executed might be a spectacle to
the people to be wondered at, and therefore in respect of the shape, it was
called Caluarie, that is, the skull of a dead man: and those who have resorted
to those parts, they report this day, that the same place is a round knolle
like a dead man's skull, where the Lord Jesus was crucified beside Jerusalem.
But how ever it be, this is most certain, that this place was shameful and
ignominious: and the innocent is conveyed to that place where the murderers
used to be execute. No doubt, it was vile, and stinked, yet it hindered not
that sweet savor to ascend to the Father, through His death, and the more
ignominious that the death was, the glory and triumph was the greater, and the
more stinking that the place was, the more sweetly sauoured He to the Father,
His sacrifice had a most sweet smell in the nosthirles of the Father. This is
the thing that I mark: I see, that these Jews who persecuted the Lord of
glory to the death, cannot be satisfied, and the hatred against the innocent
is endless. They are not content that He die a shameful death: but they will
have Him to die a shameful death in a shameful place, and they will have Him
conuoyed and led out like a thief. No, brethren, the hatred of the world
against the children of the light, has none end: they hated the Lord first:
The Lord Jesus is the light of the world, and ever from that day the children
of darkness shall never cease to hate the children of light: as soon so ever
as a man shall profess that he appertains to Jesus Christ, at that same
moment, the world, and the children of darkness shall begin to hate them,
and to persecute them: As the rage of the Jews was unquenchable against
Christ, so it was after His passion and ascension against all Christians.
Brethren, in this matter, we must pass above the malice of the Jews, and
behold the counsel of God, and see, that all this doing comes from Heaven, for
the Father does it, albeit He use the ministry of these Hangmen: I see this,
He lays on shame upon His own Son: and not only shame, but He heaps shame
upon shame upon Him: He will first have Him shamed in respect of the death of
the Cross: then He will have the world to gaze upon Him: and next, in respect
of the two thieues that were led out with Him: and then in respect of the
place: He will have Him to suffer shame in all things, in presence of the
world: So that one would wonder, that the Father would pursue the Son with
such extremity of wrath: it is no small thing to take on the burden of sin.
O sinful soul! run under sin as thou will, yet one day thou shall find it
the heauiest burden that ever was. If the surety suffered such a pain, and
such a burden, what shall become of thee? If thou by thy self shall undertake
such an heavy burden of wrath for thy sins? But Brethren, the thing that
appertains to us concerning the place of execution is this: All this process
and judgment is a type of that great and terrible judgment of the world in
that Great day: and ye shall see that visible judgment to be like this
judgment that was holden on Jesus. He suffers like a reprobate, and is judged,
and that same thing that Jesus suffered temporally, when the great Judge shall
sit, the reprobate shall suffer eternally. Then take heed: It is a terrible
thing to fall into the hands of that living God, who is a consuming fire. Look
to it as ye will, for whosoever he be that shall not be saved in Jesus in
that day, beside all the shame that they shall bear, the very place wherein
they shall suffer shall add something to their shame: As their soul and body
shall be ignominious; so the place shall be stinking: the very place shall
heap shame after shame: let Hell be where it will, it is the most shameful
and ignominious place that ever was: and thou shall be shamed and shent
whosoever shall be casten into it. And by the contrary, in that Great day of
Judgment, they who shall be saved in this JESUS, as they shall be glorious
many ways: so even in respect of the place, they shall be glorious. That
Heavenly Jerusalem is the pleasandest place that ever was, and those that
shall come to Heaven, beside all that glory that they shall have therein, they
shall have glory in the very place: for Christ suffered in a place, foul,
vile and ignominious, that they might dwell for ever most glorious in that
glorious place, that Heavenly Paradise.

Now to come to the third, which is that drink which is propined unto
CHRIST when He comes to that place: no question He was very thirsty: beside
the pain, He had an extreme thirst: and being thirsty, He desired to
drink: He was a vvearied man, for He was holden all the whole night over
without either meat, drink, or sleep, yea, and all the next day also,
beside the fear of death: and therefore, it was no marvel that He desired
to drink. And MATTHEW says, that they gave Him Vinegar to drink, mixed with
Gall: Then, both sour and bitter was His drink. Now it is true that Saint
MARK says, that it was Wine mixed with Myrrh: All is alike: for Myrrh has
the bitterness of the gall. There are sundry opinions about this drink,
which they gave Him: Some thinks that this was a delicious drink, and that it
was carried there, and offered by the women who followed Him weeping: to the end
He might feel the less pain, so long as He underlay so longsome and cruel
death. There are others who think that this drink served to hasten the death:
because the death was painful, for they count Myrrh to be of this force, that
it will cast out blood at any wound. So when the LORD had drunk, they thought,
that the blood should have springed out at the wounds, and should have most
hastily procured His death.

But I leave these opinions, and I think, that this was no delicious drink:
and I think again, that this drink was not given to hasten His death: and I
think that this sour and bitter drink, was offered in derision and scorn by
the Jews, and soldiers, who had no pity nor compassion upon Him, and that of
the bitter malice of their hearts they offered it to Him. No mercy for Christ
now, but all extremity: and to think so, I am partly moved by that Prophecy
which is contained in the 62. Psalm, and 22. verse, wherein the LORD is
brought in, complaining and saying, In my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink: and partly, by the History following, wherein it is said, Then they
brought Him in derision a sponge with vinegar, and put it to His mouth: and
this His drink is to be counted a part of His Passion. Of this we have this
lesson, always keeping this ground, That this Judgment is a type of the
latter Judgment. Amongst all the pains that they shall suffer, who shall not
be found in JESUS CHRIST, they shall thirst to death, both of soul and body,
as the LORD thirsted, who was counted as a reprobate: so the reprobate shall
thirst exceedingly: And as the LORD got not so much as a drink of water, to
quench His thirst, no more shall thou.

As the rich Glutton, when he was in Hell, could not get one drop of water
to cool his tongue, that was so sore burning in torment: no more shall thou
be quenched of that eternal wrath: for sin brings the most terrible drowght
and hotnesse in the soul and body that ever was. Thou shall drink the cup
of the bitter wrath of God for ever and ever* Blessed are they who hunger and
thirstes for righteousness they shall be filled, says Christ. They who shall
be saved in Jesus Christ, shall never thirst, for they shall have in their
bellies the fountain of living water. Jesus Christ, when this drink is
propined, He tastes it, and would have no more of it, because as Jesus Christ
bare the nature of man, so He had this natural taste, and nature abhorred
this drink: And albeit that patiently He suffered all injuries of others: yet
He would not use violence against nature to His own self: let one suffer
violence of others, but do no violence to thine own self: Yet we see, that
albeit He knew well eneugh, both the bitterness and sowrenesse of it, yet He
tasted it: This learnes us, that there was no bitterness nor sowrnesse but the
LORD would taste it, that thou should not only taste, but also drink, yea
quaffe all delicious and sweet drink evermore: yea, not only of the water of
life, but even the delicious drink of this world, for refreshment of our
body. Then when thou art drinking a sweet drink, remember that Jesus Christ
drank a bitter drink, that thou should drink a sweet drink. Otherwise,
I tell thee, drink on, and pamper thy belly as thou will, thy sweet drink
shall become a bitter curse unto thee.

Now we come to the very action of crucifying: He is thirsty, He cannot get
the thirst quenched: He must suffer the death with an extreme thirst: there is
not a thief, but he will get a drink. The men of war come to the
execution: and first, they stripped the LORD of glory: They take His garments
off Him: So the LORD, before He was mounted upon the Cross, He was stripped
naked, and then being stark naked, they mount and spread out that glorious
body on the Cross, And nails Him with nails: and this is complained of
before: They pierced through mine hands and my feet, Psalm 22.17. And now
being nailed on the Cross, it comes to pass, as Paul says in the Epistle
to the Galathians, Chap. 3. verse 13, 14: He is become a curse for us, that
we should become the blessing of God in Him: Not that Jesus began then to be
accursed of the Father, when He hang upon the Cross: No, from the time of His
conception: even all the time that He was in the world: As our sins were
laid upon Him, so the curse of God was on Him, pursuing our sin: All these
three and thirty years that He lived in the world, the curse of God goes
never off Him: for the curse of God never leaves sin. A wicked man will seem
to be blessed, and to prosper, and who will sit at such ease as he will, play
him, and bless himself in his own heart, but when he comes to a miserable
end, and dies a miserable death, when the miserable death appears, then the
world sees, that that man was cursed. It appeared not that Jesus Christ was
cursed, till He was dying, and going to be nailed on the Cross, then all the
world sees that He is cursed, beside all the things that sin brings on a
man to: it shall bring thee to a shameful death: and if thou be not found in
Jesus Christ, and be not covered with His Cross, then thou shall die in the
end a cursed death: although thou be in thy bed, and thy Wife, thy friends,
and all thy children about thee, the death that thou shall die, shall be
accursed. Blessed are they who die in the Lord: Cursed are they who die not in
the Lord, let them be hanged, beheaded, or die in their bed, terrible shall be
that death that follows after this death: The death that He died, was a sore
and odious kind of death, to a man to be taken quick, and nailed quick on
the Cross: and no doubt, He hang for the space of three hours: so as ye
death of those who are not in Christ, is accursed, so it is sore: He suffered
not only this pain in body, No, the chief torment was in ye soul, and it
was tormented with that bitter sense of the wrath of the Father. It is not a
death of the body that sin brings on, it brings an extreme bitter pain to
the soul. The Lord dies not in a moment, he is dying, and not dead, a viue
image of the death of hell: thou shall die in the pain of hell, and never get
an end. Those who die in Christ, die what death they will, be they beheaded,
or hanged, or drawn in raxes, or burnt, they shall never die a cursed death:
their death is a sweet death, and all the joys that ever was, shall issue of
their death: It must be so, What makes a cursed death but sin: and if thou be
in Him, as JESUS was crucified: so thy sin is nailed upon His back: and
therefore being taken away, what must follow, but that thou must be glorified.

And either thou shall be crucified thy self, No, not in the Earth, but in
the Hells everlastingly: or else thou must have thy sins crucified on the
Cross of JESUS CHRIST, and be partaker of his death: and therefore, if any of
us would die a blessed death (it is certain, that we must die) let us see
whether our sin was crucified with Christ, or not: Shall I have no warrant of
the death of sin in me, and that I was crucified with JESUS CHRIST, and am
freed of all pain eternally, through His Cross? Will ye that I shall tell
you, how ye shall get the certainty of this? Look if thou find a
continual death of sin, look if thou find this regeneration and a new
life, and love of GOD and a delight to serve Him in some measure, then assure
thy self, that thy sin was crucified on the Cross with JESUS CHRIST: and,
if thou live in wantonness, and gettest no mortification, thou shall be
crucified in the Hell, yea, though thou were a King. Our lords and gentlemen
will pass their time, but I denounce, albeit thou be an Emperor, thou shall
be tormented, and consumed away by that eternal wrath of GOD in Hell. Go
on thy vvayes. O, the world is sleeping! Shall they never know what they
are adoing? What are these oppressors doing? these murderers doing? these
adulterers and fornicators doing? Is there any care of Heaven in them? Is
Heaven or Hell but tales? No, no: it shall be the terriblest sight that ever
thou saw. It is not as men say, to wit, Hell is but a boggarde to scarre
children only: No, thy miserable soul shall find in woeful experience the
dolor and woe of that place.

Now it restes, that I speak about the hour in the which He was crucified.
Only Saint MARK calls it, About the third hour. Then apparentlie, the
LORD JESUS was nailed on the Cross betwixt eleven and twelve of the clock:
And a little before twelve He was mounted up upon the Cross: for betwixt the
sentence of Condemnation and Execution, there passed not an hour: For there
was a malicious earnestness to hasten Him to the Cross, neither vvoulde they
give Him leisure to draw His breath. This lets us see the fearcenesse of the
wrath of the Father when He judges sin. After that He was once
condemned, He got no rest, but was hastened to the place of Execution, to
suffer pain and shame. Look still to the ground. This judgment is the type
of the latter judgment: if the sentence of condemnation be passed,
immediately thou shall be pulled away (look to it as ye will) to
everlasting torment. Therefore, blessed is that soul that has part of the
suffering of JESUS CHRIST. To Him, therefore, who once was ignominious, and
now is glorious, be all Honor for evermore: AMEN.

THE XV. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII. THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

MARK CHAP. XV. THAT KING OF THE JEWS.

LVKE, CHAP. XXIII. Caluarie, there they crucified him, and the evil doers;
one at the right hand, and the other at the left. JESUS, Father, forgive them:
for they know not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lottes.

Jews, save thy self. Greek letters, and in Latin, and in Hebrew, THIS IS
THAT KING OF THE JEWS.

IHON, CHAP. XIX. JESUS in the mids. Pilate wrote also a title, and put it on
the Cross, and it was written, JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Jews: for the place where JESUS was crucified, was near to the City: and it
was written in Hebrew Greek, and Latin. Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King
of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of the Jews. answered, What I have
written, I have written.


IN these days past (beloved in the LORD JESUS) we have brought this History
of the Passion of Jesus Christ, to the very act it self, to the crucifying of
Him upon the Cross. The last day we spoke something of His crucifying, and
last we spoke of the hour of the day, in the which He was crucified: MARK
names it to have been about the third hour of the day, which according to our
reckoning, and our fashion of dividing of the day, fell about the twelfth
hour of the day: which manifestes a very hasty dispatch and a short space
betwixt the doom, and the execution: yea, all this matter was very hastily
dispatched, for He was taken in the night, in the which He got no rest, but
was hurried first to Annas, and from him to Caiaphas Hall, and then before
Pilate the Roman Judge, and there before him condemned: So that He is taken
in the night, and the next day before twelve a clock He is crucified. In the
night He is taken, and brought before the Judge: The accusation passes: The
doom is given: and He is crucified on the morrow following before twelve of
the clock. Now to pass by the malice of the Jews, and their earnestness to
have the Lord put to death, we shall mark, that all this judgment we may
see the swiftness of the wrath of the Father, which pursued the Son, because
He bare the sins of the world. It lets us see plainly that the judgment
that shall be in the latter day, to the which this is proportionate (it is a
type of the latter judgment) that judgeme^t also, I say shall pass over
swiftly, and the reprobate in that judgment, when the Lord is once entered
into judgment, shall not get leave nor leisure to draw their breath, till
they be caste^ into Hell. And after that the terrible Judge shall once enter
into account with them, and give out that sentence, Depart from me ye cursed
of my Father, with the Devil and his angels, immediately those damned
souls shall be hurled to Hell. If the wrath was so swift upon the Son of
God Himself, what shall be the swiftness of the wrath upon the reprobate in
that Great day? Then come to the Text which we have read, and to go forwards
to speak of the things and circumstances that fell out in the time that the
Lord did hang quick nailed upon the Cross: for, as I have already declared,
He hung the ^pace of three hours quick, nailed upon the Cross, ere He gave
up the ghost. The first thing we have to speak of, is concerning the two
Thieues that were crucified with Him, the one at the one hand, and the other
at the other hand. Next, we shall speak of that prayer that Jesus conceived
whilst He was hanging on the Cross before His enemies. And thirdly, we
shall speak of that title and inscription that Pilate commanded to be fixed
on the Cross: to wit, JESUS of Nazareth, the King of the Jews: and this
contained the crime and cause of His suffering. Last, we shall speak of the
dividing of His garments, and how they cast lottes on His coat. All these
heads are plain, and they offer plain doctrine. Then to come to the first; It
is said, that They crucified with him two thieues, two vagabondes, two
throat-cutters, and they crucified the one of them at his right hand, and the
other at his left hand. And He hung on the Cross in the midst between them
both. They crucify not the Lord Jesus Himself alone but betwixt two Thieues:
and not at the side, but one of them at each side, and Him in the midst:
g^uing out thereby to be understood by all the world, who looked on Him, (and
there was an hudge multitude of Jews, Romans, and Gentiles, looking on) that
of all Malefactors He was the greatest. Brethren, I see this through all the
History of the Passion of Jesus Christ, ever His dolor enc^easses, till it
come to the end and to the height. And I see this, that as His pain grows
continually, So shame is heaped on His head continually: and whilst He is
hanging on the Cross, at the same time the greatest shame is heaped on His
head: for He hanges upon the Tree, betwixt the evil doers* as Prince of all
evil doers in the world. To let you see, that as the pain of the reprobate
shall be extreme; so the sh^me and confusion that they shall suffer in Hell,
shall pass all measure. In this circumstance, as in all the rest, I look not
so much to the Jews, and to their malice, as I look to His Father in Heaven,
to His wrath, and to His Justice: it is He who is the chief worker of all
these things. All the^e men, Pilate, Herod, the men of war, and the High
Priests, they are like as many burrioes to that Judge.

The LORD hanges on the Cross in extreme pain of body and soul: and as He
hanges, in extreme pain, so there is extreme shame joined with it. Now, if
the shame and pain was extreme, it must follow, that He bare an extreme
but then of sin: these go together in GODS Justice, extreme burden of
sin, extreme pain, and extreme shame: for the Justice of GOD requires,
that extreme sin be punished by extreme pain and shame. It is true, the
Martyrs suffered greater shame and pain, than ever murderer did, or
malefactor: yet it follows not, that their sin was greater than the sin
of them who suffers not so great pain. Why? The Martyrs suffered not for
sin, Non eo nomine. Never a Martyr suffered for sin, but for the
testimony of the same Lord Jesus Christ who suffered for their sin: and
therefore in their suffering they had an exceeding great joy, assuring them,
that they had a remission of their sins in the blood of the Lamb JESUS
CHRIST. But JESUS CHRIST suffered for sin Eo nomine: it is one thing to a
sinner to suffer, and it is another thing to suffer for sin: No, if the Lord
make thee to suffer for the least sin, if it were but for an evil thought,
thou shall feel how terrible a Judge He is. The LORD suffers, and is shamed
for sin: the Lord JESUS suffered extreme shame and pain: therefore the
consequent follows, He bare an extreme but then of sin. When I look to
this utter shame, as I call to mind all the sins that JESUS suffered for: so
chiefly, I look to that high pride of Adam, and of us all in Adam, whereby we
aspire to be like to that High and glorious Majesty, that pride, whereby we
would have spoiled that great GOD of that honor and glory which was due to
Him: Therefore in this utter shame, the Father of Heaven meets, randers and
requites that high pride of Adam* and for that He heaps shame on the head of
His Son: As thou aspirest to dishonor Him by pride, so He meets thy pride
in His dear Son. If thou be not found in JESUS in that great day: the
prouder thou be in the world, the greater shall be thy shame, beside that
unspeakable torment of soul and body. Now, will ye see in this extreme
pain and shame that the Lord suffers, how the wonder of our salvation is
wrought: it is so far from that, that it is wrought with a glorious pomp
(the Jews would have had this work wrought gloriously, and would have had the
Savior a glorious King, and therefore they stumbled at this, at the
ignominious Cross of Jesus,) Ye see by the plain contrary, that there
cannot be a greater pain nor shame. We are not bought by glory nor pomp: we
are redeemed from death and shame, by death and shame: such a redemption cannot
stand with His Justice: His Justice requires blood, Heb. 9.22, Noremission of
sins without blood, Then every one of us, who would attain to salvation, we
must not look to Heaven first, to get it in JESUS glorified, but we must look
to Jerusalem, and to Golgotha: first, To see Him there hanging and crucified:
spare not to kiss Him on the Cross, and to bathe thy self in His blood: and
if thou take offense at His Cross, thou shall never see Him in glory, but
to thy shame: No, by the contrary, take on persecution with Him, that in that
great day thou may be glorified with Him.

To go forward, Luke in his 23. Chapter, verse 34. marks a circumstance which
is not marked by the rest, to wit, that JESUS prayed to His Father for His
persecuters. This prayer apparantlie has been either at this time when they
were striking the nails through Him, or else very soon thereafter: howsoever,
He is hanging on the Cross at that time: The words are, Father, forgive them*
for they know not what they do: 1. Pet. Chap. 2. ver. 23, says of Him: When He
was reviled, He reviled not again: He rendered none evil words again, when
He suffered, He threatened not again, but committed it to Him who judges
righteouslie. When they were nailing Him on the Cross, and scorning Him on it
He show not an angry countenance: He committed the vengeance to GOD. In
these words, he would let you see, a marvelous meekness and patience in
JESUS CHRIST, and therefore by the Prophets He was compared to a Lamb. No,
never a Lamb suffered with such mildness, as JESUS did. But now in this
History he goes somewhat further: he lets us see, that the LORD IEnot only
recompensed evil with evil: but He rewarded good for evil, and whilst they
torment Him, he conceiues a fervent prayer for them: and this lets us see not
only a wonderful patience, but also a great love and pity He bare to His
enemies. It is a wonderful thing to see any in torment to be patient toward
the tormenter, but it is greater in the torment, both to be patient, and to
pray to GOD for him who torments him: and this is the greatest of all, to
suffer for the tormenter. This love properly pertain es to JESUS CHRIST only.
The Martyrs have prayed for them who persecuted them, as STEVEN did, Act,
Chapter 7. verse 60. LORD, lay not this sin to their change: but neither
STEVEN, nor any other Martyr in the earth suffered extreme torment for the
tormenter. Never a man had such a love, to suffer for his tormenter: No, this
love is proper only to JESUS CHRIST: and in the Scripture it is ascribed unto
JESUS CHRIST, that He died for His enemies His tormenters. These last words
of that place of Peter, where he says, He committed vengeance to Him who
judges righteously, are worthy of consideration: for there he will let us see
the ground of patience in suffering, His eye was on His Father, and He saw
his Father to be a just Judge, and to take vengeance on them who persecuted
them. Would thou be patient in suffering, go not to revenge, but put the
revenge in the hand of the Judge: except a man have this consideration, it is
impossible for him to suffer a wrong patiently. And it is as true, that these
men of this Land, who in no measure are patient, but are ay revenging: those
who will do two wrongs for one, (he will glory that he has slain two for
one, and he will brag of his foul murder: and say, I have one slain, he
has two, he has better than his own) It is impossible, I say, that these men
cannot have GOD before their eyes, they look not to GOD, because in suffering
injuries, they leave not the revenge to GOD, and so their damnation shall not
be so much for the wrongs, as because they usurped the office of the Judge,
and gave him not vengeance to whom it belongs. Some of you may ask, how can
this be, that Peter says. The LORD committed vengeance to His Father, stand
with this, that Luke says, He prayed for them? how can these two stand? To
commit the vengeance to God, and to pray for thine enemies? I answer, These
things are different, To commit vengeance to GOD, to commit a wicked man to his
own Judge, and to beg a vengeance to a wicked man: JESUS gave them over to
their own Judge, and gave the Judgment to GOD: he begged not vengeance on
them: he prays for them to his Father, that he would forgive them. To speak
my mind here: This Prayer that the LORD made upon the Cross, I take it not
so much to be for the malicious Scribes, Pharisees, and Priests, who did this,
not so much of ignorance, as of malice: For in the 17. Chapter and 9. verse he
says, I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given me: As for
the poor multitude of the Jews, and the men of war, and for the ignorant
Gentiles, who were there. The effect declares the force and power of this
Prayer, for by one preaching of Peter, there were three thousand souls
converted of the enemies of Christ, Act. Chapter 2. verse 41. No question this
hasty conversion of so many, came of the effectualnesse of the Prayer that he
made to the Father, on the Cross: yea, by appearance the force of that Prayer
uttered it self then, when the multitude came from the spectacle of the Cross
home again, knocking on their breasts. But consider the form of the Prayer,
he says, Father, forgive them, the reason is, They know not what they do:
But they are silly blinded people, Paul 2. Cor. 2. Chapter verse. 8. says: If
they had known what He was, they would not have crucified the LORD of Glory.
Ye shall ever mark, Brethren, two series of sinners, and two sorts of
sinning. There are some malicious sinners, woe to those. Some are ignorant:
some sins of knowledge: yea, the malice of the heart draws them to a
mischief: and some because they know no better, being wrong informed. No
doubt, many of this multitude thought they were doing good service to GOD:
Malice in sinning, makes a man inexcusable, and closes his mouth before that
Judge: ye shall see this one day. The malicious sinners, when the sentence
shall be pronounced against them, shall not whisper once again: But
ignorance, albeit it makes not a man inexcusable (it will never excuse thee
before that great Judge, Beguile not thy self, thou shall not once open thy
mouth, and say, LORD, the thing that I did, I did it of ignorance: and
therefore I deserved not death) yet it is not so evil as malice: for whereas
malice prouokes the wrath, and judgment of the Judge: for it is a terrible
thing to have an malicious heart, and of set purpose to sin against the
Judge. Ignorance will move the Judge to pity and commiseration: and so, ye
see, the LORD seeing the poor ignorant multitude He pities them, and as He
pities them, so He prays for them: Ignorance moved Him to pity, and to
pray for them. In a word: The Christian man that is persecuted wrongfullie,
either has to do with malicious men, (we may find this in experience ere
we die) who persecute of malice: or with enemies, who are not so much
malicious, as ignorant: if he have to do with malicious persons, patience is
required: but if he have to do with ignorant bodies, then not only patience
is required, but also rueth and love. Would thou have patience? then commit
vengeance unto Him who judges justly: for if thou would be patient,
look to thy GOD, and say, I commit thee in the hands of the Judge. And, if
thou have to do with an ignorant, see that thou be pitiful: look to the
ignorance of them that persecute thee; and thou shall not so soon look to
their blindness, but thou shall not only be patient, but also pitiful,
and the ignorant will seem to be miserable, and to be pitied: for this is
certain, that the innocent man, who is persecuted, is not so much to be
pitied, as he who of blind ignorance persecutes him. Alas! What is to be
pitied, but that which procures damnation before GOD? So ignorant blinded
bodies are most to be pitied.

Now consider how all ranks and sorts of people shame Him: and first Pilate
shames Him, and commaundes an inscription and title to be written on the
Cross, bearing the crime and cause of His death: It is said, that Pilate the
Judge, Writes a title to be fixed on the Cross: and be writes it, in
Hebrew, and in Grecke, and in Latin, to the end, that men of all Languages
might read it, and understand it, and the effect thereof is this, JESUS of
Nazareth, the King of the Jews. This was in Hebrewe, in Greek, and in Latin:
three Languages, to be read by Hebrews, Graecians, and Romans. There is no
question, but this was written according to the fashion of that time: for among
the people of GOD, both the judgementes and also the punishments, with
inscriptions containing the cause thereof, used to be publicked. And this was
a commendable and allowable custom, that when a man was condemned to die,
they always used to put up an inscription, containing the crime and cause: to
testify, that he was vvorthilie executed. According hereunto they handle the
Lord JESUS: for they lead ye whole process in the sight of ye people, and went
not into a corner to judge Him, but in the presence of ye whole people, they
led Him out of the Ports of Jerusalem, to execute Him. Read of this custom,
Josh. Chapter 7. verse 19. Of Achan, who stolle the Babylonians garment, how
he was judged of the whole people. Read of that blasphemer, in the
wilderness, Leuit. 24.23. how before the whole people he was executed
publikly. Read of Jonathan, how he was judged and condemned of his father
Saul, in the sight of the whole people, 1. Sam. Chapter 14. verse 5. As the
Judgment was public, so they used to put an inscription above them, to
testify to the people their crime, and the cause of their death, that they
died justly. It is no small matter to slay a man, albeit he were the poorest
that ever was, and there is not a Prince in the face of the earth, that may
slay a man without a good cause: No, not the Emperor has that power. And as
no man should be slain lightly: so if there be a just cause of execution,
the man may not be executed privily at the pleasure of the Judge, but if there
be good justice, the Judgment must be before the people. The people have
their own right and entresse in judgment seats.

Ye know in that great Judgment of the world, which shall be at the latter
day, not one shall be judged and condemned without the approbation and consent
of the whole Elect, which shall stand round about their Lord. Then, how much
more has the people, at the least the best part, entresse in earthly
Judgments, to see good administration of justice, and Judgment, and that the
Judge use no Tyranny. This then was the cause of this Inscription, even that
the cause of the death of Jesus should be made manifest to the people,
according to common commendable custom. But Pilate had another respect: Pilate
did this, not so much, that the people should know the cause of His death: for
his conscience told him that He was innocent, as he put it up, to revenge him
on the malicious Jews, who compelled him against his heart and conscience to
condemn Him. He will have this put up, that their King was hanged, and that
they hanged Him with their own hands. But GOD has His part here, and all was
governed by that heavenly Providence, Neither is Pilate, nor the Jews here
so much to be looked to, as the dispensation of the Father, As Pilate did it
for one end, so the LORD did it for another end: Men will do a thing upon an
evil intent, GOD will do the same thing by a wicked instrument to His good
end, by His effectual providence He will have this to be put up, to ratify
the Heavenly and Spiritual Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST: and He will let them
all see, that JESUS is the only King: and inspeciall by this inscription the
LORD will have it testified to the world, that as JESUS hung upon the Cross
with pain and shame, that so likewise upon the same Cross He triumphed
gloriously over His enemies: ere He came to Heaven, on the Cross He got
victory, and He triumphed over them all, and led them all captives on the
Cross, as it is written to the COLOSS. CHAP. 2. VERSE. 15. More than this: The
LORD did it to this end, To fore-shaddowe, that the preaching of the Kingdom
of JESUS CHRIST, to follow on His Ascension should be to all Nations*
Kingdoms, and Languages: for immediately after that He passed out of the
world, JESUS was proclaimed to all Nations the King of Glory, and continues
to this day, and shall be for ever. Pilate is a preacher hereof, albeit he
have little mind of it: but he was like Caiaphas, who prophesied, that it
was expedient, that one should die for the sins of the whole people, CHAP.
11. VERSE. 40. And this is done by the special providence of GOD, no doubt. The
constancy of Pilate in his sentence and vvriting, notwithstanding the strong
opposition of the Scribes and the High Priests, who desired him to alter and
change the title, and for that which was written by Pilate, to wit, This is
the King of the Jews, to write, That He said He was the King of the Jews:
this declares that it was of the immutable decree of GOD. Pilate had no power
to alter one letter of it for his life. GOD led the pene of him so, that he
had no power to do otherwise, to testify, that it was of that Eternal
decree. And this is that drecree whereof we read, PSALM. 2.7. I will declare
the decree, that is, The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, etc. This
decree is unchangeable, it must be executed, and it shall last to the end of
the world: And I say, the LORD JESUS shall be King in despite of the JEWS
and the High Priests, and all His enemies, and that one day we shall see to
the full joy of our hearts: To that Glorious King, with His Father, and the
Holy Spirit, be Honor and Glory for evermore, Amen.

THE XVI. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.





MARK, CHAP. XV.



LVKE CHAP. XXIII. Jews, save thy self. Greek letters, and in Latin, and in
Hebrew, THIS IS THAT KING OF THE JEWS.

JOHN CHAP. XIX.




THE time that JESUS CHRIST is hanging on the Cross, (Brethren) and whilst
He is in extreme pain and torment, those that stand by they set themselves
to do Him all the shame they can, to the end, that in that agony He might
have the more annoy and grief. I cannot divide better that shame that they did
Him, than from the persons who went about to shame Him: the whole, both Jews
and Gentiles, are set to shame Him: And therefore, after He is condemned, they
take two Thieues, and they crucify them with Him, the one at the one hand, and
the other at the other, and Jesus the Innocent in the midst, as if He had
been the greatest of all. Then there is not a rank of persons amongst them,
but every one begins to rail upon Him, and shame Him. And first to begin at
Pilate, he begins and shames Him, for he writes an inscription concerning
treason against the Majesty of Caesar, and affixes it on the Cross, where He
hung, This is the King of the Jews: howbeit to speak the truth, Pilate
sought more the shame of the Jews, who by their obstinacy compelled him to
give out the sentence of death against the Innocent, than the shame of Jesus
Christ: and by the inscription the Lord will have the Jews shamed, because
they hanged their King. But we have spoken of Pilates part the last day:
therefore now let us go forward to the parts of all the rest. Then after
Pilate, comes in the executioners, who with their hands had nailed Him on the
Cross. It appears by the words of John, speaking of the dividing of His
garments into four parts, that there were four Executioners: (or Hang-men)
So that every one of them got a part thereof. These in contempt, and in despite
of Him, in His face, whilst as He hanges on the Cross, they take His
garments, and divide them in four parts, and on his coat they cast lottes.
Then after the Hang-men, comes the people, and they wagge their heads on him,
and in despite, and bitterness of heart, they rail on him, and say, Is this
the man that said he would destroy the Temple, and build it up again? Is
it likely that He can do this, who cannot save Himself from the Cross?
Then comes there the Princes of the JEWS, the SCRIBES, the High PRIESTS, and
PHARISEES, and they taunt Him also, saying, Thou who sauedst others, save thy
self. And after them, comes in the men of war, the ROMAN Souldioures, and
they begin to rail out also, and They offered him Vinegar to drink, and
said, If thou be the King of the JEWS save thy self, and come down from
the Cross. And last, one of the Thieues, who was hanged with Him, falls
out in railing, If thou be that CHRIST, save thy self and us.

But now we shall speak of every one of these in particular as the LORD
shall give us grace: and first we begin at the part of the Hang-men. Then
in His sight, whilst he hanges, they take his garments, (and made four
parts of them, that every one of the men might have a part thereof: and as
for his coat, because it had no seame, and was not sowed, but was a wouen coat,
from the top thorowout: therefore, they would not divide it, but would cast
lottes for it, whose it should be. And all this was done, that that which was
prophesied (by David, who was the figure of Christ, Psalm. 22.19.) might be
fulfilled, which says, They divided my garments among them, and on my coat
did cast lottes.

Now to let you see that these Hangmen did nothing in all this action, but that
which from all eternity was appointed to be done in the council of GOD. To
examine this fact better: First they do Him vvrong in spoiling the LORD JESUS
of His own goods: (Howsoever they esteemed of Him, yet He was innocent)
Next, they do Him shame, in stripping Him, and setting Him naked upon the
Cross, in the sight of all the world. And last of all, they despite Him, and
contemn Him, in taking His garments, and parting them in His own presence,
where He Himself might behold it. So they did Him vvrong, shame, and despite.
But Brethren, as in all other circumstances conjoined with the Passion. I look
not so much to men, as to the Lord: So here I look not so much to these
executioners in parting of these garments, as to that Heavenly Judge His
Father, and to His justice in this matter: for whatsoever be their part, and
how unjust soever they be, that Heavenly Father is just, and that burden of
our sin which Jesus Christ took upon Him, deserved all this: as surety for
us, He demerited all this.

Now to examine more narrowly every one of these: to wit, the wrong, shame,
and despite, we shall see how justly all is done: if ye will look to His
Father, and first consider the wrong done unto Him, in taking His clothes: He
was wearied of His garments, because He was cledde with our sin. Now would
to GOD that we could feel in mercy this weight of sin, which our Mediator
did bear upon His back for us: for then we would not run on so wantonly
as we do. And it tells us this, That a sinner that is not in Jesus Christ,
who has not put off sin, but yet bears the burden of sin, has no right
to wear so much as a most vile garment, yea, though it were but a bratte of a
sack to hide his shame from the sight of the world; let be Gold, Silver, or
precious raiment: and if it shall fall out at any time, that he be reaued and
spoiled of his clothes, let him take it to be of the just judgment of GOD,
whatsoever be man's part therein. And though the Thieues bereave him, yet the
GOD of Heaven is just in punishing of him, whatsoever part man has in the
action. Yet it tells us more, for I tell you still, that this judgment of
Jesus Christ is the image and figure of the latter judgment: for such process
as is used here, shall be used in the latter judgment. Then, I say, it
tells us, that in that latter day, a reprobate and sinner, who shall not be
found in Jesus Christ, shall be deprived, and spoiled of all the creatures,
made for the use and ornament of man, and there shall never a one of them be
left him, neither shall he have so much a foot-breadth of earth, or the
meanest commodity in the world: yea, albeit he were a king, let him have
possessions, kingdoms, and the whole earth now, but then there shall not be
any thing in this world that he shall possess at that day, but shame in the
Hell for evermore. Where by the contrary, they who shall be found in Jesus
Christ, shall not only be cladde with incorruption and glory in Christ; but
also shall be put in possession of a new Heaven and new Earth, to reign with
their Head and Lord Jesus Christ for evermore. Ye see then what happiness it
is to be found in Jesus Christ at that Great day. O the misery of him who
shall be found out of Him!

Now to come to that shame which He suffers on the Cross. The Father,
through His nakedness herein also is just: He was cledde on the Cross with
our sins. It tells us this: that among all the punishments of sin, this
is one, to wit, nakedness, to set the body naked in the sight of the world.
Ye read in Esaias. 3.17. where the sinful women are threatened for their pride,
that the Lord JEHOVAH shall make naked and discover their secret parts to the
world. But to speak of the latter day: beside all the rest of the punishments
of the reprobate, the nakedness of their carcases shall be a punishment, they
shall rise with foul bodies, whereas the Elect shall rise with glorified
bodies: and the reprobate shall stand up in the sight of all men and Angels,
with naked bodies, that their shame may be seen, and they shall cry (to hide
their shame) on the mountains, to cover them, and on the hills to fall on
them. Now last to speak of that despite that He suffered: They part His
garments before Him, in despite of Him: They go not to a backside to deal
them. Look to Gods dealing here: this is a just thing with God, that he who
is a sinner, and who in contempt and despite of God has sinned, that he be
contemned again, and suffer despite openly. And Christ, among all other
punishments, bare this punishment of contempt upon the Cross. Then if contempt
be done unto thee, who art a sinner, and not in Jesus Christ, not cledde with
His justice, in respect of God; it is due justice, if thy goods be taken and
pulled from thee before thine eyes, if thy sons be slain in despite of
thee, or thy virgins destored, thy self looking on, take it for the just
judgment of God. In the latter day, beside all the punishments that shall
fall upon a reprobate, despite shall be done to them. If it were but this, that
the persons whom they disdained, contemned, and spitted upon, shall be
glorified in despite of them. So to end this: This teaches us, how good a
thing it is to be in Jesus Christ, and how blessed that body shall be who
is found in Him. And as for thee, who art out of Jesus Christ, woe shall be to
thee, suppose thou were an Emperor. Now to go forward: After the Hangman,
and after their despite, follows the part of the people who gazed on Him,
they begin, and wagge their heads. David foretelles of that in the 22.
Psalm, verse. 7. They had me in derision, and made a mow, and nodde their
heads, and they said, Is this the man who said, he would destroy the glorious
Temple of Jerusalem, and build it after in three days* Come down from the
Cross, and save thy self. They mistook the LORD, for the LORD understood of
the Temple of His body, which after three days by His glorious resurrection,
he should reedifie and build up again: so the opprobrie that they cast up to
Him is this: He was wount to say, He would cast down the Temple, and build it
up again in three days: But this is a thing impossible: and their ground they
take from His present infirm estate, that inhabilitie He was in on the Cross.
So they gather of that, Seeing He could not free Himself, that the other was
impossible. Before I mark or observe any thing on this place, I shall follow
out the scoffing, railing, and mocking of others, After the people came in the
Princes of the people, as High Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, Elders, and Rulers,
and they rail on Him, saying, This man took on Him the Name of CHRIST, let us
see if He can save Himself: As they would say, It is impossible to Him who now
hangs so ignominiously to save Himself. After them came the men of war^e, and
in derision: They offer Him vinegar to drink, And they say, this is very like
a King. How can He do the duty of a King, to deliver the people, who cannot
deliver Himself. This they said, because He had called Himself a King, to
the prejudice, as they thought, of Cesars Kingdom* And lastly, one of the
thieues rayled on Him, to wit, He that hang at His left hand, saying, So like
as thou art that Christ who can neither save us nor thy self. Now, because
the railing of the whole is all to one effect: therefore, shortly I shall
observe some things in general, as the Lord shall offer.

In all this railing out against Him, ye see the extreme humiliation of JESUS
CHRIST, for our sins: He is made of no reputation: No, He is trodde on as a
worm: And no question, that extreme torment of body was not so grievous to
Him, as was this railing on Him. They speak to Him as a very reprobate: and
so far as lay in them, they endeavored to make Him to despare of all help.
So ye may seee, this railing was a thing most grievous to Him. And David
being His type, he complains on this shame, that they heaped on Him, in the
22. Psalm. All this lets us see, how dearly the Lord has bought our life
and Salvation: And we are more than miserable, if we see not this: And also it
lets us see, what should have become of us, if He had not satisfied for us: and
what should become of thee, if thou be not in CHRIST in that great day. And it
tells thee, seeing all this is for thy sin, that thou should have a sad
heart to have such a Redeemer made such a spectacle, and thou should groan
under the burden of sin: and when thou read of the Cross, thine heart
should be sorrowful, that ever thou should have moved the GOD of glory to
such vengeance of His dear Son for thee. Think not that every man shall be
relieved of his sin by Him. No, only those who learn to groan under the
burden of their own sins, by the which they have pierced Him: and turn to
the LORD unfeignedly, and get favor. So if thou learnest not at one time or
other to groan, under the burden of thy sin, thou shall never be relieved
by Him.

But to mark something of this railing: I see, that these things they cast up
to Him, is the very verdict, whereupon they accused Him. They accused Him,
because He called Himself the Christ, and because He called Himself the King
of the Jews: and because He said, that He would destroy the Temple, and build
it up again the third day. So the very thing yt they cast up to Him in
despite, is ye very crime wherefore they condemned Him. Men would think, yt it
should have contented them to had Him hanging in torment: but Brethren, alas,
the malice of the enemies of Jesus Christ is endless, there is none end of it:
it will not be the death of one Christian: yt will satisfy them, it will not be
thy blood that will quench their thirst: but in thy torment they will rail on,
and strive to cause thee to despare, that thy soul may perish. There is such
an extreme despite in their hearts, that they would have thine ashes and thy
bones to be exponed to opprobrie and shame, which has lain so long in the
grave. See we not this, how the bones of faithful Christians have been
taken up, and burnt by the Antichrist. The LORD save us from their cruelty:
But here I lift up mine eyes, and look unto GOD. The Lord Jesus, He suffered
most justly, who was cled with our sins, and bare them on the Cross for our
cause: and it learnes thee this, that if thou suffer opprobrie and shame*
and men rail on thee, that thou go ever to see, if thou be in Christ, in thy
suffering: for if thou be out of Christ, woe is to thee, for that is but the
beginning and forerunner of that pain and shame that thou shall suffer in
Hell. I tell this more, in that latter day, when ye reprobate shall be condemned,
their sin which was the cause of their death, shall ever be had in memory, but
if once thou go to Hell, ye remembrance of thy sin shall never be buried*
but thy verdict shall be cast in thy teeth, and thy conscience shall taunt thee,
and shall say to thee, Murderer, thou delitedst in murder, now go to murder,
now free thy self out of Hell, if thou can: and to them who followed
Harlots, Thou delitedst in Harlotrie, and in offending of GOD thou who
could not be satisfied in pleasuring thy fool lusts, now satisfy thy
self with these extreme torments; now go to thy harlotrie, let see: And
to the blasphemer, Thou delitedst in blaspheming of GOD, now let see if thou
dare blaspheme, go thy way now, and blaspheme: And to the Idolater, Thou
delitedst in worshipping of Idolles, and leftest the worshipping of the true
GOD; now go thy way to Idolatry, etc. Now, would to GOD the world could
think^ Hell to be earnest. This torment and railing in the death of CHRIST, is
an image of the torment of Hell.

I see here further, that besides this, there is a ground of all their
opprobrie, to wit, that shameful Cross which JESUS was hanging on: They
thought, that seeing JESUS was crucified, it was impossible for Him to cast
down the Temple, and to build it up again: They thought it was impossible for
Him to save the world, seeing He could not save Himself: and that He
could not do the duty of a King, who was already hanged: How becomes it a
King to be hanged? The cause of their offense was that shame which He
suffered and that they saw that He could not deliver Himself. The Cross of
Jesus is foolishness to the world: and blessed are they who will not take
offense at the Cross of Christ. Look how they are deceived in their
judgments: Because the Cross was the only mean whereby He should have
done all things, when He was hanging, was He not destroying the Temple of His
body, that after three days, by His glorious resurrection He might build it
up again? And when He was on the Cross, did He not the office of Christ?
that is, of an anointed Priest: for then He was offering that Sacrifice of His
body to the Father: And was He not by the Cross purchasing to Himself and to
us a glorious Kingdom? Yea, on the Cross, He like a glorious King, triumphed
over the Devils and made an open show of them: for He had a battle with the
Devils on the Cross, and triumphed over them all. Col. 2.15. This same
blindness of the world remains still in it: for when the world sees a body
under affliction, in poverty, bu^nt or martyred for Christ's sake, then the
world thinks it is impossible that that body can attain to glory. They think
him as an outcast, and will scorn his profession. They will say, Are these
your Christians? of all men they are the most miserable, if that be the way
to Heaven, I will renounce to go that way, this is rather the way to go to
Hell. This is the voice of the world: And the cause is, because miserable
catiues know not what sin is, which at that time behooued to be purged by
the Cross: for the justice and Majesty of GOD being offended, required that
it should be so: and now in us sin through manifold crosses and
afflictions must be mortified. Let the world think and speak as it
pleases, the only way whereby thou shall come to life, is suffering and
affliction: and thou must think this, that we must be racked through Hell,
ere we come to Heaven. Our redemption is wrought by the Cross: thou shall not
come to Heaven, but by the Cross. The ground of all is sin: But alas, the
world sees it not. The word will teach thee, that there is no other way to
come to Heaven, but by affliction: and it will thee, that if thou be not
purged and changed by trouble and affliction, thou shall never see Heaven.
Alas, that we could once groan under sin. And blessed is the soul, that
has a sight of the weight of sin: and vvoe to that soul, that has no sight
of sin.

To go forward: I see in this Thief, who rayles on Christ, some special
thing: he has a particular of his own, he is in torment, and therefore he
says, Jf thou be that CHRIST, save thy self and us. Brethren, a torment,
whatsoever it be, if it be not the better sanctified, it will move the
creature to fall out in blasphemy: thou vvilt blaspheme both in heart and
mouth, and thou vvilt say, that there is no power in GOD to save thee: And the
Thief in effect said this, There is no power in thee to save me* I renounce
thee as a Savior: and, if thou confess His power, thou will deny His mercy,
and vvilt say, GOD is but a Tyrant. And, if thou vvilt say, He is merciful:
be merciful to whom He will, He cannot be merciful unto me: This last
distrusting of mercy to thy self, is a great sin. And that to say
altogether, that there is no mercy in GOD, it is a plain blasphemy. And
last, to say, there is no power in GOD it is to deny GOD to be GOD: For how
can He be GOD, if He want power? So I think, that this catiue has been a
great blasphemer of that Majesty: and when I look on it, I see in him the
image of the death of the reprobate, when they are dying and changing this
life. (The Lord give us grace to die well.) The reprobate shall think, that in
their doing, God has no power to save them: for, of all men in the world, the
reprobate is the most Ioath to die: for either they shall think that God is
not merciful at all, or else at least, that there is no mercy in Him for
them: and so the miserable creature will turn his back on GOD, and
immediately shall cast himself into Hell and damnation. We read of Sidrach,
Mesach, and Abednego, that they were so far from this blasphemy, that when
the Tyrant falls out in blasphemy, they meet him, and say, Our GOD is
Almighty, and He has power to deliver us if He please. Never come thou to
despair, though thou should die ten thousand deaths: but sleep in His
bosom, and hang on Him, and save His honor, and think not that which may
derogate His honor, and say, Though thou should slaye me, LORD, yet will
I trust in thee, and so die sweetly, resting in His arms. Well, I see this
has been a miserable body, and has died miserably, blaspheming the God of
Glory: and this is even as the reprobate shall do at the latter Judgment.
And yet when I compare him with the Pharisees and Priests, I find their
blasphemy greater than his. Well shall it be to the Thief, in respect of
them, for they had knowledge, and he wanted. Who should have had knowledge
but they? They had no torment, he had sore torment. What need had they to
blaspheme? Therefore, their condemnation shall be greater than his. And when
I compare this blasphemy of the Thief with the blasphemy of some men in
these days, who when any cross falls upon them without their expectation,
will say, What can GOD do more unto me? so in effect denying power to be
in GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST: I count the blasphemy of these men to be greater
than his was. For now JESUS is in Glory: and the Thief saw Him on the
Cross in misery with himself. If thou now blasphemest Him so, it were well
done, that thy mouth were sowed up, that thou never spakest a word.

Now to end with this. The LORD give us grace, that neither in thought nor
in word we dishonor that MAJESTY, but may acknowledge His mercy and
power toward us in JESUS CHRIST: To whom be all Honor, Glory, Praise,
Power, and Dominion, both now and evermore, World without end: AMEN.

THE XVII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIII. Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.


WE heard the last day (Brethren) of all these railings and blasphemies that
the Lord Jesus suffered of all ranks and estates of persons, whilst He hang
on the Cross naked, living in torment. Pilate began, and fixed on the Cross
an ignominious inscription, That Jesus was a Traitor against Caesar, and that
He suffered death for His treason. Then the Hang-men, four in number, in
despite, and in His sight, took his garments, and divided them in four
parts: and because his coat had no seame, but was wouen thorowout, therefore
they cast lottes for it, who should have it whole. Then comes on the people,
with their part, and rail upon Him, and blaspheme Him, saying, Now if thou
be that Christ, come down and save thy self. Then follow the high Priests,
the Scribes, and the Elders, who rail on Him, and say, Is this he who will
save others? let see if he can be able to save himself. Then the men of
war and Gentiles begin to rail, if thou be the King of the Jews, save
thy self, and come down from the Cross. And then one of the Thieues railes
out on Him, If thou be that Christ, save thy self, and us both: but now so
like as thou art the Christ, thou art adying as well as we, and art neither
able to s^ue thy self, nor us: and therefore thou art not a King. Now,
Brethren, ye may perceive that it was no prayer that this thief made to
CHRIST, as some think.

We spoke of this thief the last day: now we have to speak of the part of
the other thief: he is twitched with repentance: in an instant he becomes
penitent: and the inward conversion of the heart to GOD, he vtters outwardly
in sundry effects: First, perceiving the other thief his companion to
blaspheme GOD, the first action that he does, he defends the honor of the LORD
against the other thief, and rebukes him: and after that, gives a free
confession of his sins: and last, he turns to Jesus Christ hanging on the
Cross, and says, LORD remember me when thou come to thy Kingdom. The
LORD answers immediately to the thief: Verily, thou shall be with me this day
in Paradise.

To come then first to the rebuke he gives to the other thief, Fear thou
not GOD? The meaning is, Thief, fie on thee, seeing thou hangs in a common
misery and torment with me, and this man, fear thou not GOD, who wilt
blaspheme and rail on Him, seeing thou art shortly to appear before that
Tribunal, and give an account of all thine evil deeds, and chiefly of the
blaspheming of the innocent. So he takes up the blaspheming from the
fountain, and he lets him see that his heart was void of the fear of GOD:
for if he had any sponke of the fear of GOD, he had not fallen out in railing
against the GOD of glory.

We learn this lesson, that when the hand of GOD is lying on any man, and
pressing him to the death, then it is time to be humble, and to fear the LORD,
and that terrible Judgment wherein thou must stand immediately after this life:
and if there appear no fear of that Judge in thee, and if thou vtterest a
plain rebellion, that testifies that his hand shall never leave thee, until
it bruise thee in powder, and thrust thee to the lowest Hells. This is the
thing that affliction should work in us, Humiliation and the fear of GOD.
Learn the lesson at the thief. Proud soul, and proud creature, if thou will
not learn at others: But as this rebuke testifies, that this should be: so the
railing of the other testifies, that it is not ay in men. There are some men
whom all the torments in the world will not move, ere they be the better,
they will be in Hell, hang them, nail them to the Cross, tear them with
pincers, they shall never be the better. What is the cause of this? It is a
wonderful thing, that such trouble and torment should not work some fear of
GOD in the creature. But how can any affliction press out of the creature that
which was never in it. The fear of GOD is not in the hearts of many, and
therefore how can they utter it: a rotten and withered stick was never more
meet to be burnt, than thou by nature. So we being by nature like as many
rotten sticks, albeit we were pressed with mountains, we shall never yield a
sweet sap, or any repentance: No, before we yield any drop of repentance,
we shall be bruised in powder: fie on nature: if thou werest a Prince, thou
shall go to Hell, if thou have no more but nature, if thou gettest not one
d^oppe of grace. Yet ye see, that the other thief, when he is pressed,
yeeldes one drop of sap: he becomes penitent, and is zealous of the glory
of the Lord JESUS. These are good effects: The Cross that wrought evil in the
other thief, works good in this thief: But who made the difference? Who
discerns thee, says Paul: Not nature: They were alike in nature, alike in
misdeedes, alike in a wicked life, the one had lived as wickedly as the other,
alike in torment: It was JESUS that made the separation, it was a happy time
for the one thief, that ever he was crucified beside the LORD of glory. The
Lord JESUS made the difference: out of that fullness He powers out one drop
of His grace: He gives none to the other.

Learn this, that all troubles and afflictions, crosses, and all the torments
in the world, shall never make thee better: All the torments in the world,
shall not work one drop of spiritual moisture out of thee: the torments may
well p^esse out sour and bitter sap, as blasphemy, railing, and despare,
but no good sap, as Faith, or Repentance: except thou get it of the fullness
of JESUS CHRIST: and therefore my counsel is, When thou feel the hand of
the Lord on thee, and namely in the hour of death (a dangerous hour) turn
thee to Jesus Christ, and say, thou may press me down, but long ere I
yield one drop of grace, except thou give it me: Lord, therefore give me one
drop of grace. Another thing I mark in the rebuke of the other thief. Common
misery should work a mutual compassion: thou should piti^ them who are in a
like misery with thee, and if thou do it not, thou do^st as the evil
thief did: I say thou have no fear of God: and if thou raylest on him who is
in misery with thee, thine heart is full of the gall of bitterness. By nature
we are all alike in misery: there is not a thing that becomes a sinner better,
than to have compassion on others: an heart without pity, shall never be
pitied, not never shall see life.

Now, to go forward, when he has said, Thou art in like damnation, lest that
ye thief rebuked should have thought, yt Christ should have deserved that
pain as well as he (think not that they who are alike in misery, are alike
guilty: No, no, ye are deceived) Well, he meets this, we suffer nothing but
that which we demerite: I and thou are justly in this common condemnation, but
this man has done nothing amiss. This railing and pain, this man demerites
not: yet if ye will weigh the words narrowly: we shall see other two
arguments, whereby he rebukes this blasphemous companion. The first is, from
their merits: The second from the innocence of Christ: The first, thou
meritest this torment: and therefore should not thy merit work a fear of
God, and a fear of an heavier judgment: Lord save us from the merit of
sin. When a man is in torment, and chiefly in death, the pain should work a
fear of God: and then considering the merit, there should strike a greater
fear in the heart, that there should ensue a greater damnation afterward. The
consideration of merit should work a fear, and the conscience should not so
soon stand up to accuse us of sin, but we should be stricken with a fear of
that terrible Judge: but every man has not this sense: the thief has not
that sense of the merit of the present pain, nor yet of the greater pain
that was to ensue. What is the cause of this, that every man feels not this,
The conscience of the merit of sin is not given to every man: We are all
sinners, and merits all our pain, we merit death and Hell. But, alas, where
one gets the conscience of their merit, and feels that they deserve death,
ten wants it. It is a pity to see, how many dies without sense like dogs,
and then if it fall so, that one get the conscience of sin in the hour of
death, it falls out ofttimes, that they get not the sense of mercy. It may
be, that thou get the sense of sin, and be stricken with a fear, but with a
desperate fear: for with the sense and feeling of sin, if there be not also
a sense of mercy, there is nothing but terror, and a servile fear. So thou
shall die like a vile slave in damnation. So the conscience of this thiefes
merit makes him to fear God: and no doubt, he has had a sweet sense of the
mercy of God in Jesus Christ. But who made this difference? It was the Lord: It
was a happy thing for this thief to be crucified with JESUS CHRIST: for all
this slowed out of the Cross of JESUS CHRIST. Therefore take up the lesson.
Think not that in the hour of death thou shall be twitched as thou
should, either with the feeling of thy sin and misery, or yet of mercy:
except that thou sweetly turn thee to the Cross of CHRIST, and say, LORD, I
feel neither sense of my merit, and what my sins deserves, nor of mercy:
LORD, therefore give me it, then the sweetness of that sense shall swallow up
that pain. No comfort in death but in JESUS CHRIST: except thine eyes be set
on that Cross, Woe is to thee, and woe to thee again, and better for thee, if
thou had never come in the world. Thou and I, says he, suffer justly. This
confession witnesses the inward conversion to JESUS CHRIST: for when the heart
of a sinner is turned to JESUS CHRIST, it will taste a such sweetness, that
the creature will not care by that it be shamed, so it can get that LORD in
whom it feels such a sweetness, glorified: it is a sure token, that these
shameless sinners, these men who will not shame themselves in the sight of the
world, but will stand in their points of honor, with GOD, these miserable
souls, these bloody murderers, these adulterers, tasted never of that mercy
in JESUS CHRIST.

If thou would have thy sins hid from the eyes of GOD, that terrible
Judge, then open them to the world, that the LORD may be glorified: and if thou
hidest thy sins, the LORD shall rippe up thy breast in that great day, and
let all the world see the most hid and secret corner of thine heart, to thy
shame and confusion.

Now come to the third argument of reproof, and it is taken from the
innocence of Jesus: This is an innocent and just man, Fear thou not GOD, to
rail on the innocent: if He were guilty, as thou and I am, thy railing were
more tolerable, but how can thou rail on this just man? The lesson is,
Just ones who suffer innocently, should not be railed upon: the LORD keep our
mouths from railing on them: if thy conscience tell thee of their innocence,
revile them not: and a man who suffers, may be innocent two manner of ways:
for either he is innocent in himself, and not guilty of that for which he
suffers, or else if he be a malefactor, and guilty, he may be innocent
through Faith and repentance through the blood of Jesus Christ, as this thief
was innocent in Christ. Now if a man be innocent of that crime for which he
suffers, rail not on him on pain of thy life: and if thou find him
innocent in the blood of Jesus Christ, and find him to have true and
unfeigned repentance in Him, albeit he be never so wicked, let him die, and
suffer these pains he should suffer: for repentance should not exeeme and
free him from civil punishment: but beware thou rail on him: surely thy mouth
should be stopped, to rail out on him. God forbid that an evil word be spoken
out against him as a reprobate, whom the LORD Jesus countes innocent in His
blood: for this railing testifies that thou counts that man as a reprobate: and
that is too sore a judgment thou takes to thee. I see here further, the LORD
never leaves His Son without a testimony of His innocence: Pilate ever on
testified His innocence before he condemned Him, and said, once, twice,
thrice, I find nothing worthy of death in Him: No, Pilate was never brought
to say, that Christ was guilty, suppose he condemned Him, but ever preached,
and proclaimed His innocence. Then when He is coming to suffer, the poor
women follows and testifies: and now the poor penitent thief testifies the
innocence of Christ: and lastly, the men of war were compelled to say, Of a
truth, this is the Son of God. And if ye consider well, ye shall see two
things very contrary: that of all men that suffered, He was both the most
just, and the most unjust: He was innocent in Himself, and He was guilty in
us: and this for our consolation: for this lets us seee, how meet a Mediator
He was for us: my Savior must be innocent in Himself, Heb. 7.26. and He must
be guilty in me. Thus far this thief has uttered that inward repentance,
in rebuking the other for his blasphemy, and sin, and in confessing his
sins before the other thief and those that stood by: now follows the third
effect, he turns him to the Lord, and in all humility seeking remission,
grace, and life, and says, Lord remember me when thou come to thy Kingdom.
Prayer should follow upon confession of sins: but mark the word, he calls
Him Lord, albeit he saw Him hanging on the tree* there like a vile slave, yet
he acknowledges Him to be a King, when he ascribes a Kingdom to Him, albeit
he sees Him hanging there like a slave, yet he asks life of Him: albeit he saw
Him in weakness, in torment, and at the point of death. All these things are
marvelous, and ye shall see them the more marvelous, if ye will consider well
the person of him who prays, what a man before this time he was, and then what
is his estate present, and last, the person of Him to whom he directs his
Prayer.

This his conversion was marvelous: if this man had been trained up in the
school of Christ any space of time, it had been less marvelous: but being
trained up in a den of thieues, where he had lost all kind of equity and
naturalitie, where he had lived like a beast, like a lion, living by cutting
of throats, theft, and by the blood of men: this man to be turned from such
an foul heart: to get faith, and seek mercy so suddenly in a moment: such
sudden mutation is more than marvelous aad wonderful.

Then will ye look to his present estate: if he had been free in the body
without pain, so that he had gotten leisure and license to look through that
body to His Kingdom, and to that eternal Life: then this doing had been
less marvelous: but being nailed quick on the Cross, in such extreme
pain, that might have occupied and exercised all his senses: and when he is
looking and waiting for the hand of the hangman to break him quick on the
Cross, to this man to have driven his senses, and to have set them on a better
life, from that hell he was in, to that heavenly Life, it was more than
wonderful: and I say, it was as wonderful, as if he had leapt out of the
lowest hell, to the highest heaven.

Then come to the person of him to whom he prays: if he had seen Jesus
Christ standing before him like a glorious King, it had been less to have
been wondered at, but he is hanging in that shameful death, and in greater
shame than he: for they railed not on him, as they did on Christ (which, no
question, was more grievous than all torments, as if He had been a reprobate
from GOD) So if he had seen Him in glory, it had been no marvel, but to
seek life in a man who was dying ignominiously, and who was hanging in a worse
estate than Himself, and to have pierced through, and seen through such a cloud
of ignominy, such a fair Life and glory: I say, it was more than wonderful.

Further, if he had seen Him before, and been familiar with Him, heard Him
teach, and had seen His wonders, as the Apostles did, it had not been much to
marvel at: but this being the first meeting, the first acquaintance, and
never to have spoken with Him before, they met in an ignominious Cross
together, then to seek in such a death, such a life: in such ignominy, such
glory, it is a thing more than marvelous. Came any of the Jews then, and
prayed unto Him? Yea, came any of the Apostles? Came any of His Disciples?
Came either Peter, or John, or Matthew? No, all were offended with Him. I say
of this man, to the glory of God, that he shamed all that stood by, he
shamed the Apostles, and made them to cast down their faces: And I say, he
shames all men and women, who will not believe when they see Him not crucified,
as he saw, but glorified now in the Heavens, sitting at the right hand of
that Majesty: shame shall light on thee, and this Thief shall be set up in
glory, to testify against thee, and to condemn thee. 1. COR. 1.27. Paul
says, GOD will raise up things naughty, to shame things high in the world,
and to humble the pride of the flesh. If ever this was practiced, it is
practiced in this Thief. Therefore, in time learn thy lesson at this Thief:
for if he do thee no good, he shall do thee evil: and this same preaching
shall do thee evil, if it do thee no good. The LORD raised him up upon a
Gallows, to be a Teacher of Faith and Repentance, of Hope, of Patience, of
Love, and of all graces: and think no shame to learn at him: for, if thou
think shame of the Thief to be thy master, he shall give out a testimony
to aggreadge thy damnation: and he shall say, I went to teach the Infideles
on the Cross with Thee, and they heard it, and believed not, Lord, let their
damnation be aggreadged. All this that I speak tendes to this, That he who
glories, may glory in the Lord: And they who would marvel, let them marvel
at the Lord. I speak not these things, that ye should wonder at the Thief,
that silly creature: But all this is, That ye should wonder at Jesus Christ,
who wrought such a wonder at this time, and showed such a power when He was
weakened: It is a wonder to show such power in His humiliation, and such mercy
on such a vile sinner, who was not worthy that the earth should bear him,
let be to dwell in Heaven. Wonder at Him who is so merciful and gracious to
poor sinners. To Him therefore, be praise for evermore: AMEN.

THE XVIII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIII. Jesus said unto him, Verily, J say unto thee, to day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.

JOHN CHAP. XIX. Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister, Marie the wife of
Cleopas, and Marie Magdalene. Jesus saw his mother, and the disciples standing
by, whom he loved, He said unto his mother, woman, behold thy son.


WE heard the last day (Beloved in Jesus) of the repentance of one of the
Thieues that hung on the Cross with Christ: in a moment, wonderfully he
begins to be penitent for all his misdeedes, and former life: and he vtters
his penitencie, and the displeasure that was in his heart for sin in sundry
effects: First, he rebukes bitterly that blasphemy that the other Thief
speaks out against the Lord, and says, Fear thou not God, seeing thou art
in the same damnation? Thou and I suffer justly, for we have demerited all
this: but this man (pointing out Christ) has done nothing amiss. When he
has thus rebuked the Thief, he turns him about to Jesus Christ, who hung in
the midst, and he directs his prayer to Him, and says, Lord remember me
when thou come to thy Kingdom. The other, the blasphemer, would feign have
lived in the world: And therefore, because he saw that JESUS had no power
to give him this earthly life: therefore, he blasphemeth CHRIST in His face.

But the penitent Thief seeks not this present life, but desires that he may
get entry in to that Heavenly Kingdom. The last day I spoke concerning the
petition of the penitent Thief. I repeat nothing. Only wonder not at the
Thief, or at such an earnest repentance in him suddenly: b^^ wonder at Jesus
Christ, who in such weakness, hanging so shamefully upon the Cross, yet
uttered such mercy, and such infinite power, yea, one of the most miserable
catiues that ever was in the world. I go forward, and first I shall show
you of the answer that the Lord gives to the penitent Thief: and then I shall
come to the earnest recommendation that Jesus made of His Mother MARIE, unto
JOHN. The Lord answers him, Verily I say unto thee, this day thou shall be
with me in Paradise. The answer contains a promise: and the thing that the
Lord promises, is, Thou shall be with me: thou seek to be with me in
my Kingdom: thou shall be with me, and thou shall be a subject with me
and more, a follower: and whereas thou werest a vile Thief, I shall make thee
a glorious King in the Heaven. And when shall this be? Without delay: it shall
not be to morrow, or other morrow, but this same day immediately thou shall
be transported to that unspeakable glory. And where shall this be? It shall
be in Paradise. Thou shall not go to Purgatory, but into Celesti^ll
Paradise. Of this word Paradise we read in sundry places of the New
Testament, as namely, 2. COR. 12.4. (where PAVL speaks of his rauishing to
Paradise) and also REVEL. 2.7. But to leave the words, and to come to the
meaning: This Paradise signifies none other thing, but that House of the
Father, in the which is many mansions, as we said in the foureteenth
Chapter. Now would ye know the place of it? PAVL says, It is far above
these visible heavens, where Christ himself ascended, EPHESIANS. 4.10. It is the
place of the Throne of that Majesty of that Glory, and of that everlasting
rest of the Kirk of Jesus Christ, and of His Saints, where they shall rest
in a wonderful glory everlastingly. The word is borrowed from that
Paradise, that Park of pleasure, in the which ADAM and EVAH were planted, to
live in a vvonderfull pleasure for ever, if they had stood without sin.

But to come to the matter. First in this answer that the Lord makes to the
penitent Thief, ye may see a vvonderfull readiness in Christ, to hear the
petition of a miserable sinner: for he has scarcely spoken the word, when
the Lord makes an answer: and no marvel; for He that preuentes thee with
grace, ere thou think of grace, He will follow after with grace: He who
gives grace to beg grace, He will give a gracious answer. ROMAN. 8.26. The
Spirit of GOD interceadeth for us, with sighs unspeakable. That is the first
grace. Then he subjoynes* The Lord who searches the heart, knows the sense
and meaning of his own Spirit. There is the second grace. Thou shall not so
soon open thy mouth to speak to Him with the Spirit, but He shall as soon
hear thy word: thou shall not so soon have a meaning, but it shall as soon
touch the heart of the Lord, as it touches thine heart: because it is not thy
spirit, but the Lords Spirit who speaks in thee. So all the difficulty and
hardness, is, to get the first grace to pray: there is no difficulty of
the next. And there are wondrous few who gettes this grace, to beg, to
sigh, to sobb, etc. yea, where one has it, ten wantes it: and when this is
once gotten, the other follows of its own will: for if thou ask spiritual
graces, of necessity thou shall get thy petition granted. And, if we ask
earthly things, either shall we get our petition, or else the Lord once
shall show us, why He will not grant it: and so we shall have contentment
to undertake His will, and shall heartily thank Him. There is more yet in this
answer: Besides this easiness to hear, mark an abounding mercy, and
exceeding liberality, of the Lord, passing above the petition: The Thief
only prayed the Lord to remember him, when He came in His Kingdom: The Lord
aunsweres, Behold, even I give thee more than thou requirest, for thou shall
be with me this day in Paradise, so thou need not to fear that I forget
thee. The Thief seeks but a little thing: the Lord gives him more than he
can seek: the hand of the Lord is not so scarce. Will thou seek a little
thing? the Lord shall give a thousand times more than thou can seek: the
Lord has neither scant nor want. Brethren, the glory which we shall find one
day, shall be greater than we can look or hope for in this world. No, things
Heavenly, which He shall give, surmountes further above our capacity, than
the Heaven does above the Earth. Yea, if thou speak of earthly things,
finds not many by experience, that they get such an estate in the world, as
they would never have looked or hoped for: I sought but life (says David,
Psalm. 21. 5) yet the Lord gave me to be a king: that is, He gave me not only a
private and obscure life, but a glorious life in the sight of the people.
Besides this easiness and liberality of the Lord, to grant to a poor man,
above that that he durst presume, He prescribes no time, but this same day. I
know not if he durst have been so bold, as to have sought such a time, that
same day. Mark further here, a wonderful power in the Lord, at that time when
He was in a most vile and ignominious death, which was the image of Hell, to
pull a man quick on the Cross, to break Him on a Cross. The Lord is
weakened: the Jews thought more of the dirt they trod on, than of Jesus: yet
ye see what a wonderful power which strikes out from Him to the thief: this
is the power of a King, This day thou shall be with Me in Paradise What
Emperor durst speak this? Yea, He vtters the power of GOD Himself: This
promise is proper to GOD only, to promise participation of that heavenly
Kingdom. What Angel durst do this? None, but the eternal and immortal GOD.
It is true, the LORD Jesus, whilst as He hang upon the Cross, was wonderfully
weakened, and that glorious Godhead that dwelt in the humane Nature kept it
self closse for a time, and held in the beams of His glory for a time,
within that veil of His body (for if He had not kept closse that Glory of
His Godhead, the world, could not have crucified Him) yet He kept Him not so
closse, but in the Cross He manifests Himself, He does the part of a King,
and fought a fiercer battle, than all the Kings in the world. He fought
against all the enemies, and in the end He triumphs in that Cross, as in a
Chariote, and leads them all, as thieues before Him: And if there were no more
to show that He was a King, than this hasty conversion of the thief, it may
tell you, if Christ had such a power, whilst as He hang in such weakness on
the Cross: What power has He now when He is in the Heaven, exalted in the
Throne of glory. If it be so, that we feel not CHRIST powerful in us to
life, as the thief felt. Blame not JESUS, as if He wanted power sufficient
now in glory, who had such power in His humility: but blame thy self: Thou
wants that which the thief had: thou wants Faith in Christ glorified: the
thief may shame thee, who believed in Him, when He was in extreme ignominy.
Then to end all this yt has bin spoken of this answer in a word. Seeing ye
Lord of lords, ye Lord Jesus is so ready (Never was there King so ready to
hear a subject, as Jesus is:) if thou werest the vilest body that goes, a
Thief, a Harlot, etc. yet if thou will say this, Lord, remember on me, and
give me a part of thy Kingdom: if thou prayest to Him from a penitent heart,
with confidence and assurance, I promise unto thee, Heaven and Earth shall go
together, ere thou vvantest thine asking. Seeing our Lord Jesus is so liberal,
then seek more than enough, more than a Kingdom, and thou shall get more. The
only cause why we want, is in us, we have no hearts to seek it. And last:
Seeing He is so powerful, let us seek from Him with this assurance, that He
can give all things which either we can seek, or can conceive, and that
according to His effectual power working in us. Now I end with this History of
the Thief, and I come to the other History, concerning that recommendation
that Jesus makes of His Mother Marie, to John, His Disciple, whom He loved.
The Lord Jesus hanging on the Cross in extreme torment and pain: He is not
only a sufferer (howbeit indeed He sufferes all extreamitie) but in suffering
He does many works: First, He does like a King, in giving life and glory
to the Thief. All the Kings in the Earth in their Royal Robes, shall not do
so much as He did on that vile Cross. Now next, He vtters a very natural
and loving affection to His Mother, who bare Him, when He is to depart out of
this life and to be taken away hastily, He is careful how she shall live when
He is gone from her. To come to the History: We have first the occasion that
bringes on this: and secondly, the commendation it self: and thirdly, how Ihon
accepts of her. As concerning the occasion: There stands by the Cross, a man
and three women, whilst the LORD is hanging quick in extreme torment, He
spies out these four persons, MARIE His Mother, and MARIE His Mothers Sister,
that is, her kinswoman according to there HEBREW phrase, who was either the
Wise, or the Daughter of Cleopas, and MARIE MAGDALENE, a kind woman, out of
whom He had casten seven devils: (kindness meets kindness) Their hearts
were with Him, howbeit He was hanging upon the Cross. Then, if thou can
do no more unto Him, yet follow Him with these women to the death of the
Cross. There are three Mary's, better Mary's were never in the world: and
John, whom here he calls the disciple who^ Jesus loved: this style he gets in
ye Gospel, because, as Jesus loved him entirely, so he finds this love deeply
settled in his soul: and well is he that finds that the Lord loves him: All the
Kingdoms in the Earth are nothing in respect of that sense. Well. These are the
four that are standing by the Cross, together. As for John, I see now
certainly this doing of his in the following of the Lord, and this standing by
the Cross, shows, albeit that Faith in Jesus Christ, in the heart of John,
and all the rest, was wonderfully smoothered, for all were offended in Him that
night: yet that Faith in his heart was not altogether quenched: No, it was not
quenched in one of the Apostles, nor in Peter, who denied Him. To speak of
John, Think, ye that except he had had Faith, that ever he would have
followed Him to the Cross, and except he had believed that Jesus after such a
death should have risen again in glory, except he had looked for a glorious
resurrection, that ever he could have beholden such a miserable spectacle:
Faith gave him boldness to follow Christ to the Cross, Hope furnished him
comfort, when he beheld Him in ignominy and pain. These three women vtters a
tender and loving heart toward Him. Brethren, if there had been no more, but
this natural love that a mother bears to the son, Marie would never have
followed her Son, to such a vile death, if she had not believed that death
should have turned into such a glorious Life. Would she have stood beside her
Son, and seen Him torn and rent quick in such torments? What mother would
have done it? 1 Thessalonians, 4.13. ye read what Paul writes to them: I would not
have you ignorant, that ye mourn not for them which are asleep, as the
Gentiles who are desperate in their displeasure. If thou have but a natural
love in thine heart, when thou see him, or her, whom thou love, depart,
that love shall work but impatiencie in thee, and a desperate displeasure,
that is, if with that love thou have no hope of a glorious resurrection,
desperate shall be thy dolor, and it were better for thee to want thy natural
affection. Indeed it is true, our Faith* and Hope of glory after this life,
will not extinguish the natural love, neither puts it away the dolor that one
should have.

I desire not that a man should be senseless without love: and I count more of
a stone, than of one without love, and better were it, that that person were a
stone So I say, Faith and Hope will not extinguish displeasure, but it will
mitigate it so, that in a wonderful heaviness it will find joy, and thou will say, albeit we sunder now, the day will come, wherein we shall have a
joyful meeting.

Come yet to these women: They may teach all men and women to the end of the
world: Think ye not, that they should have been terrified at such a Cross,
and that Marie should have thought shame of her Son, so shamefully tormented,
and railed out on by all men. Well then, if these women by the sight of that
shameful death of Jesus Christ on the Cross are not terrified nor diuerted
from following, albeit they saw His glory to come, but very obscurely, and if
their hearts were knit with Him, whilst as He hang on the Cross, and there
was never a band so surely knit, as their hearts were with Him. Fie on all men
and women after these women, who will think shame of the Cross of Christ,
albeit they have greater presence and sight of the glory of Jesus Christ, than
these women had. Shall a silly word, shall the sword, shall the fire,
terrify thee? And if it be so, these same women shall stand up and condemn
thee in that great day. Now let us consider these words, whereby He recommends
His mother to John. The Lord, as He is looking from Him, He sees these four
standing together, (for wicked scorners stood together, so the godly who mourn
for Christ drew together) and He directs His speech to two of them: First, to
Marie, and next to John: Woman, He says, Behold thy son, poynting to John,
not to Himself. This style that He gives her would not be passed by, He calls
her not mother, but Woman, and this is the common style which Jesus gave her,
whilst as He was in the world: it lets us see whilst Jesus was in the world,
as at all times, so especially at the hour of death, whilst He is living in
the world, He had His eyes raised up from all earthly and carnal things, which
men in this life count much of, as are, mother, son, daughter, husband, wife,
kindred, Country: And by His example, He would teach us, when we are here to
know none according to the flesh: No, not Christ Himself: for in Heavens there
shall be neither father nor mother, nor husband, nor wife: but we shall be
(all old things which accompany the old creature, being abolished) like
Angels in Heaven. Therefore, Jesus, as a pattern, teaches us this, to turn
away the eye piece and piece from this Earth, and all that is in it, that we
count not much of them, but that ^e behold that heavenly life. Paul. 2. Cor.
5.16. When he was speaking of the redemption that the Lord bought with His
precious blood, says, From henceforth I will know no man according to the
flesh, and if I did know Jesus sometimes according to the flesh now I will not
know Him and he gives a reason Who ever is in Christ, let him be a new
creature, the old creatures are past away, behold all things are made new. Fie
on thee, that have thine heart fixed on these earthly things, and forgettest
Heaven. This for the style that He gives her: Come to the words, He says,
Behold thy son: As if He had said, Woman, I am to depart this life, and I put
John in my stead, and I ordain him to take the protection of thee, and to do
the duty of a son to thee, in my stead: then He turns Him to John, and
He says, Behold thy mother: As if He had said, I go out of the world, and
I leave my mother to thee, and I ordain that thou be a son to her, and she a
mother to thee, and that thou keep her, and intertaine her, so long as thou
and she live together. It may be asked, The LORD JESUS CHRIST going to Heaven,
might He not from the Heaven have kept His own mother? might He not have
taken the defense of His own mother? might He not have preserved Her from all
dangers? No question, He might have kept her well eneugh: yet He committes her
to John, whom He loves, because He loves His mother well, He commends her to
a man whom He loved intierely, He will not contemn the ordinary means, and
manner of doing, this same He does daily, the LORD JESUS has power to save
His Church, and all the members of the same, to protect and defend them, but He
will not contemn these ordinary means, He will have every one to keep
another, as He commended His mother to John to be kept: And woe be to thee,
who may, if thou keep none: And namely the LORD has a care of that infirm
sex, that women be kept by the protection of men, who are faithful. She who
is kept under the protection of any in the world, let her give CHRIST glory
for it: for it is by His direction: as Marie was directed to John. Consider
here further: The LORD at this time is in the service of His heavenly Father:
and there was never a man so occupied in His life, as He was at this hour, and
He was never so occupied all His time, as now: and He was now occupied chiefly
in suffering. It is an easy thing to be occupied in performing duties of the
service of GOD, in respect of suffering: it is a sore thing to suffer, as to be
cast in a fire, to be nailed on a Cross: yet in suffering albeit He is
occupied so, that He forgets His own self, yet when He sees His mother, He
forgets not her. I would all men should mark this lesson: The malediction of
GOD shall fall on these that deserve the curse of their mother, who glory in
it, let them glory in it as they will: our duty to GOD prejudges nothing our
duty to father or mother: thou was never so occupied in the service of GOD, as
was Jesus Christ, at this hour, who in the midst of all this did His duty
to His mother: and Christ will let us see, that our duty to our GOD stands
well with our duty to man. Will thou pull the first and the second Table
asunder, the one from the other: Will thou say, that the first prejudges the
second, thou do lie: But look the order: That CHRIST keeps in these
duties: does He first His duty to His mother? No, first, He does His duty to
His Father: He is obedient to His Father, to the death, and in the midst of
that obedience to the Father, He does His duty to His mother. Begin at thy
GOD, if thou would do thy duty: and next, come to man, and if thou passest
by GOD, to do thy duty to man, thou shall do nothing of love, nor of
sincerity. Fie on thee, and that love, and that duty thou vtterest to man:
follow not on that love thou bear to GOD, and will thou say this: I see my
duty to the King, and to my father binds me, I will do my duty to them, and
last, I will serve GOD: any thing will serve Him: will thou jest so with the
LORD, I say to thee, if thou beginnest at man, even at the King, or at thy
father or mother, and postpone the LORD, I say to thee, the LORD will have none
of thy service: And if thou hate not, says CHRIST, father and mother for my
cause, thou art not worthy of me, Luke 14.26. Then, what shall become of
them, who prefer father and mother to GOD, he is but a knave, that will take
on him the name of a Christian, and will serve men before GOD: No, that name
shall turn to thy shame. Therefore under the pain of thy life, do thy duty
first to GOD, and then for GODS cause do thy duty to man, that GOD may have
the glory of it. Further, there are some in the hour of death that will take
so little care of the world, and of them whom they leave behind them, that
they are destitute of natural affection, that they regard not if they die,
though all the world should fall in one moment: for men wanting that natural
affection, will say, What care I, if once I be gone from the world. Now there
are others, albeit they loose not altogether that natural affection, who have
their senses so occupied, and exercised about the present pain, that they will
not know their parents, kinsfolks, or any that appertain unto them. Who was
ever in such a pain as Jesus was? And yet out of the midst of torment, of
blasphemies, of wrestling with death everlasting, with the wrath of the Father,
and with all the Infernal powers, He is careful of His Mother. No man was
ever borne, that had such a natural affection as He: no son in this world
ever loved his mother so well as He. And except thou be in Jesus Christ, and
He sanctify thy affections, that in the hour of death thou may sleep in
Him sweetly; either thou shall loose altogether this natural affection, or
else it shall be suffocate: that albeit thy Parents, and all thy kindred were
about thee, thou shall have no care of them: No, thou shall not once by thine
head and countenance utter any meaning, that thou have a care of their weal.
JESUS CHRIST honored His Mother beyond any man, even on the Cross, in such
a pain, and such a displeasure. And this testifies, that natural affection
was greater in Jesus, than in any man. Further: Seeing Jesus from the Cross,
in shame, in torment, in that fearful battle, etc. commendes His Mother to
John, it tells us, that the duty which we owe to Parents, stands not in
ceremonies, so much as in performing of necessary duties. One word is greater
in the hour of death (or the meanest care; than all that thou could do
being in health. It is said, Honor thy father, and thy mother. But our lords
and gentlemen think it enough to take off their hats, and to bow their knees
to them. Stands the honor of thy Parents in a ceremony? Commendes God
hypocrisy? Learn at Jesus Christ: the honor of thy Parents stands in
performing all essential parts of thy duty to them. Was thy Mother bound
to give thee suck? and to bring thee up in thy youth? I say thou art as
straightly bound to honor thy Mother, and to nourishe her in her old age. Woe
to them that procure their mothers curse, and who are not tender to their
mothers, and will neither foster them, nor have a care of them. This example of
Jesus Christ, which is registrate in the Gospel, shall bear witness against
thee, when thy conscience shall rent and tear thee. Men are come to such
unnaturalness, that the Lion was never so cruel, as men in Scotland, to them
out of whose bellies they came. Now what does John? He takes her home heartily.
John takes another man's mother and entertaines her, and he gets but this
direction from the Cross Fie on thee that gettest a direction from the throne
of heaven, to honor thy own mother. I say not (says Christ) my mother, but
thy mother. When men will not obey Christ from that Heavenly Throne, what
shall become of them in that great day? Shame shall be heaped on them. And John
who took not home his own mother, but another man's mother, shall stand up and
condemn thee, who would not entertain thine own mother. All the speeches of
the world will not learn men in this wicked generation. Further, this is not
to be p^ssed by, that John had an House, and so had the rest of the Apostles:
say not yt they were beggars: it is but folly to place religion in beggary. I
say it in a word, These privileges in the world, Houses, wives, children, etc.
are as well sanctified to a Minister, as thy lordship is to thee. Now I
beseech thee, as ever thou would yt the Lord should bless thee and thy
possesho^s in this world, and should give thee an hope of yt life to come, let
the Ministers of the Gospel have a part of their own: (It is not yours:) as
ever ye would give an account to the Judge, and to be answerable to Him in yt
great Checker: for all the blood of perishing souls shall be required at
them, who withdraw these temporal things whereon those should be sustained,
whom God has sent to feed the souls of men and women to that Heavenly life.
To the Lord of that life, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for evermore: Amen.

THE XIX. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.



MARK CHAP. XV.



LVKE, CHAP. XXIII.




BELOVED in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, we have heard the last day, that the Lord,
when He is hanging on the Cross, He was not only occupied in suffering, at
the will of His Heavenly Father; but also He was occupied in doing. First we
heard He did like a king, howbeit He hung on the Cross like a vile slave in
the sight of the world: Yea, He did like God, He appardoned the poor Thief
that hung at His right hand, and was penitent, and sought grace and mercy at
Him for his sins: and He makes a promise to him, that he should be with
Him shortly in Paradise. Then next we heard, that when as He hung quick on
the Cross, He did like a loving and kind Son to His Mother, who bare Him: He
recommends her earnestly to be entertained with John His well beloved disciple.
Now in this days exercise we have a rehearsal of other things that fell
ou^ when as Jesus hung on the Cross: there falls a wonder, there falls a
darkness at the noone-tide, the Sun is obscured: the time is noted, when,
at the sixth hour, the space of three hours, as we shall hear: All the time
that He hung on the Cross, the darkness continued on the Earth: The next
thing we have, namely, out of Matthew and Mark, an heavy complaint, that the
Lord falls out into when He had hung on the Cross about three hours: for
He falls out in the beginning of the ninth hour into an heavy complaint to
His Father, saying, My GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me? Then we have
how the Jews misconstrues the voice of the Lord: but first we shall speak of
the wonder: there falls a darkness in the whole land: or as some interpret, on
the whole earth, the cause is noted: The Sun which should have given light,
is obscured: a marvelous Eclipse contrary to the common course of Nature,
fell on the Sun. The time is noted: When it was the sixth hour. Now,
Brethren, This place requires, that I should speak something concerning the
division of the night, and the day: for this is requisite for the understanding
of the History of the Passion of Jesus Christ: the Jews took up the
beginning of their night, from the going down of the Sun, and ended at the
rising of the Sun: they divided their night in twelve hours, whether long or
short: they had a more compendious division, and divided it in four parts,
which they called quatuor vigilias, four watches, every watch containing three
hours: as for their day, they measured it from the rising of the Sun in the
morning, to the going down: and as they divided the night: so did they the
day in twelve hours, whether it were long or short: and as they divided the
night, so did they the day in four parts, each part containing three hours:
they called the first part of the day, the first morning, prima diluculi, and
the first hour, albeit it contained three hours, taking the name from the
hour where it began, the second part, which contained other three hours:
they called the third hour, taking the name from the hour it began at,
speaking exclusive, as we use to say: the third part taking the name from the
part it began at, they called the sixth hour: the fourth part they called the
ninth hour. This much for the division of the day and night, after the
fashion of the Jews. To apply this to our purpose, In this History of the
Passion of Jesus Christ, ye shall find mention of all these four parts: of
the first, the third, sixth, and ninth. In the first hour, or in the morning,
the LORD JESUS was led into the Common Hall, to Pilate to be accused: His
accusation continued the first three hours, and much of the third hour, or
second quarter, as we counted it: His accusation continued about the space of
five hours: Then alitle after the sixth hour in the end of the third hour:
as JOHN in his nineteen Chapter says, The doom and sentence of damnation was
given out against the Lord, In the same third hour, as MARK in his fourteenth
Chapter says, The Lord Jesus was crucified, so that He was both condemned and
crucified in the end of the third hour: So between eleven and twelve, a short
space passed between the sentence of damnation, and the execution. In the sixth
hour, which was the third part of their day: ye see, there falls out, a
fearful and terrible darkness on the face of the earth: and according to our
account the darkness remains from twelve hours, to three in the afternoon,
the space of three hours: for so long hang the Lord upon the Cross. Then ye
have mention here of the ninth hour, the fourth part of their day. The Lord
then uttered His complaint to His Father: My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? This is according to our account when it was three after noone:
and hastily after this, He yeeldes His blessed Spirit in the hands of His
Father. So the Lord Jesus died, and yielded the Spirit, between three and
four hours afternoon. Now this shortly, for the better understanding of the
History. Now to speak of this wonder and darkness, His heavenly Father
would testify by this darkness, that whilst His glorious Son was humbled on
that vile and ignominious Cross: and as Paul to the Philippians 2. says
Whilst as He was weakened, and made of no reputation, at this time His Father
would testify, not only of His innocence, as He was man, but also of His
glory, as He was God. In humbling of Him, the Father would glorify Him: But
will ye look to the Sun, and the senseless creatures of Heaven and Earth,
the very Sun and senseless creatures would testify, that they were addebted
unto that glorious Creator: they would testify that sorrow that they had,
that the Lord of glory should suffer such an ignominious death. The senseless
creatures were moved, the Sun gloomes, and hides his face at that wicked
action: the earth shiuers and quakes, ready to swallow up and devour those
miserable persons: and the Sun, and the senseless creatures begin to teach
that senseless and hardened people, with whom they had to do: Not with a man,
but with the Lord of glory: but teach what they would teach (here is a
miserable example of induration) this miserable people for all this darkness
was not moved, they would not turn. So, Brethren, see what it is once to be
given to a reprobate sense: if the LORD give thee up to a reprobate sense, the
earth shall not be so senseless as thou: and though the earth should stand up
and teach thee, thou shall not hear nor see what it says: Of all judgments
that falls on the soul, this reprobate sense is the heauiest and most
dangerous: and if thou continuest in it, it were a thousand times better for
thee, when thou werest made a man or a woman, to have been made a stock or a
stone: for if there be not a wakning in time out of so dead a sleep, ere ever
thou beware, the wrath of God from He^uen shall overtake thee, when thou criest
peace: then shall the wrath come, thou shall not get leisure to think of
mercy. The Lord waken this senseless generation, for there was never a
generation more senseless than this generation is, notwithstanding of so many
voices sounding, not only voices of men, but of the heaven, the earth, and
senseless creatures. I will speak sparingly of this darkning, and (as the
Philosopher calls it) the eclipse of the Sun, for it serves not much to
edification: Only thus far, that ye may see the greatness of the wonder, and
that ye may wonder at the Lord Jesus hanging on the Cross: This Eclipse was
not natural, for the natural Eclipse of the Sun, falls out, when the
Moon is in the changing, at the which time there is a concurse and conjunction
between the two Planets, the Sun, and the Moon: The Moon goes under the
Sun, and takes away a great part of the light of the Sun from the Earth.
But this Eclipse falls out in the full moon. The Law commanded the Passover
to be celebrate in the month of March, the fourteenth day of their month, in
the which time, the Sun and the Moon are as far asunder as they can be, the
one being in the one side of the Heaven, and the other on the other side: so
that between them the whole Globe of the Earth is cast in. But in this
Eclipse against Nature, the Moon which was now opposite to the Sun, turns
her suddenly about, and comes under the Sun, and hides the sight thereof, and
brings on a terrible darkness on the world: So that, as ye will read in
profane writings, during that darkness, the stars were seen at the
Noonetide, as at Midnight. And to be short, it is written that the Philosophers
in Athens marking this Eclipse, endeavored to search the cause of it, could
not find out the natural cause, and one Dionisius Areopagita said, It
behooued to be that, either the God of Nature suffered, or else the world
should suddenly be dissolved, and be lied not. The Lord Jesus the GOD of Nature
suffered, and they raised up an Altar then, and wrote on it, To the unknown
God, whereof ye read in the Acts 17.

This for the wonder. Now let us come to that that fell out in the ninth
hour, that is, our three hours afternoon: Mark, This serves for our
edification: ye heard, the Lord Jesus was in extreme agony, and anguishe in
His soul, and also He suffered great pain in His body: yet all was nothing
to that extreme bitterness, that He felt in His soul when as He hung on
the Cross. Now in this agony, He vtters this voice with a cry, Eli, Eli,
lamasabachthani, that is, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These are
the first words of the XXII. PSALM: for David being the Type of Christ, and
feeling that vexation of spirit in some measure, which Christ felt out of
measure, he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This place
and these words minister occasion unto us, to speak of the inward conflict and
passion that Jesus had in His soul: And, that ye may understand this matter
the better, I shall rehearse unto you the whole Passion of JESUS CHRIST, in as
few words as I can. Then, the whole life of Jesus Christ whilst He was in
this world, was a continual suffering of the burden of our sins that He
bare, and that obedience to His Father, required, that not only in His
lifetime should He do for our salvation: but chiefly, it required, that
the Mediator should die. All that He did had been nothing worth to us, and
if He had not died: for as the Apostle says, HEBR. CHAP. IX. VERSE. XXII. No
remission of sins without blood. Think not, that ever thy sins shall be
forgiven thee, without the shedding of the blood of Jesus Christ: And either
thou must die, or have part in the death of the Mediator. The end of His
suffering, was the perfect abolishing and undoing of the sins of the Elect,
as ye may read in the ninth CHAPTER to the HEBREWS. Now mark again: This
perfect abolishing and undoing of our sins required a perfect passion and
suffering of the Mediator. Whether ye look to the time, it required a perfect
time: or will ye look to the greatness of it, it required an infinite
quantity of greatness: for if it had not been perfect in time and quantity,
thou had never been redeamed.

Brethren, that ye may the better understand the whole Passion of JESUS
CHRIST, I shall point out unto you the whole manner of His sufferinges: For,
why should we not know this? Our life stands in His death: He suffered
all for us. And I see through out the Scripture, the whole sufferinges of
Christ may be drawn to these three sorts: The first is, The Lord Jesus
suffered temptations: Secondly, The Lord Jesus suffered shame and ignominy:
the GOD of glory suffered shame: How agree these two together, Shame and
Glory? The third, the LORD JESUS suffered pain, and that very grievous
pain in soul and body: I shall go through all these three kinds of
suffering shortly, and so I shall make an end: And first, to speak of these
temptations shortly. I call the temptations that the LORD suffered, those
tryalles of Him, by the Devil His enemy, for he let Him never rest, (and
woeful was that battle that He had with him on the Cross) and His
temptations by the ministers of the Devil in the world, who solicitated Him
to leave His GOD, even such temptations as we are subject to in this world,
only except sin: for He knew no sin, there was not one spotte of sin
in that holy One: and so He was not subject to these foul motions, and
inward temptations, as we are, who dare not face the Sun nor the Moon. And
wherefore suffered He all these temptations? Even for thy cause: the end of
all His suffering was, that He might succor all them who were tempted either
in body or soul. HEBR. Chap. 2. verse. 18. Art thou tempted: if thou can
have recourse to Him, who was tempted for thy sake, He will pity thee: As
He suffered, and was tempted, so by His suffering, He has learned to pity
thee. He who never has tasted of misery, he cannot pity the miserable
body: And therefore, when thou art tempted, go to CHRIST, and say, LORD,
thou wast tempted as I am, therefore, now help and succor me. Thus far for
the first sort of Christ's sufferinges.

The second sort was His shame and ignominy, that open ignominy that He
suffered, especially on the Cross. Whether ye look to His accusation, (they
accused that most innocent One, as a vile sinner) or whether ye look to all
these false Testimonies that were brought against Him, or yet whether ye look
to the tauntes and mockinges that He suffered, and to that spitting on His
face, and blasphemies upon the Cross. In all these ye shall s^e that shame He
suffered for our sins. The Apostle, ROMAN. Chap. 15. verse. 3. says, Jesus
Christ, when he was in the world, he spared not, nor he pleased not
himself, as we do: but, as it is written. The rebukes of them which rebuke
thee fell on me. All these despites thou should have suffered, but the LORD
He translated them upon Himself. O the shame that the sinner should have
suffered, and if the LORD JESUS had not taken it off the back of the sinner,
and laid it on His own back. Come to the last sort: Thou who would be
freed of pain, either in body, or soul: Mark the pain of the Lord, lay
hold on it, and apply it to thy soul: for otherwise, Nothing shall remain
for thee, but pain everlastingly: all the kingdoms of the world shall not
save thee. Then the last sort, was pain and dolor in body, and pain and
dolor in soul, but in the soul chiefly: Look to the time of it, from His
first conception, to His last breath: scarcely was the Lord well borne when
through the persecution of Herod the Tyranne, His mother was compelled to flee
with Him to Egypt, from that time He was under continual affliction, whilst as
He entered into the thirty year of His age, when He takes upon Him the part
of a Mediator for mankind: from this forth (for He lived after this space
three years, and an half) His pain grew, and increased in body and soul:
and ay nearer the last hour His displeasure and pain grew the more.

Now, Brethren, we shall speak shortly of these pains and dolours that the
Lord suffered in the time of these three years, and an half: for the Gospel
makes mention of that suffering: during this space, the Lord Jesus is in
continual pain both of body and soul: not in body only, but chiefly in the
soul. His pain during this time is chiefly that inward anguish: all His
pain was for our sins: if ye compare the soul and the body together, the
soul is ten times worse, and more sinful than the body: the soul is nothing
but a sink of sin: all sin proceeds out of that stinking puddle of the
soul: The body has no life in it, but that which it has of the soul: and
therefore seeing the Lord offered Him to suffer for our sins, He behooued to
suffer chiefly in the soul.

What shall I say of the impudent Papists, who maintain this doctrine, that
the Lord suffered not that inward pain of the soul: O! that they dare be so
bold, as to avouch such doctrine against the manifest words of the Holy
Spirit: They know not what sin is: They know not what is the greatness of
the evil of sin, or the Justice of GOD: and lastly they know not what is the
mercy of JESUS CHRIST, In a word I proclaim both before GOD, and His Angels,
the Pope and his shauelings are open enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, if it
were but in this, that they take away the chief part of His suffering. Be
thou a Papist, if thou continuest in that fantasy, thou shall never have no
part, nor portion of His suffering.

Concerning the suffering of His body, and of that ignominious death of the
Cross, we have been speaking: Only now I shall point out the ground
whereupon the sufferings of the LORD arises: First, they rise of that natural
infirmity: He was an infirm man without sin: He hungered, as we do, He
thirsted, as we, and through traveling (He rested never day nor night) and
sojourned through the world: He wearied, as we do.

Then another ground was, that sadness and heaviness of the soul: He was in
a continual sadness: there was never so sad a man as He was: we read that He
did weep, but we never read that He did laugh. And think not, that when the
soul is in heaviness, that the body can be well. And last, His suffering
proceeded of a violent dealing against Him, and nayling Him on the Cross:
(who was so violently handled, as the LORD of glory was.)

I leave this, and we will speak of the dolours which He suffered in His
soul: First, the LORD JESUS, whilst as He traveled up and down amongst His
people, He was in a continual displeasure. When He looked upon that
obstinate people, He was sad when He entered in Jerusalem, He vvepes and
says, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, feign would J have gathered you, as a hen
gathers her birds under her wings, but thou would not.

The most special grief that the LORD suffered in His soul, was that which
Luke in his twentieth two Chapter names an agony, that is, an anguish in the
soul, and an heavy pain proceeding from a battle that He had in His soul:
it proceeded from the wrestling with the wrath of GOD, and infinite wrath)
with Hell, and the powers of it, with death not temporal, but everlastingly.

Now this agony He vtters in the Garden, when He says, My soul is heavy
on all sides, even to the death. That word was expressed out of that bitter
anguish that He had in His soul, whilst He spoke so.

To speak of the time of it, I am of that mind, that it was not only when
He was in the Garden, but before in the twelfth Chapter of John, when He
was speaking to His disciples He says, My soul is troubled: And He turns
Him to His Father, and He says, Father save me from this hour, yet the
nearer He drew to death, it grew greater and greater: it was greater in the
Garden, than it was of before: but now on the Cross, when He said, My God,
my God why have thou forsaken Me? it was the greatest of all. I will speak
something of this, I will certify you, the special understanding of the
suffering of Jesus Christ stands in the knowing of this inward agony which
JESUS CHRIST had in His soul: and if ye know not this, ye know nothing of
His suffering: it is true, that no tongue is able to tell it: No, all the
tongues of Angels: the heart of man, nor Angel, is not able to conceive the
greatness of it. The words of the Scriptures express not the greatness of
the anguish but so far forth as the LORD will give me the grace, I will
speak somewhat of it. In the words that the Spirit uses in the Scripture ye
shall find this: The LORD suffers a torment in His soul: then ye shall see
in the words, an exceeding greatness of the anguish in the soul: and lastly,
ye shall see in the words of the Spirit, not only that He suffered anguish in
the soul, and the greatness of it, but the very degrees and parts of it
particularly.

First, go to the old Testament, in the fiftieth and third Chapter, and fifth
verse of the prophecy of Esaias, has these words, It pleased the LORD JEHOVAH,
to break Him, the words importes, not only the breaking of the body, but also
of the soul.

Then in the hundredth and sixteen Psalm, and at the fifth verse David who was
a type of CHRIST says, The sorrows of death have compassed Me, and the
anguish of Hell has overtaken Me: These words importe not only a bodily
suffering, but they importe an anguish in the soul.

Come to the New Testament* Matthew in his twentieth and sixth Chapter, My
soul is heavy and compassed to the death. Would thou have the greatness
of it, He says, On all sides: And whereto? Even to the death: not of the
temporal death* but even to the death of the soul. Then Luke in his twentieth
and two Chapter says, He was in an agony: He was in anguish, He was
wrestling. With whom was this? His disciples were away from Him: There was no
man with Him. It was with the wrath of the Father from Heaven with a wrath
unspeakable. Peter 2. Acts says, GOD raised Him up from death, and raised Him
the doloures of death, being loosed, He could not be retained with them. The
words in their own language is, (...), and signifies extreme dolor, like
as a woman has in bearing her birth. The Spirit of GOD uses to express the
pain of the Hell in the soul by a similitude of a woman who trauelleth in
birth: for of all pains in the body, it is the greatest and sorest, and ye
that have felt it, ye know, that ye could not live, if it continued with
you. 1. THESSALON. CHAP. 5. VERSE. 3. He settes down the pain of Hell, by
that similitude, When they shall say, Peace, then shall come the sudden
doloure upon them, like a woman traveling, then shall they not escape. And
MARK, CHAP. 14. VERSE. 33. comes on more particularly, and says, Not only
he had a pain in the soul: but also he settes down the degrees of the
pain. The native Language is most proper, (...): that is, He began to be
astonished: and then (...), He began to be in a grievous and extreme
anguishe. When the wrath began to press down the soul, then the anguishe
arose, and the extreamitie of pain.

But I leave the opening up of all these words until the next occasion, and
so to end: As we speak of the suffering of CHRIST, So I beseech GOD to open
our souls, and our hearts, to feel it: For there is no life, but in His
suffering: And the LORD give us grace, that our hearts may take fast hold
of his sadness and dolor to our joye everlasting. To this LORD be Honor
and Praise, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XX. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII. JESUS cried with a loud voice, saying, ELI, ELI,
LAMASABACHTHANI? that is, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?


THE last day (well-beloved in Christ) upon occasion offered in this place, we
began to rehearse over all the whole Passion of Christ: and we brought the
matter to that agony, and that inward anguish of the soul, which the Lord
suffered, beside all the outward passions of His body, especially during the
time of three years and an half, to wit, the time in the which He bare
openly the office of a Mediator betwixt God and man. Now as the Lord will give
us grace, by occasion of this voice, whereby the Lord uttered this heavy
complaint to His Father, before He yield up the ghost, when He says, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? we shall speak this day of that inward
agony and anguishe of the soul that the Lord was in, when He uttered this
voice. I perceive three grounds whereby we may be able in some measure (for
who is able to attain to the perfect knowledge of the greatness of that agony
that the Lord suffered?) to come to the knowledge of that agony. The first
ground I shall take out of the words of Scripture, whereby that agony is
expressed. The second ground I take from these effects, that the Lord uttered,
partly in prayer, and partly in heavy complaint in that agony. And the third
ground I shall take from our own feeling. What auailes all the knowledge in
the world without feeling of His Passion, and of His Resurrection? Then to
go forward in order, and to open up every one of these grounds: The last day
I began to bring to you the words of Scripture, some out of the old Testament,
and some out of the New, by the which this inward agony yt the Lord suffered in
his soul is expressed most viuely. I cited to you those words that are in the
53. chap. of Esaias, where there is a viue and lively prophecy of Jesus to come
into the world: The Lord (says the Prophet) took pleasure to break him. This
breaking is not only of the body on the Cross, but chiefly in breaking of
the soul: for the soul of Jesus was rent with sorrow. Then I cited out of the
116. Psalm, the words of David, being the type of Christ: The dolours of death
have compassed me, the sorrows of Hell have overtaken me. Then I came to the
Gospel of Matthew, and I cited these words out of the 26. CHAP. My soul is
heavy on all sides to the death. There is the heaviness of the soul, and an
heaviness without any joy, and a heaviness to death, even to everlasting
death. Then I came to Luke, who in his 22. CHAP. has these words, And he was
in an agony: there is a battle. But where? In the Garden. With whom? None was
fighting with Him: no man was near Him. Whom with, but with the heavy wrath
of the Father, that He felt in His soul? In the 2. of the Acts I cited the
words of Peter, Whom God raised up again, when He had loosed the dolours of
death: The word in its own languague signifies that pain that women suffer in
traveling, whereby the Scripture uses to express the pain of Hell. And last
of all I came to the words of Mark, in his 14. Chap. where he not only vtters
this inward pain that the Lord had in His soul, but also the greatness of
it, and the degrees, and parts thereof. The words are, When the Lord was in
the Garden, he began to be afraid, and astonished, and then to be in a
wonderful heaviness. The words in their own language are more significatiue.

Now Brethren, we shall examine and weigh these words of Mark.The first
word that Mark uses signifies an astonishment, a fear, and an horror,
whereby the Lord in the Garden was troubled suddenly from the Heaven: so that
all the members of His body shook and trembled. It is not a matter of jestes:
it arose upon a sense of the wrath of God coming from Heaven: and a most
vehement sense thereof, that lighted on Him suddenly, because He bare our
sins, and this terrible wrath ouer-tooke all the powers of His soul, and
occupied them. Brethren, I take this to be none other thing, but that first
stroke of everlasting death, whereby the reprobate shall be stricken in the
first entry to Hell, when they set in their head first to Hell, the wrath
shall so strike them, that all the powers of the soul shall be dammished. The
suffering of Christ in His soul is the viue image of the suffering of the
reprobate in Hell. And ^t is it that Paul in the 1. Epistle to the
Thessalonians, sets down, When they shall cry peace, and all things are sure,
then sudden destruction approaches: the wrath and vengeance from Heaven lights
on suddenly: so that all the hairs of their heads shall stand on end, and it
shall come upon them suddenly, even as the showers and dolor, comes on a woman
who is traveling in birth. I can give no better example of it, than ye have in
the Prophecy of Daniel, in Belshazzar the profane man, he is sitting with his
Princes, banketting and profaning the holy vessels of the House of the Lord.
What falls out? he sees come out of the wall suddenly, an hand writting, he
sees it not so soon, (look the first stroke of Hell) but he is stricken with a
fear and horror, his knees shiuer and smite one another, and he becomes like
a dead man: a viue image of Hell.

This for the first word that Mark uses, and the first part of that agony
that JESUS CHRIST suffered for us in His soul. Now we have to weigh the
second word, He says, He began to be astonished, and to be in a
wonderful heaviness, The word in its own language signifies an extreme
pain in the soul: Who is able to tell it? (The Lord save us from the
extreamitie thereof) it rose upon that horrible wrath that He was stricken
with, and was lying on Him, and pressing down His soul: First, He was
stricken, then the heavy wrath of GOD lies still on the soul so that He has
dolor in His soul, that all the powers of His soul is full of wrath. Who can
bear the wrath of the Omnipotent GOD: No, not CHRIST as He was man only, no
not all the Angels in Heaven: The LORD save us from it. When the wrath of the
great GOD strikes on any in the Hell, all the powers of the soul fail, and
all leave off to do their duties, being full of displeasure.

It is a mar^eilous thing (for as careful as the LORD was wount to be of the
redemption of man* for that was His only care night and day, it was His meat
and drink) yet all that care was now away, and He forgets it, and He falls
out in a Prayer, and He says, Take away this cup from Me: and that was the
cup of His Passion for our Redemption: yea He bids His Father take it away,
which if it had been taken from Him, never a soul should have been redeemed:
Consider then, if He was in an agony, or not: when He forgate the work of
our Redemption. Now we must not think that this forgetfulness came of sin
(our forgetfulness comes of sin) the Holy one had no sin: but it rose of
an infirmity of Nature, wherewith He was cled for our sin. Ye see, if a
man be in a distress in the soul the senses, and all the powers of the soul
are so occupied about that sorrow, that they forget their own functions and
operations, to help the part that is distressed: Even so it was with the LORD:
for when for our sins He was vnderlying the wrath of that Omnipotent Judge,
all the faculties of His soul, His understanding, His memory* etc, left all
their functions, that all might concur to help Him in that common agony.
Well, Brethren, if ye would see Hell, ye have here the viue image of it: The
reprobate after that at the first they are astonished with the sudden wrath:
as they continue in Hell, their dolor and pain shall ever be augmented: the
wrath shall still lie upon them, like a mountain tumbling on them, and
pressing them ever in soul and body: so that they remain ever in this
everlasting pain. Christ made an end of it: but if thou be a reprobate: this
anguish shall never leave thee. Oh! that the world will not know this, and
once pause on it: would they then, think ye, run to all mischief as they
do. And if once thou be cast into Hell, mountains of dolor, and heaps of
wrath shall be heaped on thee for evermore. These are two parts of that Hell
that the Lord suffers: now would ye have the third part* I remit you to the
5. Chapter to the Hebrews where there Paul says, that the Lord when He
prayed in the days of His flesh, with strong cries, and with tears, He
was heard: He had a terrible fear, beside the present pain: He was in a
fear of a greater danger to ensue. If thou go to Hell once, beside the
present pain that thou shall be in: And, O the weight of that pain that
shall be on thee! thou shall ever have a terrible fear of a greater pain to
fall on thee, ye pain of Hell is not ended in a moment, but you shall find the
pain g^ovving everlastingly, and a mountain of wrath shall come after
another, as ye waves of the sea follovving one another. It is a sore matter to
be in this pain everlastingly.

Now we have heard the first ground out of the words of the Holy Spirit: Come
to the second ground. When He was in the agony, He vtters such effects, that
they who saw Him, and heard that pitiful voice, might easily see, what anguish
He had in the soul, He falls out in a prayer, Father, take away this cup;
that is, the cup of thy wrath, wherein He vtters a forgetfulness of our
redemption, the dolor so increases upon Him, that He prays with greater
intention, with tears, and with strong cries, and with weeping. Hell will
cause thee to mourn, and compel thee to squeele, and houle like a dog:
laugh not, it will cause thee to gnash thy teeth, if thou be cast in utter
darkness: yet as He prays, the wrath increases, that He did sweat blood, and
the drops of blood fell from His face to the ground. What man read ye of, or
heard ye ever of, or ever shall, that was in such a fear, in such a torment,
that for the fear of the torment, he did sweat blood. So, that ye see, that
the Lord was in such anguish, as never a man was. Were any of the Martyrs in
such a fear, or such an anguish, as this? No, no: Then as He vtters His
agony in prayer, so He vtters it in many, heavy and bitter complaints, John
12. When he is speaking of His glorification suddenly, He breaks off, and
says, My soul is troubled, what shall I say? and then He turned Him to His
Father, and says, Save me from this hour: and last He says, My soul is
heavy on all sides, even to the death. But of all complaints, this that He
vtters on the Cross: My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? is the most
heavy, and it proceeds from the most bitter anguish of the soul. Now the
Lord grant, that this complaint may save us from that complaint of the
reprobate, that they shall utter in Hell: No question, these words utter a
forsaking of Him, and that He was deserted for a time: He was left off,
without all comfort in the world: Of all joy that He was wount to have: all joy
was taken from Him: They import not a diuulsion of the Godhead from the
manhead: the glorious Godhead dwelt in the Lord Jesus, whilst as He hang on the
Cross: GOD never left Him at any time, after that once the Son of God took
to Himself our flesh: He left it never, no, not on the Cross, nor in the
grave: He left it never, nor never shall, but the Godhead kept it self so
closse in Christ the man, that it would let Him have no joy, whilst He should
pay that ransom to the uttermost farthing, whereby the justice of God was
satisfied for our sins. And this is the thing He complains on: Yet whilst He
says, My God, my God, He lets us see He despaires not, but in the mean time
whilst He was left, He cleau^th to God, and has His confidence in His God,
the Devil and all the world cannot separate Him from His GOD that dwelt within
Him. Confidence in God will ofttimes be in the godly without feeling of joy,
albeit that Spirit will not be out of their souls: The Spirit will minister no
joy to them, yet the poor soul will never leave off to put confidence in God.
Well, this complaint tells us, that Jesus Christ was deserted for a time, to
save us, who should have been reprobates for ever. But there is a great
difference between Jesus Christ, and the reprobate. Indeed they agree in
this, that both He and they are left comfor^l^sse, He uttered a great
complaint: so they shall complain and houle: And as He cried and wept, so
shall they: But here is the difference. He was for a time in a manner
reprobate, they shall be made reprobates for ever: He complained for a time,
but they shall complain for ever: He ceases not to put His confidence in God:
the reprobate shall have no confidence, but as God shall leave them, so shall
they leave God, and as God shall turn His back on them, so shall they turn
their back on God. This is a sore matter. Then Jesus He uttered this
complaint, My God, my God: They shall not say, My God, why have thou left me:
but shall cry, alas, for ever! God has left me for ever, and cast me off from
His presence for ever. This speech My God, is a speech of confidence, and He
cleaues to God in His heart, they shall shoute and cry, GOD has left me for
evermore and cast me off. This for the two grounds, come to the third ground,
that is, our own feeling: for if thou feel not, all thy knowledge auailes
not a straw, Paul to the Phillippians Chapter 3. says, He counted all things
to be but loss and dung, that he might know Him, that is, Jesus Christ. The^
he sets down the parts of this knowledge, that I may know Him, and the virtue
of His resurrection, and the communion of His Passions, and be made conformable
to His death. Wherein stands ye knowledge of the resurrection of Christ? It is
not eneugh to know it only: The knowledge stands in a fe^ling of the force of
the glorious resurrection in thine heart, and thou shall feel the old canker
of sin mortified, and thee to be quickened with a new life to live to God.
And likewise wherein stands the knowledge of His suffering? It stands of the
feeling in thine heart of the mortification of sin: Thou must feel a
regeneration in thee, or else thou feel nothing, and thy soul shall get no
life, howbeit thou knew all the Bible: All this knowledge of Christ is but a
dream, without a feeling: and thou art but sleeping, except thou find a
virtue proceeding from His suffering to thy soul, to reform it. But to speak
of that feeling-knowledge of Jesus Christ who died for our sins: How shall
thou find and feel in thine heart that He suff^red anguishe for thy sins,
not only in body, but also in soul? I think there should be no body, but
they should be meditating on an answer: I shall tell you, how I, and thou,
and every one of us shall feel that curse and malediction that Jesus
suffered, and that was laid on Him for our sins. If I find in my soul in
some measure that wrath for my sins, which Jesus felt in full measure (Lord
save us from that measure) if I taste and get a proouing of that bitter cup
of the wrath of God, that Jesus drank the dregs of, and all for my sins:
if I taste of it, and put it to my mouth, when I feel this way and taste, I
will begin and reason: If I find my sins and the burden thereof so heavy,
that I can scarcely bear one sin among a thousand, yea, though it were but
an evil thought: If I find the burden of my sins so heavy, who am but a
man, O how heavy must all the sins of the Elect be, that Jesus bare on His
back! (Look how I come to His feeling from the other.) Then I will say, O
how heavy were the sins that JESUS bare on His back! And then I shall
say, If once I can but taste one drop of that wrath that follows my sins,
and finds it to be so bitter: (Let them taste of that cup who will, they
never tasted of so bitter a thing) Then will I say, O how bitter was that
full cup of wrath whereof JESUS drank out the dregs and all, seeing one
drop of it is so bitter in my soul. There we come in some measure to the
feeling of that bitter wrath that JESUS felt. Behold the dealing of GOD with
His own: for although He loved them never so well, yet He will let them
feel the burden of their own sins in some measure, and He will tie the
burden of them on their own backs, whilst they groan and peach: and He will
touch them with the sense of wrath from heaven; and that to let them understand
how sad and heavy a wrath it was that Jesus suffered for our redemption.
And when we feel any burden for sin, let us run to meditate on the sore
burden of JESUS CHRIST, or else thy sickness and thy trouble is not
sanctified to thee, if thou feel not that Jesus Christ has borne the
burden of thy sin. Well, Brethren, this is a way, whereby we come to the
feeling knowledge of the pain that CHRIST suffered, and this is bitter. But
there is a sweeter manner: If I feel that sweet mercy of GOD in mine heart,
and that peace of conscience in my soul, I will begin and reason with my
self after this manner: This mercy that I taste of, this peace of conscience
that I have, this joy and gladness that I taste, it behooued to proceed out
of the malediction, and out of the wrath that lighted on my Mediator, it had
been impossible for me to taste of mercy, if my Redeemer had not drunken out
that full cup of wrath. And I say, indeed to thee, if the Lord Jesus Christ
had not drunken out that cup of the wrath of God, there had never been such
a thing, as any joy, or any piece of conscience in this world, nor in the
world to come, if it had not been ransomed with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ; there is not one drop of grace, peace or joy, but that which is
bought and which the blood of Jesus Christ, has paid for. Alas, if the world
could understand how dear one drop of grace is: No, ere one drop of grace
came, it behooved the Lord to be taken, and put in the winepresse of Hell, and
tread on, and tramped on with the feet of the wrath of God: for this Justice
of God who was offended, should never have suffered one drop of grace to
come, if it had not been satisfied by the blood of the mediator.

Now to end this purpose, I know perfectly that all this speech of the Cross,
is but foolishness to the wise of the world: These wise Heads who compass
the World with wisdom, all is but foolishness to them. It is foolishness to
them who perish, as Paul says, 2. Cor. 4.4. If thou find the Cross of
Jesus but foolishness, take thee a doom: thou shall perish, all the world
shall not save thee: and again by the contrary says Paul, The speech of the
Cross is the wisdom of God, and the power of God to them who are saved. All
is but foolishness in respect of the Cross: all the strength and might of the
world, and things under Heaven is but weakness, in respect of Jesus Christ,
and His strength. If thou countest the speech of the Cross, to be power and
vvisdome: assure thy self, thou have an earnest penny, that thou shall get
life, and blessed is that soul that delites to hear of ye Cross of Christ,
and counts it to be the power and wisdom of God, which shines wonderfully in
this base Cross: ye wisdom of GOD shined never so in the creation of the
Heavens, and of the world, as in the vile and abject Cross of JESUS CHRIST.
The power of GOD shined not so much in creating thee of nothing, as it shines
in thy redemption: The more foolish that this mean is that the LORD uses in
redemption, to wit, a silly Cross; the more base it appears to be, the
greater is the glory of the wisdom of GOD, who wrought such a great work of
redemption through such base means. I say, the more infirm that this mean is,
(for what is more infirm than a silly poor man, or a vile Cross?) the power
of GOD appears ye greater, who has wrought such a glorious work out of such
a base mean. And I say, if thy redemption had been wrought with a glory, as
the Jews and the Gentiles imagined, if GOD had yielded to their fantasy, and
wrought our redemption by a glorious mean, that glory of GOD had been
obscured, and the mean had gotten all the glory. But it has pleased the LORD
to work this work of redemption and salvation by base and naughty means,
that the world respects no more of, than the dirt which they tread on. Look
what is the difference betwixt the wisdom of GOD, and the wisdom of man:
Will ye look to the cause of our redemption, to JESUS CHRIST, or to the
Professors, and to Ministers, they are the foolishest in the world: silly
bodies, and compare them with potent men, they are but contemptible, and of no
valor: and, compare them with wise men, they are but fools. So look to the
Cross, and to the Ministry thereof, whereby we are saved, all is weak,
base, and contemptible: and all to this end, that the LORD only may get
the glory: and, as the APOSTLE says, He that glories, may only glory in the
LORD: And let every one of us give glory to that LORD of Glory: To whom
with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Praise for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XXI. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.







MARK, CHAP. XV.





LVKE CHAP. XXIII.

JOHN CHAP. XIX.






DVRING the time that the LORD JESUS hung quick on the Cross, which was three
hours, and large more, ye may read (well-beloued in Christ) sundry voices
that He uttered. When I look through the four Evangelists, I find in number
six sundry voices, and every one of them is well to be marked: for at that
time He uttered nothing in vain. The first voice we read of, was a voice of
divine power, together with mercy, when one of the Thieues, who hung at His
right hand, said to Him, Lord remember me, when thou come to thy Kingdom:
The Lord answered him like a King, and like a powerful and merciful God,
Verily J say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise* The next
voice, was a voice of humane pity, and natural affection toward His Mother:
she being by the Cross with John, and other women, He recommendes her to the
custody of His w^ll beloved Disciple. The third voice we read of, was a
voice of sadness, proceeding from an heart that was sad on every side to the
death, and from that agony on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? The fourth voice in like manner, was a voice of sadness,
proceeding from a wonderful heat in the soul and body, I thirst. The fifth
voice by all appearance was a voice of joye, seeing the work of Redemption to
be wrought, and the wrath of His Father to be assuaged, He says, after He had
drunken the vinegar, It is finished. The sixth and last voice in like manner was
a voice of joye: for finding He was to give up the ghost immediately, and
finding His Father sweetly to loose His soul from His body, He says, Father,
into thine hands I commend my spirit.

Now Brethren, all th^se foresaid voices the Lord uttered during the time that
He hung quick on ye Cross: Of these we have heard, the first, the second, and
the third, which was that heavy complaint that He made to His Father, My God,
my God, etc. This day as God shall give us grace, we shall speak of the
three other voices; one of them of sadness, and the other two of joye. But
before we come to these voices which are the three l^st voices, we have to
speak something of the misconstruing of the complaint of the Lord uttered to
His God. Now the Jews that stood by Him, and heard Him cry, Eli, Eli, (for
He cried aloude) of maliciousness, not of mistaking Him, they begin to
calumniate and to misconstrue His words, because the word Eli, which is, My
God, sounded like Elias: Therefore they said, He cried for Elias, when He
cried on His God, Let us see if Elias will come, and take Him down. In the
which words we may see clearly, that they sought not only to destroy His
body, but the Devil in them sought to sunder and sever Him both in soul and
body from His God: they would not hear Him cry upon His God, but they
sought to destroy His body and His soul, such was the insatiable malice of
the hearts of these Jews against Jesus Christ. This is the common dealing of
the Devil and his instruments with the godly, and chiefly in that last hour,
when the separation of the soul from the body is to follow: Not only to get
the body dead, but the soul and God separated: if thou beginnest to pray and
call on God, they will scorn thy prayer, and seek to cut thee from God, and
all hope of life. But to leave them, and their bitter maliciousnes: As in all
the poinctes of the suffering of Christ, I look more to the disposition of His
Father, than to the Jews, to the devil, or his instruments: So I do in this.
No question as His Father exercises Him inwardly with a bitter wrath: eue^ so,
when as the Lord by making an heavy moan, seeks an outgaet, and cries, My God,
my God, etc: He will have Him met outwardly with bitterness. Aim where He will,
He meets Him with nothing but bitterness and wrath inwardly and outwardly, hell
inward and outward, no refuge, nor escaping till yt ransom be paid to the
least farthing. Well Brethren, if ye would see an image of hell, see it here.
The Lord Jesus was for a time, and fealt nothing but extreme bitterness. But
the reprobate, after they be once casten into hell, there is nothing for them
but bitterness: let the^ aim here and there to escape, houle and cry, they
shall be met wi^h bitterness. What if it were but for a time! The Lord escaped,
His suffering was but for a time; but no escaping for thee, if thou be thrust
into hell, thou shall never get out, and shall find nothing but bitterness, aim
here or there, all shall be in vain, and everlasting bitterness shall be casten in
thy teeth, and compass thee on all sides: that is a sore word, An everlasting
bitterness, never to have an end. So blessed is that soul for ever, who in
that Day shall be found in Christ to get a part of that passion yt He suffered:
the Lord give every one of us grace now while we have time, to know Him, and to
seek to be found in Him for woe to yt soul yt shall be found out of Him in ye
great day. Now I come ^o ye voices, and first to that fourth voice yt the Lord
uttered, when He said, I thirst. When uttered He it? When He knew that all
^hinges were ended: To the end that the prophecy might be fulfi^led that was
spoken of Him before, He said, I thirst. A voice of sadness^, coming from an
extreme drought of body. The Lord Jesus, as He too^e our nature upon Him, so
He took on all our infirmities sin ex^epted. Many times was He hungry and
thirsty: but chiefly when He hanges on the Cross in that extreme heat of His
soul and His body. The soul was burnt up with wrath, and all the moisture of
the body likewise dried up with wrath: at this time the Lord had such a
thirst, that the tongue of man cannot express it: thou sufferedst never such a
thirst, in any Fever or disease, as the Lord Jesus suffered for thee on the
Cross. And no doubt, beside other pains, this exceeding thirst was a part of
His pain, and a part of that ransom that He paid to the Father for our
redemption. Ye see when a man is in a Fever, the thirst will be a special
part of the pain that he has: Therefore, albeit the thirst that the Lord
s^ffered on the Cross, was an exceeding great pain: yet He will not utter His
voice, I thirst, till the ransom was paid: He would not seek to quench that
thirst, till that wrath of the Father was satisfied. The drought was
insatiable: for the infinite wrath of God thirsted after the blood of the
Mediator, bearing our sins, and was not quenched till the blood of the Mediator
was drunken up. No quenching of sin, but by the blood of the Mediator: if thou
be not in Him, the wrath of God will thirst for thy blood. After this,
follows that bodily thirst: The soul is dried up: the moisture of the body is
clung up: the wrath suckes all up. On this rises the thirst of the body: for
except the Lord had had a spiritual thirst, and a pleasure to obey His Father
to the death, and to save thy soul from Hell; it had been impossible for Him
to have suffered that bodily thirst so long. Learn this lesson at the Lord
Jesus, and follow His example: we should suffer patiently all pain that it
pleases the Lord to lay on body and soul, knowing that it is according to His
will, and that by thy suffering, thy obedience to Him is tried. And, as we
should suffer patiently all paine^; so we learn at Christ to abide patiently
this bodily thirst in sickness or Fevers, knowing well that the Lord lays it on
us, to try our obedience and patience. But will thou know how thou should
abide it patie^tly? The Lord Jesus had a spiritual thirst to obey His Heavenly
Father, and for thy salvation, that swallowed up that bodily thirst. Get thee
an earnest thirst to obey thy God: it will be a wondrous thing how patiently
thou will suffer whatsoever God will lay on thee. Therefore Brethren, in all
things we should set our hearts to obey God: and wink and close thy eyes at
all dangers: yea, if thou be in extreme thirst, and going to die, say, Lord, I
will obey thee: and, if thou get thy heart thus resolved, and humbled under the
hand of thy God, howbeit thou be in pain for a time, thou shall see a fair
end. The Lord Jesus after this thirst, and after death, saw a glorious end. So
no question, will thou lean on thy God, as He did, and abide His will
patiently, thou shall see the joyfullest, and most glorious end that ever was.
The Lord give us grace to obey God, and to say, Cast me here, or there, and lay
on me what thou will, I shall obey thee, though thou should slay me, I will
trust in thee. This is an happy r^solution. We shall speak of the end
wherefore the Lord uttered this voice: To the end (says John) that the
Scripture might be fulfilled. In the 5. of Matt. the Lord says, J come not to
dissolve the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill the Law, and to fulfill
every jote of that Law: Heaven and Earth shall perish, ere one jote of that
Law shall pass away. Now among all the prophesies that Christ fulfilled,
there is one here made mention of in the 69. Psalm, Jn my meat they gave me
bitterness, and in my drink they gave me g^ll to drink. Now this prophecy
is accomplished: David spoke this in his own person typically: but the veri^y
thereof was fulfilled in Christ. David got no vinegar to drink: but Jesus
Christ drunk vinegar. When the Lord came into the world* and wrought the work
of our redemption there was not so much as a title that was foretold of Him,
but He fulfilled it: there was not a circumstance of His death, but it was
fore-tolde: That nayling was fore-tolde, where it is said, They pierced mine
hands, and my feet: The hanging of Him betwixt two Thieues was fore-tolde,
They reckon me (says the Prophet) among the unjust: The dividing of His
garments was fore-spoken, They diuid^d my garments among them, and cast
lottes for my coat. Look the XXII. and IXVI. PSALMS, and the LIII. CHAPTER of
ESAIAS. So this drinking of vinegar was foretold. Now what learnes this unto
us? Was there ever any man whose death was pointed out this way? No, never any
one. All the Kings, nor all the Emperoures, had never such a particular
pointing out of their death. This lets us see, that the Father had a more
special care of the death of JESUS, than of the death of any man that ever
was: and consequently, it lets us see* that there was never such a vvorthie
personage in the world as JESUS, and that there was never such excellency in
the death of any, as in the death of Jesus: in it stood the life of the world.
Let men make pompes of the death of Emperors, the Lord had never such an eye
to the death of any, as to the death of His only well beloved Son, and all
the predictions of His death are to this end, that we comparing the issue of
His death, with the predictions, we might believe that Jesus was sent to be
the only Savior of the world. When I think on this, I wonder at the
blindness of ye Jews, yt cannot know Him to be the Mediator, but after that
once a man be given to a reprobate sense, he will say, the Sun in ye noone-tide
is but darkness. The Gospel is hid, says Paul 2. Cor. 4.4. to them who perish:
if thou see not and believe not ye Gospel, thou have an earnest penny in thy
bosom, yt thy damnation is sealed up Thus far for His thirst they gave Him a
drink: There is a vessel full of vinegar: This was a custom that they used:
they had a drink beside them who were crucified: Some think it was for this
end, that the pain might be stanched: There is a drink of vinegar standing
beside the Lord: but I know not if they gave such a sour drink to the
thieues. So this vessel standing beside one of them steps to it in scorn, and
takes a water sponge, and puts it on a reed, and puts it to His head, he got
little thank for his work: I take this giving of this drink to the Lord at
this time, to have proceeded from bitter malice. The wrath of His Father was
begun to be assuaged: yet the wrath of the Jews could not be assuaged. There
is none end of the malice of the Jews, so long as breath is in Him, they never
cease to rage against Him. When He was dead they persecute Him: when He was in
glory, they thought to shame Him. When ye Lord looses ye raines of ye devil,
and of wicked men to chastise his own, they run headlongs to wrack His Church:
ye Lord seeks but chastiseme^t: they seek wrack of body and soul: he yt
knows not this, he knows nothing, and if these persecuters got their will,
they would not only seek ye wrack of ye body, but also of ye soul. What does
ye Lord for this? when ye Lord has pulled in their raines, He takes ye
scourge, and casts it in ye fire, because they run far beyond their commission.
This shall be ye end of their miserable souls. O yt damnation yt shall overtake
them! when ye Lord has chastened us by them, they shall be cast in ye fire for
ever. Refuses ye Lord ye drink? indeed before He was raised up on ye Cross,
He tasted of this, but would not drink, but He being on the Cross* it is
said, He drank it. It may by that after such a troublesome labor, that His
drought was so great, that He was glad to drink any liquour. Always, this I
know, except the Lord had had a thirst of thy salvation, He had not drunken
it. The thirst of thy salvation made Him as He drank out the cup of the
wrath of His Father: So to drink out this bitter cup that was propined to
Him, out of the bitterness of their hearts, He drank out the wrath of God,
and the wrath of man, that thou should drink the water of Life. I say,
remember upon that drink that Jesus drank, when thou drinkest delicious
drinks: it is not thy money that buys the wine, except it be bought with the
precious blood of Jesus: not a piece of bread, or any thing pertaines to thee,
if it be not bought with the blood of Jesus: to them who are sanctified, all
thing is sanctified, and if thou be not in Him, thou shall be accused as a
violent possessour of all things, in yt great day. Now I go to the next voice,
when He has drunke^, He says, It is sinished, that is, yt wearisome work is
now put to an end: now the ransom is paid: now the work of Redemption is
ended. Brethren, that ye may understand this, The Lord when He was in the
Garden, had two works: The first was, to buy Heaven, to conquer life to us:
The second, to put us in possession of it. The first work He began it in the
first moment of His conception, and continues still from that time to that
moment: He gave up the Spirit to the Father. Now that work being ended, He
proclaims on the Cross, cries out in the audience of them all, Consummatum
est, it is finished. Now that wearisome work is ended, the dear work is
ended, Heaven and life, and righteousness is conquered to the world for ever.
This is the sum of the Gospel, the work of our Redemption is ended: this is
all our preaching, Heaven, life, and glory is conquered again, to the lost
world. Thou need not to give one penny out of thy purse for Heaven. Cursed
are they from the High Heaven, to the low Hell, that open their mouth to say,
Thou must pay some of that ransom out of thy purse: Woe to the Papists who
will stand up and say, Thou must pay some part of that ransom, woe to that
foul mouth that dare be so bold to open it, and say, pay thou a part of that
ransom with thy money, seeing that Jesus Christ has proclaimed that all is
finished and bought by His blood, woe, vengeance and everlasting damnation
shall light on the Pope, and all the Papists that dare open their mouths to
speak such presumptuous words. Yet there is another work remaining, which is
to put us in possession of Heaven, and He began this, at His resurrection: and
He holds it on yet, and shall continue it unto His coming again: And at that
day of His coming, ye shall hear Him crying, All is ended: not on His
Cross, but in glory: and all the Angels and all the Saints shall cry, All
is ended, Glory to him who has ended all, and no more shall be. Look down
to His heart, and to the sense, from whence this voice arose, when He says
this: ye shall find that Jesus felt the wrath of His Father assuaged. Before
He was in an agony: now He feels the agony to cease: where before He found
no joy, now joy returns: On the sense of all these things, falls out this
voice, All is ended. When I look to this, I think I see ye image of a godly
Saint dying: for the godly are like to him in death and life. Before the last
moment they are in a battle, and suddenly they will say, I have gotten the
victory in Jesus: and the^ last they will yield up the spirit. Come to the
last voice: It is a voice of joy. I am of that opinion, that before the Lord
yielded up the ghost, the agony left him, and that joy that had left him,
returned again, and made him to utter joyful words. The Evangelists say, He
cried with a loud voice. What voice this is, Luke expresses, Father, into thine
hands I recommend my spirit. All that were standing about might have heard him
uttering this powerful voice. Now ye would wonder, that a man immediately
yielding up his spirit, should have such a strong voice. Ye see men and women,
in death their voice will fail them: some will not have any voice, and some
not any sign: some, if they get that grace to speak, yet it will be a weak
voice, because the strength of nature fails. Yet Jesus all the day before
uttered not so shrill a voice. So it must follow, that natural strength was
not failed in Jesus Christ, and that by the strength of nature, he might have
lived long: for the other two lived long, and were not dead, till they came and
brake their legs. Jesus died against nature: neither was he broken as they
were. What follows of this? Jesus Christ in that same moment that he yielded
the spirit, he had a power above nature: and a divine power against nature,
which puts out the life: and, if he had power against nature to put out his
life, he uttered before the Jews, that they had no power to put out his life,
and that he had a power to keep his life if it had pleased him: And that is
it which he says, None takes my life from me, but I lay it down, and I take
it up again. Ye will hear, that when word came to Pilate that JESUS was
dead, he wondered, and all the world wondered at this yielding up of the
spirit. And by this the Lord would show, that he was not a common man: he
would show, that he was God, either to keep his life, or to put it out, at
his pleasure. He says, Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit. These
words are far from this, My God, my God, why have, etc. for those words
proceeded of great sadness mixed with confidence, but of no joye: but these
words, Father, into thine hands, etc. as they proceeded of confidence, so
they proceeded of a wonderful joye. No doubt, at this time he feels that
sweet hand of the Father dealing with him most sweetly: not as the
reprobate: Alas, the hand of the Lord in justice striking the soul of the
reprobate, looses it from the body, with the sense of extreme wrath. But the
Lord feels the hand of the Father loosing his soul from the body with
sweetness. And all they who die in CHRIST, will feel the Father loosing the
soul with sweetness, as these last words utter. Look to the Martyrs: they
never utter the first voice, My God, my God, etc. No, but the second, Father,
into thine hands I commend my spirit, because they find joye in torment*
Steven, the first Martyr, uttered the second voice, ACTS, CHAP. VII. VERSE. 59.
And the rest of the Martyrs followed him: which testifies plainly, that this
was a voice of joye that JESUS uttered. But mark the words of CHRIST: ye see
that every man and woman, beside the body, they have a spirit, and more
beautiful, and far more precious of substance than the body, and yet it
lodges in an house of claye, and in an earthly Tabernacle. Next, there will
be a separation of the soul and the body. Thou think ever to live, but
whether thou will or thou will not, thy soul shall be separate from the
body, and then the body shall die. Shall thy soul die? No, if thou be in
CHRIST, the Father shall take thy soul.

Now again, Brethren, see how careful the Lord is of his soul at the poinct
of death. If Jesus, who had no sin, is so careful of his soul; I pray thee,
who art a sinful body, how careful should thou be thereof? It must live,
either in Heaven, or in Hell: if the Lord cried so loud that the earth quaked
again, and till the Temple rent asunder; wilt not thou, a sinful creature, be
careful of thy soul? A man should have care of the soul at all times, but
chiefly at the hour of the separation, for at that time the Devil is busy to
devour thee, and the golfe of Hell to swallowe thee up. Then look how careful
thou should be in following the example of Jesus, to recommend the soul
into the hands of the Father: and look how careful thou art to render the
soul into the hands of the Father; the Father shall be as careful to loose
the soul, if thou be in Jesus Christ, to conuoy it with Him to rest for
evermore in His blessed bosom. The LORD give us grace to commend our souls
into the hands of that faithful keeper in the hour of death, and that we
may find Him ready to receive and conuoye them with Him to that everlasting
rest, purchased to us through Christ: To whom with the Father, and the blessed
Spirit, be praise for evermore: AMEN.

THE XXII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.









MARK, CHAP. XV.





LVKE CHAP. XXIII.





JOHN CHAP. XIX.


WE heard the last day (well-beloved Brethren) the sundry voices and speeches
which Jesus Christ, vvhilest He hung quick on the Cross, and was nailed
through hands and feet uttered in the audience of the whole people. The first
two voices were the voices of pity and mercy. The one of mercy, to one of
the Thieues, that was crucified with Him, Verily (says the Lord) this day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. The other of pity, to His own Mother,
(who stood by, looking on Him, when as He hung upon the Cross in extreme
pain) recommending her to JOHN, His well-beloved Disciple. Other two voices,
were voices of sadness, and heaviness of heart: The one an heavy complaint
to His Father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The other proceeding
from an extreme drought, that came of that sense of wrath and pain which He
felt during the time that He hung upon the Cross, I thirst. The last two
voices were of joye, for it appears well, that before the Lord gave up the
ghost, comfort and joye returned to Him again. And I am of this mind, that
there are none, who are Gods own, but before their departure out of this life,
(sooner or later) they will get a sense of that joye which they are to pass
unto immediately. The first voice of joye, was, All is ended: As though He
vvoulde say, This w^^ke is done, and ended, and now the ransom of the
redemption of man is paid to the least farthing. Now the last voice was
when He was immediately ready to render up His spirit into the hands of
the Father, says, with a feeling of joy in the heart, Into thine hands,
Father, J commend my Spirit. Now this day, we have to speak by His grace,
First, of His death, and the yielding up of His Spirit: Next, of those wonders
that fell out immediately after the Lord had rendered the Spirit: and thirdly,
we have to speak how the multitude were moved when they saw these wonders.
Now as concerning His death, the words are but few. John says, When He had
spoken, and cried with a loud voice, He bowed down His head, and He rendered
His Spirit. The words are to be marked, He renders His Spirit, first, as it
were, He took His soul in His own Hand, and delivered it in the hands of
the Father, desiring Him to keep it well, to the day of His glorious
resurrection: for, Brethren, this is the difference between the godly, and
ungodly in their death: as they differ, and are unlike to other in their life:
so especially in their death. The ungodly cast away the soul and life, and
cares not where it goes: but woe is to them that do so, they will never take
up such a life again, when they have cast it* away, not regarding where it
goes to, but thinking lightly of it. No, let no man nor woman cast away this
life, or dislodge this soul lightly: if the soul go from thee lightly, and
thou carest not for it: better it were for thee, never to have had a life, a
soul, or a body. But again, Brethren, The Lord Jesus, as all His lifetime He
is careful for the soul that is lodged in an earthly tabernacle: so chiefly,
in the moment, when it is to fllit, The godly, they will not let the soul flit
out of the body, until they know that the hand of the Lord, is sweetly loosing
the soul, to keep it, until the day of their glorious resurrection.
Brethren, it would be well marked, There is not one of the four Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, but they note very precisely the death of the
Lord, and the yielding up of His Spirit. As for the circumstances that fell out
in His Passion: some will note one thing and leave another. As for example,
These voices that He vtters on the Cross, not one of the Evangelists has them
all, some has one, and some another. But when it comes to the yielding of the
Spirit, they all in one harmony note, The Lord gave up the Spirit. This is a
thing not to be passed by, nor to be lightly looked on, and it lets us see, the
death of our Savior, the separation of His soul from His body, is so
substantial, and so needful a thing both to Him to have suffered, and us to
know, that except the Lord had suffered the death, all the crucifying of Him
inwardly and outwardly, all the rest of His suffering had auailed us nothing,
the ransom of our sins had not been paid: for that was the curse that was
laid upon us, to pull our soul from our body: and as it was needful that He
should suffer the death for us, so it is needful to every one of us to know
this, that my Savior died, and His soul was really separated from His body,
it is needful that thou have evermore the Lord Jesus crucified before thee,
and know that the soul was separated from His blessed body: for grace and
remission of sins is conquered through the death of the Mediator: if thou
have not Faith of the death of the Mediator, it is impossible that thou can
believe that thy soul shall come to Heaven. The Apost. Heb. 9. has a notable
comparison, he says, When a man has made a Testament, and his legacy,
wherein he leaves such inheritance to any man: his Testament can never be
sure, nor ratified, before the man be dead: and if he ratify not the Testament
with his death, it cannot be sure: for the man in this life may alter the
Testament: But after that once he die, there it stands, it cannot be revoked:
Even so says the Apostle, The Heir of the world, Jesus Christ has made a
Testament, and such one as never man made, leaving such goods and heritage to
His Saints, as never man left, even that heavenly Heritage, that exceeding
Glory, Now, says the Apostle, If the Heir of the World, Jesus Christ had not
sealed up His Testament by His blood, it had never been sure, but His death
interueening and closing it, then the Testament is sure, and all the world is
not able to alter one jote of it, to add or diminish it. Woe be to him that
will add any thing to the Testament of Jesus Christ: he is counted a villain,
who will add to a man's Testament. Will thou add or diminish any thing at thy
pleasure, from the Testament of Jesus Christ. This New Testament is the best
Testament that ever was: Let Worldlings be content with the Testaments of
their forefathers, yet count thou nothing at all, except thou get a part of the
legacy left in His Testament. Woe be to thee, albeit thou get Ea^ledomes and
Kingdoms and great possessions left to thee by the Testament of thy
forefathers, if thou gettest not this Testament. Well, Brethren, this Testament
can not be ratified, but by the blood of the Testator. How can I believe it,
except I know that He died, and that the soul was as verily separated from the
body as ever the soul of man was: so when I consider the death of my Savior,
who has made such a Testament, I am so far from that, to be offended at
that shameful death, that the death is the ground of my salvation, and that in
His death is all my glory, and the assurance of my life is in the assurance of
His death, and His ignominy and shame is my glory.

Now thus far for the death of the Lord Jesus, Now come to the consideration
of these wonders that fell out immediately, as He gave up the Ghost: The Veil
of the Temple rent asunder, from the top to the bottom, The earth quaked:
Such things never fell out in all the deaths of men in the world: No, not in
the deaths of all the Kings in the world: The stones were cloven, the graves
of the dead did open. These are the four wonders that are noted to have fallen
out immediately, when the Lord gave up the Ghost. Brethren, the Lord in His
death, He was even in the extreamitie of His humiliation, He was weakened,
made of no reputation the Lord of glory was tread upon by the feet of death,
death stamping on Him, He could not be further humbled: there is nothing so
ignominious as death: except it be sanctified: it is terrible and ignominious,
so that if it be not sanctified in the death of the Lord Jesus: it is but a
curse to thee, and a vengeance from Heaven: yet for all this casting down of
Him, His heavenly Father leaves Him not, but in His greatest humiliation the
Father gives the greatest tokens of His glory, and He testifies that He was not
only innocent, but that He was the Lord of glory, and yt Godhead never left Him
in that ignominious death, nor never shall leave Him, albeit it kept the self
close, y^ He might suffer that ignominious death, because it was not expedient
that He should utter His power: yet yt Godhead in His death wrought such
wonders, that He testifies before the Jews that yt same man which hung there
was the Lord of glory and the Lord of life. Will ye come further, that albeit
that miserable people had not a tongue to speak, and would not give a
testimony of the glory of CHRIST, the dumb and senseless creatures, who had
not mouth, nor tongue, nor life, will not be silent, but will do their homage
to the Lord. Fie on thee, and woe is thee, that ever thou got ye mouth or
tongue: the dumb creatures in their kinds do homage to their God, and
glorifies Him, and shames all the world, and they shame all ye disciples: for all were offended at Him now. So now ye earth and the rocks shame them all: fie
on them. The Lord as He came riding to Jerusalem, like a glorious King, to
give them a show of His glory, Luke 19. When the disciples cries, Hosanna,
Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord, the Pharisees were angry at
it: they were offended to see the Lord glorified. Then Jesus answered, if these
would hold their tongue, the stones would cry: These stones and senseless
creatures shall cry and glorify Me, there should not be a wall in Jerusalem,
but they should have cried: if the disciples and the multitude had holden their
tongue: and if men had their tongue, and glorify not God, the stones shall
rise up, and shame them, and glorify Him. Now the mouth of the people is
close, and not one of the disciples cried, Hosanna: yet the earth forgets Him
not, she cries in her own manner, Hosanna: the rocks cry: the veil of the
Temple cries, Hosanna whilst it rent asunder. Well, Brethren, blessed is the
soul ye has a mouth to glorify God: woe to thee that has gotten a tongue to
glorify the Lord, and does it not: if the Lord in humiliation was glorified by
the dumb creatures, can He want His glory now in Heaven? if thou glorifiest
not God, another shall glorify Him: if no man shall glorify Him, the sea, the
earth, the sun, and the moon shall glorify Him: and thou, albeit thou were
a King, shall be thrust in Hell to thine everlasting shame. Now Brethren, there
is not one of these four wonders, but particularly they would be considered:
and first, The renting of the veil of the Temple. The veil of ye Temple was a
fair wall, ouergilt with fine gold there was never a thing so glorious outward
in this world, as yt Temple, upon ye which hang a glorious Tapestrie wrought
curiously: it divided ye most holy place, called the Sanctuary, wherein the
Lord gave His presence, and it was ye type of that heavenly Sanctuary, wherein
Jesus Christ entered by His blood, it got the name from the office and use, it
was called a veil, a covering, because it hid the Sanctuary from the sight of
the people, and of the Priests: only the High Priests excepted who entered in it
once in the year, and that not without blood: No, for his life he durst not
enter in it without blood. Now when the LORD gives up the Ghost, this Veil
cleaues in twain* and in a manner he makes an answer to the voice of the
Lord. Will thou who have life, reason, mou^h, and tongue, answer Him, He will
make the veil to answer Him. The Lord said a little, before He gave up the
Ghost, Consummatum est: All is ended, the ceremonies of the Law of Moses are
ended: the sh^ddowes are away: there is no more use of that veil. When the
veil hears this, The veil says, Amen, it is true my Lord, and here for my
part, I give over my office, and I give the sight of the Sanctuary to the
people, and shall not hide it any mo^e: for Jesus Christ has opene^ up the
Veil, and pulled it down, and mad^ an entry to the Sanctuary by His blood.
Well, this is the preaching of the Veil to the Jews. But heard they this?
Take the High Pri^stes any h^ed to this lang^age of the Veil? No, they were
never busier in the Ceremonies, than after they heard this speech: They saw the
Veil rent, but they took no lesson by it, there is a wonderful induration,
Paul 2. Cor. 3. tells the cause, There was another veil laid on their
hearts, so that they could neither see not hear. It was harder to rent that
veil, than an hundredth vailes of stone. Lord keep us from that reprobate
sense: alas, that we should not take heed to this: The earthly veil rent
asunder at the voice of the Lord, but the veil of their heart could not b^e
rent, neither for the voice of the Lord, nor yet for the wonders. This is the
lesson: Every one of us should take heed to our heart: after that once a man
be given up to a reprobate sense, as this people was: after that once thou
beginnest to do against thy knowledge, either in manners, or in religion:
after that once thou beginnest to do against: conscience, thou will do the
contrary of all that it biddes thee* thy conscience telling thee, when thou
art going to murder, to harlotrie, to oppression, to anger thy God, all is
wrong do it not: yet thou will trampe on the belly of thy conscience. In the
first Chapter to the Romans ye may read the end of this, As thou will not
hear thy conscience, and the voice of God, the Lord catches thy conscience
from thee, and casts thee over to a reprobate sense: so that thou art past
feeling, that it were better to speak to a stone, than to thine heart, and
when I speak to that pillar, it shall rather rent than thine heart. Would
thou see a wonder: The Papists would bring in wonders, but bring in a man who
is regenerate that is a wonder: yea, it is a great wonder, to alter thine hard
and stony heart, than to cleave the hardest rock that ever was. Let me see
an regenerate man, from whom that scroofe is taken away: it is a greater wonder
to see a regenerate man from whom that scroofe is taken away, than that all
the rocks should rent. This for the first wonder: now follows the second. The
Earth quakes: No doubt, but with the quaking of the earth, there was a sore
dinne, whilst the soul of the Lord separated from the body. O! what a thing
was it to draw the soul of the Savior of the world from the body: No, the
renting of the rocks was nothing in respect of that drawing of the soul of
the Mediator from the body: The Earth is holden up by the mighty hand of the
Lord: and when it shakes, the mighty hand of the Lord shakes it. When the Lord
begins to shake His arm, all the mountains shakes: it is no jesting for if
He hit thee, He will bruise thee in pieces, although all the world were about
thee. What is miserable man doing, that will not know the power of the
Almighty God: This shaking means a threatening to this people: and the earth
threatens to swallowe them all up, for their indignity they wrought to their
Lord their Maker. If thou dishonourest thy Maker, the earth shall open and
swallow thee up, as it did Core, Dathan and Abiram* who withstood Moses: No,
it is a wonder that the earth should bear men. No, I protest, I would not
wonder so much, if the earth opened and swallowed some men, as I wonder that
the Lord in His long suffering patience spares them, and holds His hand and
Judgment off them. It is a wonder that the houses fall not down on the
blasphemers, and the chambers, where they commit their filthiness should not
smoother them* But He shall cause an heavier thing fall on the body and soul,
than a thousand mountains were tumbled on them: thou do nothing but heaps
up wrath, as the Apost. says, against the day of wrath. No, wrath, and heavy
wrath shall be heaped on them. So the earth threatens them, for the indignity
they did to their Lord. Ye see, that after the earth quaked, it will swallow
up towns and people: but she swallows them not up now, but the earth vomites
them out, as not worthy to bear them in her belly No, she thought them over
bitter to be within her, who had dishonored her Creator: but afterward look
what came on them. The earth will revenge that foul thing done to her Lord:
the land of Judea spued them out, and the earth will not let that cursed kind
have a foot-breadth of her. O! what is it to have battle with the Creator,
when He begins to arm the earth or any creature against thee, we would think
that this shaking of the earth should have moved them, yet they take no
thought for it. At the voice of the Lord the earth did shake, but did the
Priests and the Scribes shake? Are they moved at the dinne and shaking of the
earth? So again, I say there is nothing so immovable: No, not the earth, as
thine hardened heart will be at all the denunciations that will come from
Heaven, or Hell: save thy self from a reprobate sense, or else thou shall
never be wakened, till thou be thrust into hell, where thou shall be
tormented with endless vexation without any hope of comfort. This for the
second wonder. Now let us come to the clieuing of the Mountains. This
follows on the former: as the earth opened to swallow them, so the mountains
cloue to tumble upon them: The mountains will not suffer them to dishonor
their maker. What moved this, the Jews? Even as much as the other two. No
question it was a great and terrible noise, when the mountains cloue. Woe to a
senseless heart: The mountains may clieue, and shiuer and quake, but if thy
soul be given to induration, the stones and mountains shall be moved, and
broken, but thine heart shall never break. Woe again to a senseless heart,
which is not moved at the word of God: that Scepter of iron (whereof ye read,
2. Psalm.) shall light on thee, and bruise thee in pieces: Therefore, cast away
that veil from thine heart, and strive to keep light in thy soul and
conscience, and walk in sobriety, till thy God call on thee, and then thou
shall see a blessed end. Now we come to the last wonder which was wrought.
The graves do their duty: they forget not their maker: but in their manner,
they glorify their Lord God, and honor Him: yea, death it self, with the
grave, do Him homage and honor. But miserable man will not honor Him: The
graves lay open from three a clock after noone (for about three a clock the
Lord gave up the ghost,) and they lay open all that day and all that night, and
all the day following, and the next night till the morning that the Lord
rises: and then the bodies of the Saints also arole, by virtue of His
resurrection, and went into the City. The graves will tell the miserable
people, that the Lord Jesus had loosed the bands of the grave by His death. By
death He slew death: with her own sword He slew her, as we speak. She would
teach them, that the bodies in that Great day shall rise up by the virtue of
that resurrection of Jesus Christ. This question may be asked. What became of
those bodies which arose and went into the City? Did they lay them down again
in the grave, or ascended they to Heaven? I will not be curious in this
purpose: But in my judgment, they were taken up to the heavens with Jesus
Christ, to be an argument of our resurrection and going to the heavens. This
was a fair lesson: but this miserable people was not moved. Woe to a stony
and senseless heart: the grave may open, but nothing will open a senseless
soul. Therefore, I beseech you strive to get a soft and mollified heart. The
voice of Jesus made the earth to quake, the rocks to rent, the graves to open,
the dead to rise: but the voice of the LORD opened not their hearts: then He
opens the graves: It is an easier thing to raise a dead body out of the grave,
than to raise thy soul, if it be once ha^dened: it is more wonderful to
raise a dead soul, and to see that soul get a sense of Heaven, than to see
all the bodies of the Churchyard rising.

Now to compare these wonders, There are two of them, The first and the last
that teach this people: The other two, the second and the third that threatens
them. The quaking of the earth, and the renting of the rocks threaten a
damnage and destruction to them: and in this temperature of His wonders: As the
power of God, so the wisdom of God appears wonderfully: He threatens this
people for the indignity, that they had done to the LORD of glory, with Hell
and death, yet He holds up His hands. O! how unwilling He is to strike, but
if He light on thee, He will cause thee squeele: He is aiming: He is shaking
that terrible arm, and threatening them: in the mean time the Lord is
remembering His mercy, and teaches them by wonders, to look yet if they will
take a lesson, to repent of all the indignity that they had done: He
threatens them with the one hand, and offers mercy with the other, to see if
they will repent. This is the dealing of the Lord He warnes them, and He
says. Yet I will not swallow thee up with the earth, and I will not let the
rocks tumble down on thee, to devour thee, yet repent: for there is grace
for thee, if thou turnest. Brethren, no man shall go to Hell, without
advertisement to stand, to the end, that if thou will not repent, when the Lord
begins to put hand in thee, and to rent thee, thy mouth may be closed, that
thou can not say: Lord* I got no warning, all excuses shall be put away.
Alas, will not men learn for all this shaking of the mountains. Lord shake
these hearts of ours, and the Lord be merciful to all sinful souls, and to
senseless creatures, lest when they shall cry Peace, and all things are sure
enough, the^ sudden judgment approach and the wrath come and overtake them.
Now come to ye last thing and I shall end. Are there none yt are moved at all
at these wonders? Amongst so many hundreths and thousands is there not one
moved? yes there are some moved, and who are these? are the high Priests moved?
No, not a whit, is there any of ye rest of ye order of ye Priests moved? Not,
They continue blind and dumb. Are the Pharisees, and the Scribes, or the
Elders moved? No: They are not moved; but the more they hear, their hearts
are the more hardened. Who are then moved at these wonders? It is an Ethnicke
body, a Captain of men of war under PILATE, and a Pagane, who never once
knew GOD, yet when he sees this, and heard the voices, he says, Of a
surety this man was just: And more he says, Truly this was the Son of
GOD. Is there any more? Yes: A band of men of war: Not of the JEWS, but
such as had lived on robbery, without the fear of GOD, they feared greatly,
and said also, Truly this man was the Son of GOD. Who of the JEWS is
moved? Not the Scribes, and the Pharisees, and the rest of the Order, they are
nothing moved: but the silly multitude, who cried before, Crucify him, now
they go home, smiting on their breasts, and crying, vvoe to them for that
days labor: but there was never a motion in the Priests, or in any of the
Princes or Pharisees* or Scribes. It is a vvonderfull thing, to see that they
who had judgment and understanding, and who had read all the prophecies of
the MESSIAH to come, got no sense: yet a silly multitude gettes some sight
and sense. Would ye know and poinct out a senseless creature, who will
not be moved neither by work nor word: It is such a man, as has this
vvorldly wisdom: Such a man, as has knowledge, and yet does against his
knowledge and conscience: for all that these Priests and Pharisees did, was
both against knowledge and conscience: They repined against the Holy Spirit,
and against their conscience, they crucify Jesus. Whosoever thou art, who
opponest thee to the brightness of the Gospel, thou crucifiest the Lord of
glory: and as it shall be laid to the charge of the high Priests and Pharisees,
and of Pilate, and Herod, in that Great day, that they crucified JESUS
CHRIST: So it shall be laid to thy charge, and thou shall be as guilty of
His blood, as they. Woe to that soul which will resist that word and the Holy
Spirit. Woe shall be to the great men in this land, who against conscience
conspires against CHRIST, Religion, and their native Country, for wrath and
vengeance remains for them, if they leave not off this unhappy course: The
King of SPAIN, and all their associates shall not be able to hold vengeance
off them, that shall one day be heaped upon their heads. The LORD save us
from induration, and never suffer us to repine against Light, nor to scrape it
out of our soul and conscience.

I see here further: The LORD gettes more friends in His death, than in His
life: The Centurion, and the men of war, they curse the time that ever they
were employed in that service: The multitude, who bad crucify Him, through
blindness and ignorance; now they repent the time that ever they did it, and
they return homewardes, knocking upon their breasts. That immaculate Lamb,
that precious Sacrifice, hanging thus on the Cross, He cast such a sweet
smell on the earth, and on the people, that they who were His enemies, go
away mourning. This falls out often times in the Martyrs, for some people
goes out with them, who would eat them: and yet the LORD JESUS makes their
death to cast such a sweet smell, that it is effectual to move many
thousands to mourn, and to be converted: So that it is found to be true,
that the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Kirk. And they who would
have swallowed them before in their death, pitties them, and become their
friends, through the sweet smell, which they felt coming from their death,
and would go home mourning, that ever they were enemies unto them, and were
instruments of their death.

Therefore, let the enemies of the truth persecute the Saints of GOD, and
His Truth, with Fire and Sword, as they please; They shall get no vantage,
and they shall not get this Light quenched: for there shall such a sweet
smell arise out of the ashes of the Saints, which in despite of the enemies
far more shall be won to JESUS CHRIST by their death, than ever was won
to Him by their life: To Him, therefore, with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for evermore:

AMEN.
THE XXIII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.



MARK, CHAP. XV.



LVKE CHAP. XXIII.

JOHN CHAP. XIX.


WE have heard these days past (beloved Brethren in Christ) what was the part
of the whole multitude of the wicked, and persecuters of JESUS CHRIST, in
crucifying Him, in taunting and scorning Him: Doubtless, there were in that
company some of the godly, who loved the LORD JESUS: but seeing we have heard
nothing of them as yet, therefore this day we shall speak somewhat in their
behalf. Now, what are they doing in the mean time? They are standing afar
off. Some men and many women, who all that time had followed Him before,
standing to see that sad spectacle: yet with sadness they had joye, no
question: And this is the first part of our TEXT, which we have read, out of
MATTHEW, MARK, and LVKE. After this we enter into the History of Christ's
burial: But before we come to His burial, we have in the XIX. CHAPTER of
JOHN, the History of the taking down of His body from the Cross: So at this
time, by Gods grace, we shall speak of these two, to wit, Of the part of the
godly, who loved Him, and next, Of the taking down of that blessed body from
the Cross, after it was dead. Then, to come shortly to the purpose: It is
said, And all his acquaintance stood afar off. There is the general: Then
comes on the particular, Many women: particular mention is made of them: Many
women are standing afar off, looking on. We heard of before in the XIX. of
JOHN, verse. 23. of three women chiefly, Marie the Mother of Jesus, and other
two Mary's, together with His well-beloued Disciple JOHN: and they were
standing at that time when He hung quick upon the Cross, so near hand Him,
that He speaks to them from the Cross, and they heard Him. So Brethren, this
standing afar off at this time, as I take it, has been after the Lord had
given up the ghost, when the women are returning home again, being loath to
part company with Him: and as they were going home, they turned about, and
looked to Jesus hinging on the Cross, on Mount Caluarie: They stand first
near, and the^ turning home again, they stand afar off. No question, it was ye
love they bare to the Lord, that drue the^ after him, when he went to be
crucified, and yt same love yt they bare to him was so tender and entire, yt it
made them to stand and look on him when he hung on the Cross: and yt love they
bare to ye Lord Jesus made the^ to sever from the rest of the multitude, and to
gather themselves together, and look back to Him where He was hanging. For
this is a sure thing, Those that meet together in one faith and love in the
Lord Jesus, of mere force they must meet together among themselves, and be
linked together by the band of love in one body. By the contrary, those who
meet not together in one faith in Jesus Christ, their hearts will never be
joined in this world, they will never meet to make one body, they will never
separate themselves from the multitude of this world: No, if it were all my
kindred, father, and mother, brother, and sister, if they love not the Lord
Jesus, mine heart and his shall never be linked together in this world, nor
in the world to come: He that loves not the Lord Jesus, (as Paul says, 1.
Corin. Chap. 16.) let him be Anathema maran-atha* that is, cursed for evermore.
But he who loves the Lord Jesus, and meets with me in Him, let him be what
he will, let him be in the vtmoste corner of the world, mine heart and his
is linked together, and there is a conjunction which never shall be separated,
neither in the Heaven, nor in the Earth: it shall last for ever.

Brethren, when I consider this multitude here standing, looking upon Him when
He hung upon the Cross, I think I see an image of the whole world: for it
is a world of people, who are standing about Him: there are Gentiles, there
are Jews, and the false adulterous kirk, there are Priests, Pharisees,
Elders, blind guides of the people, and a profane multitude, enemies of all
sorts: And as there are many enemies to Christ, So there is a silly handful
of godly men and women, gathered together, looking upon that sad spectacle;
who resembled the true Kirk militant here upon the face of the earth: And as
in all this multitude, like draws to like, The wicked and the ungodly rank
themselves together, The Priests rank themselves together. The soldiers
rank themselves together; and also the godly rank themselves together, and
look upon that sad spectacle, their Lord crucified. Well, this is common to
all: all are standing looking to CHRIST, hanging on the Cross upon the top
of the Mount Caluarie, Jewe, and Gentile, wicked, and godly, all are looking:
But in looking there is a great difference: There are some delighting their
eyes with the spectacle, there are some feeding the malice of their hearts,
and drinking the blood of JESUS CHRIST, the Priests, the Pharisees, and the
Elders: But the godly are looking on with sadness of their hearts: And I
doubt not, but as with sadness, so also they are looking on Him with joy, by
faith in His glorious resurrection. There are many this same hour who have
their eyes fixed on Christ, both Turks and Paganes, and the true Kirk, and
the false Kirk: but one cause mooues not all. Take heed, therefore, how thou
look, either to His Cross, or to His glory: look that thy soul be set
on Him, and see that by looking unto Him, thou preasse to be partaker of the
fruit of His death and resurrection: for if thou look to Him for the
fashion, or in malice, as the Turks do, and the Pagans, and the Papists,
enemies to His Cross, thou shall perish: and better had it been to thee never
to have heard of Jesus, or never to have seen Him. Further, this would be well
considered: We see if we have a friend, who^ we love well, if he betaken out to
a shameful death (there was never such a shameful death as this) we will
think shame of him, and he will think shame that his friends should see him
in that estate. Who would think but that the acquaintances of Jesus should
have thought shame of Him, to have conuoyed their friend to such an ignominious
death, and to have seen Him so shamefully demained. So that, Brethren, when I
consider this matter well, I perceive that those His familiars and acquaintance
have seen further into Christ, than men and women do commonly. No doubt but
the friends of Christ, who came to see Him hanging in ignominy, saw life in
that death: they saw glory in His ignominy; otherwise they had never come to
see Him hanging in ignominy: And no doubt they felt a sweet perfume flowing
from that Sacrifice: It was the sweetest smelling Sacrifice that ever was
offered. All the perfume and incense that ever was offered, passed not up with
such a sweet smell in the nosethrilles of the Father, as that one blessed
sacrifice did: And as it smelled sweetly in the nosethrilles of the Father: so
did it cast a sweeter smell in the nose of the godly, than ever they found:
and they thought it had such a fragrant odor, and such a sweet smell unto
them, that they thought, ere they had been separated from Him in His death,
they had rather chosen to have dyed a thousand deaths: for as the Lord says,
Wheresoever the carrion is, there must the Eagles resort. Well is the man who in
his death finds the sweet smell of ye death of Jesus Christ. I have no more
to say of this matter, but if this acquaintance of Jesus for the time took
such a pleasure in His death, (being shameful,) that they could not be
separated from Him, it is a shame to us to draw so far back from Him, not now
hanging in ignominy on the cross, but most glorious in the Heavens. Fie on
this dull headed and dead world, that has no sense of that glory, and is not
allured by that unspeakable glory, rather to suffer a thou and deaths, albeit
it were the sword, the fire, and all torments, than to be separated from this
Jesus Christ: But the women's part is more particularly to be considered: Let
all women take heed: it is said, Many women were there, More of them, have
followed the Lord to the cross, than men, that I may speak to the glory of
GOD, and shame of men. As for men, I find nothing but this general. In Luke a
company of men and women, but in Matthew and Mark, I find of women
especially: they are looking on Him with sadness mixed with joy: And from
whence came they? It is said, that They came out of Galile, following on Him:
they never left Him, they wearied not to follow such a guide, they ministered to
Him on their own charge: As they were fed with that bread of life, that came
out of His mouth, so they spared not, freely and liberally to communicate all
that they had to Him: And happy is the man, who so finds the effect of the
word of life in his heart, that he would bestow again, all that he has for
the love of that word. Brethren, ye know, what is in hand presently: many
words need not: seeing this division of the town in competent Congregations
intended, is to feed your souls with the word of life: spare not for goods to
get that word of life.

Now, I see beside the multitude, mention made of three women, Marie
Magdalene, then, Marie the mother of James the less, and of Ioses, and Salome,
the mother of the two sons of Zebedeus: No question, these women mentioned
here have borne a tender affection to the Lord: forgets the Lord that love they
bare to Him in all times before, in following Him from Galile to Jerusalem, and
from Jerusalem unto the ignominious death of the cross and there staying with
the Lord, and not leaving Him, but ministering to Him: forgets the Lord this?
No, but He remembers upon it: thou shall never do a good deed to JESUS
CHRIST, but He shall meet thee: they love Him, and He honors them: they
never left Him: they shamed the men yea, His disciples: yea, even the very
Apostles: for we read not of any of all His Apostles, that any of them was
there present, except John: Peter had taken him to a back side, for all his
stoutnesse before: the rest were offended in Him: These women did cleave to Him
through the band of love: forgets the Lord this? No: as they love Him beyond
His Apostles: so the Lord honors them above the Apostles. It is no small
thing to get the honor to be an eye witness of the death and resurrection of
JESUS CHRIST: it is greater honor than all the honor in the world. No doubt,
the LORD made these women in their turning back preachers to the Apostles
themselves: they told Peter, James and Matthew what they had seen: there is
none end of honor, when the Lord begins to honor: as He honors them to be
witnesses of His death, and preachers of it to others: so He will have the
names of some of them to be registrate to the posterity. And it is the will
of JESUS CHRIST, that this day I promulgate the names of these women in your
audience, to their honor, after so many hundredth years, and their names shall
be registrate perpetually to their everlasting honor, whilst JESUS CHRIST come
again: yea, their names shall be written in the Heavens everlastingly. Never
one repents the gratitude done to JESUS CHRIST: thou shall get two good deeds
for one. Again, the LORD will let us see in the example of these women that
often times in women there will be a more tender love to the Lord JESUS, than in
men, who are the stronger sex: ye will see the weaker and simpler that the
sex be, and the less worldly wit that it have, the more spiritually it is
disposed, the more affectionate it is to heavenly things, the greater heavenly
wisdom it has. If any man, says PAVL, seem to be wise in this world, let
him be a fool, that he may be wise, that is tru^ly wise, wise in GOD, 1.
Cor. 3.18. And as their love is great, so the Lord will honor them to the
shame of men, and whereas men should preach CHRIST, He will make women to
preach JESUS CHRIST to men, to the shame of men, and His own glory. All tends
to this, that as men and women do desire to be honored of God, so all men
and women should strive continually to love and glorify GOD. GOD loves none,
nor honors none, but only those who love and honor the Lord Jesus Christ: if
thou love not the Lord Jesus Christ, thou shall get no love nor honor of
God: yet further, this is not to be passed by, the world wonders now, that
He had such an eye to these three women: There were many hundredth men, but
how many of their names were registrate to their honor? He had such a respect
to them, that He espied them out beside the rest of thousands that were there,
and by His Holy Spirit caused registrate them. This registrating of them came
not rashly, but from an ordinance of God, and His especial Providence. There
is not a public conuention, albeit it were a man hanged, where multitudes of
men and women run together to hear and see, but the all-seeing eye of the Lord
is upon every person in particular, man, woman, ladde, or less. Never an head
there, great or small, poor or rich, noble, or ignoble, but the eye of the
Lord is on them: yea, it goes down to the inward affections, to rippe and
search them, to see of what disposition every soul is. As for example, we are
all met together here, sundry men and women, some greater, some smaller, some
younger, some older: yet there is not one of us, on whom the Lord has not His
eye. We are met, to see Jesus Christ crucified on mount Caluarie, there is not
one of our hearts, but the eye of the Lord sees it, and He sees wherefore, and
for what end thou art come to that meeting, whether it be to feed thine ears,
and to take delectation in hearing of new things, or to take pastime to see,
and be seen, or to eschew the shame of the world, or whether thou come to
reap profit, and to be edified of that thou hear, and to get life of that
Cross and death of Christ: for therein stands thy life, and this should be the
end of thy meeting with Gods children. Th^n seeing the eye of the Lord is set
on every soul: therefore it becomes every one of us, to strive to approve our
hearts to the Lord: so that every one of us may say to the Lord, for this
end am I come, O Lord, to be partaker of the fruit of the death of Jesus
Christ. Woe to them who come for another cause, or sinistrous respect, and come
not to be edified: for the Gospel shall never be a word of life to them, but
a savor of death unto death. If it work not life in thee, and if the Spirit
work not life by the preaching of the Cross, it shall be the power of death
to thy soul.

Brethren, we have hear the first part: Now we have to speak of the second
part: The taking of His body down from the Cross before His burial. The
taking down of the body of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of lords* comes of
a r^quest made to Pilate, and made not by His friends, but by His enemies. I
see this, this miserable people of the Jews were spoiled of all power, as they
had no power to hang any: so they had no power to take any down from the
Cross, or from the gallows, without the leave of the Magistrate: they were
spoiled of all power by the judgment of God, and therefore, they behooued to
have recourse to Pilate: they were slaves, yet they would not acknowledge the
true King of glory, who might have made them free. I see here a commendable
thing in the Roman policy, As it was not lawful to hang any without the
command and license of the Magistrate, so they who were hanged, might not be
taken without the license of the Judge. There sold nothing be done to a
guilty person, but by the authority of the Judge. God in His judicial Law,
gave not only Laws concerning the lifting of men upon the cross, but also of
ye taking down of them from the cross. It is well to be marked, who it is that
gives the advice, that the Lord with the other two should be taken down from
the cross, to put an end both to their pain, and their ignominy. It is not
one of His disciples, it is not Peter, nor John, nor Matthew, they are not so
bold, they durst not presume it: No, it was His enemies that crucified Him,
that interponed their request for Him? Was this a benefit they did to Him?
Certainly this was a benefit they did to Him, to take Him down from the
cross: yet they do it, not to benefit Him, for any pity they had on Him:
for they thought, that He was living but the Lord had given up the Ghost. When
thy friends will not make a suite for thee, the Lord will raise up thine
enemies to do thee good: He cannot only make thy friend do thee good, but thy
foe also. If thou be the Lords, He can make them who would wish thee woe, to
do thee good: if thou be the Lords, the fire, the water, and the sword, which
otherwise would devour thee, shall benefit thee: the Lord, against all men's
expectation, shall do thee good, if thou be the Lords* thou shall not want
relief. Now, what was the sum of their request? They besought Pilate, that
their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken down. That is, that
they might be put out of pain, and that they might make an end of them: for
they thought they were quick. Now, whether this request was upon a custom
used amongst them, or not, the Text declares not: but it seems, except the
feast of the Passover had interueened that same time, that they would not have
been careful of them* but would have suffered them to hang whilst they had
yielded up ye Ghost. The other two were quick in pain, when the Lord yielded
up the spirit. I note this: When thy enemies do thee a good turn, they do it
never of love. These might have dispatched the Lord, and the two Thieues, with
less pain, than to have broken their thies: They had taken their lives sooner
from them, if they had beaten out their brains. So when thy enemy benefits
thee, and does thee any good turn, be sure he does it not of purpose, to do
thee good: as we commonly speak, If he give thee a bit, he will give thee a
buffet with it: Sour and bitter is the benefit of the enemy. Indeed it is
true, that the Lord, who makes all things to work for the best, to them that
loves Him, will dispose their doings otherwise, and make them to work thy
good: And therefore, have thine eye set upon the Lord, and He shall make the
malice and bitterness of thine enemy to turn to thy comfort. There is
another thing to be marked: The Lord had ordained, that there should not be
one bone broken of CHRIST, and so it was fore-tolde. Now will ye see the
force of the word and providence of God: The force of the word and providence
of God appears the more clearelie by this opposition which is made to His
ordinance: The Jews requested to have His bones broken, and Pilate gave
commandment to break them: But is there any bone broken, notwithstanding
their suit, and Pilates commandment? No, not one. This lets us see, That if
God have ordained and said any thing, it lies not in the hands of any man to
disanull it: If God shall say, There shall not be one bone of my anointed
broken; great Caesar, and all the Kings of the earth, the king of Spain, and
the Pope, and all their adherents, shall not be able to do the contrary. So in
the midst of all fear and danger, let us depend upon the providence of God,
and say, Lord, if thou have said otherwise, than these men's intentions are, I
will not be affraide for them, I know they are not able to do any thing
without thy providence* and so, Lord, I lean only on thy providence, and am
content with thy will. So in these miserable days, we are to lean to God, and
to depend on His providence, and we shall see the vain enterprises of men
vanish away like smoke, and we shall see the wicked to be made spectacles to
all the world. Let us see what moved the JEWS to make this request: Was it
pity that moved them? No: They had no pity of Him. Was it obedience to the
commandment of God, who commanded, that an hanged man should be cut down yt
same day, because he was accursed? Deu. 21.22.23. No, it was a vain
superstition that moved them, they were to celebrate the Pass^ouer, and this
was the day of their preparation, they were preparing them by crucifying the
innocent, the Lord of glory. Was this an holy preparation? This was the
Friday, and the morn was the Pa^che. John says, that was, an high day, or a
great Sabbath, because they kept two holy days together, both their own
ordinary Sabbath, and the extraordinary Passover, and this they did
contrary to the ordinance of GOD: for they should have celebrated the
Passover on Thurseday, as the LORD did: for He celebrated it that night that
He was betrayed by Judas, and led away captive by the Jews. So they did cast
in the two Holy days together, according to their custom: for when ye
Passover fell to be on Thurseday, they used to delay it until the Satterday
which was their Sabbath day, lest yt if these feasts which are so near other,
had been both kept, the people should have wearied, and if Christ and the other
had not been taken down, tha^ yt Holy exercise would have bin defiled. So they
thought, if they had bin taken down from the cross, and put away, they had
been holy eneugh. And upon that same pretense, when they were to accuse Christ,
they would not enter in the common Hall, lest they should have been polluted.
They were Hypocrites, they polluted the world, and defiled the earth that they
tread on. A polluted body who has no sanctification in Christ, there is
nothing that he touches, meat, or drink: yea, the earth he walks on, but he
defiles all: yet these foul Hypocrites thought, that if Jesus who sanctifies
the Sabbath, and sanctifies the heart, had been taken away they had been
holy eneugh. An Hypocrite is a foul body, and defiles all that he handles.
All his religion is outward standing in bodily exercises: and when he has
polluted all, yea, the very earth he treades on: he will say, Handle not, touch
not, taste not, that will pollute thee, Coloss. 2.21. There is his religion:
When the foul body defiles the air, the earth, the Heaven, he bids thee
touch it not, lest it defile thee, when he defiles all that he touches.

Now they get the request granted them, and gets a commandment of Pilate, and
so The men of war came forward, and brake the legs of the one first* and
then they came to the other, and brake his also: They brake both their legs
with great pain and torment.

Now, will ye see these 2 thieues, they are like in their death, both are
crucified, and in end both their thighs are broken: yet for all this, the one
of them is a vessel of glory, and he had a promise of glory, and an
assurance of it in his heart: the other had none. So, Brethren, take heed:
though the death of the wicked, and the godly be alike: yet they are not
alike in condition: Judge not of men's estate by the outward misery: measure
not Heaven and Hell by the outward death: The Elect and the wicked will be often
times alike in death, and often times the Elect will die in the greatest
torments. Who suffered more painful deaths, than the Martyrs did: Beware
that thou say, as the Papists, who are enemies to Christ, say: They teach,
albeit that in Jesus Christ thy sin be forgiven: yet the pain is not
forgiven: and they say, that the pain that the godly suffer in death, is a
satisfaction for sin: They say that the pain of the penitent thief was the
punishment of his sin: but they lie, and the Lord shall justify it. The
Elect suffer no pain for sin: torment them as they will, burn them, scalde
them, all is but a merciful chastisement, and death to them is a fair port to
Heaven: He makes darkness to be light to His own.

Well, this for the execution of the two thieues: They come to the Lord, to see
whether He was dead or not: they are not rash: they find Him dead: they find
no sponke of life in Him: therefore they offer not to break His thighs: See
how the word and providence of God takes effect. The Lord had said, One bone of
Him should not be broken: and therefore to preueene the breaking, the Lord
miraculously took the Spirit from His Son: His death was miraculous, as ye
heard before: by the strength of nature He might have lived longer, as that
great and mighty voice which he uttered last, testifies: and so His sudden
death was a mean to perform the Lords ordinance: He would use this, as the
ordinary mean to execute the eternal decree of the Father. It is a folly to
thee, to say, thou will depend on the providence of God, and in the mean time
to leave off means: for by so doing thou temptest God, who as He has ordained
the end, so He has also ordained the means to the end. As for example, If
thou would go to Heaven, thou must use the means, the hearing of the word,
etc. Yet many will contemn the means, and yet brag they are assured to come
to Heaven, they will contemn the preaching which is the instrument that God
uses. But I say to thee, thou deceiuest thy self: for I denounce, if thou
werest an Emperor, thou shall never see Heaven, nor life, who contemnest that
mean and instrument which the Lord has ordained to be used, to bring thee to
Heaven, which is the preaching of His truth. Now, Brethren, ye see here the
testimony of the death of Christ, given by the bu^rioes, they preach His
death, as though they had said, Mark, all people: This Jesus whom we have
crucified is dead: and therefore in token that this is true, we will not
break His bones: after that comes another burrio, a man of war, and gives
the last witness, He smites Him with a spear: so that out of the wound
gushed out blood and water: As though the knave had said, I shall let you see,
that He is dead, and that there is no life in Him, and so he smites Him to
the heart, with a spear: The Lord would have the death of the Lord testified
sundry ways for thy comfort: for the most shameful thing that ever was, is
death, except it be sanctified: it is the greatest misery that can come to
man: if thou gettest no remedy against it, for that death of the body is a
port to that death everlasting. It is no childrens play to have the soul
dislodged: No, it was an ignominy to the Lord of glory, to be holden under
the bands of death, and to be tread under the feet of death: yet the Father
will have His death testified sundry ways: First, He will have it testified
with a cry, when He cried with a loud voice, Father, into thine hands I
commend my Spirit: Next, He will have the burrioes to testify His death, and
then He will have a spear thrust to His heart, to testify His death, besides
the testimony that all the creatures gave of His death. Is this for nothing?
No, for suppose the Lord Jesus had been crucified, taunted and scorned, and
suffered all the ignominy that ever could have been, and yet had been taken
down quick, and the nails loosed, and gotten His wounds healed, thou had
not been s^u^d, thy salvation had not been wrought: Our sins had never been
forgiven us, for without shedding of blood, and death, there had been no
remission of sins, except I know, beside all the pain the Lord suffered that
He suffered the death also, I would never believe to get life* and to be saved.
Now to end in a word, Look to the witnesses: the burrioes, they were evil
witnesses for themselves but good witnesses for us* for their witnessing
testifies to our w^ll, that the Lord was dead: and so these burrioes have done
a notable good work to us, but not to themselves, because they were His
enemies. It is as true this day, as it was that day: there is, and shall be
witnesses, preaching the death of CHRIST, crying, That CHRIST died for the
redemption of the world, and teaching salvation by CHRIST to others, and
others shall get good by them, yet they shall get no good themselves. Why?
Because they are enemies to the Cross of CHRIST. An enemy to His death, can
preach His death well enough. All Preachers of the death of JESUS CHRIST ought
to take heed to this: That when they preach to others (as the Apostle says)
they be not reprobate themselves. Woe to the man who preaches salvation to
others, if in the mean time he be a reprobate himself. I must be as
careful for mine own salvation, as for the salvation of others: And
therefore, if thou speak of the death of CHRIST to thy Neighbor, strive to
be assured, that thou thy self art partaker of that salvation, through JESUS:
To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor, Praise, and
Glory, for evermore, Amen.

THE XXIV. LECTVRE OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
JOHN, CHAP. XIX.








THE last day (beloved Brethren in Christ) we entered into the History of the
taking of the Lord from the Cross, before He was buried: The taking of Him
from the Cross, it came by a request: The Jews His enemies, made request to
Pilate, the Roman deputy, and Judge for the time. The sum of the request
was, that the thies of the crucified men might be broken, and so they might
be taken from the Cross* Pilate the Judge yielded to the request, and gave
commandment to the soldiers* and to the burreo, to execute and slay them,
that afterward they might be buried. The soldiers came first to the one thief,
and broke his thies: the^ they came to the other thief, and broke his thies
also: and last, they came to Jesus, and finding Him already dead, and to have
given up ^he spirit, they would not break His legs: Yet to put the matter
out of doubt, one of the soldiers came with a spear, and pierced the Lords
side, through ye heart, and out of the wound there gush^d blood and water. Now
Brethren, this day, as the Lord shall give us grace, we shall follow out this
History, and we shall speak of three things: First, of the effusion and
gushing out of the blood and the water out of the side of the Lord. Then we
shall speak of that grave testimony that John, the writer of this Gospel,
gave to the History, and narration, that the bones of the Lord were not broken,
and that His side was pierced, and that thereafter the blood and the water
gushed out: Last, we shall speak of the end wherefore these things came to
pass. There was not one bone of Him broken: His side was pierced, to the end
that the word of the Lord (long time spoken of before) might be accomplished:
And he brings in two Scriptures, the one concerning that His bones should not be
broken, and the other concerning the pearcing of His side with the spear. Now
come to ye first of these heads. I leave the vain dream of the papists (for
all their religion is but dreams and fantasies) I pass their dream
concerning this soldier yt pierced the side of the Lord with a spear how they
say yt the Griek word (...), which signifies a spear, was the name of the man
that pierced Christ's side, and how they say, that this man was a Centurion,
and an old Captain, who was blind: and after he had pierced the Lords side,
he washed his eyes with the blood that issued out, and got his sight, and
the^eafter in an instant was converted, and became a Christian man and a
Martyr: and this is he whom they worship, and whose bones are kept as a
relict, and he is called Saint Longimus. I leave the spirit of vanities: fie
on them, they fill the hearts of the people of God with such vanities, and
therefore shame and confusion shall come upon them in the end. Now Brethren, to
speak of that which is more profitable, Of the gushing out of the blood and
water out of the side of the Lord. JOHN says, that one of the soldiers, with
a spear, pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. No
doubt this effusion of the blood and water in a part was natural and
ordinary: for, they who have skill in the things which concern the body of
man, and know the Anatomy, they know that the heart of man is a receptacle
of blood, and in the heart is the cleannest and finest blood: The vital blood
is fined in the heart of man, and the blood there is finer than in the rest of
the body: Ye hear commonly that the heart blood is the finest blood, and
most precious: Ye know likewise that there is a fliece, which compasses and
goes about the heart, which is called (...): and in it there is some liquor and
water wherewith the heat in the heart is cooled and refreshed. Then to come to
the purpose: The Lord being pierced through the sid^, and in through the heart,
it was no wonder, that that blood in the heart: and that water in the fliece
should have gushed out, especially seeing that He had but newly given up the
ghost, and He was yet warm: so that this blood and this water could not be
yet much altered, by reason of the shortness of time. But Brethren, when I
weigh this matter more deeply, and consider that this blood and this water
gushes out in such abundance, and so distinctlie, that the one is so severed
from the other, that they who stood beside might discern very well the blood
from the water, and the water from the blood. I see here something above
nature, and I am compelled to think, and say, that there was something here
extraordinary: As all things that fell out in the death of the LORD JESUS was
extraordinary, and showed Him to be more and greater than any common man
that ever died: The giving up of the ghost, with a loud voice, showed, that
He was more than a man. For Brethren, to leave the speaking of this matter,
let us see what this blood and this water means, and to what use the gushing
out of the blood and the water serves for. No question, the gushing out of the
blood and the water out of the wound testifies, that the Lord was verily dead.
What man will live when his heart blood is shed? The heart is the most vital
part of the body: It is the seat of the life: Perse it, and there is no life
for the man: So this effusion of the blood and water testifies, that the Lord
was dead, and there was no life in Him. Yet Brethren, this blood and this water
meaned more than this: they testified of the force of that death: they
testified not of a death only, but of a powerful death. No man's death was ever
so powerful, as the death of the Lord Jesus. All the Emperoures in the world
had no such power in their death* as Christ had. It testifies of a power to
purge the sins of man. What Emperoures blood ransomed sinful man, or could
purge him from his sins? What water came there ever from an Emperors heart,
which washed away the corruption of thy nature? Now to speak it in a word: This
blood and this water testified of a power that flowed from the death of Christ,
to the remission of sins, and the washing of our foul nature: with the
blood bracke out remission of sins, and with the water burst out
regeneration. Yet to make this plainer: By the blood of Christ, (which is the
blood of God, God and man in one) we are ransomed from death and Hell, the
guiltiness of all our sins is taken away, the punishment with the guilt is
taken away, Hell is taken away, the justice of God that required our blood,
is satisfied by that blood of Christ, that wrath that would have sucked up thy
blood, (it would not have left one drop of thy blood vnsucked) and that
wrath which cannot be satiate without blood, is satiate by the only blood
of CHRIST. Mark well: It was not blood only that came out of His side,
but it was blood and water: it was a vvaterie blood: JOHN, who stood by,
left this in register, That sensibly in the blood he perceived water: to
testify, That by that blood of JESUS we obtain not only remission of our
sins: but by this same blood the foulness and uncleanness of our nature
is vvashen away: for water serves to vvash away filthiness. This same JOHN,
in his first Epistle, Chap. 5. verse. 6. says, that Christ came into the world
by water, meaning the water which gushed out of His side: (JOHN could never
forget this sight) He came by water to wash away this inherent corruption
which is in us: for if it be not purged, there is no entry to Heaven. I
fore-warne thee, thou shall never see Heaven, if thy corruption be not purged
away. Then he says, He came by water and blood: not by water only, but by
water and blood: meaning this blood was waterie, and this water was bloody:
Not only to wash away the inherent corruption, but also to ransom^ us, to
obtain to us remission of our sins, and to take away the guiltiness of our
sin, both original and actual, and that punishment, and wrath that was due
to us: In that same Chapter John points out the three witnesses of Christ in
the Heavens, and three witnesses of Christ in the earth: And for the witnessing
in the earth, he counts these same two, the blood and the water, and the
third, the Spirit, who testifies that Jesus came and died for thee: where we
may see, that this blood and this water that came out of the side of the Lord
never leaves the earth, never ceases to cry, The Redeemer of the world is
come. If thou be in Jesus, that blood sprinkling thine heart, and conscience
within thee shall testify unto thee, that Jesus is come in the world for thy
purgation. So that, Brethren, I affirm this, that all the words in the world,
and all the hearing, shall not put that persuasion in thine heart, that Jesus
Christ is come for thy Redemption: except that blood and that water cry within
thee: certainly, we have no better assurance that the Lord is come, than when
we feel that effectual working of the remission of our sins, and the
purgation of them by the mortifying of sin. Now we have daily in our
Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper outward signs of this water, and
this blood whereby they are outwardly represented to our eyes. In the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper we have the sign of the blood, in the Sacrament of
Baptism, we have the sign of the water: and therefore the blood and the water
remain ever in the earth, as witnesses, testifying that Christ is come, and
they are ever represented to us in these outward signs and symboles in the
Sacraments. So in a word, this blood gushing out of the Lords side, and this
water testifies: First, that the Lord was truly dead: Next, that His death is
forceable to the remission of our sins, and to our regeneration. Unto these
two uses, we may join the third: this gushingou^ of the blood and water out of
the Lords side, testified, that the sacrifices, purgations, and washing of the
Law, were now abolished they were now no more to have place, because they were
only certain types and shadows of the blood and water to come, which gushed
out both together out of the Lords side. Now I come t^ the testimony of John,
concerning the breaking of the thighs o^ the Lord, and ye piercing of His side
with ye spear, John seals up this and first, he says, I testify this, J
bear witness to this, the^ he aggreages hi^ testimony in sundry words: First,
I, as an eye-seeing witness, stood by, and I saw with mine eyes, that the
thies of the Lord were not broken, and that a soldier pierced Him tho^ow ^he
side unto the heart, and that blood and water came out of His side. Next: As I
saw these, so I tell thee, that my testimony is true. Thirdly, I know, and am
persuaded, my testimony to be true: my conscience persuades me, that it is
true, and I believe it my self, to the end that ye may believe it. So
therefore, as I believe, believe thou: This he says to all, to the end of the
world yea, who hears this, believe it as well as I. Ye see here, JOHN is
earnest to testify the death of Christ, that verily He died: And he testifies
it with great weight, and many grave words. We have heard before sundry
testimonies of His death. The Lord in the last words He testifies of His own
death, when He cries, Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit: All
those wonders from the Heaven testified, that the Lord had given up the
ghost: His Heavenly Father made the Burreoes and the men of war to
testify, that He was dead, and to preach it to all the people about. Now JOHN
comes in last, and with many words, and words of great weight, testifies, that
the Lord gave up the ghost. What means all this? Ye see there is not any
thing in all the history testified by so many testimonies. The Spirit of God
labors not to persuade us of any thing in all His Passion, so much, as that He
died: and to certify this, that He was pierced with a spear. To leave the
Heresies, which fell in the world, concerning the death of Christ, for it was
much to persuade the world of it: they would not believe that JESUS died
truly. All these testimonies lets us see such a necessity to be in the
death of JESUS, that except the LORD had died as truly as ever man died, He
could not have been our Redeemer: And except He had died truly, we could
never have believed to have been saved by Him. Except I know as truly as
ever I knew any thing in the world, that my Redeemer died for me, I would
never go seek life out of His death. Indeed, a wanton sinner, who is lade^
with sin, and feels not the weight thereof, so long as his conscience is
sleeping, that he feels not ye burreo, and sees not yt fearful wrath that
cannot be quenched without blood and that terrible justice of God, yt cannot
be satisfied, but by death, will count little of the death of Christ: It is
alike to him, whether He had died or no: so long as thou sleep al is alike,
but after the conscience is wakened, and the Lord once let thee feel the
weight of thy sins, wherewith thou art ladned: No, if thou did but feel
the weight of an evil thought, thou would groan as fast as if the
mountains and rocks were tumbled on thee* and then thou would^st think no
life nor salvation for thee, but Hell and damnation, if thou gottest not a
Savior for thee: and if thou feel that Justice of God, and the terrors of
Hell before thee, the sight of the death of Jesus would be the most joyful and
comfortable sight that ever thou saw, and all thy joy and glory would be in
that death of Christ, Paul says Gal. 6.14 Far be it from me, that I should
re^oyce in any thing, but in the death of Christ: he found all his life to be
in that death, 1. Cor. 2.2. he says, When I came amongst you, to speak of the
death of Christ to you who knew not what it meant (a vain company they were,
who delited in vain oratorie) I would not begin to clawe your itching ears,
but I decreed to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. Now,
Brethren, besides this, In these words that JOHN sets down, and (...) the
which he aggreadges his testimony, mark another lesson. Will ye see, from
whence our Faith comes? from whence comes our Faith? from whence flows it?
JOHN says, And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true and he
knows that he says true, that they should believe. From whence then comes
Faith in this death? it comes by hearing: Faith is of hearing of a testimony
and record: and if thou hear not a record, thou shall not believe, and if
thou beleeuest not, thou shall never see Heaven. And if thou contemnest the
record, I give thee this doom, thou shall never see Heaven with thine eyes,
if thou werest a King: So Faith is wrought in the heart by the Holy Spirit, by
a record and witness bearing. So ere thou gettest Faith, some witness must
stand up and bear record. The Lord must send out some witness to cry and
preach? but what witnesses must these be? JOHN says, He that saw these things,
has testified of them. The witnesses must be seeing witnesses: it must be
John, and such as saw Him, and felt Him with their hands. Then, who must be
the witnesses? They must be the Apostles that were conversant in this world
with Jesus Christ, who heard Him preach, and saw Him work wonders, and savv
Him dead, and savv Him crucified, and savve Him pierced thorovv the side: They
must be the first witnesses. But more, Brethren, Is it enough that they savve
Him with their bodily eye? No, John adds more, that he was persuaded that
his testimony was true. The vvitnesses, as they testify that which they
savve: so they must believe it with their hearts. There were great
multitudes, hundreths, thousands, who heard Him, touched Him, and savv Him
crucified, and some of them crucified Him too: yet none of these are made
vvitnesses, to preach to the world, but the Apostles who savv and believed:
these are set up as witn^sses in ye world, that all should believe. The^ the
first ground of thy Faith is the very eye of the Apostles, and their sight and
sense: The next ground, is Faith in the hearts of the Apostles. And if ye
will say to me, Why believe ye the Gospel of John? and the Gospel of Matthew,
and the Epistles of Paul, etc. I answer, because these were men who heard and
saw Christ, and I will say more, I believe them, because they believed in their
hearts that thing which they saw, and go before not only by sight of the
body, but also by Faith in the heart.

When ye hear these records (albeit the men be not living, yet we have that
same thing that they wrote, and that which they themselves believed) I beseech
you consider them, and pass not over lightly, when ye read of John or Paul,
or the rest: I beseech you pass not lightly, seeing the ground of thy Faith is
not only their sight, but the sense of their hearts and Faith: ye who would
read with judgment, travel to go into the heart, to seek that Faith into
the heart, and that joy, and that sadness that they felt: and pray, LORD,
seeing these men utter a feeling of these things that they saw, and which they
wrote, touch mine heart, and give me thine Holy Spirit, that I may attain to
the sense and feeling of these things. If ye would have a testimony of this:
behold what PAVL says, in the second Epistle to the Corinthians the fourth
Chapter, and fourteenth verse, I believe, that I my self shall gloriously
rise: and then he brings in David's words: J believed, and therefore I spoke.
Always, look that in reading we strive to have a feeling and sense in our
heart of that which we read: otherwise we make no fruit of our reading, we
speak like parrats, we know not what we speak: I say to thee, if the word of
grace rise not from the deep persuasion of thine heart, thou speak like a
Parrat, thou prophanest that Holy word, and know not what thou speak.

Now all the Apostles are away yet their testimony remains, and this is that
blessed Gospel that we have this day, yet the Lord leaves not the world,
destitute of witnesses, who have lively voices, who will preach like the
Apostles, and indeed their record should be believed: if thou beleeuedst
never a preaching, I say, thou have no Faith, thou shall never see Heaven.
Indeed we are not Apostles, but sinful men, yet if thou beleeuest us not,
thou shall die, as well as they who would not believe the Apostles: I bid no
man nor woman believe us simply, but only so far as our record agrees with
the record of the Apostles: We may not compare with the Apostles: we have not
seen Him, we have not heard Him, as they did: they had a greater measure of
persuasion, and of Faith, and of feeling, than any Preacher has now (yet the
Lord has given His measure to every one) therefore we desire not that ye
should believe us simply, to believe every thing that we say, as the Pope, and
that soul crew will bid you believe all that they affirm: No, if he were the
best Minister that ever preached, believe his record, if it agree not with the
writting of the Apostles: They have set down the ground, and they who teach
any other thing but that which is written by the Apostles, or else that follow
on their writes by a necessary consequence, I pronounce a vengeance and a
curse shall be on them. Woe to deceivers, who poison souls daily by their
vengeance and poison. Now to come to the last head, John lays down the end
wherefore His thighs were not broken, and by piercing of His side: These
things were set down, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, and he cites
two testimonies: The first is out of the twelfth Chapter of Exodus, Not one
bone of Him shall be broken. The next is out of the twelfth Chapter of
Zachary, They shall see Him whom they have pierced. Some will marvel, that
it is said often times in the Gospel, this was done, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled: Some would think that this had been but a light cause, that the
thighs of Christ, and the bones were not broken: Wherefore? That the Scripture
might be fulfilled: the side was pierced, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled. Men would count this but light: but will thou count that light, that
the word of the Lord might be fulfilled. Think thou it a light thing* that
that thing that the Lord spoke long time before, should come to pass, and the
LORD should be glorified in His Truth. Think thou it a light thing that the
Lord should be found a liar: No, ere He be a liar, and ere a jote or title
that He has spoken, should pass away vnf^lfilled, it is better that Heaven
and Earth, men, and Angels, and all the creatures should vanish to nothing. The
Lord speaks none idle talk, as man will do, but what thing so ever that He
speaks, He speaks it of set purpose, to the glory of God, and to the well
of His Church: and therefore it is very requisite, both for His own glory,
and for the well of His Church, that His word be accomplished. Would to God we
could consider how highly we sold regard the glory of God, in believing of
His promises of mercy, and His threatenings of Justice: Well, the end of these
things was, that GOD should be glorified, in the truth of His word. There is
nothing the Lord seeks more, than to be known in the truth of His word, and
therefore look what He will do to be known to be true in His promise:
rather than His promise be not performed, He will inuert the course of nature:
the thing that the Lord has once spoken, it shall be performed, albeit all the
world should say the contrary. It is said, Numb. 23.19. God is not as man,
that He should lie, neither as the son of man, that He should repent: has
He said it, and shall He not do it? and has He spoken, and shall He not
accomplish it? Men may lie, but God cannot lie: ere He bring not about the
thing that He has spoken, He will mix the Heaven and the Earth together, He
will bring things about, against all the means in the world: not only by and
above nature, but also contrary and against nature: As He brought the promise
made to Abraham to pass. Nature can be no impediment to the LORD, albeit a
creature can do nothing against Nature. Look then what a Faith we should
have? We should believe His promise, albeit it were never so impossible to
Nature: Thou must not only glorify God, when thou see His promise come to
pass, but also thou must also glorify Him, by depending and hanging on His
word, ere ever thou see it accomplished. It is an easy thing, when thou see
the Lords promise come to pass, to say* Glorified be GOD in the truth of
His promise: but except thou glorify Him by Faith in His word, ere ever thou
see the promise effectuate, thou do nothing worthy of praise: belee^e His
word, let never death, nor life, nor power in Heaven or i^ Earth or the Devils
separate thee from that Faith in His word. No* I say further, thou must so
glorify God by Faith in His word that albeit thou savvest all things threaten
the contrary: yet notw^thstanding thou feel in thine heart that God is
true, and this was a fined and purified Faith. Such was the Faith of Abraham,
who above hope believed under hope, that he should have a seed, not
considering the deadness of his own body, nor the deadness of Saraes
womb; he believed in despite of nature, and all ordinary means; and
therefore worthily he is called, The Father of the Faithful. Then, would
thou have such a faith as the Lord commendes; believe in His promise, though
all the things in the world should threaten the contrary: Has He promised
to thee Heaven and Life, and albeit thou saw nothing but Hell and Death; yet
believe Him, for there is nothing more contrary to Life than Death: And yet,
albeit thine own heart would make opposition, and say unto thee, It cannot
be that ever thou can get Life and Heaven, for what see thou but Death and
Hell? Yet thou would glorify God by believing His promise in despite of
Hell and Death: Notwithstanding thou see the Devil, man, Death, and Hell
threatening, that thou shall not get life, yet believe the Lords promise. And
if in this case thou beleeuest, thou have a fined faith, fined and made more
precious than Gold in the furnace. And, except thou be tried by such
temptations, thou know not what faith means. Faith must be tried by
temptations, by troubles, and afflictions. Our Christians would pass through
the world with ease and rest: they will believe: but how? In peace and rest:
they cannot abide to be charged with fire and sword, but would slip over
in wealth and quietness. But true faith must abide the trial of the fire, of
manifold temptations and afflictions. Well, the day shall come when it will
be seen who among us has this fined faith: They have the fined faith, who
will seek to Jesus Christ, and to His promise in the fire.

I would have spoken of these two Testimonies, but I leave them until the
next occasion, and so I end here, beseeching the Lord to have a care of
every one of us, and to furnishe us with grace and strength, that we may
stick fast unto Him, and His promises: Not only now in peace, but even in
the midst of the fire, and in death it self: That after this life be ended,
we may be glorified in the Heavens, through Christ: To whom, with the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, for evermore: AMEN.

THE XXV. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.

MARK, CHAP. XV.



LVKE CHAP. XXIII.

JOHN CHAP. XIX.


THese days past (beloved Brethren in Christ) we have spoken of the taking
down of ye Lord from the Cross, after He was dead, which came as ye heard by
a request made to Pilate: these who made the request were the Jews, his
enemies: they requested that he should be taken from the cross: not for any
love they bare to him, but because it was the time of the preparation to the
Passover: and they believed, that Jesus and the other two crucified me^ who
hung on ye Cross should have polluted their holy feast, and holy actio^: and
request Pilate, that ye thies of the crucified men might be broken, that
thereafter they might be taken down from from the Cross. The soldiers came
first to the one thief, and broke his thie, the^ they came to the other, and
broke his thie also: last, they came to Jesus, and finding Him to be dead, they
would not break His thie: but one of the soldiers came with a spear in his
hand, and to put the matter out of doubt, he thrust Him through ye heart, so
that out of the wound ran blood and water in abundance. When John has made a
rehearsal of these things, he joins to a weighty testimony, He who saw these
things, has testified of them, and his testimony is true, and he knows, that
they are true, that ye might believe. Last, he sets down the end of these
things: first, wherefore the thies of Jesus were not broken: the^, wherefore His
side was pierced: These things were done (sais John) that ye Scripture might be
fulfilled: and for this he alleges first ye which is spoken of the type (Exodus
12) Not one bone of the Pascal lamb might be broken: and Zachar. 12. They
shall see him whom they have pierced through. The last day, Brethren, we left
off at these testimonies of Scripture: therefore this day, as God shall give us
grace, we shall speak first of these 2 testimonies, and thereafter we shall enter
to the next History, yt is, to the burial of Jesus. Then to speak of the first
testimony, Not one bone of him shall be broken. Moses speaks these words (
Exodus 12) of the pascall lamb: he gives a commandment, that in the eating of
the pascall lamb, not one bone of it should be broken. That which Moses
speaks of the pascall lamb, Ioh. draws it unto Jesus Christ, because the
Lord Jesus was the true pascall lamb: and that lamb that the Jews ate, was
but a figure and shadow of that true lamb, the Lord Jesus, who took away the
sins of the world: therefore, seeing the type and shadow had ceased by the
death of Jesus Christ (there was not a pascall lamb any more, and all the
celebration of the Passover that the Jews used after the death of Jesus
Christ, was but vanity) it was good reason, that John should draw that which
was spoken of the figure, to the thing signified by the figure: for these
words that Moses spoke of the pascall lamb were accomplished in Christ: there
was not one jot of it, but it was perfected and accomplished in Him. Paul (1.
Cor. 5) draws to Christ the very words which Moses used in prescribing of the
eating of the pascall lamb, Put away the old leaven, that we may be a new
lump, as we are unleavened, for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.
Mark this lesson for our instruction: When thou read of the Types and
Figures in the old Testament, cast away the Types, and keep the verity, and
appl^e it to CHRIST, who is figured by the Types. We are ever reading yt old
Scripture yt speaks of the types used in the old Church of the Jews, as that
Scripture of the Paschal lamb and all the other ceremonies of the Jews: but
take heed how ye read them: read them not, as the Jews read them: read not
these Scriptures, as though they were to be understood of as many types, yet
to be kept in the earth: bevvare of that: Hear them not, as though they were
any figures and shadows unfulfilled, for that were, to exclude the Lord Jesus,
who only is the body. But in reading cast away the types, because they have
alll ceased at the coming, and after the death of Christ. Cast not away the
Scripture, but dravv it unto Jesus: and that whole Scripture which the Jews
understood of the type, understand thou of Christ. As for Example, In reading
of this Scripture, Exodus 12.41. Cast aside the type, the Paschall Lamb, but
cast not away the Scripture, Ye shall not break one bone of Him, Take this
Scripture and understand it of Jesus Christ, that Lamb of God, and His bones.
And we must not think, Brethren, that this is any vvrying and wresting of
the old Scripture by the own sense, because the same Scripture which spoke
of the Type, spoke of Jesus, but mediatly by the Types: and the Fathers of
old, by reading of the Types, got a sight of the body, looking in thorovv the
shaddovv to the body. This is no wresting of the Scripture. But now, seeing
all Types are away, it is good reason, that those Scriptures now immediately
be understood of Christ, which before mediatly were applied to Christ. I go
to the second testimony, Zachary 12.10. prophecies that the Jews that
pierced thorovv Christ, should see Him: and when they see Him, they should
weep for Him, as for their only begotten son. It is a prophecy of the
repentance of the Jews, who had crucified Christ, and pierced Him thorovv: a
promise of their repentance for that woeful deed they did. This same thing
came to pass in the 2. of the Acts when Peter in his preaching laid to their
charge that wicked deed, that they had crucified the Lord of glory, and had
put hand into the Lord of life, at his preaching their hearts were pricked and
pierced through with bitterness, and they demand of Peter, and the rest, What
shall they do to be safe? and it is said, three thousand of them repented and
believed at that one preaching. The words would be marked, How is this, that
They pierced Jesus. They pierced Him first with their sins: it was the Jews
sins chiefly that procured the death of Christ: Next, they pierced Him when
they persecuted Him, when they crucified Him, and blasphemed Him, and rayled on
Him hanging on the cross: and last they pierced Him, when by the spear in the
hands of a soldier, they thrust Him through, and pierced His side. And who is
this that pierced Him. It was not so much the Ethnicke man that did this, as
the Jews, for whose sins He came to die: for they were the occasion of all
this wickedness. If we will mark narrowly, and will weigh narrowly this matter
aright, we will see great wickedness, malice, and unthankfulness to have been
in this people: The Lord came to die for them? And who are these that slay Him?
Even these for whom He came to die. Was not this a mischievous deed? Who will
not abhor and detest such a villainy and malice? Alas, should I who am a
sinner, when an innocent man comes to die for my sins, slay that man, and be
a burrio to Him? Lord save me from such wickedness, and let never mine hands
be a slayer of that man: and yet this was the malice of the ungrateful Jews.
Again, will ye consider the wonderful love that Christ carried to this people,
when they deserved nothing at His hands but death, He dies for them, when they
were His enemies: He shed His blood sor them: and thereafter when they executed
Him and crucified Him, (behold His wonderful love) He brings them to
repentance, His mercy ouercomes their malice: so that in them ye see that
which is said to be verified, Where sin aboundes, grace and mercy
superabounds, ROMANS 5.20. There is no comparison between the love of Jesus, and
the sins of men: Albeit thy sins were never so great and heinous, yet the
love and mercy of Christ, will compass them, and go round about them all: so
that no sinner has occasion to despare of mercy and of grace. I doubt not,
there is none of us all, but we will condemn the Jews, and will find fault
with the malice of this people: but look to thy self, whilst as thou
condemnest them, that thou disfigure thine own face, and condemn thine own
self. Are there none in this land that have put hand in Jesus, that died for
them, as surely, as ever the Jews did. Who dare cleanse themselves? Thou
dare not say, but thou have pierced the Lord, either one way or other: There
is not a sin that thou committest, but therewith thou have pierced the Lord.
Have thou opponed thy self to the Truth, and persecuted the Gospel, then
thou have pierced Christ. Have thou persecuted the Church of Christ, and
troubled His members on the earth? thou have pierced the Lord: for He cries
out: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me (...)? Have thou been given over to
thy lusts, and led a wicked life? I say, if thou be in any of these ranks:
if thou gain stand His Truth, persecutest Him in His members, or by thy
evil life: Protest as thou will, thou have pierced Him, as well, as the Jews,
and thou shall be as guilty of His death, as they were, and as Pilate,
Herod, Judas and Caiaphas were challenged for His death, so shall thou, except
the Lord of His mercy grant thee grace to repent. The Lord give every one of
us grace in time to repent, IOH. REVEL. 1.7. draws this Scripture to the
second coming of Christ in the clouds: for he says, They shall see Him whom
they have pierced, and all the Tribes of the earth shall mourn before Him. Of
the which we may gather, that in the latter day the very Elect, when they
shall rise, and see the Lord, when they shall see these hands, and these
seete, and that side, which by their sins they have pierced through, their
first meeting shall be with bitter mourning, they shall mourn, as a man will
do for His only begotten son, but immediately that weeping shall be turned
into joy, and the Lord shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, so that they
shall never mourn nor sorrow any more, but they shall be with the Lord, and
rejoice with a solid joy for ever more,

Now I come to the burial of that blessed body: As the down taking from the
cross came by a request, so this burial also comes by request. But who
requests for His burial? Not the Jews that requested for His down taking,
but good Joseph of Ar^mathea requests for the burial. The Jews requested not
for any love they bare to Him, but Joseph that worthy disciple of Christ
requests upon love. Then the things that we shall speak of the burial this
day are these: First, by the conference of the four Evangelists, we have a
fair description of this man Joseph: Next, we have especially in the Gospel
of Luke, how boldly he comes to Pilate: thirdly, we have the suite it self:
then the good and humane answer that he receives out of the mouth of Pilate.
Then look how this man is pointed out: First, he is described by his name, his
name is Joseph: Next, he is described by his country: he was of Arimathea, a
town in Judea: Thirdly, he was described from his substance, He was a rich
and wealthy man: and what more? What matter of all outvvard things, of our
birth, of the place of it, or all the riches and substance in the world, if
there be no more: Fourthly, he is described from his office, He was a wise and
grave Senator, and apparently he was in that Council of the JEWS, which was
called SANEDRIM: yea, apparently he was on PILATES counsel, because he was a
wise and potent man. But all these are outward things, therefore the Spirit
afterward paints him out by his inward qualities: for if thou have no good
properties, I will not give a penny for all thy calling, thy substance, and
all outward things: He is painted out in these qualities, which concern
this life, and his behauior toward me^: he is called a good and upright man in
his life. But what help all these civil and moral virtues, if there be no
more, they are little worth. Therefore, the Spirit of God describes him from the
inward grace of the heart, from faith and hope. And it is said He waited for
the kingdom of God. All his riches closed not his eyes from the sight of that
life to come. Then as he hoped for yt Kingdom, so he used the means: He
believed in Jesus Christ, and was His Disciple. So then, if thou be not a
scholar to Christ in this earth, look never to dwell with Him in Heaven. Yet
there is something wanting: He durst not avowe himself openly, for fear of
his riches and honor: But now at last, when it comes to extreme persecution,
he manifestes himself: When they sat in the Counsel, concerning the death
of Christ, JOSEPH would not give his counsel nor consent thereunto. But yet
there is an impediment in this man: for he should not only have refrained to
have given his consent, but should have opponed himself against them, as
Nicodemus did, for he opponed himself boldly unto them: Does our law (says
he) condemn a man before he be heard? IOH. 7.50. where learn ye that? So ye
see, it is an hard and dangerous matter to be a Counselor, either in Kirk or
in Policy. There will be many impedimentes in Counselors; yea, even in the
best of them: and ye see that when hard matters do come in question, men
will absent themselves from the Council: but that is not well done. For, if
thou be a Counselor, albeit there were never so hard a matter in hand, thou
art bound in conscience to be present: But indeed it is better to absent thy
self, than to come and give an evil vote. Again, there are some, who will
come, but will not consent to evil; as JOSEPH here did: But this is not
enough: there is an infirmity here: for thou that art a Counselor, art bound
to make opposition to evil. Again there are other some who will come, and not
only refuse to consent to that which their conscience judges to be evil: but
also will oppone themselves boldly thereunto, as Nicodemus did. And these are
the best sort of Counselors. Always, we see this: It is an hard matter to
be a good Counselor: for often times this terror and that terror will be
casten in to thee, if thou incline either this way or that way: and sometimes
the matter will fall out so ambiguously, that thou will not know how to vote,
or what way to turn thee: So that of all men, he who is a Cou^seller, either
in Kirk or Policy in these dangerous days, wherein such terrors are casten
in, has most need to depend upon the counsel of God, revealed in His word: and
in all things to keep a good conscience. Let no man offer to do against his
conscience, for then the conscience shall take hold on him, intend a process
against him, and challenge him, convict him, and torment him with anguish
before the Lords Tribunal* This for the description of the man. We must not
think yt by fortune or chance or of his own accord rashly he came to this
point: No, the providence of God guided him, led him out for that purpose. And
in this action God had respect, not only to the Heavenly honor of Christ: but
also to the worldly things, to riches and power. The Lord chose a worldly,
rich, and potent man to bury Him; to this end, that the Jews who by all means
sought to heap shame and ignominy upon the Lord, should not oppone
themselves, and stay Him to be buried: for if it had been a poor or mean
man, that had taken this in hand, doubtless they had opponed themselves, and
hindered His burial. Again: an honorable man is chosen to bury His Son
honorably. The Father will have an Honorable rich man to bury His dear
Son. Indeed Joseph of Arimathea got never such honor, as by yt burial of
the blessed body of Jesus, the Son of God. His calling was nothing: he had
never bin registrate for yt he was a Senator in Judea, except that the Lord had
put in his hand the burial of His dear Son. It is true, the burial of the
Lord Jesus is the last point of His humiliation: for what is the burial of the
body, but the continuance of ye body under death? And, if thy burial be not
sanctified, it is a terrible thing to be casten in a hole, and to be bound
under the earth. Woe to that body who is casten into a hole, and in the belly
of the earth, and if it be not sanctified in the burial of JESUS CHRIST. So I
say, the burial of Jesus Christ was the last poinct of His humiliation. He
was holden in the fetters of death. Yet the Lord begins the glory of the Son
at that which was ignominious in it self. He will not employ every man in this
work, but the most honorable man in the City. And then He will have His
Burial not in a vile place, nor in a backside, but in a notable and fair
place, covered with a stone. So the Heavenly Father will have the honor of the
Son and His glory, to begin at the burial, which was shameful in it self:
and then He goes forward, till His resurrection, and to His ascending to
Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of the Father. To worldlinges, this
honor of their burial, is but a part of worldly honor: but here unto
Christ, that same piece of honor was ye beginning of his heavenly glory. If
thou be in Jesus this same honor which is done to thy body in this life in
thy burial, is the beginning of thy glory which thou shall enjoy in the
Heavens. The dishonor of the faithful in this life shall be turned to their
honor and glory, and it shall be turned to their weal: All things work
together for the best unto them that love God, says Paul, Romans 8.29. If thou
love the Lord, that shame that shall be heaped on thee in this earth, shall
be the beginning of thine honor. Then much more shall the honor that thou
shall get in this life, be the beginning of that everlasting honor. Now when
Joseph takes up the body of ye Lord lying so low at the Gallows foot, and
intends to bury that body: I doubt not, but he has an eye to that glorious
resurrection, and he saw that glory wherewith that body should be glorified and
should glorify the bodies of the faithful, and make them like His glorious
body. If there were no more but that respect of the resurrection of the bodies
of the faithful, in that day it should make us count of the bodies of the
faithful, of their death and burial. 1. Pet. 3.7. Ye read, that husband
should give honor to their wives, because they are the infirmer and weake^
vessels, and because that with them they are to be heirs of the kingdom of
glory, and of that life. Ye see this, that if there were but an earthly
body, who were appearing heir to a kingdom, men will count of him: Much more
then, when we see a man or woman ordained to that Heavenly kingdom, and to
that glory, should we not honor them for that respect of glory. Paul to Tim.
says, In a great house are many vessels, some to honor, and some to
dishonor. Ye see in a Noble man's house how honorably they will handle
golden and silu^r vessels. Then when we look to a faithful man, should we not
count greatly of him, because he is so glorious a vessel, and is to be
partaker of that glory? All the glory of this world appertains properly to the
faithful: Indeed, often times they have least part thereof (that they may
know their happiness stands not in this earthly glory, but in that glory of
Heaven) and the wicked have most of it. Yet I say: All the glory even of this
world appertains to the faithful only. No honor appertains to a king who is
a reprobate: He is but a violent usurper of these worldly things, and he shall
one day give account of his violent usurpation: nothing but shame appertains
to him, and all his honor shall be turned into shame.

Now I go to the next thing: The boldness that Joseph had in coming to Pilate:
He lurked before, but now when Jesus is lying in greatest ignominy, as we
use to speak, At the Gallows foot: The man takes boldness, and steps in to
Pilates Hall, and makes his request. His riches, his substance, and honor held
him abacke awhile: but now he comes out and forgets all, and interceades for
the body of Jesus, to bury it. Thy riches and honor of the world, are like
as many fetters and iron chains, to retain thee and hold thee abacke from
Christ. Yet all the riches and honor in the world cannot hinder nor hold back
GODS calling, when He puts out His hand to draw thee in to Him: But if He
put not out His hand, and draw thee out, thou art so fast detained, that all
the strength in the world will not be able to draw thee. It is true that Paul
says, 1. Cor. 1.26. Ye see your calling, how that not many wise men after the
flesh, nor many noble are called; It is a rare thing to see the Lord draw such
men: He uses not to call many wise men, out of the hands of their wisdom; nor
many rich men, out of the hands of their riches; nor many Noble men, out of the
hands of their Nobility: No, He lets them be. We read not of any potent men
among the Jews, whom the Lord pulled out to be His Disciples, except these
two, Joseph and Nicodemus. There might have been more among the Princes of the
Jews, but we find the names of no more registrate. O how hard a thing it is,
to draw a wise man a mighty man, or a Noble man to Christ: for it is true that
Christ says, It is as hard to draw a rich man to Christ, as to draw a Camel
through a needles eye. To draw a great body through a needles eye, is no less
difficulty than to draw thee to Christ, who art a Noble man, who wilt sit up,
and talk of thy kindred, and of thy blood. This doing of Joseph may be
marueiled at. Think ye not yt Joseph should have manifested himself rather in
Jesus lifetime, than now after His death? When He was going, working wonders,
and speaking such sweet sentences as never man spoke, yet all this moved him
not to come forth, and show himself. But now Christ being in shame, he comes
out. Whereunto shall I ascribe this? I ascribe it to the force yt came from the
death of Jesus. There was never a living man in the world, that had such force
as yt dead body had. No, I say, He had more power hanging dead on the cross,
than when He was living in the world, and more mighty was His death than His
life. The Lord give us a sense and feeling of ye force of ye death of Christ*
it is able to cause a dead body rise from death to life. John 12.24. He
foretold ye power of His death: When the corn of wheat lies in the ground and
dies, it fructifies and brings forth much fruit: so the dead body of Jesus
fructifi^d, and brought with it out of the grave to life many thousand souls,
and so does it to the end of the world. Have thou life into thee, From whom
came that life? Even from the death of Jesus Christ: if Christ had not died,
thou had never felt life. He uses also for this purpose another similitude,
Where ever the dead carcasse^s, thither resort the Eagles: Meaning, where His
dead body was, the faithful where ever they were, they should take them to
their wings, from all the ends of the earth, and leave their riches and honor,
and by Faith flee to Him, to feed upon Him, for His dead body casts such a
sweet smell through the Heavens, and the Earth (a carioun casts such an evil
smell, but the body of Jesus has a sweet smell) that it will allure men and
women to come to it. The Lord give every one such a taste of His sweetness, as
Joseph and Nicodemus found, that with pleasure we may flee to Him, and feed on
Him. Now follows the request, he comes in to Pilates Hall, and desires leave
to take up the dead body of Jesus, as ye saw before, the body of Jesus was not
taken from the cross without the license of the Judge, Pontius Pilate: so they
durst not bury the body of Jesus without leave, Why? The Lord was condemned,
and the man who is condemned, is yet in the hands of the Judge, until he give
Him over. If we consider well this whole History of the suffering of Christ,
we shall find one thing worthy to be marked, Albeit the Lord Jesus was the
most innocent man that ever was in the world, yet having to do with
Magistrates, both civil and ecclesiastical, as Pontius Pilate, Caiaphas, and
the rest, from the beginning to the end, He will have nothing done but with
their leave: when the Magistrate sent out men of war to take Him, He would
not suffer Peter to resist them, but He reproved him for drawing his sword:
He would not have His body taken down from the Cross, without the leave of
the Magistrate: He would have nothing done to Him: He would not be buried
without the leave of the Magistrate. He leaves thee His example, to teach
thee, if thou werest never so innocent, yet if thou fallest in the hands of
the Magistrate, suffer nothing to be done to thee with offense, and with the
disgrace of justice and judgment: he who would die well, and in the Lord, let
Him protest that nothing be done to him that will disgrace justice, albeit he
suffer innocently. I might let you see an higher ground of this matter, but I
will touch it only. The Lord that came in the world to relieve thee from that
great Judge, and from all the points of his Justice, it behooved Him to suffer
all the points of Justice under the earthly judge Pontius Pilate, in His
condemnation, in His taking from the cross, and in His burial: this was all to
the intent, that thou might be fully freed from all the points of the
Justice of GOD, for whatsoever thing He either did or suffered, it was for thy
cause. There is another thing here, that would not be passed by: There is no
question, but it comes of the Providence of God, that this body is neither
reaued away by violence, nor stolen away by slight, but the taking away comes
of a special request^: no question, this matter was so dispensed, that the
death of Jesus should be made notable, and come to the ears of Pilate, and
all other men: the death was to be made notable to the world, and likewise the
burial was to be made notable, to the end, that His glorious resurrection
might be made known to the world. These are the two pillars of our Faith, the
death of Christ, and His resurrection, and these are the two points that the
devil and the Heretics have from time to time striuen to hew and cut down,
that they should not appear to the world, because they are the chief pillars
of our Faith: but honor and glory be to the Lord, who of His grace has kept
these pillars constantly in His Church, in despite of the devil, and all his
instruments. Now the God of Heaven grant us grace to take hold on His death,
and glorious resurrection, that through His death and resurrection we may be
raised from death to newness of life here, that hereafter we may reign in
glory with Him, To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honor,
praise and glory, world without end.

AMEN.
THE XXVI. LECTVRE, OF THE BVRIALL OF CHRIST.
MARK, CHAP. XV.



etc.

JOHN CHAP. XIX.






THE last day (well-beloved in Jesus Christ) we entered into the History of the
Burial of the Lord Jesus: and we heard that the Burial came by a request,
made to Pilate the Roman Deputy for the time: The request maker was one
JOSEPH: He is set down and described by all the four EVANGELISTES, in all his
properties: He was a man of ARIMATHEA, a Town in IVRIE. He was a rich man,
and also an honorable and grave Counselor. Then, as concerning the qualities
of his person: He was a good and an upright man, who lived vprightlie in the
world: and yet he had a further respect than unto this life, for he waited
constantly for the Kingdom of God. And therefore, when Christ came into the
world, and took upon Him that great office of the Mediator betwixt GOD and
man, he enters into His school, and became His Disciple, howbeit for fear of
the JEWS, he durst not manifest himself, but lurked secretly for a time,
even to this time that it came to the Burial of the body of Jesus; and then
he shows himself to be a Disciple of Christ. In that Council, which was
against the Lord, he was a Counselor; but he vvoulde neither give
counsel, nor consent to the condemning and slaying of CHRIST. Thus much ye
heard before concerning this man and his properties: Then we heard how he
goes forward boldly to Pilate to seek the Lords body. He lurked before,
so long as Jesus was in the world, working such wonders as never man wrought,
and speaking with such a grace as never man spoke with. But now when He is
dead, he comes out boldly, and goes to Pilate, and he manifestes himself:
To let us see, that JESUS in His death, had greater force to draw the souls
of men unto Him, than He had in His life: for from that death there came so
sweet and sensible a smell to the souls of sinners, that it drew the souls
of sinners unto Him: Namely, the heart of this man JOSEPH: So that he comes
out boldly, as said is, and he goes to PILATE, and requests him to give him
the body of JESUS to be buried. Thus far we heard the last day: Now
this day we have PILATES answer to JOSEPH'S request.

PILATE wonders that He was dead so soon: and for the more certainty he
calls a Centurion, and asks him, if He was dead already. The Centurion
affirms, that He was dead already. PILATE grantes the request. After this we
come to the manner of His Burial. We shall go forward as time shall suffer,
and God shall give us grace. Pilate wonders that he was so soon dead. This
wondering of Pilate, no question, imports, that the death of Jesus was
extraordinary: It was not after the common fashion of men yt were crucified,
for men who were crucified, they used to hing long on the Cross, before they
yielded the spirit, days and nights; and in end, ere they yielded the spirit,
the life was taken from them by violence: They were broken on the Cross. So
Pilate hearing, that the Lord was so soon dead, he wondered, as at an
extraordinary thing. There are sundry things that testify that death of
Jesus to have been extraordinary: as first, That mighty and loud voice and
crying which the Lord uttered on the Cross immediately before He yielded the
spirit: for who will give a loud cry at the yielding of his spirit? for at the
poinct of death, when nature fails, it is a rare thing to find a man to have
a voice or a word. Next, The yielding of His spirit so suddenly, when by the
power of nature He might have lived longer. Last: This wondering of Pilate
testifies, That His death was extraordinary, and that there was a power in
Jesus which controlled nature. When nature would have kept life, the divine
power puts it out. In a word: This wondering testifies, That the death of Jesus
was the death of God, the death of a man, but God in the man, glorious and
blessed for evermore.

Now it is said, Pilate understood of the Centurion, that Jesus was dead, when
he granted the request of Joseph, and gave the body to him to be buried.
First, I see Pilate is a good Iustitier, (the Roman Justice was a good
Justice, the Roman Iustitiers were good) he showed him self to be a good
Iustitier in this: a man condemned to die, he would not give Him out of His
hands, till he knew perfectly that He was dead. The Judge should not give a
man out of his hands to any, till he know he be dead; Justice requires that: If
they did so to the green tree, the Lord Himself says, what shall they do to
the withered? If so precise justice was kept on ye innocent, what shall become
of the reprobate, who must suffer every point of justice? Lord save us from
that justice of the reprobate. I put it out of doubt: This justice kept on
Jesus is a lively image of that justice, that shall be kept on the reprobate.
Thou shall not escape one point of that justice, but thou shall suffer in thy
carcage ye extremity, if thou be not participate of His blood. Another thing is
to be marked in Pilate: I see a part of humanity in him: he grants the dead
body humanely. And surely this was by the fashion: for the bodies of crucified
me^ were not given and yielded at the request of me^: as their death was
ignominious, so was their burial. I put no doubt, the conscience of the
innocence of Jesus never left him, and the conscience of His innoce^cie made
him to be so easy to grant the body of Jesus at the request of Joseph.
Brethren, if this matter had been in the hands of Caiaphas, and the Priests,
and the Scribes, and the Elders, they would not have been so ready to have
given the body to be buried* for as they sought to shame Him in His death, so
would they in His burial: they had buried Him like an Ass, and caste^ Him out
like a beast. So who is this that dishonours the Saints of God in their
burial? It is not Pilate, or an Ethnicke, or Turk, or Pagan: it is hypocrit
professors, hypocrites, Caiaphas, it is false priests, knaves, with a colored
religion: it is the counterfeit hie priests, those shauelings, those monks and
friars, who murder the innoce^ts: there was never bitterness nor gal of heart
like their bitterness, who will call themselves the kirk (they are a false and a
deceiving kirk) they have not been content to martyr the dear Saints of
God, (that bloody massacre shall never go out of memory, it shall be recent to
their perpetual shame, and they shall pay for it one day) but they have raised
up ye bones of the dead to burn the^: The vessels of dishonor seek the
dishonor of the vessels of honor: but shame and confusion shall light upon
them, when the Saints of God shall get honor. The Lord save us from them, and
that judgment which they shall receive. We go now to the manner of the
Burial. Look the loving affection of this holy man Joseph, would to God we
could learn at him (who loved the dead Jesus so well) to love Him now living
and glorified in the Heavens. When he has gotten the body of the Lord, he
takes it, and puts it, not in a foul cloth; he takes not an old sheet, but he
buys the cleanest linne^, and finest that culd be gotten: and the Spirit of
God notes, that it was a fine linen cloth, which had never touched any man's
body before: then he wraps the body of Jesus in that winding sheet. I suppone
it was with his own hands (for we read of none other that touched Him) for
he thought his own hands over unworthy to wind such a precious and glorious
body.

Now Brethren, as the Burial of the Lord was honored by an honorable man,
who was the Burier of Him: so it was honored with a clean winding sheet,
which is a piece of the honor of the Burial. But look to this man's doings
better: When he procures leave to bury Him, he departs not, and leaves another
to bury Him: he sais not, I have done enough. I have gotten his body, he has
other friends tha^ I, here he has his mother, and his disciples, and other
women, who came with him out of Galile, and others, let them bury him, and do
ye rest to him: No, he says not so: So this is a commendable thing in him, who
having gotten leave to bury him, he perfects the work, he will bury him,
himself with his own hands. Let us learn at Joseph: If we put to our hands
to the work of Jesus to honor him, (woe to him that honors him not) if thou
begin to do him any service, leave not off, whilst thou have ended it: Count
not that which thou have done, as men do, who will say, I have professed, I
have suffered for religion, more than the best of them. But when thou art
running that race: never look over thy shoulder until thou come to thy
races end: and say, thou art an unprofitable servant, suppose thou had done
never so much: go forward, the crown is not in the midst of the race, but
at the end: and he who persistes to the end of the race, he shall get the
crown, and not he who goes back again. Yet the affection of the man would
be considered and weighed, after that once that sweet smell (the sweetest
smell that ever was felt) comes from the body of Jesus, that sweet smell of
love (for the savor of that body is the savor of love, such love as man never
bare to man, such love as made the Lord to die for sinners) after that the
smell comes to Joseph's soul, it wakened up in his heart love toward the Lord:
for He must love us, before we love Him: and whilst He begins to love Him,
he makes request for Him, and ever the nearer that he draws to that precious
body: the sweet smell that came from that precious body was always the
greater, and the heart of Joseph warmed ay the more with Him: so that he could
never get rest until he got that body in his arms, and wrapped it in linen
clothes. So when we begin to taste that fragrant odor, that sweet smell, our
hearts will be allured to draw near to Him, and as we draw the nearer to Him,
we will ay find the sweeter savor proceeding from Him: Thou shall feel
always the more that sweet odor, the more near thou meet with Him: and who
ever thou be that seek Him once, thou vvilt never rest whilst thou see
Him, and be with Him. Paul speaks this of himself, 2. Cor. 4.8. I approve
rather to be with the Lord, than to dwell in this body. And to the
Phillipians, 1.23. I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ: For as well
as we love this body, we will be content to slit out of it, to let the body
fall down, like a broken pitcher, that we may be conjoined with Christ: we
will be content to slit, and to obtain Jesus Christ, even with the
dissolution of the body.

This for the part of Joseph, in the burying of Christ, now follows the
part of one Nicodemus: Whilst as Joseph is vvrapping the body of Jesus in the
vvinding-sheete, one Nicodemus who had come to Jesus by night to be instructed
secretly by Him, he comes to Him, and he comes not empty handed (come not
empty handed to Christ, bring with thee some gift) he comes with a mixture of
Myrrh, and aloes, a precious odor, and with a great weight, an hundredth pound
weight, a great weight, and a great price, for this gift has been a costly
gift. But to speak of this Nicodemus, to compare him with Joseph, as Joseph
was an honorable man, and a Prince amongst the people, so was Nicodemus an
honorable man, and a Prince amongst the people, read the 3. of John. As Joseph
was a rich man, so Nicodemus was a rich and mighty man, as Joseph was a secret
disciple of Christ, so Nicodemus was a quiet disciple of Christ, who lurked
before, and now comes to light. I read of one property in Nicodemus, which was
not in Joseph. This Nicodemus is called by Christ, a Doctor, and Master in
Israel: He was a Pharise, learned in the law of the Jews, we read not this of
Joseph. Yet to go forward in the comparison, As Joseph brought his honor and
riches, and laid them down at the feet of Jesus Christ, who lay dead in
ignominy in the sight of the world, so this Nicodemus brings his honor and
his riches, his learning, and his wisdom, and lays them down at the feet
of Jesus lying dead: there he humbles his head, as it were at the feet of
Jesus: So that this was the greatest honor that Jesus got in His death and
burial: the wisdom, the honor, and the learning of the world, and the riches
in the persons of these men was all cast under His feet, and no doubt, these
two men, before they met with Jesus, and knew Him, they stood much on their
reputation, they thought their riches, and their honor was something, and they
counted much of their prerogatives in the world, but after they got a sight of
Jesus, all these, as Paul speaks of himself, seemed but loss unto them: they
seemed but dung and dirt, in respect of Jesus Christ, whom they counted to be
their only vantage. If thou had wisdom to compass the world, it is nothing
but folly, in respect of that eminency of the wisdom of Jesus Christ, all
would stincke, and be dung to thee, thou would not endure to look upon
them, if thou had a sight of that eminency of the wisdom of Jesus Christ.
Wise men will spitte at the Cross of Christ: these wise men, if ye speak to
them of the Cross of Christ, they will spit at it: yet albeit they be wise,
the foolishness of the Cross of Christ will shame them all, the foolishness
of it shames all the wise in the world, the poverty shames all the riches of
the world, the ignominy of it shames all the honor, all the crowns and
scepters in the world: and therefore PAVL 1. Cor. in Esayes words, he
glories, Where is the wisemen now? where are the Scribes? where is the disputer
of the world? Has not this foolish Cross of Christ made all but folly: the
very foolishnes of ye Cross of Christ has made all ye prerogatives of ye
world but foolishnes: the world would not know God in His wisdom, when He had
set out such a fair Fabric of ye world, He determined to save so many as
should believe. But how? by Philosophy? No, by wisdom? No, but by the
foolishness of preaching: thou shall never see Heaven, I give thee this doom,
if thou be not saved by this foolish preaching. This for the person of
Nicodemus, now let us see his gift, it is a rich gift, a mixture of Myrrh and
Aloes of an hundredth pound weight what moved ye man to do this? now certainly
there are few folks yt will cast away their goods, and give them for nothing:
it behooued yt some great matter should have moved this man: if he had not seen
some thing in yt body, to have moved him to have brought this gift, he had
never brought such a precious gift: if he had not seen a wonderful
preciousnes in ye body (even that dead body was ye most precious thing in ye
world) he had never bin so liberal, as to have bought so much precious ointment
what causes men be so loath to bestow any thing on Christ, and His Gospel: ye
world sees not how precious He is in His Gospel, when thou see not ye
preciousnes of ye Gospel and of Christ: O! what marvel is this? yt thou
bestowest nothing on Jesus and His Gospel: I doubt not, if thou could see
ye power of ye light, and ye preciousnes of that Gospel, thou would bestow
gifts and presents, yea, all yt thou have to ye glory of Jesus, and and to ye
maintenance of it: ye had need to look on this matter at this time. The Lord
open the eyes of men to see ye price of this glorious Gospel. But to speak of
Nicodemus gift: yt gift is honorable, a gift of odours: what should have moved
this man to have both such a gift of odours more tha^ any other: if Nicodemus
had not felt ye sweetest savor and odor, that ever was, coming from the body
of Jesus, he had never brought such a gift, he meets a sweet savor with a
sweet savor: that body needed no odours of Nicodemus, because that body was
filled with the presence of God, and therefore needed none odours, to preserve
it from corruption. The natural body of a man, being dead, will stincke, but
the body of the Lord Jesus was not subject to corruption: so ye see, Brethren,
all things honor the burial, ye honorable man Joseph honors ye burial, the
winding sheet honors ye burial, yt man Nicodemus honors ye burial yt rich
gift honors ye burial of ye Lord, so His burial was on all ways honorable:
So ye glory of Jesus began in His burial. When Nicodemus is come with his
gift, Joseph and Nicodemus join hands in hands together, and They took
towells, and buries the body of Jesus, after the manner of the burial of the
Jews: Yet I see in this Joseph a thing commendable: When Nicodemus comes with
a rich gift, and a richer gift than he gave, he enuies him not, he enuies
neither the man, nor his gift, but heartily they take the body together, and
annoint it. Let no man envy another, who comes with a gift to Jesus, but let
me with my small gift, and thee with thy great gift, heartily join hand in
hand together, and glorify Jesus Christ: put away envy and emulation, and
heartily honor JESUS CHRIST, for if we saw that all our honor stands in the
honor of Jesus Christ, we would be content, that every man should come with
greater gifts to honor Jesus Christ: and so emulation would be put away. Now
the Lord give us grace to see, that all our honor stands in that, that Jesus
Christ may be honored, that we may be content with all men to glorify Him: he
says not, Nicodemus do thou the rest of it, I have done my part, I have
bought ye winding-sheete, and now I will go my way, do thou the rest, annoint
thou Him, and bury thou Him. No, he leaves Him not, but when once he put his
hand to Him he will not leave Him: have thou begun to serve Christ, leave Him
not, albeit a King should command thee, leave Him not: if thou come not with
odours come with a windingsheet, if not with ye windingsheet, come, put the
towell about Him, and bind Him, and if thou do no more, stand by, and speak
to His honur, and glorify Him, and if thou have not a tongue to speak
reverently of Him, think of Him reverently, and honor Him in thy heart If thou
honor Him not, woe to thee if thou were a King: woe to thee, if you glorify not
ye God of glory, and this may let us see by experience, yt ye soul yt has any
will to glorify Jesus, can never be at rest, but when it is occupied in
glorifying Him, he says, this was done after ye custom of ye Jews: as they
buried honorable men, so they buried Jesus, good reason was it yt so it should
be, there came never such an honorable man among them as Christ: no, not their
kings, David, Solomon. etc. were nothing to Him. So it appears yt this custom
in ye burial was according to their ceremonial law, and therefore these
ceremonies yt ye Jews used in these burialls, their washing, their odours and
the rest were all figures of Jesus to come, and of yt glorious resurrection of
His, which is ye ernest pe^ny of our resurrection, for our resurrection depe^ds
on His glorious resurrection, and if He had not risen, we should never have
risen in glory. Seeing therefore they were shadows after His death and
resurrection, all these ceremonies, all this balming, washing, etc. take an
end: and except thou would say, that Jesus is not risen and extinguish the
sweet smell of His resurrection, thou must leave off all the ceremonies. It is
true, burial should be honored, and certainly in the burial of men and
women, a great respect should be had: Why should the body of a man be cast
away: the very light of Nature imprinted in the heart by the creation dites,
that the dead body of a man or a woman should be buried honorably, and that
in hope of immortality: Nature has a smell of immortality, and it causes the
body be had in due regard: the beasts bodies ye see, when they are dead, they
are cast away and no more is made of them. Come to custom, the custom of
burial that the Fathers used from the beginning, teaches us, that the burial
of man and woman should be respected, and that upon the hope of resurrection:
Begin at Adam, go to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and all the rest of the
holy Patriarchs, they had a regard of their burialls, upon hope of their
resurrection: for the bodies of the Saints who are buried, shall rise
gloriously in that great day: and this they did not so much by Nature, as by a
revelation of God, and on this hope follovved these ceremonies: the washing
and balming of the bodies, Acts 9.37 The very word the Scripture uses, the
word of sl^eping, show the body would not die for ever: but that they laid
down the body in the grave to sleep, as if it were laid down in a soft
bed to sleep, not to lie for ay there, but to rise again^ in the morning,
when the day shall rise. Jesus Christ is the most glorious morning that ever
was: and the body that sleeps in Him, shall rise again to glory, when He
shall come in the clouds vv^th millions of His Angels. Come to the custom of
the nations: their burial was honored, they did it of imitation follovving
the F^thers, like Apes, vvanting the hope of resurrection. What h^lpeth thee
thy burial, or the honors of it, if thou vvant^st that hope of resurrection:
they vvanted the word of God the life of all ce^emonies, what good do all
these ceremonies without the word and promises of God, by them only they are
quickened, by them only they live, without them they are dead shadows. The
very Ethnikes had a respect to burial: But this was in hope of resurrection,
but upon a custom for pomp and vain glory. As in all things the Lord gave
them up unto a reprobate sense, so in burial He gave them up to a reprobate
sense. They would cast out some dead bodies like dogs, and some used to burn
the dead bodies in the fire, these are barbarous and inhumane fashions. The
body should be buried in the earth, thou should return to the earth, as
thou came of the earth: Again, some amongst the Gentiles used over great
gorgeousness, and sumptuousness in their burialls, placing the effect of the
burial in gorgeousness. But to come to us, if thou werest a King, thou
should not follow the Ethnickes in sumptuousness: when the Lord brings a
man low, will thou exalt his head, and exceed measure in gorgeousness: vvilt
thou hold up his head, when the Lord is casting down his head, the Lord will
cast down thine head, and his both to the dust. Eschew two extremities,
First, eschew contempt, cast not away the body: and secondly, eschew
gorgeousness and superfluity, keep a Christian honor: albeit thou werest a
King, or an Emperor, thou should keep a mediocritie, and Christian
honesty, and let that sweet smell of the death and resurrection of JESUS
CHRIST savor into his burial.

What shall we say in burialls then? Shall we make none exception, No, let us
look to Circumstances: Bury not a beggar like a King, look to the place and
time, and person: yet in all times places and persons, let the burial smell of
that sweet smelling odor of JESUS CHRIST, and let that simple Christian
honesty be seen in your burialls.

Now because the time is spent, and I will not weary you: I leave the rest
till the next day, and commend you to GOD, beseeching Him, that ye may be
like to Him, both in life and death, and in His burial and resurrection, that
we may dwell with Him for evermore in the Heavens. To whom with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit, be all honor, praise and glory, world without end.

AMEN.
THE XXVII. LECTVRE, OF THE BVRIALL OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVII.

MARK, CHAP. XV.

LVKE CHAP. XXIII.

JOHN, CHAP. XIX.


WE have in hand at this present (well-beloued in CHRIST) this Gospel of the
Burial of the Lord: When He is crucified and dead, His Burial is obtained by
a request: which request was made to Pilate, the Judge and Roman Deputy: he
that made the request, was Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable man, a Senator, a
rich, a good, and a godly man. There comes afterward to Joseph, one Nicodemus,
a Doctor in Israel, an honorable, a wise, and a good man, and a Disciple of
Jesus, albeit quietly, as Joseph was: and he joins hands in this work with
Joseph: So these two take the whole work in hand: first Joseph, and then
Nicodemus. In the History of this Burial we have these two parts: First,
we have the vvinding of Christ, as we speak commonly, He is vvinded and
vvrapped in a new linen cloth, being embaulmed with sweet odors. We have
heard already of this first part of His Burial: The second part of His Burial,
is the laying of His precious body in the grave. First this day we shall speak
of the laying of yt body in the grave: and next falls out a piece of a
History, concerning certain women, namely, Marie Magdalene, and the other
Marie, the mother of Ioses, who are vvitnesses of yt burial, and saw that all
things were well done. Thirdly, in that part we have read in the Gospel of
Matthew especially, we have a piece of History concerning the watching and
keeping of the grave of Jesus, after He was buried. The History is very
plain, and the doctrine thereof shall be plain also. Then to begin at the
first part of the history: The burying of Jesus after he was vvrapped in the
vvinding-sheet, John in his Gospel marks the place where he was buried:
First in general, he notes it to be in a Garden; not a Kirk, not an house
but, a Garden, in the fair fields: not under a roof, but under the roof of
heaven. This burying in Kirks is come in upon superstition. It may suffice the
greatest lord of them all to be buried in the fields, as the Lord Jesus was
buried. So the place was a Garden. Next, it is described from the situation of
it: Near Mount Caluarie, the place where he was crucified: Joseph and
Nicodemus choosed this place, of very purpose, because it was near hand:
the time straited them: the time of the Passover was drawing near, and they
were to celebrate it after the going down of the Sun: and therefore they take
the commodity of the place. This was their purpose. But the Father of heaven
had his purpose in this work. The place was notable, and known to all the
indwellers in Jerusalem. The Lord of purpose chose that place: that as the
place of His Burial was known to Jerusalem, so the Resurrection of the Lord
should be known to Jerusalem. All this knowledge that: He was buried auailes
nothing: if thou know not yt He is risen again: and without this
knowledge no remission of sins, no life. But to come more particularly to
the place: John, when he had set it down in general, he comes in special,
and he calls it, a monument; he calls it, a new grave, wherein never man
lay. It was a grave, not hewn out of the earth: it was hewn out of a stone:
and Joseph caused it to be hewe^ out, not to Jesus, but to himself: but yet he
vouchsafes it upon Jesus. All was notable; the place, the garden, the time, the
grave, that His Resurrection might be notable and easily known to all the
indwellers in Jerusalem, for He made all things to fall out so, that His
resurrection should be patent: the Lord provided that in all respects the
burial of Jesus might be honorable. Look to these men that buried Him,
Joseph and Nicodemus, honorable men: look to His windingsheete, and clean
linen cloth: look to the odours wherewith He was embalmed, they were
costly: look to the place, it was hewn out of a stone, with great cost, and
travel, it was a new grave wherein never man lay, it was ordained for an
honorable man: the Lord will have His Son honored in all these things, and
as He was a chief man, far above all the kings in the world, separate from
sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, as the Apostle says, Heb. 7.26. So
His heavenly Father would have Him appearing a special man in His burial, and
namely in His grave: for in that grave wherein He was laid, never sinful man
come, and well worthy was He, who was separate from sinners to be laid in a
grave, wherein never sinner was laid: yet the newness of the grave, it
importes something more, that when He rose it should not be said, that any
other man should have risen, but that it was only Jesus that had risen. To go
forward to the laying of the body in the grave, the two men, Joseph and
Nicodemus they take the body, and lay it in. They cast it not in, but softly
and tenderly they laid that precious body that they loved so well, they laid
it in a grave, as it were in a bed, to sleep: when they have laid Him down in
ye grave, they take a great stone, and rolls it on the door of the grave, and
when they have done that, they go to the celebration of the Passover: As all
this work was directed by providence of God, so in laying on of this great
stone, the Lord He had His providence. No question, Joseph and Nicodemus
rolled on this stone to honor the Lord, but the providence of the Lord in this
stone was chiefly, that when the Lord rose again, the enemies should not say,
that the Lord was stolen out of the grave: for it was no small matter to roll
away such a great stone: so the Lord would meet the calumnies of His enemies
in raising the stone, and not only in raising the stone, but in breaking the
bands of death, and of the grave, and in raising from death to life, wherein
He showed the power of His Godhead: for in nothing did the power of GOD
appear so evidently, as in the raising of Christ from the death: and therefore
the Apostle Paul in the first Chapter to the Ephesians, verse 19. brings it in
as a singular proof of the strong power of God. Now we have ended this
discourse of the burial, which in all respects ye see is honorable: so that,
albeit the burial be otherwise ignominious, and by the last part of His
humiliation: yet in it the Lord begins to honor Him, He begins at it His
glory: even so, albeit the burial of all men and women being shameful of the
own nature, yet the burial of all faithful men and women being sanctified
in the burial of Jesus Christ, is the first part of their honor for by it
they pass to that eternal glory: but the unbelievers by their burial pass
to shame and confusion. Now we go unto the second part of this Text, to the
part of the godly women, good Marie Magdalene, who never left the Lord, but
followed Him from Galile, then the other Marie, the mother of Joses: As they
followed Him to the Cross, so they followed Him to the burial, and they stand
aside, and see Him buried. O that love! that wonderful tender love! that could
not suffer them to be reaued from the LORD: for woe is the heart that is
separate from Jesus, and that love that drew them to the Cross, that same
draws them to the grave with Him: for nothing could separate these women from
Jesus: No, the cross, the grave, death it self, cannot separate these women's
hearts from the LORD: so out of all question, this following of Jesus to the
grave was a token of an intiere love that they bare to Him: yea, it was rather
a token of that love that came from Jesus to them: that following of Him
uttered such a love and smell, to flow from that dead body, that hang on the
cross, and was buried, that never man nor woman felt the like: He so loved the
world, that He died for it, He gave Himself for it: for, Brethren, except
that force that came from the body, had drawn their hearts, it had been
impossible that they could have followed Him. No man can love GOD first, but
because He loves us, we love Him: None can come to me, says Christ, except my
Father draw him: if He lay not hold on us first, our hearts will never
incline to love Him. Now certainly, I put no question in it: these women looked
with sad and heavy hearts on this burial: for when we see one buried, whom we
love, we will be sad, nature dites this: But as they were heavy hearted in
looking on ye spectacle: so their heart had joy in looking thereon, for they
had a great hope to see: yt glorious body rise again, so they had sadness mixed
with joy, for woe to yt sadness yt has not joy mixed with it. Now yet I see as
they continued in following Him, first to ye cross, and then to the burial:
so the Lord continues in honoring them, for He sends them out as Preachers,
and eye witnesses of his death, which honor never one of the Apostles got, but
John: so He honored them in His burial: therefore honor Christ, follow Him
to the cross, follow Him to the grave: think not shame of His cross or His
grave, love Him with thine heart, wait on Him, for He will let thee see the
most glorious things that ever the eye saw: hold therefore the eye upon Him,
look to Him night and day, now when He is in the Heavens: and I promise thee,
thou shall find by experience, He shall make thee a proclaimer of His glory:
but thou who set not thine heart to seek Him now, when He is gone to the
Heavens, thou shall not have a mouth to glorify Him, or to speak of His Name
hereafter. Now, will ye look to ye carfulness of these women, they stand
against ye grave a far off and they look no doubt with sad hearts, how these two
men, Joseph and Nicodemus handles the glorious body of Jesus, and lays it in
ye grave. Men and women for curiosity and delectatio^ use to look upon such
spectacles, but these women looked with a careful and sorrowful heart, looking
that this body should be te^derly and honorably handled and buried. Therefore,
if you have yt ability to be a handler, and medler with ye work of ye Lord, as
Joseph and Nicodemus was: look at least, yt thou be a careful onlooker and
tender it in thy heart, and see yt all things go well, and if thou do that,
ye Lord shall count it a piece of good service for ye furthering of ye glory of
His Kingdom, If thou have not to bestow on Christ, yet speak well of Him, if you
can not speak, yet think well of Him: yet these women are not content to
look on only, but they will be also medlers in this actio^: and for this cause,
when ye grave is closed, they go home with, unspeakable sadness, and joy mixed
together, going home, they prepare sweet odours for ye embalming of Him ye
third day following, they cease upon yt morn, because it was the Sabbath, and
upon ye third day He rose and disappointed them of ye embalming of Him, but yet
their intention is to be commended, they are not content to look on Him, but
according to their power, they put to their hand: but ere they prepared these
odours, a sweet smell came from His body to them: for except a sweeter smell
come from Him, except He give thee a greater grace, you wilt not bestow a pe^ny
on Him, except He give thee a pound: but being once benefited by Him, thou will
bestow if it were thy own life, (let be thy goods) for Him and His glory: and
if thou will not bestovv on Christ, and upon His Gospel, I testify thou have
never found the sweetness of the Lord, nor of His grace, It may be that He
cast a Lordship to thee, or portion of heritage as it were a bone to a dog,
but if thou bestowest nothing on Him, thou have never felt the grace of God,
thy soul has never tasted of that odor and sweetness that is in Him Now I
come to the last part which I have read out of the Gospel of Matthew,
concerning the watching of Jesus after He was buried. This watching came upon
a suite, as all other things came upon a suite, for nothing durst be done
without license of the Magistrate, of Pilate the Roman Deputy: the Judge was
reverenced, without him nothing was done. The time of the suit is noted, to
wit, the next day after He was buried. This was, no doubt, the Sabbath day, for
they began their day at Even, when the Sun goes down, (as ye would say on
Friday at Even) for no doubt, the vvatch stood about ye grave all night. The
suit is made to Pilate, and all is done by the Judge: it is a circumstance
should be well noted, think it not a light matter. The Lord in all His
suffering is subject to the Judge, it behooved Him to underly the sentence of
the earthly Judge in all sorts: if He had not vnderlyed it, it had behooved
thee to underly the fearful Judgment of that everlasting Judge. But who
makes the suit? It is not Joseph, nor Nicodemus, none of them that loved
Christ. Joseph indeed made a suit that the body should be buried? But who is
it that makes this suit? Who but they who suited to crucify the LORD, The
Scribes, the Pharisees, that were enemies to Him. Look thorovv all this
History, and ye shall find sundry suits, some evil, some good, some on an
evil mind, some on a good mind, many evil, few good, many suitors to crucify
Him, many suitors to break Him, many suitors to hold Him down in the grave: ye
read of none but of one Joseph, who makes suit to get the dead body of Jesus
buried. Read all the Ecclesiastical Histories, and ye shall find these same
things that fell out in Christ, to have fallen out in His members: when a godly
man has been drawn out before the civil Judge, or to martyrdom: there has
been sundry suitors for him, some suitors good, some evil yet ever more evil
than good. Therefore a Prince or Magistrate was never in such danger, in any
judgment, as when he gets a good man fallen in his hands. Pilate was never in
such danger, as he was into through this action, for it lost him his life
present, and the life to come. When the action of a thief or a murderer comes
before a King there is no such danger: but when a godly man is brought before
him for the cause of CHRIST, then he should take good heed, where he shall get
one to give him a good counsel: he shall get many to give him evil counsel,
many shall cry, crucify Him: and woe to him, if he assent, as Pilate did, for
he shall inuolue himself in that same guiltines with them that cried crucify
him. It is true indeed, that Pilate granted a good suite, he gave leave to
Joseph, to bury the body of Christ, yet did this any good to Pilate, saved it
him? No, Think thou when thou have executed an innocent, that thou do
enough, when thou have given His body to be buried? No, that shall not excuse
thee, nor free thee from guiltiness. O how great and weighty is the burden
of Magistrates! Therefore they had need ever to have good men about them, and
we should pray the Lord earnestly to guide them and direct them in judgment.

This much for the suitors, now come to the suit: the words are these: The
deceiuer said, whilst as He was alive, that within three days He should rise:
command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure, until the third day, lest
His disciples come by night and steal Him away, and say to the people, that He
is risen from the dead: so shall the last e^rour be worse than the first. In
effect this is as much, as if they had said these words, this man said, that
He should rise the third day, therefore appoint Him a guard to testify of His
glorious resurrection: ye Lord so directed their words, albeit their meaning
was flat contrary: Mark therefore a good lesson: ever more the Lord h^th
snared the reprobate in their wicked devises, and has ever turned them from
that mischievous end they aimed them, to the manifestation of His own glory.
The Priests and Pharisees thought to obscure ye glory of Christ's resurrection,
and if it had lain in their hands to hold Him by force in the grave: but the
Lord who works light out of darkness, makes their suit to serve for the
clearer manifestation of His resurrection, for they could have done no more for
the manifestation of His resurrection, if they had been hired for that purpose:
so look what interprise wicked men will devise to dishonor Him: I say, the
Lord shall turn it in end to His glory, but to their destruction: I will say
further, (and it may seem marvelous) perverse devises of the wicked often
times do serve more to His glory, than the good purposes and deeds of the
godly: for it is not a greater glory to GOD, to bring light out of darkness,
than to bring light out of light: the Lord is a most skillful and mighty
workman, He makes His glory to appear, by bringing light out of darkness,
by bringing life out of death, and by calling the things that are not, as if
they were: all the devises of the wicked are darkness, the doings of the godly
are light: so the Lord will sometimes be more wonderfully glorified in the
doings of the wicked, than in the doings of the godly. But this does ye wicked
no good, nor it serves nothing for their benefit, for in ye mean time they
are more malicious against ye Lord, than ever they were, they call Him a
deceiuer: this is a wonderful thing, they saw the Lords power in obscuring of
the sun, in renting of the rocks, in opening of the graves, they saw His great
glory shine in all these wonders: yet such is the maliciousnes of these wicked
men, they call ye Lord of glory, a deceiuer, and in so doing not only they
oppone themselves against God, but also they do so far as in them lay, as to
have spitted in the face of God: yet these miserable creatures, I mean the
Scribes and Pharisees, came not on a suddaintie to this extreme maliciousnes,
but they show some mean and small beginnings of it, when Christ first
manifested Himself, and began to preach amongst them: then they proceeded from
worse to worse continually, all the time He was conversant amongst them:
thereafter in His Cross and death they taunted and mocked Him, and put Him to
the most shameful death they could devise: and now when He is buried and laid
in ye grave, they utter more maliciousness than ever they did, they come to
the extremity of maliciousnes and induration, they call the Lord a deceiuer.
Cursed be yt mouth that calls the Lord a deceiuer, and as Paul says, He that
loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema maranatha, 1. Cor. 16.22.
This lets us see the nature of their sin, it was a sin against the Holy
Spirit, and this is the nature of that sin, when once thou shall enter in it,
thou vvilt hardly get back again, until thou come to extreme excecation
and induration, to thine everlasting destruction. My lesson is this, If the
Lord give us grace to learn it. When it pleases the Lord to shine unto thee,
albeit thou vverest a King, or Earl, or Lord, look, as thou would eschew
H^ll and damnation, that thou repine not to this light, but greedily embrace
it, and walk in it: for if thou step forvvard in repining, thou shall have an
hard backe-comming again, and thou shall come from excecation to excecation,
until thou come to utter destruction. Now, I doubt not, but ye are
sorrovvfull, when ye hear the Lord a deceiuer, ye are sorrovvfull to hear
light called darkness* but comfort our selves with this, the Lord who was
free of all guile and deceit, suffers Himself to be called a deceiuer, to
purge us from guile and deceit: for it might seem marvelous, that the Spirit
of God should register this name of a deceiuer, suppose they called Him a
deceiuer: for this name defiles the air to call the Lord of Truth a deceiuer:
Yet no question the Spirit has left it in register to be heard and read of
all Christians, to the end of the world, that thou may know what the
Lord has suffered for thee. And doubtless this name was heavier to Him, than
all the vexation that was done to Him: it was heavier than the crucifying of
him it self: and when thou hear this name thou should say, He was not a
deceiuer, but it was I that was a deceiuer, and He was called a deceiuer for
me who was damned for deceit, that I should be delivered from the debt and
punishment of deceit, and deceivers.

Now to end shortly: Ye have a watch, says he, go and make it sure, keep it
as ye please. He was an easy man to grant to any man whatsoever thing he
sought of him: either good or evil. He granted to Joseph his suit to bury
Christ: so he grants to the Priests and Pharisees this suit to keep Him in the
grave: The reason is, because being an Ethnic, he served not God, but the
affections of me^, whether good or evil: he looked not to God, but he had a
respect to his own standing: and therefore he cares not to grant a suit
suppose it were against God and Christ: He had a respect to his own standing,
when he commanded Christ to be crucified: Such like he respected his own
standing, when he gave Joseph leave to bury Him: and likewise now when he
grantes this suit to the Priests to vvatch His grave, he respected his own
standing. Mark this Brethren: It is a miserable thing, when a King or a Judge
has not God before his eyes: woe to yt king who has not God and a good
conscience before his eyes: for he will be a slave to the affections of any
varlot in the Countreye. A Beggar, a Horse-rubber, and the vilest slave that
can be among men, is not so vile a slave as he who serves the affections of
men, and has not God and a good conscience before him: and ever the higher,
and the greater his estate be, he is the greater slave. Now having gotten
leave of Pilate, they set men of war to keep Him in the grave, they make
the sepulcher sure with the watch, to the end He should not be stolen
away: and for the more security, they s^aled the stone, and signated it with
Pilates ring: and then it was death to any man in the world to touch it:
Yet the more busy they are, and the more they strive to hold Him in the grave,
the more the Lord glorifies Him, and the more clear and manifest was his
Resurrection. Could Pilates seal hold him in the grave? Could the men of
war hold him in? No, they could not keep him: but ye will haare: They
fell all down dead at his Resurrection, and they had not a word to speak,
suppose such was the impudency of the Priests, that although they knew that he
was risen: Yet they hired the men of war to say that he was not risen but
his disciples stole him away by night: And this error continues in the world
among the Jews ever since. But the Lord Jesus arose with great power and
glory, and now is in infinite glory in the Heavens, at the right hand of the
Father: To whom, with the Son, and holy Spirit, from our hearts, we
render all praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever, AMEN.

THE XXVIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII. NOw, in the end of the Sabbath, when the first day of
the week began to dawne, Marie Magdalene, and the other Marie came to see the
sepulcher.







MARK CHAP. XVI. ANd when the Sabbath day was past, Marie Magdalene, and Marie
the mother of James and Salome, bought sweet ointmentes, that they might come
and anoint him.



LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII. NOw the first day of the week, early in the morning, they
came unto the sepulcher, and brought the odours, which they had prepared, and
certain women with them.

JOHN CHAP. XX. NOw the first day of the week, came Marie Magdalene, early
when it was yet dark, unto the sepulcher, and saw the stone taken away from
the tomb.


THESE days past (beloved Brethren in Christ) we have heard at length of the
death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: and in end we heard of His
Burial after His death and passion. Now it follows, as the Lord shall give us
grace, that we speak of His glorious resurrection from the dead. In speaking
of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, we shall follow out the whole four
Evangelists. Matthew in his last Chapter, Mark in his last Chapter, and Luke
in his last Chapter, sets down the History of the resurrection of Jesus
Christ; but John insists more largely than the rest, for he has two Chapters
of the History of the Resurrection. Then to come to the purpose. We find in
none of the four Evangelists the time and the hour when the Lord arose from
the dead preciselie noted. We find not the manner of His rising out of the
grave. We find no mention made of any witnesses that saw Him rise out of the
grave. It has pleased the Lord in His wisdom, to conceal all these things:
yet it is certain He arose out of the grave in the morning (what hour he
knows Himself) in the morning, after ye Jewish Sabbath, which was the
beginning of the third day after His Burial: for the Jews counted their day
from even till eue^: so the third day began at evening. As it is certain that
the Lord arose out of the grave in the night; so we find in the four
Evangelists, that when He is risen, He testifies a little after, His glorious
Resurrection, by many witnesses: And first of all the emptiness and roomnesse
of the grave testifies th^s Resurrection. Marie Magdalene, and the other Marie,
and Salome, testify of it: The Ang^ls of Heaven testify of it: The Lord
Himself testifies of it by appearing to the women: And these women testify
of it to His Disciples: And then the Lord witnesses His Resurrection by His
own appearing unto them.

To come to the Text that we have read: We have first of all out of the Gospel
of MARK noted the occasion, how it comes to pass that these women are made
witnesses to the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Next, we have the coming of
these holy women out of Jerusalem with odours to anoint the dead body of
Jesus, which they supponed to have been in the grave: Thirdly, we have the
rehearsal of some things that fell out whilst the women were coming to the
grave: There falls out a great earthquake, because their was a glorious Angel
coming from Heaven to the grave: And last of all, we shall speak of the part
of Marie Magdalene particularly, because she prevented the other, and came
first to the grave: she was a woman who loved the Lord marueilously, and
waited continually upon Him. As touching the occasion* MARK says, that when
the Sabbath day was past, Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of James and
Salome, bought sweet ointments, that they might come and anoint him: that is,
the dead body of the Lord, which, as they supponed, lay in the grave. Note
the time well. It was after the Sabbath was past: for after they had seen the
Lord laid in the grave by Joseph and Nicodemus, they returned home to the
Preparation of the Passover, which was as we count on the Friday at even, when
the Sun was gone down. On the morrow after, which was their Sabbath, they
celebrated the Passover, and they rested all that day until the evening: Then
upon their Sabbath at even, which is our Saturdaye at even, when the Sun was
gone down, their Sabbath being ended, they remember their purpose, and buy
sweet odours, that on the morrow early they might embaulme the dead body of
the Lord.

Now Brethren, surely the love and affection of these women cannot be passed
by: They take a purpose to honor the Lord by embaulming His body: They rest on
the Sabbath day: a day and a night interuenes yet this time stays not their
purpose (I shall cause one night interuening put a good purpose out of our
heads. Indeed we will keep an evil purpose long in our mind: But if we have a
good purpose at even, we will forget it ere the morn, it will be buried with
us, as if we had never thought it.) But this purpose of these holy women would
be better examined, that we may see wherein they are to be commended: they
buy and prepare sweet smelling odours to annoint the body of the LORD, the
LORD was risen at this time, and the LORD had foretold them oftener than once
or twice, that He was after His death to rise on the third day, yet they go out
of very purpose that same day, this cannot be commendable in them. As for the
love that was in the hearts of these women, it cannot but be commended to all
posterities to the end of the world, and would to GOD the like love and zeal
to God were in the hearts of men and women in these days, but certainly the
deed it self, seeing they had the word of God in ye contrary, is not
commendable: But look again in all this doing, the Lord takes more heed to ye
heart, than to ye deed, and not only forgiues He the sin, but also He works
out of it, not only His own glory, but ye well of ye women: they went out of
set purpose to embalme Him, ye Lord turns this so about, yt He makes them to
be witnesses of His glorious resurrection. Now well is them yt loves ye Lord:
for to them all things works for ye best, out of their sins He works their
salvation, and out of darkness light. But to come forward to the next head: The
sweet odours being bought, confected and prepared* ye women go toward the
grave, the time is very precisely noted by all ye four Evangelists, Matthew
calls it, the end of the Sabbath, when the first day in the week began to
dawne. It was in ye dawning before the Lords day (so called in remembrance of
His glorious resurrection, which we use to call our Sunday). Mark says, it
was the first day of the Sabbath, early in the morning, in the beginning of the
week, as he would say, Sunday, early in the morning, before ye rising of ye
sun, Luke says ye same, John says, early the first day of the week when it
was dark, in a world, it was on Sunday in ye morning, at ye very point of
time, when ye sun rose. Now ye purpose of these women was not to be witnesses
of ye resurrection of ye Lord but to embalme His body (which as they thought,
was lying in the grave) but ye Lord turns ye matter so about yt He makes them
to be witnesses of Christ's resurrection, and this was no small honor, He makes
women witnesses of ye resurrection, even to ye shame of men, yea, even to ye
shame of His Apostles: for they rose early in ye morning but His Apostles lay
lurking still, and go not out: So in the example of these women, we may see
that to be true which Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.27. The Lord has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the
weak things of the world, to confound the mighty things, that all glory
might redound to Him. Another thing we see in their example, that which the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3.18. If any man seem to be wise in this world, let him
be a fool, that he may be wise. The LORD in this doing will have His
disciples to sit down in the school of women, to learn of them that
glorious resurrection, He vvil make them to be fools, yt they may be made
wise, and He will have the women to be their teachers, and if thou
acceptest not of the testimony of these women, and become not as a fool,
albeit thou vverest never so wise, thou shall never get a part of the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Now I go forwards to the third thing we have
here set down. It is an incident that falls out whilst as the women is on
their journey, going to the grave, for as they are going to the grave, there
falls out, says Matthew, a great earthquake, the cause is noted, for as they
were going to the grave, the Lord of glory sends an Angel to tell the
resurrection of the Lord to these women: so in very deed, the Angel is a
witness before the women, but the women before the men: Always, the Angel
that comes from Heaven, he is a honorable ambassador: the blessed Angels are
very glorious, and no question the Lord would have His resurrection first
witnessed by so glorious an ambassador, He would not have man to testify
first of it, but He would have a glorious Angel from Heaven to tell, and
proclaim the Lord of glory was risen, and that He had broken the bands of
death, and risen up in despite of the Devil, and death, and that to our well,
yt both we may rise to a newness of life, and yt we may be assured, that they
who sleep in Him, as Paul says, and lies in the gave, shall be raised with
Him at that great day in glory. An Angel, a glorious creature honors the
message, but yet I say, the message and commission honors the Angel more,
than the Angel does the message: yea, if it were all the Angels in Heaven,
they get more honor by it, than they can give to it. Well, if the preaching of
ye Gospel, the testifying of Jesus, and His resurrection, honors the Angels,
shall we think that any man in earth is too good to preach the Gospel of
Christ, No, if thou werest a King, it is a great honor to thee, that thou
should have grace to speak of His blessed Name. Well, Brethren, as the
ambassador was glorious, and the message was glorious, so y^ commission was
the joyfullest thing that ever you heardest: all the Angels in Heaven, are too
unworthy to tell it. Now as the ambassador was glorious, and the message more
glorious, so the Lord of Heaven honors His Ambassador with a terrible
earthquake: the ambassador of a King has honor, and why should not the
ambassador of the LORD JESUS have honor above all the Kings of the world? No
doubt the LORD in this Earthquake has a further respect, for hereby He
testified, that His glorious presence accompanied the Angel, and that to the
weal and comfort of the silly women: for as all the rest was to prepare their
hearts reverently to receive so glorious an Ambassador, so was also this
Earthquake: For if both men and women be not prepared to receive the Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST, let an Angel come from Heaven, if they be not prepared by the
power of GOD, they will not believe, they will not hear, nor receive the
message with reverence. Therefore, let no man say, What needs all this, a
glorious Angel to come from Heaven* and such an Earthquake? He might have come
otherwise, He might have come fair and softly, and in more quiet manner, I
answer to this: The LORD looked not so much to the Angel, or the message, as
to the women: for if it were an Angel that came from Heaven, He shall never be
received by the silliest body, except thine heart be prepared by the power of
God.

Now to go forward: When this Angel comes down first, we have what He
does: Then we have a fair description of this Angel: The first thing He
does, is, He goes to the grave, and rowles away the stone from the door. Ye
would think this was but a sober and servile office, to so glorious an
Ambassador. Might not men have done it? It was Joseph and Nicodemus who rolled
the stone to the tomb. Might not men have rolled it away again? Mark, and
compare the Burial with His glorious resurrection: In His Burial He kept the
Godhead close: for if either in the death of Christ, or in His Burial, that
Godhead should have uttered it self, He could neither have died, nor yet have
been buried: for the Godhead can neither die, nor be buried: but in the
resurrection, the Godhead that dwelt in Him bodily breaks out, and raises the
stone. Upon this difference there follows another: in His Burial, the Godhead
keeping it self close, He had no Angels, but mortal men, to wit, Joseph, and
Nicodemus, to serve Him: they wind Him, they lay Him in the grave, they roll
the stone to the door of the grave: But when it comes to His glorious
resurrection, in the which that Godhead that before kept it self close, brake
out, He uses not the ministry of men, but of a glorious Angel, an Angel
rolls away the stone, as it were with His own hand. Now this lets us see how
highly and honorably we should think of this glorious resurrection. It is
true, the LORD in His Burial was honorable, but He was far more honorable
in His Resurrection: for the honor that He had in His Burial was but a
worldly honor; but in His Resurrection He had an Heavenly honor: Indeed
Joseph and Nicodemus who buried Him, were two Honorable men, but an Angel is
an hundredth times more Honorable and glorious than any man, albeit he were a
king, or Caesar himself. And so the LORD in His Burial uttered Himself to
be a Lord over men, but in His glorious Resurrection He uttered Himself even
in our nature, not only to be Lord of men, but also of Angels. So Brethren,
all tendes to this, to let us see the glory of the Resurrection of Jesus. Now
would to God we could strive night and day to get a sight of it: for except
we get a sight of it, in some measure here, we shall never see glory
hereafter. But before I leave this, I see, that in the rolling away of the
stone, the Lord has a respect to the weakness of these women, knowing well
they were not able to remove so heavy a stone, to see whether the Lord was
there or no: He sendes this Angel to roll it away, to the end, that when the
women came, they should see that the LORD was risen from the dead. Well, here
we have a comfortable lesson: The LORD will help them that seek Him: Seek
the Lord where ever He be: Seek the Lord in the grave: seek the Lord in the
Heaven, and thou shall be assured, if thou be a weak body, the Lord shall
supply thy weakness, and He shall cause the strong Angel to do that which
thou art not able to do. Read we not how the Lord has sent His Angels to
fight the battles of His own? And if thou will seek the Lord when thou art
going any way, thou shall find in experience that the Lord shall send His
Angel before thee, and prepare things before thy coming. And I doubt not,
but some of you who hears me, have found this in your own experience, in
such sort, that ye have wondered at that blessed providence of His Majesty,
and has been moved glorify Him.

Now there is another thing to be marked: When He has rolled the stone from
the door, He departs not, but he sits down, and abides there, to testify
that the Lord Jesus was risen. So ye see the first witness of the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ is an Angel, He remains sitting upon the stone,
to testify, that Christ was risen in glory. The first witnesses of His death
and Burial, were men and women; but the first witness of His glorious
resurrection, is His blessed Angel; to let us see how the Lord would honor
His Resurrection, and to make us esteem of it, and to wonder at it, for in the
sight of it stands our life and glory. Alas! that once our eyes could be
opened, to see the glory of our Redeemer, sitting at the right hand of that
Majesty, then could we not but wonder at the greatness of that glory.

Well then, as I said before in this poinct: The Lord had a great respect to
the poor women. Alas! an Earthly King will have a small respect to the poor:
But the Lord of glory had a great respect to these poor women. Indeed, the
sight of the emptiness of the grave might have been a sufficient testimony
to them of Christ's Resurrection, considering the fore-warning they had before,
to wit, That the Lord should rise again the third day: but they were weak
in faith: And therefore, He that supplied the weakness of their bodies, by the
strength of the Angel, He supplies their faith by this same Angel: for they
began to doubt, whether He was risen: they thought He was stolen away: Yet
the Lord Jesus supplies their weakness, and to the emptiness of the grave,
He subjoynes the saying of the Angel, The Lord is risen from the dead. Then
the lesson is this: Again seek the Lord: Art thou sick in body, He will
supply thy weakness: Art thou weak in faith, seek the Lord: and as
certainly as He supplied the faith of these women, He shall supply thy
faith. And if thou will not believe for one testimony, He will testify
again: and I testify, He will never leave thee, if thou once aimest to seek
Him: yea, He will heap testimony upon testimony, till He confirm thee,
and bring thee to perfection.

Now Brethren, follows hereafter a fair description of this Angel. In
MATTHEW first he is described from his look and countenance. The look and
his eyes glaunced, as ye see flashes of fire. Then he is described from his
raiment: He is cladde with fair bright raiment, white like the snow: He
has fiery eyes, and his raiment is like white snow. Last of all, he is
descriued from the effect that followed on his sight. But on whom? Not on the
women, but on the strong men of war: for as soon as they saw him, they were
not able to look upon him but fell down as dead: they might not sustain to
behold him, and his glorious countenance. Now, as this great Earthquake, which
was joined with his coming down from Heaven, was a visible sign of the
presence of God, accompanying Him, so that terrible countenance and white
raiment were also visible signs of that same presence of GOD, accompanying Him
when he came to the grave. The Majesty of GOD shined in his face, and
raiment, and the same presence made the men of war to fall down as dead.
Whereto was all this? To glorify and honor that great commission that the
Angel had. Why should not the ambassador of a glorious King be glorious? Why
should not His look, his countenance, His raiment, and all be glorious? But
yet again, all this is for the well of the poor women: In all this the LORD
regarded them: for even as the terrible earthquake was to prepare their
hearts to receive the embassage reverently: Even so, was the bright
countenance and shining raiment of this Angel. Now to speak something of
the signs of the presence of God, that He has used since the beginning, to
set out His invisible glory: No, all the Angels in Heaven had never power to
get access nor apprehend yt inaccessible light. It is true, the great God has
no need to borrow either light from the fire-flash, or vvhitenes from ye
snow, or hue, or hotnes from the fire, to set forth His glory, for all the
beauties in all the creatures are not to be compared to yt glory that is in
Him. The fire had never yt glance to set forth His glory* etc. yet it has
pleased ye Lord, for our capacity submitting Himself to our infirmity, by
those things yt are most glorious and exquisite in Nature, to set out and
represent His incomprehensible glory: He takes as it were a dark shadovv
thereby, to let us see His shining glory: and therefore (Brethren) take up ye
lesson. When ever the Lord vtters His Majesty by outward signs of His
creatures, hold not altogether thine eye fixed on ye outward signs, as though
His Majesty extended ye self no further, as though there were no greater glory
in Him than in them, as though He were no vvhiter than the snow, nor brighter
than the fire: for the visible creature cannot fully express the glory of the
Creator: but by the eye of Faith, thou should pierce into that inward light
and incomprehensible glory, whereinto GOD dwells, blessed for ever, which is
represented by the beauty of these outward signs. Therefore when He sets
out His brightness by the brightness of the Sun: when thou see the Sun
shining, thou should say with thy self, I cannot abide the brightness of
this Sun: and therefore what brightness is in yt God that made it: and if by
the eye of Faith thou look through the glory of all the creatures, to the
infinite glory of the Creator, thou shall have a fair vantage, for thou shall
no sooner look upon His glory, by the eye of faith, but as soon shall the
Lord by the beams of His infinite glory, and by a marvelous light shine in
thine heart: for as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 4.6. God that commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, is He which has shined in our hearts. And I
doubt not but these poor women looking to the glory of the Angel, who was an
Ambassador of Jesus: they saw and considered how glorious Jesus was who sent
him: and so they found the glory of the Lord shining in their soul afterward,
which made them to rejoice with a joy unspeakable, and glorious.

Now to end shortly, it is said, That for fear of Him the keepers were
astonished, and became as dead men. The men of war, are standing about the
grave when His Angel comes: but when they see the Angel, the earth did not
shake so fast as they did: they shake and fall down dead, as it were in a
trance: these men were stout before: and it is likely that they had bragged
before, that all the world should not get Him out of the grave: for they were
acquainted with tumultes of war, and they had seen as many terrible sights,
as any men: yet for all their stoutnesse, they look not so soon to the Angels
face, and raiment, but as soon they fall down dead. Well, thou art a stout man,
if thou will say: All the devils in Hell shall not smite thee, nor affright thee,
thou think thou will outface all the world: this Land is full of such
foolish braggers, who will say, they will not be afraid to meet the Devil:
but one blencke of the face of that Majesty of GOD, will cause them fall down
as dead to the ground. Will ye weigh this matter aright, It is not only the
outward sight of the Angel that astonishes these men: for if it was the sight
of the Angel, why fell not the women down? Why were they not astonished? the
women stood still, and the Angel spoke to them, and they to him: so there must
be another cause of this terror? and what was the cause? They were great
sinners: sin did reign in them without repentance: they had an evil
conscience: they were enemies to Jesus Christ: and therefore at the sight of
the Angel, when the light of GOD enters in, and wakens their consciences, they
are stricken with exceeding terror and fear. The children of God, who have
their consciences purged from the guiltiness of sin, uses not to be stricken
with such terror at the sight of God, but rather receive joy thereby. It is
true: The presence of the Majesty of God is terrible in it self: and the
Angels themselves can not behold it in the own brightness: yet it is
joyful, sweet and comfortable to them who are in Jesus Christ: but when it
meets with a sinful heart, and an evil conscience, of all things it is most
terrible: if thou who art a sinful man, and who art not in the Lord Jesus: if
thou saw Him shine in thine heart, and if thou gettest not a sight of thy
sin, thou shall find such terror and fear, that all the world cannot
comfort thee, for that sight of all sights is most terrible to them who are not
in Jesus Christ. I grant, indeed, that the very children of God: yea, even the
best of them all, so long as this remanent corruption abides in them, they
find the Majesty and glorious presence of God makes them to be afraid: We
may see the example of this in these women, at the sight of the Angel they
were afraid: but after that once sin be altogether abolished, then His
presence shall not be fearful, but comfortable. We shall have no fear, but
joy everlasting: As for the reprobate, they cannot be able to abide His
glorious presence in that great day: for if that glory was so terrible that
shined in one Angel, how terrible shall it be to them that are out with
Christ, when not one Angel, but millions of Angels in glory: yea, the Lord
Himself as Judge of the world, shall appear in His incomprehensible glory,
it shall be so terrible, that it shall cause them to cry, Hills and mountains
fall on us, and save us from the presence of the Lamb. The Lord grant, that we
may be found in the Lord Jesus Christ here, and that we may have our
consciences sprinkled with His blood, that we may find the Lords presence
not only comfortable to us here, but chiefly in that great day, when we shall
see Him face to face. To this Lord Jesus, with the Father and the Holy Spirit,
be all praise, honor and glory for ever.

AMEN.
THE XXIX. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII. JESUS, who was crucified:

MARK CHAP. XVI.







JOHN CHAP. XX.

JESUS loved, and said unto them, They have taken away the LORD out of the
sepulcher, and we know not where they have laid him.


THe Resurrection of Jesus (Beloved Brethren) was without any witnesses; no man
saw Him rise: therefore, the four Evangelists record not that any man or
woman saw the Lord rise out of the grave: for so it pleased the Lord to arise
from the dead, that He would not have neither man nor woman in this world
seeing Him rise. The Testimony of the four Evangelists, is, That after He was
risen without any witnesses, then His Resurrection was known and made manifest
to ye world by many witnesses. They set down two occasions of ye Resurrection
of Jesus Christ: The first occasion was through the women, Mary Magd. and Mary
the mother of James, who after they had seen Him buried, returned home to buy
odours to embalme the dead body of Jesus, where He lay in the grave. Now when
the Sabbath had passed by, the women buys the sweet odours in the night time,
which proceeded the Lords day, as we term it: and in the night time they
confect them, yt in the day they might enbalme the precious body of Jesus.
These women (in the dawning of the day, before the Sun rose) went out of set
purpose to anoint the Lord. There is ye first occasion how his resurrection
came to light. The other occasion: As these women came, the Angel of the Lord
came down: his purpose is to testify to these women yt came out of the Town,
that the Lord was risen. Now follows the manifestatio^ of His Resurrection:
The Angel preuents the women, and rolls the stone from the grave, and abides
still there, to testify to the women, that the Lord Jesus was risen from the
dead. After this, the Lord Jesus Himself appears to the women, and confirms
the Testimony of the Angel. The women having received these two manifestations
of His rising, they get this honor to be made the first preachers of the
Resurrection before all men: yea, even before the Apostles themselves: and this
preaching of the women is the third manifestation. Then after the women had
testified to His Apostles, that He was risen, the Lord appears Himself to the
Apostles, and confirms their Testimony, that verily He was risen from the
dead. Now Brethren, it is to be known first of all, concerning these women,
who next after the Angels were made witnesses of the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, yt they came not all to the grave in one company, but as it appears
well of the History, there has bin two companies of the^, one company yt came
first to the grave, and went out of Jerusalem before sun rising: another
company yt came out after this company, and came to the grave of the Lord
before the other company. If we mark not this difference, we will see well
how the four Evangelists aggree in that History of the Resurrection of JESUS
CHRIST. As for the first company: There were two women especially, named Marie
Magdalene, and Marie the mother of James, not excluding the rest: but they are
named, because among all the rest they were most notable, and best known to
the Apostles. Mark notes three to be in the first company, these two, and one
Salome. Luke notes none, but calls them certain women, who followed Jesus out
of Galile, understanding these same women. John names none, but one, Marie
Magdalene, (not excluding the rest) because she was best known for her love,
for her zeal, for her faith, and for her affection to Christ, her name is
registrate. Brethren, the last day we heard something of the first company, and
the time when they came, in the dawning of the day before the Lords day, which
we call Sunday. Now we heard, as they came out of Jerusalem, the Angel of the
Lord descended from Heaven, with a great earthquake: No question the women were
afraid at this: but being stre^gthned with the Spirit, they came forward: as
they were coming to the grave, they fell in question about the rolling away of
the stone from the door of the grave: they foresaw not this impediment ere
they came from home: but being carried with an earnest desire to anoint the
Lords dead body: they were not mindful of any impedime^ts. We know when a man
or a woman, would feign have a thing done, they will not forecast for all
perils: but it is better to provide and foresee in time ye impedime^ts ere thou
begin the work: Yet a man or a woman who has the work of the Lord, should
not cast for all perils: for if he put not his hand to the work of the Lord,
except he see al impedime^ts removed, he will never do any thing to the glory
of God: for in performing of ye Lords work, we must not think yt He will remove
all impedime^ts at ye first, as these women found al impedime^ts to be taken
away. Now these women came forward, and as they came, they perceived the stone
to be rolled from the grave. Marie Magdalene seeing the stone away, she ran
back, and showed the matter to Peter and James, in Jerusalem, where they lay
lurking she brings in her conceit evil tidings to them, and says, The body of
the Lord is stolle^ away out of the grave and we know not where they have laid
him. So Brethren, in this Text yt we have read, we have first a particular
History of Marie Magdalene, registrate by John: The^ we have the History of
the rest of the women: As concerning Mary Magdalene, we note of her these
four things out of the Gospel of John: First, her outcomming: Next, what she
sees when she is come, to wit, the stone rolled away: Thirdly, what she does
when she sees the stone removed* she returns to Peter: and fourthly, what she
says: she brings no good tidings to Peter and James, but she says, They have
stolen away the body of the Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
Touching the going out of Marie, I stay not on it, for she came out with the
rest of the first company of women: only this, if any man would ask wherefore
the women got this honor above men, ye even the Apostles, to be made first
witnesses of this Resurrection of Christ? I answer, So it pleased the Lord yt
directed the^: and this only one cause makes their witnessing also to be
autentik, yt no man should except against it. Ye see in civil things women are
not admitted to be witnesses: but here ye see in this spiritual m^tter they are
made witnesses before all the world: and their testimony is so aute^tik, yt if
John or Peter or any of the apostles had refused this testimony, they had
hazarded their part and portion in the resurrection of Jesus Christ: and if
thou reject their witnessing this day, thou shall never have part of His
resurrection. To come to the Text: What sees she, and the rest when they come
to the grave? They see the stone rolled away, and so they are relieved of yt
care yt troubled the^ by the way. Mary Magd. and the rest, came of a great
zeal to the grave, to anoint the Lords dead body: yet I will not commend this
purpose, because they had no warrant of the word of the Lord: for He told He
would rise the third day: and therefore they should not have come out to anoint
Him ye third day. Yet when they go out the third day to anoint Him, ere they
came to the grave, they find ye impediment to be taken away, the stone to be
removed. Mark this well: If they ye came to this action without any warrande,
got all impedime^ts removed: How much more, if any man or woman of zeal to
God, and to His glory have a good purpose, and have an express warra^d of His
word, shall they find al impedime^ts to be taken away? God is the same to us
now, yt He was to the^ then. Yet I see again, it is not to be too wise in the
work of the Lord: but as soon as we know what is the Lords will, we should
address our selves to perform the same, and commit the success to Him, who
can remove al impedime^ts: for in so doing thou honor God, and give Him
the glory, yt is due to Him, when under hope against hope thou beleeuest, as
Abraham did, Romans 4.18. But ye will say, Albeit Marie Magd. found the stone
rolled away, yet she found not the body of the Lord, which she meant to anoint
with odours: I answer: she found not the thing she sought: but what lost she?
She found a better thing than she sought: she seeks the Lord among the dead,
and she finds Him among the living: the faithful who seek the Lord, shall
never be disappointed: if thou missest that thing that thou seek, thou shall
get a better thing, and if thou seek this life (if thou be in the Lord) if
thou loose it: what loosest thou? thou shall find a better life. Marie seeing
ye stone rolled away, she goes not forward but returns home again. Now
certainly I cannot deny, but this came of zeal, but I will not excuse her but
she should have stayed with ye rest, and have looked into ye grave, to hear the
Angels informatio^, but on a suddenty she returns. Brethren, this falls out
in ye best and most godly, they will often times be miscarried for a while, not yt
there is any fault to be found with their zeal, or with their affection to ye
Lord: but ye hasty and sudden doing, comes more of a blindness and ignorance
than of zeal: and therefore mark ye lesson: Who ever would be zealous in a
good cause, and would utter their affection toward ye Lord, ere they begin,
they should beware and know well what they are doing: let knowledge go before,
and let it be borne as a torch, to show the way, and then let zeal follow, for
if zeal follow not, I will not give a penny for thy knowledge, zeal without
knowledge is better tha^ knowledge without zeal: a great zeal with a sober
measure of knowledge is better tha^ al ye knowledge in ye world without zeal:
knowledge without zeal serves for nothing but for damnation: if you understood,
and could tell over ye whole Bible, without zeal that serves thee for
nothing: I had rather have one yt can speak two words with zeal, than have all
thy knowledge: little knowledge with zeal will save thee, but if you had all ye
knowledge in ye world, without zeal it will not save thee. Now ye last thing
concerning Marie: when she has returned back to Peter and John: here she
begins to make a sad narratio^, and co^plaines, and says, alas, They have
stolen away the body of the Lord, and we know not where to seek it, speaking
in the plural number: she makes a moan and look to ye affection of the woman
toward ye Lord: she could not be separate from Him, when He was dead in ye
grave (alas she had another kind of love to Him, tha^ we have now: but now,
albeit He be now glorified in ye Heavens, we will suffer our self easily to
sunder from Him without a complaint or moan: but if we found either ye force of
His death, or yet the force of His life and glory, we would never be glad
until we were joined with Him* Now when she says, they had taken away ye Lord,
albeit she speaks not ye truth, yet I will not say, she made a lie, but she
failed in ignorance, she spoke as she thought, but she knew not yt the Lord was
risen. Ignorance is a sore thing: for when once any man co^mits a sin through
ignorance, he goes forvvard from one sin to another: so she makes an evil
report to ye Apostles: strive therefore to get this misty cloud of ignorance
removed from thee: for if thou take pleasure to ly in it, ye end of it shall
be utter darkness. Brethren, mark ye mercy of God: ye Lord lays not this to
her charge: it is said commonly, love hides a multitude of sins: ye Lord when
He loves a person, He casts ye mantle of His mercy over his sins, and hides
them: He will be loath to revile them whom He loves: a man vvil not shame
another who^ he loves well, much less will ye Lord do it: No, He will cast
ye cloak of His mercy upon them yt they appear not before ye judgeme^t seat of
His Father. Now, I see further, albeit those things were not true, yet by them
ye Lord brings good to ye disciples: for they were lying in sluggishnes, and so
wakens them: so He works light out of darkness, yet yt is no vvarrand for thee
to do evil. Let no man do evil, that good may come of it, Romans 3.8. Mark
last concerning this woman Marie, I see she comes to ye knowledge of ye
resurrection of Jesus with great pain, for she waked ye night before with care:
she comes out early in ye morning to ye grave, and goes home with great care and
heaviness. It is not a little thing to come to Christ in His glory: think you
to step in at the first, to see God in His glory: thou vvilt not get leave to
see ye glory of a King at ye first, and think you to come to Christ at the
first: No, you must come to Christ, and ye sight of His glory with many tears,
and great pain But what if thou should pain thy self all thy lifetime if
thou get a sight of this resurrection in glory, and if thou gettest a blencke
of yt countenance, if it were at thy last end, it shall swallow up in a
moment all thy displeasure and pain: if thou should suffer martyrdom, yet
yt sight of His glory shall furnish such joy, as shall swallovv up all
displeasure, the sight of that eternal weight of glory makes us to count all
the afflictions of this present life to be but light and momentanean, when we
look not to the things that are seen, but to the things that are unseen.
Thou think the time here to be longsome, but once thou gettest a sight of
that glory, thou shall think it but a moment. Now leaving Marie Magdalene, I
come to the rest of the women yt were at ye grave, of who^ we have these four
things shortly, first, what they do, they enter into ye grave of ye Lord, for
it was large, not an hole: surely they behooved to love Him well in whose grave
they went. Next, when they enter in the grave, we have set down what they see:
they see an Angel in the shape of a young man, clothed in a fair white robe
sitting in the grave: thirdly, we have how they are terrified; and lastly, we
have the speech of the Angel to the women. Then first, coming to the grave,
they run not away, as Marie Magdalene did, but enter in the grave, seeking
the LORD: and in this point, they go beyond Marie, she went back, but they
go forward: otherwise she went beyond them, for love zeal, and faith in
Christ. No, not one of the disciples surpast Marie Magdalene in love, faith and
zeal, yet they surpass her in this point, and as they excel her in going
forward, they get sure information of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, for
their reward. Mark the lesson, they who are inferior in spiritual graces, in
some duties will excel them who are superior: and when the superior falls
back, they will go forward: and this lets us see, that it is the LORD who
makes the difference? Have thou more graces than thy companion: He that
preferred thee at one time, will pluck His hand from thee, another time, and
put them before thee, and to this end, that thou who gloriest in thy graces,
may glory in the Lord: for thy grace is not in thy self, but in His Hand.
This for the first thing, follows the next: What see they? They see in the
shape of a young man an Angel, cled with a long robe, from top to toe. I take
this Angel to be ye same of who^ we spoke ye last day, who first removed away
the stone, and then sat down on it, his eyes burning like lightening: and
cled in white raiment. Now this Angel withdravves himself, and hides him in
the grave, when he savv the women coming near, lest he should have
frighted them away, he goes in the grave, but he sat on the stone, first, to
terrify the men of war, lest they should trouble the women: and besides
this, there is another cause, why he goes in the grave, being to testify the
Resurrection, he chooses the commodity of the place, that when he should get the
women in the grave, that the Lord was rise^ in the grave, he might instruct
them better by the emptiness and roomenesse of the grave, that the Lord was
risen from the dead. Well, that same Lord that terrifies the wicked with His
look, that same GOD is merciful to His own: and that Angel, that terrifies
the men of war, he is a minister of mercy to the godly women. I say more, at
that same time, whilst as He chases away the wicked, in doing of that, He
shows mercy to the godly, and He terrifies the wicked, that they should not
be a stop or terror to the godly: all the terrors and judgments of the
wicked, as they serve to the glory of God: so they serve for the well of His
own: for the LORD has not only His own glory before His eyes: but also of
the ^ell of His own. Then consider again the circumstance of the place,
wherein the Angel teaches these women, the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The
Father of Heaven is very careful of every circumstance, that serves for the
testimony of Christ's Resurrection: first, He is careful of the first
witness of His Resurrection: He will not have a man to be witness, but an
Angel. Then He is careful to whom this Angel should tell His Resurrection:
He will not have him testifying it to the men of war (He will not have pearls
casten before swine) but to the women: The LORD is careful of the place
where His doctrine should be taught: He will have the women to go to the
grave, to the end they should receive the doctrine of Resurrection the better,
that by the emptiness of the grave, the Angel might the better demonstrate,
that the LORD was risen. Think ye now, that the LORD has casten off that
care He had then: That care He had of the person of the Preacher, of the person
to whom He sends Him, of the place of preaching? No, that same LORD has the
same care yet, and He will love them well, to whom He concredites His
glorious Euangell: He loves them well, whom He lets attentively and carefully
hear His glorious Gospel, and the LORD has a care where a man may most
commodiously speak for edification, and where men and women may hear Christ
pointed out commodiously. This for the thing they savv: what follows? The
silly women are terrified* as the guard of the men of war were terrified:
I see then, in the person of these women, the presence of GOD is terrible to
the godly: and more I see: when men and women are seeking Jesus Christ, the
first sight they get of Him is terrible. The ground of this is not only that
terrible Majesty, that no creature can be able to look on, (and why should
not all flesh stoop at the presence of that glorious GOD: but this is not the
only ground: but because in the most godly man or woman there is a remanent
corruption: therefore they are afraid at the presence of GOD. Feel thou it
not now, thou shall feel it ere thou go. This remanent corruption can not
abide the sight of that glory: a spot of uncleanness cannot stand in the
presence of that Holy Majesty: yet I see a greater difference between the
women and the guard: for the men of war were terrified to the death, but so
were not the vvome^. Where fro came this difference between the women and
the Guarde? That Guarde was but a company of profane bodies, without God,
without grace, without faith, without hope, without love, and was full of
sin, and of an evil conscience: But the women, suppose they were sinful,
and had partly an evil conscience (for where sin is, there is part of an evil
conscience) yet in a part they were purged from sin, and through the death of
Jesus Christ they had their conscience sprinkled with His blood: and as that
evil conscience terrified them, so that good conscience held them up. Suppose
so long as we remain in this body we cannot be quit and free of sin and
corruption: ye well is ye soul yt in the blood of Jesus finds their sins
forgiven them: for suppose it be terrified, yet it will not despair. Now I come
to the speech of the Angel to the women: The Angel seeing the^ terrified, he
speaks and encourages them first, and says to them, Fear ye not: and then he
begins to testify of the Resurrection of Christ: and last, he gives them a
commandment, to tell the Disciples* First he says to the women, Fear not.
He spoke not such a word to the Guarde, but let them lie still, till they
gathered their spirits, and rose up, and ran home: for, for all the world they
durst not tarry there. There is another difference between the godly and the
wicked: When the Lord has casten the wicked down, He will not give them a
word to comfort them, but will let them lie still. Woe to them! nothing within
them to raise them up, no faith, no hope, no part of good conscience: they are
full of sin: nothing without them: no, the Lord shall not vouchsafe a good word
on them: He will neither give the^ an inward nor an outward comfort: and at the
latter day, the Lord shall speak one joyful word to them: but He will say, Go
your way ye cursed company to be tormented with the Devil and his angels. Woe
to the estate of them yt shall be found out of Jesus Christ. Albeit yt now these
things sound not in thy ears, and now think Heaven and Hell to be but
matters of jests: yet one day, though thou be a king, thou shall find these
things to be earnest, and thou shall wish, when thou wast made a man or a
woman, thou had bin made a stock or stone. But by the contrary: The Lord
holds up ye godly, not only inwardly by a piece of good conscience, but also by
outward means, He speaks comfortablie to them: And He will say to them by His
Ministers, Fear not. Mark further: He will not only hold them up, but that
same thing yt terrified the wicked, He will make it to comfort them: He makes
this same Angel, that terrified the men of war, to comfort and encourage
them. More than this: He will not only free and relieve them from terror,
but He will pour in joye: And no question, this word had a powerful force to
raise them up, and comfort the^: And then besides this, He ministers joye, by
telling them of yt glorious resurrection. So not only fear is put away, but
the glorious Resurrection of Jesus Christ is told them, whereof there arises
an unspeakable joye. Well Brethren: albeit we feel not this joy for the
present: yet hold still thy ear, and hear on continually, howbeit with pain:
for it thou get grace to hold still thy ear, and hear: I promise thee in the
name of God, thou shall get such a joye in the end as shall make thee to
think all thy pain to be nothing. Now one word ere I end: Mark how the Lord
prepares His own to hear these tidings: He will not have them to come with a
light disposition of heart, as we use to do, without any sight and
premeditation of sin and misery. Thou will come in, and not once think thou
have need of the preaching of the glorious Resurrection of Christ. But look
the preparation of these women: Ere ever the Lord will have the Angel speaking
one word, He will have them terrified: and no question they were exceedingly
afraid: As ever thou would look for joy, thine heart must be prepared with
terror, and in some measure caste^ down, ere ever the Lord speak one
comfortable word to thee: And therefore, let no man take hardily with the
terrors of the word. This is the first. The^ the next poinct of preparation
is, When thou art casten down, ere He begin to speak to thee the glad tidings
of salvation, He will raise thee up, He will say to thee who art casten down
through the sense of thy sin, Be not terrified, but be of good comfort. And if
the Lords spirit accompany this word, it will encourage thee, and it will raise
up thy dead soul. Then when the sinner is raised up to hear gladly, then he
comes on to the glad tidings of salvation. Jesus is come into the world for
thy sins, and this Jesus is crucified, dead and buried for thy sins: and this
same Jesus is risen, and ascended up to the Heaven, to be an everlasting
Advocate for thee. What more? This same Jesus shall come to judge the world,
and to take thee with Him one day, and to make thee partaker of His glory.
This is the whole sum of the Gospel. The Lord give us grace to be
partakers of that joy which the glorious Gospel offers in this JESUS CHRIST:
To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Praise and Honor for
evermore: AMEN.

THE XXX. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII.





MARK, CHAP. XVI.




WE heard the last day (Brethren) that there were two companies of women, that
came out of Jerusalem, to the grave of JESUS CHRIST: The first company came
forth in the dawning of the day, before the rising of the Sun: The next
company came forth somewhat later, I think about the rising of the Sun. In
the first company were Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of James, and
Salome, and others, who are not named: These came out of Jerusalem
altogether: and as they drew near to the grave, they saw the great stone that
was rolled to the door of the grave, rolled away. Mary Magdalene, as soon as
she sees the stone to be rolled away, tarries no longer, but supponing it was
done by men, and that they had stolen away the Lords body by night: then in
haste she runs home, and tells PETER and JOHN, and she says to them, They
have stolen away the body of the Lord, and we know not where they have
laid him. But the other women took more aduisement, than Marie Magdalene, for
they abode still, and when she was gone home, they entered into the grave, and
they saw an Angel standing in the grave, in the likeness of a young man,
clothed with a long white robe, sitting at the right side of the grave, at
which sight they were wonderfully astonished. And this Angel to my judgment,
was even that same Angel that rolled away the stone from the grave: and with
His bright look terrified the Guarde, and frighted them, lest they should have
troubled the women. The women being astonished at the sight of the glorious
Angel, He begins to speak to them of the Resurrection, and to tell them of
these tidinges. For the better understanding of the Oration of the Angel, we
shall speak of it in these four parts: The first is a voice of comfort, a
word of encouragement, Fear not, says the Angel. The next, having
encouraged them, he begins to preach to them of the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, testifying unto them, that the Lord was risen. And he confirms by one
or two arguments that the Lord was risen. In the third part of his Oration,
he gives a commandment to the women, to tell the Apostles, and namely
Peter, that the Lord was risen: and more than that, that that same Lord
should go before them into Galile, and there they should see him. In the
fourth and last part, he concludes this speech, and he says, Behold, I have
told you. Then after the Oration of the Angel, we have the effect that the
Oration wrought in the hearts of the women, to wit, they fear and rejoice
exceedingly, and they obey the voice of the Angel, and they run home with
all haste to tell the Apostles, that the Lord was risen.

Now to return to the Oration of the Angel: It is short, but wondrous
pitthie: As for the first part of the Oration, Fear not: (We spoke of it the
last day, and there we left off: therefore now we proceed to the second
part, to that grave testimony, which the Angel gives to the Resurrection of
Christ) Before he speaks, he conciliates authority to his person. Whosoever
speaks in the name of Christ, should have an authority of person. The
words are these: I know perfectly, that ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, that
was crucified, says the Angel; he asks not, Whom seek ye? but he breaks
off the speech, and he says, I know, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, that was
crucified and buried, and by this knowledge he lets them see, that he was sent
of God, and knew the purpose of the women, ere ever they reueiled it to Him.
What man is he? that knows the mind of a man, except that the Lord give him
knowledge extraordinarily: No, all the Angels of Heaven will not know my mind,
except the Lord reueile it: No man, nor Angel, can know the heart, and search
the secrets thereof, but only GOD, that made the heart. So he lets them see,
that he was sent of God: that the word might have the greater credit: for
wherefore serves the authority of persons, but that the word they speak, may
have the greater credit. Mark the lesson: There is never one that the Lord
sends to be witnesses in the world of Christ, of His cross, and passion, of
His resurrection, of the mercies and graces that pass all understanding,
flowing from His Passion, and Resurrection, but either in one measure or other,
He will have them decored with heavenly revelation, with power, even to go
down to the secret thoughts of men's hearts, and to lay them open to them, that
they may see their own vile hearts (for our hearts are not known, not to
our own selves, until we go down, and pull off the veil off them) and all
to this end, that we may see God, in that person that speaks: and the last end
is this, that credit may be given to that gracious word: and should the word
of life pass without credit? Paul 1. Cor. 14.24, 25. says, If a Prophet
stand up to prophecy, or a Preacher to preach, and if an ignorant person come
in, loadned with sin, and not feeling the burden (alas, there are too many
of this sort) if this person come in, with the force of the word, he is
dejected, and he falls down and glorifies God, and he will say, GOD is with
that man that speaks, and if God were not with the man that speaks, the heart
of the man would never be dejected: No, all the Kings under the Heaven could
not deject the heart of the poorest beggar. So to end this in a word: The Lord
will know well whom He sends to speak these glorious tithings, that Christ
has suffered, and is risen: and this is sure, these that He sends* He will
give them power to pull down, if it were the heart of a King to the ground:
yet the style he gives to Christ, would not be past by: mark it well, he
says not, I know ye seek JESUS the Son of GOD: he says not so: but he
says, I know ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, a man who was lately crucified: So
the Angel, in styling of Him, gives Him the basest and vylest names that he
can: he names Him from a silly Town in IVRIE, JESUS OF NAZARETH: Then from
that vile death of the Cross, That man that was crucified. I doubt not, but in
this name he had a respect to the women, who knew these styles which He had in
the days of His flesh, when He was conversant here: they knew these styles
better than the styles of His Godhead, which were from all eternity: Yet he
has a further respect to these styles, to let us and these women see, that he
was not ashamed of His infirmity, nor at the shameful death of the Cross:
Noe, the Angels, to whom this death appertains not so much, as to us (says
PETER, in his first EPISTLE, the first CHAPTER, and the eleventh VERSE) delight
to look in to CHRIST, to look in to that infirmity, and to that death of the
Cross. Alas, proud sinner! will thou be offended to look in to it? when
Peter says, it is the delight of the holy Angels to look in to it: Because
these Angels in the infirmity of CHRIST, they saw the power of GOD shining:
in that foolishness of the Cross of CHRIST, they saw that wisdom of GOD
and, in that justice of GOD, they found a passing me (...) and therefore now,
and everlastingly, their delight is to look (...) CHRIST, and His suffering:
And as they delight to look in to CHRIST, and His suffering, so they shall
give praise to Him: and more for that, than for the making of the world in His
great wisdom and power.

Yet, if we will weigh and consider well, we shall find another respect,
which the Angels have in naming Him after such base styles, which is, That the
glory of His Resurrection might appear the greater. It is even as he should
have said, JESUS, of that sober Village NAZARETH, who was counted vile in the
world, and was crucified, yet for that infirmity He is risen again, and is
in the glory of the Heavens. So he names Him after these base styles, to
enlarge the glory of His Resurrection: for the humbler that He was, the
Resurrection was the more glorious. It was indeed a great matter, and a
vvonder, to see a man, a worm, tread on by the Devil, tread on by death,
(it was a vvonder, to see Him, how He was humbled,) that He should have
risen again to such a wondrous glory. So that at the Name of Jesus all knees
shall bow, Philipp. Chap. 2. verse. 10. But I leave this, and I go forward.
Next comes on the tidinges. The words of MATTHEW are these: First, He is not
here. Then the next words, He is risen. The first word was an heavy word
to these holy women: for appar^ntlie they conceived with Marie Magdalene, that
His body was stolen away out of the sepulcher, and thought not that He was
risen again. The next word they hear comfortes them: The first word makes
them exceeding heavy, but the second word makes them to rejoice, when he
says, He is risen, He is not stolen away craftily, but by His own power He
is risen.

In this anunciation, as in a picture, ye may observe the form which is used
in proponing the EVANGEL and glad tidinges of Salvation: The beginning is
always in dolor and in sadness, but the end is in joye and gladness. The
first word that we hear, is, That the LORD is come into the world, and
suffered shame, reproaches, and ignominy, and at last, the shameful death of
the Cross under PONTIVS PILATE: These are heavy tidinges to us, to hear that
our LORD was so hardly, and so evil entr^^ (...) the world; and that in
end, He died the vile death of ^^^osse for us, and was buried: And yet
immediately it follows, That the same LORD is risen, and ascended up in
glory to the Heavens, and there sittes at the right hand of GOD; and, that
through His Passion, death, and Resurrection, our sins are forgiven us, we
shall rise again, and get life everlasting: And these are joyful tidinges.

Now to insist further: The first tidinges which is told to the Kirk in this
earth, are sad and heavy: Thou must suffer: And whosoever will strive to
live godly in CHRIST, of necessity he must suffer affliction: There are sad
tidinges. But it follows, if thou suffer with Him, thou shall reign with Him:
These are glad tidinges. Now I shall give you the words of the Scripture
for my warrande: Christ (Matthew. 16.21.) says the same to His Disciples, I am
to go up to Jerusalem, and to suffer, and to be slain. And Peter took
evil with it: These are sad tidinges. But He says, I will rise again the
third day: And this is joyful. And in the XVI. CHAPTER and XXXII. VERSE. of
JOHN, He says to them, The time will come when ye shall be scattered, and
leave me alone: (Sad tidinges.) But I am not alone, for the Father is with
me: Joyful tidinges. Then He says to them, Ye shall be hated of all men
for my Names sake: (That is sad tidinges to them.) But they who continue to
the end, shall be saved: Glad tithinges. And again, in the 16. Chapter of
JOHN, and 33. verse. He says, Jn the world ye shall have affliction: (A sad
word) But J have overcome the world: glad tidinges. So ye see these
tidinges always begin with sadness, but they end with joye. And as it is
of the word, so it is of the disposition of the hearers: The sinner will first
be sad: and then find such a joye as is unspeakable: and this shall be
thy disposition, so long as thou art an hearer: But when thou shall be a
beholder, no heaviness of heart, but joye for ever, and all tears shall be
wiped away from thine eyes. While thou art hearing, thy tears shall be
mingled with joye, but when thou art seeing there shall be perfect joy without
tears. Thus far for the tidings. He is not content to tell them only, the
Lord is risen: no, one word will not suffice them, but He confirms it by
Christ's prediction, He said it before, the Lord was to suffer, and to rise the
third day. Look the XVI. Chap. of Matthew. So he confirms them by the Lords
own Testimony. These prophesies and predictions which are foretold of
Christ, are much worth: for they have this use: When thou read them in that
old Testament, they seal up the word of the Gospel, of the manifestation of
Christ in the flesh, of His suffering, and glorification, that that report of
old is fulfilled. But before I leave this: I see the Lord will not let His
own forget His word which He has once told them: suppose they would forget
it, yet the Lord will have it called to their remembrance. These women would
have forgotten that which the chief Priests remembered, when they sought a
guarde of Pilate to watch the sepulcher. Sometimes it comes to pass, that the
godly remembers not so much as the wicked, who hears the word to their
destruction: but if thou be one of His, He will have it called to thy
memory: but if thou be none of His, He will not regard, that when thou
hear, thou let it go in at thine one ear, and out at the other. Great
grace they get, who are in Him: Well is that soul for ever that is in Him.
A man will think it a great thing, that a king will speak unto him: but it
is a far greater thing, that the King of Heaven will speak to thee. There
is some proportion betwixt the king and his subject, betwixt the king and the
beggar: but there is no proportion betwixt GOD and thee: So then this is a
great mercy, that He will bring that word that thou have contemned to thy
remembrance, and ere thou remember it not, He will send down an Angel from
the Heaven, to call it to thy remembrance. We have not Angels now, as these
women had then, but I say to thee, as many true and faithful Ministers, are as
like many Angels: take away these men that preach the Gospel (indeed I grant
properly this, to call all things spoken to remembrance, pertaines to the Holy
Spirit, John 14.26.) thou shall forget the word of God that is preached, and
thou shall grow more blockish than a stock or a stone, and they that will not
hear this word, He makes them like stones, and well were it to thee, albeit
thou werest a King, if thou hear not this word, that thou werest a stone.
But mark the time, when He brings it to their remembrance, when the Lord is
risen: this tenor of time is not ay kept, but sometimes ere the thing be done,
He calls it to remembrance: for that is a part of our felicity, ever to be
holden in memory of grace. Woe to thee, that is not holden in memory of it,
but indeed it is more joyful to remember after it is done: and therefore at
that great day, when we shall see all things fulfilled, which were foretold,
our joy shall be perfected. I grant, that Hope has joy, yet it has heaviness
joined with it, but sight has perfect joy, without any heaviness: and when
we shall see all these things, that were foretold us, when we shall see
that glorious God, when we shall see every word that ever we read in the
Gospel to be fulfilled, we shall remember them all with such joy as no tongue
can tell. We glory here under Hope, but then our glory shall be in sight,
and we shall have it in our hand, and as we shall rejoice then, we shall
also glorify GOD perfectly all manner of ways, now we do it with great
infirmity, but when we shall see Him, we shall glorify Him everlastingly*
and this shall be a part of our song: Glory for ever be to that true GOD, He
promised me much, and now, I see He has fulfilled it: and so we see,
there is never one word, that we have heard, but that Holy and true GOD
shall bring it to our memory, with such a joy as cannot be spoken.

This for the first argument: now follows the second argument: The Angel
uses to confirm his speech: Come hither and see, says the Angel: The LORD is
not here, if ye will not credit my word, believe your own eyes, and see
it, is not this a great mercy, when thou will not believe His word, the Lord
will let thee see: the Lord is not contented to let thee hear these glad
tythings, but He will: bring them before thine eyes. What means these visible
Sacraments, but to help the infirmity of the weak Faith, and besides the
Sacraments, this word of God is not like the word of man, or of an Orator,
like Demosthenes or Cicero, or any man in this world: No, that word in ye
gospel in great simplicity has a great Majesty shining in it: yea, it is
visible, as the Apostle says in the first to the Corinthians 2.4. It has an
ocular demonstration, and when it speaks to thee of Heaven, it will draw
thine eye to Heaven: and when it speaks to thee of the Cross, it will let
thee see Christ crucified, and if it speak to thee of His glory, it shall let
thee see Him in glory, and that is it which Paul says in the Epistle to the
Galathians, Chapter 3. verse 1. He preaches Christ so to them, that he made
them see Christ crucified before their eyes.

Now I come to the third part: it contains a commandment that he gives to
the women. Tithings have ever some commandment joined with them, and
commandment requires ever obedience: so when ever thou gettest tithings, thou
gettest a commandment, do this, or thou shall never get part nor portion of
the tithings. No, Brethren, a Christian life is not an idle life, but
practicke, if ever thou would be partaker of these good tithings, look
that thou strive to do that which He bids thee: Ruane says the Angel,
home, this have I told you, Preach ye to the Apostles: Go tell the disciples,
that He is risen. Go your way hastily, to testify the Resurrection. This
glorious Resurrection requires an hasty preaching: and I say to you, that
testimony that is given of Christ, requires expedition: and therefore if thou
aymest to testify of the Lord, do it hastily: the glory He gets, would not
be delayed.

The next part of the direction the Angel gives them, is that they tell the
Apostles, that they go to Galile, because Christ would be before them there.

The Papists think that they have gotten a great vantage of this, that Peter's
name was expressed, and not the rest. This special direction that is sent to
Peter, imports no supremacy, but rather, if ye consider well, that he was
inferior to them all. It importes this plainly, that Peter had done a great
fault, by the threefold denial of the Lord. Alas, in this action he had an
evil conscience, and if there had not been a particular direction to Him, he
durst not for his life have come to CHRIST. Think ye, that a man that has
denied GOD, dare come to Him, except He be prevented: No, Peter durst not for
his life have looked to the LORD: so this is their supremacy, that they mark
of Peter above the rest. Now one thing: I think no man nor woman should doubt,
why these women preached this Resurrection: The LORD gives, them a sp^ciall
direction: first, from GOD, then from His Angel, and this commission might
satisfy: so that the Apostles were bound to receive this commission, that was
ordained by the LORD of Heaven. I mark this lesson, There is neither man, nor
woman can speak in the Name of the Lord except they be sent. So says Paul to
the Romans tenth Chapter, and fifteenth verse. None can preach, except he be
sent? How can one preach CHRIST, and if he be not sent by CHRIST? da^e a knave
stand up in the midst of a city, or town, and make a proclamation in the
name of the Prince, and not have a warrant, and dare thou stand up, and
speak in the Name of the great GOD of Heaven, and have no warrant, Indeed it
is the LORD who knows who is sent, and if thou werest never so admitted, and
warranded by the Church, and the Lord in that great day shall never count of
thy preaching, except thou have a vvarrand in thy conscience. Will He put His
word in the mouth of every knave: No, that is a grace, to call JESUS the LORD:
No, thou can not call JESUS the Lord, except thou have the Spirit of Jesus as
the Apostle says, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the twelfth
Chapter, and third verse. So whether we be Ministers, or others, who speak
of JESUS, we should look that that Spirit be in the heart to direct us when we
speak.

I mark next, it was not enough to have seen this resurrection, and never to
have spoken one word of it: No, He commands them to testify to the Apostles,
and the Apostles got this commandment to preach it again: for the Gospel is
not a candle to put under a bushel, but to hold it up, and show it to the
world: for it is the life, and the light of the world. PAVL says to Timothy
in his second Epistle, the second Chapter, first verse, That that thou have
heard of me before many witnesses, the same deliver thou to faithful men,
which shall be able to teach others also. No, it is not to be concredite to
every knave: it is too precious a jewel to deliver to knaves: let them deliver
it to them that are able to teach others: let the first deliver to the second,
and the second to the third, and the third to the fourth, and the fourth to the
fifth, and so let it ever sound in the world. Woe to that soul that impedes
the course of the glorious Gospel: for what can there be, where it is not
teached, but death: No, this Gospel is a stumbling block to the world. Tell
them, says the Angel, He will meet them in Galile: for Jury denied me:
No, would CHRIST say, I will not appoint to meet with them in Jerusalem: for
Jerusalem is not worthy of me, but I will meet them in Galile, and so they
met with Him, as ye shall see hereafter by Gods grace. Then I see that all
these tithings that tell us of things that are not seen: has every one of
them a promise joined with them, yt we shall see them come to pass? Believe
thou that He has suffered, and thou shall see that He has suffered, and
believe that He is in glory, and thou shall see Him in glory. We savv Him not
with our bodily eyes, but we have that blessing which the LORD pronounced to
Thomas, John Chapter 20. verse 29. Blessed are they which never saw me, and
yet do believe in me. Now blessed for ever shall that soul be, that never
savv the LORD, and yet believes in Him, and I speak to thee a sore word, if
thou beleeuest not, until thou see Him, thou shall never see Him, if thou
beleeuest not that He died, until thou see that He died, thou shall n^uer see
Him, but to thy damnation. Hope under hope, and against Hope.

Brethren, many are the impediments that will stay us: so that we will say, I
will never see Him: I hear much speaking of Heaven, but alas, I fear I shall
never see it: I hear much spoken of life, but alas, I fear, I shall never see
life.

And these are the tentations of the most godly men and women of this world,
yet against all these tentations, believe Gods promises, and hope for life: for
PAVL says in the Epistle to the Romans. the fifth Chapter, and the fifth
verse, Faith brings forth experience, and Hope makes not ashamed: because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts abundantly by the holy Ghost which is
given unto us. No, let none of these tentations hinder us: that thing that
holds back the infidels, shall work for the best to thee that fear the
Lord: and if thou fear the Lord, I promise thee in ye name of GOD, all these
tentations shall further thee, and thou shall be partaker of Life. Now a word,
and I shall end: He signets and seals up, that which he has told: I have
told you it, says he: as he would say, It is true that I have told you, and
I will seal it to be true, and ye shall find it to be true, and therefore
doubt not. So our lesson is this: Whensoever thou come to testify to the
people of God, in pain of thy life look thou speak nothing but that which
God biddes thee speak: and that thou may say in conclusion, This is true
that I have said: and that this is true, I will bide by it: and seal it up
with my blood. The Angel had no blood: but if thou be not of that mind to
shed thy blood, thou art but a deceiuer. This is a great boldness to seal,
to seal it up with thy blood: but if thou have it not sealed up in thine
heart, thou shall never seal it up with thy blood: and when it comes to the
sealing thou shall steal away. No, it is a great word to say with the
Prophet David, I believed, and therefore I spoke. Look thou speak nothing to
the people of God, but that which thou striuest to believe. How is this
assurance gotten? And will every vvanton man get this assurance to stand,
and seal it up with his blood? No, except thou strive night and day to get
the Lord in thy presence, and not to have any joye but in His presence, thou
shall never have this assurance. Then, how is it kept? The Lord has appointed
reading: Take heed to thy reading, says Paul to Timothy, in his first
Epistle, the fourth CHAPTER, and 13. verse. and give thy self to meditation,
and sh^we thy knowledge in that that thou have read, and get not a knowledge
only, but a sense to speak to others. Reading bringes knowledge, and
meditation bringes feeling: and last is prayer. And if it be the duty of all
men to pray, then especially the Minister is bound to pray, both for
himself, and for them also to whom he is sent. So in a word: Read,
meditate, and pray night and day, so far as is possible to thee to do. And
if thou do these things, thou shall seal it up with the effusion of thy
blood, and thou shall have more joye in thy death, than ever thou had in thy
life: So that thy death shall be the beginning of thy life, and of that
fulness of joye, which thou shall poss^sse with Him in the Heavens for ever:
To Him, therefore, with the Father, and His blessed Spirit, be all Praise and
Honor, for ever: AMEN.

THE XXXI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII.

MARK, CHAP. XVI.

LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.






















I Showed you from the beginning (well-beloved in the Lord Jesus) that there
were two compainies of women, that came out of Jerusalem, to the grave of
the Lord: First, one company, in the which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of James and Solome, with some others: The^ soon after that there came
out another company of women, whose names we find not registrated. We have
heard already of the History of the first women, we heard of their
outcomming, we heard what they saw, and what they heard when they came
to the grave of the Lord. Now this day we have the returning of the first
company home to Jerusalem, set down in few words. Then we shall go to the
History of the second company of women, wherein first we have their
outcomming: Secondly, what they hear and see: and thirdly, their tidinges to
the Apostles, what they had heard and seen. And this History concerning the
second company is written, by Luke, Chap. 24. verse. 2. Matthew writes
concerning the first company, and Mark also: John speaks only of Marie
Magdalene. Luke sets down the whole second company. But now to return to
the home-comming of the first company of women: It is written by MATTHEW and
MARK, that when they had received direction of the Angel, They returned home
with fear and great joye, to tell the eleven Apostles (for IVDAS was fallen
away) what they had heard and seen. I note shortly these three things in
these women: First, I see that there was a fear in them: Next, I see that they
had an exceeding joye: And last of all, I see in them obedience to the voice of
the Angel with all expedition. The fear was, because of the presence of that
glorious Angel: The joye, because of the joyful news, to wit, That the LORD
was risen: The obedience, was, because of the commandment of the Angel, to
run home, and tell the APOSTLES. All these three things are to be commended
in them: And they teach us this lesson, how we should depart from the
presence of our GOD: when we meet to hear these glorious tidinges, without
the which there is no life: and without the hearing whereof, thou shall never
see Heaven. Let no man deceive himself: they teach us how we should depart
from the word: Depart with fear and reverence: that is the first: Then depart
with joye: that is the second: And thirdly: depart with a mind to obey that
which thou have heard: and this is the last. We should fear, in respect of
the presence of the Lord, whereat all the Angels were afraid: and, where two or
three are gathered together in His Name, there is His presence. And if thou
see not His presence in the Congregation, it were better for thee that thou
presentedst not thy self in the Congregation: The joye should be of the
hearing of these tidinges. Thou delitest to hear tidinges: but all the
tidinges of the world is nothing to these, to wit, That Jesus is come into the
world, and has died for thee. And last of all: Depart with obedience: for thou
gettest this commandment, When thou go home, communicate these tidinges to
others, that thy joye may be increased. The light of the Gospel requires
holiness and a godly conversation: that thou live soberlie in thine own
person, justly with thy neighbor, and godly with thy God. When the day
breaks out, and when the Sun rises, the light of the day is not for
nothing, it cries upon thee, to thy labors, to fall to an honest conversation:
Then much more, the Sun of righteousness, that light of lights, that LORD,
when He shines, and cries, Shake off the works of darkness, and put on
the armor of light: Shake off thy murder, thy adultery, and oppression, in
pain of thy life: Thou will come out, and stick and slaye a man in sight of
the Sun: No, that murder shall not so much be laid to thy charge, as the
contemning of GOD, who shined before thee when as thou slewest that man. We
are fallen now to such a shameful murder, as was never heard of among the
TVRKES. What will become of this Kingdom? Suppose there were none other
sin, but this sin of blood, O, it cries for a vengeance. Mark this: sie
upon thee, that in such a light, and in the sight of that great GOD, thou
should commit such villainy. But I go forward: and I enter to the History
of the second company of women, who went out to the grave of the Lord. The
first company saw but one Angel, but this saw two Angels: and therefore they
are diverse. The History is very plain, and there can be no other thing
almost marked, than that which is already touched: and therefore I shall go
through it shortly, as God shall give the grace. This second company came out
shortly after the first company: they draw near, They saw the stone away from
the sepulcher, as the first did, And they enter into the grave, as the first
^id, But they found not the body of the Lord Jesus, and they are very sad and
heavy, supposing it had been stolen away: they see two Angels, whom they
supposed to be two men, fearful to look on: the first company see but one
Angel these see two, and the earthly witnesses grow in number: so the heavenly
grow: there was but one Angel only who appeared to the first company, now
this company see two Angels, and all this was for the greater certainty of
the matter, and resurrection of Jesus Christ: they seeing two Angels, are
afraid: therefore the Angels begin and comfort the women, by telling that
Christ was risen, and bids them go tell the Apostles. Now we shall mark
something of the part of the women, and then we shall come to the part of the
Angels. As this carfulness of the Lord that was in these women, was worthy
of praise: so the Apostles carelessenesse of their Lord cannot be praised: for
it became them to have come out first: and as the couragiousnesse of these
women is to be commended, so the Apostles cowardnesse merits no commendation:
and the more women testify of His Resurrection, that same brings the greater
sh^^c to the Apostles. When thou art a man, and have a calling, and will let a
Wife go before thee, it shames thee: and no doubt, the force of His
Resurrection, was more powerful in the poor women, than it was in the very
Apostles: for all this spiritual courage flows from the life of Christ: for
except He had risen from the death, and that we got life thorovv His life,
we would never have life: yea, all the spiritual life, and quickness that
was in the fathers of old, was by the virtue of Christ's Resurrection to
come, and all this quicknes of ours, is by the virtue of His Resurrection
already past, if thou have that life begun, it shall be a sure earnestpennie
that thou shall rise in glory, and live a life, like to the glorious life of
thy glorious Head and Savior Jesus Christ. Then I mark another thing in these
women: They are subject to diverse perturbations of mind: they come out with
sadness, and when they found not the body of the Lord Jesus, their dolor is
increased: then when they see and hear the Angels, they are terrified, and
last of all, they find joy. Will thou compare the godly with the ungodly,
ye shall find sometimes in the hearts of the ungodly, greater peace than in
the hearts of the godly: no pain, nor vexation in them, but they say, peace:
peace, as the Apostle says in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, the
fifth Chapter, and the third verse: but behold the end: when they have cried
Peace, then a sudden destruction from the Heaven, shall overtake them, and
their peace shall end in disquietnesse for ever. The trouble of the godly ends
in endless joy, the godly begins in sadness, goes forward in sadness, but
ever in the end they find joy, and the greater trouble thou be in, in the
end thou shall find greater joy: and when thou shall attain to that joy,
the very remembrance of that trouble that thou had in this life, shall
augment thy joy, and thou shall rejoice, that ever thou had trouble here, if
thou had been even burnt or martyred for CHRIST'S sake: and by the contrary:
The wicked that have lived here in security, when they are thrust in Hell,
in endless pain and displeasure, shall find that the remembrance of the joy
that they had in this life shall augment their pain, and they shall curse the
time that ever they lived here in such pleasure, and had this false peace on
earth. This History is plain, and therefore I go forwards: I come to the
part of the Angel: the first speech is somewhat rough: Why do ye seek the
living amongst the dead? Why do ye this? Then He comes on, and says, He is
not here, He is risen. Then he confirms it by a reason: Remember, women,
what He said to you, when He was with you in Galile, Said He not, that He
behooued to be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and
to rise again the third day. This is the meaning in effect. Then where He
begins with a reproof, there must be a fault in them: No, the LORD will
not reprove thee for nothing: I take their fault to be oblivion: for so the
words of the Angel import: they had forgot that He should rise the third
day, suppose He had told them.

Well, Brethren, I see this, It is the will of God, that we never forget His
word, and more I see, If thou let it slip out of thy mind, as we do too
readily: the Lord will reprove thee, but in His reproving and in His anger: He
never forgets mercy and lenity: in reproving of the women, He makes the
Angel to instruct and tell them that He was risen: so in reproouing of thee,
He will teach thee, and it learnes us this lesson: Always in all reproves,
teach them whom thou reprouest: if thou reprove them, without a care to
instruct them, thy reproof auailes nothing at all. Then look, so soon as his
anger goes away, and when he has spoken two words, thereafter he says, He
is not here, He is risen, Remember, He said to you, He behooued to suffer,
and die, and rise the third day: So we learn this at the Angel, It may be,
that God speak a word of anger, but it will soon go away, and the mercy
remains for ever: and when He has laid His anger aside, He teaches in
mercy: and I speak this to the child of God: Many faults in us all, and
now and then He speaks in anger, that His own perish not with the wicked
world: He will waken them with some angry word, and think as thou will, and
if thou be not wakened with some angry word, thou shall die in thy stincke,
and canker of thy corrupt nature: and so long as we are here, there is ever
some matter of anger: so that now and then He will speak to thee in anger
(for we are as foolish children, thinking and speaking as children: and
therefore have need to be chastised) but when we are perfect men, never an
angry word, nor a gloome shall be, but always mercy and pleasure for ever.
Then I mark another thing in the Angel, Remember (says he) that the Son of
man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and to die, and the
third day to rise again, as He showed to you. Well, then I see, the Lord He
forgets not His own word, that He speaks, suppose the women had forgotten
it: No, the Lord that speaks it, thinks never so light of it as thou do:
Thou will forget soon, and thou take no thought of it: but that word that He
speaks, either by Himself, or by His Ministers: He will never forget it. The
word of a King is much, and of great might: then how weighty is the word that
comes from the King of kings: Heaven and earth shall perish, ere one jote of
that word perish, or fall to the ground: and as He forgets not, so He will
have it called to the remembrance, not only of the godly, but also of the
wicked: but mark the difference: When He brings it to the Elects memory: H^e
brings it ever with great joy* as He did to these women. But as to the wicked,
it is ever a doleful and woeful remembrance, with pain and grief and this is
no small part and cause of the pain of Hell, that all the words which God
spoke to them whilst they lived, and which they contemned, shall be brought to
their memory, that book of remembrance shall be holden ever before their
eyes, that there they may see and read all the wicked works that they have
done in their life: yea, the least evil word shall be laid to their charge:
and then the conscience shall stand up and accuse them everlastingly: No, if
thou be out with Christ, I say to thee, terrible shall that sight be, that
thou shall see,: for the least evil thought shall be laid to thy charge, let
be evil deeds, and that forgetfulness of the word of God, whilst thou
liuedst, shall be a great part of thy pain and grief: but the forgetfulness
of the godly shall be hid, as all the rest of their sins shall be hid in
Him, and in that blood they shall be counted as clean, as if they had never
sinned, nor had forgotten Gods word.

Thus far for the part of the Angel: Now, I return to the women: When the
Angel has spoken, and informed them of the Resurrection: They return, and
tell to the Apostles, what they had heard and seen: Mark this lesson, They
cannot keep it within their breast, but they will communicate it to others,
they will tell the Apostles: Brethren, after that once a man, or a woman has
conceived that spiritual joy, all the world will not hold their tongue: put
them in a fire, they cannot but speak of it. Many Martyrs have proved this to
be true, if it were but a woman, she must preach it to others: and I say more,
if thou have not pleasure one time or other, to speak with joy of Christ to
others: to speak of His Passion, and Resurrection, thou never heardest with
joy. We all have pleasure enough to talk with joy of vain and profane tales:
but of that pleasure of pleasures, little or no delight have we to speak. I
condemn not only the world, but also the children of GOD, and my self with
the first. Alas, too little pleasure have we in our hearts to speak of
Christ, and His Resurrection. But to whom go they? Go they to tell the wicked
people? No, that people was not worthy of it: they steal in to the Apostles,
and them who loved Christ, who were lurking in Jerusalem. So the lesson is
this: A man that finds joy, will not communicate it to the profane man: he
will know well, that he communicates it to such one as will have joy with him:
if any man be sad, ye see they will not communicate it* but to them that will
be sad with them: so it is with joy, they will not tell to every man the joy,
but to such as will have joy with them. Look the twelfth Chapter to the Romans
and the fifteenth verse: he wishes them To rejoice with them that rejoice, and
to be sad with them who are sad. Mark this thing also. Is not this joye a
precious thing? Nothing so precious in the world, as joye: and marvel ye
not, that they should be so liberal of it? And if thou had all the world,
it is nothing in respect of this joye, and yet they are liberal of it. Paul,
Romans chap. 1. verse. 11. he answers to this, J long, says he, to come to
you, to impart some spiritual gift to strengthen you. No, this hurt not him,
for he expones himself, saying, That I might be comforted, together with
you, through our mutual faith, both yours and mine. So when he comes to
give grace, he got grace: No, it is a vvonderfull thing, when two holy
bodies meet, what joye the one will pour into the heart of the other: Put
all the Infideles together, they cannot minister this joye one to another. So
in a word, Communication of joye shall not empaire, but it shall enlarge the
joye in thee. Whereto should one stand up to preach CHRIST, but that by his
joye, he may minister joye to them that hear him. Now the LORD grant, that
both Preachers and hearers may find in their hearts this joye, which is in
CHRIST.

Now I go forward: As they go in the part where the Apostles lurked, they
find before them that first company of women, who had returned from the
sepulcher, Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of James, and Salome: and as
they enter in, they find them telling these same news to the eleven Apostles:
So that the eleven Apostles wanted not witnesses; women, after women,
testifying, that the Lord was risen. Will ye consider this well, and ye shall
see, that it imports a deadly security in the Apostles: alas, it should have
been they, who should have come to the women, to have told them of the
Resurrection of Christ. When He sendes so women after women, it testifies,
that they were in a dead security, and so it testifies a great mercy of the
LORD, who will not let them sleep in that carnal security.

Brethren, this same mercy of God toward His own, abides as yet, for in us
is nothing but sleeping, (and if thou feel it not, thou feel nothing)
Pastors, people, and all sleeps in security, as the Apostles did: And I say
to thee, that if the LORD vvoulde let thee alone, and vvoulde send to thee no
vvitnesses to vvaken thee, and to say to thee, Sinner, wake, and arise: No,
there is none of us, but we would sleep to death. So look to the LORDS
mercy in this thy misery, He sendes men to thee, He sendes crosses and
troubles to vvaken thee. Take men away, take away these clouds of
wickedness, take away c^osses, I give the world their doom (no exception,
from the King to the Beggar,) and if thou vvantest witnessing, that CHRIST
died, and rose again, thou shall sleep to destruction. Thou think that
this needs not to be preached: but thou shall see one day, that there was
never any thing so needful in the earth, as this preaching: and thou shall
curse the time that ever thou vvast set in the world, except thou count
this preaching the greatest earnest that ever was.

So this is a token of great mercy toward them: and ye will vvonder that
they should be so sluggishe, who heard him so long, and that now they
cannot be vvakened. Alas! they were not as yet so well skilled, that
Heavenly wit was not as yet in their heads, and they had more of that
worldly and fleshly wit, than of that Heavenly wit: and this drew them
to this security.

This is the nature of the Regenerate: Suppose the Regenerate in this world
count, in some measure, of the cross of Christ, and of the power of God: yet
in the best of them, there is some lack, some infirmities, and wants, and
they will think sometime the preaching of the Cross and Resurrection of
Christ to be but vanity, and a dream of vviues, as JOHN, PETER, MATTHEW,
and the rest of the Apostles did: for none of them vvoulde believe this, That
CHRIST was risen. We will think that there is some great folly in these
tidinges: (I will tell you my nature, and the nature of the best man or
woman:) but when we shall see That joyful Morning, as DAVID calls it, then
we shall say with SARAH, THE LORD has made me now to laugh indeed:
She scorned, when she heard say, she should conceive, and bear a
child: she thought she could not bear a child: and now when she sees
it come to pass, she says, The LORD makes me to laugh indeed. And so
shall we say one day, that thing which we thought but jestes, then we
shall say, I see this now, that I could not believe well enough, now I see
it is true indeed.

So then, in despite of all natural wit, strive to get an hope above hope:
and then shall thou greatly vvonder at that sight, and marvel forever, that
there could be such a joy. Now blessed is that man, or that woman that gets a
taste of it here for they shall be assured of it for ever. But to go forward,
I see, that it auailes not much to speak to a sleeping person, that is loadned
with sin, and feels it not, that is the worst estate in the world, never to
groan under this mortality, under this burden of death: They can never say
with the Apostle: Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death. And if ye speak to these persons of the Resurrection and death of
Christ, it avails nothing to them. What did the Apostles? They thought it but
a scorn: if the Apostles thought so, what will thou do, that sleep in thy
murder, in thine adultery, in thy theft, in thine oppression? If the Apostles
slept, how! will thou sleep: a sleeping sinner must be once wakened, as PAVL
says in the Epistle to the Romans the first Chapter, and eighteenth verse.
The wrath of God is manifest from the Heaven, against all the unrighteousness
of men: And I say, the wrath and the vengeance of GOD is manifest upon the
sleeping sinner, and death comes on him, that never shall have an end. But PAVL
in the Epistle to the Romans, the third CHAPTER, and the twenty and one
VERSE: he comes on with other tithings, and says, That the righteousness of
GOD through faith in Jesus Christ is made manifest to them that believe. And I
will say to thee, that Jesus is come into the world, and died for thee, if thou
beleeuest thou shall be freed of that burden of sin and wrath; and when a
man hears this, he will think it the sweetest tithings that ever he heard:
for the sinner will find life in that death, and that blood will sprinckle his
conscience, as the Apostle says to the Hebrews, and thou will find a
wonderful joy, when thy sins are remitted in Christ, of all joys under the
Heaven, this is the greatest. The preaching of Christ auailes to none, but to
him who finds his soul loadned with sin.

Now one word, and so I shall end: I see in the Apostles, and in their great
infirmity, the great providence of GOD: they will neither believe, nor
misbeleeue, but by His Providence: what ever was their part in it, the work
was good, and of a good purpose: The LORD will not have them to believe the
testimony of the first company, nor yet of the second company of women: No,
no, He will not have them to believe, until they see it with their eyes, and
feel it with their hands, and ere they pass out to others, He will speak
to them, and let them see, that they may be persuaded that it was true.

I always tell you this, It is not a small thing to testify of the
Resurrection of Christ, to preach His Passion and Resurrection: and will thou
of a light knowledge preach it: No, beware thou speak this, or that, upon a
report. Of all men that speaks in this earth, or is sent with a commission, a
Minister has most need to beware what he speaks: Speak he of the Passion,
or Resurrection of CHRIST ere ever he speak, let him get a sight of Him,
suppose not with the bodily eyes, lay hold on Him by Faith in thine heart.
Think it not enough to be an hearing witness, but a seeing witness: and
when thou have gotten that persvvasion, with what confidence vvilt thou
speak of His death: thou will speak with such euidencie, that the high
hearts of men shall be humbled, finding such weight in thy words. The LORD
give us grace, that when we stand up to speak of the Resurrection of CHRIST
to others: we may have the persuasion of it in our own hearts, and that
we may find His gracious Spirit working in us, and as we speak of Heaven,
and these joys to others, so we may find some joy begin in our own
hearts here, that after this life is ended, we may reign with Him in glory
for ever with CHRIST: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all
honor, praise and glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XXXII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.

JOHN, CHAP. XX.
















WE have heard these days past (beloved in the Lord Jesus) of the two
companies of women, that went out of Jerusalem, toward the grave of the
Lord, early in the morning. The one company that came first, wherein was Marie
Magd. and Marie the mother of James, and Salome, with other women. And the next
company of women, whose names are not expressed, nor registrate: We heard of
their returning home again from the grave of the Lord: how they come to the
place where the XI. Apostles were lurking, with some other disciples, who loved
the Lord: We heard of ye preaching that the first company makes: and then the
preaching of the second company, their preaching all testifying, that the Lord
Jesus was risen. We heard last, what effect this preaching wrought in the
hearts of the XI. Apostles, to wit, they thought it all but folly, fables,
and a fained report, and believed it not. It is an hard matter, to believe ye
report of Christ, of His Passion and glorious resurrection. Thus far we heard
the last day. Now to come to the Text yt we have read: We have first another
effect which this report wrought: howbeit it wrought not faith, yet it had its
own effect in 2. disciples at least, Peter and John, they are wakened by it, to
seek to the grave of ye Lord, to see if it was so as the women reported. Well
then, the report of the women is not altogether fruitles, at the least it
wakens some of them up to run to the grave, to see if it was so as the women
had reported. This testifies clearly, yt even all the time yt these Apostles lay
lurking like cowards, yet all that time there remained in them a seed of
faith, a seed of godliness, and a sponke of love toward their Master Christ:
Indeed it was smoothered with the dross of the corruption of nature, but yet
it was not quite put out: and therefore, as soon as these women come, and make
report of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, the seed begins to waken and draw
spirits, and makes them to run to see if it was true yt He was risen. For it is
true, that they who once have gotten faith in Christ, in whose heart this seed
is once sown, howbeit for a time they will fall in a slumber, yea, in an heavy
sleep, and that seed will be so holde^ down, that it will not be seen to ye
world, yea, they that have it, will not feel it themselves: yet it is sure,
that true seed of faith, sown once in the heart, will never be clean put out
and extinguished altogether. It is true, it will be for a time lying dead in
the heart without life or motion. The Lord will be lying in thee without
working for a time, and taking a shape and fashion, as the birth in the mothers
womb does, as the Apostle says; Galath Chap. 4. verse. 19. until Christ be
formed in you. And all this time He lies without vvorking, the man will
seem then to be but dead: but as soon as that word soundes, which is the
word of Life, the word of the Cross, and of the Resurrection of Jesus,
then that man who appeared to be dead, will take life, and Jesus, who appeared
to be dead in thee, will be quick. Howbeit they will not have faith, yet it
will stir them up to seek Christ, and inquire whether it be so or not. In
the History of the Acts, ( Chap. 17. verse. 11.) ye may read a vine example
of this: There were certain of the JEWS in a Town called Berea, and they
were in the same estate, they had no thought of Jesus, but were enemies unto
Him: yet notwithstanding there was some good seed within them: And therefore
they are said to be more Noble than the JEWS at Thessalonica. Now the
Apostle PAVL comes in amongst them, and begins to preach CHRIST: then that
little seed begins to stir, and they begin to be vvakened, and they are
thereby moved to read the old Testament, to see if it was true that PAVL
preached or no: And then they finding it to be so as PAVL had spoken; many of
them believed in CHRIST.

We have our lesson here: It is not good to be hasty in judgment, be loath
to condeme any, howbeit thou see men fall, and lie long, yet judge not too
hastily of them, for who knows if there be a sponke in their hearts, which
neither thou, nor they themselves know of: but try, whether the seed be or
no: And thou shall try it by this thing: Speak of the Death, Passion, and
Resurrection of CHRIST unto them: if after long speaking there be no
vvakening, certainly that is a very evil token, that there is no good in
that heart: if he be in such a deadly sleep, that nothing will vvaken him,
that is a faithless heart, and an heart full of gall and bitterness, and
replenished with iniquity: But if there be some quickening, although it
were never so little, yea, suppose he believe not, and yet has a readiness
to hear, and say this, LORD open mine eyes to see, and mine heart to
believe: And if this be found in him, that is a good heart, and that birth
shall come forth in its own time, for as the birth is not perfected in an
instant in the mothers womb, so faith is not perfected at the first, but it
grows by little and little.

Now when they are wakened, what do they? They run to the grave. They went
not fair and softly, but they ran to the grave. Now certainly this
running must needs proceed of some motion in the heart; some motion behooued
to stir them up: Ye see what motion moved Marie Magdalene to run home:
she was in displeasure, because she mist the body of the LORD: for she
thought it had been stolen away. It cannot be displeasure that moved them
to run: No doubt it was joye in their hearts, which made their hearts
light, and the light heart made the feet speedy: And if thou have joye, it
will cause thee to run and seek Him. But from whence came this joye? I see
no matter of joye, but in these tidinges which they heard: But how could
they have joye, seeing they believed them not? I answer to this They would
have believed, and feign would have had it so, and that was the thing which
they most desired: And ye know, that we hear that thing which we
vvoulde feign have come to pass, we will have joye to hear of it, and our
delight will be to see if it be so. And so suppose there was not a full
faith in them, yet there was a bowing, and an inclination to faith. And it is
a strange thing to bow the heart, for it will be as hard to bow the heart, as
to bow a strong Oak. So the least bowing to yield to the report of Jesus, is
wonderful, and there shall follow an unspeakable joye which passes all
understanding. The least conception of that joye will be greater, than thou will have, yea, and make thee a King or a Queen. Seek ever to that Heavenly
affection, for the Beast has this earthly affection: then seek thou after
the Heavenly, or thine estate shall be worse than the Beasts one day. So
when the heart is wakened, thou will seek the Lord: but if thine heart be not
bowed, it shall stand up like a wall, or a brazen pillar, and this shall be
thine estate, Thou vvilt have no joye, but sadness, at the hearing of these
tidinges: for the stiff heart receives no joye, but is in dolor, and there is
no seeking of CHRIST there, to see whether He be there or not: So in a
word, our lesson is this: Let not a stiff heart deprive thee of that solid
joye which is in CHRIST: fie upon that heart.

Now to go forward: They run, and they ran together, striving who should
be foremost, and who should come first to the grave, to understand the truth
of these vvomens reports. Now our lesson is this: It is an happy thing to
strive in good things, who should be readiest and farthest forwards: No, I
shall never blame one to strive to be first at CHRIST: No, strive with thy
father, and with thy mother: No, strive with all thy kindred, to be first in
Heaven, and look that thou never give place to another to go before thee: but
alas, our people strive far otherwise: we strive who should run fastest
from the LORD, and fastest forward to a mischief, to murder, blood, and in
oppression: this is all the strife in this country: Who strives to be first in
Heaven? The LORD says, Matthew. CHAPTER 11. VERSE 12. The Kingdom of Heaven
suffer violence, and the violent take it by force, and possess it: The LORD
means, that we should strive to throng in, and to see who should be first in
Heaven: Alas, how far are we from this godly striving, doleful experience
teaches us this day in Scotland. Thou will possess another man's heritage, but
who strives to possess that heavenly heritage. The LORD says in Luke, 13.
Chapter, and verse 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, Meaning, that we
should strive with our whole kindred to be first in Heaven, suppose thou will
let a King go in before thee at an earthly gate, yet strive to go in before
him to Heaven, and strive to go in before all thy kindred. Paul that exhorted
all men to run, he ran himself: he says, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the ninth Chapter, and the twenty three verse: He ran, and he
ran on, to be partaker of the Gospel that he preached to others, and he ran
so fast, that he never looked behind him: No, if thou stand to count thy
footsteps, another shall pass by thee, and thou shall come behind: He says,
He looked to that prise of the high calling of GOD, Philip. 3.14. If two be
running here on the earth, striving to get the crown, the one will envy the
other, and he will travel to get himself forvvard, and put his companion
backwards. This earthly race is with envy, and every one would take the feet
from another: Paul gives a reason hereof, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the ninth Chapter, and the twenty four verse, and says There is
but one crown: but it is not so with thee that runnest in that heavenly race,
the one will not envy the other, the one will not put the other behind, he
will not put him back, but he will take him by the hand and say, Go forward
to the end, brother, and thou shall get the crown: and this is it, that we
should every one exhort another to do, ever to go forward to Heaven, and
every one take another by the hand, to help him forward, because there is not
a crown only, but many crowns: look how many run, there are as many
crowns: will thou run, thou shall get a crown, will I run, I shall get a
crown, and will the third run he shall get a crown: never one who runs
shall be destitute of a crown. PAVL in the second Epistle to Timothy, the
fourth Chapter, and the 7. and eight verses, says, I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, J have kept the faith: now henceforth is laid up
for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord that righteous Judge will
give to me at that day: No, he cannot be just, but He must give the crown to
thee that have run: And not only to me, says he, but unto all them also
that love that His appearing: As he would say, to all them that will run
with me: and I say to thee, if thou will run on, and lead thy neighbor by
the hand, that is weaker than thou: it shall be so far from hindering thee
from the crown, that thine honor and glory shall be augmented, when thou
shall come to Heaven. Paul says in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, the
2. Chapter, and the nineteenth verse, What is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? Are not ye it, even in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at
His coming: And therefore well is that soul that winnes another to Heaven, be
thou King, Lord, Gentleman, or Minister: if thou helpest many to Heaven, thou
shall get ye more glorious crown. To go forward: they run together, but in ye
running, ye one is speedier than ye other, and John leaves Peter behind him,
and outruns him, but when it comes to the grave, he only looks in, and sees
the linen clothes lying, but he enters not in, to get knowledge, but seeing
the linen clothes, he stands still: Peter that came behind him, enters first
in into the grave, and sees the matter as it was: the windingsheete, as we call
it, lying in one place, and the kerchiefe that was upon His head in another
place by it self. To speak this by the way: it lets us understand this:
Amongst the Jews that the windingsheete was not put over the whole body and
head, as we use to do, but from the shoulders down, and the linen was about
the head: after this manner Christ was wrapped. Wherefore should I speak of
the vanity of the Papists: they will say to you, they have the same
windingsheete, and this same kerchiefe remaining as relics: and they will
have them in six or seven places at one time: is not this a great wonder it
should have lasted so long, and yet should be kept in so many places at one
time: and more they say, the vine picture of Christ is in that windingsheete,
His body, they say, made such a dint, that His picture might be seen there:
but think ye, if it were so, that the Evangelists, who register smaller
things, would have hid and conceiled it. But I leave them to their vanity, as
unworthy of any refutation, and I come to the matter. In this course and race
of Peter, and John, to the grave, I see this course that we have in this life,
is very vnequable: it keeps not always one constant tenor, nor we are not
ay alike speedy: sometimes one runs fast, sometimes he will settle and
weary, and go slowly forward, and whilst as he wearies, his neighbor will
outrunne him, and ere they come to the end, he that came out last, will
sometimes be first at the mark, and get the crown. Mark this well* it lets
us see, that to be true which Paul writes in the ninth Chapter to the Romans,
and the sixteenth verse, It is not in the hands of him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in the hands of the Lord that shows mercy: when the Lord
holds His hand to thee, thou will run, and when He takes His hand from
thee, thou will stay behind, and he that dragled behind, will be before
thee: this is the course we keep to that mark: we should not think, that
all men should run alike: and suppose thou see a dragling person, think
not, that person will never come to the mark.

Peter gets the sight first, John, suppose he got it not first, yet he gets
it, and it is said in the Text, He saw, and he believed. Mark the lesson:
Albeit there be many changes by the way, yet he or she that will persevere
in dragling, shall not want the crown, as well as they that ran speedily,
and came first. It stands not so much in the fast running, as in the
perseuering: it is not said, he or she that runs fast, shall be crowned, but
he or she that continues to the end, shall be crowned: look ay thou
pereseuere, if thou may not run, go: yet if thou may not go, fall down
upon thine hands and feet, and creep as it were a snaile, or worm, albeit
it were but two foot in the day: and as ever thou would be safe,ly not
still: it stands thee upon life and death: thou must wear away, and night and
day thou go ever to this end: and if this outvvard man decay, grow in the
inward man: and as thou grovvest vveake in this life, striu^ to grow strong
in that heavenly life, that thou art to go to. Paul in the second Epistle to
the Corinthians, the fourth Chapter, and the sixteenth uerse, says, As the
outward man decayed daily, so the inward man grew daily. So to end this in a
word: As ever thou would see Heaven, go either fast or else softly to that
life. Well, it is said, They were ignorant of the Scripture, that told, He
should rise again from the dead: and so because he saw, he believed: he
should have believed, because he heard it: for he had the Scripture for his
vvarrand: he and Peter should have grounded their Faith on the Scripture.

Take heed to this: The Apostle says, We live by Faith, and not by sight:
yet how ever it be, that man or woman believe, they are blessed: and blessed
art thou, man, or woman, that beleeuest either for hearing or seeing: and
suppose thou feel him by the hands, and beleeuest in Him, as Thomas did,
that felt Him, thou art blessed: but that is an evil thing, when thou have
the word, and yet suspends thy faith, until thou see.

It was an evil thing in Peter and John, that they let the word pass, and
believed it not: it was an evil thing in Thomas, that he believed not,
until he felt Christ: and I say to thee, it is a sure thing, if thou refusest
to believe, until thou see, thou aduentourest and hazardest thy life and
salvation: and I say to thee, if thou contemnest this word, and say this, I
will not believe until I see Him, I give thee thy doom, thou shall never see
Him to thy comfort nor salvation.

Therefore if He say to thee, and if He promise, He will give thee Heaven,
believe it, and lay hold on it, although thou vverest dying: and if He say to
thee, that He will give thee life, depend and stick by His promise.

Thou honor thy GOD in believing and depending on His promise: for thou
can not do Him greater honor, than to believe His promise.

And albeit thou see little appearance outwardly, and if thou beleeuest the
word, without doubt, thou shall get a sight of Him one day to thy comfort
and endless consolation.

Depend and wait on patiently with Abraham, and ever stick and lay hold on
the promise, and I promise to thee in His Name, believe the promise of life,
and thou shall see life: believe in Him, and thou shall see Him one day.

Blessed are they who believe in Him, and yet see Him not: blessed are they
who walk by Faith: for one day they shall walk by sight. Strive to believe
in His word, and look on Him, and Heaven and earth shall perish, ere thou
want that sight of Him one day. Yet I may not pass by the words of
JOHN: I see in him a wonderful plainness, and singleness of heart: which of
us will be contented that another registrate our faults, that any other
might read them. This man sinned this way, and that way? Then, who will
write up his own faults, with his own hands, as he does? He says, he
was ignorant. So then, if there were none other argument to tell us, that this
Book is dyted by the SPIRIT of GOD, and that it is the word of GOD, this
singleness of writing their own faults without affection or self-love,
which ever would entise us to honor our selves, tells us sufficiently.

But naturally, rather than thou had thy Parents, or thy kinsfolk
ashamed, thou would rather have GODS glory and justice smoothered and
defaced. But see if MOSES spared to register the faults of LEVI, of whom
he was descended: see if he spared? AARON: See if he spared himself: No,
he tells his own fault, he tells his own infidelity. And again, see if
DAVID spares himself: settes he not down his own adultery, and murder?
JOHN registrates his own ignorance. Let GOD be glorified, and all creatures
ashamed: for, to that end were we created: for except He had respected His
own glory, we should never have been made. Should we not then seek His
glory, although it were with our own shame? JOHN learnes us here another
good lesson, how often soever we fail through ignorance: (Alas, we fail
often through ignorance and misbeliefe, and ignorance bringes on infidelity.)
And therefore, whensoever we fail through ignorance, lay not the blame of
thy blindness upon the Scripture: In pain of thy life say not, I am ignorant,
because the Scripture is obscure and dark, as the Pope and his shauelings
blasphemouslie allege: but I affirm, that it is so perfect, that all things
appertaining to thy salvation are contained therein. And I say in despite of
the Pope, thou who say it is obscure, one day thou shall not be challenged
so much for thine ignorance, as for thy blasphemy against GOD, when thou vvilt
stand up, and say, The Scripture of GOD is not perfect, but obscure and
vvanting: I tell you, one day these blasphemers (for all their out-crying)
shall have their mouths sowed up, and they shall make an offer to speak, and
to say. The Scripture of God was not perfect: but the conscience of them shall
so strike them with fear and terror, that they shall not be able to answer
one word. Woe to them that impair the authority of the Scripture: we may
pingle with them a while here, but we remit them to that great day, that the
Judge appear, and then they shall receive their reward for their blasphemy.
But to leave them, What are these Scriptures that preach CHRIST'S Resurrection
from the dead? In what part is His Resurrection foretold? In the 13. of the
Acts Paul preaching of Christ, he confirms it by the old Scriptures: The
first Scripture is out of the 55, of Esaias, verse 3.24. Where He says, He will
make an everlasting covenant with you of the sure mercies of David: Then he
concludes, Therefore it behooued the Lord to rise from death: Mark the
consequent: No, there is not such a thing, as that ever mercy had continued,
if Christ had not risen. The Apostle says in the 2. Epistle to the
Corinthians, the first CHAPTER, and the 20. VERSE, In Him are all the promises
of God, Yea, and Amen, No, thou, or I should never have had Faith, nor any
spiritual grace, if Christ had not risen: So, so often as ever thou feel a
sponke or motion of that spiritual life within thee, thou may say, I am
sure, that Jesus is risen from the death: for this is sure, all grace and life
flows from the life of Jesus. So, if He had not risen, thou should have
had no life. He has another Scripture, out of the sixteenth Psalm, at the
tenth verse, Thou will not leave my soul in the grave, neither wilt suffer
thine Holy One, to see corruption. Then he concludes, therefore He is risen.
How follows this? It follows well enough, for if He had not risen, His body
behooved to rot, and to be corrupted, as ours rotte. And Peter in the second
Chapter of the Acts, and verse 31. uses the same testimony: Likewise in the
fifty three Chapter of Esaias, and the 8. verse, where he prophecies of Christ,
he says, And who is able to count His generation: for all His death He is that
everlasting Essence: meaning, that albeit He died, He shall rise to life
without end.

There is another Scripture, Then they should have believed without sight: But,
alas, who is careful to get this knowledge of this Resurrection: and if we had
a care to seek Christ, we would turn over these old Scriptures, to see the
prophecies of Christ to come, and then we would come to the New Testament* to
see these things accomplished, and so would meditate in ye Scriptures, night and
day, to confirm our faith, and to get our hearts set and stablished on the
LORD: for it is a matter of great difficulty, to get the heart established
with grace: and if thine heart be not established and filled with that word,
thou will never see CHRIST, nor get any grace in Him. So to end this: I
beseech you, as ever ye would see CHRIST, be diligent to seek the
Scriptures, that ye may settle your hearts here upon Him, and believe in
Him, that hereafter ye may see Him to your comfort and consolation at His
second coming, when He shall appear in the clouds, with the millions of
Angels: To Him be glory for ever, Amen.

THE XXXIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MARK CHAP. XVI.

JOHN CHAP. XX.










WE have heard (Brethren) before, first of the out-comming of the first
company of women to the grave of the Lord, and of their returning home
again: Secondly, we heard of the out-comming of the second company of
women, and their returning home again. Thirdly, and last of all, we heard how
Peter and John, being wakened with the tidinges which the women told them of
His Resurrection, came out to the grave, to see if it was so, as the women had
reported: They ran, and in running, they strive who shall be first: John out
runs Peter, (whether it was because he was younger, and more able in his
person, or whether he had greater joye in his mind, I leave that to any man
to judge) and comes first to the grave, and looks in, and goes back again.
Peter comes after him, and looks better about him, and seeing the
winding-sheete in one part of the grave, and the linen cloth, wherewith the
Lords head was wrapped, to be in another part, he wonders at it, and
thereafter goes into the grave. Then came JOHN again, who before only looked
in: and now the second time enters in, and when he saw, he believed, and
went his way. Thus far we heard the last day.

Now in this Text, ye will see, MARIE MAGDALENE, of whom ye heard before,
who came to the grave of the LORD, with the first company: and drawing near to
the grave, saw that great stone removed: who hastily ran home, thinking
verily, that the body of the Lord had been stolen away, and wist not where
it was laid. This same MARIE, as appears, has followed after Peter and
John, suppose she ran not with them, yet she came soon after: but before
she came, they had gotten the sight of the grave, and went away: she coming
to it, goes not in, but stands without, at the grave weeping. So this day
we return to the History of MARIE MAGDALENE: and first, we shall speak of
her mourning: And secondly, we shall speak of these things which she saw
in the grave, and about the grave, and how she met with the LORD, for whom she
mourned: and last, we shall speak of the effect that followed upon these
sights, as GOD shall give the grace, and as the time shall permit. Then to
begin at the first: it is said in the Text, Marie Magdalene stood without
weeping, when she came to the grave. She enters not in the grave, nor looks
not into it, but abode in that opinion, that the body of the Lord, was stolen
away, she stands without, weeping and mourning. Now certainly, I must ascribe
this to a wonderful love of this woman: there is no man that can express
sufficiently this love, that she bare to Christ: No, well were we, if we
could love Him half so well, as she did. Yet in this mourning, she sins,
for all her love, her mourning passed measure: No, ye will not find scarcely
in all the Scripture such a mourning as was in this woman: she mournes too much
and almost desperately for the body of the Lord: she mournes in vain, where
there was no cause of mourning, but cause of joy. The ground of all this
mourning was ignorance and forgetfulness: she had forgotten that which He had
told her, that He should rise again the third day: she remembered not, but
the third day missing the body, she thinks it to be stolen away. Mark this:
The godly, when they think they do best, they are often miscarried with their
own affections, they are mourning for Christ, and also loving Christ, and yet
in the mean time they are sinning against Him. The ground of this in them, is
ignorance and forgetfulness of the promises of the Lord, so that if ye would
look into that word, ye need not be ignorant concerning God: and if thou
mournest for ignorance, blame thy self, thou look not to the word: for if
thou look into this word, and mournest, thou have forgot, as Marie Magdalene
did: and therefore thou deseruest to be casten in a perplexity. Yet to
consider this somewhat better: First, when she came out to the grave, she
ran home, and seeing the stone rolled away, she tells false tithings, and
she once conceiues a false opinion. Now she stands, and abides in this
opinion, and will not go in to the grave, but stands without the grave, and
mournes desperately for a time. Well, Brethren, after that once a vvrong
opinion and conceit enter into the head of any, it is not lightly removed
again: thou may conceive it lightly, as Marie Magdalene did: but thou shall
not lay it down so lightly: Beware of opinions concerning God, and religion:
and ere ever thou suffer an opinion to enter into thine head, consider it in
the beginning: had she considered it well, she had not been overcome with it
now. Therefore, let not opinions concerning GOD, Religion, and that Life to
come, lightly enter into your heads. Now at last she bows her body, and
goes in to the grave. When she has gone forward for a season in this vain
displeasure* at the last the Lord bows her heart: for if she had not bowed
her heart, she should never have bowed her body, to have looked in to the
grave: Mark the goodness of the LORD toward His own: when they have gone
forward a while in their own perplexity, the LORD looks unto them, and
will not let them go on so desparatelie to destruction: but He wiil bow
thine heart first. The first grace is not the giving to thee the thing thou
seek, but the moving of thine heart to seek, is the first. No, He will
not present Himself at the first before thee* but He will have thee to bow
thy self to seek Him. And it lies not in the hands of any body to bow
himself to seek Him: No, as life is of mercy, so seeking of life is of
mercy: And if thou gettest an inclination to seek Christ and Heaven, that is
the first grace: and He that has g^uen thee the first grace to seek, without
doubt He will also give thee the second to find Him.

Now she looks in to the grave, and her looking in is not in vain, for
looking in, she seeks; and seeking, she finds: And mark what she finds;
she finds not a dead body, as she thought (she would have been glad to
have found it) but she sees two gloriou^ Angels, sitting in the grave,
clothed in bright raiment, the one where His head had layen, and the other
where His feet had layen. So our lesson is this, Bow thy body, and thou
shall see, seek and thou shall find: yea, I s^y to thee, if thou will bow
thy body to seek, thou shall get greater things than thou seek. MARIE
sought but Christ's dead body, and she finds Angels, bearing witness that
He was risen. So in a word: Seek, and thou shall find greater things than
ever thou soughtest. Alas, we w^nt grace, for fault of seeking: And I testify
this, that the world wantes grace and salvation for fault of seeking, for
their hea^te, cannot bow down to seek. Now what sees she? She saw
Angels. Peter and John saw something also: but what saw they when they went to
the grave? They saw but a winding-sheete, lying in one place of the grave, and
a kerchiefe in another: but MARIE saw not this only, which might have
witness^d that the LORD was risen, and not stolen away: for if He had been
stolen, they vvoulde have stolen the vvinding-sheete and the kerchiefe also.
She sees a fairer sight than JOHN and PETER did: MARIE that was a woman,
sees a more glorious sight than two Apostles saw: they see but linen clothes:
Marie sees two Angels: and in this, she is preferred to the two Apostles. That
which I say of her, I say of all these women, that they were preferred
above the Apostles.

Mark this, ye that are women: All your s^xe is honored in these women:
The first and the second company got the sight of Angels, which none of the
Apostles got. And when I consider this their preferment, I find it stands in
these two poincts chiefelie: First, they get the first revelation: it is first
told to them: and secondly, it is not told to them by men, but by Angels. In
both these the Apostles are postponed, they get it told them by women, and
then they get it told them in the second rowme: So that all women have a
prerogative in these women. In this, That the LORD gives this prerogative to
this infirm sex, He shames the Apostles: and that to this end, that all
glory may be given to GOD.

Yet I will not pass by the sitting of the two Angels: Nothing here fell out
rashly, all was ordained, he that was appointed to sit at the head of the
grave, he sat at the head: and he that was appointed to sit at the feet,
sat at the feet: So the LORD appointed, that not only they should speak
with their tongue: but also by their placing, tell, that He was risen. And
the Angel of GOD that sat at the head vvoulde say, Magdalene, here is the
place where his head lay, he is risen. And the other that sat at the feet,
vvoulde say, Here is the place where his feet lay, he is risen. It is even
so yet in the world, they whom He sendes to teach, He disposes them so,
that by their sitting, their going, and standing, He will preach, and He
will make their sitting to inform them, that He ordained to life and
salvation: The Lord works all for the weal of His Elect: yea, the least
circumstance is for the weal and salvation of His own.

Now to go forward: Marie has seen a fair sight: but stays the grace
here? and thinks the LORD He has done enough, because He has let her see
such a glorious sight? No, He will have them also to speak: They both with
one voice, say, Why weepest thou? When the LORD begins once to bow the
heart, He will let thee see grace: yea, He will not let thee see only:
but He will also let thee hear. He would not only let her see dumme
Angels, but He would have them also to speak unto her, that she might hear
joyfullie: When He has once begun, ere He leave, He will fill all the
senses with grace, He shall fill the eye with sight, the ear with hearing,
and in the end, He shall fill thine heart fully with grace and mercy. Now
what hears Marie? The Angels say unto her, Woman, why mournest thou? For, as
she looked in to the grave, she wept bitterly, the tears went never from
her eyes, nor the sadness from her heart, till the LORD Himself said,
MARIE, why weepest thou? Mark the words: The Angel no doubt rejectes her,
because she wept without measure, and in vain, because she thought that the
body of the LORD had been stolen away: she wept for Him who was living.
But as the Angel reprooues her, so he pitties her. Then, if thou weep for
the LORD, He shall cause the Angels of Heaven to pity thee. Yet again: What
say the Angels? They say not, Woman, fear not, as they did to the rest of
the women that came before: And why say they not, Fear not? She was so
overcome with displeasure, and so sad hearted, that she was not afraid of
the Angels, and was not astonished, as the other women: for they had not so sad
an heart as she had: for her heart was so filled with sadness and
displeasure, that fear could not get place. The Angel says, Woman why
mournest thou? because it was mourning that ailed her. The LORD gives always
medicine according to the sore: If thou be sad, He will say, Why mournest
thou? The Angel applies the medicine, and stilles her. A mourning body for
CHRIST would be stilled: If thou weepest for CHRIST, suppose thou pass
bounds, yet thou shall not want stilling, though He should send his Angels to
still thee: No, there was never any yt mourned for Christ, that wanted
stilling: Nor there was never any child that got so sweet words to still
them, as thou shall get, who mournest for CHRIST. Then, Blessed are they (says
CHRIST) that mourn, for they shall receive consolation, Matthew. 5.4. If thou
mourn for the love of the LORD, thou shall be stilled and comforted, and
blessed shall thou be one day. Alas, this is a laughing worl^^-woe unto it,
few men or women are now mourning wi^^ (...) Magdalene: alas, what need have
we of stilling: No, we are laughing, notvvithstanding of all th^se
judgments that approach fast, and are near at hand: they will cause us all
mourn one day: But what says the Angels to her? Say they in an anger, Why
seek ye the living amongst the dead? Behold the mercy of GOD to His
children: she merited, if ye look to her fault, to have been reproved more
sharply: she forgot the word of our Savior, and she would not look in to
the grave, yet he reprooues her not: he says not to her. Why seek ye Him
that is living amongst the dead, as the Angel spoke to the other women. This
is our lesson in a word: The LORD looks not what thou meritest but He
looks what thou need: He will not speak according to thy merit, but
according to thy need and necessity: for if thou mournest for the LORD, He
will minister comfort to thee: No, He will not make a sorrowful heart more
sorrowful: he is a cruel person that vvil do so: no, the Lord will not do so He
will not bru^se the brok^n reed* neither will He quench the smoking flax* as
it was prophesied of Him long before, Esaias Chapter 42. and the third verse:
But if thou be sad, He will raise thee up with such comfort, as cannot be
told.

Now to go forwards: When they have demanded: Why vveepest thou? ^hee
answers without any fear: as their sight terrifies her not, so neither is
she terrified with their voice. What was the cause that she feared not? and
that at the voice of the terrible Ang^lls she is not moved? Even because her
heart was overcome and loadned with dolor and sadness, that there could be
no place almost left to fear.

She says: They have stolen away the body of the Lord, and I know not where
they have laid Him. What could she do with it* and wherefore was she so
careful? She tells what she would do with it: sh^e says to Himself: I
would bury it: now all this came of a su^passing love: and therefore look
not so much to her doing, as to her love. Learn at Marie Magdalene to love the
LORD, and she may learn all the world.

This love and zeal of GOD is almost out of the hearts of men and women: and
when I consider her great love, I find it is more than any natural affection,
as father to son, or man to woman.

(...) ^^cept, there had come a force and virtue out of that body, she could
never have loved the Lord so well: No, except He loose our hearts with that
love he bears to us, we cannot love Him: but when once He looses thine
heart, thou will hate thy self to love Him: so what ever I discommend in her,
I discommend not her love: No, I shall never discommend love, nor zeal in any
person: Alas, we have too little of it, to discommend it: and I doubt not, but
all these imperfections that were in her, were covered by the LORD JESUS whom
she loved. Our comfort is this, if we love the LORD our GOD well, albeit we
had a thousand imperfections, they shall be covered with the mantle of the
righteousness of JESUS: yea, He shall meet thy love with unspeakable love.

Thus far for the sight, and hearing of the Angels: The Text says: as soon
as she had spoken, She turns her about again: Men would think this an
indiscreet behavior, to stand and hear two Angels, and then like a vain
person, to turn her about. I will not excuse this altogether, but I impute
this to the exceeding dolor and sadness, wherewith their soul was loadned:
there must be many faults ouerseene in a sad person: I had rather bear with
twenty faults in such a person, as to bear with one, in a vain person.

Now as she is speaking to the Angels: so the LORD comes near toward her
back, and ere ever He came or she savv Him, He touches her with a secret and
powerful presence of His Spirit: for I doubt not, as He came near her, but
His Spirit both turns her about, and closes the mouth of the Angels: for He is
the LORD both of man and Angel: and if He come, His presence must turn thee:
and when He comes to speak, all the Angels must hold their tongue, and be
dumb. Ye know, that JOHN the BAPTIST was a great light before the LORD
came, and many followed him: but when CHRIST comes, JOHN closes his mouth, and
as he says, Ioh. Chap. 3. verse. 29. It is the bridegroom that has the bride:
and I stand, says he, and hear Him, and hearing Him, I rejoice with an joy
unspeakable and glorious: No, it is the greatest joy under the Heaven to hear
Him speak, and if thou hear Him, thou vvilt not desire to speak: she
turns her, and she sees JESUS standing whom she sought, she sought
Himself, and finds His Messengers, but at the last she finds Himself. In a
word, we have our lesson: Seek ever the Lord, thou will not get Him at the
first: (Thou will not get a King at the first) for He has Messengers before:
and we His Ministers, are all His Messengers: and we all tell you, and I tell
you, that CHRIST is coming, and blessed be that commer: I bid thee stand a
while, and then the LORD shall come at thy back: Happy and blessed art thou
that shall be asking for Him: thou shall get such a joyful meeting as Marie
Magdalene did: but woeful shall that meeting be to thee, who delitest not to
hear, nor to speak of Him: for He shall come upon thee like a thief in the
night. So, blessed art thou who art talking with His Messengers: for He shall
call thee by name, as He did Marie, and that shall be the joyef^llest voice
that ever thou heardest. I said before, that she got a preferment above the
Apostles, in getting a sight of the Angels: but that was common to her with the
other women: Here ye see further, she got a preferment above all women: she
gets the first sight of Jesus, as MARK says, after His Resurrection. And this
argues, that her desire to see Him exceeded the desire of all the Apostles, and
all the women. So thou that longest most for the LORD shall see Him first, and
joyefull shall that sight be to thee. Yet mark how she receives it: She
knows Him not. This is a marvelous thing: she never left Him, but followed
Him from GALILE: and yet when the LORD offers Himself unto her eyes, she
knows Him not. This must be imputed to that great stupiditie which was in her
eyes, they were so dim, that she could not see. If the LORD had any
secret dispensation in it, or in what form He appeared, I will not dispute.

Our lesson is this: There enters such a mist into our eyes, that suppose the
LORD offer Himself to be seen in the word, crucified, and glorified in
His Gospel, yet thou vvilt not see Him, till the beams which glaunce from
His face, shine into thine heart, and scatter that cloud of darkness: and
when that cloud is away, thou vvilt see with such a sweetness, as cannot
be uttered: and thou who did never see that sight, thou never saw joye.

Now blessed is that soul that can behold the LORD in the Mirror, as it
were coming behind, and happy is that soul that can delight to see Him in
the Mirror: for certainly they shall see Him one day face to face, and the
LORD will turn them about, as He did Marie, and then these vile bodies,
shall be like unto His glorious body; and that face, which is now but vile,
shall then glaunce as the Sun in the Noone day. So blessed are they that can
awaite till the LORD come: Thou never mettest with one in this world, who can
make thee so joyefull as He will: and ever the greater languor that thou have
for Him, the greater shall be thy joye. Alas, we seek joye here, and there
is but few who seek CHRIST, in whom is all true joye.

Well, Marie knew not the LORD, but yet He knew her: No, thou may well
forget Him, but He will not forget thee: but He shall cause thee to know Him
ere thou go. He says to Marie, Woman, why mournest thou? At the first He
lies aloof. He says not Marie, but like an uncouth man: He says to her,
Woman, why mournest thou? Then He says not, I know thou weepest for me: but
He says, Why, weepest thou? He says not, I know whom thou seek: but,
Whom seek thou? So then at the first He holds Him aloof with His own,
He gives them not His familiar presence at the first: but as long as we are
here on earth, His speech shall be a far off: As long as we live by faith,
He looks to us as it were afar off: And this speech is to waken a languor
and piece of sadness in us, till we meet with the LORD: for the more thou
mournest, the greater shall be thy joye. The Lord if He please, in an instant
may take thee to the Heavens, but He will let thee lie here for a while, and
the greater that thy sadness is in this life, the greater shall thy joye be
in the life to come. O, that joye which that body shall have, who has longed
for the LORD! Then, think long, and wait for that His bright and glorious
coming, as Paul speaks: for no man shall get a crown, but they who have
waited for Him.

Now I shall end in a word: She supposing that he had been the Gardener
of the Garden where the LORD was buried, she said unto him, Sir, if thou
have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, that J may take him
away^. Look if she loved Him not well when He was living, for in His death
she could not be severed from Him, so did the love of JESUS constrain her.
In the twenty and fourth CHAPTER OF MATTHEW it is said, Wheresoever a dead
carkeis is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together. Now she is a
Mirror of love and zeal. Alas, if thine heart could melt with love as hers
did. Yet I see in her a marvelous stupiditie: She knows Him neither by sight
nor voice, her heart was so overcome with dolor and sadness. And this
senselessenesse that fell on good Marie Magdalene, will oftentimes fall on the
best man or woman in this life, That, as the Prophet says, in hearing, they
will not hear, and in seeing, they will not see. So all tendes to this: Let
every one judge charitablie of another: Be loath to condemn any, for as
lively as thou art, thou may fall down dead: and therefore wait on the
LORD, and the voice of the LORD shall come unto thee, and call on thee, as
He called on Marie: and that voice shall open both the eyes of thy body, and
of thy soul: and He shall let thee see and feel that it is He: and that
joye shall be complete, when thou shall come and inherit that Kingdom
which was prepared for thee before the foundation of the world. The LORD
grant it may be our only joye, and that we may hold up our eyes, and
wait night and day for that blessed coming of JESUS, at the which time our
joye begun, shall be perfected, and never have end. To this LORD JESUS,
with the Father, and that blessed SPIRIT, be all Praise, Honor, and glory,
for ever and ever, AMEN.

THE XXXIV. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
JOHN, CHAP. XX.






WE heard these days p^st (beloved in CHRIST) how that early in the
morning, first one company of women came out of HIERVSALEM, to the grave of
the LORD: and next after them another company: Thirdly, we heard of PETER
and JOHN, two of the Apostles, how they came out to the grave of the LORD,
being stirred up by the report of the women. And last, we heard of the
outcomming of MARIE MAGDALENE to the grave of the LORD the second time,
following after the Disciples PETER and IOHNNE: after they were returned, she
comes again to the grave: She offered not to look in, but stood mourning
for a space without, thinking certainly, that the body of the LORD had
been stolen away: But at the last it pleased the LORD to bow her mind,
and then she bowed her body, and looked in to the grave, and saw two
Angeles, the one at the head, and the other at thee feet of the grave where
our LORD had layen, sitting, clothed in bright raiment: and when she saw
them, she was nothing afraid, as the other women: she was so filled with
displeasure and sorrow, and her eyes were so dim with mourning, that she
could not see. The Angels ask her, Why weepest thou? She answers them, They
have taken away the body of the LORD, and I know not where they have laid
it. Ye will marvel at this: there is nothing in her mind, but the dead
body of the LORD: and as she is not terrified with the sight of the Angels,
so she is not terrified with their voice: and she turns her about from
them: and finding Him standing beside her in His own proper person: and the
LORD said as the Angel had said before unto her, that is, Woman, why
weepest thou? He calls her Woman; speaking strangely: and He proceeds
further, and says, Whom seek thou? as though He had not known whom
she had been seeking. MARIE supposing Him to have been the Gardener of that
Yearde where the LORD was buried, she says, Sir, if thou have borne him
hence, tell me where thou have laid him, that I may take him up, and bury
him. Now, as said is, there is nothing else in her mind but that dead body
of Jesus, which is an argument that she loved Him exceedingly, when He was
living: I say, all that was in her was exceeding and vehement: in her was
exceeding love to the Lord, and exceeding vehement desire to see Him, and
exceeding displeasure for Him, and for stealing Him out of the grave, as she
supposed: so that I may say, she was one of the violent ones, that Christ
speaks of in the 11 of Matthew, that breaks up Heaven: he says there, That
violence is done to the Kingdom of Heaven, and the violent possess it. She
pulled Christ out of the hands of the Apostles and of the rest of the women,
and went betwixt them and Him: and therefore she meets Him first, because
she seeks Him before them. Thus far we heard the last day: now we follow out
the rest of the History, and that thing that follows of the communing betwixt
the Lord and her: the Lord leaves her not so lying in ignorance, and
displeasure, but as He had before somewhat strangely and vncouthly talked with
her: so now He comes on more homely, and He vtters a more kindly word, and He
names Her by her name, Marie, He speaks nothing but one word but a well
chosen word, an homely word, the word of a Pastor, of a shepherd: naming
her by her own name, as it is said in the 10. of John, The good shepherd
will name his sheep by their name: this was a powerful word, as will be seen
by the effects that were wrought in her: she saw not of before: it opened her
eyes, to see, and her ears to hear: and in a word, it opened all her dead
senses. Mark this lesson: When the Lord has spoken to us for a time, as a
stranger afar off, as though He knew us not: at last He will come on with an
homely and kind word, and He will let thee see, that He knows thee by thy
name, by thy face, by thine heart, and by thine actions: Read the 4. of John,
speaking to the woman of Samaria, He speaks to her at the first, as though He
had not known her, but at the last He begins and tells her of all that she had
done, and that she was but an harlot lying presently in harlotrie: she
hearing that, she understands that He is a Prophet, and at last that He is
Christ the Messiah. Brethren, though the Lord speaks to us afar off, as a
stranger that knows us not, and we answer, as though we knew Him not: yet
stay still, and hear on, and thou shall hear one word that shall do the
deed: thy effectual calling will be performed with one word, it stands not
in many words. When He will waken thee, one word will do the deed. Yet to
come to her, as soon as she hear the word, she comes, and turns her in an
instant to Him again: so it seems, that she had turned her from Him, as she
did from the Angels that spoke to her before: she says, Rabboni: it is a
Chaldaicke word, which in our language signifies Master, He speaks but one
word, and she another: His word is a well chosen word, and so was hers: His
word was homely: hers also was homely, His was the word of a Pastor: her
word is the word of one of the flock, His word is the word of a Master,
her word is the word of an obedient disciple: and last His word is the word
of power to call her, His word testifies his calling, and the effect of His
power. In this stands our calling, when the LORD names us by our name, and
speaks kindly to us, and then we answer Him: We may not answer any way: No,
thou must answer like one of the flock, like one that knows the voice of the
shepherd: thou must answer like one that knows the voice of His Master: thou
must answer like one that feel the effect of His calling. When the Lord
speaks homely, if thou answerest homely, there shall be exceeding joy, this is
it that we call effectual calling. The thing that I note, is this shortly: As
long as the LORD speaks strangely to us, we will hear Him strangely, and as
long as He knows not us, we will not know Him, if it were a thousand
years, we will not know Him: and this lets us see, that neither man nor
woman can do ought, except He prevent them with grace: if He love thee not
first, thou will never love Him, 1. John 4. and if He know not thee first,
thou shall never know Him: No, never a man will know the Lord, except He know
them first: He says in the 4. Chapter to the Galathians, verse 9. Now seeing
ye know God, then bethinking himself, he says, yea, rather are known of
God: and therefore thou should say, Lord, love me, that I may love thee,
Lord, know me, that I may know thee, etc.

Now I go forward: When she has uttered this word Rabboni, she goes forward
to have embraced Him in her arms: He meets her, and says, Touch me not,
for I am not yet ascended to my Father: Some would marvel what moved the Lord
Jesus to stay that woman that loved Him so entirely, to touch Him. We will
hear hereafter, how a whole company took Him by the feet and adored Him, as
ye may read, Matthew. 28 8. and the disciples touched Him, as ye may read in the
24. of Luke, and the 39. verse, and Thomas put his hands in His side, in this
same Chapter, and it cannot be said, that these touched Him, after that He
ascended up to Heaven, that could not be possible: it is a marvel then, that
He should be so strange to MARIE: I answer to this, and I take mine answer
first, out of the reason, and next out of the commission He gives to Marie:
for first, when He says to her, I am not gone up to my Father, and therefore
touch me not now the meaning is this in effect: it is not time for thee to
touch me now, till that time I be in glory, and then touch me by the arms
of Faith, as much as thou can or may: ye must consider, that she was
too much addicted to His bodily presence, and she thought that He should have
remained and dwelled with her on earth, as He did before: and therefore He
would not let her come near Him, until He instructed her of a spiritual
touching: that He was not to stay here, but to dwell with His Father in the
Heavens: but after He has instructed her, He lets her and the other women
touch Him as much as they would: This is the first answer: The other, I take
it out of the commission He gives her: the commission was, to tell the
disciples, and He vvilles her to tell hastily: and therefore He will not let
her come near to touch Him, until she have done her commission

Now let us mark somethings in Marie Magdalene: Ye read in the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, the fifth Chapter, and the fourteenth verse, PAVL says,
The love of God constraines me, that is, the love of GOD binds up mine heart,
and hand, and all my senses. Now would to GOD we could love Him half so
well, as he did: he gives the reason: because He loved me, and died, and gave
His life for me: I will consecrate me to His service, and it is little enough,
thou should do so, seeing He has bought thee, and then He defines the
service: he says now, I will know no man after the flesh, that is, for
carnal respects, as for Country, land, kindred, or parentage. But I
acknowledge them as new creatures, I will look to the grace of regeneration:
this is the service of Christ, and if I have known CHRIST Himself after the
flesh: yet I know Him no more: so, He had His friends, His kindred, and His
Country as other men had: but since He is exalted above the Heavens: I will
know Him no more, so I will compare Marie with Paul: a godly man, with a
godly woman: she is like Him in this, that she loved the Lord exceeding well.
He died to redeem Paul, and therefore He loved Him exceeding well: she loved
Him, because He died for her: but when it comes to the service, Marie is not
well learned: Paul touches Him by Faith in the Heavens: Marie looks not to the
Heavens, but she goes to embrace Him in her bodily arms: in this she is
behind, but she got better instruction hereafter.

Mark this lesson: There are some men that will love the Lord entirely: and
yet when they come to His service, they will fail: for such is the grossenes
of our nature, that we cannot incline to that spiritual service, which He
chiefly requires. Papist^ie is full of this grossenes, they can do nothing, if
they want His carnal presence, either in Himself, or in a stock, or a stone,
or in a piece of bread: and therefore they dream a bodily presence of Him in
the Sacrament: all their Religion is earthly, no Spirit, no grace in it. But
accepted the Lord of that gross service of Marie that she offered: I am
certain, He loved Marie better than the Pope, and all his shauelings: yet for
as well as He liked Marie, He likes not this her service: He says to her,
Touch me not: then how will he like of that person, that He loves not so well,
that delites in gross and wilful ignorance. The LORD keep us from such
gross service, and make us to touch Him by Faith.

Another thing here: He will not suffer her to touch Him, before that she had
gotten commission to her brethren. This lets us see, if the LORD have given us
a commission, He will have us doing it with speed, not being entangled with
any thing: Paul says, in the second Epistle to Timothy, the second Chapter,
and the fourth verse: No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, because he would please him that has chosen him to be
a soldier: if the embracing of a person may hinder thee, do it not: and if
the saluting of a person in the journey may hinder thee, do it not. Ye read
in 2. Kings, Chapter 4. verse 29 Where the Prophet Elisha sends his servant
Gehazi to the Shunnamite, he says, Make haste Salute no man by the way, and if
any salute thee, answer him not: and when Christ sends out His disciples, He
bids them make hasle, and salute no man by the way, LVKE CHAPTER 10. VERSE 4.
The LORD will not have us to decline neither to the right hand, nor to the
left, if it were but a look, if it may hinder thee in the Lords work, do it
not. Paul received a commission, as ye may read, Philip. Chapter 3. verse 13.
he ran so, that he never looked over his shoulder, but that he forgot that
which was behind, and endeavored to that which was before, till he had ended
his course: Ye remember of the wife of Lot, how she was forbidden by the Lord,
to look back to Sodom: she would not go forward in her journey, but she
would look back again, and therefore the Lord turned her in a pillar of
salt: He would have them speedy in His work, and, Woe is them, that do the
work of the Lord negligently, Ierem. 48.10.

Now, let us come to the commission, He says to her, Marie, Go and tell my
brethren, Well, gets a woman the commission, where is Peter, and John, and
Matthew, and the rest of the Apostles? always in the beginning, it is a woman
that gets the commission. The last day, ye remember, I spoke of sundry
preferments of women, that they got before all men: they got the revelation
of His Resurrection before all men in the world, and not by men, but by
glorious Angels: but Marie is preferred to all men and women in this, that she
first sees the Lord, and then she gets a revelation of the Lord, that the
women got not: she gets the revelation of His ascension, and yet there is more,
she got it not to her self alone, but He says: Tell the Apostles, tell them,
says Christ, I go to my Father: So this is a special grace that women got,
and especially, Marie, that was furthest casten down, possessed with seven
devils. What should I say? The further thou be casten down: the higher shall
thou be exalted. But mark the words, He says, Tell my brethren.
Notwithstanding of their sluggishnesse, notwithstanding they were offended in
Him, yet He says, Tell my brethren. In the 22. Psalm verse 23. DAVID says,
I shall preach to my brethren. The LORD accomplished here that prophecy:
here He preaches to His brethren: ye read in Heb. 2.11.12. He that
sanctifies, and we which are sanctified, are all of one, that is, we are of
one common nature: and therefore He is not ashamed to call us brethren: and
therefore he brings in this place of the 22. Psalm, saying, J will declare thy
Name unto my brethren: the reason is this: He has a common nature with us,
and therefore He is not ashamed of us: mark it well. Now when He is risen,
He calls them brethren, and now when He is in that passing glory, the LORD
is not ashamed to call us brethren: if a man of small lineage be exalted in
this world, he will not know his father, or his mother: But the LORD that
is exalted above all the Angels, is not the prouder: He is also humble to His
brethren, as ever He was in the earth: He is not ashamed to call us poor
wretches, His brethren, and sisters, that are here in the earth: No, if thou
be not ashamed of Him first, He will never be ashamed of thee.

Now to come to the commission, He says, Tell them: I go to my Father, and to
your Father, and to my God, and to your God: Tell them this: The commission
that is given before by the Angels, tells that He was risen, but the
commission that the LORD Himself gives to Marie, is of an higher degree of
glorification: it is of His ascension: for, Tell them, says He, I go to my
Father, and to your Father, and to my God, and to your God: The LORD, when He
comes in proper person, brings ever a greater revelation, than was of before:
All the light that the Angels, Prophets, or JOHN the BAPTIST reueiled of Him,
was but darkness, in respect of that light that Himself brought. Likewise,
after His going to Heaven, the Apostles, the disciples, and Ministers:
Ministers light to the end of the world: but in that great day, when the
LORD shall come, thou shall see a greater light: thou savvest never light
comparable to that light. It is hard for thee now to believe, but sober
things, but then thou shall see great things (thou shall have no stop) even
things, that the eye has not seen, neither has entered in the heart of man.

Yet let us weigh the words better: I go up to my Father: I go not down,
let them not seek me in the earth: I have been in it, as PAVL says to the
Ephesians, the fourth CHAPTER, and the ninth VERSE, He descended into the
lowest parts of the earth: I go now to the Heaven. The word importes, that
He was to leave them, and that word was sad to them, and to Marie, and
they took it heavy. I go, says He, to my Father, and to my God: He went
not for His own well to the Father, that the Father might communicate His
glory to Him: I go, says* He, to my Father, and to your Father, and to my
God, and to your God: This imports, that as He went to His Father for His
own glory and well, so He went for their glory and well, and as soon as
He should get that glory, He should communicate it to them: and no doubt, this
word, your Father, and your God raised their hearts to follow Him: suppose
our bodies be here, our hearts are in the Heaven, and we are citizens
there, albeit thy body were burnt, if thine heart be in the Heaven, thou art
well, and if He had not gone to Heaven, neither had He gotten glory, neither
had any glory been communicated unto us: but He going to that Father of
glory, as the Apostle calls Him, and so, as the first begotten of GOD, being
filled with glory, we are made partakers of His glory, as ye read in the
first CHAPTER of this Gospel of John. The oil yt was poured down upon the head
of AARON, stayed not there, but ran down to his bearde, his breast, his
girdle, and the lowest parts of his garment: So the graces that were in Jesus
Christ, our head, stayed not there, but flowed from Him, even to the meanest of
all His members. The Lord, who is full of grace gives every one of us a part
here, and one day we shall be all filled with grace and glory for ever and
ever. Mark the words well: he calls Him first, Father, and then he calls
Him God, which imports two natures in one person; The Father importes His
Godhead, and that he calls Him his God, it imports that He is man: so that
these two words import that Christ is both God and man* blessed for ever. But
mark the order: He says not, I go to your Father, and mine: No, but to my
Father, and your Father. Ere ever He be our Father, He must be His Father. Ere
ever He be our God, He must be the God of Christ, the man: for if it had not
been for the blood of Christ, He had never been thy God: thou have that
bought unto thee with the blood of Christ, we come in under Christ our elder
brother. Now when Marie has received the commission, she tarries no longer,
howbeit she was loath to depart from Him: yet because she saw that it was His
will, she obeyes. The godly would feign go and dwell with the Lord: Paul
says, I have confidence in GOD, and J choose rather to remove out of this
body, and to dwell with GOD, 2. Corint. Chap. 5. Feign would the godly soul
be with GOD: and suppose it be pressed down with sin yet it breaks aye
upward toward the Heavens, to be with the Lord that this mo^talitie may be
swallowed up of Life: for, as long as we lie here, vv^e live under the
burden of sin. So feign would the godly be with Him, yet seeing it is his
will, that we be Pilgrims here a while, that our joye may be the
greater, when we mee^e with the LORD, whom we have longed for, we
are contented for a time.

Now when Marie departs, what does she? She told the D^sciples that she had
seen the LORD. She is preaching, and telling, The LORD is going to heaven,
to your Father and your GOD. Now Brethren, seeing we are Pilgrims, let us
take heed we be well occupied, and look we discharge our commission: for
there is no man nor woman but they have a commission: Thou that art a Preacher,
preach both in time and out of time to His glory: and if thou discharge thy
commission faithfully in thy calling, then even as Marie was welcome unto Him
again, so shall thou be also welcome, when thou shall meet with the LORD,
and He shall accept well of thee. The LORD enable us to take heed to this,
that seeing we must remain absent from our LORD for a time here, we may
ever cast us to be well occupied, and walk carefully in that calling that
He has placed us in: And then, when that the LORD of Glory shall appear,
whom we have served in this life, our souls and bodies shall enjoye the full
fruition of His presence in Heaven: To whom be glory for evermore, Amen.

THE XXXV. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII.



MARK CHAP. XVI.




BELOVED BRETHREN, these days past we have heard first the History of Marie
Magdalene, how she returned home, and how she came again to the grave of her
LORD, and of her mourning and weeping at the grave, of her looking again in to
the grave, of the sight of The Angels meeting with her, of Christ's words unto
her: first He spoke aloof, and afar off unto her, Woman, why weepest thou?
whom seek thou? Then He speaks homely unto her, calling her by her name,
and says, Marie: She answers Him, Rabboni: as He had named her homely, so
she answered Him homely: He named her like a Master, and she answered Him
like a reverend Disciple: He calls her as a Sheepehearde, and she answers
Him as one of His flock, knowing Him by His voice, she offers to embrace Him,
but He preuentes her, and says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not ascended
to my Father: perceiving her to be over much addicted to His bodily presence:
before He will permit her to touch Him, He will have her first to believe in
Him, and to touch Him in glory, by the hand of faith. Then He sendes her in
commission, Go to my Brethren, so calling His Disciples: A loving style: Tell
them of other tidinges than ever they have heard yet: They heard of my
Resurrection, but they believed not: but now I go to the Heavens, to my
Father, and to your Father, to my GOD, and to your GOD: And this is the
commission: Marie receiving it, she executes it, and runs to the Disciples
to tell them: and, as John says, she preaches to them the thing that she had
heard of the LORD. MARK says, that when she came to them, she found them
weeping: This was a weeping time, but shortly after followed a time of joye.
This change of courses ye see in the world: for though thou be wanton and
laugh here never so much, yet thou will weep soon after: But will thou weep
and mourn here for a while, when there is matter of mourning, thou shall
laugh and rejoice shortly afterward. Now when Marie finds the Apostles
weeping and mourning, she tells them, that the LORD is alive: she confirms
it that He spoke, and says, she saw Him with her eyes, But how takes the
Apostles with this commission? They remain faithless for all that she could
say: they would not believe her: No, it is an hard matter to believe the
Article of the Resurrection, That a man that is dead can rise again, and take
life: flesh and blood will never dite this unto thee, that one that is dead
can live again. The women who were more simple, and not so wise in
worldly wit, as the Apostles were, are more ready to credit the
Resurrection than the Apostles, who were strong, according to the flesh. The
Resurrection is hard to be believed of any man: but this is sure, The
Resurrection is hardest to be believed of them, who are vvisest in this
world: No, he that has this worldly wisdom, he countes these Heavenly
and Spiritual things but folly, till he be made a fool, that he may be
made wise, as the Apostle PAVL speaks, 1. CORIN. CHAP. 3. VERSE. 18. That is,
till he renounce this worldly wisdom, he shall never believe these
Spiritual things. When I consider the words of MARK, I find many faults
in the Disciples: They were lying mourning: this was a vain mourning: What
cause had they of mourning for Him whom they thought was dead, but yet was
alive? So they had matter of joye, and not of mourning. And from whence
proceeded this mourning? First, they were ignorant of the Scriptures, which
had foretold that he should rise again: Then, they had forgotten the word
which the LORD had spoken unto them, That he should die, and rise again
the third day: Yet there is worse in them than this: The first company of
women, who told them of CHRIST'S Resurrection, they would not believe them:
Then the next company comes, neither would they believe them one word. And
last, MARIE came, who not only met with the Angels, but also with the
LORD, and received a commission: and yet they vvoulde not believe her,
notwithstanding she told them that she had seen Him. So there is not only
an unbelief, but a stiffenesse in them. So that if ye will count these
faults, their dolor is first without comfort, and secondly an ignorance of
the Scriptures, and thirdly, a forgetfulness of the word of the LORD: and
last, there is an infidelity, that they would neither believe the women, who
came from the Angels, nor MARIE, that came from the LORD, and saw Him, and
spoke with Him: So that they are as new to enter to learn, as though they had
never seen nor known Christ. Yet there was some good thing in them, for
certainly, howbeit the dolor came of ignorance, forgetfulness, and
incredulity, yet I am sure of this, that the love which they carried toward
CHRIST caused them to mourn, for if they had not loved Him, they had not
mourned for Him. No, there was none of the High Priests that wet their cheeks
for His death. So of necessity, love caused them to mourn for Him. And this
sponke of love, that was covered and kept down before, in end it brake out, and
burnt through all their imperfections. It is a wonder to see how the LORD
will keep in a sponke of grace under an hundredth imperfections. And this
should make us to be loath to judge, and to give out sentence: for all the
evil that we see in any, it may be that the LORD will let thee see, that
there was some sponke of grace in that man covered; which sponk will break out
in its own time.

Now I have ended the History of MARIE MAGDALENE, who loved the LORD so
well, and so entirely. In the words following, to wit, in the Gospel of
MATTHEW, there are two discourses: The first is, of the two companies of
women, at their turning home again: as they met with the Angels before, now
they meet with the LORD Himself: In the next discourse, we have a piece of
an History of them that were set to keep the grave, who returned to the
Scribes, and to the High Priests with these same tidinges, He is risen
again. Now I shall go through this day the first discourse, and piece of
History, as GOD shall give us grace. Then to return to the women: It is
said, that as they returned home, The LORD met them: but Marie was returned
before these women came forth: she had met with CHRIST, and returned home
again. This company meets with the LORD as they returned homewarde. Ye will
perhaps ask, what was the cause that He met with Marie Magdalene? No doubt
this was the cause, She loved Him best, she loved Him above them all, and she
had the greatest languor to see Him, and she rested never, till she had seen
Him, and met with Him. What was the cause that these women saw Him before the
Apostles? No question their languor to see JESUS, was next to MARIE: The
Apostles languor was last, and therefore they got the last sight of Him. Now
the lesson is easy: Thou that longest most for the LORD JESUS, shall see Him
first, with MARIE MAGDALENE: A man will thirst for earthly things, and be
disappointed of them: but it is impossible, if thou thirst for CHRIST, and to
see thy LORD, but thou shall see Him: So, Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst for righteousness: for they shall be satisfied, Matthew. Chapter 5. verse
5. So, if thou would see CHRIST, first, long for Him (and thou shall never
get that blessedness, till thou see Him) Then, if thou can not be the
first, in care and desire to see Him with Marie Magdalene, yet be next in
care with the rest of the women: and if thou can not attain to the first,
nor second, look that thou be in the third room, at least, that thou long
with the Apostles, and thou shall get the third sight: for blessed are they
that get any sight, yea, the last sight: Blessed are they that come either
first, or last to Heaven, but think not, that this dravving near of ours, to
Him, is the cause that He draws near to us: No, if He drew not near
unto us first, we would never think of Him, let be to dravv near unto Him.

So, Brethren, the cause wherefore our hearts do dravv near unto the LORD,
is not in us, but in Him, because He thirstes for us, and draws us unto Him:
and would thou have an argument, that the LORD is near unto thee: look if
thine heart draws near unto Him, and if thou find thine heart longing and
thirsting for Him, then the LORD is near unto thee, and He is present with
thee: and if thou find no sense nor feeling of Him in thine heart, nor no
desire of Him, nor no languour for His presence, in the which is sacietie of
joy: and if thou have no languour, be sure, the Lord is far from thee, for
if He be far from thee, albeit thou had all the world about thee, thou art
but a miserable body.

When He meets with these women, He is not dumb, and He speaks not to
the ear only, but also to the heart, He says, God save you: the word in the
own language would be well marked, it signifies rejoice: Is not this a great
thing, that He that has joy to give thee, should bid thee rejoice: and no
doubt, it was an effectual word, and it made them to have joy unspeakable. A
man when He bids thee, rejoice, has no power to work joy in thee, but the
LORD is joy it self: who has joy to give? but the LORD Himself? or who can
give peace, but the LORD: as soon as He draws near to any person, and gives
His presence to Him, to ye end that His presence may work, He gives a joyful
word: the word of the Lord is of power, as Paul says, Romans 1.16. The Gospel
is the power of GOD unto salvation, unto every one that believes: So, if thou
contemnest this word, that bids thee rejoice, thou shall get no portion of that
grace that is with Him: so this word is the only minister that ministers joy to
the soul: all the things in the world, shall never minister joy to the soul
that is afflicted. When He has spoken this word (and no question it was very
effectual) they are so filled with joy, that they tarry not to make answer,
but they fell down at His feet, And embrace Him by the feet, and adore and
worship Him, as Thomas did, when he put his hand in His side: he said, Thou
art my Lord, and my God, JOHN Chapter 20. verse 28. He refuses not this
honor, because He was their LORD and GOD. Ye see here, how effectual the
presence of the LORD is, albeit it were but one word, Rejoice: the power that
is in that word, works such a joy in the heart of a sinner, that the poor
sinner must meet Him: the LORD cannot meet thee, but if thou feel that
joy, but thou must meet Him again, and strive to have Him in thine arms: No,
svvord, nor fire, nor hunger, nor nakedness, nor nothing can separate thee
from Him, if thou feel Him in thine heart, but thou must meet Him again,
and cleave fast to Him. The feeling of this joy, which is through the presence
and word of GOD, mooues us to desire to embrace Him, and makes our conjunction
with Him, vvhereupon arises our joy again, far greater than before: The joy
that we have now, is but by Faith, and a far meeting, as far as is
between the Heaven and the Earth: yet says Peter in his first Epistle, the
first Chapter, and the eight verse: We not seeing Him, but believing in Him,
rejoice with a joy unspeakable and glorious. So, believing in Him, we find
joy: but when thou shall see Him face to face: (Alas, look thou not for
this) then thorovv thy conjunction with Him by sight, there shall be praise,
honor, and glory for ever: No, such shall be thy joy, as eye never savve,
ear never heard, nor never could enter into the heart of man: thou shall
vvonder when thou see it, that ever there could be such joy prepared for
thee: and therefore measure it not by thy capacity.

Yet this would not be passed by: They go not to His throat, to His neck, or
to His middle: but they fall down, and takes Him by the feet, and worships
Him. Mark it, Brethren: a sinner will be homely indeed with his God, with
CHRIST: No, there was never a creature so homely with another, as the sinner
will be with the LORD. But mark it: This homelines will not be with
misnourturnesse, and with an opinion of paritie: albeit thou will be homely
with Him, as with thy brother: yet thou may not make thy self as companion
to Him, and count lightly of Him, but thou must be lowly, thine head must be
reverenced: He is our Head, Ephesians. Chapter. 1. verse 22. If therefore we
ought to reverence Him: for He is in a wonderful sublimitie, and highness,
above His Church: and as this is true, that the soul which is joined with Him
in this life by Faith, sees in Him such a Majesty, that it stoupes before Him:
so much more when we shall see Him face to face in glory, and His Majesty
fully reueiled, we shall reverence Him, and in humility fall at His feet,
singing, Holy, Holy, Holy, as ye have in the sixth Chapter of Esaias, and in the
Revelation. Now to go forward: While they are sitting at His feet, the LORD
speaks to them, and suffers them to feel Him: and all to this end, that they
might believe He was risen, and living, Then He says to them, Fear not: this
encouragement importes, that notwithstanding all their embracing of Him, and
confidence, there was a piece of fear and lying back in them: I will not
commend it, because the Lord has discommended it. It is true indeed, our
joining with Him by Faith, should be with such a confidence, that it should be
without any fear or doubting, but with joy. This should be: but mark it
again: There is such an holiness in that Majesty that we join with, there
is no spot in Him, and then so long as we are here, there is such uncleanness,
and such an evil conscience in us, that our Faith is joined with doubting and
fear: so that, if thou have not a recourse to Him, no peace for thee, we will
fear that that Holy one consume us that are so unholy: but the Lord who knows
thy fear, He comfortes thee: thou know not thine own fear so well as the
Lord does: thou feel Him not so soon by Faith, but as soon He knows thy
fear and thine heaviness, as He did the fear of the women, and He says to
a sinner that feign would embrace Him: fear not, thou have no cause of fear:
My terrors have taken thy terrors away: And as the Apostle says, Heb.
Chapter 4. verse 16. Let us go boldly to the throne of grace, with confidence,
that we may receive mercy: and if thou hear this voice, thou may go
boldly, and He shall put away all te^rours and fear. But in that life to come
when all matter of sear, as sin and corruption of nature, is away, albeit
we shall see Him more clearelie, and be conjoined with Him more perfectly,
yet all fear shall be taken away, for perfect love castes out fear, as John
says in his first Epistle, Chap. 4. verse. 18.

Now to go to the commission, Go, and tell my Brethren, that they go into
Galile, and there shall they see me: They would see me: bid them go before
me into Galile, and there they shall see me. There is here then a commission
given unto the women to the Disciples: There was before a commission sent unto
the Disciples by the Angels: First, of a company of women, and afterward
another company: and next, MARIE was sent from the Lord Himself. Now He
sendes a new commission, to tell them, that He was risen, yet they never
believed. Here we see a marvelous patience, in suffering their incredulity
so long. What King vvoulde have had ever the tenth part of this patience. With
this He joins the loving style, Tell my Brethren. He says not, Tell these
sluggishe and faithless bodies. His patience is joined with love unspeakable.
All the world cannot express the lenity and patience of the LORD toward
His own: though they should be never so unbelieving, yet He calls them His
Brethren. We should study night and day to know that the LORD loves us:
for our standing is not in our love toward Him, but in His love toward us:
and if thou find thy self rooted in His love, as the Apostle speaks to the
EPHESIANS, thou shall never be separated through any occasion from that love
that is in CHRIST. Then again, I see He has a marvelous study to get
them instructed. He says not, I have sent many already, and yet they will
not believe: No, He sendes every company after another till they believe,
and till faith be wrought in their hearts. What means all this care to
instruct them? The Lord was to send them forth to teach others, and
therefore all His study is, (before they instruct others,) that they might
believe themselves. No, if the Lord send thee to tell of His Death, His
Resurrection, and Ascension to the Heavens, and of His coming again to
Judgment, He will have a care that thou be instructed, and that thou believe
that which thou deliuerest unto others. No, I will not give a penny for a
Minister that has no assurance, no feeling, nor no sight of the death and
Resurrection of CHRIST, and that will stand up, and speak to the people of
GOD. Besides this patience, this love, and this care that He has to instruct
them who are to be employed in His service, He shows a marvelous wisdom
in humbling them through the teaching of the women: And therefore He will not
send an Angel unto them, but infirm women, to school them, and shame them:
and howbeit the commission bears not this in express words, yet He will
have the women to say in effect, Fie upon you, ye are sluggishe bodies, ye
should have taught us, and not we you. This is it that the Apostles should
have understood: They understood His wonderful wisdom, He was to send
them to the world. He was careful to instruct them, He sendes not Angels to
school them, but women, to learn them humility, that they never forget this,
that they were schooled in the school of women: for as it is required that the
servants of GOD have knowledge and a persuasion, so they must have humility,
or else they cannot be faithful Preachers. Now one word, and so I shall
end, Bid them, says He, go to Galile: He says not, Go to Jerusalem:
No, the LORD had turned His back on Jerusalem: for these who contemned Him
when He was humbled in the flesh, the LORD will despise them when He is
glorified. Woe to them whom He forbiddes His servants to go unto: Woe to
us, if He say once, Go not to EDINBVRGH: Woe is them, and woe to that Town
where the Lord forbiddes His Messengers to go. Beware of this, that the Lord
say not to His Messenger, Go to the North or South, but go not to EDINBVRGH,
for then shall wrath and destruction light upon it. What confusion and
destruction lighted upon Jerusalem, after that the Lord had once turned His
back upon it? Yet says the Lord, Bid them go to Galile, and there they
shall seem: They believed not others, who told them of me, but there I shall
speak unto them mine own self. This is the great mercy of the LORD
toward His Disciples, upon whom the LORD should never have looked, if He
had respected their infidelity: but albeit they were unfaithful, yet He
remained faithful and merciful: for He could not deny Himself, but where
there sins abounded, there His grace surmounted above them all: for, as the
APOSTLE says, Where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more. Now all the
world was full of sin when Christ came, yet grace superabounded. Now this was
a meek dealing with them, that they should see mercy above their sins, to
this end, that they should by experience teach others: for he that feels
both misery and mercy, is the best teacher in in the world. So being to
send them to teach others, He lets them find grace to superabounde. PAVL,
Roman. 5.20. says, Where sin abounded, there grace superabounded. Read the
first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 1. verse. 13. there the Apostle says, J was a
blasphemer, and an evil liver, and a persecuter: this was his misery: and if
the LORD had never looked to him, he had never been an Apostle, nor a
Christian man. But what says he thereafter? The grace of the LORD JESUS
superabounded: and for as high and weighty as my sin was, yet His mercy was
greater, and it weighed it down. So then ye see the LORD cares for them that
lie in misery, to tell them of it. I tell you this day, ye are lying in
misery, and He is careful that the Preacher have a sense both of misery,
and of mercy, to tell of the wrath of GOD, which is manifest from the Heaven
upon all impenitent sinners: And, if thou will repent thee, I assure thee,
though thou were the greatest sinner that ever was, thou shall have mercy:
and therefore, if thou have gone long on in sin, yet even for GODS cause at
last, take up thy self: and I promise thee exceeding mercy in that bloody
Sacrifice of our LORD and SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST, who has died both for thee,
and me, and all penitent sinners: To Him therefore, with the Father and Holy
Spirit, be all Honor and Glory for evermore, AMEN.

THE XXXVI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII.









MARK, CHAP. XVI.

LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII. EMMAVS.








WE heard hitherto in the History of the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST,
(Beloved in Him) of sundry vvitnesses of His Resurrection: First Angels, and
next women: Namely, MARIE MAGDALENE was the first that got the sight of
Him after His Resurrection: and after her, other women got a sight of Him
also, and a direction to His Disciples, to assure them, that He was risen
again.

Now in this TEXT which we have read out of the Gospel of MATTHEW, we
have a piece of History of another sort of vvitnesses, that testified of the
Resurrection of JESUS; even of the men of war, who were sent out to watch
the grave: they came not to the Disciples, but to the High Priests, and they
testify unto them of the Resurrection of JESUS. Then, in the History written
by MARK and LVKE, we return to the true vvitnesses, to wit, two of them
that were His Disciples: He meets with them as they were journeying from
Jerusalem to Emaus, and thereafter these two tell the rest, that the Lord was
risen. Now to go through these two pieces of History shortly, as God shall
give the grace, and as time shall permit: When the women that had met with
Jesus, had returned, Some of the soldiers that had watched the grave,
returns home to Jerusalem, to tell the things that had fallen out: but they
came not to the place where the Apostles were, but to the place where the High
Priests were, from whom they were sent, and they tell the Lord was risen.

The History is plain: these witnesses are the soldiers that vvatched the
grave: they have not such a commission as the other witnesses had: they are not
sent by CHRIST, nor by His Angels, but run of their own accord: but yet
they run by the special providence of GOD: No doubt, His providence directed
them to the High Priests, and not so much to instruct them: for they were
hardened, as to let them see, that they were disappointed of their
expectation. They obtained of Pilate, to let men go out and to keep Him in
the grave, and to have smoothered His Resurrection, that it had never come to
light and yet the LORD sendes these same men to Jerusalem, as witnesses of that
resurrection, that they would have smoothered, as if they had been sent out by
the High Priests, to this end, that they should be witnesses: they could
testify no better of it: the LORD turns it about so, that they could do no
better, if the High Priests had hired and waged them, to be witnesses of His
Resurrection. It is a vain thing to strive with GOD, and to hide that thing,
that He will have brought to light: for hide it as thou vvilt, in despite of
thee He shall bring it to light, to thy shame, that He may be glorified.

Now to speak what they testified: they testified the same thing that the
women had testified: they testified the truth, they testified All that was
done, that JESUS was risen: yet there is a great difference betvveene them,
and the women: when the women understood, that He was risen, they came home
with joy, the men of war came home with sadness, and with
coffeehouse, and they preach this to them that were sad to hear it, and
ashamed of it: they preach it not to the Apostles, as the women did, but to
the High Priests.

Mark this Lesson: Look how ye tell tythings: there are some that will make
good tithings of evil tithings, and evil tithings of good, as they please,
albeit they be never so good, if they be not contented with them, they will
make them evil: but be they never so evil, if they be contented with them,
they will make them good, and tell them with joy.

Bevvare how ye tell tithings of the Church of ENGLAND of FRANCE, or of
GERMANY, or of other parts. Look when thou speak of the prosperous estate
of the Church, that thou speak it with joy: and when ye hear that the
Church is troubled, speak that not with joy, but with sadness: Thou that art
not content with the prosperous estate of CHRIST'S Church, thou would have
hid CHRIST'S Resurrection, as the Scribes did: and if thou had been living
with them. So in a word: if the Church be sad, tell it with sadness, and if
she be joyful, tell thy tithings with joy: if thou speak of JESUS, and His
glory, speak of Him with joy and pleasure in thine heart.

Now to go forvvard: The High Priests, when they hear these news: they are
nothing content therevvith, but are ashamed: They call a Council of the High
Priests, and the Senators of the people. The thing that they decerne, is to
bribe the men of vvare that vvatched the grave, and to hire their tongues to
lie: they gave them a great sum, to say, That the body of the Lord was
stolen out of the grave by the disciples, in the night, whilst they slept: and
lest the men of war should be affrighted for Pilate: and so refuse to lie:
they prevent that: for say they, take no thought of Pilate: ye shall get no
harm: If he hear of this, we will persuade him, and so keep you
harmless. Well, these men were once disappointed, and yet leave they off? No,
they will have His glory and Resurrection smoothered: and because they could
not get it by violence, now, they will smoother it by craft: No, that thing
that they cannot do by violence, they shall seek to bring it about with
lies: No, think ye, that these Traitors and Apostate Lords do rest: No,
that thing that they could not get done by violence, they seek to do it by
craft.

Well, ye would marvel at this* ye would ask Whether or not they were
assured that the LORD JESUS was risen, and believed the report of the men of
war? I answer: It could not be, but they believed that He rose by a divine
power: No, it could not be but they thought it: and if they had thought that
the disciples had stolen His body away, they would have pursued them, and
gotten the body again. Then seeing the arm of GOD raised Him up, and they
knew that the Lord was risen: Is not this a wonder, that they repent not, but
will oppone them to the power of God? No, wonder not at it. Men, who have once
begun to fight against the Holy Spirit, and God Himself immediately, can
scarcely ever repent, and turn back again, but rather goes forward to
fulfill their sins, as the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. the wrath of God is
come upon them to the full. This is not the first time they fought against God
immediately, but they had often times done so before, and beginning, they leave
not off, but go forward. So, learn this lesson: mark how dangerous a thing
it is, once to begin to oppone thy self to God: if thou beginnest once to
oppone thy self against that Majesty, the wrath of God shall so sease on
thee, that thou shall not get leave to go back, till thou be shut in hell:
So Steven Acts 7.31. speaks of these same Jews: O stiffenecked people! ye
ever resist the Holy Spirit: that is, as ye have begun to sin against that
Holy Spirit, so ye continue, ye cannot go back again: So that they are set
out as a spectacle of Gods judgment: and it should learn us to tremble, once
to think evil against that Holy Majesty: these people may be a document to
all them that oppone themselves to Him. The Lord save us from all sins, but
namely, from this sin against the Holy Ghost, that can have no repentance.

Now to go forward: The soldiers against their own conscience, sell
themselves miserably to lie: and it was a wonder, that the Jews knew it not to
be a lie: the men who made this lie, were profane men of war, who commonly
use to have little godliness or religion. Indeed, I grant, the Lord has His
own of all sorts: but seldom find ye, that men of war are either good or
godly. Besides this, they were Ethnikes, and without God in the world: in a
word, they were profane hearted men: then what wonder was it, that they sell
their tongue and their conscience: No, if thine heart be profane, thou shall
soon sell thy tongue, and thy conscience to any man, and thou shall soon sell
thine hand to murder, albeit it were a King, as ye have heard of sundry. Our
Kings Majesty had need to take heed to this, that there be no profane men
about Him: for they will sell him, and his kingdom for a little price. It is
said of Esau, Heb. 12 16. He sold his birthright, he sold Heaven, he sold
his part of Paradise, for a mess of pottage. What was the ground of all this?
The Apostle says, Let no profane man be among you, as Esau: prophanitie was
the ground, and he brings in this, as an effect following prophanitie: if thou
be profane, thou will sell thy conscience: and I say, this merchandise of
buying and selling of consciences, that is so frequent in this Land, tells,
that this Land is ouerspread with prophanitie. The Apostle says, It is the
will of God, that ye be holy: but Scotland may say, farewell holiness: Alas,
if thou kept in thine heart holiness, thou will keep thy conscience: but if
thou be profane like Esau, thou will sell thy conscience for a penny: So, I
direct mine exhortation to all sorts of men: to Traffiquers, be not profane
but keep an holy heart, and thou shall keep a good conscience, and if thou be
a Judge, if thou be profane, thou will sell thy: conscience for a crown: art
thou a Marchand, if thou want an holy heart, thou will sell thy conscience:
a Minister, if his heart be not holy, he will soon sell his tongue, and his
conscience. So in a word, Let us strive with our conscience, to have an holy
heart: Alas, the ground of all this mischief in Scotland, is prophanitie of
hearts. When they have sold their tongue, they went, and said, He was stolen
away, and the Evangelists note it, That that fame remains amongst them unto
this day. I think, ye should marvel, that such a false fame should have
prevailed: God disappointed them before, but now He permits them to get the
victory. Woe to that victory that is gotten against God: woe to that man that
goes against God, if an evil action prosper with him, it is a token, that he
shall be thrust in Hell. This was but a small victory: for no doubt, all that
He appointed for life and salvation believed, that He rose. Now, Brethren,
when they are away, the true persuasion remains in our hearts, that the LORD
rose: so that ever truth in the end gets the victory. Ye would marvel that
the people should credit that His body was stolen out of the grave: for if it
was stolen, by whom was it stolen? They say, by His disciples: Is it likely,
that they who were a company of timorous and abashed persons, durst have come
out without armor against Pilates guarde: They say, whilst they were asleep,
they took it away: then they slept very sound, that they could not hear such
an hudge stone taken away, and if they were sleeping when it was taken away,
Why followed they not when they wakened: and no doubt, if it had been true,
they would have followed, and have brought the disciples, and executed them.
Ye would wonder now, why these people should not have believed: I answer,
These people were appointed for damnation, and they hated the light: and
therefore a lie gets soon place in their hearts: they that hate the truth,
the Devil cannot make such a lie, but they will easily believe it. What is the
cause, that the people believe the Pope, and that crew of the Antichristian
kingdom. The cause is this: They hate the light: and therefore, as the Apostle
says, Because they believed not the truth, the Lord makes them to believe
lies. So our lesson is this in a word: love the truth, and thou shall hate
lies: they hate the truth, and their hearts drink in lies. The Lord set our
hearts upon Him, and make us to believe the truth.

This for the first: we go to the second, and we shall enter in it, and leave
the rest till the next day, because the time is almost spent already. We come
again to better and more holy witnesses: There are two of the disciples of
Christ, the name of the one is Cleopas, and the name of the other is not
expressed: these were not two of the eleven disciples, but two of the common
rank of disciples that used to follow the Lord. The same day, says the Text,
to wit, the same day that He rose, the same day that the women went out, and
did meet Him, and that same day, that these women returned and preached to the
Apostles: These two disciples went on their journey, about threescore furlongs,
which is seven mile of ours, or thereabout from Jerusalem: They are not going
to seek Christ, but they leave Him, and as it were in a manner, they despared
that ever they should see Him, and they were thinking all that time that they
had spent with Him, was lost: yet suppose they were leaving Him, He leaves not
them: These women sought Him, and they found Him: but these two disciples leave
Him: but yet the Lord castes Him in their way. Well, Brethren, who ever finds
the Lord, man, or woman, it is of grace: if thou have found the Lord, thou have
gotten mercy, thou have found mercy: for if thou find Him, thou have found
Him, ere ever thou have sought Him: or else if thou have sought Him, thou have
not sought Him as thou ought: for Marie sought Him not as she should have
done: and therefore the Angel said, Why seek thou the living amongst the
dead? So thou that seek Him not, and find Him, thank GOD: and thou that
seek Him, and seek Him not as thou ought to have sought Him, if thou
find Him, thank Him: for it is of grace that thou find Him: for if He
looked how thou soughtest Him, thou would never find Him. We fail often
in seeking of Him: either we seek Him not with that measure of desire that
we ought, (alas, the best of us all in this world, cannot seek Him with half
a great desire) or if we seek Him, we fail, as the women did. And last of
all, we seek Him not for that end we should seek Him. We should seek Him
for that life and that grace that is in Him, that we might be like Him, and
partakers of that life. But all men for the most part seek Him for some
worldly respect, as for a deliverance out of misery: and if thou be sick,
thou vvilt cry for thy health: and if thou be poor, thou vvilt cry for
riches: and if thou be hungry, thou will cry for meat: So that the seeking
of Him is either for the belly, or some other worldly thing: scarcely one
among an hundredth will seek the Lord for himself, for Heaven and glory: and
if one can come thus far to get a groan for Heaven, that will be in a sober
measure, and with a great imperfection. We are by nature addicted to the
things that are on the earth, and for them do we seek them: but Heavenly
things, that cannot be seen, we seek them not, we think them but
folly. So I say, if we get a desire, we get it with such an imperfection,
that it is a wonder. The thing that thou and I should most seek for, is that
second coming of CHRIST, to put an end to this misery that is within us,
and without us: so that this should be our saying, Come LORD JESUS, and put
an end to this misery. But who cries for this coming? Yea, rather I hear
men say, God keep me from that day. Alas! know thou not, that thy misery
shall never have an end until that day? The Apostle PAVL says, We that
have gotten the first fruits of the Spirit, we sigh in our selves, waiting
for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies, Roman. Chapt. 8. verse. 23.
We are now the Sons of GOD, but it appears not what shall be: but then
it shall appear what thou art. Now the Godlyest is in most misery: And
alas, it appears, that the best of us has that SPIRIT but soberlie, and not
in that measure that we should have. And if we had it, we would sigh and
cry, Come LORD JESUS come: that word would never go out of our mouths, and
our eyes would never be from the Heavens, to look when our Lord would come and
break their clouds, and these visible Heavens, and then take thee to Himself
out of this veil of misery, to that endless joy. So to come to our purpose:
Whether we see Him first, or last, it is of grace, that all glory may redound
to Him.

Well, as they are journeying betwixt Jerusalem and Emmaus, they are talking
as two men use to talk together, and all their talk was of CHRIST, and His
crucifying: for this was but the third day after He was crucified. Ye see,
Brethren, for all this leaving of the LORD, and desparing ever to see Him: yet
here is a piece of godliness in their hearts, and a sponke of Hope that
keeps them, that they drowned not into despare: for if they had not prevented,
they would have perished with the rest of the Jews: and as they are thus
wrestling betwixt Hope and Despare, the Lord takes them by the hand, to help
them. It is a good thing, to have, if it were but one sponke of grace: yea, if
it were but to speak of Him: For none can call Jesus the Lord, as the Apostle
says, except he have gotteen the Spirit of Christ. So, hold on, and speak of
Him, if thou can do no more.

Yet to go forward: When they are talking, He comes in, and goes with them:
Mark it, This is an argument, that the Lord heard what they were speaking, and
as He hears them, He joins with them side for side. Well, take heed to
thine heart, and to thy words, The Lord is nearer to thee than thou think:
walk, as if thou werest speaking to Him, and as if He heard thee, or saw thee:
and when thou speak, abhor not the presence of the Lord: Thou that wilt
run to an hole, wilt abhor His presence: but ay say this, Lord be present
at my speaking, what means all this baudrie talk and blasphemy? Even this,
Thou seek not to have thine heart sanctified by the presence of thy God: so,
if thou will speak, say, Lord, be into mine heart, and Lord, rule my tongue,
and open my mouth, and then when He opens thy mouth, gracious words will come
out. So in a word, seek that presence to sanctify your speech and actions. It
is said, when He joins with them, Their eyes are so bound up, that they could
not know Him: They know not His face, nor His voice: Mark says, That he
appeared to them in another form, and Luke sets down in plain words how
this was, to wit, not that He was of a diverse form indeed, but because their
eyes were holden, and closed, that they could not know Him, so the change was
in them, and not in Him, He remained in one form, and was ever like Himself:
in all His appearance He never altered His presence, but He altered their eyes
that beheld and looked upon Him. I think some of you would ask. In what
form appeared He? Was He naked? The soldiers got His clothes, Whether was
He naked or not? No, I think not that He was naked, but He appeared with His
Ioynes girded, as a man addressed to a journey, as He appeared to Marie cled
like a Gardener: yet ye will ask, had He indeed clothes on Him or not: I
have no warrant of that: always He appeared to them to be clothed indeed, and
they thought He had cloths on Him: these men thought He had clothes on: for
their eyes were bound up. It is a wonder that they could not know Him, nor His
voice, He altered not His voice, and yet they could not know Him: albeit it be
natural by the sight of the eye to know one with who^ we are acquainted, and
it is natural by the ear to know the voice: yet this place lets us see, that
the Lord has a commandment of these gifts: and when He says, look that
thou see not, thou shall not see: and if He say to thee, look that thou know
not thy father, thou shall not know him: and more, if He say, know not the
voice of thy wife, thou shall not know her voice. All this tends to this, We
should beg our eyes, our ears, and all at the hands of God, and ay for that
gift that thou have, thank God heartily, and say, Lord, I thank thee for this,
that I can know the voice of one creature from another: so all our lifetime
should be a begging of His gifts, and if we move, we should thank our God.
Now, if we should beg this natural sight, that we have, much more are we bound
to beg the thing we have not, to beg a spiritual eye to see heavenly things,
and then when thou gettest it, thou should render thanks to Him. Now of
graces this is the best, that the Lord gives, an eye to see that life, for if
thou gettest one blencke, certainly thou shall see Heaven, and that joy and
glory, at the which one day, thou shall wonder. Now, glory be given to Him
for all His gifts: and even for this, that He has given us these bodily
eyes, I beseech Him to give every one of us spiritual eyes, that we may get a
blencke of Him here, and in the Heavens enjoy His presence for evermore,
through Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all
praise, and honor, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XXXVII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.








IN this History of the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST (well-beloved in Him) we
have heard hitherto of sundry witnesses, testifying His Resurrection from the
death: The Angels began, and they testified His Resurrection to the women: The
women testified it to the Disciples, who were conuened at Jerusalem, and
namely to Peter and John. Then MARIE came forth the second time, and she
meets with the LORD. Then there are other women, who came forth, and meets
with the LORD. And after these women, there comes other witnesses, to wit,
enemies, who were sent to watch the grave by PILATE, and the High Priests, and
they witnessed, That He was risen. But they sold their tongues to the high
Priests, and the JEWS, to make a lie, and to affirm, that the LORDS
DISCIPLES had come in the night, and stolen away His body while they slept:
And after these vvitnesses, ye heard the last day, we returned to other two
vvitnesses, who both were the Disciples of the LORD; the one is named
CLEOPAS, but the name of the other is not expressed. These two even in a
manner, despairing that ever they should see the LORD, they depart out of
Jerusalem, where they were with the rest of the Disciples, to a Village not
far off, called EMMAVS, and they were talking by the way of the things
which immediately had fallen out before. The Lord, who saw them, and heard
them, addresses Himself shortly to them, and goes with them, as a passenger
going out the way: and He binds up their eyes, so that they could not know
nor discern Him, suppose they had followed Him* and had been with Him long
time before. Thus far we heard the last day. Now we follow out the rest
of this History: and in this Text which presently we have read, we have the
communication which was betwixt the Lord and them, while they went out the
way, they knew Him not, and He makes Him not to know them: so each one of
them is a stranger to others. The Lord begins the conference, and He
demaundes of them first, What manner of communication it was that they had,
while as they were in the way? And next, seeing their countenance sad, He
demaundes of them, Wherefore they were so sad? These are the two things which
He demanded of them. Now to note something of them. As they walked out the
way, ye see they have been sad, and their speech and communication by
appearance has been a monefull complaint, which they made concerning CHRIST:
Not vain and idle talk, nor rejoicing in the tidinges: but all their talk
and speech came from sad and heavy hearts. But whilst they are sad, the
LORD comes to them, and He comes to comfort them. Well is that soul that is
sad and mournes for Christ, and His Kirk: for that soul shall get
consolation out of Christ's mouth. But if where there is matter of mourning,
thou be merry, then the Lord will not come to comfort thee. It is true, these
men were sad for Christ without a cause, for that was the most joyefull day
that ever was, and therefore, they should especially have been joyefull that
day: yet suppose they were sad without a cause, the Lord comes and comforts
them. No, it is better thou be sad for Christ for a matter that is joyful,
than to be glad in a sad matter: choose rather to be sad for Christ,
than to be merry or over wanton: And if thou be sad, albeit there be no
matter, the LORD will pity thee: but if thou laugh, rejoice, and take thy
pastime, the LORD will let thee laugh on for a time, but He will leave thee
destitute of all consolation when thou have need of it. I tell you this aye,
There is no matter of laughing in this miserable Land: it were better for us
to mourn, and to be sad for sin, that we might get comfort from GOD.

Now to come forward. CHRIST perceiving these men to be sad, H^e draws
near unto them, and He asks the cause of their heaviness, and what moved
them to be so sad? and He desires them to reueile their moan and care unto
Him. Suppose He makes Himself unknown unto them, and speaks to them as
though He had no care, yet no question this is His will that they should
reveal the cause of their care and sadness unto Him, that they might find
comfort in Him.

Brethren, are ye sinners, are your hearts filled with care, it is the will
of thy GOD and Savior JESUS CHRIST, that thou pour out thine heart to Him,
and let Him see thy sadness. Mark this. It is no small matter to know GODS
will: we are slow and sloathfull to turn us: we will consume our selves,
and pine away in our sorrow and grief, ere we make our complaint and moan
unto Him, who only may furnishe us with consolation: and He knows us well
enough: and therefore He awaites not, till we first reveal our griefs unto
Him, and pour them into His bosom: but He prouokes us first, and He will
enter in, and seek them out, as ye will hear: He sought them out of these
men with great difficulty. Come ye to me, (says Christ, Matthew. 11.28.) all
ye that are weary, and I shall refr^sh you: I here is His will: If thou be
wearied, come to Him, and get rest and ease to thy soul. If thou go not to
Him, thou shall never get rest nor ease, whether thy trouble be within thee,
or without thee. Yea, not only by word inuites and prouokes He us, but also
by His doing He draws us, Ioh. Chap. 6. verse. 44. there He says, No man can
come to me, except the Father draw him. It is His will, that thou should
come unto Him: but if He put not out His hand, and draw thee, thou vvilt
never come to Him in all thy life time. And therefore, whensoever ye hear
this voice, Sinner, come unto me: then say this again unto the LORD, LORD
draw me, put thine hand to mine heart, and draw me, or else J cannot come
to thee. No, except the Lord put out His hand, and draw thine heart to Him,
thou art not come. All the Kings in the world are not able to draw a sinner,
except GOD only. Now consider their answer, and see this communing: The one
named Cleopas, takes the speech in hand, (the other disciple is silent) and he
answers the Lord very roughly, not knowing with whom he had to do,
thinking Him to have been a passenger, and stranger, walking out of the way,
he says unto Him, Art thou a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the
things which have fallen out within these few days. In these words,
(because he took the Lord to be a stranger and passenger, going out of the
way) ye cannot blame him in making such an answer: And as he took him to
be a stranger, he answers well: for when such wonderful works fall out in
any Countreye, it becomes no man to be ignorant of the wonderful works of
GOD: and if ever there was a wonderful work, that work of the Crucifying of
the Lord was most wonderful: And if thou be ignorant of the wonderful
works of GOD, thou merits a rebuke: And as Cleopas marueiled, so will the
godly marvel at thee, who can neither be seeing nor hearing, nor consider
the wonderful works of GOD. It is a wonder to see the illumination of a
sinner, and the conversion of the heart of a man to GOD, and to see a
regenerate man: yea, the raising of a dead man to life, is not so marvelous,
as is the quickening of thee, who art dead in sin and trespasses, as the
Apostle PAVLE says, to the EPHESIANS. Chap. 1. verse. 21. And as the quikening and
illumination of a sinner is a wonder, so also the blinding of a sinner is a
wonder. Is it not marvelous, that though thou cry to him as thou will, and
albeit heaven and earth should go together, he will neither hear nor see?
As the Lord is more than wonderful to his own in mercy, to cause them to
here and see, (thou wonderest little at his mercy, but all the Angels wonder
at it,) even so in blinding and hardening of the wicked, the LORD is
wonderful. Sit thou here now, and see not, nor hear not the LORD?
All the world may wonder at thee. So the LORD may be wondered at, either
in mercy to his own, or in justice to the wicked: as The Apostle speaking in the
eleventh Chap. to the Romans, he wonders at it, and from morning till evening
we should vvonder at that God and his works, at that mighty GOD, whom the
Prophet calls Deum admirabilem.

To go forward. The Lord, who knew all things, (for all things are naked to
His eyes) He knew better what was done, than Cleopas did, yet He will not take
upon Him that He knevv, He misknowes them, and He asks: What are these
things: Mark it, Brethren: He got a rough and sharp answer before, and yet
He leaves not off, He will not leave them, but He bears with their
infirmities, and now He gives another pull to the heart, and deals again
with them, that they should power out their sadness and grief to Him: No,
if thou pertainest to the Lord, He will not leave thee for an hard meeting:
and suppose thou dravvest abacke, He will give thee another pull, Albeit we
be unfaithful, says the Apostle, yet the Lord abides faithful: Change as
thou will, the Lord shall never change, but remain ay constant in mercy to
His own till they be perfected, and crowned with glory. Then Cleopas
seeing him to be troubled with a stranger, at the last he must tell the
words that he and his companion were speaking, as they went on the way:
Mark this lesson: Repine as thou vvilt, when the Lord draws thee, at the
last thou must yield* But what is the cause, that any sinners will yield
when the Lord draws? Even the secret operation of His Holy Spirit: and if he
that drew them by the word, had not a secret power and operation by His
Spirit in their hearts, they would never have yielded. Albeit the LORD would
prove them by speech and language, albeit He would exhort them, admonish
them, threaten them: yea, and scourge them to come to Him: and well is the
soul, albeit it be scourged, yea if it were harled thorovv the mids of
Hell, if it were through never so great difficulties in the world, if once it
get grace to come to Him: yet none outward thing will make us to come to Him,
it is the inward draught of His Spirit, that makes us to come to Him, and
draws us by the eye, by the ear, and by the hand: if He take us not by the
hand, we can never come to Him. It is said in the 2. Chapter to the Romans,
and the 4. verse, He draws the reprobate, and calls them, but all that
calling is but outward: He will scourge them, and dravv them outwardly, but
He never puts the feeling of His holy Spirit in their hearts, and so they can
never come to Him: and therefore when the Lord is outwardly drawing and
calling thee, say always this, Lord, draw thou mine heart inwardly by thine
Holy Spirit, or else, it will be long ere it come to thee, if all the
sicknesses, all crosses, troubles, scourges, judgments that can be, and all
this preaching that I hear, will never cause me come to thee, except thou
draw mine heart. Now to come to the words that Cleopas speaks: there is none
of them, but they would be marked: he begins and rehearses to Him the whole
sum of these things that he and his companion had been speaking, and he
propones them summarily, and he says, All the things we have spoken, was
Concerning Jesus of Nazareth. Alas, few of us take pleasure to talk of Him:
therefore when the Lord comes and takes thee by the hand: look thou may
say, Lord, I have been talking of thee in some measure: for as sure as the Lord
laid to His ear to hear, what Cleopas, and his companion talked, as sure He
lays to His ear, to hear what thou speak. Then when he has told the
general, he lets the stranger know what a man Jesus was, and then he tells
shortly, what had befallen him these two days, and after he speaks of the
effects that it had wrought in his heart, and in the hearts of His disciples,
to wit, that He was no Redeemer. This is the whole conference, and I shall go
thorovv this conference, as God shall give the grace, and as time shall permit:
First, in describing of Him, he calls Him Jesus of Nazareth, That was the
style he gave Him: Mark it: The first thing that he speaks to Him, is an
untruth: he calls Him Jesus of Nazareth No doubt, he thought He had been
borne at Nazareth, suppose they had the Prophecy, that He should be borne at
Bethlehem in Judah, Micah Chapters. verse 2. and that He was borne there. The
ground of this error that was amongst the Jews, was because of Joseph and
Marie dwelt at Nazareth, and Jesus was brought up there with them, that false
rumor spread, that Joseph was His father, and that He was borne there, but He
was not borne there.

I grant, it is true, that after His resurrection, Peter in the Acts, and the
Apostles themselves, called Him Jesus of Nazareth, as Cleopas here calls Him
Jesus of Nazareth.

Also Paul in the twenty six Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the
ninth verse, calls Him Jesus of Nazareth, but neither Peter, nor Paul spoke
this of ignorance, as if He had been borne there, but because they to whom
they spoke, knew Him best under that name, they submitted themselves to their
capacity.

But as for Cleopas, he knevve no better: for he thought indeed, that Jesus
had been borne at Nazareth: so the first word he speaks, is plain untruth:
so ye see what it is to judge with the multitude: The Papists will send thee
to believe that which the multitude believes, and makes the multitude a token
of the true Church: but thou shall be beguiled with the multitude, and if thou
follovvest them, because they walk in the broad way, thou shall perish with
them.

Next, consider His description, He calls Him, Vir Propheta. Indeed He
failed not in this style, He was a man, and was a man indeed, blood, and
bone, as we are: yet there is a defect in this word, Cleopas knew no more,
but that He was a man, he knew not that He was GOD and man in one person. It
is true, Peter in the 2. of the Acts, calls Him Vir Propheta: yet he knew
He was the Son of GOD, blessed for ever: so as in the first words, there is
an untruth, so in the next words there is a defect, I mark this, to let you
see the ignorance that was in them, before the LORD ascended to the Heaven. It
was a wonder, that they who walked so long with Him, should have been so
ignorant: the third time he calls Him A Prophet. Indeed He was such a
Prophet, as was never before, nor after Him: yet there is a fault here, he
gives Him the greatest style he thought He had, but He had far greater
styles: for He is not a Prophet only, but also a Mediator, King, and High
Priest: Then he comes on, and he tells what a Prophet He was, saying, that
He was powerful in word and deed. Now would to GOD we could speak of Him
in love, with this poor man that had little knowledge: indeed in this style
he would let us see, that there was never such an one in word, nor work:
never one wrought such miracles as He did, and never man spoke, as He did, as
His own very enemies testified of Him, John Chapter 7. yet will ye measure it
with the knowledge of the man, there is a defect here also, he thought He had
been like the rest of the Prophets, who prophesied not by their own spirit,
but by the Spirit of JESUS, yet was he ignorant that JESUS spoke and wrought
all by His own Spirit. Why should we not know these things: This is the
difference between CHRIST, and all the Prophets: all these Prophets, and
Moses himself were but servants: they spoke never a word by their spirit,
but by the Spirit of CHRIST, as Peter speaks in the first Epistle: Spoke
Moses, Esaias, or Ezechiell in their own name? Dare any Minister speak in his
own name: No, not under pain of his life, but JESUS is called the LORD of the
house. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, the third Chapter, He spoke by His own
Spirit, and these preachings were preached by His own Spirit, and He spoke by
His own authority, as ye may read in the seventh Chapter of Matthew.

An Herald, if He speaks in his name, should be hanged, but the King
himself will speak in his own name: the LORD spoke in His own Name, but the
Prophets spoke not in their own name: read these Prophecies, They say there,
Thus says the LORD: but ye shall find thus, when Christ comes, He says,
Amen, amen, dico vobis: Verily, verily J say unto you, in mine own Name and
authority, and not in my Fathers only: This Cleopas knew not, but counted Him
a Prophet like others, albeit more excellent than others: Cleopas thought He
was potent by the Spirit of GOD, and so by another: but he knew not, that He
spoke in His own Name, and by His own authority, being equal with the
Father.

Now to be short, he says, He was mighty before GOD and the whole people,
That is to say, He had the approbation of the LORD from the Heaven, and what
ever He spoke, the LORD approved it: what ever He did, His Father approved
it. Then again, He did never an action, but with the approbation of the
people: But it would be asked, How approved they Him, seeing they persecuted
Him, scorned Him, and crucified Him? I answer: Albeit that neither by word nor
deed the Jews, nor the High Priests had approved Him: yet the conscience of
the same High Priests, and Jews approved Him, and bare witness to them that
He was GOD, so that sometimes they were compelled to say, Never man spoke as
He did, John Chapter 6. verse 46. and sometimes again, since the world
began, was it not heard, that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne
blind, John Chapter 9. verse 32.

So that all that they did to Him, was against conscience. I regard not what
thou do to me, if thou be bound in conscience to testify, that that is
true which I speak, and that is good which I do: for in that day, thou who
speak against thy conscience, shall not have one word to speak: thy
conscience shall bind up thy mouth: so this is well said, that He had the
approbation both of GOD, and man: but he thought He had this approbation as
one of the Prophets, suppose in a greater measure.

But look the first Chapter to the Hebrews, and the fifth verse: For unto
which of the Angels said he at any time, (let be Prophets) Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee? Then he knew not that he had that
approbation of that God who dwelt in him, God in him approved him. Roman.
Chap. 1. verse. 4. it is said, He was declared mightily to be the Son of
GOD. And 1. Timothy, Chap. 3. verse. 16. He was justified by the Spirit. And
again it is said, Acts Chap. 2. verse. 22. Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved
of God among you, with great works, and wonders, and signs, which God did by
him in the midst of you. Cleopas knew little of this.

Now, Brethren, we have examined his words, and ye see here a great
ignorance: In the first words an untruth, and ye see in all the words
following there is some want. And to whom is it that he preaches? He
preaches Christ to Christ, and he describes the Lord to the Lord: and yet
the Lord hears him patiently. Ye will not believe how He will hear thy
babbling, if in thine heart thou have a love to GOD: suppose thou babble He
will hear thee, and if thou speak with love, suppose thou can not pray as
other men and women can: Babble on to Him, and speak on with a good heart, He
will no more reject thee, than He did Cleopas: He is aye like to Himself.
For what is all our language to Him, but a babbling: yea, all our knowledge is
but babbling. So suppose we have not knowledge, nor a tongue to speak, yet
let us not leave off to speak in love, and with our hearts, and He shall
hear us, and give us a comfortable answer. Now I counted never so much of
knowledge, as of an heart which loves God: Keep an heart to thy God: come
with faith and love to thy God, and thou will not think how He will delight
in thee: if we come with love to the Lord, then we come boldly to the
Throne of grace. And why? Because we come not in our own righteousness, or
in our own perfection: we appear only in the merits of JESUS CHRIST: And
suppose thou babble and be ignorant, yet if thou appear in Him, thou art full
of knowledge: for His knowledge the Lord countes to be thine. O, what is it
to be in Christ! He who has Christ, has all, though he were never so
vveake, he is strong in Him, My power, says the Lord, is perfect in
infirmity. And therefore, says Paul, I will glory in my infirmity, that the
power of God may be seen in me. 2. Cor. 12. Now a word, and so I end.
Cleopas begins to tell what was befallen to such a personage, who was
mighty in word and deed: yet for all this, they handled Him most unworthily
of any man, Our Priests and rulers, as PILATE first, they condemned Him to the
death, without a cause, and next, they have crucified Him: if ye consider well
the words, ye will find, that He speaks to them with a vvonderfull
indignation, as if He had said,: albeit He was such a man, and so great a man
in all respects, yet they condemned Him without a cause, and then they
crucified Him. And what indignity was this, for as the Apostle says, Albeit
He was the LORD of glory, yet most shamefully they crucified Him, 1. Cor.
Chapter second, and the eight verse: Well, take up this in His words, What
ever is done against Christ, it is an indignity, if we knew that Majesty we
offend: if we saw* Him, we would count the least evil thought to be indignity
against Him, by reason of the worthiness of His person. What ever was done
against Christ, it was indignity: No, this world was not vvorthie of Him: and
I say more, what ever evil is done to His members for His cause, it is an
indignity, because there is a dignity in them.

It is another kind of thing to use a Christian man, as thou will, than to use
a Turk: thou think it a small thing to stick him: yet one day thou shall
know that he is a worthy personage: especially, if he suffer for Christ.

Take heed what the Apostle says, They crucified the King of glory, and the
Lord of life: how agree these two together, the King of glory, and then, to be
crucified: He countes that the greatest indignity was done to Him, that ever
was done in the world: Then the Apostle says of His Saints, Heb. 11. They
have persecuted them, and slain them with the sword, whom the world was not
worthy of: And I say more, The godly, who see the worthiness of Jesus Christ,
and of His Saints, and then s^es the indignity that is done against JESUS
CHRIST, and His Saints, it is no vvonder that they cannot comport with it.

Villane, if thou werest a King, that regardest not to offend Him, they cannot
comporte with thee, the offending of Him is the sorest vvound that ever came to
their hearts: and when they see any thing done against His Saints, they
cannot comport with it: No, it could not be possible, that the godly could
comport, or suffer these things unless they knew all these things were done by
His providence. O villane, who boastest thou will do to the Saints of God,
what thou please, what art thou but His rod, and thou shall be casten into
the fire: and suppose thou set thy self against His glory, yet He shall
make thee, in despite of thine heart, to serve to His glory. Then thou, who
art the child of GOD, in such cases, should say, I see the finger of GOD
in this, for this tyranny could do nothing, without the providence of my
GOD. Look how PETER speaks in the ACTS, Chap. 2. verse. 23. he says, They
crucified him: But this is his comfort, That they did nothing, but according to
the determinate counsel of GOD. And the godly know, that all comes from Him,
and for His glory, and thou that vvilt not glorify Him, He shall be
glorified in thy destruction, and shame everlasting. Now to this glorious and
blessed GOD, be glory for ever and ever: AMEN.

THE XXXVIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.












WE continue yet (BRETHREN) in this History concerning the two Disciples of
CHRIST, who that same day of His Resurrection, (not knowing of it) went out
from the rest of the Disciples, that were conuened at Jerusalem, to a Village
called EMMAVS, not far from Jerusalem. We have heard of their outgoing, and
of their meeting with Christ: howbeit He knew them, yet He let them not
know that He knew them: but He bound up their senses, their eyes, and
their ears, that when they looked to Him, and heard Him speak, they knew
him not: but they took him to be a passenger: and no question he appeared
unto them in the habit and vveede of a passenger. And meeting with them, he
asks, what was their communication, and wherefore they were so sad, and
discomforted? One of them, named CLEOPAS, takes the speech in hand, and
begins to speak roughly unto Christ, That he was come from Jerusalem,
and knew not these things which were fallen out within few days. It is
half a refusal of an answer. Yet the Lord will not leave them off, but he
asks, What are these things which have fallen out? He answers, OF JESUS OF
NAZARETH. Of him is the whole sum of their talk. Then he comes on, and he
makes it more clear, to the passenger, as he thought: and first he lets him
see what a man Jesus was. There was never such a man: He was a Prophet,
mighty in word and deed. No man ever spoke as he spoke, and no man ever
wrought such miracles as he wrought: so that he had an approbation both of
God and man. Then next, he comes to these things which had befallen so
vvorthie a person, such indignity as never was seen: he says, Our high
Priests and Rulers have condemned him to die, and have dispatched him by the
most vile and ignominious death that could be: They have crucified that
Prophet that was mighty in word and deed, like a villane. Thus far
hitherto.

Now the rest of this narration that follows, contains three parts: the
History is plain, and therefore we shall go shortly through it, Cleopas
gathers a sore and a comfortless conclusion upon the crucifying of Christ, a
conclusion of desparing* that Jesus should have redeemed the world: it is said,
We hoped that he should have redeemed Israel from their sins: But now He is
taken away, and He is dead, and therefore our hope is gone, and we can look no
more for Him to be our Redeemer.

Mark this, if he reasones well or not, Jesus is crucified, and therefore He
cannot be our Redeemer, we cannot hope that ever He shall redeem the world: By
the contrary, he should have reasoned, JESUS is crucified, and therefore He
is the Redeemer: for as the Apostle Heb. Chapter 9. and twenty two verse
says, Without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins: for if He
had not suffered, He could not have been the Redeemer, and have redeemed us:
but Cleopas and the other, knew not what the Redeemer should have suffered,
they knew not what the Redeemer meant, and therefore being deceived with the
false opinion that the people had concerning the Messiah, that He should be
like a King, Julius Caesar, the Emperor by an earthly power, to deliver them
from the tyranny of the Romans.

This false opinion made them to gather this, that He could not be the
Redeemer, seeing that He was crucified. And indeed if this ground that they
laid, had been true, He could not have delivered them being crucified. I
spoke of this the last day, if thou followest the multitude, and beleeuest (as
the Papists bid thee) as the multitude believe, and close thine eyes, thou
shall perish with the multitude. They will say, What ado have thou with the
Bible, thou have no more ado, but believe as the Church believes* but I say
unto thee, It shall happen unto thee, as it happened unto Cleopas: That thing
that should be the matter of hope, it shall cut thee from hope, as it did this
poor man Cleopas, yea, I say further, if thou beleeuest with the multitude,
thou shall perish with the multitude. Fie, is not that rabble ashamed of this
light, fie upon them: No, the vengeance from Heaven shall light upon them,
except they repent.

Now to come to the second part of the narration that he makes: ye have
heard his conclusion: But now says Cleopas, This is the third day since he
was crucified and dead: Yet we hear nothing: As he would say, once dead and
ay dead: Mark what he would gather of this: It is the third day since he
died, and we have not seen him, alas, I fear we shall never see him again:
alas, he will never redeem Israel: He dare not speak this right out, but
he keeps it in his mind. Is this a good conclusion, It is the third day
since he died, therefore he cannot redeem Israel? He should have concluded,
It is the third day, since he died, therefore he is risen in glory, to be
the Redeemer of Jsrael. But the ignorant man knew not the Scriptures of GOD,
as Christ says to him hereafter: for Christ had foretold, that he would
rise the third day, and yet he had forgotten it: and so he concludes, I
shall never see him: and he cannot be the Redeemer. Then ye see what it is to
be ignorant of the Scriptures of GOD, and to forgette them: There is nothing
concerning Christ, but it is fully set down in the old and new TESTAMENTES:
So that if an Angel would come down from Heaven, he can tell no more in
substance. Yet if thou will not look to them, but close thine eyes that thou
see not, and stop thine ears, that thou hear not, and so forget them again
before thou be well out of the Kirk; it is a wonder, that thou should
get any matter of hope. No, thou shall find nothing but matter of
desparation. Whosoever therefore vvoulde have matter of joye in the heart, and
have joye in their distress, let them always have the Scriptures before their
eyes. What needed these men to have been troubled, if they had kept the
Scriptures before their eyes? So in a word: As thou would have joye in
trouble, keep the Scriptures in thy memory, for there is no joye, but in
these Scriptures.

Now to go forward to the third part of this Narration of Cleopas,
concerning Christ. Before he comes to it, he makes a rehearsal of these same
things which had happened that same day in the morning: for on the third day
in the morning, there went out some women (he himself was not so ready: it had
been better for himself to have said, I went out to the grave* and I saw, and
I heard this) and they have made us, the Disciples of Christ, all astonished: for
they told us, that they found not the body of CHRIST: But they told us that
they found Angels, and that the Lord was risen, and alive: but for all this
we believed not. Then some of us who were men, namely Peter and John, who went
out, and they found this, that the LORD was out of the grave. But mark his
last words, But none of them saw the LORD. Alas, these two DISCIPLES
apparantlie has come out of HIERVSALEM, ere MARIE MAGDALENE, and some other
women, who went out that same day, had returned, and showed, that they had
seen the Lord. They went away over soon to Emmaus. But look what he
concluded: They saw Him not, therefore He was not risen: This is it that they
would conclude, Because they could not see Him with their bodily eyes, therefore
they looked never to see Him: As if we should have measured the Redeemer, and
the Redemption by gross and carnal senses. Look if he concluded well? He
should have concluded the contrary, We could not see Him with our eyes and
senses, and therefore we believe He is the Redeemer: That is the conclusion
that He should have gathered: for faith is the demonstration of things which
are not seen as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 11.1. This is a false conclusion,
We cannot see Him with our bodily eyes, therefore we cannot hope to see
Him. But by the contrary, We cannot see Him with our bodily eyes, therefore
we believe and hope to see Him. Then we see this in CLEOPAS, and his fellow:
suppose they were with CHRIST, and should have had an eye to have seen: yet
they are mere carnal: for leaning only to the senses of the body, they are
more natural than spiritual: and so they conclude, They should never see the
Lord: for suppose they spoke not this with their mouths, yet they thought it
in their hearts, and they were standing betwixt hope and despair. No, if thou
be but a natural man, thou shall believe nothing, but that which thou
conceiuest and feel with thy senses: but for Heavenly things, thou can
not believe them: Heaven and Hell will be but fables to thee, and all will be
but folly unto thee. There are enough of these men in this Town: and
therefore, as ever thou would see Heaven, as thou would live hereafter,
and as thou would reign in glory, seek to have spiritual senses, which
may pass far beyond nature: a spiritual eye to see things Heavenly, and
a spiritual hand to feel things Heavenly, or else thou shall die and
perish, and thou shall never have life hereafter. Then in time, seek to be
spiritual, and to seek Heaven and Heavenly things. A bodily eye will never
perceive these things. Ye see then, how false a conclusion he has
gathered. Yet I perceive in the last part of his narration, something that
smelles of the hope of Resurrection: an impediment in his heart, he is near
to despair: almost he has given over both faith, and hope of CHRIST, that
ever they should see Him: yet he is fleeting above, he swatters and swimmes,
he gives not clean over, he drownes not altogether: but, as ye may
perceive, a sponke of faith and hope remains in him: and it bears him so
above, that he says not, I despair. And where got he this? Even of the
report of the women: suppose he believed not them, yet he durst not say,
that they lied, or that it was untrue that they spoke. Well, it is always good
to hear of CHRIST, and if it were but a woman to speak of Him: for in the
day of thy trouble, yea, if thou were betwixt hope and despair, that thing
which thou have heard, will be brought to thy remembrance, and keep thee
from despair: But thou who have not heard, thou shall perish: and thou who
have heard, suppose thou beleeuedst not at the first, and conceiuedst it not:
yet when thou art at the brinke of desparation, that shall hold thee above,
thou gettest further information.

Now go to the rest. We have heard this preaching of Cleopas, to the
passenger as he supposed. Ye see he was careful to teach Him: and no
question, all that he knew of Christ, he told it* Learn this lesson at
Cleopas: All that knowledge which thou have of Christ, tell it to another: and
if thou have little, tell it to him that has nothing: and it may be, thou
shall get further information, as Cleopas did: for the stranger instructed him
in all things. Now CHRIST speaks, and He says to him, (not letting him
know that He was Christ) O fools! He that Christ calls a fool, is a fool
indeed: And if He call thee a fool, thou art one. And then He says, Slow
of heart to believe concerning Christ the Messiah. Before I come to the words,
behold the clemency and mercy of the Lord: These two men were rauing like
fools, or as men in a fever: suppose they were His Disciples, they utter a
plain distrust: and yet the Lord castes them not off: He saw a little spark
in them* He saw a sponke of faith, and He goes not to put it out. So that it
is true, that is spoken of Him, Esaias, Chap. 42. He never brake the bruised
reed, nor yet put out the smoking slaxe, but held it in, and quickened the
sponkes thereof, where he found it, till it came to a perfection. No, He
will never cast thee away for a little faith: but He will entertain it,
and of a sponke, He will make a fire.

Yet to come to the words: He says, Fools, mad men, without any mind.
And then He calls them, dull hearted. There are two things in man, A mind
to see, and a will to embrace that which he seees: As for their mind, they
were bereaved of mind: as for their will, they have not a will, nor an heart
to embrace it: So, mark, what misbeliefe is? Alas, it leaves not one part of
the whole, all the powers of the soul are vitiate by misbeliefe, Faith goes
through all the powers of the soul, it first stands in an illumination, and
sight of those things that concerns thy salvation, it decernes of things
heavenly, and then goes down to the heart, and makes it to embrace JESUS
CHRIST, and His benefits: even these heavenly things, that thou can not see
with the eyes of the body: Infidelity, by the contrary, begins and blindes
the mind of the infidel, that he sees not, nor cannot see nor discern of
things heavenly and spiritual: Albeit thou can never discern so well of
policy, as the Heathen could, yet in heavenly things thou art but mad, and
out of their minds: Christ would call thee vvood and mad: Look how Paul
calls all the Philosophers, 1. Romans In a word he calls them fools, and
then infidelity goes from the mind, and filles the heart, and makes the heart
astonished: if thou be an Infidel* thou art dull, and senseless: thou may
lay hold on the world, but if thou gettest no better, thou shall die in thy
dullness and senslessenesse. So, would thou know, whether thou art quick
or not, and of a good conceiving: Try not thy self by earthly things, and say
not, I understand the writing of this man, or that man, but if thou would
know, whether thou werest not dull and senseless or not, look if thou see
any thing in Heaven, and heavenly things, and then thou art not dull and
senseless: but if thou feel not heavenly things, albeit thou werest a King,
go thy way, thou art but a dull and senseless creature, the Ass, or the Dog
is better than thou: there the style He gives them, wood men and mad men,
without a mind. These men that can compass these things in the world,
think themselves quick: but I say to thee, in the Name of this JESUS, if
thou know not CHRIST, and heavenly things, thou art but a dull and
senseless man, and see not, nor understand no more, than an Ass.

Mark every word that He speaks, whilst He calls them slow to believe all
that the Prophets had spoken: He castes the Prophets in their teeth, He calls
them slow to believe, not this thing, or that thing, not this man, or that man,
but that which the Prophets had spoken.

It is evil, not to believe any that speaks the truth, but it is worse, not
to believe a Prophet. Any man that is sent, or called of God, if thou beleeuest
Him not, that same calling of the man, augments thy judgment: look to it, If
ye believe not a man that is called, that calling of his, shall augment thy
judgment. Then He says, Believe ye not the things that they have spoken to
you? hear thou many things, and is this word often beaten in thine ears,
and hear thou this day, the morn, and other morn, and yet, will thou not
believe, the more heavy is thy judgment, the more thou hear, if thou
purposest not to believe, the greater is thy judgment. I give thee my
counsel, if thou purposest not to believe, hear not a preaching, for all the
preachings that thou have heard, shall aggrauate thy judgment, and a thousand
times heavier shall thy judgment be, and better, that thou had heard never a
preaching, except thou purpose to believe. Mark this: He uses a sharp form of
rebuke, before He teach them, He tells them not what He was, He makes as
though He were a stranger, and yet He calls them fools, and slovve to
believe.

Take heed to this, ye that will not suffer your selves to be called
foolish, and will not suffer your heart to be launced, but ay would have
good words, and that will not hear your selves to be called fools: there
is the way to grace, there is the order of teaching, and hearing: and if thou
teach, call a fool, fool, albeit he we^e a King, call him mad, or else
thou vvilt beguile him, call a slow hearted body, foolish, that is the only
way to come to light and knowledge.

Thou that would preach, must do this, and thou that art an hearer: First,
thou must get a sense of thy misery, and that thou art but foolish, as ever
thou would see Christ, strive to get a sight of the blindness of thy
soul, and the hardness of thine heart: and if thou see thy blindness, and
misery, then thy desire will be vvakened, and thou would give ten thousand
Kingdoms to be out of that damnable estate.

Now, I shall be short: When H^e has begun thus roughly with them, and
has prepared their hearts to hear, then He begins to teach. Why should I
call thee a fool* and an hard hearted body* except it be to teach thee: So
He begins and teaches them a fair preaching, and no doubt, He made a large
discourse, but here it is summarilie gathered up: He lays down His
proposition, It behooued him to suffer, and to enter into his glory. There is
the necessity: It behooued that the Lord Jesus by many and sore sufferings
should enter into His glory. Mark this, who can tell it clearer than He
Himself told it? So I will tell it again, Jesus by His suffering beho^ued to
enter into His glory. JESUS CHRIST once leaving His glory, got no entry
again into it, till He was so inanited as never creature was. The LORD
puts to a necessity of suffering, saying, It behooued him to suffer: and so
say I, There was such a necessity laid upon Him, that He behooued to
suffer, and all the world could not save Him from it, being once come down
into this world. Therefore, the LORD by His Prophets had fore-tolde this
necessity, That he should suffer death: and therefore, seeing He
fore-telles it, it behooued him to suffer: All the world shall not bring it
back again. The Lord as He had fore-tolde it, so He had ordained it from
all eternity. Will thou call back again that that the LORD has decreede?
Thou may reduce the decree of man, but all the world cannot reduce the
decree of GOD. These are the causes of His suffering: but I shall come to a
lower and a subordinate cause: I say to thee, thy sin made this necessity.
The LORD taking upon Him the burden of thy sin, and becoming Mediator;
that immaculate Lamb, that had no sin, neither in body nor in soul, He
taking once the burden of our sin upon Him, He was, in a manner, holden out
of Heaven for a time, and He was made accursed: and therefore, before He
suffered for sin, He could not get entry into Heaven, for wheresoever sin
is, there is death, be it inherent within thee, if thou get not one to die for
thee, thou must die: for this is plain talk, (but would to God it were well
learned) death must ever follow sin, if thou lay it not on Him, and He die
not for thee, thou shall die for ever. Thou make but a pastime of harlotrie,
and murder, and theft: but I say, There is no satisfaction of thy harlotrie
and murder, but death: I say to thee, harlot, thou art dead: murderer, thou
art but dead: albeit thou be a lord, I tell thee, thou art but dead, if thou
get no relief in the Mediator, without satisfaction for thy sins, thou shall
never see Heaven. Christ saw not Heaven, after He took on our sin, till He was
dead, and offe^ed His blood. The high Priest durst not enter into Sanctum
sanctorum without a basen full of blood, under pain of death: Even so, Christ
entered not into heaven, but with his own blood: And if thy sin held an
innocent out of heaven, O miserable body! think thou, that thou, who art
altogether defiled, can come to heaven? Nothing can enter there that is
defiled. Murderer, thou shall never see heaven, except thou go to Jesus, and
lay on the burden of thy sin upon him, and say, Lord, take this burden
from me: and if thou can say this from thine heart, he will take it from
thee.

Now Brethren, a question would be asked, If Jesus has died for thy sins and
mine, that we might get an entry? Thou may say to me, What to do have I
to suffer, seeing the Lord has prepared the way? What to do have I to suffer
in soul or body? or why should I be afflicted, seeing the Lord has made
the way patent? I will not answer with the Papists: for they will say, Thou
must pay one part: but I say to thee, in despite of thine heart, if thou pay
any part, thou must pay the whole. But I answer, All these sufferinges is no
satisfaction to bring thee to Heaven. Then thou will say, Why should I suffer,
if it help not to bring me to Heaven? I answer, All the afflictions which are
laid on thee, are laid on thee for the slaughter of the remaining corruption:
feel thou not a remaining corruption within thee? All th'afflictio^s which
are laid on thee, as sickness, want of goods, loss of friends, etc. all is
laid on thee to slaye that remaining corruption. Brethren, I will tell you
plainly. The death of Jesus, and His suffering, is the only mean to enter
into Heaven, in despite of all the Papists. Again I say, Look what need
we have of His death, we have as much need of affliction in our own persons,
to slaye that sin which remains in us: Suppose there be many ways to slay
sin, yet except thou be chastised and vexed with affliction outwardly and
inwardly, as it pleases the Lord to lay it on thee, thou shall never see
Heaven. So cast thee not to sleep, but make thee for affliction and trouble to
mortify thy sin, or else thou shall never see Heaven. And well is thee that
art afflicted, and made like Christ by thine afflictions. What words can be
t^uer, than the words of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14. It behooves you to enter
into heaven, by many tribulations. The Apostle says, there is a necessity.
And again he says, Heb. 12.14. without holiness (affliction brings
holiness) no man shall see the Lord. Well, thou that delitest to pol^ute thy
body, I tell thee, if thou be not holy, thou shall never see God. And I say
more, Without affliction either in soul or body, thou shall never be holy.
Thou that sleep securely, and have mind of nothing, but thy dinner, and thy
supper, good chiere, and good company: I tell thee once, twice, yea, thrice,
thou shall never be holy, and thou shall never come to Heaven: and if thou
sleep on in this estate, thou art not one of His count Book. Let him, or
her, who is afflicted, thank God, and take it out of His hand, and say, The
Lord has sent it to sanctify me Lord give me thy Spirit, that I may be holy,
that I may see thy blessed face one day, to my everlasting joye in Jesus: To
whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, be glory for evermore, Amen.

THE XXXIX. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.












WE insist yet (Beloved in Christ) in this part of History concerning the two
Disciples of CHRIST, who in the day of His resurrection went out to
HIERVSALEM, to a Village near by, called Emmaus. We heard these days past,
what Cleopas, one of the two spoke by the way, to Christ, whom he took to
be a passenger, because his eyes were bound up, that he could not see Him,
nor discern Him, neither by His voice, nor by His face. All his speech te^des
to this, Our hope is gone, we thought Jesus should have been the Redeemer, but
He is dead, and continues under death. We entered in the answer which Jesus
makes, speaking to Him like a passenger. The first entry is rough language: O
fools, says He, and dull of heart, to believe all that the Prophets had
spoken of Jesus! An hard entry. Thereafter He begins to instruct them and to
teach them: The chief poinct of doctrine is first laid down in these words,
It behooued that CHRJST should suffer, and by suffering, enter into his
glory. Of this which we heard the last day* I repeat nothing. In this
TEXT, as GOD shall give us grace, and as time shall suffer, we have the
confirmation of this doctrine: He proves this necessity, that he behooued
to suffer, by many testimonies: And then, in the second, we have how He
manifested Himself, and how their eyes were opened, and how He let them
see, that He was Christ. And in the third part we have the effects which
it wrought in them, after that they knew Him to be their Lord and Master.
Then to begin at the first, To prove that Christ suffered, and so entered
into His glory. He searches the Scriptures, He begins at Moses, and from
Moses he comes to the Prophets, interpreting unto them what Moses and the
Prophets had spoken concerning CHRIST, interpreting that which concerned His
Passion, and that which concerned His glory, after His Passion. The matter is
set down summarilie: Here no Scriptures are expressed, neither such as were
taken out of MOSES, or the PROPHETS: but summarilie it is said, That He
proved all out of MOSES and the PROPHETS: There He alleged not a bare
testimony: but He declared and expounded every one of the Testimonies to
these two Disciples. And then when He has interpreted them, He gathered the
conclusion, That it behooued himself to suffer.

Now, Brethren, we see in this place, what the preaching of the Gospel is in
effect: it is none other thing, but the declaration of Moses, and the Prophets:
Christ preaches here the Gospel to them, and yet He does nothing, but
interpretes Moses and the Prophets. So the preaching of the Gospel, is nothing
but the exponing of Moses and the Prophets: and this Euangell is a plain
commentary of the Text of Moses: Moses wrote not one thing, and the Apostles
another, but Moses wrote the same thing, that the Apostles wrote: only this is
the difference: Moses wrote obscurely, the Apostles more clearly: Then mark
well this: They that are preachers of the Gospel separate never the
interpretation of the Gospel from the Text of Moses, and the Prophets. Some
fantastic brains have thought the Old Testament not needful since the
Gospel was written: but all is vanity, Christ teached not that way: ye see,
Christ takes His Text out of Moses, and interpretes Moses and the Prophets,
and the Apostles wrote nothing of Christ, but that which they grounded upon
Moses: and as for us, we should speak nothing, but that which we ground
upon the writtings of the Apostles: and next, we ground our preachings upon
the Prophets, and thirdly, upon Moses, that is a ground, and that is a sure
ground, and all the world cannot cast it down, that doctrine which is grounded
upon the Apostles, the Prophets, and Moses, it is good, but if it be not
grounded upon these three, I will not give thee one penny for it: Secondly, ye
see, all the interpretation of Moses, is concerning Christ, and what befell
Him, His suffering, and His glory after His passion, there is the chief corner
stone, whereupon our Faith is builded, and whereupon our Faith is grounded, and
whereupon the doctrine of Moses, the Prophets and the Apostles is builded, the
corner stone, Christ, and therefore says the Apostle, being grounded upon the
foundation of the Prophets, and the lowest stone Christ: and in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, Chapter 3. verse 10. He says, No man can lay
another ground, but that which is laid already: Jesus is the foundation and
ground of all true doctrine and verity, Paul Romans 10. calls Him the end of
the Law, in Him is all the Law fulfilled, and He put an end to all these types
and shadows in the Law: So there is the chief ground of our doctrine, Jesus
Christ the lowest stone, upon Him is grounded the doctrine of Moses, the
Prophets and the Apostles, and we build our doctrine upon Him.

I go forward: This for the first head, now follows the second part of the
Text, how He begins to manifest Him, for as yet, they thought Him to be but
a passenger, yet a gracious man, and blessed passenger, as ye will hear: they
were loath to depart from Him: it is said, When they draw near to Emmaus, in a
town where they thought to lodge all night, the Lord makes, as though He would
have gone further, the words are, He faines, as though He were to go further,
that village was not the end of His journey, the words give occasion of a
question: Thought the LORD one thing, and spoke He another, to speak one
thing, and to think another, is a plain lie: I will not insist in this
matter, the purpose of the Lord at this time was to enter into the village and
town with them, and sit at Table with them, upon this condition, that they
should be earnest with Him, urge Him, and in a manner constrain Him, but this
failing was in them, they not being earnest, He purposed to leave them, and
to go further, then when it comes to the doing, and executing of His purpose,
when He said, He would go further, He lied not, for He purposed so to do,
if they had not been earnest with Him, and caused Him to abide: Then wherein
can it be said, that He used simulation, except in this, that He show not
them, that if they were earnest with Him, He would abide: No, if thou would
have Him to stay with thee, thou must be earnest to seek Him, and constrain
Him in a manner) I might let you see examples both in God, and godly men, that
have showed a part of their purpose, and kept the rest to themselves: God said
to Moses, I will slay this people, and none of them shall escape: He kept up
this, except thou interceede: And again He says, Yet forty days and then
Niniue shall be destroyed: Lied the Lord? Not, albeit He kept up a part of His
purpose, except they had repented: for if they had not repented, He had
destroyed them. So the Lord bids Samuel conceal His purpose in annoynting
David, 1. Sam. 6.16.

This only is our lesson, Be not curious to seek that which the Lord has
not reueiled to thee, but see thou study to do that which the Lord has
reueiled: thou have no warrant to seek that which He has not reueiled: O
Scotland, thou have no warrant whether GOD will stay with thee, or not, but
thou have this warrant, to entreat Him earnestly by prayer, and in a manner to
constrain Him to stay with thee: No, He will depart, if thou gettest not an
heart to constrain Him, He will not stay with thee if thou be not earnest to
bid Him stay, thou have no warrant that He will stay with thee: And I say to
thee, if He be not better entertained in Scotland than He is, He shall leave
thee: and woe to thee, Scotland, if He leave thee, this cold entertainment,
may justly make thee to fear, that the Lord shall leave thee, Scotland Many in
this Country of highest rank would put Him away, but if ever He depart, a
heavy judgment shall light upon them. Now when He seemed, as though He
would go further, in a manner they do Him violence, and they stick to Him,
taking Him to be a man, a passenger, a gracious passenger, and therefore they
are loathe to sunder from Him, and they use arguments to move Him, they say, It
is toward night, and the day is far spent, and where can thou go? stay
with us all night, then the Lord yielded, and tarried with them: Mark this: We
use to say, Prayer will break hard weard, and it is true, repentance and
supplication will hold off judgment, that would light upon us. The Lord
says, in the eleventh Chapter of Matthew, and the twelfth verse: The Kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. What causes Him
to tarry? violence is done to Him: and I say to thee, if thou enterest into
Heaven, thou must do violence and take it by force: and I say more, if thou
throngest not, and seek it not night and day, thou shall never enter in it:
and if these disciples had not thronged on Him, and constrained Him, He had not
remained with them: thou should ever pray to God, and say Lord, leave us
not, tarry with us, we may not sunder, if thou stickest not to Him, He shall
leave thee. Then ye see, what it is to be humane, they would not let Him
walk in the night: but what reward got they? in stead of man, they receive
God, and man blessed for ever: so I say, humanity to man, hospitality to
Pilgrims, has a great revvard. The Apost. Heb. 13.2. says: That some
received Angels into their houses unawares, when they thought they had received
men. Abraham received Angels in his house, Genesis 16.3. Lot received Angels, Genesis
19.8. Now, Brethren, I say this to you, as ye would receive God, have mind of
the poor, and now especially, in this extreme dearth, give them some part of
that thou would put in thine own mouth, and that which thou would put on
thy back: there is none of you, but ye will say, If ye had Christ here, I
should feed Him, and if I saw Him naked, I should give Him clothes, the
reprobate shall say the same in that day: We should have cled thee, if we had
seen thee naked, etc. But what answers the Lord? When ye did it not to one of
those little ones, ye did it not to me. Knew Abraham, or Lot, that these men
that they received in their houses were Angels, and thought these two, that He
was Christ: No, they thought Him but a passenger. We read, they that have
showed humanity to men, received God, but we never read that any that never
dealt humanely with men, and sought not to entertain them, got ever God to
lodge with Him. So in a word, as thou would not manifest thy love to God, be
humane, gentle and merciful to man. He who loves not his brother, who^ he sees
daily, how can he love God whom he never saw? No, thou louedst Him never, say
what thou will: fie upon that man, that has no humane entertainment in lodging
of strangers. Now when He is gone in with them, He sits down at supper (for it
was Evening) sitting down, He takes the bread and gives thanks. Take heed to
this: ye with profane hands will pull, rent and swallow up ye Lords benefits,
without knowing of God, but the Lord of glory now sitting down as man, He
would not break bread, until He had sanctified it by prayer: when He has
blessed the bread, He takes it, and distributes it to the disciples: so ye
see, this is an Holy passenger, whilst He makes Him to be a passenger, He is
Holy. Mark this, ye that are passengers, all His communing in the way, is
holy: then when He sits down, He blessed the bread, ere He eat: how ever He
makes Him to be a passenger, he dissembles never His holiness, but always He
is holy, He is holy in the way, He is holy in the house, He is holy at the
table, that holy Lord will never take on the habit of prophanitie, Mark this:
Be what thou will, if thou be a Lord, traveling, albeit thou dissemblest thy
rank, behave thy self as a commmon passenger, or as a merchant, etc. yet
with the company thou art in, behave thy self holy, be holy in thy journey,
be holy at the table, and in thy eating show that habit. Ye that travel,
either in this Country, or to other countries see, how far men are from
this: if they meet with an evil person, they will be as evil, if they meet
with a filthy person, they are filthier, they will speak two filthy words
for one: if one go to Germany, he will be an Vbiquiter, and in Rome a Papist,
in Scotland a Christian, in as many places as many forms: so thou yt is a
Passe^ger, as ever you would look for rest hereafter, look yt thou be holy: a
holy hearted man in a company, will not only have great graces in himself, but
also he will be gracious to yt company, and communicate these graces to them
with whom He is in company: So dissemble as thou will, be ever holy, and as
ever thou would dwell with Jesus, be ever like Him in some measure in
holiness: and well is us, if in word and deed we be holy pilgrims in this
world. This would not be passed by, He sunders not from them in the house, He
goes not to one house, and they to another, but He will go to one house with
them, and will sit at the same table with them: then He will not stay still,
till they give bread to Him, but He begins to give bread to them, and feeds
them with His own hand: So ye see, Brethren, what it is, to be earnest to
entreat the Lord, to stay with thee: Now certainly, He shall be more homely
with thee, than thou can be with Him: if thou beginnest to entreat Him, He
will remain with thee, and feed thee with His own hand, and they that have
found the Lord, they have seen such an homeliness, as they could never
think of. In the 3. of the Revelation, verse 20. The Lord Jesus says, I will
stand at the door, and I will knock, he that will open to me, I will come
in, and suppe with him. Once let me in, I shall be so homely, as thou never
would have thought, I shall insinuate me in thine heart and I shall not
only sit at thy table, but I will sit in thine heart, and shall feed thine
heart with joy, and food everlasting.

Now to go forward: the Lord, who no question bound up their eyes, before,
opens them now: if He close thine eyes, the world cannot open them, He only can
oppen them: The mean whereby He opens them, apparently was that form of
prayer He used before He brake the bread: Next, they understood, that it was
He by the distributing of the bread: for He used to feed them with His own
hand: and therefore by these signs they are made to know Him. I see here,
grace grows: after that once grace begins: none end of grace: after that once
He has invited them, He suppes with them, then He feeds them with His own
hand, and then at the last, their eyes were opened: and judge ye, what joy
that was to them: No doubt, that was the most joyful sight, that ever they
saw. So, hold on, and entertain the Lord a while, and set Him at thy table,
and never be glad to eat nor drink, except thou find some presence of thy
GOD (for it is a loathsome dinner, if thou want Him, and if thou entreatest
Him on, thou shall find in end, an exceeding joy: Entertain Him now, as a
passenger, and in the end, thou shall see Him to thy comfort, thine eyes shall
be opened to see Him, as He is.

Then it is said, as their eyes were opened, He was lifted from them, ye must
not think, that the Lord made His body invisible, it is contrary to the order
of nature, a thick body to be invisible, nor ye must not think, that He
brake out at the house side, as the Papists dream: this departure was by the
holding of their eyes, He was not changed in this form, or that form, but the
change was in their eyes, so that, they see not how He departes, or in what
manner, as before, their eyes were holden, that they could not know Him. To
leave this, ye would marvel, He gives them but one blencke: in an instant He
goes away from them: why stays He not? No, it was not meet for them, that He
should stay, nor yet was it possible for Him to stay after that manner that
they would have had Him to have stayed, seeing now sufficiently they were
assured that He was risen it was not needful that He should stay with them,
as of before, as ye see, the Apostles in the 1. of the Acts, speaking to Him,
they say, Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel: That is
in effect Lord, will thou not remain with us here on the earth: No, He would
not stay with them, but gives them a glance of Him: then secondly, He could
not dwell amongst them, the earth could not be capable of a glorious body:
glorify a man or a woman, the earth cannot keep them, glorify a man or a
woman, this earth is too evil for them, and they cannot dwell in the earth:
No, that Paradise wherein Adam was set, that pleasant Garden that He was placed
in, could not keep a glorious body, and a glorified man. So the Lord being
glorified, could not dwell and abide amongst men, as of before: so then,
would thou dwell with Christ, and dwell in that pleasant place (and thou
shall never have happiness nor joy, till thou dwell with Him) Think not to
bring Him down to the earth, but if thou would dwell with Him, flit out of
the earth, make thee for flitting. Paul says, I desire to flit and to dwell
with the Lord: Would thou desire to dvvell with the Lord, desire to flit
out of thy body* for if thou have not a desire, but art afraid to flit, it is
a token that thou have no langour of God, and that thou shall never dvvell
with Him, but that soul that desires to flit, to enjoy that presence, that
soul that has groaned for it (for the soul that is godly, groans, as a man
that groans under a burden) shall enjoy the presence of God, and dvvell with
Him, and that soul shall be glorified: thy body, indeed, shall not be
glorified, until that time that He shall appear, and then thy body and thy
soul both shall be glorified with Him: and then our eyes shall see Him, and
our bodies shall dwell with Him in the Heaven, in that everlasting Paradise.

Now Brethren, hitherto the Lord has manifested Himself: then see what
effect follows, and is wrought in their hearts of this manifesting. Ye
would think that so soon as the Lord had been taken from them, they should
have been sad: For who would not be sad to want Him? For if thou saw
Him, for all the world thou would not be content to want His presence. Ye
would marvel, why they make no moan for that short time that He abode with
them. No doubt, that sight that they got, left such a comfort in their hearts,
as cannot be spoken. And if the Lord give His presence to any man, his heart
will have such a joye, that it will feed upon it. Ye read, in the eight
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, how the Eunuche, who came from the
Queen of Candare, when Philippe came, and baptized him, Philippe was carried
away from him, yet the Scripture says not that he mourned when Philippe was
taken away: No, it is said, that he went on his way rejoicing. From whence
comes this joye? No doubt, it was the presence of Philippe that left this joye
behind it. So in a word: The presence of God leaves always joye: and if thou
get a blinke of Him in the morning, thou shall be joyefull of Him all the
day, and that joye shall feed thee: and when thou art eating and drinking,
that presence will feed thee. Woe to thee who seek not to get a blinke of
Him: for if thou gettest not a blinke of Him, thou shall never have solid joye
in thine heart.

But the words would be marked: And they said between themselus, Did not
our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and when he
opened to us the Scriptures? There are the words. When these two men heard
Him, the word was effectual: but they think Him not to be their Lord, till
he manifested Himself unto them: and then they call to mind by their
burning, that they found that it was He that spoke unto them. This confirms
them that it was He. The same burning of the heart that one will have is a
sure token of the presence of Christ: for if the Lord were not present in
thine heart, it would not burn at the preaching. No, not an Angel has power
to set thine heart on fire. So thou that have this burning, thou may say,
that the Lord Jesus is present in thine heart.

But mark this: We see in these men, that our eyes are so blind, that we
cannot discern the Lord so long as we live here: we cannot get full sight, but
we are in a strife: if the heart shall say, The Lord is here, the flesh will
say, He is not here: so that we hing here betwixt hope and despair. But when
He once manifestes Himself in glory, then that burning which we felt in this
life, that sense which we then felt, shall be brought to our remembrance.
Think not that thou shall loose that sense: No, Thou shall take it up with
thee to the Heaven: and we shall say one to another, Remember ye not what
burning we had, when we spoke and heard of CHRIST in the earth? Then it
behooued this LORD to have been then with us in the earth. So the remembrance
of that joye which thou felt in the world, shall be a part of thy joye which
thou shall have in the Heavens in the life to come: Therefore, get much joye
here, and lay it up in store in thine heart: go on in feeling, and I promise
thee, in the Name of GOD, it shall never depart, but it shall ever augment and
enlarge thy joye, and glory in the life to come. No, as the word of GOD,
which is the immortal seed of GOD, euanishes not: so, neither shall the
effect of the word ever euanish. Then, ever strive to get a sense of the
working of this word in thine heart.

Now a word, and so I shall end. Ye would think this a sober conclusion,
As we walked by the way, when he sp^^e to us, our hearts burned, therefore
it was he that spoke with us: So they concluded, that it must be his Spirit
only which settes the heart on fire. May we not in like manner conclude, At
the preaching of Paul the Spirit settes the heart on fire, therefore Paul is
Christ? This is a false conclusion. And I answer to this, That if these men
had felt no more, but a common feeling, in an ordinary measure, their argument
had not been good: But they had another feeling, than can be at the preaching
of a man: for no doubt, with the word He sent His Spirit to work in them
extraordinarily. And I put it out of question, They had such a vvonderfull
feeling, as they could never have had at the preaching of any man whosoever.
So their conclusion is sure, Seeing as He spoke, He breathed His Spirit upon
us, He must be CHRIST. It is a vvonder of them, who have gotten GODS
SPIRIT, how they will discern of GODS SPIRIT in others: And many are
beguiled for fault of this SPIRIT. There is very much spoken of our feeling
at the PREACHING: And what serves all? They call it a fire: for the Spirit
which raises that feeling, is like a fire, and therefore He is compared to a
fire, Matthew. 3.11. And a fire has ever an vp-burning: and if thou have true
feeling, thine heart shall be set on fire, and that fire is mighty, and will
burn up the dross of thy salvation, which is in thy foul heart. No, speak
not of feeling except thou be regenerate: Thou that art an Harlot, speak not
of feeling, except thou feel it burn up thine harlotrie. And thou that art a
murderer, say not that thou have a feeling, and if it burn not up thy
bloody heart. So I charge thee before God: hear not one word, except thou
find that Spirit to burn up thy corruption; thou tellest me, that thou
feel, and yet thou remainest an harlot, fie upon thine harlotrie, let not
that word come out of thy mouth. Again, as the fire of Gods Spirit burns up
the dross of thy corruption, so it will inflame thy love to God, it will
inflame thine heart, and all the power of the soul to the love of GOD, and
righteousness, so that it will bind thine heart to God, as the Apostle
says, The love of God constrains me, so that thou would be content to
die, to live with Him, and to pleasure Him, thou would not care, to live, or
to die: and what more? as a fire is nourished with some matter, that is meet
for burning: so this fire once kindled in our souls is nourished, and fed by
the continual presence of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, and that precious oil of the
Holy Spirit. Further, a flame tendes always upward, and it will lift an heavy
thing that falls down upon it: ye see a train of powder will blow up an
house: We are heavy by nature, and loadned with sin, yet that fire of love
will raise thee up* and place thee with the Lord, whom thou love, and thine
heart will be lifted up to Him. There is never one that loves JESUS in the
Earth, but they are dwelling with Him in the Heaven, and shall enjoy that
presence everlastingly. So ye see, what it is to have the heart set on fire,
till we meet with our LORD, and then our hearts shall have the full fruition
of His presence for ever. To this JESUS, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be
glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XL. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MARK CHAP. XVI.



LVKE CHAP. XXIII.







IHON, CHAP. XX.


WE have heard (Beloved in Christ) these days past, of the conference which
was betwixt Christ, and these two Disciples, who were going to Emmaus. Christ
reproved the^ sharply, because they thought that Christ being crucified, all
hope of Redemption was past. Next, He instructed them, affirming, that it
behooued Him to suffer, and by suffering to enter into His glory. This His
doctrine, which He proved by many Testimonies of Scripture; beginning at
Moses, and from Moses He comes to the Prophets, interpreting unto them, what
they had spoken concerning Christ, concerning His Passion, and concerning His
glory after His Passion: for the preaching of the Gospel is nothing else, but
an expounding of Moses, and the Prophets, and Jesus Christ is the foundation
whereupon the doctrine of Moses, and the Prophets, is builded: He is the end of
the law all tendes to Him. Thereafter, we heard how Christ manifested Himself
to these Disciples: for, when as He made Himself as though He would have
left them, being constrained by them, He went in to tarry with them: and as
He sat at table with them, in the blessing, and breaking, and distributing of
the bread, their eyes were opened, and they know Him. Last, we heard what
effects were wrought in them, when they saw He was their Lord and
Master: Howbeit He left them, yet they were not sad: but that sight which
they got of Him, left exceeding great joye and comfort in their hearts: and so
they call to mind that burning which they found in their hearts when He spoke
unto them, whereby they are more confirmed, that it was the Lord that spoke to
them: for the burning of the heart which a man will find in himself, is a
sure token of the presence of Christ. Now in the Text which we have presently
read, we have set down their returning to Jerusalem, with great expedition,
and how they declare to the Apostles, and others, who were there assembled, all
things yt fell out unto the^ by the way: these things which they saw with their
eyes, and which they had heard with their ears. Thereafter we have set down
another appearing of Christ, which fell out this same very time yt these two
Disciples are talking together with th'eleue^, of these things. The^ to come to
the words: It is said, They rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem.
The circumstance of the time of their returning would be weighed: They make no
delay: they stay not all night in Emmaus, albeit it was late, and they were
before of intention to have remained there till the morning: but they use all
possible expedition, and they rise that same hour to return to Jerusalem,
that they might show the Disciples what they had heard and seen, and make them
partakers of their joy. Compare this their returning to Jerusalem, with their
coming out of Jerusalem to Emmaus: ye will find a great difference: When they
came out of Jerusalem to Emmaus, they went slowly with sad hearts and sad
conference: and when the Lord, whom they supposed to be a passenger, met them,
and inquires what conference that was, that they had amongst themselves? They
take leisure enough to tell Him the sorrowful news that had fallen out in
Jerusalem, of the crucifying of Jesus of Nazareth. But in their returning to
Jerusalem they make great speed: they go quickly, they go with joyefull
hearts, hasting to communicate to the disciples the great joye which they
themselves had conceived upon the things which both they saw and heard. The
lesson is plain. When the children of God are casten down, when their hearts
are grieved, when they have no joyful and comfortable news to tell, but sad
and heavy tidinges, concerning Christ, and His Gospel, and the estate of His
Kirk; then they will go slowly, and with heavy cheer: they will speak
slowly, and with sadness, they will have little pleasure in any thing that
they do; for the grief of their hearts takes hand and foot from them: so
that they can do nothing willingly, and with cheerfulness. But by the
contrary, when their hearts are joyful, when they have joyful and
comfortable tidinges, to tell to others of Christ and His Kirk; then are they
quick and speedy, and cheerful in all their doings, they will go with
expedition and chearefulnsse, they will speak with cheerfulness, with
chearfulnes they will make haste to communicate their joye to others: for ye
joy which they conceive in their hearts, cheares up and encourages all the
members of their bodies to do their duty willingly, with cheerfulness
and pleasure: Yea, such is the force of the joye in the heart, that it will
swallow up and overcome all troubles, all stays, and impediments, which can be
caste^ in to hinder a good purpose: and therefore, if thou see a man slow to
a good action, and namely, to preach the Gospel of JESUS, thou have just
occasion to suspect that he has found little joy in his heart through the
Gospel: as by the contratrie, if thou see a man hasten with chearfulnes to
preach the Gospel, it is a sure token, that he has his heart filled with the
sense of joye through the Gospel. Now when they came to Jerusalem, They
found the eleven Disciples of the Lord, and beside them, they found sundry
others gathered together with them. Appearinglie these men who were gathered
together with the Disciples were such as had heard the Lord Jesus teaching
when He was conversant in the world and had found the power of His Preaching
effectual to their conversion: for as evil men delight in the society of
evil men, because conformity in manners makes men to entertain society
together: as the harlot with the harlot, the drunkarde with the drunkard, the
thief with the thief, etc. Eue^ so good men take pleasure in the company of
good men, that they may be a mutual furtherance one to another of the glory
of God, and their own salvation. When these two Disciples find th'eleuen, and
the rest that were with them in Jerusalem, look how they are exercised: They
are telling one to another, that the Lord Jesus was risen indeed. These two
Disciples came to tell the^ these news, supposing they had known nothing of
them: but they found themselves prevented, they found that the Lords disciples
tell them that same that they came to have informed them of, to wit, that the
Lord Jesus was risen indeed. And this they prove by the testimony of Simon
Peter, who had affirmed to them, that he had seen the Lord: for among others
to whom the Lord appeared after His Resurrection, He appeared in particular to
Simon Peter, as Paul testifies, 1. Cor. 15.5. where he tells that He was seen
of Cephas, before He was seen of the rest of the twelve. So these two
disciples that made haste upon set purpose to further, strenthe^, and comfort
others, they are furthered, strengthened, and comforted by others, and so they
find their coming to be profitable to themselves. The lesson shortly is this:
Often times it comes to pass, that they who come of set purpose to declare to
others, that joy which they have found to be wrought in their souls by the
Holy Spirit, by the preaching of the Gospel, are prevented by others, and
hea^e of others these same glad tidings that they came to speak themselves,
before they can get time or leisure to utter them themselves, and so they find
that same joye communicated to them, which they come to communicate to others:
or if they be not prevented, then it falls out, that they hear these same
glad tidings of others, that they themselves declare to others, and so receive
mutual comfort: or if others speak nor to them, at least this fall out, that
of their own message, and of that speech that they utter of JESUS CHRIST, they
will find their joye to increase more and more, and to abound: so that it
falls out, that their preaching is not only powerful and comfortable to the
souls of others, but even to themselves: and when they preach to others, they
preach to themselves. If thou have gotten a spiritual grace or comfort to thy
soul, be careful to communicate it unto others: for by so doing, thou shall
find thy grace and joye to increase: fear not, that by communicating of thy
grace, it shall be empaired: for these spiritual graces, are not like
worldly benefits, whereof the more thou give to others, there is the less
behind: but the more thou give of these spiritual graces unto others, the
more thou have behind to thy self, the more shall they increase: For to him
that has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance. Matthew. Chap.
25.29. But it vvoulde be marked: Albeit these two Disciples find themselves
to be prevented by the eleven, who were telling that same thing that they came
to tell them: yet they are not so silent, nor conceal not the things which
they had heard and seen: but it is said, that they also told what things
were done in the way, and how CHRIST was known of them in breaking of bread:
and so they go about to confirm the APOSTLES in that which they themselves
were telling of the Resurrection of CHRIST.

Now a question may be moved here. How is it that LVKE says, that when
the two Disciples came of purpose to tell the eleven, what had befallen to them
in the way, and what they had heard and seen concerning JESUS, the eleven
preuentes the two, and tells them, that JESUS was risen, and had appeared to
Peter; seeing MARK, speaking of this same matter, says, that when these two
went, and told Christ's appearing to them, to the remnant, that they believed?
How agree these two together? To this I answer: First, That when LVKE says,
that they told the two Disciples, that the Lord was risen indeed, and that
he had appeared to Simon Peter, he means, that there was a number among
them, who believed: and that which was proper to some, he ascribes it
indefinitelie to the whole. And on the other part, when MARK says, they
believed not, it is to be understood, that there were certain of them, who
believed not. And so both the EVANGELISTES according to the accustomed form of
speaking in the Scripture, attribute that indefinitelie to the whole, which was
proper to a part. Next, I answer: When Mark says they believed not, he
speaks of a full and perfect Faith, that was free of all doubting wavering,
and inconstancy: but Luke speaks of a begun Faith, which in the mean time
wantes not the own doubting: for we may perceive in the History, that
sundry times after this, they were in doubt, as ye see hereafter in the 41^
verse of this Chapter, where it is said, that after He had showed them His
hands, and His feet, they believed not: their hearts were not constantly
settled with an assurance of His resurrection.

Now in the next part of our Text, we have set down another appearing of
Christ after His resurrection, which falls out in this same very time, when
these two disciples were talking with the eleven, and this is His first
apparition: we have heard of four already, His first appearing was to Marie
Magdalene, the second was, to certain other women, the third was, to ye two
disciples, who were going to Emmaus, the fourth was to Peter, which we showed
you before: Luke touched in a word, verse 34. Now in this His fifth appearing
He appears unto the disciples, being assembled together. The three
Evangelists, Mark, Luke, and John, set down particularly the circumstances of
their assembling and meeting together, which circumstances would be well
considered, because they serve for the clearing of the History, the first
circumstance is of the persons, that were conueened, who, and how many they
were: Mark says, that He appeared unto the eleven: and yet we must understand
by the History yt follows in John, that Thomas was not present at this
meeting: but here he gives ye name of the whole, to ye most part, and after
Judas death they were commonly called the eleven. John says, generally, and
indefinitely, That the disciples were assembled. Of this circumstance we mark:
The disciples of the Lord for the most part ever used to meet, and assemble
together: they assembled together before His Passion: they assembled together,
even in the very time of His Passion, and hanging on the Cross (for it is
said in the 23. Chapter of Luke, and the 49. verse: And all His acquaintance
stood afar off, and the women that followed Him from Galile, beholding these
things) and now they assembled together after His Passion. So ye may see: They
who are Christ's, are ever going about to meet and to hold themselves
together, that they may speak, and confer of all things, that fall out
concerning Christ, and the estate of His Church, whether they be joyful, and
comfortable, or sad and sorrowful, that they may edify, and further one
another, mutually in the course of their salvation, that they may be joined
together, and make up, and compleete one body. And why not? For as there is one
GOD the Father, one head the LORD Jesus, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism,
one hope of vocation: so there should be but one body, the members whereof,
should endeavor, to entertain love and unity amongst themselves, Ephesians.
Chapter 4 verses 3 4, 5, 6. This meeting together, of the members of the body
of Christ, and their mutual conference, brings with it, an exceeding great
consolation and joy: for the Lord has promised to send that Comforter the Holy
Spirit, to these meetings of the Saints: and Christ says, in the 18. Chapter
of Matthew, and the 20. verse: Where two or three is gathered together in my
Name: there will I be in the mids of them. If thou despisest these holy
meetings, and disdainest thou the holy conference, I denounce to thee in the
Name of Christ, thou shall never find a solid joy, or consolation: many
there are, who contemn the meetings of the faithful, and the assemblies of
the Saints, and disdain the means of grace, godly speeches and conferences:
and yet will dream to themselves, that the Holy Spirit will dvvell in their
souls, and that they will find joy, and consolation: but the end will prove,
that their corrupt and false hearts have deceived them.

Now I come to the second circumstance, which is concerning their exercise in
that meeting. What were they doing? Mark says, They sat together: Luke
says, They were speaking of these things that they had heard by the report of
sundry persons, concerning the Lords Resurrection: so ye see, their exercise
was holy, their conference was spiritual, and this was a very good preparation
going before the Lords coming, and appearing to them: yea, no question, it was
wrought by the force and power of the Lord Himself, when He was approaching
and drawing near to them: for when the Lord is drawing near, and approaching
to us, then that Holy Spirit who dwelles in our hearts, begins to move and
utter Himself, He wakens up joy in our hearts, He opens our mouth to speak
with freedom and liberty, and to entertain purpose of spiritual and
heavenly things: for that Spirit in our souls has a forecast, and feeling
before hand, of the LORDS coming, and this is it that shall move the godly in
that great day, when they shall see the tokens of the coming of the LORD, to
look up, and lift up their heads, knowing that their redemption draws
near, Luke 21.28. for except the Lord did send before a ligt to shine in their
souls, as a messenger going before Him to tell Him, that the Lord is coming,
they would never lift up their heads: and therefore when the Lord commands His
disciples to look up, and to lift up their heads before His coming, it is as
much, as if He had said to them, that He will furnish them strength at His
coming, to lift up their heads, and to be waiting for Him.

Now follows the third circumstance, concerning the time of this meeting:
John in setting it down, is more particular, than any of the rest of the
Evangelists, He says. It was the same day, at night, which was the first day
of the week: That is, it was the same day that He rose, which for that same
cause is called the Lords day, and it was in the Evening, after Sunne-setting,
when it began to be dark night: for it was after the returning of the
disciples from Emmaus, and they returned not to Jerusalem, until it was very
late: for we heard before, it was toward night, when they desired the Lord
to stay with them, and they returned from Emmaus to Jerusalem, after the Lord
had stayed some space with them, and had eaten, and manifested Himself to them
in the breaking of bread, Luke 24.29.30. John tells the cause why they
assembled in the night, rather than in the day: For fear of the Jews, who as
they were malicious against the Lord Himself, so would they have uttered their
malice against His disciples, and all them that loved Him: so they make a
choice of a time that was least dangerous: for, Brethren, it is the Lords
will, that His children make a choice of the time, that is most convenient, and
which may serve most for their safety in their assemblies and meetings: it
makes not at what times meetings be kept, whether in the day, or in the night,
if so be, that they who assemble and meet together, be holy: for all times are
sanctified to the faithful, and them who are holy themselves: for it is true
that Paul says, To the pure, all things are pure, Tit. 1.15. Likewise Christ
Himself shows His presence to His own indifferently, at any time when they
are met together, whether it be day, or night: it is not these outward things,
that Christ chiefly respects, neither the time, nor the place, nor no such
outward circumsta^ce, but Christ looks chiefly to the persons, that meet
together, and to their disposition whether they be holy or not: the outward
things sanctify not the person, but the person sanctifies the outward things:
many think that if they come to the Church on the Lords day, because both
time and place, is holy, that they are holy enough: but if thou have no
holiness in thine heart, all things are polluted unto thee, the time is
polluted, the place is polluted, the exercise of the word is polluted: For unto
them that are defiled, and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even their minds
and consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.16.

The last circumstance is of the place: The Evangelists make no particular
mention of a special place, wherein they did meet: only John marks, That the
doors were shut, and therefore, that they kept themselves close, and quiet:
and in this their meeting and exercise they were secret, so that the Jews knew
not either where they were or what they were doing: John says, it was for
fear of the Jews that the doors were shut: As they had holy wisdom in
choosing of the time: so they had holy wisdom in choosing of the place. God
will have His children to be wise in all things, and when Christ sendes out His
Apostles, He exhortes them To be wise as serpents, Matthew. 10.16. The faithful
are compassed about, with many perils, and dangers on all sides, which hardly
they will eschew, except they have holy wisdom. Now, it was not only the fear
of danger, from the Jews, that made them shut the doors, but likewise that
they might be secret: for when the Saints are exercised in godly conference,
and in spiritual and heavenly exercises, and when they are handling secret and
hid mysteries of salvation, then they should be separated from the world, and
from the society of profane men: profane men should be debarred from such
holy exercises, and from the meetings of the Saints, and one day they shall
be fully debarred, and put out of their company: for when they shall be
gathered unto the Lord Jesus, to enjoy His glorious presence in the Heavens,
the wicked shall get none entrance there, to trouble them any more with their
prophanitie.

Thus far, we have spoken shortly of the circumstances of the disciples
meeting: Now it follows we should speak of the appearing it self. Whilst the
disciples thus gathered, were speaking one to another, of the Resurrection of
Christ, in the mean time, Jesus himself comes, and stands up in the mids of
them. He presents Himself to them, when the door were shut, after an
extraordinary manner, a marvelous manner, and very suddenly: for a glorified
body has a very swift and speedy motion. John lets us see, that His
appearing and coming to the house to them, was miraculous, for he says, He
came when the doors were shut: but the particular ^^nner of His entering in,
by what way He came into the house is not expresselie set down by any of the
Evangelists: and therefore sundry men have sundry opinions of the manner of
His coming in, every one far different from another: First, The Papists
affirm, That the body of our Savior pierced through the door, the substance
and body of the door remaining whole, unbroken, and unaltered in any part:
so that both the body of the LORD, and the body of the door, at one time,
were in one place. And this they affirm, that they may have some appearance
of a ground to establishe that vain and foolish dream and fantasy of the
bodily and local presence of the body of our Lord in the Sacrament of the
Supper. Of the which doctrine of necessity it must follow, That one, and that
self same body may be in many places at one time: for if it were true, yt
two bodies might be in one place at one time, then it would follow, that one
body at one time might be in many places. But both these assertions are
directly repugnant to the nature of a body, whatsoever it be, whether it be
a glorified body, or a body not glorified. It is but a vain distinction,
which the Papists have invented, betwixt a body glorified, and a body not
glorified: for a glorified body remains a true body, the glorifying of it
takes not away the nature, nor the natural properties of a body: and therefore
it cannot be at one time in many places, but only in one place: neither can
it be in one and the self same place with another body.

Next, others think, That when the body of the Lord went in at the door* the
body of the door was rarefied, and yielded, and gave place to the Lords body,
that it might enter in: and when it had gone in, it returned to its own estate,
and was thickened and made solid, as of before: even as when the Lord was
walking on the sea, the sea was thickened and made hard and solid under His
feet, yt it might bear Him above, and thereafter again incontinent it returned
to its own nature. This opinion is more tolerable than the former, because it
stands well enough with the Omnipotent power of God, where as ye former
sentence of the Papists cannot stand with His omnipotency, because it includes
a manifest contradiction.

Thirdly* some think, That when the Lord was entering in, the door opened to
Him, and after He was come in, the door incontinent and most speedily closed
again. This opinion semes to be most probable: we read in sundry places the
like to have been done, as in the 5. Chapter of the Acts, the Angel of the
Lord opens the doors of the Prison, where the Apostles were, and shuts them
again. And in the 12. Chapter of the Acts, when the Angel brings Peter out
of prison, the iron gate opened unto them of the own accord. And likewise in
the 16. Chapter of the Acts: When Paul and Silas being in prison, prayed, and
sung Psalms to God, all the doors of the prison opened, and every man's bands
were loosed: in the which places ye see, When the Lord delivered His servants,
whether by the ministry of His Angels, or without their ministry, the
doors were opened: But in no place of Scripture we read of the rarifying of a
body, and much less, any thing of that vain opinion of the Papists, That two
bodies may be in one place at one time: and therefore this last opinion seems
to be most likely: But in this point we insist not: Only one thing we mark
out of this place, that the LORDS coming is very sudden, and unlooked for: how
so ever it be, that the LORD comes unto men, whether it be in mercy, as He
uses to come to His own: whether it be injustice to the wicked, His coming
is ever sudden, and without their expectation: and therefore we should not be
so careful, curiously to enquire about the particular coming of the LORD, as
we should be careful to prepare our selves, that we may be ready,
waiting for His glorious appearing, that when ever He comes, He may find
us with oil in our lamps, ready to enter in with Him. Watch (says the LORD)
for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, when the Son of man will come.

Now to end shortly: Having spoken already of the circumstances of the meeting
of the disciples, as also of the marvelous appearing of the Lord to them: it
follows last, that we speak of His saluting of them: when He comes in amongst
the mids of them, He is not silent, but He salutes them, and says, Peace be
unto you. This was His common salutation, which they were acquainted with: and
no question, He uttered it with such a homely and familiar voice, that they
might easily have known that it was He, and none other yt appeared and spoke
unto them: for He went about by all means possible, to remove all doubting
out of their hearts, that so they might have a full assurance of His
Resurrection: and yet, for all this very hardly could they be persuaded, that
it was He: and therefore Mark says, He reproved them for their unbelief,
and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him
being risen up again. For such is the infidelity, and dulnes of our hearts,
that all the means that GOD uses, is little enough to make us to believe. Now
when the LORD says to His disciples, Peace be unto you, we must not think,
that this was a bare and simple vvishing and desiring of peace unto them,
without any further effect. No, we must not think so: This word was
powerful, this wishing of peace behooued to be effectual in their souls,
because it proceeded from Him, who is the fountain and author of all peace,
and who Himself is our peace, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.14.17. And when
the Lord, who is peace Himself, comes to preach peace: How can it be possible,
except the hearts of men be harder than the flint, or adamant: but that
preaching of peace, must be effectual in their souls. The Lord in this
wishing of peace is not like man, the most that a man can do, is to wish
peace, and to desire peace to others, No man, albeit He were never so holy, can
do more, he cannot give his peace that he wishes, he cannot make his peace
effectual: But Christ, when He wishes peace, He gives and communicates that
same peace: He works that same peace in their hearts: and therefore, when He
is departing out of the world, comforting His disciples, He says, Peace I
leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto
you, Ioh. 14.27. He says not only, I leave peace with you, but I give you my
peace, and that, not as men in the world, who can do no more but wish, I make
my peace effectual, by giving you peace. The Lord make every one of us
partakers of this peace, that we may ever have matter of rejoicing in JESUS.
To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, be all praise and honor, for
evermore.

AMEN.
THE XLI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.









JOHN, CHAP. XX.


BELOVED in CHRIST JESUS, we have in hand as yet the History of the
appearing of Christ after His glorious Resurrection: First He appears to
MARIE MAGDALENE at the grave: Next, He appears to another company of women
as they returned from the grave: Thirdly, He appeared to two of His Disciples
that same day of His Resurrection, as they went from Jerusalem to Emmaus
Fourthlie, He appeared to Simon Peter alone: And now last, (and this is His
appearing which we have in hand) He appears to a company of His Disciples,
to the eleven, ( Thomas being excepted) with others of the common sort, where
they were gathered together in the night, in a secret place of Jerusalem. The
last day, as God gave the grace, we spoke of this conuention of the disciples,
and of His miraculous and sudden coming, and standing up in the mids of
them, the door being shut. We heard, when He stood up amongst them, what He
did, He salutes them after His old fashion, and says, Peace be unto you, in
such sort, that they might have understood that it was the Lord, by the voice,
and that salutation, wherewith they were acquainted: but ye see, what effect
His presence, His voice, and His salutation works in them.

In the beginning of this Text, which we have read, when they see Him, and
hear Him, it is said, That they are abashed, and troubled in heart, and
terrified with Jesus. Why? Because they thought, they had seen a spirit, or an
Angel in the shape of a man: this His presence should have confirmed and
strengthened their Faith, which even they pretended to have of the Resurrection
of Christ, but it falls out otherwise. This is an hasty change, and little
before, they are speaking confidently one to another of Him, and of His
Resurrection: These that were conueened at Jerusalem before, were speaking of
Him, and assuring the two disciples, that He was risen indeed, then the two
assuring them, that He was risen: now in an instant they are astonished, so
abashed, and afraid, that when they see Him, they cannot believe, that it is
He, their Faith almost euanisheth. A little before, in their mind there was
light, there was knowledge, now in stead of that light, comes in blindness,
and dimnesse in the eyes of the mind: a little before, there was Faith in the
heart, and joy in the Resurrection of Christ, now there is such infidelity,
that they will not believe their own senses: in stead of joy there is trouble,
this is a sudden change from the better to the worse: ye see, how suddenly
the soul of man will be changed: now he will believe, now Faith in an instant
will be turned in infidelity, now he will rejoice, and even now his joy will
be turned in dolor. This is our estate, so long as we live in the world: but
Brethren, it would be marked, where begins this change? There are two parts in
the soul of man: there is the mind, the eye of the soul, that gives light to
the soul, and to all the parts of it, and to the whole man, then there is the
heart, and the affections that should be guided by the mind, which is the eye
of the soul: both are changed in the disciples in an instant: but where
begins the change? Not at the heart, nor the affections first, No, but it
begins at the mind, the mind deceiues it self, and she believes when she
sees Christ, she sees a Spirit: when she sees one thing, she supposes she sees
another, she blindes her self: and when she has blinded her self, then
follows terror, and all the affections of the heart are troubled, by reason
of the false imagination of the mind. Brethren, there is not one of us, but we
have this mind, this heart, these affections, and these mutations: Why then
should we not know them: I mark this, to let you see the vanity of the
reason of man: the best thing in man is his reason, but she is full of vanity:
she that should have guided all the inferior powers of the soul, she is
first out of order.

It is a miserable Commonwealth, where the head is out of order: for then it
being out of order, all is misordered: commonly, it is this mind, that puts
all the affections out of order, and by her vain imaginations, reasonings, and
toys, she will give in such terrors in the soul, as is wonderful. If there
be any power of the soul, that has need to be reformed and renewed in JESUS
CHRIST: I say, the wit and mind of man has most need to be renewed, and
illuminate by the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST: And therefore the Apostle exhortes
the Ephesians, To be renewed in the spirit of their mind, Ephesians. Chapter 4
verse 23. Plato was a fool, and Aristotle, and all the Philosophers, who were
accounted wonders in the world, for their wisdom in natural things, who said,
the mind of man was perfect, and placed reason, as a Queen in the soul, to
guide and hold all the affections in order.

The Papists are a litte better than the Philosophers: for they asc^ibe too
much to the mind and reason of man: they set themselves to advance man, and to
extenuate grace, and their wisdom is far from the wisdom of God.

The Spirit of God says, in the Epistle to the Romans, Chapter 8. verse 7.
That the wisdom of the flesh, is enimitie against God: for it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither can it be.

But to go forward: When they see CHRIST, They supposed, that He had been a
spirit. I doubt not, but He appeared in some glorious form, they may not abide
the sight of Him, without great terror and fear: they are blinded with the
sight of Him, this eye of the body, subject to mortality (all is mortal, the
eye, and all) is so infirm and weak, that it may not abide to see a thing
immortal, glorious and heavenly: All that we see, is mortal, the Earth and
the Heavens are mortal: an heavenly and spiritual thing, the eyes of the
body cannot behold: I say more, let be the eyes of the body, and this
outvvarde sense, the eye of the soul that should be clearer in sight than the
eye of the body, may not abide any immortal and heavenly object, so long as we
are in this life, it may not behold an heavenly thing: I speak by naturaull
disposition: a man that has but nature, may not look to God, and heavenly
things: but so soon as these glorious objects are laid before the eye of the
mind, there goes a great dimnesse over it, and that exceeding brightness
blindfoldes it so, that it is not able to behold it. The fault of this is not
so much in the glorious object, as it is in thy soul (and if it were right)
heavenly things should comfort thee. The fault is in the evil disposition of
the eye of thy soul, it is but a bleered eye like the eye of the body, looking
to the Sun grows blind, and is worse than of before: so is it with the eye
of the soul: for the eye of our soul, is but bleered: there was never such a
bleered eye in the body as in the soul: the fault then is in the canker and
vile disposition of the soul of man.

This is their change: at the sight of Christ, they are blinded in mind, and
troubled in heart. What does the Lord? Lets He them be? lets He them ly in
that blindness and terror? No, He departs not, but trauells to change them
over again in mind, heart, and affection: it is the word of Jesus only, that
is able to alter and change the heart of man, and that evil disposition and
blindness which is there, when all the affections of the heart are out of
order, it is the word of Christ only, that has power to change them, all
the Angels in Heaven, and all the men in the Earth will not be able to put
thine heart in order, if it be troubled. Therefore he or she that has blind
terrors, let them resort to the hearing of the word of God: I say to thee, if
thou disdainest this word, and if thou seek to this man, or seek to that
man, or seek to Angels, thou shall never get rest nor relief in thy
trouble. So it is the word of Jesus Christ, that must give light and
consolation.

But what sort of word must this be? Must it be a soft, a gentle and calm
word to the ear? No, when the mind has blinded it self, and when the
affections are out of order, she must be tamed, the affections are hammered
and thrown down, because the pride of the soul reaches up to Heaven, to
reason against God, 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, Chapter 10. verse 4, 5.
Therefore she must be subdued by sharp threatening and sad speeches, to hammer
her down. So the Lord says, Why are ye troubled? Why let ye vain fantasies
arise in your hearts? No doubt, these words had power to repress and hammer
down the misordered vanities in their hearts: then the disordered affections
must be compelled to be in order, not by fair words, but by threatening, and
saying, away to your order, they must be beaten and stricken down. Let no man
deceive himself: thinking, that he should always hear soft and gentle words:
No, that will never make a change in the soul.

Come to the words: Wherefore do doubts arise in your hearts? In the words
the Lord lets you see, how the mind blindes her self, when a spiritual
object is set before it, the word Ascending, that is used, lets us see, that
first of all, a small cogitation enters in, and then it grows to a mountain:
When she sees an heavenly object, God, or the word, or Christ, in the which
God, or Christ is seen: as soon as this heavenly object is laid before the eye
of the mind, she begins to reason, she gets not the blenck so soon, but
as soon she reasones, and the discourse arises up like a mountain, so that the
light of the Spirit shall be taken out of her eye, and shall make such
conclusions, that shall rise up and stand like mountains, and blind her, and
if she has any sight, pull it out of her, as ye see sometimes, when the
Sun will be shining bright within a short time a cloud will arise from
below, and will take away the light of the Sun: Even so, from the reason of
man arise doubts like a foome (all thy reason is but stinking foome) and it
will stand up like a foul black smooke, betwixt thee and God, Romans 1.21.

Read ye not, what the Apostle says: The Gentiles and Philosophers beginning
at reason, put out the blencke that they had of God, and in their wisdom they
became mad fools.

This day, the Papists, and their Doctors, have blinded themselves with vain
Philosophy, and with their thornie questions they have drowned Christ, and so
obscured Him, that He could not be seen to the world, and they drown
themselves in their own dung.

Let all men then take this lesson: When the word of the LORD is offered to
thee, Be not too curious: Bevvare of thy learning, beware of thy reasoning,
lean not too much to it, that it stand not up between thee, and GOD, and
blind thee: let not cogitations arise: When it comes to the Scripture, reason,
Why not? but with soberness, with a soul desirous to learn, with prayer,
with calling on that Spirit: No light in that word, but by that Spirit of
light, who dited the Scriptures: If thou gettest that Spirit, then light shall
be offered and given to thee, but if thou vanishest in thy mind, and followest
thy wit, except thou castest away thy reasoning, read not one word: I forbid
thee to read one word of the Scriptures, lest thou aggreadge thy damnation.

Now, I go forward: When thus way by checking, He has beaten down the
imaginations, reasonings, and cogitations that sublimely rose out of the mind,
and when by an angry word, He has beaten down the affections which were
out of order, now in gentleness He begins to teach and instruct them, and
He teaches them two things: First, that He is a body: Secondly, that He is not
a Spirit, and that He is that same CHRIST, that same man, that same body, and
none other, that before His Passion, haunted with them, teached them, and
wrought miracles in their presence, He teaches them, by a familiar argument:
First, by the sight: Behold, says He, mine hands, and my feet: He holds up
His hands, not His hands only, but also the marks of the wounds of His
hands, He lets them see His feet, and the print of the nails.

Next, Handle Me, says He, if ye will not see, feel: What better argument
would ye have? than to feel flesh, blood, and bones. Next, He proves, that
He was no Spirit, but a man, with the body of a man, A spirit, or an Angel,
has not body flesh, and bones: but so it is, I have them, Ergo, I am no
spirit. This is a sensible argument: and see, how He dimittes that glorious
body to their eyes, and to their hands to be seen, to be touched, that He
might make them to believe: albeit Faith be a spiritual work in the soul,
yet it is wrought, and confirmed in the soul by the eye, and by sight, by the
hand by touching. This place lets us see how damnable is the doctrine of the
Papists who would have us to believe that in the Supper of JESUS CHRIST, there
is a local and bodily presence of CHRIST'S body, and that the whole body is
there, and that the blood is there drunken by thee, and the body is eaten by
thee, after a bodily manner with the mouth of thy body, and not sacramentally
and spiritually. How dare these deceivers of the world, these vile knaves
affirm, that they eat the body of JESUS CHRIST, and puts it in their vile
mouths. What reasonable man, can be persuaded of it. Will they teach me, as
CHRIST teached His disciples, will they let me see visibly with mine eye, and
feel sensibly with mine hand, a body, then shall I believe, otherwise, no
Papist, will cause me believe, that I eat CHRIST really and bodily with my
mouth, no more than the disciples would believe that CHRIST was a body, till
they felt Him, and saw Him, I will be of the Faith of the disciples. Believe
them who will, I shall never believe them, by the grace of GOD. Let me see a
body, not the roundnesse and whiteness of the bread, and let me feel this,
that CHRIST let His disciples feel: if thou vvilt not let me feel that, I
will never believe thee: hold thee content, and I am not bound to believe
thee: yea more, if I believed thee, I were fair in the wrong, I should sin
against the LORD, and against the truth of His body. Why? If I believe thee,
neither seeing, nor feeling such a thing, then I should believe, the body of
Christ to be unvisible, and intractable, and to believe that, is to believe the
body of CHRIST to be no body. That body that is not seen, nor handled, is
not a body, these properties being taken away from a body, there remains no
body, yea, sight and feeling are such inseperable accidents of the body, that
the very glorified body cannot be without them.

The Papists cast unto us a frivolous distinction betwixt the glorified body of
CHRIST, and His unglorified body: No, the very glorified body is as well
visible and tractable, as an unglorified body. The godly in the latter day
shall see whether it be visible, or not. Go thy way with thy bodily presence,
thou debarrest thy self from that presence, that the godly shall see, one
day to their consolation.

Furthermore, Brethren, There is another thing to be marked: I see JESUS
CHRIST, after His glorious Resurrection, to have kept the marks of the wounds,
He shows His hands and His wounded hands. He shows them His feet, and His
wounded feet, and He showed His side to Thomas, when he would not believe and
made him to put his hands in His side. Ye would marvel, that Christ, rising
up in glory, should have kept the marks of infirmity. When the Lord rose,
it became Him to shake off all infirmity: and the marks of His wounds are a
part of infirmity. See ye not how it has pleased the Lord to humble
Himself for our cause, to the end, that we should believe. Not only rose
He, and appeared unto them, but also after He rose, He keeps the marks of
His wounds, that no vvayes they should doubt, but fully believe, that it
was He, and none other. It is a vvonderfull thing to see the humility of
Christ for our cause: as all His life was but an humbling of Himself: so
after His Resurrection, for thine exaltation, when He should have gone to
glory, He abides forty days, to cause His Disciples believe. Art not thou,
who art dust and ashes, bound to humble thy self for Him, seeing that He, who
is so glorious, humbled Himself so low for thee? Now whether the Lord keep
these marks or no, or whether we shall see Him come with them or no in that
great day, I will not be curious: but this I know, the fresh memory of the
wounds, and of the Cross, shall never vanishe out of the hearts of the
Elect: and in the Heaven thou shall remember a thousand times better, than in
the earth, when thou shall see Him as He is: when thou shall behold Him
whom thou have pierced through, thou shall mourn, says the Prophet
Zachary. There is the remembering of the wounds. And as that Cross shall
never go out of the eye of the Father, (for it is as present now before the
eye of the Father, as it was that hour that He was crucified:) So when thou
shall come to Heaven, always thou shall have a memory of the Cross: And in
this respect He is called an everlasting Sacrifice, and an everlasting Priest.
And, as the sight of that Cross pacifies the wrath of GOD: (were it out of
the eye of the Father, the flame of His wrath vvoulde devour and consume
thee, for the pacifying of the wrath stands in the sight of the Cross:) So
the joye and peace of thy conscience in Heaven, shall stand in an everlasting
remembrance of the Cross and His bloody wounds. There are two grounds of
our Eternal joye and peace in Heaven: First, our joye and peace stands in the
sight of that present glory of Christ in Heaven. Next after the sight of that
glory, they stand on a remembrance of His bygone Cross: These shall be the
two pillars of the everlasting joye and happiness which the Saints shall
have in Heaven. So He shall stand in as good stead to thee in the Heaven, as
He did in the earth. Learn to seek Him, to embrace Him, and to be homely
with Him: for in Him stands thy joye everlastingly, and ever thou be happy,
thou must be with Him. Now this for Christ's part. Hitherto has He taught
them, by the senses and things sensible: But look what this works in them:
It is said, That for joye they could not believe, and they fell out in a
wondering. There is the effect that it wrought: There is something here
wrought: to wit, a joye, and a vvondering. Yet the thing that they should
have, is not as yet wrought, that is, Faith: for joye and wondering by
appearance stays their faith. So hard a matter is it to cause a man to
believe. It is an easy thing to thee, who know not what Faith is, to say,
I believe: but when thou art put to the proof, thou will find how hard a
thing it is, to cause thee to believe. There is as great contrariety betwixt
our nature, and faith in Christ, as is betwixt water and fire: And if thou
beleeuest, there must be as great change in thy nature, as to change water
into fire, and fire into water. Nature must be turned into grace. But how
comes it to pass, that joye and wondering should stay Faith? Consider it:
That which one would feign have coming to pass, ye know he cannot easily
believe it, when one tells him, that it is come to pass: And that which least
we would have coming to pass, we most easily believe that it has come to
pass. A man that fears evil, will credit an evil report readily: but he
that earnestly wishes a good thing, will not so soon credit a good report:
he will think it almost impossible. But yet when a man hears tell of a
thing which he would feign have coming to pass, although he believe it not,
yet the heart will leap for joye. This was the disposition of the Apostles:
The thing that fainest they would have coming to pass, was a sight of JESUS.
And if thou were acquainted with Christ as these men were, if He were taken
out of thy sight, thou would get no pleasure, till that thou saw Him,
as PAVL says, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST: He had such a
thirst to see Christ, that he would not care for death, nor for the grave, to
see Him. Howbeit they cannot believe, yet they have joye, and their souls are
ravished with admiration. Faith is not so much in a ravished and carried heart,
as in a set^ed soul. A faithful heart is the most settled heart in the
world. If there be vanity in the heart, faith is so solid that it will
press out vanity. Faith is a solid thing in a settled heart. A faithful man,
is a settled man: and a man without faith, is as an empty vessel, and as a
bag of wind: his joye is light, and proceeds only from the swarfe of the
soul. But after once faith be settled, there will be solid joy that comes in
with pleasure, and searches the least corner of the heart: a joye unspeakable
and glorious begun here, which will have none end, till we see Christ. So
this their joye goes not far enough down in their hearts: for they are
ravished with joye, but had not solid faith. When I mark this place, I see in
it what shall be the estate of the godly when they shall meet with their
LORD: The first sight shall rauishe them so, that they shall wonder, that ever
there could have been such a glory. Will thou but suspende thy judgment for
a while, thou shall see that which thou never saw, and that which thou never
heardest tell of, and that which never could enter into thine heart. When thou
shall see this, thou shall fall into an admiration: Then after once thou
know Him, then after the admiration shall follow a solid faith, a solid
joye, and a settled apprehension of things spiritual, and that not for a time,
but for evermore. Now it lastes not, scarcely is it present when it
euanishes: But after the full sight, shall follow the solid joye that never
shall have end. As by the contrary, This shall be the estate of the
reprobate: The first sight and sense of that wrath that shall ceaze upon them
so fearcelie, as never before they could have suspected, shall astonishe,
confound, and dammishe them. Thou knew never what measure of wrath is
hidden up in the treasure of GOD. Thou who art a reprobate, till thou feel
it, there shall come such a terror upon thee, that it shall cause all the
hairs of thine head stand over end: and it is called (...), such an
astonishment as Christ suffered in the Garden, a little before He was taken.
Then shall follow on them that anguishe, and fearful dreadfulnesse, pressing
them, when they have been astonished at the sight and sense of wrath which
is called (...), which was the LORDS second perturbation, which is a more
settled feeling of wrath, and more constant apprehension of dolor, sorrow,
and anguishe for evermore in the Helles: And it shall be so weighty when
they are shot into Hell, that it shall press the sap out of them. The
LORD save us from it, and give us grace to be found in CHRIST, that we may
be saved from that wrath which is to come, in Him: To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, for
evermore: Amen.

THE XLII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.












We continue as yet (beloved Brethren) in the History of the appearing of
Christ after His glorious Resurrection: His fifth appearing was to the eleue^
(who were so called after the defection of Judas) and the others: The common
rank of His Disciples conuened together in the night, in a secret pl^ce of
Jerusalem: and while they are sitting together, having their conferences one
with another, and each one persuading and certifying another of the
Resurrection of the Lord: in the mean time the door being shut, the LORD on a
suddaintie comes in ere they wist, and He stands in the mids of them, and
standing in the mids of them, He wishes His peace to them, and He says,
Peace be unto you: they seeing Him, and supposing He had been a Spirit, or an
Angel in the likeness of a man, they were abashed, and astonished: The Lord
aftherwards settles them with a little sharp rebuke: He begins to show unto
them, that He was no spirit, but a very body: and that same very man called
Jesus, who before His Passion was conversant with them, that same man that
suffered, and therefore He holds out His hands and His feet, which were both
marked with the print of His wounds on the Cross: See (says He) feel (says
He) look if I be not that same man which suffered, a Spirit has not flesh and
blood, as I have, Ergo, I am no Spirit. When He had in this manner, led them by
the very sense to know Him, by the eye to behold Him, by the ear to hear His
familiar voice, and salutation, by the hand to handle Him. What effect
followed, Yet says the Scripture, they believed not, and they could not
believe, for exceeding joy wherewith they were ravished, for admiration, and
wondering they could not believe for a piece of time: Faith dwelles in a settled
heart: and if there be any vanity, and any emptiness in the heart, Faith will
press out the vanity, and will fill up that emptiness in the heart, and the
faithful man is the most solid and settled thing in the world: and he who is
the unfaithful man, is a vain hearted man, his heart is blown up with
vanity, albeit he had all the natural wit in the world. Now the joy that
Faith brings with it, is not an admiration and rauishing of the heart, but it
is a solid joy, a solid apprehension of spiritual things in the heart: so the
hearts of the disciples at the first sight became ravished in admiration, the
veil of their hearts were not touched with joy, they had not that settled
joy, that they had afterward.

Now to come to the Text that we have read: In it, first, the Lord yet
continues in assuring them that it was He: He strives on with their
infidelity: then when He has showed them visibly the action of a body, in
eating in their sight, then He comes to a sweet Sermon, wherein He instructes
them in two points: first, that all things that befell to Him, as His Passion,
and Resurrection behooued to have befallen to Him: secondly again, that as
those things befell to Him of necessity: so of necessity those things
behooued to be preached to the world. So He instructes them in these two
necessities. Then He comes on in the second part of His preaching, and gives
direction to them, to be preachers, and witnesses to the world of all these
things, promising again to them that Spirit, which He had promised them
before His Passion, and that they should have the greater security. He gives
them commandment, not to depart out of Jerusalem, until they were endued with
virtue out of Heaven: this is the effect.

To come to the first part: When they heard Him speak with a voice familiar,
wherewith they had been acquainted, and that homely salutation, Peace be unto
you: yet they would not know Him, when they had seen His hands and feet, yet
they believed not that it was He, when they had handled Him, and felt Him, yet
they believed Him not for all this, they were ravished with joy, yet they
believed not. The Lord will not leave them in this unbelief, but He will let
them understand that it was He, He teaches them by the sight of a bodily
action. He asks if they had a^y me^t: They present to Him A piece of roasted
fish, and that was all the delicate they gave Him, and with it A piece of honey
comb, He takes and eats in their sight, He eats the piece of the roasted
fish, and the honey comb: Not that the Lord after His Resurrection, had any
need to eat any of their meat, He who now was immortal after His
Resurrection, that was glorious, and that was full of God, and had all the
powers of His soul filled with God: What needed He their piece of fish, or
their honey comb to eat: So it was not for any need He had, that He eated,
but that He eated in their sight, that they should believe that the Lord was a
body: a Spirit eats not, neither drinks. The Lord therefore shows them that
He was no Spirit. In doing this, Brethren, no question, He humbled Himself,
being now immortal and glorious, and full of God: Was not this a humbling of
Him, an immortal body to take that mortal bread? It is a wonderful thing,
to see, how Jesus Christ humbled Himself, ay whilst He was yet still in this
world: Being says Paul Philip in the form of God, and thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. He made Himself of no reputation, taking on
Him the shape of a servant, That is, the nature of man and in the nature of man
became obedient to the Father for us to the death, and to a vile death even to
the death of the Cross, a foul death, and a sore death. Then, when after He
was once ^^ade and risen again, and should have entered to His glory, and have
passed to Heaven imm^diately after His Resurrection, to sit at the right hand
of that Majesty: He would not immediately do so, but did defer and delay it
the space of forty days, and all this time humbling Himself, it was a small
thing, that when He was mortal to humble Himself: but when He was immortal,
that He should have continued so long humbling Himself for the cause of man,
it is a wonder, and amongst all the parts of His humiliation, this is one
part, that He ate this mortal food. And thou, when thou shall be glorified,
thou shall not be so far humbled, as to eat any food of this world: thou
shall not be so far humbled, as JESUS CHRIST was humbled. Was this, Brethren,
for the Apostles cause only, Was it for Peter's cause, John, James and the rests
cause? No, Paul says, All is yours, speaking to the Church, whether it be
Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or things present, or things to come, or life, or
death, all is yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1. Epist. to the
Corinthians, the 3. Chapter, and the 21. and 22. verses. So all the Apostles
themselves, were for the Churches cause, I speak to you, Paul, John, James,
etc. were for your cause, and all this homeliness of Christ, with them was for
your cause, as they were for your cause: so seeing the LORD has so far and
so many ways humbled Himself, consider, if we have not great cause, to meet
Him, or not: If any will bow so low, as to take thee by the hand, will thou
not put out thine hand again, and meet Him: and think ye, that this
humbling of the LORD of glory has taken an end, it ends not so long, as
this Ministry continues: Know ye, what this Ministry, and this preaching
is? It is but an humbling of GOD from Heaven, and that for thy cause: look
what Paul says, in the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, the 5. Chapter, and the
20. verse: We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though GOD did beseech you
through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God. There
ye see, that by this Ministry, GOD humbles Himself, to pray thee to be
reconciled with Him, is not this an humbling of God? even that He should pray
thee to be reconciled with Him, He becomes a suter, and solister for thy cause:
says the Apostle, We pray you, that y^ should be reconciled to Him: and what
is it to God to humble Himself, if not this when He beseeches and requests us
by His Messengers and Ambassadors, that we be reconciled to Him.

This exceeding humbling of the LORD, as it lets us see His love unspeakable
toward us, so it requires a meeting on our parts, as we would eschew
fearful judgments. If the first humbling of GOD, when He humbled Himself in
our nature, will not move thee to make Him a meeting, it shall bring on a
judgment: If the second, wherein He humbled Himself after His Resurrection so
many ways will not move thee, it shall double thy judgment: if the third
humbling of Him, now in the Ministry will not move thee: if thou contemnest
the word, and the Ministry, it shall triple the judgment, albeit thou werest
the King of the world: O that judgment and wrath! that shall be heaped upon
thee, thou shall be thrust down, and plunged in Hell, to be tormented for
evermore.

Can GOD humble Himself for nothing? No, either shall it be for passing
mercy, or else for a passing judgment to thee, for ever more.

Then, Brethren, ye shall mark in this place, and I shall only touch it by
the way: The Lord after His glorious Resurrection eated the meat they gave
Him: Hereof it follows: That after His glorious Resurrection, He kept these
natural powers, as eating and drinking: if He kept them not, how could He
eat at this time, if there was not a power attractiue in His stomach? how
could the meat go over to His stomach. This I speak, to let you see, when we
shall rise and be glorified, and see our Lord* and when this humbled body
shall be translated to the likeness of His glorious body: as we shall keep
the same soul and body: so we shall keep all the natural powers and
faculties of them.

Nothing shall be lost in the Resurrection: We shall keep all, but after
another manner: all these powers now are infirm and weak: all are vile,
without glory, then all shall be glorified, faculty of eating and drinking
shall be glorified and made spiritual. Will thou then desire meat, will thou
hunger, as thou do now: will thy stomach desire meat, as it does now: No,
all thy natural powers shall be filled with GOD. 1. Cor. Chapter 15. verse
28. God shall be all in all: He shall be meat and drink, and all things to
thee. In the 21. Chapter of the Revelation, and the 22. verse. He shall be
the Temple: Thou shall not need to go to the Church, Thy God shall be a
Temple: Thou shall not need Sun, nor Moon, or a lantern, or a candle, Thy
God shall be all in all to thee: So long as we are here, we hunger, we thirst,
we have this meat, and that meat, and we must have the Sun, by day, and the
Moon by night, and a candle, all this necessity importes an imperfection:
Eatest thou, drinkest thou, all is an argument of imperfection, and albeit God
filles thee in a part (GOD begins to fill thee in this world, and thou will
feel His sweetness) yet He gives us here in this life, but a little taste:
GOD is not all in all to us, and therefore, so long as we are here, we must
eat and drink: but after that once GOD shall fully possess us, and replenish
our souls, when we shall see our Lord again, we shall never hunger nor
thirst, there shall never be want again, there shall be fullness, not of
perishing joy, but a fullness of such glory, as no tongue can express, and all
the powers of thy soul shall be replenished with an unspeakable pleasure: the
world knovves not what this means: and when it is spoken to them, they
think it vanity. To enter here curiously about this meat, and to dispute:
What became of this meat? whether it was digested, and turned to nutriture,
and whether it was avoided again, I think it needless: But to speak it in
a word: It was an easy matter to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who made all of
nothing, who made thee of nothing, who made thy meat and drink of nothing,
who made that piece of fish of nothing, and who made that honey comb of
nothing, to turn it into nothing again, without a concoction or digesting in
the stomach.

Now, to go forwards to the second part of the Text, and to come to His
svveet Sermon: No question, He delivered it at great length: but Luke has
summed it shortly: Here JESUS CHRIST preaches after His glorious
Resurrection: ye heard many of His preachinges before His suffering, in John,
hear this now after His Resurrection: The first thing He does, He informs
His Disciples of a necessity: It behooued Christ to die, and it behooued Him
to rise again after His burial the third day, there is a necessity: He
proves this: What ever thing, says He, was written of me, in Moses
first, in the Prophets next, and in the Psalms last: all behooued to be
accomplished, every jote of it, of necessity would the LORD say, must be
accomplished, Heaven and Earth must pass away, ere one jote of that which is
spoken of Me, pass away, but all must be fulfilled.

To touch this, He takes up all the whole Old Testament into three parts:
First, the books of Moses: Secondly, the Prophets: Thirdly, the Psalms of
David.

Commonly, we will hear the Old Testament divided in two parts: First, the
books of Moses: Next, the Prophets, now He makes the Psalms the third. In
the Psalms we have continual prophecies of CHRIST, yet I think this is the
principal cause of it, because the Psalms are songs, which David sung unto
GOD, and thereafter put in write, and this is the chief purpose of the
Psalms. It is true, that in the Psalms there are Prophecies contained
concerning CHRIST: and therefore the Psalms were before rekoned with the
Prophecies, and David counted amongst the Prophets, Luke Chapter 24. verse 15.
Yet the chief purpose of the Psalms, is to sing unto the LORD, and then he
prophecies, he stands as a viue and express type of CHRIST, wherein he
differs from other Prophets, who in their prophesying were no types of
CHRIST. But to return: What ever thing, says CHRIST, is written of Me, it
behooued that to be accomplished: But so it is, all these things have been
written and foretold of Me, my suffering and my Resurrection, Moses, the
Prophets, and David have foretold them: Ergo, of necessity I behooued to
suffer, and to rise again the third day. Ye see then, what He is doing,
He is binding the Faith of His Disciples, to believe of Him that He was
risen, urging them with such a necessity, that they could not escape.

It is not so easy a thing, (as the world thinks it) to believe: Ask at a
vvanton companion, if He believes: He will answer: Why believe I not, when
in the mean time His own mouth, nor His heart, has no more smell of Faith,
than the thing He touched never: and yet the blasphemous knave will say, He
has Faith: but to get Faith, of all things thou shall find, that it is the
most hard and difficill thing, and ere ever thou beleeuest, thou shall be
straitted: The soul shall be so forced and constrained to believe, that thou
can not say otherwise.

Well, Brethren, we have done with it, and we have made shipwreck of
salvation, if we believe not this Gospel, and this History of the death and
Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST.

Beleeuest thou not that JESUS CHRIST has died, and has risen again for
thee, thou shall never see Jesus to to thy comfort: But ere ever thou or I
believe that this is true that is written of CHRIST'S suffering, and His
glorification, ere ever thou beleeuest the History of the New Testament of the
Passion and rising again of Christ done and ended: thou must be persuaded:
there is a necessity that all these things that are spoken in the Old
Testament behooued to be done: if then thou would know the necessity of
these things, cast thine eyes to the Old Testament, and cast it over, Begin
at Moses, and then come to the Prophets, and lastly, to the Psalms of David.
Read the Old Testament, and that write shall show thee such a necessity of
these things that more possible had it been, that the world should have
vanished away, than that these things should not have come to pass: and then
when ye take the New Testament, and sees these things which are foretold to
be accomplished, ye will not believe with how great joy, the heart will rest
upon Jesus, and it will say, I will believe this, that Christ has suffered,
and is risen for me: then thy pleasure will be, to turn over the Old and
New Testament, that thy Faith may be the more confirmed.

To go forward with the proposition of the argument, when He says, It
behooved all these things to come to pass: He propones it not simply, but
whilst He tells it, He secretly rebukes them, Heard ye not of this before? Are
not these the words, which I spoke to you while I was yet with you? Why have ye
now forgote them, seeing not long since I told you them? I find in the
disciples of Christ, a very great ignorance at the first: Think ye that any of
them knew one word of this, notwithstanding they were foretold in Moses, in
the Prophets, and in the Psalms: No, not a word: then with this ignorance, I
see a great forgetfulness, albeit they knew not, should they not have
remembered, what their Lord said to them before His Passion? and yet when they
see Him suffer, and see His Resurrection, this cannot waken their memory, to
say, My Lord told me this: and therefore I will believe: in them thou may
see thy nature, how ignorant, and forgetful thou art by nature: let thee ly
still, albeit thou werest Peter or Paul, or the best of them, let thee sleeepe
on, thou shall die sleeping: if these disciples had not been wakened, they had
died, and this is the great and special mercy of God, that He shows to His
own: He will let them fall in a slumber, and ly a while in ignorance but
incontinently He will come, and give them a put, with sharpness and mercy,
and waken them. Thou who refusest sharpnes, O that sharp wakening that shall
abide thee! Therefore, as soon as the Minister of God cries unto thee, O
Catiue! sleep thou? death and damnation abides thee, if thou wakenest not:
but if thou will waken in time, thou shall find mercy: pray unto the Lord,
that thou may be wakened, for if thou wakenest not in time, heavy shall the
judgment be, that shall overtake thee: woeful shall thy wakening be, and the
dolor that shall come on thee, as the pain of a woman in travel: Our men for
all our crying, will not be wakened, but if they continue sleeping, they shall
go to Hell.

Now to come to the assumption: These things are written of me, that I should
die, and rise again: and no doubt, when He tells this to them, He falls out
in a discourse of the Scriptures, alleging testimonies out of Moses, the
Prophets, and the Psalms, as the words following, declare. But to proceed: Is
the Lord content to allege the Scriptures simply? Does He no more? Mark it
well: as He alleadges and opened the Scriptures unto them: So He opens their
mind and understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. Would ye
have an effectual preaching, there is an effectual preaching: when these two
go together: when the Scriptures are opened, and the Lord puts in His hand,
and opens the heart, and the dead soul that is sleeping, to understand that
piece of Scripture, which is opened. Would ye have the difference between the
preaching of Christ, and the preaching of His servants: all their preaching is
nothing, in respect of His, Moses, the Prophets, and all the Apostles, are
nothing to Him: when He preached, that same LORD that spoke, had power in His
own hand, and made His own Spirit, to open the heart: never a preacher had
that, that the Lord Jesus had, He had His own Spirit to give unto His own,
when He spoke His own word: the preachers have not that Spirit to give, but
referres it unto the Lord, 1. Cor. 13.5.6.7. Paul says to the Corinthians, who
esteemed much of Paul: O vain men, Paul is nothing, he only plants, Apollos is
nothing, he wateres, but it is God that gives the increase: if he blessed not
the labor of Paul, or of any other preacher, all were lost labor: if the Lord
give not His Spirit with the word, man teaches in vain. In the 16. of the
Acts, verse 14. When Paul is preaching, we read not, that any are converted
for all his preaching, but only one woman, Lydia, happy Lydia: When Paul
preached, it is not said, that Paul opened her heart, but that the Lord opened
her heart: Paul delivered the doctrine, but the Lord* and not Paul had the
Spirit, to give with the preaching: therefore when ye hear, and come to
hear, ever cry, Lord, open mine heart, No creature, no Minister, none
Angel: yea, all the Angels of Heaven, will not open the heart of a sinner.
Cry for that Spirit, that He would open thine heart, that thou may feed
upon that food of life.

Now consider at what time it is, that the minds of the disciples are opened
to understand: It was even when He is exponing the Scriptures, then their
minds are opened, and at none other time, to let you see, in despite of the
world, that there is none opening of the heart, none illumination of the
Spirit, but by this word, by the hearing, and by the reading of this word.
Away with these fantastic revelations of the Anabaptists, away with the
Pope, and the crew of His shauelings, who affirm, that the Spirit will be
effectual at the preaching of his unwritten verities, at the dreams and
fantasies of men, which is not only not found in the Scripture, but also is
altogether contrary and repugnant to the Scripture. I pronounce, let them
hear, albeit it were a thousand year, the Spirit of Jesus shall abhor that
trash and peltrie. Set me up the Pope, to preach these vanities to thee: I
denounce, thy mind shall not be opened, that Spirit shall never come to open
the minds, neither of them, who preach, nor yet their minds who hear them.
Go unto Rome, sit and hear, and lend thine ear to a flattering society of
their Clergy, hear them on, thy soul shall the more be blinded, the more
thou hear: the Spirit of Christ, will only accompany His own word. Look
what is our nature in the Disciples of CHRIST, know thou it not? their
minds were blinded, and sound sleeping, while the Lord opened them. They knew
not what Moses said, or what the Prophets spoke of Christ, while the Lord
opened their understanding. Nothing in nature, but evil, nothing but
blindness in the mind. Away with the Papist, and his freewill, fie on thee,
that think thy self better than thou art: fie on thee, that know not thy
natural blindness, and deadness, thou will come and speak of thy Free Will,
and of the light of thy mind: thou will say, that thou have a Free Will to
incline to heavenly things: be not deceived with the conceit of this engine,
and natural quickness. Indeed in humane things, a man will have a great
quickness and sharpness, but bring him to the Scriptures of God to Moses, to
the Prophets, and Apostles, he is as blind as a Moldewarpe, and as fond as a
fool: the greater natural wit and quickness that thou have, (a sore thing)
the greater excecation and foolishness in spiritual things: speak to the
natural man of the Scripture, of all the fools in this world, he is the
greatest: the more natural wit thou have, if it be not sanctified, the more
foolish shall the Cross of Christ, and His Resurrection to glory* seem to
thee: for the wisdom of the flesh, is enimitie against God. I tell thee, thou
must not bring thy natural wit to the Scriptures, Paul tells thee, If thou
would be wise in God, thou must be a fool, that thou may be wise. Art
thou wise in the world, when thou come to the Church, leave thy wisdom
behind thee: art thou a Lawyer, keep it to the Session-house? art thou a
Mediciner? Have thou any great wisdom? leave all behind thee, and come like a
silly child that has no wit, or else, the more thou hear, the greater
shall be thy blindness and induration.

Now come to the conclusion of the Argument, He concludes, That it behooued
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day. There is a
necessity of Christ's death and Resurrection, and so a necessity, that they
should believe them: for to the end that we may believe in the Gospel: there
must be a necessity laid upon us, to wit, that we be assured, that otherwise
it could not be, but it behooued Christ to suffer, and rise again, as the
Euangell records. Now this necessity we show you before: We may know by the
old Testament, Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms: for this we must lay as
an infallible ground, that whatsoever was foretold by them, of necessity it
behooued to come to pass: and so we see, that the Old Testament, serves
greatly to strenthen our Faith, for when we see the things that were
foretold to be all fulfilled in Him, all matter of occasion of doubting is
taken away. The Lord work this Faith in our hearts, for Christ's sake: To
whom with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, for
evermore.

AMEN.
THE XLIII. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.


IN opening up of the fifth appearance of the Lord after His Resurrection to His
Disciples conueened in Jerusalem in the night time (well beloved in CHRIST) we
have heard how the LORD has traveled by sundry means to make them to know
Him, while as He appeared to them, and stood up in the mids of them suddenly,
He spoke to them familiarly, and after His own accustomed manner, yet they
believe not, nor understands Him not by His speaking, but thought that He had
been a Spirit, or an Angel in the likeness of a man: Then He comes nearer
them, and showing out His hands and His feet, and marks of the nails
wherewith He was vvounded on the Cross: He says to them: See, feel, and
touch mine hands and my feet with your hands, see, I am even He, I am not a
Spirit, as ye suppose: I am a very body, a Spirit has no flesh, nor bones,
therefore I am no Spirit: yet they believe not for joy, says the Text, but
they stood wondering. Then He comes nearer them, and demandes, whether if
they had any meat amongst them, and they gave Him a piece of roasted fish, and
of an honey comb, He eats in their presence, testifying to them by His action
of eating, He was no Spirit, a Spirit cannot eat nor drink, yet He leaves
them not, but He preaches to them a sweet Sermon, whereof the last day, ye
heard, there was two parts. In the first, He propones to them a necessity of
all these things that befell unto Him, all behooued to come to pass, He
behooued to be crucified, He behooued to rise again the third day. And why?
Because it was written: First, in Moses: Secondly, in the Prophets: and
lastly, in the Psalms: What ever was written, all behooued to be accomplished,
not so much as one syllable of it might perish, because whatsoever was written
by Moses, the Prophets, and David, all was ordained and decreed, all was bound
in a fast decree from all eternity. This was the first necessity.

Now, this day, Brethren, as God will give the grace, we shall come to the
other necessity, which is of the preaching, and then we shall come to the
second part of His Sermon, concerning a direction unto His Disciples, to go
out to the world, and testify of these things, that they heard and saw of
Him. Then to come to the purpose: as it behooued that all these things that
were foretold of Christ should come to pass, so there was als great a
necessity, that all should be preached: That repentance and remission of
sins, should be preached in His name among all Nations. Now to speak
somewhat of this necessity of preaching. Men think commonly all this
preaching to be for a piece of policy, and for the fashioun: a man to stand up
and preach to the rest, they think it a piece of folly, ueening to the Church
to be but for the fashion. But I shall tell thee, except there be preaching,
no salvation, no life, shall pertain unto thee, except there be preaching,
Christ's coming into the world, is in vain for thee, all His suffering is for
nothing, His Resurrection shall be of no value to thee, they will do thee no
good.

For to speak of the ordinance of God, and of that eternal decree: for as the
Lord ordained from all eternity, Christ to come in the world, to suffer, and
to rise again: so He ordained preaching to be in His Name. But to leave that,
think thou to come to Heaven without faith? No, thou shall never see it,
without faith, thou shall never see ye face of Christ, think y^ to get Faith
without hearing? If thou contemnest hearing, thou shall never get Faith in
Christ, But how can thou hear if there be no preaching: thou must hear a
voice: So without the sounding of the Gospel, no life. Christ, and His
suffering, and His rising is but dead to thee without preaching. That life
that flovved from the Resurrection of Christ, is conveyed in the soul by
hearing, and without hearing thou shall ly dead, and die everlastingly.
Therefore, Christ, when He came into the world, He was no dumb sufferer, He
preached on night and day, Paul says, Ephesians. 2.17. When He came, He was the
peacemaker, and He preached peace. And to the Romans, Chapter 15. verse 8.
He is called a Minister of Circumcision: and CHRIST knowing this necessity of
preaching, when He goes His way to Heaven, leaves He the world without
preaching? No, Paul to the Ephesians, Chapter 4. verse 11. says, He gave some
to be Apostles, some to be Prophets, some to be Evangelists, some to be
Pastors, some to be Doctors: and all to the end, that they might preach the
Gospel of peace to His coming: And Paul says of himself: Woe to me, if I
preach not the Gospel, 1. Cor. Chapter 9. verse 16. He left His Spirit behind
Him, as ye see, He promises in John Chapter 14. verse 26. But mark, He left
His Spirit to be ministered by preaching: thou who contemnest this preaching, I
denounce to thee, thou shall never taste of that Spirit: thou who vvilt stand
up, and say, I have the Spirit, and then contemnest the Ministry, I say,
thou lie, albeit thou vverest the Emperor of the world.

Now to go forward: there is a great necessity of preaching: But take heed
to this preaching: He describes this preaching by sundry circumstances: First,
it must be in some name and in some authority: a man that stands up and
preaches to the people: he must preach to the people in some name: an Herald
will stand up at the market cross, and make his proclamation, it must be in
some name: for if he stand up and proclaim in his own name, he is but a
knave, and deserves to be hanged: So, whosoever stands up to preach, look
that he preach never a word in his own name. CHRIST says, there must be
preaching in my Name: Look that all preaching be in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Now, what is the name of CHRIST? The Name of CHRIST is His power (O that
passing power!) His authority: What power? Even that power that He speaks of
in the last Chapter of Matthew: All power in Heaven and Earth is Mine.

Then in the second Chapter to the Philippians, and the ninth verse: Wherefore
GOD also has highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name, above every name: He is
exalted in a wonderful sublimenesse. O that high sublimenesse! that the Lord
has received: He has gotten a Name above all names, and a power above all
powers, and none shall have such a power: then he sets out this power: All
knees must bow at the Name of JESUS: all powers must bow to that power, and
all knees must be folded before it: bow thy knee before that power, or else,
thou shall be thrust in Hell: all knees shallbe bowed before that Tribunal:
that Name will cause all the Devils in Hell, bow, and stoop.

It is written in the 4. Chapter of the Acts: There is none other Name under
Heaven able to save men, but the Name of Jesus Christ: thou shall never see
life, but by this power and this Name: Mark it: No life, I will tell again:
No salvation to man or woman in the world, but by the Name of Jesus, and His
power: and therefore how great shall the power of this His Name, as ye may
well see by the word, which sets it out, even the Gospel. The Euangel that
speaks of the Name of Jesus, Paul calls it to the Romans, Chapter 1. verse
16. The power of God, unto salvation. Speak of Caesar, and this Kingdom, or
that Kingdom: will it be powerful unto life? Will all the speaking of all the
creatures in the world be powerful unto life? Speak of the Cross of CHRIST,
what seems to be more base, yet it is the power of God, and the vvisdome of
God unto salvation. So the power must be wonderful, when a word will have such
a power, that it will save a soul. The LORD, when He was in the world, He
preached in His own Name, and the Jews marked, that He preached with
authority, and He says: Amen, Amen, I say unto you, That is in mine own
Name: As for all other teachers, all their preaching must be in the Name and
authority of Jesus, and not in a creatures name.

When a man has this LORD in His eye, without regard of himself, when he
goes to set out that Name, ye will not believe, how the LORD will be with him,
and how He will make his authority to be seen.

But by the contrary, if a man have no sincerity, and have not the
authority, and Name of JESUS before him, but seek himself in his preaching,
he will have no spirit, no grace, none authority, his language will be
unsavory, his preaching will be of little value. Paul, because He preached
Christ, and Him crucified, therefore, says He, that his preaching was with
euidencie and demonstration of the Spirit: on the other part, because the
Corinthian Doctors had themselves, and not Christ before their eyes: therefore
he says, that they preached with ostentation, and humane eloquence, all their
preaching was but wind. The Philosophers of old, spoke much of matters of
virtue, but because they never spoke one word in the Name of Christ: therefore
all their speaking was but babbling, neither were they changed themselves, nor
yet changed they others, they might teach men to be Hypocrites, and to cover
their vices: but they could not be instruments of Regeneration, because they
spoke not in that powerful Name of Jesus Christ. I put the Papists in this
same rank, that will speak in the Popes name: I say, all their doctrine,
and their speaking of salvation, is more in the name of man, nor in the Name of
Jesus Christ: and therefore it may well work error, and hypocrisy in thee,
but no salvation: thou may well think that thou have something, but in
effect thou have nothing.

Then we see of necessity there must be preaching: but whereof must this
preaching be: The LORD says, it behooued that preaching be in my Name, Of
repentance and remission of sins: There is the sum of the Gospel. Would
ye know the effect of all preaching? The whole Gospel is summed up in those
two Heads, Repentance, and Remission of sins. It is not my purpose, to
insist largely in these points, but I shall speak of them shortly. Repentance
is none other thing, but a preparation to the soul. Whereto? To receive grace,
to receive remission of sins, salvation, and life everlasting. It is but a
making straight the ways of the Lord, who is coming with grace and mercy to
the soul. This Repentance is wrought partly by the Law, and partly by the
Gospel. The Law says: Cursed be he that continues not in all which is
written in the book of the Law, to do them: and because the conscience of all
flesh, accuses them as guilty of the transgression of the Law: therefore
there arises in the soul, horrors and terrors unspeakable: Then the Gospel
comes in to comfort the casten down soul, and it says, Whosoever believes in
Jesus, he shall be saved, for this is the sum of the Gospel. When the soul
hears this, it conceiues an unspeakable sorrow and sadness for the offending
of so merciful and loving a Father: and this the Apostle calls a godly
sorrow, 2. Cor. Chapter 7. verses 9. and 10. Now it is this godly sorrow
properly, which works repentance, and turns the heart to God, that before was
far away from Him. The other sorrow that is by the Law, properly is not the
cause of repentance, but it prepares the heart thereunto. Therefore, seeing
this godly sorrow turns the heart to God, of necessity it must be
accompanied with faith: for without Faith there is no conversion to God.

The preaching of John Baptist, tells us, how necessary the doctrine of the
Gospel is to work repentance: for He says, Repent, for the Kingdom of God
is at hand, Matthew. Chapter 3. verse 2. The reason, why they should repent, is
here taken from the approaching and presence of the Kingdom of God, that is,
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Now as for remission of sins, it is an applying of the wholesome medicine of
repentance, and by order of nature, it follows after Repentance, when the
heart is prepared with repentance, then comes in Remission of sins, then
comes in that joyful sentence which the Lord makes His Spirit to proclaim to
thy soul: O sinner, thy sins are forgiven thee, in the blood of Jesus
Christ: for Remission of sins is nothing, but the sentence of the great
Judge, saying, O sinner, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Now, this Remission of sins is wrought by that same doctrine that works
Repentance, the Gospel that works Repentance, ministeres likewise assurance
of the Remission of sins: both are wrought by one mean, for Repentance and
Remission of sins, are both wrought together, the one goes not in time before
the other, but in that same moment that we begin to repent, we get assurances
in our consciences, that our sins are forgiven us, and we hear as it were
out of the mouth of God, that joyful sentence of absolution. It is true, that
a Minister may pronounce Remission of sins to another, a certain space after
he has repented, Christ says, Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them, Ioh. 20.22. But the Lord, Himself absolues a man in the same very
time he repentes: yet by order of nature, repentance is first, and prepares
the heart to Remission of sins: Remission of sins follows, and applies grace
to the soul prepared with Repentance: Repentance and the preparation unto
grace begins with a sadness: thou who never had a dolor in thine heart,
thou never repentedst. Turning unto God, is with a very heaviness in the
soul, and a sadness for sin, not so much for wrath and Hell, as that thou
should be so wicked, that thou should have offended so merciful a
Father: But the remission of sins, and the applying of grace is with an
unspeakable joy: there the sadness of repentance is recompensed: thou who wast
not sad first, look not to get that joy: thou who art not heavy, thou shall
never be lighted: no joy for thee: if thou go on in sin, wantonly and
merrily: thou have gotten the joy that thou shall get, thou shall never get joye
but the joye of sin. A true Christian is joyful, and sad through Repentance,
and joyful through remission of sins, thou shall weep ere thou laughest,
thou shall lament, ere thou rejoycest: No joy to a faithful soul, but after
sadness, and all the joye of a sinner is pressed out of sadness, as the wine
out of the berrie. So the heart of a sinner, must be first pressed, contrite
and broken, and then joy must be pressed out thereof like juice, and then the
greater contrition, and the greater sadness, the greater joye shall follow. So
long as thou remainest in this world, all thy joy must be pressed out of
sorrow: No, thou must not sorrow for one day, or a year, but as thou art a
continual sinner, so there must be a continual sorrow. I give thee a
faithful counsel: Be ever sad: away with vain hearted persons, that have no
sadness: ever have this dolor, and that is the right way to this joy. I doubt
not, but ye that have felt these things, know, them: First, there must be
unspeakable sighs, Romans 8.26. and then unspeakable and glorious joye, 1. Pet.
1.8. And when we come to Heaven, and have laid off this burden of sin, joy
shall remain everlastingly with us, sadness shall go away, then our joy
shall rise no more out of sadness, but thy joy shall be sincere, no sigh, no
tear then, all tears shall be wiped away: Then as thou would rejoice,
and find joye, mourn here a while, that all mourning may be taken away:
laughest thou now, have thou never a tear, then thou shall mourn for ever,
no laughing for thee, thou shall be thrust into Hell, where there is nothing but
shouting and crying. So, as thou would rejoice sincerely, without any
sadness one day, now get joy out of tears. Mark these things: not one
syllable of this shall fall to the ground. Well then, we have the necessity of
preaching, and in whose name we should preach, and what we should preach:
First, Repentance, and then remission of sins: begin with preaching sadly,
but end joyfully, with that joyful remission of sins. Now, the third: to
whom must this preaching be? must it be to the Jews only: No, it must be
more largely extended: To all nations: and what should be preached to all
Nations: First, Repentance: Next, remission of sins: if Repentance should be
preached to all Nations, then all Nations are sinful: Repentance teached to
all, importes, that sin has power over all the world: that infection has
poisoned all that are come into the world, as Paul says, All have sinned, Jew
and Gentile, and all are closed up under sin, none excepted, Romans 3.23. and
11.32. What more? The preaching of Repentance to all Nations, importes, the
great abundance of sin, and the largeness of the dominion of sin. Again
the preaching of the Remission of sins to all Nations, importes, that the
grace of Christ is extended to all: As sin spread it self over all where, so
grace is spread over all where. The righteousness of God by the Faith of Jesus
Christ, is unto all, and upon all that believe, Romans 3.22. Again, the
preaching of Remission of sins to all Nations, importes, that the
superabundance of grace before Christ came, grace was closed within the bounds
of Jury: but after that once CHRIST came and suffered, and rose again, and
went unto Heaven, then Heaven was opened, and grace was powered down in such
abundance, that Jury could not contain it, but it spread through the whole
world. As it spread, so the preaching behooued to be spread, grace goes with the
preaching: contemnest thou the preaching, thou shall not get one drop of it,
grace is dispersed by the dispersing of the preaching: take away preaching, no
spark of grace: Woe be to them, who restrain the preaching of such abundant
grace in this Land, within so narrow bounds, and all for greediness. Hell
shall swallow up these sacrilegious persons, who withholde the goods from the
preachers of grace, if they repent not, say, this narrownes of the hearts of
men, who hinder preachings, is not so much, a sin done against the poor
people that perish in ignorance, as against the grace of God: they will laugh
at this now, but one day they shall houle: O that flood of wrath, that shall
be heaped on them: this injury is done to grace, it is a restraint of grace,
and an impairing to the glory of GOD, that is through grace: woe to thee, woe
to thee again, that holds down the grace of God, and pinches it through thy
default, thou shall once curse the time that ever thou did it: if thou
restrainest that grace, that should bring poor souls to Heaven and salvation.

But to go forward: We have heard the necessity of preaching, in whose name
we should preach, what we should preach, and last, to whom it should be
preached, to all Nations, even, to the Gentiles. O! if we Gentiles should not
rejoice, that mercy and grace is preached unto us, who were aliants from the
grace of GOD. Now albeit this grace be extended to all, yet there is a
difference in order of preaching: for the Lord says, Beginning at Jerusalem:
As He would say: this preaching must first be preached at Jerusalem, and
begin there: and before grace be offered to the Gentiles, grace first of all
must be offered to the Jews. Grace pertaines first to the Jews, they were the
people of God of old, and therefore they must have their own right: and then
when grace is offered to the Jews, grace is extended, and runs abroad over
all the earth. Paul says to ye Jews: It was necessary, that the word of God
should first have been spoken unto you, Acts 13.46. There is the order: yet
the Lord loves Jerusalem, and forgets it not: Jerusalem that crucified the
Lord, the Lord forgets it not, the Lord will not cast it away, but will send
His Apostles to preach there first. O how loath was He to cast away that Nation
that He had chosen of old, from among all Nations: a people that He has once
begun with: O how loath will He be to cast away that people: Scotland has a
proof of this, I dare say it: had not been the patience that the Lord bears
unto this Land, He had not spared us so long, because of the great contempt and
disdaining of the Gospel. But above all the rest, that Nation which the Lord
has chosen from among the rest, to be a peculiar people to Himself, He will
offer grace to it first: and therefore the Jews got this honor first, to have
grace offered to them. And as grace in this life is offered to the Jew, so
shall the Jew, get first glory in Heaven. Paul Romans 2.10. says: Glory, and
honor, and peace shall be to every man that does good, to the Jew first, and
also to the Grecian. And as the glory shall belong unto the faithful Jew
first, so by the contrary, the unfaithful Jew, shall first be dishonored
for the Apostle says in the words immediately preceding: Tribulation and
anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does evil, of the Jew
first, and next of the Grecian.

But to end here: I beseech you to strive unto unfeigned Repentance, and to
get an assurance of the remission of thy sins here, if thou will be honored
in this life by grace, and in the life to come, by glory in Heaven: for
neither grace nor glory pertaines, unto impennitent sinners who lie like swine
in sin, and delight in sin: But only to all penitent sinners, where sin
aboundes, grace and mercy superaboundes, and that in the blood of Jesus
Christ. To whom with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all honor, and glory,
for evermore. AMEN.

THE XLIV. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.




AFTER that the Lord (belooued Brethren in Christ) in His fifth appearing after
His Resurrection, by sundry evidences has gone about to persuade His
Disciples, that it was He, He vtters a sweet Sermon for their instruction,
wherein first He instructes and informs them in two necessities: the first
is, that all things that befell to Him, as His Passion and Resurrection
behooued to befell unto Him: the second is, that as these things befell to Him
of necessity, so of necessity these things behooved to be preached in the
world. Next, He gives them a direction to go out, and to preach this Gospel
to the world. We have heard already of the two necessities: First, that it
behooued Him to suffer the death: and to rise again from death, because these
things were foretold of Him, in Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms:
therefore of necessity they behooued to come to pass. We heard thereafter of
the necessity of the preaching of these things. Profane men think preaching
is for the fashion, but they deceive themselves, for if there be a necessity,
that thou should believe, that thou may be saved: there is as great a
necessity that there should be preaching of the word: for Faith is by hearing,
and without hearing no Faith, no life, no salvation.

In opening up of this necessity of preaching, we marked unto you the
particular circumstances, that are set down in the Text: Namely, first, in
whose name this preaching behooued to be: to wit, in the Name of JESUS CHRIST:
Next, whereof it behooued this preaching to be: to wit, of Repentance, and
Remission of sins: (for that is the sum of the Gospel) Thirdly, to whom
this behooued to be preached, not to the Jews only, but to all Nations: and
last, in what order this doctrine should be preached: first, to the Jews,
beginning at Jerusalem, and thereafter to the Gentiles. Now in the Text that we
have presently read, the Lord comes to the second part of His Sermon, wherein
He gives direction to the Apostles, to be Preachers, and witnesses to the
world, of all these things, promising again to them that Spirit, which He
had promised to them before His suffering, and that they might have the greater
security, He gives them a commandment, not to depart from Jerusalem, until
they were endued with power and virtue out of Heaven.

But to come to the words: after that He has set down the necessity of
preaching, He gives them a direction and charge, to be preachers of these
things unto the world. Now, says He, ye are witnesses of these things:
that is, These things that ye have heard and seen come to pass, according as
they were foretold: ye must not keep them close and secret with your
selves, but ye must declare, preach and testify them unto the world.

Now, it is not without great cause that the Lord directes, and sendes them
out to preach: for look how necessary it is, that the word be preached, as
necessary it is, that some be directed, and sent out by the Lord to preach:
for, How shall they preach, says Paul, except they be sent, Romans Chapter 10.
verse 15. A man must not run unsent, but before he preach: he must have a
commission from God. If we will enter in a particular consideration, and mark
all things set down in this Sermon, we will find there is nothing either
concerning Christ Himself, His suffering and rising again, or concerning the
Gospel of Christ, and preaching of it, or concerning the Ministers and
Preachers of the Gospel falls out rashly, or by fortoun and chance, but that
all things come to pass by the determinate providence of God, and in a manner
of necessity: so that in respect of this providence they could not otherwise
have been. We have heard before, that there was a necessity of Christ's death,
and resurrection, and that there was a necessity of preaching, now here we
see, that there is a necessity of sending of Ministers: to preach the Gospel,
for there is no faithful Minister, but he must have his commission of Him: God
must make choose of him, and separate him from the common sort of men, as Paul
says of himself, He was called to be an Apostle, and put apart to preach the
Gospel of God, Romans 1.1. So must it be with all faithful Pastors. It is true
indeed, some will preach, who^ ye Lord has not sent, some will run unsent, and
some will preach to get honor, vantage or preferment to themselves, but these
are not faithful Pastors, but all faithful Pastors must of necessity be
sent of ye Lord, and receive their commission from Him. Now, if this be true,
yt nothing concerning Christ, or His Gospel, or the Ministers yt preach, it
falls out without ye determinate providence and counsel of God, it is as true,
that none hears ye Gospel preached without ye same providence. The special
providence of God, is no less extended to the hearer, than to ye Preacher of
ye Gospel: so that the hearer as well as the Preacher is bound to glorify God
in His gracious providence, and in ye riches of His grace. Many oftentimes
think that it is by conjecture, yt men come to ye Church, and hears the word
preached: but ye faithful man that has felt the power of this word, in
quickening His soul, and raising it from death to life, is assured, yt the
Lord had a special providence and care in making Him to hear yt word at such a
time, to his great comfort. But it would be marked, that albeit all ye
Preachers of the Gospel be sent by God, yet all are not sent after one manner:
there is a great difference amongst them, for some are sent immediately of the
Lord Himself, without the ministry of men, as were the Prophets of old, and
here the Apostles: None of these were sent by men's ministry, but it was only
the Lord Himself, who sent them, according to the good pleasure of His will:
some are sent mediately by the ministry of men, as are the ordinary Pastors
and Ministers, in the Church this day, who albeit they be sent by God, yet
the Lord uses the ministry of men in sending of them. Now these men whom the
Lord employes in this piece of service, to call and send others, should not be
rash, nor lay hands suddenly on any man, but they ought to be very careful,
to take good heed unto the Lords will, and consider, and try narrowly,
whether it be the Lords will, to call such and such persons to the Ministry,
that so they may have a good conscience, that they have sought to conform
themselves to Gods will. When Christ sent His Apostles, He sent them according
to the will of GOD the Father, 1 Cor. 1.1. So whomsoever men call and send,
they must call and send them according to the will of God the Father and the
Son. But ye will say: How shall men know these men, whom the Lord
thinks meet to be sent? How shall they know, whether it be the Lords will,
to choose such and such men to His Ministry? I answer: The LORD has set
down sufficient marks and tokens in the Scripture, whereby we may know them,
whom the Lord would have us to send, He has stamped them with gifts beyond
the common sort of men. If ye would know what these gifts and graces are,
wherewith the Lord endues them: read 1. Timoth. 3, etc. and Tit. 1.6. In the
which places ye will see, what properties the Spirit of God, requires to be in
a faithful Pastor. Indeed, I grant, there are some of the properties rekoned
out there, by the Apostle, that are common to other true Christians with the
Pastor: As to be temperate, wise, holy, righteous, and such other: but there
are some other, that properly belong to a Pastor: As, that he be apt to
teach, that he be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and convince the
gainesayers, that he have skill to guide and rule the Church of God. Let them
who have power to call Ministers, take heed unto these properties, that they
call not men to this High calling, upon a private affection (which vice and
corruption has been too common in all ages) but that they call them whom the
Lord has stamped with these graces, and pointed out as meet to undertake this
charge, that they may have the better conscience in their proceeding. Yet
before we leave this, it would be considered who these were whom the Lord
sendes: were they wise men? were they such, who constantly avouched Him, and
professed His Name? Were they such men as deserved much at His hand? Were they
such as were meet and sufficient for such a glorious calling? No certainly:
For who is sufficient for these things, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2, 16. We
are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, 2. Cor.
3.5. What manner of men are they then? Even these who before His death and
suffering were offended in Him, who were ashamed of Him, and fled away: even
these who after His Resurrection were so hard to believe, that He was risen
again from the dead: for all the pains that the Lord took upon them, men
altogether unmeet, and insufficient for such an high and glorious calling,
men, who by nature were fraughted with such stuff, as was directly repugnant
to such a worthy calling: and yet for all this, the Lord castes them not off,
but sends them to preach salvation to the world. He made them of darkness to
be light, to shine to the rest of the world: for says Paul, God who commanded
light to shine out of darkness, is He that has shined in our hearts, 2. Cor
4 6. Our hearts are dark by nature, yet the Lord by shining in them, brings
light out of darkness: for as the Lord in the first creation, commanded light
to come out of darkness: so daily in the new creation and regeneration: and
namely, when He sets a man in His Ministry, He makes light to shine out of
darkness. We have a notable example of this, in the Apostle Paul, he had been
before, a blasphemer, and a persecuter, an oppressor, yet such was the mercy
and favor of God toward Him, that for all this, He not only beautifies him
with that common grace, to be a Christian, and to get an assurance of the
Remission of his own sins, but also countes him faithful to place him in
His Ministry, to preach Repentance and Remission of sins to others.

The world thinks it an easy thing, to make a man a Minister, but if we
consider what stuff is in man, and how far his nature is repugnant to that
calling, we will think that of all things in the world, it is most hard, and
most painful.

It is an hard thing indeed, to bring a man out of nature, and make him a
Christian, but it is far harder, to make a man a teacher of Christians, and a
disposer of the treasures of grace, and of the secrets of God. Now, when I
begin to consider what should have moved the Lord to have chosen such
persons, and so unmeet for such an high calling, I think this chiefly has
been it, that when the Apostles went out to preach Repentance, and Remission
of sins, to others, and to exhort all persons, how grieuouslie so ever they
had sinned, to come and to seek mercy in Christ, they might propone
themselves, as examples of the superaboundant mercy of God, and that they in
their Ministry might declare, and make manifest the gentleness and long
suffering of God toward all men, even the greatest sinners in the world, and
that by the proof and experience that they found in their own person, of the
mercy of God in calling them, and placing them in that high calling, who
before were so miserable wretches: and so upon their own experience, they
might the more easily persuade, even the most miserable sinners, to seek for
mercy and grace in Christ. When Paul preaches, Where sin aboundes, there
grace and mercy superaboundes: if he had not found this by experience, and
had not stood for example hereof, he would not so easily have persuaded
sinners of the exceeding greatness of the mercy of God.

But to go forward: Because this direction that He gives them, and this
Ministry He calls them to, was very painful and troublesome, and so they
might have taken hardly with it: therefore in the words following, the Lord
goes about, to encourage them, to undertake it, and to discharge it cheerfully:
the Argument is of great force, Behold, says He, I will send the promise of
my Father upon you: that is, I will send unto you the Holy Spirit Himself, and
with Him His extraordinary gifts and graces: as the gift of prophecy, of
working of miracles, of tongues, and such other, that ye may be the more able
to discharge this calling, and to perform the work I send you for, He calls
this the promise of His Father, because the Father long before by His Prophets
promised at the coming of the Messiah, to send His Spirit in great abundance
upon them that believe. Ye may read this promise in sundry places of the Old
Testament, but chiefly in the 2. Chapter of the prophecy of Joel, and the 28.
verse. In the last days, I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons, and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions, and also upon the servants, and upon the
maids will I power my Spirit, etc. And of the accomplishment of this promise,
ye may read in the 2. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Out of this place
we may mark first: That the things which the Father promised of old to His
Church, the Son in the appointed time accomplished them: the Father promised
of old the Spirit, and His graces, the Son in the fullness of time sendes
the Spirit and His graces, and gives them to His Church: and for this cause the
Spirit, and His gifts that is given to every faithful man, is called the
measure of the gife of Christ, Ephesians. Chapter 4. verse 7. And thereafter in
that same Chapter ver. 11. the Apostle says: That Christ, to the end He might
fill all things, He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: that is, He gave all sorts of
gifts unto His Church, that He might fulfill the promise of His Father: and all
these gifts and graces, that we see are now in the Church, from whom came
they, but only from the Lord Jesus? This leade^ us to an higher ground, that
the Son has received of the Father, all graces, and all the gifts of the
Holy Spirit, together with the Holy Spirit Himself: the Father has given all
first to the Son, and not to us: for the Father loves the Son, and has
given all things into His hand, Ioh. 3.35. And, In Him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. Chapter 2. verse 3. Yet there is an
higher cause of this, to wit, that the Son only has merited the Holy Spirit,
with the fullness of all His graces. No man ever merited any of them: for who
can merit them, but he who first received them. The Lord Jesus received them
first: we have none, but as He gives us: He merited and purchased them to us,
with no less price, than with the ransom of His own blood.

Now would thou know, how all these graces, that the Lord has bough^ with
such a dear price, are communicated to thee, and made thine? I will tell thee:
Not by any merit of thine own, for thou could merit nothing at the Lords
hands, but Hell and damnation: but it is of the free grace and liberality of
the Father and the Son, that they are made thine: it is of this grace, that
out of His fullness we receive grace for grace.

When the Apostle, Coloss. Chapter 2. verse 9. has said: In Him dwelles all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily: thereafter he subjoynes: And ye are
compleete in Him: as if he had said, All this fullness is made yours, of free
grace, whilst as by Faith ye take hold of Him.

Consider the wonderful bountifulness and liberality of the Son, to thee,
who gives thee these graces freely, that He bought so dearly, and purchased
with such a worthy price: Ye know, says the Apostle, the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that He being rich, for your sakes became poor, that ye through
His poverty might be made rich. 2. Cor. 8.9.

Now, ere I go forward, I mark another lesson, that the Spirit of God points
out clearly, in these words, for our instruction: for when the Lord says, I
will send you the promise of my Father upon you, that is, the Holy Spirit, with
His graces, He lets us see, that without His Spirit, His presence and
assistance, a Minister cannot be able to do any thing well in His calling, but
that in the discharge of every part of His calling, he must be assisted by
the Spirit. The Apostle Paul, when he is telling what good success his
preaching had among the Gentiles, he takes not the praise thereof to himself,
but he ascribes all to the presence of Christ, by His Spirit: I dare not, says
he, speak of any thing, which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the
Gentiles obedient in word and deed, Romans 15.18. It is not with a Minister, as
it is with a man in the civil policy: No, there is a great difference: for in
the civil policy, a man by his natural gifts, by his wisdom, and
quickness of his wit, may do some things without the special assistance of
the Spirit of Christ, but in the Church no man can do any thing without the
presence of the Spirit, the man that has not the Spirit, and His graces in
some measure is altogether unprofitable and unmeet for the Lords work, for
this cause, the Lord makes a special promise of this Spirit, to them whom He
places in His service, because their calling and function, in all respects is
spiritual. Look to experience, and ye will find the truth of this promise:
There is not a faithful Minister, but in some measure he has the Spirit of
God, to be powerful with him in his calling, in such sort, that not himself
only, but others also, who see and hear him, will sensibly perceive and take
it up. The Apostle Paul, found sensibly the Spirit of God to be powerful with
him in his laboring in the Ministry, when he says, It was not I that
labored, but the grace of God, which is with me, 1 Cor. Chapter 15. verse 10.
And again, when he says, That he labored and strove, according to His
working, which works in him mightily, Col. Chapter 1. verse 29.

And on the other part, when he says to the Corinthians, Ye see the
experience of Christ that speaks in me, which toward you is not weak, but is
mighty in you, 2 Cor. Chap. 13. verse 3. he importes, that as he himself
found the power of the Spirit within him, so they to whom he preached, found
it by His Spirit.

But I insist not to bring in particular places, for if we consider well the
Epistles of Paul, we will find many sentences testifying to us, that not
only he himself found the power of the Spirit in his Ministry, and the life
of Jesus working mightily in him, in the mids of his infirmities: yea, even
in death it self 2. Cor. Chapter 4. verse 8. but also that same power was
manifest unto them that heard him. Natural men think all is but scorn that
is spoken of the Spirit, and of His power in the preaching of the Gospel, they
laugh at it, as if there were no such thing: but the faithful man finds, that
it is not for naught, that Christ promised His Spirit to them whom He sends,
as also that without that Spirit, no grace could have been wrought in their
souls.

Now in the last words of this Text, to assure them the more, that they should
receive this Holy Spirit that was promised, the Lord commands them, That they
go not out of Jerusalem, but that they tarry there, until they be endued with
power from on high: that is, Until they have received this Spirit that He
promised to send unto them: So in a manner, for their further assurance, He
prescribes to them a particular time, within the which they should receive the
Holy Ghost. The Lord, commonly, when He makes a promise of any thing to His
own, He will give them some wa^rand, to confirm and assure them, until He
fully perform His promise: for because He knows our weakness and
infirmity. He gives us as it were an earnest penny to strengthen our Faith
and Hope, until He pay the whole sum to us for such is our weakn^sse, that
albeit we have no more, we cannot be able long to depend upon His naked
word. It is true indeed, that the Lord sometime, for the trial of the Faith
of His own, will charge them to rest upon His bare and naked word only, to
believe His promise, He will give no fur^her assurance, as likewise for a
season it may be, that they depend upon His bare word: but it is as true, that
this cannot continue long: for except as by Faith they depend upon the word:
so also they have some feeling and foretasting of the thing promised, and some
earnestpennie and security to assure them of the obtaining of the promise,
their Faith will fail and decay. So weak are we in Faith, so ready are we to
mistrust, that we cannot stand nor continue, except we be underpropped and
vpholden by some special warrant from God.

Now to end: One thing further may be marked in these words: The Lord
discharges the Apostles to go out of Jerusalem, until they have gotten t^is
Holy Spirit, that He promised them. The lesson is: A Minister should not
covet to go to the world, to preach the Gospel, until the time he be
assured that the Holy Spirit accompanies him, and his trauells: for if the
Apostles themselves might not go out to preach, until the Spirit were sent
unto them, it is a foolish thing for any man, after them to presume to do it.
But, alas, it is a thing greatly to be lamented in this age, that there are so
few, that wait until they be accompanied with the Holy Spirit in their
Ministry, and that so many go rashly to undertake such an high calling.

Many upon a conceit that they have of their natural gifts, their wisdom,
their quickness, ingine memory, eloquence, and such other gifts will start
up to the pulpet, and preach confidently to the people in the Name of Jesus.
But the Lord in His just Judgment, not only withdrawes all blessing from
their labors, but also heap^s shame and ignominy upon them, and makes it
manifest to the world, that He sent them not, but they ran unsent: But thou
who would have a good conscience, who would have the Lord to bless thy
trauells in His Ministry, presume not too far of thy natural gifts, how
great so ever they be, but wait upon the Lords leisure, until He prevent
thee with His Spirit, and endue thee with power from on hie, and in the mean
time be crying earnestly for the presence of that Spirit, who when He comes,
will open thine heart, and loose thy mouth to speak with boldness, and
freedom in the Name of Jesus. To whom with the Father, and that blessed
Spirit, be all praise, and honor, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XLV. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XX.






HITHERTO (beloved Brethren in Christ) we have insisted in the opening up of
that Sermon, that the Lord uttered to His Apostles in His fifth appearing after
His Resurrection, as it is set down by the Evangelist Luke, wherein, first. He
lets them see, that it behooued Him to suffer, and to rise again from the
death, because it was so foretold of Him, and that it behooued Repentance and
Remission of sins to be preached in His Name, to all Nations, beginning at
Jerusalem. Next, He gives them a direction, to go out to the world to be
witnesses and preachers of these things, albeit they were altogether unmeet and
insufficient, and had deserved no such thing at His hand, because they were
ashamed of Him, and fled away at His Passion: yet He honors them with this
high calling then to encourage them the more cheerfully to undertake this
calling, He promises to send unto them the Holy Spirit, who was before promised
to them by the Father, to accompany them, and their trauells. And last, that
they might have the greater security, and assurance to receive this Spirit, He
gives them a commandment not to depart from Jerusalem, until they find His
promise performed unto them, and until they were endued with power from on
high.

Thus far we have heard out of Luke of this Sermon: Now in this Text that
we have read* John follows out chiefly ye latter part of the Lord, concerning
the sending out of the Apostles, and he insistes therein more largely, and
particularly than Luke does, marking especially the things that were omitted
by Luke: for he vvrote after him: First, in these words we have set down a
preface, to prepare their hearts the better to receive the word which He
was to speak unto them: thereafter we have the preaching, wherein first, He
sends out the Apostles to preach the Gospel: Next, He confirms them partly by
giving them the Holy Spirit, partly by arming them with power and authority.

But to come to the words: John says, that before He sent them out, He said
again to them, Peace be unto you. Before, at the first meeting with them, this
was His salutation, Peace be unto you: Now He repeates these words again.
Wherefore is this? It was to prepare their hearts to receive the more
reverently and attentively, and with the greater comfort these things that He
was to speak to them concerning their charge to preach in His Name to the
world. The man that would receive the word of the Lord, especially, the Gospel
of peace and consolation, must have His heart prepared with the assurance of
peace, for the message of peace and consolation requires: First, that the soul
be prepared with peace, to the end, it may receive the word with peace and joy:
for except the soul have some persuasion of peace, it can find no comfort:
and if we receive the message of peace, with a persuasion of peace, and with a
joy in the soul, then the more we hear, the greater shall our comfort be,
the more shall we drink in that joy of the Holy Spirit: The messengers of
peace should follow this example of the Lord: When they are to preach the
Gospel of peace, they should prepare their hearts, that by foretelling that
all their message and the word that they are to speak tendes to peace, and
likewise they who come to hear, should have their hearts prepared with some
sense of peace and joye, but such a joye as follows upon sorrow for sin, and
a sense of their own misery, and which ever is accompanied with true
Repentance: for there is no true joye of a Christian man in this life, but that
which is conjoined with Repentance and sorrow for sin.

Now, when the Lord has prepared their hearts with this preface of peace,
He comes to the Sermon: and first, He gives them a direction to go out to
preach the Gospel: As my Father, says he, sent me, so send I you. We have
spoken some thing already of this sending out of the Apostles, in opening up
of the Lords words, as they are set down by Luke: and therefore here I
shall be the shorter in speaking of it. Ye see the Lord sets down this
sending of the Apostles, by way of comparison with His own sending, I sent
you, even as the Father sent me. This comparison importes first, that the
Son only was sent immediately by the Father, the Son only has gotten this
honor to be sent immediately by the Father. The Apostle says, Christ took not
this honor to Himself, to be High Priest, but He that said unto Him, Thou
art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee, gave it Him, Heb. 5.5. And the
Father by sending the Son immediately Himself, gave Him all power to send all
others: so that all others are sent by the Son, albeit not all after one
manner, for some are sent by Him immediately, as the Prophets, and Apostles,
some mediatly, as the Pastors and the Teachers. Indeed, I grant, The Prophets
and Apostles were sent also by the Father, but they were sent mediatly by the
Father, and immediately by the Son: and therefore Paul uses to call Himself,
The Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God the Father: whereby he means,
that immediately he was sent by the Son, and mediatly by the Father: the Son
sent the Prophets, and Apostles immediately: and therefore it is said, when He
ascended, up to Heaven, He gave some to be Apostles, and some to be Prophets,
Ephesians. 4.11. Next, this comparison importes, that the office of the Apostleship
is not only lawful, but also that it is furnished with authority: for Christ,
who sent His Apostles, was first sent by His Father, not only had He a lawful
calling, but He had it with authority: even so, all true Pastors and Teachers
in the Church, have not only a lawful calling to preach the Gospel, but also
authority joined with their calling, because they are sent by the Son, for
it was the Son, that gave some to be Pastors and some Teachers, Ephesians 4.11 for
albeit true Pastors in ye Church be called by ye ministry of me^, yet they
are sent by the Son and therefore men have their authority from Him, for in a
manner they represent His person, as the Son represented the person of His
Father, and was His ambassador to the world: so they are ambassadors of the
Son, and must represent His person. Men in this Land despise the Ministers
of the Gospel, and count most vilely of them, in respect of the baseness of
their persons: but they should consider, it is not with men, but with God, and
Christ Himself whose ambassadors they are, that they have ado: the
obedience, or disobedience, and contempt of the Pastor, redounds directly to
the Son: and the Father, and the Son counts it to be done to Himself, and
to the Father: for He says: He that hears you, hears me, and he that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises Him that sent me,
Luke 10.15. Thirdly, this comparison lets us see, who they are, that have a
lawful calling in the Church, not every one that has a pretense and show of
outward calling, but only they who are called by them, who were sent
themselves before. And therefore these only are lawful Pastors, who have been
called by the Presbytery, and fellowship of the Elders, who themselves before,
had a lawful calling. The people and flock have no power to call a man to the
Ministry, they may indeed nominate, and present a man, and give their
consent: but the calling and admission of a man to the function of the
Ministry, belonges only to the Eldership and Pastors, who before were
called themselves.

But to go forward. When He has charged them to go out to preach the
Gospel, because it was a very weighty and painful charge, therefore He
encourages, and strengthenes them the more willingly to undertake it: First, by
bestowing upon them the Holy Spirit, and His graces: Next, by arming them with
power and authority. To come to the first: it is said, When He had said
this, He breathed on them, and said unto them: Receive the Holy Ghost. In
giving to them the Holy Spirit, He uses an outward and visible sign, He
breathes upon them: for this breathing upon them, was not the sending and
giving of the Holy Spirit it self, but it was an outward sign and Sacrament,
to represent, to signify and assure them of the giving of the Holy Spirit, the
outward breathing upon them, was a sign of the inward breathing of the Holy
Spirit upon their souls, and a sign very fit and convenient to express the
thing signified for the wind serves very well to represent the Holy Spirit, and
is used for that same purpose by the Lord Himself, Ioh. 3 8. The wind bl^wes
where it lists, etc. But it would be marked, that the Lord uses not only the
bare and naked sign: No, that could have profited them very little, but to the
sign He joins words, telling the meaning of it, He says: Receive the Holy
Ghost. For the Lord in all Sacraments uses commonly to join the word to the
Sacrament: As in Baptism, and the Lords Supper: to the end, that not only He
may declare and open up the meaning of the sign, but also to work, and
confirm Faith in men's hearts, that so the Sacrament may be powerful and
effectual in them, for the outward sign alone is not able to work Faith in
the soul, but it is the word chiefly, that works Faith, the word is the life
of the Sacrament: and therefore, except the word be joined with the outward
sign, it cannot be a true and effectual Sacrament: Now it is to be
considered, that this breathing of the Lord upon His Apostles, was not a thing
that He would have to be kept ordinarily in His Church, but it is an
extraordinary sign used extraordinarily by the Lord, in the sending out of
extraordinary men, the Apostles, to an extraordinary calling, whereby the Lord
at that time endued them with extraordinary graces necessary for that great
calling. And therefore foolish and damnable is the practice of the Pope, his
Cardinals, and his Bishops, which they use in sending out their shauelings
into the world: for when they admit them, with their vile and stinking mouths,
they breath upon them, and say, Receive the Holy Ghost, filthily abusing this
action of the Lord, as if it lay in their hands, with their breathing to give
the Holy Spirit: whereas the Lord has reserved this power to Himself alone,
and communicates it not to any man: they are but counterfaiters of such things
as the Lord will not have to be counterfeited, for this His action in all
points was extraordinary: and therefore ought not to be used ordinarily: but
I leave them to their own vanity.

A question may be here moved: How agrees this doing of Christ, on His
Disciples, and giving them the Holy Ghost, recorded here by John, with the
words that we heard before out of the Gospel of Luke* where the Lord says:
Behold I do send the promise of my Father upon you, but tarry in Jerusalem,
until ye be endued with power from on high: Which words importe, that at this
fifth appearing to His Disciples, which is one with this that John records, He
gave them not the Holy Ghost* but only promised to send Him to them: I answer:
Both these places agree well enough together, for in Luke the Lord promised to
send His Spirit with His graces in a full measure upon them, which promise
indeed he performed on the day of the Pentecosts, when they being gathered
together, there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like fi^e, and sat upon
each one of them, and they were all miraculously filled with the Holy Ghost,
Act. 2.1. But the Lord here, only gives them the Holy Ghost, and His graces in
a small measure* to be as it were a beginning of that full accomplishment,
which they were to receive in the day of the Pentecoste: for we may not
think, that the Holy Spirit, and all His graces were given fully and
compleetely to the Apostles at one time: No, but they were given piece and
piece, and by degrees: for first, they got the fruits of the Spirit, when the
Lord was conversant with them in the flesh* in the days of His infirmity:
Next, after He rose from the death, they received them in a greater measure, as
we may see in this place of John: and last, after the Lords ascension, He
powered down in abundance His Spirit, with all His graces, according as He had
promised to them, Luke 24.49. and was long before foretold by Joel, Chap. 2.
verse 28. But why would He not give them the Holy Spirit, and His graces in a
full measure at the first? Because there behooued to be a certain proportion
and correspondence between the Head and the members: the Lord Jesus was their
Head, they were members of His body: so long as He was not fully glorified
Himself, it was no reason, that they should have received the fullness of
grace, but when He was fully glorified, He filled them abundantly with grace,
Ephesians. 4.10. The Lord now glorified in the Heavens, has store and abundance of
grace to give to His Church, but our hearts are not prepared to receive grace:
we offend Him continually with our sins, and grieve His Holy Spirit, for
this is the last age of the world, wherein sin aboundes, and therefore, that
we are not so skant of grace, the fault is not in the Lord* there is no
scarcity nor want of grace with Him, but the fault is in our selves, who
entertain sin in our hearts, whereby we banish grace out of them, and
makes the Spirit, who should be our Comforter, to be a witness against us in
that great day of the Lord. Now after that the Lord has encouraged His
Apostles, by giving them His Holy Spirit, and His graces, in the words
following, to make them the more willing, He arms them with power, and
au^ho^itie, before He send them out, He says: Whosoever si^nes ye remit, they
are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained: As
if He had said to them, I will not send you out powerless, with a fectlesse
word in your mouth, but to the end ye may the better discharge your
commission, I enarme you with power, I will give you power to bind and loose,
to forgive sins, and retain sins. The Lord sendes none out to his warfare,
till first He furnish them with weapons and armor. But what weapons are they?
Even spiritual weapons. Paul says, The weapons of our warfare, are not
carnal, but mighty through GOD, to cast down holds, etc. 2. Cor. Chapter
10. verse 4. He has given them power, to discharge their calling. Ye may
read of this power at great length, Matthew. Chapter 16. verse 19. When the Lord
speaking to Peter, in his person says to all the Apostles: I will give unto
thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in Heaven. And Matthew. Chapter 18. verse 18. the Lord says to all his
Apostles, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. So ye see, the Lord
gives them this power, before His suffering, and now after His Resurrection, He
renewes it again. Now, we must not think, that this power was given only to
the Apostles, and their Ministry, which was then extraordinary: No, but it
is given also to the ordinary Pastors, and their ordinary Ministry, to
continue with them to the end of the world.

Now, Brethren, because this power which the Lord gives to His Ministry, is
a matter of great importance, and serves much for our instruction. We shall
insist somewhat more largely in speaking of it: First, What are the means,
whereby this power is practiced and put in execution. The means are two: the
first is, the preaching of the word, the preaching of the Law, and the
preaching of the Gospel. The second is, Ecclesiastical discipline, which
ought to be conjoined with the preaching of the word, and should follow after
it. But wherein is this power placed? Stands it in this, that the Pastor
himself should retain or forgive men's sins? Is this the proper effect of the
Ministry? No, the Pastor himself has no power, to forgive or retain
sins, because that belongs only to God Himself, and cannot be communicated
to any creature. The Pharisees themselves acknowledged this: for when CHRIST
said to the sick of the Palsy: Son, thy sins are forgiven thee, they
counted Him a blasphemer: for say they: Who can forgive sins, but GOD oly,
Marc. Chapter 2. verse 5. etc. And the Lord says himself, Esaias 43.25. I, even
I am He that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. This is so proper to the Lord, that He will not give this
power to any flesh, because it is a part of His glory: and He says, J will
not give my glory to another, Esaias 48.11. And good reason it is, that this
power of forgiving and reteining of sins belong only to Him: for all sin,
properly is against the Majesty of GOD Himself: for John says, Sin is a
transgression of the Law of God: Therefore David, when He had slain Vriah, and
had committed adultery with Bathsheba his wife, he says to the Lord: Against
thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight, Psalm. 51.4.
So this stands sure, that properly it is a thing belonging to GOD only to
forgive and retain sins, to bind and to loose: that is, to pronounce the
sentence of remitting and reteining of sins. Then wherein stands this power
that Christ has given to His Pastors and Ministry? I answer: It stands in
the promulgation and proclaming in the earth of that sentence that is already
past, and given out in ye Heavens: for this is manner of ye Lords dealing with
men, He will not lift them up to Heaven immediately, and make them to hear ye
sentence of remitting or reteining of sins pronounced there by Himself: No,
but He abases and demits Himself to us, and by His Ministry, He comes down, as
it were out of Heaven to us, and by His Ministry He intimates and proclames
to us, in the earth that sentence, which already He has pronounced in the
Heavens, and that either to our comfort and consolation, if it be the sentence
of remission of sins, or else to our grief and downecasting, if it be the
sentence of reteining of sins. And if we despite and contemn this
Ministry, wherein God abases and demits Himself unto us, and by the which,
as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.20. He prays us to be reconciled unto Him, we
can have no warrant, nor assurance of the remission of sins, not of
salvation. Then ye see, that this power that the Lord gives to this
Ministry, stands in the proclaming and declaring of that sentence which is
already past, and pronounced in the Heavens, and the words that the Lord uses
here, if we mark them w^ll, import this same meaning: for He says, Whosoever
sins ye forgive, they are forgiven speaking in the time bypast, as if He had
said, this is a thing already done, the sentence is already pronounced in
the Heaven: as for you who are my Ministers, ye only intimate and proclaim in
earth that sentence, which is already past in Heaven: and He says on the
other part: Whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained, using the time
bypast, as if He had said, the sentence of reteining of their sins is already
pronounced in Heaven, and ye only intimate and declare on earth ye sentence
which already is past in Heaven. Now having considered wherein this power
consists, we shall let you see, what sort of power it is: This power that the
Lord has given to His Ministry, either extraordinary, as the Apostles had,
or ordinary, which the Pastors have, is not a Kingly power, not such a power
as is given to Kings and Rulers in the world: No, it is only a ministerial
power. Let a man, says Paul, so think of us, as of the Ministers of Christ,
1. Cor. 4.1. And again, He says: We have not dominion over your Faith, but we
are helpers of your joy, 2. Cor. 1.24. yet it is a power, and so the Apostle
calls it, 2. Cor. 13.10. According to the power which God has given me, to
edification, and not to destruction. And, a glorious Ministry, 2. Cor. 3.9.
And as the word of God calls it a power, so also the consciences of men find
it to be a power, Therefore, the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 13.3 Ye seek
experience of Christ, that speaks in me* which toward you is not weak, but
is mighty in you. And if we will compare it with the civil and kingly power,
we will find it in this respect to be preferred to the civil power: that
whereas the civil power is extended only over the body, the life, and goods
temporal, this power of the Ministry, is extended to the soul, to the
spiritual graces of the soul, and life everlasting: and therefore it is
called by the Apostle, the Ministry of the Spirit, and of righteousness, 2
Cor. 3.8, 9.

Now, to end shortly: There may be a question moved: When the Minister either
remittes sins, or reteines sins, upon earth, how shall he be assured, that
ye Lord has not remitted or retained them in Heaven: for it becomes the
Herald or Messenger, to make intimation of nothing, but of that whereof he
has a special warrant from the Judge: otherwise he cannot have a good
conscience in his intimation: then how shall the Pastor know Gods sentence
pronounced in Heaven, that he may have a good conscience in his proceeding? To
this I answer: It is true indeed, the Pastor has none extraordinary
revelation of that sentence, which is past in Heaven, but all the warrant that
the Pastor has, is ordinary, wrought by the Spirit, accompanying His own
word, which He left in write unto us, and the Pastor gets this vvarrand out
of the word, by the applying of the general sentences of the word, to
particular persons, according as they find their disposition and behavior,
and by this means, gets such a sufficient warrant out of the word, as his
conscience may rest upon. As for example: to speak first, of the sentence of
the Remission of sins: Before the Pastor absolve a man, and remit his
sins, he looks first to the general sentences set down in the word, that
may be his warrant, as namely, that sentence which the LORD Himself vtters,
Ioh. 3.13. Whosoever believes in the Son of God, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life.

Now, to Faith in Christ, join Repentance, for the Gospel joins Repentance
and Remission of sins together, Luke 24.47. and says, Whosoever believes and
repents* shall be safe. To this general proposition, the Pastor will assume
particularly: This sinner repents and believes, whereupon he concludes,
(declaring the sentence that is already past of Him in the Heaven:) therefore
this sinner has his sins forgiven him, and he shall be saved. Again, before
the Pastor bind a man, and retain his sins, he looks to this general
sentence of the word, He that believes not, and repents not, is already
condemned, Ioh. 3.18. Then he assumes particularly: But this sinner believes
not, neither repents: whereupon he concludes, the declaration of the sentence
which is already past in Heaven. Therefore this sinner is condemned, and is
bound in Heaven. The Lord work in our hearts true repentance, and Faith in
the Lord Jesus, that not only we may hear the voice of the Pastor,
absoluing us, but likewise our own consciences may assure us of the Remission
of our sins, through the mercy of God in Jesus Christ. To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, and honor, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XLVI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XX.






WE have heard hitherto (Well-beloved in Christ) of five sundry appearings of
our Lord, after His Resurrection: The first was, to Marie Magdalene: The second
was, to other women: The third was, to two Disciples, as they were going from
Jerusalem, to Emmaus: The fourth was, to Simon Peter: The fifth was, to the
eleven, assembled together in one place: In this fifth appearance, the Lord has
a Sermon to His Disciples, wherein first, He lets them see the necessity that
He should suffer, and rise again, and that these things behooued to be
preached to the world, and thereafter gives them a direction to go out to
preach Repentance and Remission of sins to the world, in His Name: and to
the end He may encourage them the more willingly, to undertake this charge* He
promises to give them the Holy Spirit, with His graces, yt was promised before,
and for their further assurance He enters them presently in some measure in
possession of the Spirit: for John says, He breathed upon them, and said
unto them* Receive the Holy Ghost, and then He enarmes them with authority
and power to forgive and retain sins. And He says, Whoso^uer sin^es ye
remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are
retained. Now in the words that we have presently read out of the Gospel of
John, we have set down a particular H^storie concerning Thomas and his
incredulity: this Thomas is he who is also called Didymus: we read of him,
first that he was called and received to be one of the twelve Apostles, Matthew.
10 3. Next, we ^ead, that he was offended, that the Lord purposed to return
again to Judea, being request^d by Martha and Marie, to come to Laz^rus their
brother, and that he burst out in words full of anger, and i^d^gnation, saying,
Let us go also, that we may die with Lazarus, Ioh 11.16. And last, we have in
this place set down the History, not only of his great incredulity, but also
of his stubburnesse and wilfulness therein: for neither did he believe,
neither had he a will or purpose to believe. Of this doing of Thomas we may
learn, that by nature there was no difference between ye Apostles of the Lord
Jesus, and other men, albeit most vile and most unworthy: but grace made the
difference they were as incredulous, as stubburne, as hard hearted as any other
by nature, while it pleased God of His mercy, to open their he^rtes, to make
them to b^leeue: And therefore, the Lord Jesus, when He calls them to be
Apostles, and ordaines them to preach the exceeding g^eatnesse of His mercy to
others, He makes them to stand for e^samples of that same mercy that they
preach to others, that they might ye more easily persuade others, and make them
to come to seek mercy in Jesus. This was the end why the Apostle Paul says.
The Lord showed mercy on him who was a m^serable wreth, and had called him to
be an Apost. Jesus Christ, says he showed on me all long suffe^ing, unto the
ensample of them which shall in time to come, believe in Him unto eternal
life, 1 Timothy 1.16. Thus much concerning the person of Thomas, we come next, to
the History of his incredulity, and first, to the occasion of it: the rest of
ye Apostles and Disciples who were assembled together in one, to whom the Lord
Jesus had manifested Himself, declares and preaches to Thomas ye Resurrection
of Christ, ye cause of their preaching thereof to him was, because Thomas was
absent, when the Lord appeared to the rest. What was the cause of his absence
it is uncertain, neither will we curiously inquire, what it was. It may be,
that after Christ His Master was apprehended, he kept himself close, and
lurked secretly for fear of danger through the malice of the Jews, and durst
not manifest himself so soon, as the rest: or it may be, that he was
entangled with his own private affairs, at that time when the rest met
together, and were speaking of Christ, and His Resurrection from the dead.
Always, what ever has been the cause of his absence, we may perceive, that
he was deprived of that grace and presence of the LORD, which the rest who were
met together, found: Whereof we learn this lesson: That whosoever do absent
themselves from the assembly of the LORDS Saints, from these holy meetings,
whereinto the LORD has promised His own blessed presence, they procure no
small skaith and damage to themselves, they deprive themselves of some grace
and comfort that the LORD ministers to them that meet together. What ever be
the cause of thine absence, it cannot be but hurtful to thee, albeit all
causes of absence be not alike hurtful: for if thou be absent by negligence,
the less is thy danger and loss but if wilfully, and upon contempt thou
absentest thy self* then not only depriuest thou thy self of grace and
comfort, but also thou procurest the wrath of GOD upon thee, for the contempt
of His blessed ordinance. Therefore if we would be partakers of the grace and
blessing that the LORD has promised to these holy assemblies, we should
postpone our private adoes and the cares of the world, unto these Holy
exercises, and we should embrace that counsel of our Savior* Seek first the
Kingdom of Heaven, and His righteousness, and all other things shall be
ministered unto you, Matthew. Chapter 6. verse 33. The man that makes this his
first and his chief care, to seek the Kingdom of God, when he has gotten
it, he will find by experience, that there is nothing necessary for the
sustaining of this present life, that shall be inlaking to him. It is a foolish
thing to be too careful for these worldly things: for if thou seek first
the Kingdom of Heaven, all these things will be caste^ to thee.

Now to come to the preaching of the rest of the Disciples to Thomas it is
said, The other Disciples said unto him, We have seen the Lord: They preach to
Thomas, the Lords Resurrection: for the benefit they had received themselves
in Thomas absence, they willingly communicate to him, they knew and they saw,
that the Lord was risen, they tell this to Thomas: as they believed, so they
wished and desired, that he should believe also. This Example of the Apostles
we ought all to follow: When the Lord communicates any spiritual benefit to
us, we should not keep it close to our selves, but we should be careful to
communicate it to the well of others. And thus doing we need not to fear that
the grace shall be empaired and grow less: No, by the contrary, this
communicating of the grace, and using of the talent, that the LORD has given
us, is the hie, and ready way, to augment the grace, and to reap profit of
the talent, that we have received. Albeit thou have taken great pains, and
spent much time with the loss of some worldly goods to attain to grace: yet
that should not make thee the more sparing, in communicating it to others: It
is the Lords will, that thou give it to others freely, cheerfully and
liberally. Therefore try and examine, whether thou will be willing and
careful to communicate to others the grace that God has given thee: and if
thou find this, then thou have a good conscience: and if thou find it
not, thou have no matter of rejoicing, because thou do not that which the
LORD requires at thine hands.

When the Disciples have informed Thomas, of the Lords Resurrection, look
how Thomas takes with it: What is his part? In a word, he believes not their
report. His incredulity was very vvonderfull: for albeit he was compassed
with such a cloud of witnesses, of faithful witnesses, of eye-seeing
witnesses, yet he believes not. Apparently, every one of them who had seen the
LORD, course by course, had told him of the LORDS Resurrection: and first,
Marie Magdalene, who got this honor first, to see the LORD after His
Resurrection, has witnessed to Thomas, that she saw the LORD, and spoke with
Him: Next, the other women, who did meet with Him, as they were returning from
the grave, testifies the same: Thirdly, the two disciples who were going from
Jerusalem to Emmaus, informed him, that they did meet with Him in the way, and
of the conference they had with Him: Fourthly, Peter, to who^ also ye Lord had
appeared, strove to persuade him: and last, the whole number of the Apostles,
and the faithful there assembled, testified with one voice, that they had
seen Him, and spoken with Him: yet Thomas is nothing moved with all these
speeches, their witnessing, makes not him to believe, he remains still in
incredulity. This example of Thomas, tells us, that all the outward means
that can be used, all the testimonies of the world, the testimonies of the
most faithful, most godly, most wise, of the eyewitnesses, will not move the
heart of a man to believe, will not persuade him of any point of doctrine
necessary to Salvation, if there be no more. What then will make a man to
believe? Nothing but the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST: it must be He, that must
witness unto our hearts, what is the will of GOD, concerning us: it must be
He, that must take away the vale, and illuminate our dark souls: it must be
He, that must open our hearts, as He opened the heart of Lydia, and make us
to believe. If this Holy Spirit of CHRIST, be not present, a man will not
believe his own eyes, his own senses will not persuade him. We saw the
truth of this before, in the rest of the Disciples, when the LORD stood in the
mids of them, when they saw Him with their eyes, when they heard Him speak
face to face, they believed not: While, as Luke says, the LORD opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, Luke Chapter 24.
verse 45.

This doctrine would be well marked, because it serves to decide a
controversy, that this day is betwixt us and the Papists: The controversy and
question, which is betwixt us and them, concerning the chief and principal
witness and judge: First, of authenticke Scripture: Next, of true
interpretation of particular places of Scripture: that is, How shall a man
know, that this Scripture that we have, and we read, and use daily, is the
very word of GOD, and not the word of any creature: And again, How shall a
man know, what is the true meaning of any particular place of Scripture, and
whether this or that sense of the word, is to be received. The Papists
affirm, that the chief and principal witness and judge both of the one or
the other, is the Church: they say, yt we could not be assured, that ye
Scripture is authenticke, and yt it is ye very word of God, except ye church
affirm it so to be, and likewise they say, yt we cannot be assured of ye right
meaning of any place of ye Scripture, except it be by ye testimony of ye same
Church: they teach, that we ought to believe, that the Scripture is the word of
God, and that this or that is the true interpretation thereof, because the
Church says so, and so they make the testimony of the Church, to be the
chief, and almost the only Argument, that should move men, to believe, that
the Scripture is authenticke, and the word of God, and that this or that is the
true and proper interpretation of any place of Scripture: for these are their
common speeches, The Church is above the Scripture, the Church is of greater
authority than the Scripture: without the authority of ye Church, no man is
obliged to believe, that ye Scripture is the word of God: the Church is ye
supreme Judge of ye right interpretation of the Scripture, and many such
others. But by the contrary: We affirm, that the chief and principal
Judge, and witness, both of the Scripture, that is, the word of God, and also
of the true interpretation of the Scripture, is the Holy Spirit, because He
only is able to persuade men's hearts, He only is able so to testify, that: He
can move them to believe, He only is able to open the understanding of men,
to make them to understand and take up the right meaning of the Scripture. Then
will the Papist object, Ye make the Spirit that is given to a private man, to
be the Judge, and witness of the authentike Scripture, and the interpretation
thereof, and it is an absurd thing, to prefer the Spirit, speaking by the
authority of any private man, to the authority of the Church: I answer, It
follows not, that we make the Spirit of a private man, to be Judge either of
the one, or of the other, because we affirm that the Spirit, who is Judge
speaks in the Scripture, and by the Scripture: and by the Scripture, as by the
most powerful and effectual mean, mooues men to believe: and therefore,
that this Spirit, who is Judge, is not the Spirit of a private man, but the
Spirit of the Scripture it self: for this Spirit by the Scripture, teaches us,
that the Scripture is au^henticke, and that it is the word of God: and again,
this same Spirit by the Scripture, teaches us, that this or that is the proper
meaning of the Scripture, for the principal voice of the Holy Spirit, whereby
He speaks to us, is the Scripture, which this day is to us in stead of the
vine voice of God Himself, and ought to be esteemed, and embraced of us, as
if God Himself spoke to us out of Heaven. As for the voice of the Church (when
I speak of the Church, I mean not the Roman Church: for she is but an
adulterous Church, and falsely clames to her self, the name of a Church, but I
speak of the true Church militant) it is not the chief mean, whereby the
Holy Spirit uses to persuade men, but it is an inferior mean, and of less
importance than the Scripture, neither has it that force, to make men to
believe, that the Scripture has. But to leave this, and to return to the
incredulity of Thomas: not only, he believes not, but he vtters great
stubburnesse in refusing to believe, not only was he incredulous, but also
malicious, neither did he believe, neither was he willing to believe: for he
says, Except I see in His hands, the print of the nails, and put my finger
in the print of the nails, and put mine hand into His side, I will not
believe it: he would not believe, except he saw Him, except he saw His
hands, and His feet, except he saw the print of the nails, where with His
hands and His feet were pierced, and except he had put his hand in the wound
of His side, which one of the soldiers had pierced with a spear. We may here
see his stubburnesse and obstinacy, that was joined with his incredulity:
incredulity is commonly accompanied with obstinacy, and stubburnesse, in such
sort, that when the way is laid before us, and the door opened, whereby vv^e
may escape out of this bondage of sin, and thraldom of darkness, wherein
we are kept captives, yet we refuse to go out of that bondage, and rather
strives more and more to thrall our selves to sin, and to hold our selves in
the bands of darkness. This contumacie and stubburnesse in sin, is that
poison, and that gall of bitterness, that Satan has spued into the hearts
of all the children of Adam, and this is that band of iniquity, whereby, as by
a strong chain we are led bo^nd, as miserable catiues, unto eternal
condemnation, except we be relieved from it, by the mercy of God in Jesus
Christ. Peter perceiving the impiety and deuilish practices of Simon Magus* he
takes up this to be the ground and fountain of all, when he says, I see, that
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bands of iniquity. The Lord
save us, and free us from this miserable bondage, wherein we are by nature, yet
if we consider more narrowly the words of Thomas, we shall find, that not
only was he incredulous, not only was he stubburne, but also proud and
arrogant, and contemned and despised all the rest, in respect of himself,
esteeming himself only to be wise, and the rest to be fools, scorning their
witnessing, and report, as a fable, not worthy of credit, and a vain dream.
An incredulous man, that believes not the truth, is not only stubburne and
obstinate in his incredulity, but also he swelles in pride, and seems in his
own conceit to be only wise, contemning others as fools: he will count the
preaching of the Cross of Christ, and of His Resurrection, to be but plain
folly: he will count them that believe the doctrine of the Cross and
Resurrection of Christ, to be fantastic, and doated fools: and yet in very
deed, of all the fools of the world, they themselves are the greatest,
although they be counted wonders in the world, for their natural wisdom.

Therefore the Apostle says, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the
third Chapter, and the eighteenth verse: If any man amongst you seem to be
wise in this world, let him be a fool, that he may be wise: he says not:
if any man among you be wise (for he that has not the wisdom of God, and is
not wise in Christ, he has no wisdom, he is but a very fool) but he says,
If any man seem to be wise, in this world, let him be a fool, that he may
be wise: that is, let him renounce, and forsake all carnal and worldly
wisdom, which is enimitie against God, Romans Chapter 8. verse 7. and can no
more stand with the wisdom of GOD, than darkness with light, yet it would be
marked, that Thomas says not simply and absolutely, that in no c^ce he would
believe, that Christ was risen again, but he says, Except I see in His
hands the print of the nails, etc. The words are conditional, importing,
that in some case, and upon some conditions he would believe. There are two
sorts of contumacie and stubburnesse in sin and unbelief: the one is
conditional, and such was the unbelief of Thomas: the other sort is
absolute, without any condition, when in no case, upon no cause nor vvarrand
will believe: and of this sort was the sin and unbelief of the Priests
and the Pharisees: for when the soldiers that were appointed to keep and
guarde the sepulcher came in to the town, and told them, that JESUS CHRIST
was risen out of the grave: not only did they not believe, but also they
strove to keep themselves in such unbelief and hardness of heart, that in no
case nor condition, they would suffer themselves to be reformed, and so they
detained the word of GOD, into unrighteousness. There is a great difference
between these two sorts of unbelief: The first sort may obtain mercy,
Thomas obtained mercy, the LORD pardoned his unbelief: The other sort, very
hardly can obtain mercy, the Priests and the Pharisees found no mercy, their
unbelief was laid to their charge, the LORD forgave them not, but as they
remained in unbelief, so they perished in their infidelity. The LORD save us
from this cursed sin of unbelief and infidelity, and namely, from this
absolute unbelief, that in no case will suffer reformation: for through
process of time, it brings on this sin against ye Holy Ghost, which never
will be forgiven neither in this world, nor in ye world to come. Now last, ere
I leave these words of Thomas, we may see, what is ye ground and fountain of
this unbelief, obstinacy and pride of Thomas: the ground of all was, he
leaned too much to his gross and bodily senses, to his seeing, feeling and
handling, he makes his eyes and his hand to be ye ground of his faith. Thomas,
indeed, failed not in this, that he desired to see ye Lord with his eyes, and
to handle him with his hands: for ye heard before, how ye Lord, by ye sight of
the eyes, and ye feeling of Him with their hands, persuaded ye Apostles of the
certainty of His Resurrection, Luke 24.39. and likewise we see, that ye Lord
having regard to ye infirmity of His own, pitying the weakness of their
faith, daily in ye Sacrament teaches them by ye outward senses, as by the
seeing and tasting and handling of ye Elements. But herein Thomas sailed, that
he addicted and tied himself so to his senses, to his sight, and to his
handling, that he affirmed and professed plainly, except he saw him with his
eyes, and handled him with his hands, he would never believe, that ye Lord was
risen again from the death, notwithstanding of the witnessing of so many, so
godly, and so faithful persons, who every one after another, testified of the
Lords Resurrection. Then mark it, Brethren: It is not unlawful for a man, to
desire to see the Lord, even with his bodily eyes: No, that desire is lawful
and acceptable to God: for all the Saints that ever have been since the
beginning of the world, desired to see our LORD face to face: Many Kings and
Prophets have desired to see Him, and yet saw Him not, Luke Chapter 10. verses
23.24. Abraham, the father of the faithful desi^ed to see Him: and old
Simeon, who got a revelation, that he should not depart, while he saw the
LORD, earnestly waited and thirsted for to see Him, Luke 2 25. So that it is a
lawful and acceptable thing, to desire to see the Lord.

But in desiring to see Him, we must beware, that our faith be not so tied to
the outward senses, that we refuse altogether, to believe, except we see the
Lord with our eyes, and handle Him with our hands: No, I say more, thou must
be so far from tying thy Faith to the outward senses, that thou must not tie
it to the very inward feeling of the soul: thou must not say, except I ay
feel, I will no wise believe: for albeit, that at all times thou have not a
feeling, and find not grace into thy soul, albeit thou find not the Holy
Spirit, who is the earnest penny of thy salvation, to be presently working
within thee, and sealing up thine adoption: yet, thou art obliged to rely and
depend upon the bare word, and naked promise of God, and so to seal in thy
soul, that the Lord is true: for he has made a very small progress in
Faith, that will not trust in GOD, and depend upon His naked word, except ay
he have some feeling of grace, of joy, of comfort, and of the Holy Ghost. The
Saints of God many times, when they had no feeling, depended upon the word
of promise, and waited upon the accomplishment of it. Job, when he felt not the
Lords favor, but conceived that the Lord was angry with him, he says*
Although thou slayest me, yet will I trust in thee, Job 13.15. And Abraham,
when he saw none appearance, that the Lords promise concerning his seed could
be performed: yet it is said of him, That above Hope, he believed under Hope,
Romans 4.18 Likewise, David, when he was in great danger of his enemies, and
saw little appearance of delivery, still trusted in God, and depended upon His
promise: for he says, I will rejoice in God, because of His word, I trust in
God, and will not fear what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56.4. It may be, that
the Lord exercise thee with the conscience of sin, and with the terrors of
His wrath, in such sort, that thou find no sense of grace, nor of His
favor: yet in this case, despare not, but by the example of the Saints,
learn to depend upon the word and promise of God, till thou find the
performance of it, to the comfort of thy soul.

Now to go forward, and to end shortly: After that the Evangelist has set
down after this manner, as ye have heard, the history of the incredulity of
Thomas* he comes to another appearing of the Lord, after His Resurrection,
which is the sixth in number: for of five we have heard already, and this
appearing, seems chiefly to be for Thomas cause. The time of this appearing
is noted: It was eight days after: that is, from that day, in the which Thomas
had plainly professed, that he would never believe, that the Lord was risen,
except that both he saw Him, and felt Him, and His wounds: and it was the
eight day likewise after the Lords Resurrection: for the former five appearings
of the Lord, whereof we have already spoken, were al upon the first day, in
the which the Lord rose from the dead. So, ye see, that Thomas (the space of
whole eight days interueening) remained in incredulity and unbelief. This
example of Thomas, lets us see, what is the disposition of the soul of a man,
after he has committed a sin against the Majesty of God, after he has once
sinned, he is wrapped up in a senseless security, he sleeps sound in his
sin, there is a vale casten over the eyes of his soul, that he cannot see
sin in its own color, he cannot consider the way wherein he is walking,
nor the judgment which he is drawing on his own head. Whereupon it falls out,
that he proceeds from sin to sin, and either he falls over again in
that same sin, which before he has committed, or in some other sin. We
have a proof of this, in the person of Peter: for after that once he had
denied his Master, he slept in a senseless security, he made little account of
the great sin he had committed: whereupon it came to pass, that soon after
he falls over again in the same sin of denying of the Lord: and alitle
after being demanded, he denies Him the third time, and if he had been oftener
demanded, no doubt, but he would have denied Him oftener, if the Lord had not
looked upon him favorably. The like also we see in David, albeit otherwise a
man after Gods own heart, after that he had committed that foul adultery,
with Bathsheba, the wife of Vriah, he is twitched with a grief or remorse,
but lies still sleeping securely in sin, and so from adultery with
Bathsheba, he falls in abominable murder of Vriah, her husband, and after
this, he continued for a long season, as it were benumbed, and without a sense
of his sin, or fear of judgment: and as all sorts of sin leave some
senslessenesse and induration in the heart, so chiefly, stubburnesse and
contumacie, in not believing the known truth of God, brings greatest
senselessenesse and induration. An example of this: Paul lets us see in the
Gentiles, who followed not that light, that the Lord had left in nature, and
which the Lord show to them in the works of His creation, that they might
glorify God, but repined against it: and therefore says the Apostle, As they
regarded not to acknowledge God, even so God delivered them up unto a reprobate
mind, to do those things which were not convenient, Romans 1.28. Because they
would not glorify God, as became them to do, there was such a dimnesse in
their eyes, such senslessenesse and blindness ouertooke them, that they
regarded not to do the things that were most unnatural* They past all
feeling, and gave themselves over unto wantonness, to work all uncleanness
even with greedines, Ephesians. 4.19. And they had their consciences burned as it
were, with an hot iron, 1. Timoth. 4.2. It is a dangerous thing, once to fall
in sin: for if the Lord leave thee to thy self, thou shall never stay, while
thou r^nne headlong to destruction. Therefore pray continually, that the Lord
would look favorably upon thee, and that He would lay hold on thee, that
thou fall not away from Him: and if thou have fallen, that He would put out
His hand, and draw thee to Him again, that thou may return, and be saved.

Thus for the time of the sixth appearing of the Lord: now He appears after ye
same manner, that He had appeared to the Disciples before: For the Disciples
being within, and Thomas with them, Jesus came, the doors being shut, and
stood in the mids. Of this manner of appearing, we have spoken at length
before: and therefore we will speak no more of it: When He is come in among
them, He uses that same form of salutation, which He used before: for He said,
Peace be unto you. We pass by this salutation also, because we have spoken of
it already: No question, it was a very effectual and powerful salutation:
because He that wished peace unto them, was the author of peace. Only one
thing I shall mark, and so I shall end: I see, there is nothing that is able
to waken the soul of a sinner, that is lying sleeping in sin, and wrapped up
in a sensl^sse security, but only the gracious presence of the Lord Jesus.
What was it that wakened Peter, when he had thrice denied his Master? It is
said, The Lord turned back, and looked upon Peter, whereupon, immediately his
heart smote him, and he went out, and wept bitterly, Luke 22.61* 62. How was
David wakened, when he had long lien in his sin, without any remorse? How,
but by the favor of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who pitied Him, and sent
His Prophet Nathan unto him,: for this ye must understand, that all the
Prophets, which spoke of old to the Fathers, were sent immediately by Jesus
Christ, and spoke by His Spirit, 1. Pet. 1.11. and 3.19. And what was it that
wakened Thomas out of his security? What moved him that was so obstinate in
his incredulity to believe? What, but the gracious presence of Christ? for
except that mercy of God in Jesus Christ, waken us out of security, all the
Judgments of God, that ever He has powered out upon any from the beginning,
will not move us, the most fearful and terrible examples of His wrath upon
others, will not waken us. Judas lets us see the proof of this in his Epistle,
when he tells that they who turned the grace of God into wantonness, were not
moved to abstain from sin, by the example of that fearful and terrible
Judgment of God, which ouertooke Sodom and Gomorrhe, and the cities about
them, but that they likewise, notwithstanding of these great Judgments,
continued in the like sins, and defiled the flesh, Jude 7, 8. Then, seeing,
we are naturally sleeping in sin, and none outward thing in the world, no
judgment, neither temporal nor spiritual seazing on us, in never so high a
measure, can be able to waken us. Let us pray earnestly, that the LORD would
prevent us with His own gracious presence, that we sleep not, while death
oppress us. The Lord make every one of us, to find this presence of the LORD
Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, and
honor, for evermore. AMEN.

THE XLVII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.










AFTER that we had spoken at length (Well beloved in Christ) of the first five
appearings of the Lord after His Resurrection: we began the last day, to
speak of this sixth appearing, the occasion whereof was premitted by ye
Evangelist John, to wit, the absence of Thomas from the rest of the Apostles,
when the Lord appeared unto them, and his great incredulity when they told
him, for notwithstanding that many faithful witnesses testified unto him, that
the Lord was risen, and had appeared unto them, that they saw Him with their
eyes, heard Him with their ears, and handled Him with their hands: yet such
was the incredulity of Thomas, that he professed plainly, that in no case he
would believe, except he saw in His hands the print of the nails, and put his
finger in the print of the nails, and put his hand into His side. To remedy
this incredulity of Thomas, the Lord appears now the sixth time, eight days
after His former appearings, when His disciples were met together, and Thomas
with them, Jesus came the doors being shut, and stood in the mids of them,
and saluted them after the accustomed manner, saying unto them, Peace be unto
you.

Now in these words which we have presently read, we have the Lords conference
with Thomas, first: Next, in the last words of the Chapter, the Evangelist
meets men's curiosity, affirming, albeit all things that Jesus did, were not
written in this Gospel, yet it was not imperfect: because all things were
written that were necessary to life and salvation. In the conference that the
Lord has with Thomas, He meets him not roughly, and rigorously, as his
incredulity had justly deserved, but with lenity and meekness, He
endeavors to make him to believe, by granting him his desire. Thomas had
plainly professed, that except he saw the print of the nails, and put his
hand into His side, he would not believe: therefore the Lord says, now,
Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see Mine hands, and put forth thine hand,
and put it in My side, and be no more faithless, but faithful. See the
gentleness of the LORD, and how lovingly He speaks to him: Thomas was not
only incredulous, but also he was stubburne, obstinate, proud and arrogant,
he counted others fools, that believed, he professed, that in no case he
would believe, without seeing and feeling of the LORDS wounds.

Now the LORD grantes this to Thomas which he desired, albeit he was unworthy
of it: yea, the LORD inuites him, and lovingly bids him put his hand in the
print of the nails, and in His side: for the LORD speaks not this in
bitterness and tauntingly to Thomas: for the words that He subjoynes, Be not
faithless, but faithful, testify, that He spoke of love, and in lenity to
Thomas, to make him to believe.

It is true, indeed, the words contain a sort of reproof and rebuking of
Thomas for his incredulity, but this reproof is so tempered, and seasoned
with such lenity, and meekness, that scarc^ly can it be perceived and taken
up. This dealing of the LORD with Thomas, lets us see, how great is the mercy,
gentleness and long suffering of the LORD JESUS toward sinners, whose sins
deserve nothing but wrath and judgment: such is His mercy and meekness
toward sinners, that to the end He might please us: Paul says, Romans 15.3.
He would not please Himself: He suffered shame and ignominy for us, He
suff^red dolor and pains for us, He died for us, and after He rose, He
spared no travel to make the Apostles bel^eue: sundry times did He appear to
them, and now He appears for Thomas cause, albeit he had run very far in the
course of infidelity, and stubburnesse, yet He strives by granting him his
desire, to persuade him, and make him to believe. The Lords gentleness and
long suffering is very great toward all men* even the very reprobate
themselves, who refuse the riches of His bountifulness, and patience, and long
suffering* not knowing that the bount fullness of GOD, leads them to
repentance* Rom Ch^pter 2 verse 4. For as Paul says, He suffers with long
patience, the vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, Romans Chapter 9. verse
22.

But it is greater toward his own, in whom He sees some sponke of grace to
be: for albeit He find it to be very small, and heavily oppressed, and
smoothered down by the corruption of our flesh, and of our cankred nature, yet
He endeuoures to cherish and intertaine it: for He breaks not the bruised
reed, my quench the smooking flax, Esaias 42.3. Matthew. 12.20 But, Brethren, it
serves for no purpose, to speak of this gentleness and bountifulness of the
Lord, except we have a sense and feeling of it in our own souls, and except
we taste how sweet and bountiful the Lord is: for no words can express it,
no words can persuade a man of it, except he find the proof and sense of it
in his own soul. The Lord work a feeling of it in every one of our hearts,
that we may speak of it with the greater assurance and persuasion. But there
may be a question moved here: The desire of Thomas seems to be unlawful and
unreasonable, why then should the Lord have granted it to him? How stands this
with His Justice? How agrees this with that unchangeable Nature of GOD in
Christ? To this I answer: That Thomas failed not in this, that he desired to
see the Lord: for that is the desire of all the Saints, but in this he
failed, as we heard before, that he tied his faith so precisely to his outward
senses, to seeing, and handling, that he professed that no wise he would
believe, except he saw the Lord, and felt Him: yet no question, he had in the
mean time some spiritual desire to see the Lord, and he had a true and
sincere love toward the Lord. This loving dealing of the Lord with Thomas
teaches us this comfortable lesson: The Lord marks not narrowly the
infirmities and wants that are in His own, He looks not narrowly to the
weakness of their Faith, to the imperfections and wants of their prayers and
requests (for their prayers are full of wants and imperfections) but He passes
by their imperfections, He ouersees their infirmities, and misknowes the
corruption wherein their Faith, their prayers and desires are inuol^ed and
ouercled, and He has a regard to their Faith, albeit they have it in never so
small a measure: for the Lord knows the meaning of His own Spirit, even then
when He is wrestling into us against an inumerable number of our infirmities,
sins and corruptions. Happy is that soul that has a sponke of true Faith:
for the Lord will regard it, and ouersee many infirmities and imperfections in
him.

Thus far of the Lords speech to Thomas: Now follows the answer of Thomas
unto the Lord: Thomas meets Him with a notable confession: Thou art my Lord,
and my God. The Text makes no particular mention, whether or not Thomas put
his finger in the print of His vvounds, and his hand in His side, when the Lord
bade him. If so he did, and would none otherwise believe, then surely he
has been very hard of heart, impudent and obstinate, who would not believe
when he saw the Lord with his eyes, and heard Him speaking to him. But it is
more probable, and I am of that judgment, that so soon as Thomas saw the
Lord, and heard Him speaking, that he was ashamed of his incredulity, and he
came to himself, and bethought himself, for it is a wonder to see, how soon
the soul of the most obstinate and endured man will be turned, when it pleases
the Lord to be effectual in it by His presence. The rest of the Apostles
believed not so soon as they saw the Lord, and heard His voice, albeit their
incredulity was not so great as was the incredulity of Thomas: yet when it
pleased the Lord to open their eyes, and to illuminate their understanding,
they believed. And Thomas who by many degrees surpassed all the rest in
incredulity, after that once he saw the Lord, and heard Him, incontinently he
believed, and gave a notable confession of Him. Then mark it, Brethren, Faith
dependes not on our selves, on the strength of our nature, on the free will of
man, or upon such and such disposition of the soul, but it dependes upon the
free mercy and good pleasure of God: It is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in GOD that shows mercy, Romans Chapter 9. verse 16.
Therefore* when we see any belief in CHRIST, let us ever give the praise
thereof to GOD, and not to the man, as if it were of his natural strength
power, and inclination.

But let us consider this confession of Thomas, and the grounds vvhereupon it
arises, he says, Thou art my LORD and my GOD. This confession that he gives
of the LORD, proceeds from a clear light, whereby his mind was suddenly
illuminated, and that by the powerful and effectual presence of the LORD, his
mind was first illuminated to see CHRIST to be the LORD, as He is man: for
CHRIST, as He is man, is LORD over all, thereafter to see Christ as He is GOD,
for by the veil of the flesh, and of the nature of man He is led in, and gets
access to see the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in Him bodily: Next this
confession proceeds from the apprehension of the heart, whereby it felt the
Lord, and took hold of Him: for as that clear light shined in his mind, so
also the heart of Thomas was opened to embrace the Lord, and to draw Him in to
himself: and therefore he calls Him not simply Lord, but my Lord, he styles
Him not simply God, but my God. For no question this plain and clear
confession testifies, that there was a clear illumination in the mind, and a
full persuasion in the heart of Thomas of that which he confessed.

If we compare Thomas with the rest of the Apostles, we will find, that as
he surpassed them far in unbelief, so he surpasses them far in believing
and confessing of the LORD: for such a confession has not been hitherto
uttered by any of the Disciples: so that in this example we may see verified
that common saying, The last shall be first, and the first shall be last. The
rest of the Apostles were before Thomas in Faith, they believed before him, but
now Thomas by a sudden change, runs out before them, he has a clearer
sight, and a greater measure of Faith than they had.

The rest of the Apostles had the Holy Spirit given them, and that strengthened
their Faith, but Thomas who then was absent, after that once he see, and hear
the Lord, he finds such a clear and marvelous light in his soul, that he
vtters a more glorious and notable confession than any of the rest had done
before: And this likewise teaches us to ascribe the praise of all the benefits
and graces that is in man, to the grace and mercy of GOD, who distributes to
every man, according to the good pleasure of His will, that which He thinks
meet: for as was said before, It is not in him that runs, nor in him that
wills, but in God that shows mercy.

This sudden change and notable confession which Thomas gives of the LORD,
teaches us yet further, that there was some sponkes of grace, and of spiritual
desire left into the soul of Thomas to see the LORD, and to enjoy His
presence: for except there had been some piece of desire to have seen Him, how
could he upon a suddaintie have embraced Him so willingly, and joyfully, as
one long desired and looked for. For the words of Thomas importe, first, that
he had great sorrow and sadness in His soul, because as he thought he had
lost the LORD: Next, that he had a desire to find Him, and to see Him again:
And thirdly, that he had an exceeding great joy when he found Him, and by his
expectation saw Him, and enjoyed His presence. This serves for thy comfort, who
have gotten a measure of grace, albeit the corruptions and infirmities of the
flesh strive to drown, and smoother and suffocate it, yet never shall it
altogether be abolished and extinguished, but at last, it shall wrestle out,
and prevail, and overcome the corruption.

Now, to come forward to the LORDS reply, to Thomas: He answers him,
Thomas, because thou have seen, thou beleeuest, blessed are they which have
not seen, and have believed. He says not, because thou have touched Me, but
because thou have seen Me. So in my judgment Thomas touched not the Lord, but
contented himself with the seeing of the LORD, and hearing of His voice. He
acknowledges the Faith of Thomas, but He extetenuates it in comparison of
others, He praises not Thomas for His Faith, because he tied his faith to his
senses, He believed because he saw Him, but He praises and commends the
Faith of others, who no counting of the outward sense, should believe in Him,
albeit they saw Him not. Albeit He acknowledges the Faith of Thomas, He
calls him not blessed for it, but He pronounces them to be blessed, who have
not seen Him, and yet do believe.

These words of the LORD to Thomas, lets us see, that the case and condition
of them who believe without seeing, is nothing worse, nor inferior to the case
and condition of them who have not seen the LORD, and upon sight have
believed. We this day who have not seen the LORD face to face, but only have
heard His word, and believe, are nothing inferior to them who saw Him, and
believed, and namely to Thomas who would not believe, except he saw the LORD:
and if there were no more, to assure thee who have not seen the LORD JESUS,
and yet beleeuest, that thou art blessed this joy that thou shall find in the
mids of thy greatest sorrow and affliction, might be a sufficient argument,
to persuade thee: for Peter says, The Godly in the mids of their affliction,
believing in Christ whom they have not seen, rejoice with a joy unspeakable
and glorious, 1. Pet. Chapter 1. verse 8. Indeed in this life, the blessed
estate of them, who believe in Christ, is neither clearly seen by others,
neither is it thoroughly felt by themselves, for it is not seen what we shall
be, and here only have we the first fruits of the Spirit, and a foretasting
of these things that shall be reueiled, but in that great day, when our LORD
shall appear, then shall it be seen, how blessed the estate of them shall
be, who believed: for then when we see Him as He is, we shall be like to Him
in glory. The world countes them who believe in Christ Jesus, to be vile and
contemptible bodies, but one day they shall see their happiness, and their
glory, to their shame and confusion. But here it may be asked: What mooues
the Lord so highly to commend the Faith of them, who believe, and yet see not?
What can be the cause of this? I answer: The reason is, because Faith without
sight is more hardly obtained than Faith by sight. The man that believes
without sight, he must overcome many more impediments and tentations than the
other, who believes that which he sees, and this is commonly true, that which
is obtained most hardly, and acquired with greatest difficulty, is most
precious, most excellent, and most worthy of praise: and so this Faith that
wants sight, is far to be preferred and more praise worthy than the other:
for it is sundry ways tried and fined, before it appear, 1. Pet. 1.7.

Now to go forward: The Evangelist in the end of the Chapter, by the way
meets some things which curious men might have objected: First they might have
asked: Whether if all the miracles which the Lord Jesus wrought, while He was
in the world were set down in write, and extant in the Gospel written by him.
John answers: No, they are not all written: for he says: Many other signs
also did Jesus in the presence of His Disciples, which are not written in this
Book. They might have said again to John: then by appearance this Euangell
that thou have written is not perfect, but imperfect? To this he answers? My
Gospel is perfect enough, because all things are written that are necessary
to Faith and Salvation. These words are casten in only by the way in this
History of the Resurrection: for albeit he seems to break off the History
of the Resurrection of CHRIST, and to conclude in a manner the whole Gospel,
yet he returns again to the same History of the Resurrection in the Chapter
following, and in the end thereof he concludes the whole Gospel almost in
these same words that are set down here. But to return and to speak of the
miracles, whereof John speaks here: he says, Many other signs and Miracles
wrought the LORD, which are not written in this book. Then it may be asked?
Wherefore are they not written? Were they unprofitable? Serves the knowledge of
them to no use? To this I answer: That these miracles were profitable and
steadable to confirm and strengthen the faith of them, who lived in that age,
and saw them done: yea further, they are also steadable to the faith of them,
who lived in the ages following: for when we read and hear, that there was
such a great multitude of miracles wrought by the Lord, albeit we know not
distinctly and particularly what they were, that serves very much to strengthen
and confirm our Faith, so that we see these miracles which are not written,
are not left out of write, as though they were unprofitable, and as though they
served for no use, or were unworthy to be remembered? No, they were profitable
and worthy, but they are left out, because the miracles set down in write by
John, and the rest of the Evangelists, which indeed are very many, are
sufficient to Faith and Salvation. But because the Evangelist sets down in
this place, the end of the miracles that the Lord wrought: therefore we shall
speak more largely of them.

CHRIST, when He came into the world, was many ways marvelous: and
therefore amongst many other glorious styles, He gets this also, to be called
wonderful, Isaiah Chapter 9. verse 6. For first, if we look to His person,
He was wonderful: for He was GOD and man in one person, the like whereof,
never was, nor never shall be. Next, if we look to the doctrine which He
brought out of Heaven, and to the word which He preached to the world, He
was wonderful: for wonderful was the light of His doctrine: whereby He
brought a marvelous light to the dark world, and this made the officers to
say to the High Priests: Never man spoke like this man, Ioh. Chapter 7. verse
46. and in the 7. Chapter of the Euangell of Matthew. verse 29. He teached them
as one having authority, and not as the Scribes: Last, if we consider the
things that He did, and the wonders that He wrought in the world: He was
wonderful, for they declared plainly, that He was not only a man, a creature,
but that He was God, the great Creator, and that Eternal JEHOVAH. And these
miracles served to confirm His doctrine: for the doctrine and the word of the
Gospel preached by CHRIST, served to work and beget Faith in the heart, but
the miracles served to confirm the doctrine, and the word which He preached:
for they were steadable either to prepare the hearts of men to receive the word
and doctrine of the Lord, or else to confirm them in that word which they had
reeceiued already. Now both the word and doctrine of Christ, and also His
Miracles are set down and left in register to us, by the special will and
direction of Christ, to the well of them that were to live in the ages to come,
that they might believe, and get life and salvation: and therefore this written
word and doctrine should be received by us, as the viue voice of Christ
Himself, and we should count no less of it, than if we heard Christ
Himself speaking to us, with His own mouth, and likewise we should count of
the miracles written in the Gospel, as if we had seen the Lord Jesus working
them before our eyes: and therefore now in our age, we need not any new
miracles, to confirm of new again, the doctrine of Christ, and His Apostles.
Indeed miracles were very necessary to them that lived in the Primitive
Church, when the Gospel was first preached, and when it appeared unto the
world to be a new doctrine, and when the Church was in her infancy, then
miracles were very needful: but now, seeing the doctrine of Christ, and His
Apostles is sufficiently confirmed already by all these miracles, that were
wrought in these days by Christ, and His Apostles, we need no miracles. Why
should we desire them, except we thought, that the doctrine is not yet
sufficiently confirmed, and as yet is but a new doctrine. If we think, that it
is the same doctrine, which Christ and His Apostles taught, it needs no new
confirmation. Many vain and fantastic men, but especially the Papists this
day are not content with the Miracles that have been wrought by the Lord
Jesus, and His Apostles, to confirm the doctrine of the Gospel, but they
crave new miracles to confirm the doctrine of the Gospel, as if it were not
sufficiently confirmed already. But, I say unto thee, Vain man, go seek
miracles as thou will, and as long as thou will, never shall thou get any other
true miracle from God, except only this miraculous and wonderful effect that
the Gospel works, in bringing forth in our hearts this true and justifying
Faith in renewing us, and in beginning that life eternal in our souls: for
the faithful find by experience, that this Gospel of Christ, is the power of
God unto salvation to them that believe. If thou be not content with this
marvelous, effect, but wilt go on to seek outwa^d signs and miracles, thou
declarest plainly to the world, that thou never did find this powerful
effect of the Gospel into thy soul, and if thou find not this powerful
effect to be wrought into thy soul by the preaching of the word, and by the
miracles that were wrought by the Lord Jesus, and His Apostles, thou will never
believe, albeit thou saw ten thousand new miracles wrought before thine
eyes. Now, we told you before, that both the word and doctrine, and likewise
the miracles were written by the special will, and direction of Christ, but
there is a difference between their writting: for all the doctrine of Christ
that is necessary to life and salvation in substance, not so much as a
sentence excepted, is set down in write, the Holy Spirit He omitted nothing.
But all the miracles that the Lord wrought are not set down in write: for it
was necessary for our Faith, that ye substance of the whole doctrine should be
set down in write, but it was not necessary for our Faith, that all ye miracles
which He wrought, should be written. Our Faith required the one, but our Faith
required not the other: for the Lord in writting and registrating of His word,
and miracles had not respect unto the curiosity of vain man, which is
insatiable, and can never be satisfied, but He had regard to the Faith and
Salvation of man: and therefore He set down these things in write, which were
sufficient and necessary for Faith and Salvation. Our Faith and Salvation was
the rule and measure of the Lords revelation, and not the curiosity of vain
man: Now, if all things are written that are necessary to life and Salvation,
then thou who is not content with these things, but seek other things, and
claims unto unwritten verities, which are the fantasies of men's brain, and
cry for new miracles, What can any man think that that thou art doing, but
seeking something above and beyond eternal Life and Salvation, thou seek
but fantasies, that thine own head conceiteth* Indeed, vain Papist, if thine
understanding were capable, and if thy faith were able to comprehend all these
things, all the doctrine and miracles that are written in the Old and New
Testament, thou would have some show of reason to require more, to clame to
unwritten verities, and to desire more miracles, and I would the more willingly
give thee leave to require them. But, seeing such is the weakness and
infirmity of thy Faith, and understanding, that thou art not able to
comprehend these same things that are written, which far surpasses the
capacity and understanding of man, why should thou, miserable wretch,
devise other things to thy self? Why go thou about to clout and clamp to
the word of God (which so long as we live in this world, we are not able fully
to attain to) the dreams and fantasies which thou have forged in thine own
brain.

Now to end shortly: The Evangelist in setting down the end wherefore these
miracles were left in write which is, that we might believe in Christ, and get
life through Him, lets us see, what are the things that chiefly we ought to
believe of Christ, These things, says he, are written, that ye might believe
that Christ is that Son of God. These words comprehend summarily the
substance of all these things, that are necessary to be believed of Jesus: we
must believe in Jesus, even that Jesus, who was borne of the Virgin Marie, who
walked in Judea, and was conversant among the Jews. And what must we believe
of Him? These words tell us, we must believe two things of Him: First, that
He is, That Christ: Next, that He is, That Son of God. The first respects
His office, the next respects His person: By reason of His office, He is
called That Christ, because He is anointed of God the Father, to be our King,
Priest and Prophet: for these three sorts of persons, Kings, Priests and
Prophets, used to be anointed in the Old Testament: In respect of His
person, we must believe that He is That Son of God: for as Christ is GOD,
and the Son of GOD, properly He is a person, even the second person of the
Trinity. The nature of man that He assumed, makes not up a part of His
person, but was only assumed to the divine person, and was so straightly
conjoined and united to the person of the Son, that whole Christ, GOD and man
is called but one person.

Now, look what benefit we receive by believing these things of Jesus: He
says, In believing we have life through His Name: How comes this, that Faith in
Jesus we get life? First, we fly as it were, and mount above, while we come
unto CHRIST and take hold of Him: For where the Carioun is, thither will the
Eagles resort: Next, when we have honored Him so, that we count nothing of
our selves, while we rest in Him by Faith, then through our Faith as a conduit
He conuoyes life into our souls, and that not an euanishing life, but Eternal
life, and this life is the life of God. So this life that we live here by
Faith, flows first from the Son of God, and from Jesus, as He is God, then
it comes to us from the Son of God, as He is Christ, and anointed our King,
Priest and Prophet, for first, as He was anointed to be our Priest by His
death and sacrifice upon the Cross, He merited life unto us: thereafter, as
He was anointed to be our King, and Prophet, He applies powerfully and
effectually unto us the benefits, which as our Priest He merited unto us by
His death: for as He is our Prophet, He applies them to us by His teaching, and
as He is our King, He appliets them to us by working powerfully and effectually
into us by His Spirit. Now we see, what we ought to believe of Jesus, and what
gain we receive by this Faith: the gain is very great, but the means to come
by it, lies not in our hands, we are not able by our own free will, or by the
strength of Nature to believe, flesh and blood cannot teach us this Faith: for
as it is true which Paul says, No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. Chapter 12. verse 3. So none can believe, that Jesus is
that Christ and that Son of GOD, but by the same Holy Ghost, as the LORD
Himself told Peter, after that He had confessed that He was the CHRIST, the
Son of the living GOD: for He says unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon the
son of Iona* for neither flesh nor blood has reueiled that unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. Chapter 16. verse 17. And therefore we must
crave continually of the LORD, that He would vouchsafe His Spirit on us, to
work Faith in our souls, that believing in JESUS CHRIST, we may get life and
Salvation through Him: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all
honor and praise, for evermore.

AMEN.
THE XLVIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XXI. AFter these things, Jesus showed Himself again to His
Disciples at the sea of Tiberias: and thus showed He Himself:














WE continue as yet, Brethren, Beloved in Christ, in the History of Christ's
appearings, after His Resurrection, whereof, this which we have set down in
the beginning of the 21. Chapter of John, is the seventh, if we reckone
precisely all the particular appearings, whereof any mention is made in the
Gospel: But if we count only the appearings unto His Apostles assembled
together, this is the third in number, as the Evangelist himself hereafter
tells. In the first two appearings He manifested Himself unto the eleven
being assembled together in an house, the doors being closed, only Thomas
was absent in the first appearing, now here He appears only unto seven,
being together, not in an house, but without at the fishing. As concerning the
particular time of this appearing, what day it was from the first day of His
Resurrection, or how many days it was from His last appearing unto them, it
is not particularly set down: and therefore we will pass by it, but the
Evangelist marks particularly the place of this appearing: for he says, Jesus
showed Himself again at the sea of Tiberias, which sea is otherwise called
the sea of Gennesareth, for according to the accustomable form of speaking
among the Jews, a lake is called the Sea. Before we come to the rest of the
circumstances of this appearing, it is expedient, that we answer to a question
that may be moved: It may be asked, What is the cause that the Lord appeared
so often times unto His Disciples, and so many ways? Had it not been enough that
He had appeared to them once or twice? What needed there any more appearings? To
this answer: There are many great and weighty causes, wherefore the Lord so
often times appeared, and first: because Faith in the Resurrection from the dead,
is a thing very hardly and with great difficulty is obtained: for among all
the Articles of Faith there is none more contrary to Nature, none appears to
be more incredible: therefore the Lord, that He might assure them that He was
risen, and that they who are in Him, one day shall rise again, He appeared so
often times after His Resurrection. Next, He appeared so of^ to His Disciples,
because they were to be the first witnesses of His Resurrection to the world:
and therefore, they needed often times to see the Lord, to have heard, to have
handled Him, and been conversant with Him, they needed all sorts of helps to
their Faith, that they might have full assurance themselves, that the Lord was
risen, to the end, that with the greater assurance, and with a full
persuasion, as the Apostle speaks of himself, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5 They might
testify of that Resurrection both by viue voice, and by writting unto others,
even to the coming of the Lord Himself, and indeed so it came to pass: for
because He appeared and reueiled Himself so often times to them: therefore they
had exceeding great liberty and boldness, both in their speaking, and
writting: for the frequent seeing of Him, hearing of Him, speaking and
conuersing with Him, made them to have a full persuasion, and this full
persuasion made them to have great liberty and freedom: for he that has not
a full persuasion in his own heart, should not take upon him to be a witness
and preacher of the graces and benefits of God to others, neither will he ever
be able to speak of them with freedom, to move others to believe. Thirdly,
He appeared so often unto His Apostles, not for their caus^ only, but for our
cause also, who should live in the ages to come: He had respect unto the
weakness of our Faith: for every particular appearing of Christ, serves to
help and further something our Faith, our Faith degree by degree is helped by
every one of them, and all His appearings being joined together, are a sure
and steadfast ground to our Faith to repose upon, they serve to consummate our
Faith, and to bring it to a full perfection: for when we hear or read, that
our Lord appeared at any time to His Disciples, we should think, and settle
this in our mind, that when He appeared unto them, He appeared unto us, when
they saw Him, we saw Him: when we read, that the Lord appeared unto Peter, I
should think that He appeared unto me: when John and the rest of the
Apostles saw Him with their eyes. I should so esteem, that I saw Him with
mine eyes, and whenever they saw Him, I should lay my count, that I saw Him:
for when that Peter says, That with his eyes he saw His Majesty, 2. Pet.
1.16. he points out Christ as it were with his finger, to be seen with mine
eyes. When Paul says, That the Lord was seen of him after His Resurrection,
1. Cor. 15.8. he points out the Lord to be seen by me. When John says, We
declare unto you that which we have heard, which we have seen with these our
eyes, which we have looked upon, and these hands of ours have handled of that
word of life, 1. Ioh. 1.1. he sets the Lord as it were, before my face, that
I may see Him with mine eyes* I may hear Him with mine ears, and may handle
Him with mine hands, To the end that my joy may be full, as he speaks there,
verse 4. And therefore, thou who art a faithful Christian, have cause to
rejoice, that the LORD so often times appeared to His Disciples: for it was for
thy cause, for the helping and confirming of thy weak Faith, that He appeared
so often, that so thy joye may be the more full. Now I go forward unto the
circumstance of the persons to whom the Lord appeared: There were seven of
the Disciples gathered together, for he says, There were together, Simon
Peter, and Thomas, who was called Didimus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilie,
and the two sons of Zebedeus, and two other Disciples. No question it was
not by fortune, or chance, or rashly, that so many of the Disciples met
together at this time: but it was by the determinate counsel and providence
of GOD that they were assembled together, to the end that he might manif^st
and exhibit himself unto them, being assembled together.

When the Lord has a purpose to communicate his graces and benefits in a
great measure, he uses commonly to call together a number of his own in one
place, that he may communicate his graces the more liberally unto them, being
assembled together: for he gives not his great graces, nor vouchsafes not his
glorious presence so much to private persons alone, as he does to a company
of the Saints assembled together, it is to them chiefelie that he manifestes
himself. When the Lord was purposed to bestow the holy Spirit, what does
he? he gathers the whole number of the Apostles together in one place, upon
the day of the Pentecoste, and then he sendes upon them all, the holy
Spirit, in the form of fiery and cloven tongues (as we read in the second
Chapter of the Acts, and the third verse.) Our own experience may be a
sufficient proof unto us of this, for when find we the Spirit of God to work
most powerfullie, and the graces of God most abundantly to be bestowed
upon us? not when we are our self alone, but when we are assembled together
with ye Saints to exercise the means of grace, to hear the word, to offer
up our prayers together unto God, and to be partakers of the Sacraments: And
therefore, if thou would have the Spirit of GOD present with thee, and
look for any grace, despise not the fellowship, contemn not the assembly of
the Lords Saints. Now amongst the rest that are here counted out, we see
Thomas is reckoned to be one: The first time that the Lord appeared to his
Disciples, assembled together, the door being shut, THOMAS was not present:
but the second time that the LORD appeared unto them, he was present with
them. Now in this third appearing of the Lord to his Disciples, he is also
present with them. This example of THOMAS lets us see that a man, who is
gone astraye, and has wandered out of the way, after that once the Lord
mercifully takes him by the hand, and sets him in the way of grace, that he
will be careful constantly to walk into that way with the rest of the
faithful, who are walking in that way, he will be loath to separate himself
from their society, after that once the Lord begins freely to give grace, He
ceases never to heap grace upon grace, while grace be crowned with glory: for
it is true, that the Apostle says, That He who has begun the good work in
us, will perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. And our Savior
says, To every man that has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance.
So happy is the man in whom the Lord has once begun to work, for He will
never leave him, while He perform His work in him.

Now, when they are met together, what is their exercise: They go to the
fishing, the occasion of this exercise comes of Peter, he purposed to separate
himself from the rest: and therefore he says unto them, J go a fishing: The
rest cannot be content to sunder from him, but they offer their company to
him, and they say: We also will go with thee. What made Thomas, and the rest
of the Disciples so unwillingly to sunder from Peter, and what made every one
of them so desirous to enjoye the company of another? Was this by chance or
fortoun? No, but it was by the special providence of GOD, that same providence
that before gathered them together, now keeps and retains them together, in
such sort, that albeit some of them were of purpose to have sundred themselves
from the rest, yet the rest will not sunder from them. The Lord will keep them
together, that He may communicate unto them such grace as He would not
bestow upon them being sundered one from another. He shows Himself, and He
vouchsafes His presence in them to their exceeding joy and comfort, being now
together, whereas if they had been separated, if Peter had gone one way, and
Thomas another, and the rest the third, it is not likely, that the Lord would
have manifested Himself unto them. But how is this, that the Disciples of the
Lord, who were ordained and appointed by the Lord Himself to an higher
calling, to the Apostleship, to be witnesses and preachers to the world of
these things which they saw and heard of Him, go to the fishing. Might they
leave that high calling, and take themselves to so base and contemptible an
exercise: I answer, that herein they do nothing amiss: for albeit they were
appointed and designed by the Lord to be Apostles, yet in effect they were not
as yet Apostles, they had not entered to that calling, neither were they meet
for it, until the time that they were endued with power from on high, and
before they had received the Holy Spirit in the form of fiery and cloven
tongues in the day of the Pentecoste. And further, what fault was it, albeit
they had entered to their office of the Apostleship, that they should be
exercised in an honest and lawful occupation, and should work with their
hands, as we read of the Apostle Paul, who in sundry places professes, that
he labored with his own hands for his living. Read 1. Cor. 4.12. 1 Thessalonians.
2.9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8.

Now, when they agree to remain together, They went their way, and entered into
a ship straightway, and they go to take fish, and to seek bodily food for
themselves, but the Lord in the mean time, is calling them to a better thing,
even to see the Lord, and to enjoy His gracious presence, which was a great
deal better, than all their fishing, and all that they could have gained by
that exercise: and Peter, after that once he knew that it was the LORD which
spoke to them, counted more of His presence, than of all the huge and great
number of fishes, that were enclosed within the net: for he leaves them all,
after that once he knew that it was the Lord that spoke, and showed Himself
present unto them, yea, he castes himself into the Sea, and hazardes his life,
to the end he may come speedily and soon unto the Lord. The Lord, who ever
has a regard of His own, makes all their actions, and their sufferings, to
tend to their well and comfort, yea, to serve and further them to eternal
life. When thou go to perform any thing, when thou addressest thy self to
any work what ever it be, whether it be husbandry, fishing, merchandise, or
any other exercise, I give thee my counsel, endeavor ever to entertain in
thy soul a sense and persuasion of the love of God, and if thou so do, thou
shall find, that when the members of thy body are exercised in their labor,
that thy soul likewise shall make a progress straightway to Heaven. Well,
they go to the fishing, but what success have they at the first? Not very
great, their success was very slender: for it is said, That night they caught
nothing. How came this to pass? Was it through their unskillfulness? No, it was
by the secret providence and direction of God, who often times delays the
success of the labors of His own, and will not answer their expectation at
the first, to the end, that in His own appointed time He may give it more
abundantly to their greater comfort: for this is the Lords accustomed dealing
with His own children, Of set purpose He will disappoint them for a time, to
their greater benefit and comfort thereafter. When Paul writes to Philemon
concerning his servant Onesimus, who had fled away from him, he says, It may
be that he has departed for a season, that thou might receive him for ever.
Next, the Lord uses to disappoint the hope of His own for a season, because
that serves more to the glory of God, than if they got it at the first time:
for when men find a prosperous success in all their vvayes, and all things
answering to their desire, scarcely do they consider and discern Gods
blessing: yea, many times it comes to pass, that in such cases men ascribe
the praise of all to themselves, to their own wisdom, their travels and
labors; they flatter themselves, and sacrifice to their own net: But when
they see themselves, notwithstanding of all their travels, disappointed of
their hope, and thereafter find a blessing and good success; then they
plainly discern, that all things proceed from the blessing and favorable
providence of God, and therefore gives to the Lord the praise and glory of all.
Last, when He delays the success which His own hope for in their labors,
He gives them a fair recompense for the want of the temporal benefit for a
season, and He gives them a spiritual benefit to their soul: for when
thereafter He gives them a success, He makes them to see His blessing, and
opens their hearts, and looses their mouths, to sound His praise, which is
better than any earthly benefit that can be bestowed upon man. When the
Disciples had long labored without success, at last the Lord comes, for
th'Euangelist says, When the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the Sea
shore. Howbeit the Lord will long absent Himself from His own, and give them
no sensible blessing in their travels, yet at the last he will come in his
own due time to their great comfort.

Now the time is marked when the Lord comes, to wit, in the morning: he
tarries away all the night, and comes in the morning. The Scripture compares
the time in the which we live without Christ, unto the dark night: for as
in the night no man can walk, nor be exercised in the work of his calling,
no more can any man without Christ walk in the way of salvation, nor do
any thing acceptable to God. Again, his presence and coming is compared to
the morning; for as in the morning, when the Sun rises, men may see the way,
and walk in the way, and be exercised in the works of their calling. So when
CHRIST, that Daye-starre begins to arise, that Sun of Righteousness
begins to shine unto the souls of His own, then they see the way of
salvation, and they have courage and pleasure to walk therein, and to do the
works of light, which are acceptable unto GOD: when He is absent, there is
nothing but night and darkness, when He returns again, there is light. DAVID
seems to allude unto this pr^sence of Christ, by His Spirit in the soul,
when he says in the xxx. PSALM, verse. v. Weeping may abide at evening, but
^oye comes in the morning.

Now howbeit the Lord stood before them on the shore, Nevertheless the
Disciples knew not that it was JESUS. How this comes to pass, that they
knawe Him not, it is uncertain, for the cause is not set down, neither will
we curiously inquire for it: it may be, and it is likely, that their eyes
were closed that they could not discern and know Him, whom otherwise they
saw present before them. The example of these Disciples lets us see what is
the natural disposition of the children of God: They sought not the Lord
first, yea, when H^e offers Himself unto them, they know Him not. So it is
with us all by nature, neither can we seek God, neither can we so much as
once think of the seeking of Him, neither when He offers Himself unto us
unsought, can we d^scerne Him and know Him by nature: Except God by His
Spirit prevent us, and illuminate the eyes of our minds, and open our hearts,
and make us to know Him, we will never seek Him, nor know Him, but we
shall ever remain in darkness.

Yet albeit they know not the Lord, He begins to show Himself unto them,
and He breaks off conference unto them, Sirs, have ye any meat? And by
this speech He p^epares them to that good success and blessing which He was
to give to their travels: And this He does, by bringi^g them to a confession
of their want and needfulnesse: for when he inquires at them, if they had any
meat, they answered him, No. They confess their want: for mark, Brethren,
how the Lord will have thy soul to be prepared before He communicate His
blessing. Thy skant, thy need, and thy poverty, though it were never so
great, will not do the turn; it will not move the Lord to bless thy
travels, if there be no more: No, He requires further of thee, He will have
thee to acknowledge, to feel, and to confess thy poverty. The Lord pitties
not, but abhorres proud and sturdie beggars. He does to His own as a loving
father does to his son: Albeit the father see his son in great poverty and
need, lacking food and raiment; yet if he come proudly and stubburnly by the
door and presence of his father, he will not know him, nor help him, howbeit
he have substance and wealth enough; unto such time as he is humbled and come
to himself. Even so the Lord, when we are in misery, in great want and
need, and will not acknowledge nor confess it unto Him: He will not know us,
nor bestow His blessings upon us till we be humbled. Now when the Lord has
prepared them with the confession of their own want, thereafter He gives them
the blessing, Cast out the net on the right side of the sh^p: and the^ He
promises them a good success, for He says, Ye shall find. But what needed y^
Lord to bid the^ cast out the nets, that they might get fishes? Might not the
Lord have given them fish enough without their travel and labor? Might He not
by His omnipotent power have commanded the fish to have enclosed themselves
within the nets? Yes no doubt, without their travel and labor He might have
filled the ship abou^dantly with fish: yet it was His pleasure and good will yt
they should work and labor, and take pains upon the^, first before He g^ue
them any blessing: He would not bless the^ with a good success, except they
labored. Further ye may see here, how great pleasure and liking the Lord has
to see men painful in their calling: for albeit they had bin molested and
troubled all the night with laboring, yet the Lord will have the^ to cast out
their net again in the morning, to the end yt He might give a blessing to their
travels. Indeed it is true that He desires not our labor, as if it could
stand Him in any stead: He gives not a success to it as if it merited any
thing at His hands: for He gives success and increase only for His own names
sake, and for His Christ's sake, without any merit of ours: for if He had not
respect to Himself and His Christ, if we took never so great pains, we would
find but a sober success. Many find by experience, yt without Him, if they
would pain themselves from morning till evening, they can find no success.
Yea, when the Lord withdrawes His blessing, the children of God themselves
find the proof of this Peter and the rest of the Disciples who were with him,
toyled and pained themselves all the night without any success or profit.
Then the cause chiefly why the Lord requires our travel and labor, is
because it is an ordinary mean appointed by Him, whereby we should find and
receive His blessing, and it is a part of our service and duty that the Lord
has appointed to us. For when with a simple and upright heart, we are
laboring in our calling, we are serving the Lord. Therefore Paul charges the
servants, to be obedient to their masters with singleness of heart, as unto
Christ: meaning that in their service done to their masters, they serve not so
much men, as Christ, Ephesians. 6.5. Now the Disciples obeyed this commandment of
the Lord, for they cast out the net, and they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of ^ishes. This their obedience is very commendable: albeit they had
been troubled and wearied all the night, and had caught nothing: yet at the
request of a stranger, a man whom they knew not, whom they supposed to be no
more but a common man, readily they yield obedience, and cast out the net. And
this their readiness testifies, that they had exceeding great patience and
consta^cie in enduring of travel, notwithstanding of all their labor and
pains preceding. What was the cause of this their patience? Even partly
because their long laboring and pains that they had taken without any
success, had humbled and tamed them: if they got no fish, they got a better
benefit, they were somewhat mortified, and learned patience, partly because
they had an hope of a good success, and that the Lord should bless them at
the last, therefore patiently they endure in laboring: for we see commonly,
that hope of vantage will sustain a man, and cause him to endure much trouble
and labor. And this hope, if it be in the Lord, who never leaves His own,
makes the patience and enduring of labor to get a good success. So long as
thou live, cast hope never off, if it were no more, but because by it thou
glo^ifiest God: for by faith and hope to obtain all good things which are
necessary either to soul or body from the hands of the Father of lights,
from whom all good things descend, we glorify Him in the multitude of His
mercy. By the example of the Disciples let us learn, that when we have
troubled and pained our selves very long and find but sober success of our
travels, at least to be humbled and mortified, and to continue constantly in
laboring waiting patiently for ye Lords blessing: for as ye d^sciples in the
end found a better success than they could have looked for: (They found the
net to be filled with such a multitude of fishes, yt they were not able to
draw it) so shall we find in the end, yt our patient waiting for ye Lords
blessing shall not be frui^lesse and without success.

Now to go forward. They knew not the Lord when at His command they cast
the net into the Sea: but now, when they see such a marue^lous draught of
fishes enclosed within their nets, they begin to conceive that it was the
Lord that spoke to them. The first man who discernes Him, is JOHN, who
describes himself here to be the Disciple whom the Lord loved: and
commonly he describes himself in the Gospel by this style, and that because
he found the love of God spread abroad in his heart by His Holy Spirit in an
exceeding great measure. JOHN said unto PETER, It is the LORD. The thing that
makes JOHN to know that it was the Lord that spoke, was the extraordinary and
marvelous success that they found in their travels: for in that success he
saw and considered not only an exceeding great power, but also a wonderful
bountifulness and liberality, whereupon he gathers, that it was the Lord
that spoke unto them, and commanded them to cast out the net, and directed
them in their labor, and made them to get such success. Learn then here
by JOHN'S example, when the Lord bestows His benefits and graces on thee, and
when thou see His works, by His works and benefits to ascend to God the
giver of them, and in them to acknowledge Him and His essential properties,
His power, His bountifulness, His mercy, His providence, etc. For if we
weigh rightly, and deeply consider the benefits and works of God in them,
we will find as it were a seal of the majesty of God, of His power, of His
mercy, of His liberality and bountifulness, which should move us to lift up
our eyes to Heaven, to behold the Lord, who is the worker and giver of all,
that so with cheerfulness and pleasure we may glorify Him: for this is our
greatest happiness and felicity to glorify the majesty of our God in all
things. There are many, who when as they see the wondrous works of God, and
daily receive benefits of Him, they so rest upon the outward works and
benefits, that they never ascend to God, the author and giver of them, to see
Him, and to glorify Him. But miserable are they who so does, what ever they
be: for by so doing, they not only deprive themselves of happiness, but
also they turn the blessings of God into a curse to them.

When JOHN has informed PETER that it was the Lord, what does PETER? It is
said, When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girded his coat to him
(for he was naked) and cast himself into the Sea. He shows a great zeal and
forwardness: for in my judgment this doing of PETER proceeded not from
foolish hardiness, and inconsiderate rashness, but from a true zeal and
fervent desire to meet with the Lord. Now, will ye compare JOHN and PETER
together, ye will find great diversity of gifts: JOHN knew the Lord first,
and that by sight: PETER knew the Lord next, but by hearing, for JOHN informed
him. JOHN was before PETER in faith and knowledge: but PETER, who comes
behind, passes JOHN, who was his teacher, and had instructed him, for he is
more zealous than JOHN was: JOHN exceeded in knowledge, but PETER exceeded in
zeal. This lets us see the truth of that sentence of PAVL, One and the self
same Spirit works all gifts, distributing to every man severally as he
wills, 1. Corinthians. 12.11. Even in the Apostles themselves: for even among
them some excelled in one gift, and some in another: JOHN excelled in
knowledge, and had knowledge of the glorious person of Jesus Christ, and
namely, of His divinity, as his Euangell declares (for it is full of high
mysteries and sublime doctrine of Christ) above the rest of the Apostles. PETER
excelled in zeal and forwardness, and was more ardent in zeal than the rest,
as we may read in the Gospel: PAVL excelled in laboring, and painfulnesse
in preaching of the Gospel: for he says himself, I labored more
abundantly than all the Apostles, 1. Corinthians. Chap. 15. verse. 10. The LORD
gave not all graces to any one of them, but to every one such a measure of
grace as He pleased: neither had it been expedient to themselves, nor so
profitable to others: It had not been expedient to themselves, because it
might have been that they would have comtemned and despised others in respect
of themselves. It had not been so profitable to others, because others would
have envied them for their great perfection of graces. And so by this means,
the body of JESUS (even His Church, which should be compact and straightly
joined together) would have been miserably rent asunder.

On the other part, this inequality and diversity of gifts that the Lord
gives to men, is a special mean to join and knitte together the members of
the mystical body of CHRIST: for as in the body of man the inequality and
diversity of functions and gifts that are given to several members, joins
and holds together ye members of ye body: eue^ so yt inequality and diversity
of spiritual graces given to every member of ye body of Christ, every one
having need of the help of another, joins and holds together the members,
to make up one compact body. Rea^e of this in the first Epistle of Saint Paul
to the Corinthians, Chap. 12. verse. 24.25.

Now I shall only mark one thing, and so I shall end: All the night
preceding, when the Lord Jesus was absent, John's faith and Peter's zeal were
languishing and dwining: but in the morning when Christ returns, both John's
faith and Peter's zeal begin to revive, and to get new strength and
vigor. Whereof we may learn, that this grace of faith, knowledge, and zeal,
is wakened and raised up by Christ, who is the only matter and object of
them: for our faith and knowledge proceeds of His gracious light, which shines
in our dark souls: Our zeal proceeds from the Spirit of Christ, who by His
coming kindles a burning fire in our hearts, and makes us to burn with
zeal, who before were cold in the service of God. PAVL says, God that
commanded light to shine out of darkness, is He, who has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. Chap. 4. verse. 6. The words import, that all faith and
knowledge of God that we have, is by looking unto the face of Jesus: For when
we look unto His face, the beams of that glory which shines in it, is
conveyed into our souls, and lighteneth them, and so works faith and
knowledge in them. And when we shall get a full sight, and see Him as He is
clearelie face to face, then we shall be like to Him in glory: for His
glory shall transform us into this same image from glory to glory, 2. Cor.
cap. 3. verse. 18.

Then seeing that no grace can either be wrought or entertained in the soul,
without the presence of the Lord Jesus, and the beholding of His countenance,
we should be careful constantly to look to His face, and behold His
glory in the mirror of the word, so long as we are in this pilgrimage, that
so hereafter we may see Him face to face, and so be made partakers of His
glory, which He has purchased to all them that love Him by the shedding of
His own blood. To Him, therefore, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be
all praise and glory:

AMEN.
THE XLIX. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
JOHN, CHAP. XXI.














IN this seventh appearing of Christ (Beloved Brethren in the Lord) we have
spoken already of the place of His appearing, to wit, at the Sea of Tiberias:
and we have spoken of the persons to whom He appeared, who vve^e seven in
number: the Lord by His secret providence gathered them together, and kept them
together, (albeit some vv^uld have su^dered from the r^st) to the end the Lord
might show Himself unto them being assembled together in one place. W^e hau^
spoken of their exercise, how they were fishi^g but got little success
howbeit they had labored all the night. We told you also of the Lords
appearing to them, He shows Himself to them in the morning, and finding yt
they had caught nothing, He biddes them cast out the net on the right side of
the ship: we show you their obedience, albeit they knew Him not, and thought
that He had been a stranger, yet upon hope of a good success, they cast out
the net. We have heard what success the Lord gave to this their obedience, the
net was so filled with fishes, that they were not able to draw it: And last,
we have heard, how John knew Him first, and told Peter, and how Peter upon a
fervent zeal to meet with the Lord, casts Himself into the Sea, and hazardes
his life. Now this day, by Gods grace, we shall follow out the rest of the
History of this appearing of Christ, as namely, how the Disciples did meet
with the Lord, and how when they came to the land, miraculously they saw
fishes laid on hot coals, and what was the Lords conference and dealing with
them, and what was the behavior of Peter, and the rest of the Disciples. But
to come to the words: when Peter had cast himself into the Sea, and came to
the Lord, what do the rest of the Disciples? Are they altogether careless?
Have they not also a desire to meet with the Lord? Yes, they have a desire,
and they came to the Lord, albeit not so soon as Peter, For they came by ship,
for they were not far from land, but about two hundredth cubits. Albeit they
came not all so soon as Peter, yet at the last, they al come to ye Lord as
well as Peter, for they were not destitute of grace no more than Peter: as
zeal carried Peter to ye Lord, so Faith and knowledge brings and leads the
rest to the Lord: Peter's zeal moved him to come more speedily, suddenly and
hastily to the Lord, but their Faith and knowledge, brought John and the rest
also to the Lord, for such is the force of Faith, that albeit it have not ay
such fervent zeal accompanying it, as was the zeal of Peter, yet at last it
will lead and convey a man unto Christ. Strive above all things to have
Faith, and seek it daily of the Lord: for if thou have Faith in Christ, not
only shall thou get a comfortable sight of Him, here in thy soul, but also
thou shall see Him hereafter face to face: and by the contrary, if thou want
Faith* if thou have it not in some measure, thou shall never get a sight of God
to thy comfort: for as the Apostle says, Without holiness^ no man shall see
the Lord, Heb. 12.14 (If thou be not holy, thou sh^lt never see Heaven) so say
I, Without Faith, thou shall never s^e God, if thou have not Faith, thou shall
never come to Heaven, Mock Faith and holiness^, as ye please the Lord she
(...) ^sie this one day, without Faith and holiness the gates of Heaven
shall be closed upon thee, thou shall never get no portion of life nor glory.

Now while the Disciples are coming to the Lord, They are drawing the net
with the fishes: Compare this doing of theirs with the doing of Peter, and ye
will see, both do well, albeit the manner be diverse: Peter left the net,
and all ye fishes behind, and swimmed out hastily and speedily to meet ye Lord,
John and the rest drawing after them the net full of fishes, come to ye Lord,
both do well, both their doings are commendable: for zeal so carried Peter yt
not only he cared not for ye net and the fishes, but also he hazarded his life,
that he might come to ye Lord: John and the rest of ye Disciples, as they knew
ye Lord Himself, so they esteem highly of that benefit which the Lord
powerfully and lovingly had bestowed upon them, as a pledge of His favor: and
therefore they were not careless of the benefit, they misregarded it not, but
they thought it meet, to carry it with them* for His cause who had vouchsafed
it on them, and so both ye one and the other are worthy of praise: and hereof
we may learn this lesson: The actions of ye Children of God, wherein they are
exercised according to ye gift that ye Lord has distributed to every one,
albeit they be very far different one from another, yet they are all in some
sort good and worthy of their own praise, because every one of them helps
another: for as it is with the gifts and faculties, so it is with the actions
and operations proceeding from them. Now the gifts and faculties are diverse,
and yet all are for the well of the body, and every one of them supplies the
want of another yea even ye meanest gifts help the greatest, the gift of the
foot helps the gift of the hand* and of the eye: Even so, the actions and
operations slowing from the gifts, serve for the well and commodity of the
whole body, and every one of them supplies the want and inlake that is in
another, the least may help the greatest in some thing that it wants. Ye see a
proof of this here, in the actions and doings of the Apostles. Peter left the
net, the fishes, and all behind him* that he might cor^e hastily unto the
Lord, the thing that in^a^ed in him, the rest supplied, they bring the b^nefite
with them, the fishes that the Lord had sent them. Again, albeit that John and
ye rest brought y^ fishes with them that ye Lo^d gave them as a pledge of ^is
love, yet they were somewhat slo^e* they ^a^e^ not, as Peter did to come to the
lord: now Pet^r helpe^ them in this wa^^, for by hi^ zeal and forwardness, he
stirred them v^^^ and provoked them to a godly e^ulat on.

We must not incontinently despise and reject the particular actions of every
one of the children of God, because they are not perfect in all respects: for
the Lord will not bestow all gifts at once to every faithful man, but we
should consider all the actions of all the children of GOD gathered together,
as it were in a mass, and one heap, and so, because every one helps and
supplies the want of another, to the well of the whole, we shall find a
perfection.

Now, when by ship drawing the net with the fishes after them, they come to
land: What falls out? What find they? They find a miraculous work: for it is
said, As soon then as they were come to land, they saw hot coals, and fish
laid thereon, and bread. Where ever they came, they saw miracles: when they
were on the Sea, they found a miraculous multitude of fishes enclosed in the
net: when they come to the land, they found another miracle, a fire, and all
furniture for their dinner, extraordinarily prepared without the hand of man.
No question, these things were done by the extraordinary working and
dispensation of GOD, to the end, that not only they might assuredly know, that
the Lord was risen again, but likewise, that when they considered His
marvelous and extraordinary power, they might be persuaded, that He who rose
from the dead, was not only man, but also God: for these His vvonderous works
bare witness, that the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily, John says, We saw His
glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, Ioh. 1.14. How saw we
this glory? How discerned he it: Even by these and many other such wondrous
works: and indeed, it had done them little good to have known, that Christ was
risen again, except they had been assured, that He who rose was God, the
Son of God, if they had not known this, the knowledge of His Resurrection
had not been steadable to Salvation.

Now it would be marked, that he says, when they come to land, They saw
fish laid on the coals, and bread. This was for their sustentation: So the
Lord manifested not only His power in the miracle, but likewise His love in
feeding of them, to the end, that they should not rest and content themselves
with marueiling at His power, but that upon the consideration of His great
love* they should be moved to love Him again intierely, and to put their
trust in Him. Indeed, we ought to vvonder at the gloriousness of the person
the Lord, and at His extraordinary and marvelous power, for He is, as the
Prophet Esaias 9.6 calls Him Wonderful, but we should so marvel at His power,
that in ye mean time we end^uoure to have a sense of His love, that we may
love Him again, and put our trust in Him: for without the sense of His love,
our maruelling and vvondering at Him, will do us little good.

Now, let us come to the Lords conference with the Disciples, Jesus said unto
them, Bring of the fishes, which ye have now caught. The Lord breaks off
first the conference: for they carried such a reverence to the Lord, that they
would not presume once to speak: for as the presence of the Lord works
Faith, and love in the soul, so it works fear and reverence of His
Majesty, if thou vvantest fear and reverence to His Majesty, thou never
foundest His presence in thy soul. Now when He bids them, Bring of the
fishes which they had caught, He demands an account of the benefit which He
had bestowed on them, and so He shows, that it was not His will that rashly
and unadvisedly they should have cast away the benefit wherewith He had
blessed them, albeit it was but an earthly blessing: and hereby we may see,
that the fact of John, and the other Disciples was vvorthie of praise, who
left not the fishes behind them, but drew the net full of fishes to the land.

Again, it is worthy to be marked, that he ascribes the taking of the fishes
which He had enclosed in the net, and freely given them to their travels and
labors: for He says, Bring of the f^shes which ye have now caught. This form
of speaking, lets us see, how well the Lord likes, and how highly He counts of
the labors which His own Children undertake at His commandment: for albeit we
be altogether unprofitable servants, when we have done all that we can do, Luke
17.10. and all our labors be not steadable to Him, nor profitable in
the^^elues, yet such is His love and favor toward His own, that both He
commends them as profitable servants, and allows of their works as steadable,
and this He does, to the end He may encourage us as His children, not to
weary, but to go forward in well doing: for it is necessary that we be
exercised in well doing, and go forward in good works: for God has ordained
that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10 that without them it is impossible to
attain unto eternal^ life In like manner, when freely He crowns His grace into
us, He calls that crown, a reward, as if we had d^serued it by our labors:
for the Lord uses to deal with us, as a loving father deals with His
Children, the father will make much of his son, and allure him, and promise
him an hyre, to move him to do that thing that he is obliged to do of duty: so
the Lord dates and allures us, and calls the thing which He gives us freely,
an hyre and reward, to the end, that He may encourage us to go forwards in
vvell-doing. Likewise, in that perfect form of prayer which the Lord has
taught us, He calls that bread which He biddes us crave from GOD, our bread:
as though GOD were indebted to give it unto us, and as if we had a right unto
it: which nevertheless we crave from God as appertaining to Him and not to
us: yet He teaches us to call it our bread, albeit we have no right to it, to
testify His fatherly love and favor toward us. When the Papists hear any
thing ascribed to our labors, and when they hear a reward named in the
Scriptures; then incontinent they conclude, That we merit it at GODS hand.
But they deceive themselves: for as the Lord ascribes here the taking of the
fish, which was His benefit, and blessing unto their labors, which they
undertook at His commandment. So after this same manner, and no otherwise,
He uses to call that a reward which He gives us freely, to the end He
may encourage us with the greater pleasure to do His will.

Now let us come to the obedience to this commandment of the Lord. As soon
as Peter hears the Lord bidding them bring of the fishes which they had
caught, incontinent he stepped forth, and drew the net to land, full of
great fishes, an hundredth, fift^e and three. He is very ready to obey.
Before, when first he understood that it was the LORD, he was carried
with such a fervent zeal to meet with the LORD, that he left the net,
fishes, and all behind him. Now when he hears the LORD commanding to bring
the fishes, there is none of them so bent and ready to obey. Which lettes us
see, that when PETER left all, and cast himself into the Sea, to meet the
LORD, he despised not, neither misregarded the benefit of the fishes, which
the LORD gave the DISCIPLES. So learn in this example of PETER what is the
disposition and behavior of a sanctified and holy person: for a season he
will be ravished and (as it were) transported, above all the pleasures and
outward comfortes of the world: and he will be so set upon the
meditation and thinking of those things which are spiritual, and to enjoye
the presence of the LORD, that scarcely will he once so much as have any
thought of them, because he countes himself to be a Citizen of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Again, when he knows that it is the Lords will, that he should be
exercised the time of his pilgrimage here in some earthly calling, he is
content to return back again, and to put his hand to work, exercising him
in his own calling, yet in the mean time, when his hand is working, his
heart is in Heaven where his treasure is, when he is exercised in his calling,
his conversation is above: and as Paul speaks of him: He uses the world, as
though he used it not, 1. Cor. 7.31. That is, When he is exercised in worldly
things, he has not his heart fixed on the world: for that is the right using
of the world: for that man that has his heart fixed on the world, when he is
occupied in a worldly calling, he abuses the world. If ever in all thine
actions thine heart be glewed to the world, and thine affections teddered to
the earth, if thou have no pleasure to think of Heaven and heavenly things,
thou may take that for a sure token, that as yet thou art not called to the
participation of grace.

Now, when Peter draws the net with an hundredth, fifty and three great
fishes in it, the Evangelist marks, that Albeit they were so many, yet was not
the net broken. No question, as the taking of so many fishes, the hot
coals, and fish laid thereon, with bread, was effectuate, as ye heard by the
secret, extraordinary and miraculous providence of God, so was this also: and
all was to this end, that the Disciples might see, that the Godhead dwelt in
Him bodily, and that the Godhead, which before the Passion, was obscured, and
kept the self close, did now utter the self gloriously. When Peter has
drawn the net with the fish, to the land, The Lord said unto them, Come and
dine. In the former doings, ye have heard, He uttered His Godhead, now here
by His familiar and accustomed form of doing, He makes it manifest, that He
was man also. Ye have heard before, that by the actions of eating and
drinking, He proved, that He was not a Spirit, but a man, Luke 24.39. And as
He is careful to inform their minds, and by these actions to persuade them,
that He is both God and man: so likewise He has a care of their bodies, and of
the sustentation of this temporal life. He knew that by their long and
painful travel, they were both wearied and hungry, and had great need of
refreshment, the Lord had a care of this, and He feeds them as it were with
His own hand: so that at one time, both their souls and their bodies are
fed by Him: and this should be thy care, that when thou find that the Lord
feeds thy body, and has a care of this temporal life, that thou also strive
to find, that the Lord feeds thy soul, and has a care to bring thee unto
eternal life. And, indeed, if thou receiuest these temporal benefits which
serve for the sustentation of thy body with thanksgiving and prayer, thou will
find, that when the Lord feeds thy body, He feeds also thy soul.

Now, the Evangelist marks by the way, interrupting the History, That none of
the Disciples durst ask Him, Who art thou, seeing they knew that H^e was the
Lord. No question, the Evangelists sets down these words, partly to let us
see, what great reverence they carried to the Lord, while they sat at table
with Him, and partly, to let us see, how full and sure persuasion they had,
that it was the Lord, for he tells the cause, why they durst not ask Him, who
He was, because They knew that He was the Lord, and it had been too great
boldness and impudency in them, to have asked that at the Lord which they
knew well enough, and the Lord had reueiled Himself to them sufficiently
before, and now also. By this behavior of the Disciples, we may mark what is
the nature of Faith, and the force and effect of it in the regenerate man: it
is not vnreuerent, but thinks reverently of the Lord, whom it apprehends: it
is not impudent and shameless, but humble and shamefast: it is not immoderate,
it passes not measure, but it is moderate, and conteines the self within
bounds and measure: that is, it is not evermore curiously seeking many and new
revelations, but it is content with that measure, that the Lord has reueiled:
By the contrary, look to the nature of infidelity: it is ever vnreuerent
toward GOD, impudent and immoderate: it is never content with that measure of
revelations, which the Lord has given, but it is ever curiously out of
measure, seeking new revelations: and what if it were for any good end, what if
it were, to learn and grow better, then it were somewhat more excusable, but
it is all to this end, that either it may tempt the Majesty of God, or else to
satisfy the immoderate and insatiable curiosity: we may see the example of
these fruits of infidelity in sundry persons: as in the Jews, who as David
says, often times tempted the Lord in the Wilderness by their infidelity, but
chiefly in the Scribes and Pharisees, they ever tempted the LORD: for albeit
both by His Word and doctrine, and also by His divine works and miracles, He
had sufficiently reueiled Himself unto them, and albeit also, they had been
convicted in their conscience, that He was the Messiah, yet notwithstanding of
all this, they continue still in tempting of Him, and they say, Master, we
desire to see a sign of thee, Matthew. Chapter 12. verse 38. But the LORD
answered them, An evil and adulierous generation seeks a sign, but no sign
shall be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonah. The Papists this day,
are very like the Scribes and Pharisees, they cannot be content with that
measure of revelation which the LORD has given us in the Scriptures, and
namely, in the New Testament, wherein the Mystery of CHRIST, and the doctrine
of Salvation is fully and clearly set down (a clearer revelation than is there
set down shall we never find, until the LORD come in the clouds, to judge
the world) they cannot be content with all the Miracles, which we read
wrought in the Old and New Testaments, by the Prophets, by the Lord Himself
and the Apostles, but they are ever seeking for new and extraordinary
revelations, they are seeking unwritten verities (which may be cal^ed vanities,
they are ever seeking new miracles and such other toys and dreams, they can
never be content: But we may answer them, as the LORD answered the Pharisees:
They shall get no more signs nor revelations than they have gotten, already:
they are too bold and impudent, after that the LORD has sufficiently reueiled
Himself, to s^eke for new revelations. This their doing testifies
sufficiently, that they have no Faith: for faith is reverent* shamefast and
moderate, keeping the self within the bounds of Gods reueiled will: but by the
contrary, it bears witness of their infidelity: for this impudency and
immoderate seeking of new miracles and revelations are fruits of infidelity.

But a question may be moved upon these words: When he says: And none of
the Disciples durst ask Him, Who art thou, seeing they knew that He was the
LORD. Is it unlawful for us to seek increase and growth of knowledge? Yea,
are we not commanded to seek it daily? Says not the LORD, Seek, and ye shall
find: ask, and it shall be given you: knock, and it shall be opened unto
you? Luke Chapter 11. verse 9. Yea, is it not said, The violent take the
Kingdom of Heaven by force, Matthew. Chap. 11. verse. 12. And does not the Lord
recommend importunity and earnestness in craving, by the Parable of the
widow, who importunated the unrighteous Judge? To this I answer: It is
lawful, indeed, to seek continually the increase and growth of knowledge, as
well as of all other spiritual graces: yea, it is a thing that the Lord
recommends unto us and commands. But of what knowledge should we seek the
increase? Only the knowledge of these things that are reueiled and set down
in the Old and New Testament: it is the Lords will, that we ever grow in
knowledge of these things, and that we go from knowledge to knowledge. But
this increase of knowledge is far different from curiosity in seeking new
revelations, besides the things that are reueiled in the writes of the
Prophets and the Apostles. The Lord likes well growth of knowledge, but He
mislikes curiosity: yea, I say to thee, if thou seek a clearer and more
ample revelation, than that which is already set down in the Old and New
Testament, thou offendest highly the Majesty of God: for by so doing thou
deniest that Christ when He came into the world, brought with Him a full and
perfect revelation of all things necessary. Read what the Apostle Paul says,
Romans 10.6.

Now, to end shortly: In the last words of our Text, we have set down the
Conclusion of this appearing of Christ, whereof we have spoken, wherein he
tells, that it was the third in number: for he says, This now is the third
time, that Jesus showed Himself unto His Disciples, after He was raised again
from the dead. I think he calls it the third in number, not absolutely, but
in respect of the Disciples, and so the words import: for it is said, This is
the third time that He showed Himself unto His Disciples: for if we number
precisely the particular appearing of Christ after His Resurrection unto this
time, whereof we have any mention made in the Scripture, we will find that
this is the eight in number, He showed Himself first to Marie Magdalene: Next,
to other certain women: Thirdly, to the two Apostles, who were going to
Emmaus: Fourthly, to Simon Peter: Fifthly, to lames, as we may read, 1. Cor.
15.6. Sixthly, to the Disciples assembled together in Jerusalem, Thomas only
being absent: Seventhly, to the same Disciples assembled together, Thomas
being present with them: Eighthly, He appeared unto these s^uen, at this time
when they were fishing. Now it was not without cause, that the Lord reueiled
Himself so often after He rose again. No question He did it not only to
confirm the Disciples of the truth of His Resurrection, but also for our
cause, that we might have steadfast faith, and full assurance, that He is
risen again for our comfort, And it is the Lords will, that when we read,
that there were so many that saw Him with their eyes, heard Him, spoke with
Him, handeled Him, and haunted with Him, we should be fully persuaded and
assured of His Resurrection. But I will not insist in this matter, because I
have spoken of it already. Now seeing the Lord has had such a great care of
our faith, that by believing we might have comfort, seeing so often times, and to
so many He appeared, the LORD make these means effectual, to work and to
increase faith in us, that both in our life, and especially in the hour of
death, we may have matter of rejoicing in Him: To whom, with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit, be all praise and honor, AMEN.

THE L. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XXI.






WE have heard these days past (Beloved in the Lord Jesus) of the third
general appearance of the Lord Jesus after His glorious Resurrection. The
place we heard was by the Sea of Tiberias. The persons to whom He appeared we
heard were seven in number. The manner how He appeared, was by miracle by
wonderful working. He shows a miracle in the Sea, by taking of many great
fishes there: Then by land, by the extraordinary preparation of meat and fire
to His disciples, coming off the sea to the land. To this He joined ye third
miracle, in keeping whole the net, so that there was not a thread broken,
notwithstanding of the great number of fishes taken therein. Thereafter as He
manifested Himself in His Godhead and divine power in working of miracles; so
He comes on more familiarly, and manifestes Himself in His humane nature, and
lets the^ see, yt He was a man, and ate and drunk with the^, as other men:
therefore He sits down, and dines with them, He eats Himself, and gives them
to eat also: Then having dined, He enters in conference with Peter: which
conference we have to entreat of this day, as God will give us grace. The end of
His conference with Peter was not to make him an Universal Bishop, His Vicar
here on ye earth, as the Papists speak: that is to say, To make up a Popedom:
for the Papists make these words relative to that promise, which they say He
made to Peter before. Matthew. 16.18. I say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I will build my Kirk. That was not the end: but ye end of it was to
restore him again to his own rowm of th'Apostleship, from the which he fell:
for Peter had made a foul defection from his Lord, he denied Him thrice, and
so by this defection and threefold denial, he deprived himself of his rowm of
th'Apostleship, whereunto he was called. Look how verily Judas fell by his
traitorie, as verily did Peter fall: for he that denies the Lord Jesus, unto
the time he be restored again, he cannot be a Christian man (let be an
Apostle or Minister.) So in a word, the end of this conference was to restore
Peter again, by taking out of his own mouth a threefold confession of his love
to the Lord and of the hatred of that foul sin which he committed, by denying
of the Lord. Indeed it is true, at Christ's first meeting with His disciples at
Jerusalem in a manner he was restored, because he got a d^rection with the
rest, to go forth and preach the Gospel, where Christ says, As my Father
sends me, so send J you, Joh. 20.31. Yet because this was general, therefore
now to take all grudges and doubts out of the heart of Peter, and the rest of
The Apostles, he has a particular dealing with him here in this place: and this
he does in presence of so many disciples, for the greater confi^mation of his
restoring: and herein the Lord vrges him thrice, that He might draw out of him
a threefold confession, answerable to his thr^efold denial. It may be
likewise, that in this conference the Lord had a great respect to recommend the
ca^e of His Kirk, which He was to leave behind Him, to Peter, and to the rest
of The Apostles: for in the person of Peter, He speaks to all the rest. Upon
this conference mark this generally: First, that the Lord will not refuse
repentance and pardon to him who has denied Him, if his denial come of
infirmity: Next, That it is the Lord only, who prouokes and allures a man to
repentance, and who preuents him if he be careless of his sin. We saw before,
that the Lord looked upon Peter, after he had denied Him in the Hall of
Caiaphas and made him to weep. Now He accomplishes and brings to perfection yt
work which He began, and He vrges a threefold confession. But to come to ye
matter: The Lord begins to commune with him, and these are the words, Simon,
the son of Iona, love thou me better than these? (pointing out the rest of
the apostles) that is, more than the rest loves me? This the Lord demands of
Peter, not that He was ignorant of the love of Peter toward Him: for Peter
testifies this in his answer, when he says to the Lord, Thou know that I
love thee. The Lord knew the inward affection of Peter, as well as himself did:
So as for Himself He ned not this confession, nor to speak one word, for He
knew his heart: yet He vrges the confession of the mouth, that that love which
he ba^e in his heart, he should profess with his mouth: wherefore, in
demanding, He calls first of all, Peter to remembrance of his bragging, that
he used a little before His Passion, when Pe^er stood up and said, Though all
should be offended by thee, yet will I never be offended. Matthew. 26.33. As
though he should say, Though all should leave thee, I shall not leave thee, I
shall be ready to go to prison, and to death, with thee. Therefore the Lord
says, Love thou me more than these? The^ with this he calls to remembrance
that foul defection, for all his craking: as if He would say, For all thy
boasting, PETER, remember thee of thy deni^ll. So in one word, He pricks
his conscience, He rebuk^s him both for his arrogant vanting and also for his
foul defectio^. This He does in effect: but if ye mark ye words, ye shall see
ye pricking of him to be joined with such sweetness in speaking, as is wonderful,
to be so seasoned with love as is marvelous: for He says in effect as much as
this, Howbeit Peter thou have fallen in thy bragging and vanting, and also have
made foul defection from me: yet if thou repent thee, and turn to me, and if
thou love me, there is place of pardon and forgiveness. So ye see two contrary
things joined together, asperitie and lenity, soreness and sweetness,
rebuke and consolation, casting down and raising up, wounding and healing in
one sentence. The Lord in one sentence, in one demand, at one time, yea, at a
poinct of time, He could wound a man, and heal him. Some might think, seeing
that this was the first conference that Christ had with Peter after his
denial, and that there should have been another kind of meeting, and more
sharp beginning with a run-a-gate, who had denied his Master thrice: ye may
think He should have vpbraided him, and said, Run-a-gate, why deniedst thou
me so mischievously? Why against thy conscience sinnedst thou so hainously?
But He says not so: but these are all the words, Simon the son of Jona,
love thou me. The Lord was not a flyter, a chyder, an vpbraider, a crier,
etc. Therefore it was prophesied of him, My servant shall not cry, nor make his
voice to be heard in the street, nor quench the smoking flax, nor break the
bruised reed, Esaias. 42.2. Matthew. 12.19.20. The ground was, That exceeding love
to Simon Peter, the passing love to sinners, especially, to the secret ones,
whom He had chosen: that love hid all their sins, as Peter speaks, in his
first Epist. and 4. chap. So that if He spoke an angry word to any, His anger
was so tempered with love, that scarcely did it appear. So learn this lesson:
Rebukers should be lovers: if thou rebuke a man, love him, otherwise speak not
to him, but close thy mouth: for if thou season not thy rebuke with love, then
that which should have been a medicine, will be turned into poison. They that
should be instructers and admonishers, should be lovers. Wherefore, whatsoever
thou do, do it in lenity and meekness, and not in bitterness. A bitter
teacher is not vvorth a penny. And this is it that Paul requires, 2. Timoth.
2.24. where he says, The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be
gentle toward all men. All should be in lenity, teaching in lenity,
admonition in lenity. Wherefore? Because if lenity be lacking, there will be no
edificatio^, no co^forting, no instruction If that which thou speak be
smoothed over, and mixed with a gall of bitterness, it will poison the man:
Therefore, whatsoever thou be, whether Minister or other, look that thou have
love, and it will make thee to discharge all the points of thy duty with
lenity. Now the Lord is not contented to demand this once only, Simon, the
son of Iona, love thou me: but once, twice, thrice. What needed this, ye
will ask? was it not sufficient to ask this once? What behooved this doubling
and trepling? Brethren, this was not only yt he might make a threefold
confession answerable to his threefolde denial, that so he might be restored:
but also because his threefolde denial procured that he should not be so soon
and easily credited: They that have made a foul defection, as Peter did,
certainly they would be tried, ere they be trusted. And Christ this day would
learn us, that Apostates would be well tried, and their hearts would be
sounded, and ripped up from the ground. A slender answer should not content
us: we may not settle upon the swarfe of the heart, but the heart must be
pricked with many interrogations, it must be lanced deeply, that if there be
a spunke of sincerity and love, it may be raised up, and appear: for ye will
not think what deepnes of deceitfulnes lies in the heart of man, as Ierem.
17.9. says, The heart is deceitful and wicked above al things, who can know
it? It is hard to thee to get thine own heart sou^ded and tried: go thy way,
and assay it, and thou shall find it to be true, thou shall be beguiled with
it, as well as another. And as for the sincerity of the heart, it is not in
the utmost swarfe, but it is down low in the ground. Therefore thine heart
must be touched, pricked, and lanced: partly by thy self, and partly by
others, till that pure fountain of sincerity and love break forth and
appear. There is the special cause of this doubling. All this serves for the
weal of PETER, howbeit he took evil with it for every demand was a
confirmation of PETER, in that grace of Apostleship. Now to come to PETER'S
answer: Peter said unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee. Behold
the meeting, Christ says, Love thou me? He answers, Lord, thou know
that I love thee. There is a sweet meeting. When the Lord requires love of
thee, then meet thou Him with love. This answer imports, yt His demand has
been very loving, uttered with a sweet voice and behavior, and that He said
as much as this, I love thee Peter, love thou me? So in this demand He has
touched the heart of PETER with the sense of that love which He bore to PETER.
Now this sense opened the heart of PETER to love the Lord again. 1. Ioh. 4.4.
There will never man love the Lord first. It will pass thy power to love Him
first: therefore of need force the love of Christ behooved to be shed abroad in
the heart of PETER, and he behooued to be touched with the love of the Lord,
before he could answer, Lord, I love thee. Therefore, if the Lord say unto
thee Love thou me? Say, Lord, love me, that I may love thee. And if ever
thou would discharge a duty in this l^fe, strive ever to find that Jesus
loves thee, for else all His commandments will be for nothing. But mark
the words: P^t^r svvould seem not to answer the Lord as He propones: the
Lord propones by way of comparison, Love thou me bett^r than th^se? Peter
answers simply, Lord, I love thee: He says not, better than these. I see
here a piece of modesty, more than he had before: for before he fell, he
was over lofty and jollie, and thought little of the ^est: But now I see
after his fall, he will not compare with the rest, but simply he says,
Lord, I love thee.

Brethren, I see, that although his fall was evil, yet it has done him good:
it has tamed him: he was over arrogant before. The defection of the godly is
very evil: yet this is a sure thing, that the fallings and the sins, yea,
the foulest defections of the godly do ever better them, and work always to
their good. A vvonderfull thing: The Lord, who brings light out of darkness,
makes the defection of His own to turn to their weal. Has he been a
proud man, an ignorant man, etc. the Lord will give him a fall, He will
cast him down upon his back, and with that He will tame him, and make him
to stink in his own nostrils, as He did to Peter: for now when he is fallen,
and sees his own weakness, he speaks soberly, and makes no matching with the
rest* Lord, if The Elect be much beholde^ to God, for He makes all things to
further them for their salvation. So in a word, No evil can come to the godly
man. Yet the words would be considered: he says not simply, I love thee:
but, Lord, thou know that I love thee: he takes the Lord to be witness to
his confession: as if he would say, It stands not in my words, but Lord, thou
know, that I love thee. And so here he both acknowledges Jesus to be God,
(for He is only judge to the heart) and also approues the sincerity of his
love to Him: for God is said to be witness not so much to the confession of
the mouth, as to the sincerity of the heart. If thou love the Lord, call Him
to be witness of thy love: and therefore beware of your confession of faith
and love to the Lord: look yt it be with sincerity of the heart and not from
the teeth forward and neb of the tongue only: but look yt it rise from the
love which is rooted in the heart, for the Lord is witness and judge of the
heart, He will pass from thy words, and will look in with a pearcing eye
into thine heart, and rip it open, to see if there be any sincerity of love
there. So look ever to ye heart, when thou take the Lord to be witness to
thee. Men commonly take no heed to this, they say, The Lord knows, when they
will speak falsely. Ye shall find this commonly, that he who is the greatest
swearer and falsest man, is ever readiest to take God to be his witness: but
when he speaks so, what is he doing? eue^ craving that God would send a
vengeance and judgeme^t on him. Yet to weigh the words more narrowly: he
says not simply, Thou know: but when he professes his love to Him, he
gives Him a reverend style again, and calls Him, Lord. No, The Apostles carried
to their Lord a vvonderfull reverence. This learnes thee, when thou make a
confession, a profession, a protestation, vvherin thou namest ye Lord as it
should be in modesty and sincerity of heart; so should it be in fear and
reverence. That God who is full of glory and majesty, should never be named,
but with honor and reverence, when thou speak to Him, speak in reverence:
yea, think never of Him, but with reverence. Well, these speeches and
protestations of men, wherein they name the majesty of God, yt are so
irreverent, rash, and insolent, testifies and sais plainly, That in their
hearts there is no reverence to God: yea, they utter, yt in their hearts they
have said, There is not a God in heaven. But, O miserable catiue, thou shall
find yt there is a God one day to thy everlasting damnation, I give thee no
less doom. Consider further: when Peter answers ye Lord the third time, it
is said by John, yt Peter was sad in heart, and gives a sad and sorrowful
confession, because he thought the Lord, by so many interrogatio^s, credited
him not, but d^strusted him. The^ learn hereby what should be ye properties of
a true confession: as confession should be in modesty, sincerity and reverence;
so it should be in sadness: ye confession of a sinner must be in grief and
sadness: there is no question, but in his confession he saw matter of sadness,
and saw ye Lord by His urging of him so many times would have him to be sad.
This he perceiues, and therefore he is sad, when he confesses. So the confession
of a sinner must be with sadness of heart. Will thou come to the Lord with a
wa^ton confession, after thine accustomed mirrinesse? No, no, for the Lord by
pricking of Peter so often, declares yt He has no pleasure in a confession,
except it be in sadness. Therefore, when thou confessest, say, Alas Lord, that I
cannot love thee so well as I should do, and would do. Well* if the Lord
seek a confession of thee, He will prick thee, till He get a sad confession
of thee. Now it may be asked, What ned this confession once, twice, thrice to
be repeated? What needed Peter thrice to say, I love thee? I answer: what
needed P^ter to deny Him thrice? Now certainly, that threefold denial
requires this threefold confession: if he had denied Him but once, it might
have been, He would have asked but once: if thou go down to Hell by
degrees, will thou leap up to Heaven without any degrees at an instant? No,
no, look by how many degrees thou have gone down from God, toward Hell, by as
many degrees must thou approach to Him again: for when thou have committed a
great sin, thou can not repent enough for it: albeit thou should weep
and mourn many days and years, all is too little. Many a time must thou
confess thy sin, which if thou do, thou shall both thereby glorify God*
and also obtain a fuller assurance of the remission of thy sins: for the
more thou repentest, and the more thou co^fessest thy sins, thou will get the
fuller persuasion and greater assurance that thy sins are forgiven thee.

Now I go forward: The Lord meets Peter again, when he has professed that he
loved Him, He says, F^ede my Lambs: and again, Feed my sheep and the
third time, Feed my sheep. Peter, seeing thou have confessed, that thou love
me, here I absolute thee: the Lord says in effect, I restore thee to thine
office again, be thou an Apostle, be thou a feeder of my sheep, be a Pastor
to me, this is the principal purpose: so that ye love of Jesus restores a
sinner: it is this love that restores thee to the room thou have been in. But
I insist not here: in this answer to Peter, ye see, how the Lord will have
thy faith and thy love to be manifested: No, ye confession of faith and of love
must be manifested in actio^, according to the calling the Lord has placed
every one into: has the Lord called thee to be a king, He will say unto thee,
feed my people, as thou would love me, and the Lord grant, ye Kings may take
heed to this, and especially, our King, yt as he professes a love to Christ, so
he would feed His people: the Lord give him this consideration: art thou a
Minister, and say, thou love the Lord: well, the Lord will say to thee
again, feed my lambs, I need none of thy feeding, thy love and well doing
cannot extend the self to me, but do good to others who carry my Image for my
cause. A profane man or woman with a shameless face will say* I love God: the
greatest knave of them all will say so: but if it manifest not in an actio^,
thou art but a liar, thou love Him not: faith and love must ever utter
themselves in good actions: have you gotten a heart, hands and feet do some
good, otherwise if you do never a good deed, thy profession of faith and love
is but vain. Look 1. Ioh. 2.4. He that says, I know God, and keeps not His
commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him. If a man says, I
love God, and hates his neighbor, he is a liar, so yt he shall be punished, not
only because he did no good, but because he was a liar: there are many lying
Protestants in this Land: they will protest they love God: but when it comes to
the trial, the world sees, yt they have only a show of religion, and not ye
power thereof: there is anot^er thing here yet to be marked: until Peter had
professed he loved Christ, He bids him not feed His lambs: but look how the
one follows the other: therefore it must follow, yt feeding of the lambs of
the Lord, must come of the love of ye Lord. If Peter had said, I love thee not,
Christ could not the^ have said to him, feed my lambs: the^ the lesson is
clear: a man cannot be a Pastor, a feeder of the sheep of Christ, except he
love Christ: No, there is none in any calling, yt can do any good deed, except
ye welspring of love be in his heart, if yt be not, he shall never do any good
deed, all shall be sin: thou may well flatter thy self, and others may
flatter thee, and say all is well: but if love be not, how fair and glansing
so ever thy work be, God cou^nts not of it. No King in his calling shall ever
do a good deed, except he do it for love he bears to ye Lord: therefore,
seeing a Pastor should learn all other folk to do their duty: yea, ye King
himself, how much more is that love required to be in him, if he would do
rightly, sincerely, and earnestly: as for his feeding, it is more poisoning
than f^eding, if he have not love to Christ: the Pastor is not worth a penny,
yt strives not to get a sense of yt love of Christ in his heart. The^e are so
many difficulties and impediments cast in to a Pastor when he is about to
discharge his duty, which he can never be able to overcome, except he both love
ye Lord, and be sensible of the Lords love toward him: the life of a Pastor is
a thornie l^fe, and the more faithful ye man be* ye more vexatio^s and troubles
will he underly: what is his life, but a continual t^ouble? with who^ has he
to do? with a flock: for a Pastor and a flock are relative: and what a flock?
some are so dull, that teach he never so much and careful^y, they remain rude
and incapable (many of this town are guilty of this) and if there be any
capable, they are so vain, so wanton, and light headed* yt they vanish away in
their own cogitatio^s: and again, some are so infirm, yt every thing almost is
a stu^bling block, suppose yt me^ give no offense, yet will they tak offense:
some so malicious and endured, that the more the Pastor cry, the more endure
they their hearts, and rejects all wholesome admonition: some will be sitting
up before the Pastor, and mocking him when he is preaching, and when the
Pastor has done all the points of his calling faithfully, he needs not to
look for any thing, but unthankful meeting in the end: No, the more faithful
a man be in his calling, the more tentations shall he be subject to, to make
him the more weak and feeble. If ye would have the proof of this: look 1.
Cor. 4.9. What are we, says Paul, God has set us up to be a mocking stock, a
^azing to the world, to the Angels, and to men: what are we? the ofscouring of
the world, that is sweeped out, to be cast to the backe-side. Then what held
him up? and what held up Peter? and the rest of the Apostles and Martyrs?
What? but the love of Jesus: if they had not loved Jesus, and that exceedingly,
they would soon have fainted (we want the tenth part of that love to Jesus
that they had, alas, all is vanished away.) Would Peter or Paul, or any of them
have borne out these things, if they had wanted the love of Christ, if it had
not constrained them No, 2 Cor. 5 14. he says, We are fools, but for Christ's
sake: for that love of Christ constrains me: that is, the love of Jesus
occcupies so all my senses, that it bears me out: thereafter he resolves that
love which he carried to Christ, into the own cause, where he subjoynes:
Because we know, that if ^ne be dead for all, then were we all dead: the ground
of His love was: because Christ loved him: and this love is the cause, that
makes His own to do all, to suffer all for Christ's sake, to live to Him, to
die to Him: look if thou find, that Christ loves thee, and then thou will
love Him: so that thou will not refuse, if it were a thousand deaths for His
cause. O the love of Christ is a great gulf! No, it will drown greater
persecutions, than the Sea will: Pray therefore that the love of the Lord Jesus
may be in thine heart, that thou may love Him again. Now again, if the
faithful discha^ge of the duty of a Pastor must proceed of necessity from
the love of Christ, as the effect from the cause. Then mark, how ye shall
know, whether a man love Christ or not: a King* a Minister, every Professor
whosoever. Would ye have a token? look if he be faithful in his calling: if
this be a necess^ry effect, then mark their works: by their works thou shall
know them: the love cannot be seen with the eye, it is uttered by a mark by
the life, when thou see a man well occupied in his own calling: the King
ministering Justice, the Pastor feeding his people, certainly, thou may say,
Yone man loves Christ, but if the action be inlacking* what warrant have I,
that a man loves God, I have none. The Apostle Paul, by the confusions and
perturbations which he saw to be in the Church of Corinthus, gathers, that the
false teachers, these deceivers love not ye Lord Jesus: and therefore he
denounces a judgment against them, saying, If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be had in execratio^ yea, excommunicated to death, 1. Cor.
16.22. I say, an unfaithful Pastor, who feeds his own b^lly, and not Christ's
sheep, is accu^sed, not only because he spoils ye Church of Christ, but also*
because he loves not ye Lord Jesus Woe shall be to him one day: and by ye
contrary: a faithful Pastor, o what honor and glory shall he be exalted unto!
Yet again, these words would be considered: the word of feeding would be
looked to: it is a borrowed word: to speak properly, a Minister feeds not: it
is an Heard, that feeds neat and sheep: the Scripture applies not this word
only to Ministers, but to Kings: for look how busy as an Heard is going about
feeding his flock, as busy should a King be in his calling: a King is but an
Heard set over to feed ye people of God: but the Scripture commonly in the New
Testament applies it to Ministers, because in a Minister there should be as
great diligence, painfulnes and carefulnes toward ye people, as in ye Heard
toward ye flock: and if there were no more to teach this, this threefold and
so earnest commendation to Peter and the rest were sufficient. It is true, that
ye Lord Jesus Himself is the Prince of ye Pastors: yea, properly He is only
Pastor, He is the Heard: and therefore He clam^s this style to Him, Job. 10 1.
For why? the flock is His, and not ye Ministers: therefore He says, Feed my
lambs, then ye are his flock, and He is your Pastor properly. Again, it is
His food, that ye flock is fed with: all ye store of ye fodder of grace is out
of His barn. If a Minister minister to you ye smallest portion of food which
is not taken out of ye barneyard of Jesus, it is poison he gives you. Knaves
have deceived ye world long: the Pope and his shauelings have propined poison
to ye people, and have made many thousands go to Hell: give Christ's flock
Christ's food. But notwithstanding that Christ properly is ye only true Pastor,
yet lovingly he co^muninicates this His style to them who^ He employes in His
service of ye Ministry. Thou yt art a Minister, He calls thee a Pastor: but
thou art but as a servant laid under ye chief sheph^ard: they are not Lords of
ye flock: No, not the best of them: No, not Lords, but dispensators: so they
are not prope^ly Pastors. Seeing then, such is the mercy of the Lord, that He
so honors them, that He co^municates His style to ye Ministers: therefore they
should strive to show themselves worthy of that style, by ye faithful
discharge of their calling, in feeding of ye flock. But who are they that
should be fed? Christ says first, Feed my lambs: and then He says twice,
Feed my sheep: all is one, for ye Kirk is compared to a fold full of sheep.
He says not, Go feed tygres, lions, wolves, but lambs, sheep. Who are these
then? By these lambs and sheep, the Lord understands His Chosen, (Blessed is
he that is chosen in Christ, for great is the number of them that perishes, a
very ha^dfull shall be saved) they must be more tame ones, silly simple ones,
like sheep. Ye see ye sheep ever receiving hurt, and never noysom nor hurtful
to any other. Any beast will overcome a sheep, but it will overcome none: so it
is silly simple ones yt are Christ's sheep. Now I mean not, yt all The Elect are
at ye first hand as silly as sheep: no, but yt they who were before like
wolves, lions, tygres; by ye Spirit, through the preaching of ye word, by
process of time, are tamed, and made like sheep. No, no, when Peter went out
to feed the^, they were like tygres, raging in their lusts. No, the chosen by
nature, before they be tamed and called, they are nothing different from ye
reprobate: they rampe and roar like lio^s, albeit in ye secret counsel of God,
and His decree of predestination, and by His grace, there be a great difference
betwixt ye one and ye other: for God only makes a difference betwixt His El^ct,
and the reprobate. What was Paul himself, or any other, before they were
called, but wolves and tygres? The^ ye Pastor, albeit he find men as wolves and
tigers, yet he should not stay from feeding of the^: no, he must preach ye
Gospel, yt thereby he may make of wolves and tygres, lambs and sheep: for many
of them that were like tygres, after they had once heard the voice of the
Apostles, became simple as sheep. Now it may be asked here, Seeing the Lord
recommends unto Peter only His chosen to be fed and instructed by him, should
The Apostles have care of any other, to feed and instruct, except of The Elect
only? Let it be that these Elect at the first hand be like wolves and
tigers; yet the care of them only in this place is recommended unto Peter,
and the rest, by the Lord. I answer, Albeit the Lord recommende chiefelie
the care of The Elect, yet He excludes not the reprobate: for it is the Lords
will, that food should be offered to them also: for the Pastor cannot know
who are Elect or Reprobate: and therefore, it is his duty to count all to be
elected, and to feed all: he must not be rash in judgeme^t. No man should be so
bold, as to presume to give out sentence, who are chosen, or who are reprobate:
for the LORD knows who are His, 2. Timoth. 2.19. Therefore, let him stay,
until the Lord discern who are elect: let the Pastor count all to be Lambs,
and endeauoure to feed all, yet his labors shall only be fruitful in the
Elect: for there is never one that is not chosen, that shall be tamed by the
word: all the preachings in the world will not tame a reprobate, but he shall
ever be a Wolf: indeed, a reprobate may for a season take on a sheep skin:
that is, he may play the hyprocrite, and may seem outwardly to some to be
godly, but truly and in effect, he will never have true Faith nor godliness.
Now last, this would not be passed by, that the Lord bids Peter feed His, not
another man's sheep, but His own sheep: that is, them whom He has redeemed
and ransomed with His own blood. This word contains an argument, wherefore
the sheep should be fed: to wit, because they are the Lords, ransomed with His
own blood. And more than that, this word admonishes the Pastor, that he
count not the slocke to be his own, but the Lords, and that he feed it not
to himself, to use the slocke for his own gain and advantage. John Baptist
says, He that has the bride, is the bridegroom, but the friend of the
bridegroom reioyces greatly, because of the bridegroomes voice, Ioh. 3.29. By
these words John signifies, that he wooed not the Church to himself, but to
the Lord, who is the bridegroom: And Paul says to the Co^inthians, I am
jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I have prepared you for one husband,
to present you, as a pure virgin to Christ, 2. Cor. 11.2. For it is the most
abominable and detestable sacrilege that can be, to spoil Christ the
bridegroom of the Church His bride, and to take from Him His flock, which He
has redeemed with such a precious and glorious ransom, even the blood of God,
Acts 20.28. Seeing then, that the Lord has committed to Pastors the Church,
which is His own Spouse, and His Flock, which He has redeemed with no less
price, than His own blood, the LORD give Pastors grace to be careful in
feeding of them, with that food of life, furnished unto them by the LORD Ies^s:
To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, and honor, for
ever.

AMEN.
THE LI. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
JOHN, CHAP. XXI.




THE last day (beloved Brethren) we heard, how the Lord in this third
appearing, unto His Disciples after His Resurrection, when He dined with them,
fed them, and giving them meat out of His own hand, he entered in
conference with Peter: especially, the end of the conference He had with
Peter, was to restore Peter to that dignity of the Apostleship, from which h^e
had fallen, and whereof he had made himself unworthy through his apostasy
and threefolde denial of his Lord and Master, He asks him one thing thrice:
Simon, the son of Iona, love thou Me? Peter answers and gives a threefold
confession: Lord, thou know that I love thee. The LORD answers again, and
gives a threefold absolution, and pronounces the sentence of his restoring
again three times: F^^de, then says the Lord, My Lambs, feed My sheep.
This He does, to confirm him the better in his restoring: for when a man has
made a foul defection from God, his heart is not easily persuaded of grace
again, it will not be at one or two sentences, it will not be a promise at one
time, that will give him an assurance of the favor of God again: therefore,
to give Peter the greater assurance of grace, He triples over the sentence,
and gives him three times that commission, to feed His lambs and sheep. The
last day, Brethren, as the Lord gave the grace, we opened the meaning of these
words, and last, of these words, My Lambs, my sheep: now only thus far I
add for your consolation: ye see all this love that Peter confesses toward the
Lord Himself, He turns it over upon His Lambs, His Sheep, and flock, in a
word, upon His Church. Mark it: The Pastor or Minister will no sooner profess
love to his Lord that placed him in that room, but as soon the Lord will send
him to the flock and people: if thou love me, the Lord will say, love my
people, the Lord will place His people in His own room: look what love any
will bear to Him, He will have it declared and uttered to His Saints, and
more, He does it three times: so often as Peter professes love, so often He sends
him to ye people: look how often the Pastor professes love to Christ, as often He
will send him to ye people: if he say, I love thee, then He will answer, feed
my Lambs: if He will say a thousand times, He will answer, feed my flock,
manifest it upon them that carry mine Image. This shows the wonderful love
that God bears to His Elect: He will have all that duty that is due to Him,
to be translated upon His Church: so that whosoever do not their duty to ye
Church, I ^ffirme and I say, profess as they will, they have no love to
Christ, thou may stand up, and babble, and vaunt of thy love to Christ: but I
say, there is no such love in thine heart, as thou professest with thy mouth.
If thou s^yest, thou love God and do not thy duty to man, thou art a
liar, 1. Joh. 4.18.

To go forward to this Text: When He has restored him to the office of
Apostleship, which by his denial justly he had lost, He gives him the office
with a knot, as we speak, and He forewarnes him in the entry, that he shall
get no rest in it and when he has done all, what shall be his reward in the
world: He tells him, Thou shall be girded with cords, in stead of a girdle,
and then thou shall be led away, whither thou would not: that is, to a
violent death, whereby thou shall seal up the Gospel that thou have preached:
then the Lord gives him, and he receives the office of Apostleship with this
p^emonition* that in the end of it he shall die the death. The Lord fore^arnes
him to this end, that he should be on his preparation, to mak^ him ready to
d^e, and to enarme him against the death: for death coming unawares is
terrible, and will te^tifie ye proudest flesh that lives: (...) this
forewarning s^rues for ye enarming of him, forewarned, half armed, as the
Proverb is: Preparation for death, meditation of that death, and of the life
to come, is better and more steadable armor against death, than a jacke, or
all the strengths and castles in the earth. It is a terrible thing when death
lights upon a creature suddenly, it dammishes the creature.

But to the purpose: In the person of Peter, I perceive, That there is no man
the Lord receives to be a Pastor, a feeder of His flock, or a Minister, but
He takes him with this pr^monition: Make thee for death: that is a hard
beginning: Prepare thee to shed thy blood for my sheep, and to seal that
Gospel, which thou have preached with thy blood: for why? a man that enters to
feed the flock of the Lord, has not ado with lambs only, silly and simple
sheep, but he must fight with Wolves: as he must feed the lambs, so he
must fight with Wolves, Tygres, Bears, etc. that would devour the Lambs?
Yea, sometimes, it will fall out, that these whom they think to be Lambs,
will manifest themselves to be Wolves: yea, beside this, it may be, that one of
His own flock, shall stand up and devour him in the end: and beside this,
what is the Devil ever doing with him? Is he not ever going about the Fold,
like a roaring Lion, with the mouth of him ever wide open, seeking to swallow
and devour not only the flock, but also the Pastor? so that he should make
him for death. It is true, Brethren, every Pastor in the end dies not a
violent death, all are not hanged? beheaded or burnt: Some, yea, many die their
own natural death, and in peace: the Lord honors not every man with the
gift of suffering for the Name of Christ? (it is an honor, get it who will) as
He honored Peter, and He requires not, that every man seal this doctrine with
his blood in the end: but yet it is the Lords will, that never a man enter so
soon to the Ministry, but as soon he make him for suffering, and that he
preach so, that he be ready to seal up every preaching with his blood. Away
with the man, who when he enters, thinks with himself, that he shall have
ease, and a quiet and a pleasant life. It is true, again: the Lord will not
speak now to every man face to face, forewarning him, and giving to him a
revelation from Heaven now, as then He did to Peter, yet there is nothing more
certain than this: it is His will, that every man be re^^ie every hour to
seal up the Gospel with his blood, if it ple^se the Lord to call him. Paul
(Acts 21.) when he was going ^p to Jerusalem, he got a fore-warning, That he
should be bound hand and foot, and so it fell out: but it was not fore-tolde
him that he should die: yet he says, when the godly are standing, weeping
and lamenting, seeking to dissuade him to go up, What do ye weeping and
grieuing mine heart? Why trouble ye me? I am ready, says he, not only to be
bound, but I am prepared to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus. So howbeit he
got not the warning, yet he had this resolution settled, to suffer. Now
appertains this nothing to you, who are the people? I say to thee, Thou who
wilt call thy self a Christian man, and who have given up thy name to Jesus
Christ, thou art as far indebted to seal up thy profession with thy blood, if
thou be charged, as the Pastor is; otherwise I will not give thee a penny for
thy profession: It had b^ene better thou had never taken that name, if thou be
not ready to seal it up with thy blood. It is true, every one is not in
very deed marty^ed: but I say to thee, There is a necessity laid upon
thee, that in some measure thou prepare thee to suffer the cross and death it
self for Christ's sake, and so that thou be a Martyr in thine own mind and
resolution: And albeit thou eschew death, yet of this be assured, That thou
shall bear the burden of affliction, either inwardly or outwardly: for
whosoever would live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer affliction. 2.
Timoth. chap. 3. verse. 11. and Act. chap. 14. verse. 22. it is said, Through
many afflictions, we must enter into the kingdom of God. This necessity is
laid upon us. It is the duty (as we use to speak) of every Christian man and
woman, to suffer. Therefore Brethren, seeing this necessity is laid on us,
That we must suffer some affliction, we should be prepared for it, yea, if it
were to die the death for the name of Jesus. Let every one be preparing
themselves, both Pastor and people: for it may be, that all estates be sooner
put to try all than ye look for, and that the Lord say to the Pastor, Thou
have been preaching these many years, now seal it up with thy blo^de: And
to the people, Ye have been prosissing long, now suffer for it. There is my
counsel, Suppose thou shed not thy blood, yet look that in the resolution
of thine heart thou be a Martyr, thou be headed, hanged, and that suffer all
sort of torment that ever any suffered, and strive to get contentment to die at
the pleasure of the Lord. He knows not what a Christian man means, who has
not this resolution. A fool thinks that this hie calling is to get pleasure
ease, and delicacie: No, no, as CHRIST went out of the ports of Jerusalem,
bearing His own cross to the place of execution, so He calls thee to go
forth with Him, out of this world, bearing His reproach, Hebr. 13.13.
Otherwise look not to have participation of His glory. Yet let us mark the
words more narrowly. Now certainly will ye look in to them, ye will see
that Peter's calling to th'Apostleship was wondrous strait. Peter might have
thought, and said with himself, Seeing I am entering to be an apostle, I am
entering to a glorious calling, I will get honor enough, I was before a poor
Fisher, now I will get honor, ease, peace and rest. The Lord answers, No
Peter, it shall not be so. And this He declares by comparing his condition to
come in his age, with his bypast condition in his youth: As if He had said,
The order of nature shall be inuerted in thee, for when thou vvast young, ere
thou saw me, thou gottest leave to girde thy girdle about thee, to dress
thy self, and to walk where thou would: That is, When thou wast most able
and strong to bear the Cross, thou wast spared, and thou did all things
pleasantly, and according to thy desire; and when thou addressed thy self to
the journey, thou girded thy self as thou pleasedst. Here He alludes to ye
oriental people, who used to wear long side clothes: and therefore when they
went to any journey, behooved to trusse the^ up, and to gird the^ to the^. But
after this it shall not be so: but when thou shall be old, and through age more
unable to suffer affliction, and to bear ye cross, then thou shall be
afflicted another shall gird thee: That is, Bind thee with cords: and as thou went
before where thou would, so now thou shall be led whither thou would not.
Now Peter might have said, Suppose I sustain trouble in my age, yet thou will
give me a peaceable death in ye end. (There is no man almost, when he has spent
his time in ye commonweal, but in his age he will get leave to be at rest, and
to die peaceably) No, says ye Lord, when thou art an old man, thou shall be
hurried out, and die a violent death. And it would seem, yt Christ dissuaded
Peter to be an Apostle, and to enter into such a hard calling, where in his
old age, which requires to be freed from travel, and trouble, should be most
afflicted, whereas in his youth he was freed from affliction. There is an hard
meeting, and calling of Peter to be an Apostle. I think many now would run
aback from the ministry, if they wist of so hard a meeting. Well, the day of
trial is coming. Mark ye lesson. When the Lord calls a Pastor, He will tell
him ye worst of it: He uses no flattery in His calling: In ye first entry He
will lay before thee great crosses and terrors: It may be thou get ease, rest
and commodity: but I assure thee, yt this will be the co^fere^ce the Lord will
have with thee when thou entrest. When thou have served me, look for the
cross for thy stipend, when thou have done all, make thee for death. Therefore
say not, I will enter, because I will get a good fat Benefice, and fair
living, I will get peace and ease. It may be yt the Lord cast these things to
thee, and yt thou find the^, but propone not yt to thy self, as a cause of
thine entry: but say, I am entering to labor, to trouble, ^o pain, and it may
be, in ye end, when I have done al, I shall lay down my life: let ye be thy
resolution. In this there is great difference betwixt God and ye Devil: When
ye Devil calls one, in the beginning he promises the^ riches, wealth, honor,
and preferme^t: the villane will promise felicity and happiness in this life:
but in ye end, miserably he deceiues the^, who trusted his flattery.
Th'experie^ce of the wretched catiues proves this: for never got they such
things as were promised, but misery, terror and horror in the end. But
Christ calls men otherwise, and says, Aim not at me, but by the cross, so
long as ye are in this world, ye shall have opposition, oppression, and sorrow:
they shall bruise you, they shall tread you under foot. But in the mean time
He promises, That in the midst of all their griefs, yea, in death it self,
they shall find comfort: for when He has said to His Apostles, In the world
ye shall have sorrow. He subjoynes incontenent, But be of good comfort, for
I have overcome the world, Ioh. chap. 16. verse. 33. The world shall not be
victorious over thee, thou shall get a fair advantage and outgate at the last,
thou shall get the victory. And in ye midst of their troubles, not only
promises He, but also He will give them a sweeter taste and sense of inward
joy, than all ye worldlings ca^ have. When they are sitting in the midst of
all their glory, riches, and outward pleasures, yea, in the very death, He
furnishes life, as Paul says, 2. Cor 6 9. As dying but behold, we live: yea,
such a sweet life, as the natural man never could think of. In thy death, the
life of Jesus Christ shall be most lively. Thou need not then to fear to
suffer any extremity for Jesus, seeing ever He has promised thee such a
vantage. Yet further I see here this, not only out of this place, but also
through the whole Scripture, and experience teaches it, That the prerogatives
and vantages of this life, liberty and preferment, stands not well with Jesus
Christ: at the least a Pastor should not lay his count to brook the^ both
together. Peter, when he was a free man, and a Fisher, going out and in at his
pleasure, he knew not what Christ meaned. As soon as he comes to Christ,
farewell with his freedom: he put his girdle about him ere he knew Christ,
but knowing Christ, he must be bound with a cord, and hurled in bands: if any
take this calling upon him, to enjoy the outward comforts and prerogatives of
this world, he deceiues himself. Likewise Paul, Philip. 3.7. Ere he knew
Christ, a Gentleman (folk think, a Minister cannot be a Gentleman) a
citizen of Rome, an Hebrew, a Pharise according to his sect, and in his zeal
going beyond all men, and in his righteousness he was vnrebukable, according
to the Justice of the Law: but when he comes to Christ, what became of all
these? he leaves all, renounces and quites them, he counts them for Christ's
sake to be damage and doung. So, I say again: I see not, how the advantages,
liberties, and these outward prerogatives, can stand well with the Lord Jesus.
Indeed ye Lord some times casts these things in great abundance and affluence
to His own: and then if it please God* why may thou not brook them: for
the Minister has as good right to these earthly things, as another: for the
Lord sanctifies them to their use: but in the mean time take the counsel of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.31. Use them, as though thou used them not: Settle never
thine heart on them, let them never be thy chief respect, in pain of thy
life, and if they come in comparison with Christ, take Paul's counsel and
experience also: count them all damage and loss, and count them hurtful to
thee: yet a degree further, count them but doung, loath them, spit at them, as
at dirt: if they seem to separate thee from Christ, shake them off thee,
denude thine hand of them: I say, albeit it were thy life, if it hinder thee
from Christ, away with thy life, give it to any Tyrant, Persecuter, if it
hinder thee, that thou can not brook Christ with it: for if thou give thy
life for Christ indeed, He shall be advantage to thee, not only in the time of
thy life, but chiefly, in the hour of death, as Paul says of himself,
Philip. 1.21. Now, Brethren, take heed, all these earthly things, as
liberties, riches, nobility, kindred, glory, honor of the world, and favor
of men, these things can stand thee in stead only, so long as thou leauest thy
riches, thy nobility, albeit thou were come of Kings, can be steadable no
longer: but if thou be laid on thy back, on thy death bed, at the hour of
thy death, what will they help thee then? Nothing, but thou will disdain them
al: No, they shall not hold thy life one hour: the^ all these advantages in
earth cannot be advantage in ye hour of death: in heaven or earth no advantage
to any in ye hour of death, but Jesus, who has overcome death: if you have
Jesus, o yt joy you shall find in death: and by the contrary, How terrible a
departure will they find, that have not Christ Jesus. This miserable generation
will not know this, until they feel it by sad experience. There were two
thieues hanged with Christ, but both got Him not to be advantage in death:
therefore let men, when they are living, and wholest, have Christ before their
eyes, and seek to be acquainted with Him in their life, that they may have Him
to be advantage in their death. Yet one thing further, ere I leave these
things, I think all yo^g men yt have health, ability and strength of body,
to run and ride, rash here and there, that have liberty to pass and repasse
at their pleasure, may learn a lesson at Peter. Peter, when he was young, he
might have done what he pleased: he thought he was a happy man: for the word
importes, when he makes mention of his former condition which he had before
he knew Christ: for when he was young, and had liberty, he was free from
Christ: for he knew not Christ, before Christ knew him: so Peter in his youth a
free man, a young strong man, he was also free from Christ: foolish, vain
young men, esteem themselves to be happy, if they have health, strength,
ability and freedom to live as they please, albeit they be without God and
free of Jesus Christ: alas, that is a miserable freedom, when thou art free
here in earth, if thou be free from Christ also, that is miserable: for if
thou be not a bond-seruant to Christ, albeit thou were a King, a Caesar, thou
art but a servant to sin, and a slave to the devil. Paul Romans 6.20. says,
When ye were the servants of sin, ye were freed from righteousness: if thou
be not the servant of Christ, thou art a slave to the Devil, and sin: for of
need force, thou shall either be the servant of Christ, or else, thou shall be a
greater slave than a horserubber. Let never a man glory in a liberty, that he
may run, or ride, do this or that, except that, with that freedom he find
himself bound as a servant to Christ, and except he can say in his heart:
albeit I be free, yet, Lord Jesus, I am thy bond-seruant: for Peter's condition,
when he was in the chains and bands, led out to die the death for Christ, was
better than when he was a young man, following his own lust and pleasure: there
is no happiness but in Jesus Christ, all these earthly liberties will not make
thee happy, if thou be not bound to Christ in his service: they only are truly
free, who^ the Son makes free, Ioh. 8.36. And the Apostle says: Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2. Cor. 3.17. But I go forward: He
says, Thou shall be led whither thou would not. This is a marvelous
thing. These words would import, that he died not willingly for the Lord; but
he was drawn contrary his will to the torment. How can this be? The words
may import a comparison, to wit, That one shall lead thee, not so much where
thou will, as where he will, for thy will shall be subject to the will of the
persecuter and torme^ter. I answer. Indeed it is true, when Peter suffered for
his Lords sake, he suffered not so vvilingly, but in the mean time for there
was a battle within him, and he found something that made resistance to yt
obedience: first there was nature, which naturally abhors death: there is
nothing more terrible to nature, than this dissolution and parting and seuering
of the soul and body: and therefore Christ Himself, who set Himself in all
respects to be obedient to ye Father, having our nature, abhorred death, and
prayed, saying, Take this cup from me. So I say, it was no marvel yt nature in
Peter abhorred from death and would have declined yt death in some measure.
There was another cause more in Peter than was in Christ: Christ had nature,
but it was holy: Peter beside this common nature, had some remaining
corruption: And whosoever has it (as all men saving Christ Jesus has it) they
will find, that when they are bent to give obedience to God in any thing, it
will rebel* and make some resistance: and when thou fainest would obey Him,
and lay down thy neck to die for Christ, it will draw thee aback. Again, the
best yt lives, will utter the words of The Apostle, I do not the good thing
which I would: but the evil, which I would not, that I do. Romans 7.19.
Therefore, Brethren, learn this lesson at Peter, All the godly from the
beginning, and all the Holy Martyrs, what ever they have been, that have died
for the Name of the Lord Jesus, their obedience has not been altogether
perfect: No, it is a vanity to think, that the Martyrs died without all
fear: I say, The best of them in their death found some horror and
infirmity: And I say, The victory that they got was by an inward battle
in their soul: and as they were victorious, by yielding themselves outwardly
to the death; so they were victorious in their souls. This is comfortable.
When thou see that the Saints feared and abhorred death, if thou find the
like fear in thee, yet be not over much casten down: Thou will say, Shall I
suffer death in the fire? shall I be burnt quick, and be dammed, as the
Martyrs have been with sundry sorts of tortures? Alas, I am not able to
abide it. And no question, there will be an horror in thine heart, when thou
think of this, but especially when thou come to the act of suffering,
then all such infirmity, such fear and dread shall rise, and get up in thy
soul: But let this be thy comfort in the Lord, when thou find this, that
this fear shall not hinder thine obedience, and say, There is nothing that
befalles to me, but that which befalles to the best servants of God, I am not
alone, such infirmity, such dread and fear as I have, Peter had, and the best
Saints of God had: and howbeit they had them, yet their obedience was not
hindered thereby. And so as Peter and the rest got the victory, notwithstanding
of fear and dread, thou will give me the victory with Peter. This aduertises
us thus far. Never man suffered martyrdom by his own strength. And if Peter
had been given over to his own strength, he vvoulde not have suffered more
than Judas: And if Steven had not been sustained with the sight of Heaven, to
have holden up his heart* he vvoulde not have suffered the death. Paul teaches
us, Philip. chap. 1. verse. 29. As faith is the gift of God, so it is the gift
of God to suffer affliction. It is given to you, says he, to suffer. And
therefore he says to Timothy, (2. Epist. chap. 1. verse. 8.) Be partaker of the
afflictions of the Gospel. But how? By your own strength? No: but by the
power of God. And therefore, whosoever would have this strength, let him beg it
of the Lord. Whenever it shall please God to say, Go to the stake: then ever
say, Lord give me strength, and I shall suffer. Therefore, as night and day we
should be upon this resolution, to suffer for Christ; so should we night and
day be earnest in prayer: and if thou find the power of God by prayer to be
conveyed to thine heart, thou need not to fear: for that power will prop it
up, and uphold it in th'extremity of death and martyrdom. So ever be in
prayer, saying, Lord give me strenth: and if thou get once a piece of this
power, thou shall wonder at it.

Now John in the next verse he joins ye meaning of these words of the Lords to
Peter, lest any man reading or hearing, should doubt of the meaning, This spoke
he, says John, signifying by what death he should glorify God. He means,
that he should die a violent death, he should not get leave to die his own
natural death in peace: but that he should die violently upon the scaffolde.
The Papists upon these words, gather, That Peter was crucified, and that ye
Lord meant, yt he should be hanged: but the words bear no such thing. Thou
shall stretch out thine hands. What necessity is there here to import
crucifying, or hanging, more than heading? or any one death more than another?
What death it was, it is not certain: it is far better not to meddle with
it, than to believe men's fables. Only the words of ye Lord import, yt he died
violently. But what death soever it was, it is not much to edification. Yet
this is not to be passed by, but well to be marked, That when He is speaking of
his death, He says not after this manner, He signified what death he should
die: no, but by what death he should glorify God: a thing more worthy of
marking, He styles and defines ye death and martyrdom of Peter to be a
glorifying of his God. Brethren, the death of all the godly and Saints,
whatsoever kind of death it be, whether it be in peace, their own natural
death, or a violent death, whatsoever kind of death it be, it may be defined
after this manner, to be a glorifying of God. And blessed are they that die in
the LORD, Blessed are they that die in faith in the LORD JESUS: that is, as
PAVL says, sleeps in Him, 1. Thessal. chap. 4. verse. 14. So I say, The death
of every godly man and woman, glorifies their God. Yet we must understand,
That the death of these who suffer martyrdom, and seals up the truth of
Christ with their blood, that death especially gettes this praise, and this
style, That it glorifies GOD after a special manner. Mark it well* Martyrdom
properly is called, The glorifying of God, because in it especially is the
matter of the glory of God. Above all other deaths of men in the world, in
the death of the Son of God Jesus Christ, was greatest matter of the
glorifying of His Father: and therefore, above all other deaths, the death and
cross of Christ gettes this style of the glorifying of GOD, Joh. Chap. 12.
verse. 28. When the LORD has striuen with the fear of death, look how He
considers with Himself, Lord glorify thine own Name: that is, Be thou
glorified in my death. Next, after Christ's death, the death of the Martyrs
serves most for the glory of God: and therefore, next after Christ's death,
the death of the Martyrs brooks this style. Therefore ye see in this place,
John speaking of the martyrdom of Peter, calls it, The glorifying of GOD. And
Paul to the Philippians, speaking of his death, says, that the Lord should be
magnified in his death, Philip. chap. 1. verse. 20. And all to this end, To
encourage us chearefullie to go to death for Christ's sake What knows any of
us, but we may be charged with martyrdom, whether it be Minister, or any of
the flock? And I affirm to you, that if the Lord call any of you to die for
the Gospel, if ye deny Him, He will deny you. These are His own words,
Matthew. 10.33. Therefore, seeing every one of us, if we be Christians, are
bound to suffer: No, not a Minister only, but the soberest of you all, lad
and less. We have this encouragement to suffer Martyrdom, that our death
shall glorify God after a singular manner. It is no matter what become of
thee, if thou gettest that honor to glorify God: for be assured, if thou do
so, thou shall be partaker of His glory. When the conference is done, the Lord
appearantly rises up, for the time of this conference they were sitting
together, And the Lord says to Peter, Follow thou me. The meaning is this,
as though He would say, Well Peter, I have forewarned and enarmed thee against
this death: in toke^ of this, follow thou me: for he gives him this as an
undoubted sign of his cross and death yt was to come. No, Brethren, they that
will follow the Lord, must take up his cross, and follow Him. And therefore
bids He Peter follow Him. Well, these words are hard to flesh and blood. But
here is the great comfort, We have Christ to follow, He goes before us, When we
go to the cross to martyrdom, He goes before us. To go to death, without
Christ going before us, of all things it is most terrible and fearful: But
to go to death, following Christ, there is great matter of consolation: for
when He is before us, and if we follow with His cross upon our backs,
we shall find, that the death of Christ has taken away the bitterness of
death. Whosoever shall follow Christ, shall never taste the bitterness of
death. But if thou bear thine own cross, thou die for thine own sin,
as a Malefactor, a Thief, a Murderer, etc. Woe is thee, for the end of that
death is th'extremitie of Hell. It stands not only in a shameful,
ignominious, and comfortless departure, and in the sundring of the soul from
the body, it ends not there, but thereafter ye soul must be thrust into Hell,
to be tormented for ever. But when we have Christ going before us, bearing our
cross, suffering for our sins, and the^ we following Him, bearing His cross,
He dying first, takes away the bitterness of death, and makes our death an
entry to life everlasting. There is a comfort that Peter gettes in death: so
that death is made sweet to him, and a port to life everlasting. Brethren, ye
must understand, That Christ goes before us, not only in His death, but in
His Resurrection and life: for at this time He was risen. So PETER follows
Him in His Resurrection. There is a double comfort, We follow JESUS CHRIST
not only in His death, but also in His Resurrection, to raise us to life
again: for it is by virtue of that life of JESUS CHRIST, that we rise to
life, after our death. Whereto intendes all this? Even to encourage us to
suffer Martyredome, and seal the Gospel with our blood, if it shall please
the Lord to call us: and happy art thou if the Lord shall honor thee, so that
He will have thee to bear His Cross, and to suffer as an innocent, who for a
thousand of thine own sins art worthy of an ignominious death, and desperate
departure: for if He go before thee, if He bear thy Cross, the bitterness
of death is taken from thee, because the guiltiness of thy sin is forgiven.
Now, the Lord furnish us strength and courage, that we shame not His cause, if
it shall please Him to call us to suffer for the Name of Jesus, To whom with
the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all praise and glory, for ever. AMEN.

THE LII. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
IHON, CHAP. XXI.












WE have heard, Brethren, that after the Lord had restored Peter to the
dignity of the Apostle ship, from the which he had fallen by his threefold
denial of his Master, in the Hall of the High Priest, he adds to his
absolution and restitution, a premonition, and forewarning, forewarning him,
that in the end of his Apostleship, when he should become an old man, he should
close up and seal his Apostleship with his blood When thou wast young, says
the Lord to Peter, thou girdedst thy self: thou knittedst, thy clothes, when
thou wast wont to go any way, and wentedst, whither thou pleasedst: but when
thou shall be old, thou shall not get credence to gird thy self, to put thy
girdle about thee: but thou shall stretch out thine hands, and another shall
gi^d thee with cords and chains, and shall lead thee away, not where it shall
please thee, but where it shall please him, he shall lead thee to the death. We
heard, John opened up the meaning of these words and told us, that Christ
thereby signified, that Peter should glorify God by a violent death: and
thereafter, to encourage him, the Lord goes before him, and bids Peter follow
Him, signifying thereby, that His death had taken away the bitterness of
death, and that by virtue of His Resurrection, he should live again.

Now in the words that we have read, in the first place we have set down a
new conference between the Lord and Peter: for while they are in the way, the
Lord going before, and Peter, following, there they fall again in a new
conference, and Peter, as he was ay too rash, albeit very zealous: so here
rashly he demandes a curious question, and it is about John the writter of this
Gospel: the question is, What should John do? What shall this man do? Shall
he not follow the Lord? The Lord had not bidden him follow Him: it might have
contented Peter well enough, that the Lord had kept silence of John, and he to
have done the thing that the Lord bade him. Now, Brethren, ere I come to the
question, ye must mark the occasions of this curiosity of Peter: I perceive,
the first occasion that brings Peter to this question, is this: When they are
going together, Peter looks over his shoulder, and turns him about, and
turns his eye from the Lord, and looked to John, that apparently followed a
far^e off: upon which follows this curiosity, and this learnes us this
lesson: If the Lord bid thee, follow Him in any calling what ever it be, as
He bade Peter follow Him to the death (that was his calling, for a man
follows God in his calling, all lawful callings are but a following of the
LORD) learn here to be wiser than Peter: hold thine eye constantly upon Him,
thine heart upon Him: in thy calling follow Him foot for foot: tread thou in
the same footsteps, so far as He shall give the grace, decline not, neither
to the right hand, nor to the left: and as to thine eye, look that it be never
drawn from Him, look not over thy shoulder to see what is behind thee, but
look constantly on the Lord: for if thou do this, thou loses ye sight of Him,
and that of need force shall make thee to settle back in thy calling: Peter
but once turning, goes one foot backward, and falls back from yt course wherein
he should have walked, Paul Philip. 3.14. considered this well, and in that
race he ran to be partaker of Resurrection, and life everlasting, he says, I
never look behind me, I never look over my shoulder, to see what is behind,
but mine eye is ever upon the mark, to get the price of the high calling of
God. Seeing then we have taken up a course to walk in to that life, Jesus
Christ being the forerunner, and breaking up the Heaven: hold thine eye
continually upon the forerunner: follow Him in thine own calling* and see that
thine eye go never off Him* It is the felicity of the creature to follow Him,
and thou must follow the Lord in thine own calling: there is the first
occasion. Upon this follows another: for piece and piece he comes to his
curiosity, turning himself about, and looking to John, Whom the Lord loved,
who was very familiar with the Lord, and apparently has used the Lord more
homely, than any of the rest* for he was the man which leaned on Jesus breast at
supper: for when ye Lord forewarned them, that one of them should betray Him,
Peter winkes upon John, and beckenes unto him, as he leaned on ye Lords breast,
to ask who it was: John said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Now Peter
remembering this love of ye Lord toward John, and this great familiarity, he
marueiles why that Disciple should have been left behind, and should not have
been required to follow Him, as well as he, and so he falls out in this
curious question, and forgets in a manner his own calling: there is the ground:
Peter looking to John, he sees him not so soon, but he finds in him the
matter of his curiosity: will thou leave off thine own calling, and take
leisure to look about thee here or there, to this man or that man, when ye
Lord has bidden thee strictly follow Him, and forbidden yt thou should look
about thee: thou shall not so soon do this, but as soon thou shall find
matter of curiosity: No, if thou take thee yt leisure to look to another,
thou shall get a stu^bling block to stay thee from thy calling: therefore, if
thou be called by God to any calling, look yt thine eye be never off ye Lord,
as thou will be answerable to Him, hold thine eye upon Him, take thee not so
much leisure from thine own calling, as to look once to another man: o yt
strict life yt is required of a Christian: men think yt they may live loosely
as they please: No, but thou must walk circumspectly, and precisely in thy
calling, holding thy eye upon ye Lord: Another thing I mark: Peter, when he
sees John following after, wonders yt the Lord bids not him also follow, he
thinks that ye Lords homelines with John is failed. It will be at times, yt
these men yt have found in greatest experience ye love of Christ, and
familiarity with Him (and blessed are they yt have found His love, and is homely
with Him: if thy acquaintance begin not here, you shall never be acquainted with
Him hereafter, let no man be guile himself) it will be yt me^ will think ye
Lord has forgot them, has left them, and cast them off, and they themselves will
begin to doubt of ye Lords favor, the smallest thing yt can be, will make us to
dout: but there is no cause why either you should doubt, or other men should
think so: for whom He loves, He loves to ye end. The answer which ye Lord
gives here to Peter, testifies His love was as great now as ever it was before:
if thou gettest once His love, it shall not fail thee, it will appear, indeed,
to thy sense, yt it fails, but measure thou not ye favor of God by these
things that are outward you must not judge rashly, either of thy self, or of
others by these outward things. Now come to ye question: upon these occasions
follows this question, What shall this man do? Shall not John thy beloved
disciple follow thee? Will thou leave him behind thee? If thou give me this
honor to die for thee, will thou not give him the like. Ye see here, an
example of curiosity, not only superfluous, but hurtful: he hurt himself,
and did no good to John? What was the ground of it? he took him leisure from
his vocation, which was to look to Jesus, and to follow Him, to scanse upon
John. Upon this, he falls in this inconuen^ent, Paul 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. speaking
of them who lived inordinately, he joins these together, They work nothing
themselves: again, They are curious about other men's affairs: Meaning, yt all
this curiosity about other men's affairs comes from idleness in their own
calling. Upon this it comes to pass, yt thou sets thy mind on other folk: if
thou were busy in thy own calling you would not be curious in other folks
affairs, and this ye shall find, yt these me^ that busy their heads about
other men's adoes, finding fault with this man, and that man, they are most
idle, and careless of their own adoes: fie upon this curiosity, fleeting and
flowing hither and thither. Then set thy mind on thine own calling, and so
thou shall not get time to trouble and vex thy mind with other men's adoes.
This is the curious question: folk would think that this is but a light word
which Peter speaks, but it is not so: for beside this curiosity, there is
another fault in him, he has a sinistrous judgment of the Lords doing, he
thinks all men should be called to one calling: he is called to die for Him,
and so he thinks should John also: but the LORD lets him see, that he is
beguiled. There are many in this warfare, but all this has not one station and
calling, he has one, and he has another, he has this, he has that, The Lord
will say to one, Do thou this: to another, Do thou that: to Peter, Follow me:
to John, tarry thou still there: for example: There will be ten men in this
warfare, and he will take one of the ten, and say, Come thou out, and go, and
be burnt for my Names sake, and he will let the rest stand still, and will
exercise them with croces: some more gently, some more sharply, as pleases Him:
so diversely He will cross them: no Christian without some cross: be patient
in it, and thou shall get a fair outgate: He will exercise one in the mind,
and another in the body, the third in his goods and gear: He has many ways
to exercise His own: if there were a thousand of them, He will get as many
crosses, so that none shall escape his cross. It is a vain thing, to think,
that all men should be called to that, whereunto thou are called: No, leave
others to the Lord, to do with them as He pleases: go thou to the scaffold,
if the Lord command thee, and leave thy neighbor.

Thus far, for the curious question: Now come to the rebuke: He meets Peter
in anger, and with sharp words, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
it to thee? Do that which thou art commanded to do: Follow thou me: As He
would say, Let John be: thou art too curious, look to thy self: turn thine
eye from John, and follow me in thy calling, which I have placed thee into. Ye
shall perceive in this reproof three things that He finds fault with: First,
that he should have left off his calling: the second that he was curious about
John's calling: the third the greatest of all, he enters into the calling of
the Lord: a great usurpation: it pertained to the Lord, to call John, and every
man, as pleases Him. O! but he would be the caller of John: this is no small
thing: No, no, thou must not scoff with the Lord, as though He had no
discretion to call others: so in this doing, he does injury to the Lord.
Brethren, behold in Peter, how many evils falls on curiosity: First, he
forgets his own calling: Secondly, he is too curious in his brothers calling:
Lastly, he does an injury to Christ, makes an eruption upon Christ's office,
to spoil Him of His authority and power, to call all: and think ye not,
albeit the Lord now adays, as He did Peter then, but He looks with an angry
eye upon curious men. This rebuke is registrated, to rebuke thee, if thou be
given to curiosity: But it would be marked, that albeit the Lord be angry
with Peter, yet nevertheless He forgets not His mercy. When He found him to
linger in his course, the Lord leaves him not, but He puts out His hand, and
takes hold of him: therefore He says, Follow thou me. This is the mercy of
the Lord toward His own, that when He rebukes them, He leaves them not there,
but He will put out His hand, and pull them in again to Him: No, never one of
us would go forward, except by a new grace pulled us forward except the Lord
led us by the hand, there could not be such a thing, as a man could be saved.
There is such a stumbling and wavering in our nature: therefore Paul said, I
strive by all means to attain to the Resurrection of the dead: Yea rather,
says he, I am comprehended of Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.11, 12. Therefore, ay cry
for grace after grace, otherwise, thou can not go one foot right forward,
much less persevere to the end. Ye will ask a question: Should never one of
us be careful of our brother in his calling? Humanity required, that Peter
should be careful of John: is this the thing the Lord reprooues and forbids?
I answer: there is a great difference between carfulness and curiosity: it
is not carfulness He finds fault with: Woe to him that cares for himself
only: for why should not every one of us be helping one another, and be
careful to bring forward the straggling body? But it is curiosity that the
Lord reprooues. Then the lesson is this shortly: Take heed, that by thy doing
(men should be very wise) thou hinderest not thy self more by thy curiosity,
when thou enterest into the affairs of thy brother, than thou profitest him by
thy care: when thou beginnest to care for him: beware thou fall not in
curiosity: pass never the bounds of thy calling: for there is none that has
a calling, but it is joined with care of his brother, and the higher calling
the greater care. The Kings calling requires a great care of others in the
Policy: Such like, the Ministers calling is joined with a care for the
people, not to feed himself, but to feed the people. It is joined with a
special and wonderful care, so that night and day his eye should not be off
his flock: Yet men should beware, that their care turn not to curiosity.
Curiosity is very dangerous. A curious man has no love to thee, for he takes
pleasure in the hurt and evil that falls to thee, and it is his meat and
drink, he feeds upon the evil report of others. John subjoynes, that when
the Disciples heard of these words of Christ, they give them a strange gloss.
They say, John should not die. A fair gloss, a fair commentary. John says,
This was not the meaning of the Lord, He spoke not such a thing, He said not
to him, he should not die, and that was not His mind, He told not whether
he should live or die. But He said, If I will, he tarry till I come, what
is that to thee? Ye see how ready men are to misconstrue and pervert the
one-folde meaning of the LORD. If the Disciples, who heard His own lively
voice, were so ready to give a false and a lying gloss to His word, which
they heard Him speak; I pray you, what marvel is it, albeit men daily
misconstrue the written word of GOD, and never leave off to father lies upon
the Scriptures? Ye vvonder at the Papists: I vvonder not. Look the whole
Scriptures: these Traitors conclude ever a lie upon the truth. Look the
Rhemish new Testament, and the rest of their vvrittes, I vvonder not at them,
but I vvonder at this, Considering this grossness of ignorance, and the
propension of men naturally to misconstrue GODS Word, and Will, that there is
so much as one to open the truth, and to understand the right meaning of the
word. The cause of this misconstruing is not of the Scripture, as if it were
doubtsome, hard, obscure, or as a nose of wax, as they blaspheme: but the
fault is partly in the blindness of the mind of man, and partly in the
peruersitie and frowardness of the will, and malice of the heart: for it
falls out, that either (such is the blindness of man by nature,) they know
not the mind of the LORD, or else, if they know His mind, yet willingly
they desire not to know it, but to remain ignorant: for it is true that the
Apostle PETER says, They that are unlearned and unstable wreast the SCRIPTVRES
to their own destruction, 2 Pet. Chap. 3. verse. 16. And PAVL says, Jf our
GOSPEL be hidden, it is hidden to them who perishes, whose eyes the god of
this world has blinded, 2. Cor. 4.34. Again we may perceive, that a lie ran
speedily abroad, and was easily received, and got soon place in the hearts of
The Apostles, whereof we may learn, that the multitude commonly drinks in lies,
vanities, fables, and Heresies very suddenly, because naturally they are very
bent thereunto. Yet this error remained not long with The Apostles: for after
that, according to the Lords promise, extraordinarily in the day of the
PENTECOSTE, they were illuminated, and after the Holy Spirit was given
them, who called all things to remembrance which the Lord had spoken unto
them, when He was present with them, and gave them the true meaning and
understanding of all these things (as CHRIST says, Joh. chap. 14. verse. 26.)
This lie concerning JOHN euanished, then all the Disciples knew the LORDS
meaning, when He spoke these words to Peter, of John, If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee? But the Papishe Kirk, and that
Antichristian Kingdom this day, makes it plain enough unto us, how bent men
are by nature to receive, maintain, and entertain lies, and vanities: for in
that Kingdom not only is this fable of JOHN retained, but also an hudge
multitude of lies, and of the vanities and fantasies of the brain of man,
which were devised by the GENTILES, are allowed and received: for almost all
the Religion of the Papists, like a Beggars cloak, is clouted and patched
together, partly of the fables and superstitions of the GENTILES, and partly
of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jews, which were abolished by the coming
of CHRIST. If any would know what fables they maintain, and give out,
concerning John, let them read their golden Legende.

Now in the last two verses of this Euangell, the Apostle concludes his
GOSPEL, and in the conclusion he tells us who this was of whom Christ
and PETER were speaking of in the words preceding, Even that same Disciple
which testifies of these things and wrote these things. And so telling that
it vv^s he, that witnessed, and wrote these things, he closes up his Euangel,
and puts his seal to it. But the words are to be marked: JOHN says, he
testifies these things, meaning by word: and then again, he wrote the same
things: So he bore witness of the Gospel of Christ, both by word and
writing. Whereof we have to l^arne. That we should strive all manner of
vvayes to bear witness unto the truth of the GOSPEL of CHRIST, by word,
by writ, by confession of our mouths, and if need require, by the shedding of
our blood also: for the more testimonies be given to the truth, the greater
glory redounds to God: Again, we see, John, when he has ended the History
of the Gospel, he affixes and puts to his seal to it. We should follow this
example: for after we have preached Christ, we should be ready to seal it, if
it were with our blood Look to Paul, after he had preached Christ to the
Philippians, and had labored to make them to believe, he says to them, he
would rejoice and be glad with them, although he were offered up upon the
sacrifice and service of their Faith: that is, he would be content to seal
up the Gospel which he had preached to them, by his death, that their Faith
might be the more confirmed.

Now, in the words following he sets down the cause which moved him to put
to his seal to his Gospel: for says he, We know that his testimony is true:
So the cause of his sealing of his Gospel, is the full persuasion and
assurance which he had of the truth: And, indeed, he only who has full
assurance in his heart of the truth of these things, that he teaches, can
confidently put his seal to his preaching: and therefore a Minister should
endeavor to have full persuasion in his heart, that he may speak with
liberty and great assurance, as Paul speaks of himself, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. and
that if need require, he may seal the Gospel with his own blood.

Now to come to the last verse, and to end shortly: The Apostle meets a
question, that some curious men might have demanded: they might have asked: Are
all the things which Christ did, and the wonders which He wrought, set down
in write by thee? To this he answers: That all things which Jesus did, are not
written: for says he: There are many other things which Jesus did, the which
if they were written every one, I suppose the world could not contain the
books that should be written: And so he wrote not all things, which Christ
did, neither was he of purpose to write them, neither was he able to write them
all: for if he had written them all, the whole world could not have contained
the books that should have been written. Upon this question we may perceive,
how curious the brain of man is, and how immoderate his ingine and appetite
is: there is nothing can content it: it cannot be contented with all things
which are written in the Old and New Testament, with all things which are
written by the Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles, but it is ever seeking
for more, seeking for new revelations, new miracles, and such other things.
The Devil knows well enough this to be our nature: and therefore he propines
to the world an huge multitude of lies, vanities and fables, and especially, to
the Kingdom of the Antichrist, to the Pope and his shauelings, who cannot
content themselves with the written word of God, the Old and New Testament,
but gripes greedily to unwritten verities, as they call them, to traditions,
which falsely they call, divine Apostolic, Ecclesiasticke: so that, all men
may perceive, that the Popish religion serves not so much to work Faith, and
bring Salvation to men, as to satisfy their curiosity and immoderate
appetite. Let men take pleasure in that religion, as they will, they may well
get their foolish appetit pleased and satisfied, but they will never get true
Faith nor Salvation by it. Then mark of John's answer to this question: That
men should keep a measure in speaking and writting these things which
appertain to religion and the worship of God: this did they, whom the Lord of
old employed to be penne-men of the Old and New Testament: this did the
Prophets, this did the Apostles, this did the Evangelists,: for in their
writting they respected two things: First, the infinite and incomprehensible
Majesty of God, and the unmeasurable and unspeakable greatness and multitude
of those things that might have been written of that infinite and most
glorious Majesty of God, and of Jesus Christ his Son: Next, they respected
the mean measure of man's understanding, and likewise of his Faith, which is
not capable of all these things which may be written: therefore, by the Lords
direction in their writting, they applied themselves to our capacity, and
endeavored to set down these things which ye Spirit of God thought might
sufficiently serve for our Faith and Salvation: for if all things had been
written concerning that infinite and incomprehensible Majesty, our memories
had been overwhelmed, our understandings confounded, and our Faith overthrown.
Lamentable experience lets us see this day, that the Papist by their unwritten
verities, and infinite traditions ouerwhelme the world, and subvert the Faith
of men. Now last, the form of speech which the Evangelist uses, would be
considered, when he says, If all things were written, the world could not
contain the books that should be written. Men would think, that this speech
were hyperbolicke, and that the speech far exceeds the matter it self, but
indeed, it is not so, but rather in this form of speech the Holy Spirit
submits Himself to our infirmity, and applies Himself to our weak
capacity, and sets down an infinite and incomprehensible matter, in a form of
speaking, which we may easily understand: for when John spoke this, he
considered and beheld that incomprehensible and infinite deepenesse of that
glorious Majesty which dwelt in Christ bodily, and which manifested it self
in His works and miracles, which was able not only to swallow up all the senses
and cogitations of all men, but also the Heaven and the earth and when He
endeavors in some measure to express that incomprehensible Highness, after
such a speech, and in such terms as we might understand, he says, The
world could not contain the books that should be written of Christ and His
works, if they were all written: which speech imports, that no living creature
is able sufficiently to set out and by words to express that glorious
Majesty, and His glorious wotks, and miracles that He wrought, according as
their dignity and excellency required: for the whole world is not able to
comprehend that infinite Majesty: for this we should not be ignorant of,
that this whole Scripture of the Old and New Testament written by the Prophets
and Apostles, which sets out unto us the glorious Majesty of God, and His
properties, His power, His mercy, His Justice, His wisdom, etc. is by
infinite degrees inferior to the Majesty which it describes unto us, and that
the Spirit of God paintes Him not thoroughly and fully in His essence and
nature, and in His own perfection, as He is: No, but in painting Him out, He
attempers His style to our infirmity and weakness, that we may understand and
believe: for there can be no words so high, so sublime, so glorious invented or
devised by any, that can be sufficient to express that Majesty which is
inco^prehensible and infinite. Always, seeing the Holy Spirit has set down so
much in the Scripture concerning that glorious and incomprehensible Majesty of
God, and His worship, as is sufficient for our Salvation: let us therewith be
content, and not curiously seek for any more, and while we read, or hear the
Scriptures, let us earnestly crave at God, that He would work faith in our
souls, that we may believe, that Jesus is that Christ the Son of God, and
that in believing we may have life and Salvation through Him. To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, honor and glory for evermore. AMEN.

THE LIII. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII.







MARK, CHAP. XVI.


WELBELOVED Brethren, these days bypast, we followed out the History of the
Resurrection of the Lord, and of His manifold appearings unto sundry, but
especially, unto His Disciples, as they are set down by the Evangelist John,
who insists more largely in describing His appearings to His Disciples, than
any of ye rest, and as God gave the grace the last day we ended his Gospel,
and spoke last of the conclusion thereof: now it rests, that we follow out so
much as remains of the History of the resurrection, as it is set down by ye
rest of ye Evangelists: for John wrote his Eua^gel after all ye rest, and
omitted purposely such things as were written by ye rest, willing us to
address our selves to ye rest of ye Evangelists, that there we might read and
follow out ye rest of ye History of CHRIST, which he left off: And so we
are this day to enter into the description of another appearing of CHRIST,
after His Resurrection, as it is set down by Matthew and Mark. This appearing
of the Lord seems to be the ninth in number: for the first was to Marie
Magdalene, The second to other women, The third to two disciples, as they went
to Emmaus, The fourth was to Simo^ Peter, The fifth to James: Then three
several times He appeared to His disciples, being gathered together, as ye
heard out of John. So this is ye ninth appearing, wherein it is likely, that He
shows Himself not only to the eleven disciples, being met together, but also
to a great number of brethren, being together with them: For this seems to be
yt appearing whereof The Apostle Paul makes mention, 1. Cor. 15 6. where he says,
He was seen of more than five hundredth brethren at once. In this appearing
there are sundry things to be considered, As the circumstances of time and
place, the disciples worshipping of Him, when they saw Him, the doubting of
some of them, His communicatio^ with the disciples, and sending them out, with
a commission, to preach to all Nations. Appearantly this is that meeting which
the Lord in His appearing to the women, enjoined to the Apostles: for by the
women He gave The Apostles a direction, to meet Him in Galilie, Matthew. chap.
28. verse. 10. According to this direction, it is said, The eleven disciples
went into Galilie, unto a Mountain, where Jesus had appointed them. So the
place was in that Mountain of Galilie, wherein the Lord had appointed them to
meet. The time is not particularly mentioned: yet it is likely, that as the
Lord gave a direction concerning the place; so did He also concerning the time
of their meeting. Then this whole meeting, the time, the place, and all, is
according to the direction and appointment of the Lord. Now as they keep this
meeting upon hope to see the Lord, according to His promise; so they are not
disappointed of their hope: The Lord is as good as His promise, He shows
Himself present unto the^. Mark the lesson: The Lord who has appointed and
ordained ye meetings and assemblies of His own, and has promised to be amongst
them when they are gathered together: He disappoints the^ not of His promise,
but shows Himself to be present with the^. This ye disciples found by
experience, when they met together by His appointment, ye Lord shows Himself
present unto the^. This same have al ye godly found in all ages and ye faithful
find it this day in their meetings: for albeit He show not Himself present
after a bodily manner, as here He did to His disciples; yet He is present,
yea, no less present with His own now, than He was then; but He is now
present after a spiritual manner: and the faithful find His presence to be no
less powerful, and effectual now, than it was then: for from whence comes
this unspeakable joy, comfort, and peace of conscience, which the faithful
find in their meetings, but from the presence of Jesus? for except the Lord
Jesus were present in our souls by His Spirit, it were not possible that we
could find such a powerful working, and such sweet motions, and alterations
in them. Vain and foolish men, who are touched with no sense of sin, disdaines
and scorns the meetings of the Saints, they think them all to be but
fectlesse and for ye feshio^, they think they feed upon fantasies: But ye
faithful find by experience, that the presence of Christ in their meetinges is
so powerful, and comfortable, as no tongue can utter, nor the heart of man is
able to conceive. And thou yt contemnest and scornest these meetings, thou
shall find one day, by sorrowful experience, of how great comforts thou have
deprived thy self: And if thy conscience were once wakened with the sense of
sin, thou would find, that there were no joy, nor comfort to thy soul,
but by these meetings: Then thou would have greater pleasure to frequent
these meetings, tha^ ever thou had to eat or drink when thou werest hungry
and dry. Now when ye Lord appears to them, what do they? what is their
behavior? It is said, When they saw Him, they worshipped Him. What made them
to fall down, and worship Him? What saw they into Him? No question they saw
in Him a glorious Majesty. By all appearance at this time He has showed
himself in greater glory than He did of before. So beholding His glory on
the one part, and their own unworthiness on the other, as He approaches unto
them, they humbly fall downne, and worship Him. This their behavior teaches
us, that wheresoever the Lord of Glory is present, there He should be
worshipped and adored: His presence requires adoration. See thou the Lord
present with thee? Then in humility fall down, and worship Him. But thou will say, I cannot see Him, how then can I adore Him? The Apostles saw His
glorious presence with their eyes, therefore they ought to have worshipped Him:
but as for us, who live in these days, after His ascension to Heaven, we see
Him not, and therefore how can we worship Him? But I answer thee, It is true,
thou see Him not now with the eyes of thy body, but thou see Him with
the eyes of thy soul, thou see Him with the eyes of faith, thou see Him in
the word and Sacraments; first crucified, and then glorified. And if thou will not worship Him when thou see Him here present in the word and
Sacraments, thou would not have worshipped Him if thou had seen Him
with the eyes of thy body face to face. These profane bodies, who will not
worship Him now when they see Him present in the mirror of the Gospel,
they will never get leave to worship Him in the Kingdom of Heaven. Think
thou not that the Lord is seen present in His word? What means Paul then,
when he says, that an unlearned man coming into the meetinges of the
faithful, where many are prophesying, finding himself rebuked and judged of
all, and the secrets of his heart made man^fest, that he will fall down on
his face, and worship GOD, and say plainly, That GOD is among them indeed.
1. Corinthians. Chap. 14. verse. 24. and 25. What sees the unlearned man among them,
that makes him to fall down and give such a confession? No question, but the
glorious light of the GOSPEL shines into his soul, and Christ offers Himself
present to be seen by the eye of faith. The faithful this day by experience
find in their meetings, this same presence of the Lord: And therefore it
becomes us, in all our meetinges, ever to vvorshippe the Lord, and to sit with
fear and reverence, to hear the word, and to prepare our hearts to receive
the Holy Spirit, whom the Lord promises, and offers, with the preaching of
the word to all His Chosen. Again, this their behavior teaches us, what
force and power there is in the glorious presence of Christ Jesus. His presence
is powerful to humble and bow both the body and soul of the creature. This
made Paul to say, that at the Name of JESUS every knee should bow, both of
things in Heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth, Philipp.
chap. 2. verse. 20. For that sublimitie and highness whereunto the Father has
exalted Him, is so effectual and powerful in all creatures, and of all
sorts, that either sweetly and willingly it mooues them to worship Him in
all humility; or else it breaks and bruises them with fearcenesse and
violence, and compels out perforce obedience of them. The sight and sense of
this sublimitie and highness* makes the blessed Angels in Heaven, in all
reverence to worship Him. The sense of this sublimitie, makes the Saints on
earth, when either they speak or hear of Him, reverently and in humility to
bow both their bodies and their souls unto Him. And by the contrary, The
sight and sense of this same sublimitie, raises up in the Devil and his
angels, such horroures and dread, as cannot be expressed. The sense of this
sublimitie, makes the wicked, how proud and jollie soever they be in their
own conceit, often times, when they hear of Him, to quake and tremble.

The Evangelist Matthew notes, That notwithstanding of their worshipping of
Him, yet some of them doubted. But who were these that doubted? Even some of
these who before worshipped Him. And what moved them to doubt? Apparently that
same that before moved them to worship Him, moves them also now to doubt: to
wit, that extraordinary and unaccustomed majesty and glory wherein Jesus
appeared to them, which scarcely they could have deemed to be so great and
wonderful. And certainly, the glory of the Lord, sitting this day in the
Heavens, at the right hand of the Father, is so exceeding great and wonderful,
that if it were permitted to us to behold it, as it is with our bodily eyes
(such is ye corruption of our nature) we could not but doubt whether He were ye
Christ, who was so far humbled and abased in ye earth, and of whom we heard
before in ye Gospel. Beside this cause, ye difficulty to believe this article
of the Resurrection of ye dead seems likewise to have furthered their
doubting: for indeed among al ye articles of our belief, there is none more
contrary to nature, nor harder to believe, tha^ this article of ye Resurrection
of our bodies from ye dead. Nature can never be persuaded, yt a dead body, yt
has bin a prey to worms, and is resolved in dust and ashes, can rise up again
to life. But, as of all articles there is none harder to be believed, so there
is none more necessary to salvation, nor none that brings greater consolation.
And therefore the Lord (that we might have the more full assurance and
persuasion thereof) took great pains upon Himself, and for the space of
forty days He remained upon the earth, after His Resurrection* and sundry
times showed Himself to His Disciples, and many other of the Faithful, that
all occasion of doubting might be removed, and so their joye and comfort
might be the greater.

Now this doubting of the Disciples lets us see what is the disposition of
the hearts of the Godly, even in their best exercises. For even their best
exercises are ever accompanied with a piece of doubting, of want, of
infirmity, etc. their worshipping of GOD is with doubting, their prayer is
with infirmity, and wavering of the mind, their meditation falls from GOD,
and spiritual things to carnal and earthly things, their hearing of the word,
is ever with some piece of loathing, their Faith is mixed with infidelity: so
that, before they can come to any great measure of grace, they must strive and
wrestle through many infirmities, and overcome many difficulties and
tentations: so that the best man, even in his best works, has no matter of
rejoicing, if the Lord would enter in judgment with him. Ye have heard the
disciples behavior, now look how the Lord meets them: First, He draws nearer
to them, and then He enters in communing with them: for it is said, Jesus came
and spoke unto them: He approached to them, partly, that He might take away
all occasion of doubting from them, partly, that with the greater profit and
commodity He might instruct them, and that His teaching might be the more
powerful and fruitful: for no question, while He draws nearer to them with
His body, and offers Himself to be seen more clearly with ye bodily eyes, in
ye mean time He draws nearer to them inwardly, and joins Himself by His
Spirit more powerfully and familiarly to their souls: for this is the
accustomed dealing of the Lord, when by the word He is purposed to be
effectual and powerful in the soul of any man, He draws near them by His
Spirit: whereas by the contrary, when He is not of purpose to be effectual
by his word, in the heart, He approaches not inwardly to the soul, but He
holds Himself a far off, and gives them only a show of His power and glory
outwardly a far off.

Now follows the Lords co^muning with His Disciples: wherein He gives them a
commission, to go out and preach to the world, baptizing them that believe.
But before He gives them this commission, by way of preface, He sets down the
ground of this commission: to wit, that power and authority which He had: for
says He, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: for it was
necessary that the Apostles should be informed of this His power and
authority, which He had given Him, to the end, that knowing that infinite
power, whereupon their commission and Apostleship was grounded, they might the
more chearefully and willingly with free hearts, and open mouths discharge
their commission and message, being assured, that they had Him, who was Lord
of Heaven and Earth, to be their protector and maintainer. Mark this,
Brethren, This Ministry of the Gospel, albeit it be but a sort of service in
the Church of God (it is no Lordship) and albeit men count very basely of it,
and esteem it of all callings in the world, to be the most vile and
contemptible: yet it is grounded upon such a power as far surpasses all the
power of all the Kings and Monarchs of the earth: and it is the Lords will,
that both the Ministers themselves, and likewise the people that hears them,
have their eyes fixed, and be exercised continually in the contemplation and
consideration of that incomprehensible and infinite power, whereupon this
Ministry is grounded: to the end, that both the Ministers may the more
cheerfully and courageously discharge their calling, and also the people that
hear them be not offended, nor stumble at the baseness of this outward form
of the ministry, not measuring the Majesty and glory of the Gospel,
preached unto them by the outward show and form which they see, but by the
infinite and incomprehensible power of the Lord, whereupon it is grounded.
Next, it is to be marked that He says, All power is given me, not in heaven
only, but also in earth: He joins them both together, and that for the comfort
of His Apostles, whom He was to send out, and of the Ministers who were to
follow them to the end of the world: for when He says, that all power was
given to Him in the earth, it serves to encourage the Apostles, and all
Ministers in the Church faithfully and chearefully to discharge their calling,
so long as they remain here in the earth, and grounding and anchoring
themselves upon that infinite power which the Lord Jesus has upon the earth,
to strive and fight courageously and boldly against the assaults of Satan,
against the allurements of sin, against the fear and terror of trouble and
persecution, and against the manners and behavior of this unthankful world,
as assured, that His almighty power in the earth, shall guarde and defend them
in their calling, so long as the Lord has a work ado with them. Again, when
He says, that all power was given to Him in Heaven, it serves to comfort the
Apostles and Ministers upon the hope of a reward, that after they have
discharged their duty in their calling, and after they have striuen against
all difficulties, and has overcome all tentations, at last they should wait
for the Kingdom of Heaven, where they shall rest from their labors, and enjoy
the presence of their Lord and King for ever, 1 Cor. 15.19. Jf in this life
only we have hope in Christ, of all men we are the most miserable: By the which
words, He means, if the power of Jesus Christ, whereupon we repose and
anchore our selves, extended no further, than within the bounds of this present
life, then our estate and condition of all men were most miserable: yet ere we
leave these words, it is to be considered, what manner of power this is, whereof
he speaks, and whereupon their Apostleship is grounded: that ye may understand
this the better, ye must consider, that there is a twofold power in the Lord
Jesus the Son of God: the first is heritably, the other purchased: The first
He has as the Son of God, equal with the Father, before the foundations of
the world were laid, and of this He speaks in His Prayer to His Father before
His Passion: Father, glorify me with thine own self, with that glory which I
had with thee, before the world was, Ioh. 17.5. The other, the Son of God,
Jesus Christ purchased to Himself for our cause, when He made Himself of no
reputation, and took on Him the form of a servant, humbled Himself, and
became obedient to the death, even to the death of the Cross: for the Lord
then exalted Him highly, and gave Him a Name above every Name, that at the Name
of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth, Philip. 2.6. Here the Apostle speaks of that
power, which He as a Mediator, acquired by His perfect obedience in all
things, and of this acquired power it is which the Lord speaks in this place:
for from this power which He purchased to Himself, by His obedience in our
flesh, proceeds the Gospel: from this power proceeds the Ministry in the
Church: from this power proceeds Salvation to the world: for that herita^ble
power which the Son of God, had with the Father from all eternity, without
the manhead of Christ, and His acquired power by His obedience, would never
serve to bring life and Salvation to sinners.

Now to come to the sending out of the Apostles: He says, Go therefore and
teach all Nations, baptizing them: In these words He gives them their
commission, and committes unto them the Ministry, and office of the
Apostleship, commanding them to go forth to all Nations, to teach and baptize
them: for the Lord sets down here distinctly three points of their calling:
First, yt they should go forth to all Nations of the world not holding
themselves within ye narrow bounds of ye land of Judea, as they did before:
Next yt they should preach ye Gospel: thirdly, yt they should baptize, that is,
yt by baptism they should seal up yt Gospel which they had teached before,
But to who^ should they go out? to who^ should they preach? Whom should they
baptize? Not the Jews only, but all Nations: and Mark says, Go ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: As if He had said, My
power is extended to all Nations, to every creature: and therefore this my
Gospel, and your Ministry, whereby my power is manifested and declared to
all, must likewise be extended to all creatures in the world. These words of
the Lord furnishes us sundry lessons for our instruction: First, we may learn
here, that this office of the Apostleship, which the Lord committes to His
Disciples, is not a bare style of honor, No, but it is a laborious and
painful charge and calling: they are commanded to go out into the world, to
preach diligently the Gospel to every creature. The Pope, his Cardinals and
Bishops, vaunt and brag, that they are the successors of the Apostles: they
clame this as a style of honor to themselves: but in the mean time they
refuse to undertake any pains and travel for man's salvation, as the Apostles
did: these idle bellies live in carnal security and sensuality, taking their
pleasure and pastime, and deceitfully gather in to themselves the substance of
the world, and commit the charge of Preaching to Vicares and Curates, as if the
Gospel were too base an exercise for them, and a thing whereof they had just
occasion to be ashamed: and therefore let them clame what styles they list to
themselves, they are nothing less than successors to the Apostles: Next,
these words lets us see, that there are two points of ye Ministry: for ye
Lord gives His Apostles commission to preach the Gospel, and to baptize: so
the Ministers have these two things enjoined unto them: to preach the word, and
to minister the Sacraments: we hear nothing spoken here of offering of a
Sacrifice, either bloody, or unbloody, or of a Priesthood: and no question, if
there had been such a thing, or at least, if it had been a matter of such
importance, and so necessary, as the Pope and his shauelings say, the Lord
would altogether have misknowne it, and passed it over with silence, but He
would have spoken something of it to His Apostles: so it is but a folly and
vanity, to think, that since Christ has once offered Himself a propitiatory
Sacrifice for ye Redemption of the world, that now there remains any
propitiatory Sacrifice in the Church. The Lord has put an end to them all by
His death and Sacrifice: there is no Priesthood committed either to the
Apostles before, or to the Ministers now, but that, whereby ye preaching of ye
word they offer the souls of men and women in a Sacrifice to ye Lord: Away
with that deuilish sacrifice of ye Mass, whereby the Pope and his Clergy
deceiues the world, making men believe, that daily they offer up Christ
again, as a propitiatory sacrifice to the Father, for the sins of the
quick and the dead. No, there is no propitiatory sacrifice now left to the
Kirk. That sacrifice which the Lord once offered upon ye cross, is sufficient
and perfect enough, to take away the sins of ye world. Thirdly, these words
teach us, ye these two poincts of the calling of the Ministry, Teaching and
Baptizing, were not committed to diverse and sundry persons; but both were
committed to one and ye self same person. So that he who is ordained to
preach, is ordained to baptize: and he who cannot preach, has no power nor
liberty granted him of the Lord, to baptize: and if he baptize, he does it
without the Lords commandment, he has no warrant of Him: and therefore his
doing is but a profanation of that Holy Sacrament of Baptism. This baptizing
of infants, which is ministered by private men, has no warrant nor allowa^ce of
God, much less that which is done by women. Fourthly, out of these words we
may learn, what order ought to be kept in the ministering of Baptism to wit,
the word must be first preached, the covenant of grace and the glad tidings of
salvation must be first opened up unto us: and then Baptism should be
ministered, to seal up that same word and covenant, which before was preached.
Wherefore serves Baptism, except first the word be preached? Baptism is a
seal. And what serves ye seal for, if there be nothing to be sealed?
Wherefore can it serve, if the charter of the word preceed not. Therefore,
except the preaching of the covenant of grace preceede, Baptism is nothing,
but an unprofitable ceremony, and a dead element. Now in whose name should
this Sacrament of Baptism be ministered? The Lord says, IN THE NAME OF THE
FATHER, AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY GHOST: That is, Ye shall baptize, by
the authority and power of the Father, the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Whereof we have to learn, That the power and efficacy of Baptism depends
neither upon the power of the Minister, who baptizes, nor upon the force nor
power of the words pronounced by the Minister in Baptism, as if there were any
such power or operation in the words, as the Papists falsely attribute unto
them: but all the force and efficacy of Baptism depends upon the power of God
only. And therefore, it is the duty of him who is baptized, to lift up his
eyes and his heart to Heaven, and to crave the blessing and efficacy thereof
from God only. Next, it would be noeed, yt He says not in a general term,
Baptize in the name of God: but He says distinctly, Baptize in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Therefore it is the duty
of him who is baptized, not to content himself with a confused knowledge and
consideration of God, but he ought to behold that glorious Majesty, and yt
incomprehensible essence distinctly in the Trinity of the persons: that is,
three distinct persons in one Godhead: for faith is a distinct and a clear
knowledge and apprehension of the Majesty of God: for whosoever truly and
sincerely believes, and puts his confidence in God, he finds sensibly by
experience, that all good things flow first from the Father, as the fountain
of all grace and goodness, through the Son, as Mediator, by whom all grace
is conveyed and communicated unto men: and by the Holy Ghost, who powerfully
and effectually works all grace in ye heart. Last, we see here a clear and a
plain naming of the three distinct persons of the Godhead, the Lord names
distinctly, The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. In all the Old
Testament, we will not read so plain and clear a distinction of ye three
persons of ye Godhead. Then learn here, that Jesus Christ the Son of God
brought first of all into the world a distinct knowledge of God: and that He
first of all distinctly named, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
Indeed it is true, that God was known in the Trinity of persons in some sort
by the Fathers, who lived under the Old Testament, before Christ's manifestation
in the flesh: but the knowledge which they had was obscure and confused, in
respect of that knowledge which JESUS brought into the world at His coming:
but chiefly this distinct knowledge of the three persons of the Godhead, was
manifested after Christ's Resurrection from the dead, and His Glorification:
for Christ glorified, is chiefly the image of the unvisible God, and the
brightness of His glory, and the engraven form of His person. And from
Christ glorified, especially proceeds th'effectuall operation of the Holy
Spirit, in the souls of His Elect. All tendes to this, To let you see, that
the clear and distinct knowledge of the Godhead, in the Trinity of the
persons, proceeded chiefly from the Kingdom of Christ, and from His glory.
Now to this God, one in essence, in three persons, The Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, be all praise, honor and glory for evermore, Amen.

THE LIVE. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
MATTHEW. CHAP. XXVIII.

MARK, CHAP. XVI.






THE last day (Well-beloved Brethren in Christ) we began to speak of the nine
appearings of the Lord to the Disciples, as it is set down by Matthew and
Mark. He appeared to them in a Mountain of Galilie, where He had appointed
them to meet Him. We heard what was the Disciples behavior: The sight of
that glorious Majesty made them to fall down and worship Him: yet in the
mean time some of them doubted: and therefore the LORD, to confirm them,
draws near unto them, and enters into communication with them: and in His
communing, first He tells what power and authority was given Him, both in
Heaven and earth: to the end He might move them the more willingly and
chearefullie to undertake the office of the Apostleship. Then when He has
laid down this power, as a ground of their office and Ministry, He sendes
them out in the world, charging them first to go to all Nations: Next, to
preach to every creature: And thirdly, To baptize, in the Name and authority of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Now in these words, first He
tells them what doctrine they should teach to the world, then he makes them
a threefolde promise: The first is of life and salvation to then that believe
and are baptized: The second is a promise of th'extraordinarie and miraculous
gifts of the Holy Spirit: The third is a promise of His own glorious and
powerful presence with them in discharging of their calling, and that not for
a season, but to continue to the end of the world. Then in the first words
which we have read, He tells them what they should teach: not al things, not
every thing that they pleased themselves: but He says, Teach them to observe
all things whatsoever J have commanded you. So He restraines the doctrine
that they should teach unto the world, unto that doctrine which He Himself
first had taught them. In the 14. Chapter of John, verse. 26. after He has
first promised the Holy Spirit, to teach His Apostles all things, then He
tells what He means by All these things, which His Spirit should teach:
and He bounds them, and restraines them, to that doctrine, which He Himself
had taught them before: For, says He, he shall bring all things to your
remembrance, which I have told you. Even so here He restraines the preaching
of The Apostles, to these things which He Himself had taught them. So mark
this lesson: The doctrine of Jesus Christ, which He delivered the time that
He lived in the world, and had His conversation among men, is the ground,
the rule, and the measure of all true doctrine. The Spirit of the Lord Jesus,
whom He left behind Him, to be His vicegerent in the earth, kept preciselie
this rule: He taught not so much as one sentence in substance, but that which
CHRIST had taught before. The Apostles, whom He sent out into the world,
declined not one jote from this rule: for they taught the world nothing but
that which the Holy Spirit had furnished and suggested unto them before: and
that Spirit taught them nothing, but that which JESUS had taught them before.
So that the doctrine of the H. Spirit, and The Apostles, come all wholly from
Jesus, as the only doctor and teacher of His Kirk, of whom the Father said in
His baptism and tra^sfiguratio^, Hear him. So it should be with ministers and
Teachers of the Church to the end of the world, they should make Christ's
doctrine to be the rule of all their doctrine, they should teach nothing but
that which Christ teached before them: the faithful Ministers of Christ in all
ages have striuen to do so: they confirmed all their doctrine, so far as
they could, to the doctrine of Christ. Indeed it is true, through process of
time, corrupt men entered in the Church, who respected not God, nor His glory,
nor the well and salvation of men, but their own honor, their own lusts, and
their belly, who taught the world, not the doctrine of Christ, the way of
life, but their own fantasies, dreams, and traditions. We may see this
lamentable experience this day in the kingdom of the Antichrist: What teaches
the Pope and his Clergy to the world? Not the word of God: Not the doctrine of
Christ: Not that doctrine which the Holy Spirit furnished to the Apostles: not
that which the Apostles have left in register this day: they make not that to
be the rule of their preaching, but they teach their own vanities, devised by
themselves: they teach men's traditions: they teach unwritten verities, as they
call them, which are for the most part altogether repugnant to the doctrine
of Christ. The Lord save us from their doctrine, wherewith they poison the
world, and bring men to perdition. Now, as the Pastors are obliged to teach
nothing but the doctrine of Christ, so are the people bound to hear, and
receive none other doctrine, but the doctrine of Christ: and for this cause,
they should pray earnestly, for the Holy Spirit, who is promised to His own,
to illuminate their minds, and to give them the gift of discretion, to
discern spirits, as also, they should be diligently exercised in reading, and
considering the Old and New Testament, the writtings of the Prophets and
Apostles, which contain exactly the doctrine of Christ necessary to
salvation.

Now, let us consider in order, the promises which the Lord joins with this
commission that He gives to His Apostles: the first two are set down in Mark,
the third in Matthew: the first promise is of everlasting life and salvation,
to all that believe by their Ministry, and are baptized by them: He that
shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved. This promise of life and
salvation that He subjoynes to the preaching and baptizing of the Apostles,
was, no doubt, to move and allure men upon the consideration of so fair and
great benefi^es, that they should receive them the more willingly, to believe
in the Lord Jesus: With this promise to them that believe, He joins a
denunciation of judgment against all those who would not believe by their
Ministry, He denounces eternal death, and damnation against them: He that
will not believe, says He, shall be condemned. So that, as on the one part,
He promises a fair reward, to move men to believe: so on the other part, He
threatens a fearful judgment against them that believe not, but despises the
Apostles doctrine, to make men to abhor and detest that abominable sin of
infidelity. Upon this promise of reward, and threatening of judgment: first,
we learn this lesson: The Ministry of the Gospel is ever effectual and
powerful in men, either one way or other: for seeing, this Ministry of the
Gospel, which from the Apostles days continues, and shall continue to the
end of the world, is grounded upon that incomprehensible power that filles
both heaven and earth, how is it possible, but it must be mighty and
powerful? It must be powerful, either to life and salvation: or else, to death
and damnation: to life to them that believe: to death to them that believe not.
Therefore Paul says, that always they triumphed, and were victorious in
Christ, and that they were a favor to God, both in them that are saved, and in
them who perish: In them who are saved, they were the savor of life unto
life: but in them who perish, they were the savor of death unto death, 2. Cor.
2.14. The Apostle in these words, lets us see, that the preaching of the
Gospel is ever powerful and effectual in all sorts of men. Alas, men count
too lightly: yea, despise, contemn and scorn this preaching, as if it were a
matter of none effect, and the word of man and not of God: but take heed, how
thou hear the Gospel: for thou shall find it to be the most powerful
thing that ever was, and if it be not powerful to work life and salvation,
it shall work death and damnation in thee: Next, we learn out of these
words, that Faith, Righteousness, Salvation, and all spiritual graces, are
so tied and bound to this Ministry of the Gospel, that whosoever submits
himself to this Ministry, and conformes himself to the Gospel, he shall
attain to Faith, Righteousness, Life and Salvation: and by the contrary:
whosoever contemnes this Ministry, he shall never get any spiritual grace:
no Faith, no Righteousness, no Life, no Salvation but by this Gospel. But ye
will say, We should not tie nor bind the grace of God to those external
things? We should not restrain Gods working to the outward Ministry.
Indeed, I grant, the grace of GOD, is not so tied to these ordinary means,
and outward helps, which are daily used in the Church, but that ye may work
without them, and that ye may work immediately by His own Spirit, in whom,
and when He pleases: but it is as true, that whosoever contemnes those outward
ordinary means, which the LORD has ordained to be used: he shall be
deprived of all spiritual grace, of Faith, of Righteousness, of Salvation:
For Faith, says Paul, is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God preached,
Romans Chapter 10. verse 17. Many foolish men withdraw themselves from the
outward Ministry, from the means of grace, and are exercised in pastime, in
drinking, in harlotrie, and yet they will say: they will come to Heaven as
soon as the best of them, but they deceive themselves: for if thou contemnest
these outward means, which the LORD has ordained, thou shall never get no
grace, the gates of Heaven shall be closed on thee, thy portion shall be with
the Devil and His Angels: Thirdly, we may mark out of this promise, an
excellent and worthy effect of Faith: to wit, Salvation and eternal life: for
He says, He that believes, shall be saved. But we may not think, that this
effect proceeds from the force, power, worthiness and merits of Faith: No,
but this effect of life and Salvation proceeds only from the virtue, power and
merit of Christ, which the soul apprehendes: for this Life and Salvation
stays and abides so plenteously, and in such abundance in Christ, that as
soon as we put out the hand of Faith, and takes hold of Him, so soon will
we find that life of CHRIST conveyed into our souls. His life is made ours by
Faith: In Christ there dwelles such a marvelous and glorious light, that when
we approach to Him by Faith, by the beams of His brightness, He shines in
our hearts, that we may get the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in
the face of Jesus, 2. Cor. Chapter 4. verse 6. By Faith His light is made ours:
in Christ there is such a wonderful and incomprehensible glory, that as soon
as with open face with the eye of Faith we behold Him in the mirror of the
Gospel, as soon are we transformed in the same Image from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3.18. by Faith His glory is made ours, and when we shall see Him face to
face, and when Faith shall be turned into sight, He shall perfect our glory,
He shall change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all
things to himself. Philip. chap. 3. verse. 21. Seeing then so excellent and
worthy are th'effectes of faith, we ought both carefully to use th'ordinarie
means whereby faith is wrought: and also pray earnestly, that the Lord
would give a blessing to them, and by them work faith in our hearts: that
so we may enjoye all these graces and benefits. Fourthlie, we see in this
promise of life and salvation, that the Lord joins Baptism with faith in
Christ: For, says He, he that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be
saved. We may not understand this so, as if Baptism were either simply a
cause, or an half cause of salvation: No, it has no respect of a cause in the
salvation of man: but it is joined to Faith, as a sign, and an outward mark,
to testify and bear witness of the cause, to wit, Faith in Jesus Christ:
and in such sort it must follow upon Faith, and be conjoined with it, that
he who believes would vvishe to be baptized, it is not possible that he
can contemn Baptism: And, if a man contemn Baptism, let him boast of his
faith as he pleases, that contempt is a sure token, that he had never faith,
neither shall he get eternal life. So Baptism in some respect is necessary
to salvation: that is, it must not be contemned, or neglected: for if a man
contemn or neglect it, he cannot get salvation: but it is not simply and
absolutely necessary to salvation: that is, incase a man contemn it not, nor
neglect it, he may be saved without it. It is the contempt, and not the want of
it that hurtes man, for a man may be ingraffed in Christ by Faith, and may be
saved by Christ, without the seal of Baptism: for the grace of God is not so
bound and tied to th'ordinarie means and outward helps, but that the Lord
may work without them when and where He pleases. And the Lord Jesus as
apparently importes no less in these words, than that Baptism is not
absolutely necessary to salvation: for when after the promise He settes
down the cause of damnation, He speaks not a word of Baptism, for He
says only, He that believes not shall be damned: of set purpose He
leaves out Baptism. And if it had been absolutely necessary to salvation,
no question He vvoulde not have misknowne it, and passed it by. Now last,
mark the meaning of these words, He that believes not. This negation and
want of faith comprehendes first, all sin whatsoever against the moral
Law, whether it be original sin, wherein we are conceived and borne, or
actual sin, proceeding from original sin: for if we have not Faith in the
Lord Jesus, all these sins whatsoever will be laid to our charge, and will
bring us to damnation. Next, this negation and want of Faith, comprehends that
infidelity, rebellion, and stubburnesse, whereby men disdainfully refuse and
reject that grace which the Lord offers freely in Jesus Christ to sinners, and
this sin of infidelity, of all sins is the greatest, and most detestable:
and therefore procures most speedy, fearful and heavy judgment, and
therefore Christ says, He that believes not, is condemned already, Joh. 3 18.
These words importr that there is no delay of judgment to him, who
disdainfully rejects grace, but the judgment is present and already past
against him: and he gives a reason, taken from that rebellion and repining
against the Majesty of the only begotten Son of God, he is condemned
already, says he, Because he has not believed in the Name of that only
begotten Son of God. The Lord save us from this cursed sin of infidelity:
for where it is, all other sins are laid to men's charge, it and draws out
most speedily most fearful judgments.

Now, it follows, that we speak of the second promise to them that believe:
These tokens shall follow them that believe in my Name, they shall cast out
devils, and shall speak with new tongues, and shall take away serpents, and
if they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay
their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. The former promise, was, of
life eternal to them who believe, this promise is of the gift of working
miracles, He promises that the Holy Spirit should give to them that believe, a
power and gift to work miracles. We may not think, that this power is common
to all, and that every particular Christian who believes, should have this
gift, neither must we think, that it should be extended to all times, and
ages. But this promise is to be restrained to a certain number of particular
persons, on whom it shall please the Lord, to bestow this gift of working of
miracles, and it is to be restrained and bounded within a certain time: it
must be restrained to that first age and infancy of the Church, to the first
time that the Gospel began to be preached, for then it was expedient and
necessary that the Gospel which was unknown, and not heard of before to the
world, should be confirmed by miracles: and therefore we ought not to look for
new miracles in this age wherein we live, because the Gospel is already
sufficiently confirmed by the miracles wrought in that first age of the Church,
by Christ and His Apostles, and them that immediately succeeded. The Papists,
indeed, brag much of miracles that are daily wrought in their Church, but
their miracles are such as Christ foretold: that false Christ's, and false
Apostles should work, and that the Antichrist should work at his coming,
Matthew. 24.24. And they are these, which Paul calls lying signs and wonders,
which notwithstanding he says, are effectual in them who perish, because
they received not the love of the truth. Now, ye see here, there is a promise
of sundry great and excellent things to be wrought by some of the faithful in
the first age of the Church: as namely, casting out of Devils, of speaking with
new tongues, taking away serpents, the drinking of deadly and poysonable
things, without harm, the healing of sick folks, by laying on of their
hands, wherein, I purpose not particularly, to insist, but only to mark some
things generally for our edification. Consider first, the order of these
promises which the Lord makes to them which believe: First, He promises life
and Salvation: thereafter, He promises working of miracles: the promise of
life, is a promise of the greatest miracle, that ever was wrought in the world:
as for other miracles, they are but works, signs and tokens of that life and
Salvation that was to be wrought, which far surpasses all other miracles. The
Lord Himself testifies unto us, that all the miracles which were wrought in
the first age of the Church, were counted but like as many fignes and tokens of
life and Salvation to be wrought by Him. When He says, Matthew. 9.6. That ye may
know, that the Son of man, has authority on earth to forgive sins, I will
restore to health this man that is sick of the Palsy: then He says to the
sick man, Arise, take up thy bed, and go to thine house. Where He lets us
see, that the miracle of bodily health, was a sign and token of a greater
grace and miracle, eue^, of Remission of sins, and life everlasting. Whereupon
we mark this lesson: That Faith is never without some miracle: it has ever
one miracle or other following upon it. Indeed, it has not always with it
such miracles as were wrought in the first age of the Church: as casting out of
devils, healing of diseases: yet it never wants that greatest miracle of all,
the miracle of Regeneration, of life and Salvation, which Christ Himself lets
us see, is more to be marueiled at, than all the miracles here promised: for
when the seventy disciples, who were sent out with power to work miracles,
returned rejoicing that they had wrought such great things, that they had cast
out devils, and healed diseases, He said unto them: Albeit I have given you
power to cast out devils, to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and that nothing
shall hurt you, Nevertheless, in this rejoice not, but rather rejoice that
your names are written in Heaven, Luke 10.17. There He wills them, to count
life and Salvation to be a greater miracle than all others. Peter testifies
likewise, that when the Gentiles in that first age of the Church, saw them
that were converted to the Lord Jesus, not walking after their old manner, in
wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, etc. it seemed strange to them, they
marueiled much, that they ran not with them unto the same excess of riot, as
they were wount to do, 1. Epist. 4.4. Where he tells us, that the conversion
of sinners was a wonder to the Gentiles: and indeed, it was no marvel, that
they counted so of it: for a man truly renewed by the Spirit of grace, and
converted unto Christ, is a wonder of the world: and thou who art renewed by the
Spirit of Jesus, and have gotten an assurance of the Remission of thy sins,
of life and salvation, thou will never seek any new outward miracles, to
confirm to thee the truth of the Gospel: for thine own salvation will
confirm thee more, than all the miracles in the world can do. Again,
consider here, that this gift of working of miracles, follows not ever, nor
absolutely that justifying Faith, but this gift of working of miracles requires
further, another sort of Faith, which we call the Faith of miracles, which is
nothing else, but a special and extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost, whereby
some of the faithful in that first age of the Church, were able to work
miracles and wonders: and this Faith of miracles is grounded upon some
particular promises and sensible persuasions in their hearts, who get that
extraordinary gift, that God by them at such times, and upon such persons, and
such occasions would work miracles. This would be marked against the Papists,
who confound this Faith of miracles with justifying Faith: for they say: to
work miracles, none other Faith is required, but this true Faith, which we
call justifying Faith, whereas, indeed, they are two different Faiths, of
diverse kinds and natures.

Thus shortly of the second promise: Now it rests, that we speak of the third
promise, which we have set down by Matthew in the last words of his Gospel:
there he says, Lo, I am with always unto the end of the world. This promise
the Lord makes unto His Apostles, to whom He had given commission to go into
the world, to preach the Gospel, and to baptize, and with this sweet and
comfortable promise He ends His co^muning, that at this time He had with them:
as in the beginning of His co^muning, to the end He might encourage them the
more cheerfully, and courageously to undertake and discharge that high and
painful calling of the Apostleship, He showed and declared unto them His
great and incomprehensible power which He had given Him, both in Heaven and in
earth: so here He closes up His communing with them with a promise of the
presence of that same incomprehensible power: for, says He, I am with you
always unto the end of the world: A promise most excellent, and full of
heavenly consolation, as if He had said, I, even I, who have all power given
me, both in Heaven and and in earth, I shall be with you, not to remain with you
for a season, but for ever, unto the end of the world, and not at certain
diets, and with any intermission, but always, every day, and at all times.

Mark well the degrees of this promise: First, there is a promise of an
infinite and incomprehensible power: Next, there is a promise of the presence
of this His power with them: Thirdly, He promises that this power shall not be
present with them for a certain time only, but even to the end of the world:
Fourthly, He promises it shall be present unto the end of the world, not by
set diets and days, but without any intermission.

But is this promise made unto the Disciples absolutely, without any condition?
No, it is not absolute, but conditional: and what is the condition? Even that
same which He set down in the words immediately preceding: if the Apostles
teached men to observe all things whatsoever He commanded them: that is, That
they teached these things which He had taught them before, all these things,
and no other thing.

This promise which here He makes to His Apostles, is extended unto the
Ministry in all ages: yea, even to the Ministry, at this present time: for
the LORD says, I shall be with you unto the end of the world: But so it is,
that the Apostles are now dead, they are no more in the world: therefore this
promise is made unto the Ministers of the CHVRCH, to the successors of the
Apostles, who should remain in the Church until CHRIST'S coming to
judgment. Then all Ministers who faithfully discharges their duty in their
calling, and sincerely teaches all these things, and only these things
which CHRIST taught, and commanded them to preach, have in this promise great
matter of comfort and rejoicing. The Lord requires faithfulness and
painfulnesse in the Pastor, in discharging of his calling: and if he labor
faithfully and painfully in his Ministry, let him commit the issue and
success unto Him, who has promised, never to leave His own, but continually
to bless their travels with His presence.

Now as it is required of the Pastor, that he should be painful and careful
in his calling, to the end that he may enjoye this presence: So it is the
duty of the people, to have a care, that the Pastor be not abstracted and
vvithdrawne from his charge by vvordlie affairs: For, says PAVL, no man that
warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, 2. Timoth. 2. 4.
And if so they do, they shall be partakers of this same presence which the
LORD promises here to His Disciples: for the presence which the Lord has
promised and gives to the Pastor, is not for himself only, but it redoundes
to the weal and commodity of the people also: The Pastors blessing, is the
peoples blessing: And by the contrary, the curse that the Lord lays upon the
Pastor, is for a curse to the people, upon whom the Lord will be avenged for
the contempt of the Ministry.

The Papists brag much of this promise, and they gather upon it, That the
Kirk cannot err: for, say they, seeing the LORD has promised to be with
His own unto the end of the world, how can it be possible, that He can
leave His Kirk, that it can err? But if they weigh aright the condition
whereupon the promise is grounded, they may see, that they have no matter of
bragging: For, as we showed you before, this promise, That the Lord will be
with them, is not made absolutely, and in all cases, howsoever they behave
themselves: but upon this condition. He promises His presence, That they teach
men these things, which He has taught them before, that they teach all these
things, only these things, and none other things. So that if they teach
not these things, but their own dreams and fantasies, they have nothing ado
with this promise: for if they keep not the condition, what vvarrant can
they have to look for the promise.

Now how far the Papists are from keeping this condition, from teaching
the doctrine of Christ only, it is more than manifest, and they are blind
that sees it not: for in stead of the doctrine of the Gospel, they teach their
own traditions, dreams, and fantasies: They have banished the Spirit of
Truth, and have bewitched the world with their lies and vanities.
Therefore, seeing the felicity and happiness both of Pastor and people
stands in this, To find the Lords presence with them in this pilgrimage, the
Lord grant, that both Pastor and people may strive carefully to hold fast the
doctrine of the Gospel: and that they may conform their lives thereunto, that
so with confidence they may claim to this promise of the presence of Christ:
To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise and honor, for
evermore: AMEN.

THE LV. LECTVRE, OF THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST.
MARK, CHAP. XXVI.

LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.





ACTS, CHAP. I.










BELOVED BRETHREN IN CHRIST, we have already insisted at length in the
History of the LORDS Resurrection: wherein we showed you, how often He
appeared to His own, and especially to His Apostles: to the end, that not
only they themselves might be more fully persuaded of His Resurrection: but
also with the greater confidence and liberty they might speak thereof to
others. In His last appearing to His Apostles, we saw He gave them a
commission and charge, To go out to the world, to preach the Gospel, and to
baptize, In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: but He
wills them to teach nothing else, but only these things, and all these
things which He had taught them before. And to the end He might the more easily
move them willingly and cheerfully to undertake and discharge this calling;
first He sets down His unspeakable and incomprehensible power whereupon is is
grounded, showing them, that al power in heaven and in earth was given unto
him: Next, He subjoynes a threefold promise of blessing to them in the
discharging of their Ministry. The first is a promise of life and salvation to
them who believe, and are baptized. The second is a promise of th'extraordinary
and miraculous gifts of the H. Spirit. The third is a promise of His own
powerful presence to continue with them unto the end of the world: upon
condition, That they faithfully discharge their calling, and teach these
things, all these things, and only these things, which the Lord had taught,
and no other. Now it rests, that we speak of the History of His Ascension to
Heaven, which we have briefly, and in few words, in th'Euangelistes: for
Matthew and John makes no mention of it: Mark touches it shortly in his
Gospel. Luke also speaks something of it in his Gospel, but he insistes in
it more largely, in setting down the Circumstances of it in the first Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles: In the words which we have presently read, we
will see, how the LORD leads His Disciples out to Bethania, we will see what
conference and communication is betwixt the Lord and them, we will show how He
blessed them, we will see the manner of His Ascension, and what was the
behavior of the Apostles, while He was ascending to Heaven, and looked
steadfastly to the Heaven, as He went up.

Then to come to the words, Luke says, He led them out into Bethania. This was
the place from the which the Lord ascended up to the Heaven: and therefore of
set purpose He leads them out of Jerusalem to this place. They come not to
this place by fortune or chance, they come not there of their own accord, or
upon any foresight that they themselves had: No, but they were led out of
Jerusalem, to see that glorious Ascension of Christ, and to be partakers of His
grace. But who led them out? It is said, The Lord led them out: none comes
to grace by aim, none comes to the place where grace is in dealing by fortune
or chance: No, it is the Lord which leads them, as then the Lord led His
Apostles, as it were by the hand, to Bethania, to see His glory, and to be
made partakers of grace: so it is always by the LORDS secret and powerful
providence, that any man comes to the place where the LORD distributes His
grace: for says CHRIST, No man can come to me, except that Father who has
sent me, draw him, Ioh. Chapter 6. verse 44. Therefore, if thou find at any
time by this Ministry, grace to be communicated into thy soul in His
Church, ascribe never the praise of it to thy self, or to thy travel, but
give the praise and honor of all to the LORD JESUS, who had a care of thee,
and by His gracious providence b^ought thee there. But who are these whom the
Lord leads out? Not all they who heard Him, who knew Him, who had conuersed
with Him, but it is only His Disciples whom the Lord led out, these only
whom He used most familiarly, whom He loved most tenderly, and who in a
manner were His domestiques. The number of them whom the LORD chooses and
leads out to grace at any time is not great, they are but few in respect of
the multitude whom the Lord passes by, but especially at this time it was the
LORDS pleasure to choose but a few to be eyewitnesses of His glorious
Asce^sio^: for it was ye Lords will, that His Ascensio^ should rather be
manifested and made known to the world by hearing, than by seeing: for ye Lord
prefers, and likes better of that faith yt coms by hearing, tho^ of that faith
yt proceeds of seeing: for He says to Thomas, Because thou have seen me,
thou beleeuest: but blessed are these that have not seen, and have believed.
Joh. 20.29. Mark a manifest difference betwixt ye suffering and crucifying of
the Lord, and His Resurrection and Ascension: When ye Lord was crucified al
sort of people beheld Him: there were gathered a great multitude not of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, out of many nations (for it was a solemn
time, the time of ye Pass^ouer,) but there were not so many yt beheld His
Resurrection, nor Ascension: for it was His pleasure to manifest Himself after
His Resurrection to a small number of His own familiars, namely, His disciples
and Apostles: and likewise it was His pleasure, to make choice but of a few of
that same sort to be eyewitnesses of His glorious Asce^sion: for He would have
His glory to be made manifest to ye world rather by the preaching of ye Gospel,
than by the sight of the eyes. Of this difference we learn this lesson for our
instruction, That the shame and ignominy of Christ is offered to be seen of all
sorts of me^: but His glory is manifested only to a small number, even to those
who are saved by His blood. The shame and ignominy of Christ in His members,
is laid to the eyes of all sorts of men: there are none who sees not how vile
and contemptible the faithful are under the cross: but the glory of the
faithful is seen but of a few, eue^ only of those who are ordained to be
partakers of that same glory: For albeit, says John, that now we are the sons
of God, yet it is not made manifest what we shall be. 1. Epist. 3.2. And as
The Apostle Paul says of y^ Jews, Jf they had known the Lord of glory, they
would not have crucified him. 1. Cor. 2.8. So say we of the wicked of the
world, If they knew that glory of the children of God, they would not so
contemn them, despise, and persecute the^ The place yt He leads the^ to, is
said to be Bethania: and Act. 1.12. it is said, They returned to Jerusale^,
from the mount that is called the mount of Olives, near unto which mount was
Bethania: both were near to Jerusalem, about 15. furlonges, or a Sabbath days
journey, about 2. miles, Ioh. 11.18. The Lord of set purpose chose this place
to manifest His glory, wherein before He suffered ignominy. It was in this place
that He wrastled with the fear of death, finding the terrors of the wrath of
God ceazing on His soul, when He said his soul was heavy unto the death. It
was in this place that the band of men of war came and took him. It was in
this place that they bound him, and led him away to that shameful death of the
cross. Therefore in this place the Lord makes a show of His glory: in this
same place He addresses Himself to triumph: from this same place ascends He to
His Heavenly Throne. Mark the lesson in a word. The Lord of necessity must
be glorified in that same place, where before He was dishonored: He must be
honored either in mercy by ye conversion of a sinner, who has despised Him, or
else by the executing of judgeme^t, and pouring forth of vengeance upon
th'obstinate and stubborn contemners. But to go forward to the conference and
communication that was betwixt the Lord and His Apostles alittle before He
ascended to Heaven. This co^fere^ce is set down, Act. 1.6. For after the
disciples were come together to the mount of Olives, they asked him, Lord, will thou at this time restore the kingdom of Israel? The Occasion of this their
question is not set down here: but it is likely, that the Lord at this time has
bin speaking something of that Heavenly Kingdom: and that upon His speech they
have taken occasion to ask this question of th'earthly kingdom. In demanding
of this question they fail many ways: First they fail in curiosity, being
too curious, as the Lords answer imports: Next, they fail in this, that as
yet they think yt He should have been an earthly king and that His kingdom
should be of this world. Thirdly they fail in this, that they desired to
reign and triu^ph before they had foughten sufficiently, and ended their
warfare. This might seem strange, that they profited so little in so long time,
having such fair occasion. Their ignorance cannot be excused for by the space
of 3. years and more they were co^uersant with the Lord, hearing Him preach,
and saw Him work miracles: and after His resurrection sundry times He appeared
to them, and spoke to the^: and in this same time they saw in Him a majesty,
they saw Him clad and invested with Heavenly glory: and yet for all this they
are earthly minded, and think of nothing but of an earthly kingdom. In this
example of ye disciples, we may perceive how dull we are by nature and
incapable of spiritual and Heavenly things. All the outward means of ye world
will not profit us, if there be no more; albeit we heard al Heavenly and
spiritual things never so long, albeit we saw all things never so long, we
will never be a hair the better, except yt we be taught of God, and except
our minds be illuminate, and our hearts be opened by the H. Spirit. Therefore
when we use the outward means, we should pray continually, yt the Lord would
send His H. Spirit to instruct us inwardly, and to join His blessing with
them. Now to come to the Lords answer: first He reproues them for their
curiosity, he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times and the
seasons: and He gives them a good reason, because the Father has put them in
his own power. Men in all ages have bin too curious to inquire the things
which belong not unto them. The Apostles here began curiously to inquire of the
time of the restoring of the kingdom to Israel, and ever since men have
continued curiously to inquire the times and seasons, and namely, the
particular time of the Lords coming to judgment. But the Lord here snibs and
represses this curiosity in the apostles: for what had they ado to search out
the things yt the Lord kept secret to Himself? It is not ye Lords will, that
men at any time should be curious to inquire the particular times, which He
keeps close to Himself, and namely, the particular diet and period of Christ's
coming to judgment, for of that day and hour knows no man, no not The Angels
which are in heaven, Mark 13.32. Next in the answer, He calls them to
remembrance of yt promise which He made to the^ before of ye sending of ye H.
Spirit, and induing them with power from an high. But, says He, ye shall
receive power of the holy Ghost, when he shall come on you. This putting them
in remembrance of ye sending of ye H. Ghost, imports, yt although it was not
long time before made unto the^ yet they thought not of it, nor remembered it
not as it became the^. So yt in the^ we may see what is our natural
disposition concerning spiritual things: we are very careless to think of
the^, yea, for ye most part, we are altogether forgetful of the^. If a promise
were made to us of great earthly benefits (so carnal and earthly are our
hearts) we would think on it day and night: but albeit the promises of Heavenly
things be often renewed to us, hardly ca^ we think of the^, or remember the^.
Thirdly, in this answer He puts the^ in mind of their office and calling to ye
Apostleship, Ye shall be witnesses, says He, to me both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth: as if He had
said unto them, Inquire not curiously of the things which belong not to you,
but look to your calling, and the office which I have chosen you to. And He
sets down what is their calling, Ye must be witnesses. And to whom? Both to Jew
and Gentile. And in what order? First begin at Jerusalem, and Judea, and then
go to Samaria, and to the rest of the world. It is the Lords will, that me^ so
carefully atte^d first upon ye calling that ye Lord has set them into this
life, to be faithful and painful in it, yt in it they may honor their Lord,
and next upon ye promise of grace and salvation yt is promised in the life to
come, that they take no leisure, nor spare no time upon th'inquiring of curious
questions. Of this answer of the Lords we may learn this lesson: the Lord
deals very meekly and gently with his own: their curiosity and wilful
ignorance deserved a more sharp and rough meeting, but the Lord meets the^ not
as they deserved; for albeit that eue^ now he was to leave ye world and ascend
to his Father, and to enter into glory; yet he stays a while with the^, and
with the Spirit of meeknes and wonderful patience he teaches and instructs
the^, who were so gross and carnal minded. That which the Lord did at this
time to his Apostles, that same thing does he daily to his own, in whom he has
once begun to work, he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking flax, he will not put out grace, if it were never in so small a measure,
but he will cherish and nourish it, that it may come to perfection and that ye
little spark may grow to a fire and flame. Albeit we be rude and earthly
minded, and take no pleasure in spiritual things, yet the Lord continues with
great lenity and wonderful patience by his Ministry, to teach and instruct
us. Now to go forward to His Ascension: Before He ascends, He blesses His
disciples: Luke says, He lifted up his hands, and blessed the^. What means
this, that the Lord lifted up His hands to Heaven? Even this, that he conveyed
and drew grace powerfully out of heaven to his disciples: Before He ascended to
Heaven, He drew down grace out of Heaven, to remain with His Apostles, whom
He left behind Him in the earth, when He ascended, according to that which
before His Passion He said to them, Peace J leave you, my peace I give you.
Ioh. Chap. 14. verse. 27. Now when He liftes up His hands, what sort of
blessing gives He them? Was it a common sort of blessing? Was it such a
blessing as one gives to another? No, but He gives them the blessing of God He
gives the^ an effectual blessing. And if we consider who this was that
blessed them, we may see, that of necessity it behooued this blessing to be
effectual: for He was not only a Priest, but a King also: Indeed as a
Priest He blessed them, for it was the Priests office publickelie to bless
the people: as a Priest likewise lifted He up His hands in ^lessing of them:
(for this was a Rite and Ceremony which the Priests were accustomed to use
in their blessing) but as a King He gives them effectually that blessing
which as a Priest He wished unto them: for He was now to sit down in the
Throne of His Kingdom: and therefore that blessing which as a Priest He
wished unto them, He works it effectually in them by His infinite power, as
He is a king. Men may vvish well one to another: men may vvishe peace and
blessing sincerely, and from their hearts to others: but it lies not in their
hands to effectuate and to bring to pass that thing which they wish, but it is
proper to God only, and to Jesus His Son, to make the blessing effectual. One
thing here would be marked well for our comfort: to wit, that Christ has left a
singular blessing to the Ministry of the Gospel: for as before we heard, that
the Lord made a sweet and comfortable promise to this Ministry, eue^, that He
would be always with them unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. Eue^ so, now we
see here, that ye Lord at His departure out of ye world, leaves a special
blessing to ye same Ministry: yea, such a blessing as is not left to any other
calling in the world, no, not to the calling of a King: for ye calling of a
King, and al other callings whatsoever, receives their blessing only in this
blessing, which Christ gives to His Ministry: for except men in all callings
by this Ministry be brought to the obedience of Christ, and to sanctification,
they are accursed: and if we look to the experience which ye faithful find in
their souls, we will find, that yt blessing which the Lord left to His
Ministry at that time is effectual this day: for they find it to be
effectual to work faith, repentance, joy and tranquillity of conscience, and
they find it to be, as th'Apostl. calls it, The ministry of the Spirit, and
the ministry of righteousness, 2. Cor. 3.8, 9: and if there were no more to
testify unto us the effectualnes of this blessing, this were sufficient, that
we see it has continued so long in the world, notwithstanding of all
adversary power, and opposition made thereto: for seeing this Ministry is so
weak, base, and co^temptible in it self, how had it bin possible, yt it could
have continued and endured so long in the world, against the fury, craft, and
assaults of Satan, against the malice, hatred and persecution of men, against
the oppositio^ and practices of the mighty, great and wise men of the world,
except that this blessing, which at His departure He left with it, had bin
effectual; if it had not bin effectual, it had soon euanished, and had bin
rooted out. Now come to the Ascensio^ it self it is set down partly by Mark,
and partly by Luke in his Eua^gel, and in the History of the Acts of
The Apostles in these circumstances: first, Luke says, As He blessed them, He
departed from them, He went alitle from them: Next, He was taken up: Tdirdly,
He was received in a cloud: Fourthly, being received in yt cloud, His Apostles
beholding Him, the cloud to^ke Him out of their sight: Fifthly, being taken out
of their sight by the cloud, He was carried up into heaven. If we weigh and
consider well all these circumstances, we will see, that th'Ascensio^ of our
Lord, was not only exceeding glorious, but also very sensible and visible: for
while He stood in the mids of them, He depa^ted and separated Himself a space
from them, to the end, that they all might the better see Him ascending:
thereafter He was taken up piece and piece, degree by degree, so that sensibly,
piece and piece they might have followed Him with their eyes: then as they are
thus beholding, a cloud interueenes, and takes Him out of their sight. After
this, they see His person no more, but they see yt cloud wherein He was
received to be carried up into heaven: al these circumstances, were very
sensiible: for now He goes not from them on a suddainty, He conueyes not
Himself out of their sight in a moment, as He did with the two Disciples with whom
He sat at table in Emmaus* and no question, the Lord of set purpose would have
His Ascensio^ to be so sensible, to the end yt the disciples who saw it, and
the whole form of it so clearly, might have a settled assurance and full
persuasion in their hearts, to the end. yt with the greater euidency, liberty and
freedom they might preach and proclaim it to the world (for the full persuasion
of the heart made the^ bold and confide^t in preaching, as Paul says Seeing we
have such trust, we use great boldness of speech: yt so ye world hearing the^
speak with such euidency, freedom and boldness of the Lords Asce^sion, and seeing
the^ paint out so vinely and sensibly the whole form and process yt therein
was used, might without any doubt fully believe, yt the Lord was ascended to
heaven* so the Lord had a regard and respect unto His Kirk, and in all the
faithful yt should live in th'ages to come, yea, even of us, who live this day,
when so sensibly and visibly in the presence of His Apostles, He ascended into
heaven. The Lord made not His Apostles eye witnesses of His Ascension so much
for their own cause, as for the Kirkes cause, which by their Ministry was to
be gathered together, and to be brought to the obedience of Jesus: so when you
co^sider^st yt sensible form and progress yt the Lord used in His Ascension
for thy cause, it is thy duty to praise and glorify His Majesty for it. Now
after the Lord is carried up to heaven, what follows? was there no higher
degree of glory? Yes, for Mark says, After He was received into heaven, He
sat at the right hand of God. After He had past through all the visible Heavens,
He was set at the right hand of His Father in the highest Heavens, far above
all principality and power, and might, and domination, and every name that is
named, not in this world only, but also in that which is to come: so that all
things were made subject under His feet, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. and this the Father
had spoken of Him before, when He said, Sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110.1. To sit at the right hand of
God, is to obtain yt highest degree of glory in the heavens: as Mediator, to
have equal power and glory with the Father, to have power over all creatures, to
do with them as He pleases, to have all things under His feet, to be declared
to be ye head of ye Kirk, and that person by who^ the Father immediately guides
and gouernes all things: for as He is ye Son of God, equal with ye Father,
He was glorified with that glory, which He had with the Father, before the
foundations of the world were laid, according as He prayed before His Passion,
Joh. 17.5. and as He is man, He is exalted above every creature, in such sort,
that by ye hand of Christ the man, God gouernes all things in heaven and in
earth: so we see, that ye Lord by degrees passed from glory to glory, and now
He is in such incomprehensibl^ glory, as this mortal eye of man cannot be able
to pierce into. Indeed, the disciples saw His glorious Ascensio^, but they
could not be able to see that highness and sublimity of glory, whereunto He was
exalted, when He sat at the right hand of ye Father. Steue^ saw the heaven,
opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.55. but
how sober and mean a portion of His glory was yt which He saw, in resp^ct of
ye fulness of glory, yt He had the^ in ye heavens? but albeit we be not able with
our bodily eyes to pierce and behold ye greatness of yt glory, whereinto He is
exalted: yet this is our comfort, yt we find sensibly by experience in our own
souls yt Jesus is sitting in his Kingdom with exceeding glory and power, by
these comfortable effects and motions yt He works within us. The Apostles,
albeit they saw Him not sitting at ye right hand of God in glory: yet in yt
same moment yt He sat down in His throne of glory, they found in their own
hearts, his kingly power and that dominion yt He has over al creatures: for
what meaned yt exceeding joy yt they had, after that He was taken out of their
sight, when they were returning to Jerusalem? eue^ this, that Christ was entered
in His kingdom, and that His kingdom and power was effectual into their
souls: and what means these spiritual motions, which are raised up in the
hearts of the godly? this sadness for sin? this unspeakable joy, this peace
and tra^quillity of conscience, this love to God, and desire to see Him? even
this, yt the Lord Jesus is come into His Kingdom, and is now reigning in ye
heavens and yt He has established this Kingdom in our souls: For the
Kingdom of God, says Paul, is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, Romans 14.17. therefore when you find any spiritual motion in thy soul,
take it for a sure argument of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God in His
kingdom. Now having spoken of Christ's Ascension, let us see what was the
Apostles behavior: when they saw the Lord thus asce^d, wh^t did they? It is
said, that they worshipped Him: next, that they looked steadfastly toward
heaven: what moved the^ to worship Him? no question, the sight of a wonderful
glory and Majesty in Jesus: and because at this time they saw Him in an higher
glory and majesty, than ever they did before: therefore of necessity their
worshipping of Him at this time behooved to be in a greater humility, with greater
reverence, and with greater feruency tha^ ever it was before. Indeed they
worshipped Him before, knowing Him to be the Messiah, but their knowledge was
but very mean and sober: but now they see and know perfectly that He is the
Lord of glory, and the glorious judge of the world: and therefore the
worshipping of Him at this time behooved to be in greater reverence, with
greater persuasion and boldness than ever it was before. The sight of that
glorious majesty makes ever the creature in reverence to worship God, and the
greater sight, the greater reverence. The faithful while they live here in
the earth, because by the eye of faith, in the mirror of the Gospel, they see
the glory of the Lord, therefore in humility they worship His majesty: but
because they see Him not clearly as He is, but darkly and obscurely, therefore
their worshipping here is not like that worshipping yt shall be when they shall
see Him face to face: for when we shall see him as he is, we shall worship Him
with greater reverence, confidence, boldness and liberty, than ever we did
before: for then we shall be made like unto Him: that is, we shall be made
conformable to the image of His glory, and we shall shake off all this
mortality and corruption, wherewith The Apostles were clad at this time when
they worshipped Him ascending to Heaven: So that that worshipping and adoring
of the Lord, which the faithful shall give Him in that great day when He
desce^ds from the Heavens to judge the world shall surpass exceedingly and by
many degrees that worship which the Apostle^ gave Him, when they saw Him asce^d
into Heaven: for the^ there shall be nothing to hinder them. Now in the mean
time while the Lord is ascending to Heaven, as they worship Him, so likewise
they follow Him with their eyes, and looked steadfastly toward heaven, where
they saw Him ascending* which testifies plainly, that their hearts were lifted
up to the Heavens, together with Christ: and as Christ ascended, so their
hearts ascended, and were lifted up to Heaven, by the power and ve^tue of that
same Ascension and glory of Christ, in whom they believed: for they that
believe in Christ, and are conjoined to Him by faith, of necessity must by that
b^nd of faith be lifted up, together with Him to the Heavens: for that soul
that is linked to Him by faith, cannot be severed from Him, but it must follow
Him wheresoever He goes Mark this lesson: when ye heart is lifted up to Heaven,
it will lift ye eye of ye body to Heaven also, and ye sight and sense of ye
Ascension of Christ liftes up the heart to Heaven: for where there is in ye
heart a sense and feeling of ye power of Christ's Ascensio^, of necessity both
the soul and the eyes of the body must be lifted up to Heaven. And this lifting
up of the eyes of the body, proceeding from the lifting up of ye heart to
Heaven: and this lifting up of ye heart proceeding from ye feeling of ye power
of th'Asce^sio^ of Jesus, which now ye faithful find, is a sure argument and
undoubted warra^^ to ye faithful, yt one day the eye, ye heart ye soul, ye
body, yea, ye whole man shall be lifted up to heaven: both soul and body in yt
great day, when ye Lord appears to judgeme^t, and shall enjoy His glorious
presence: and therefore ye godly have great cause continually to be waiting and
looking for yt glorious apppearing of Christ (and happy art thou, who art ever
waiting for it) for at yt glorious appearing thou sh^lt be partaker of glory with
him: to who^ with ye Father, and H. Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory,
Amen.

THE LVI. LECTVRE, OF THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST.
MARK, CHAP. XVI.

LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.

GOD, Amen.

ACTS, CHAP. I.










THE last day, well-beloved Brethren in Christ, we entered into the history of
Christ's ascension to heaven. We heard of the circu^sta^ces of it. The Lord led
them out to Bethania, to the mount of Olives, from the which place He ascended
unto heaven: we heard of the co^muning yt was betwixt Christ and his disciples,
who asked of him, Lord, will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Jsrael?
The Lord reproues this their curiosity, It is not for you to know the times and
the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. And then he tells what
they ought to do: First they should be mindful of the promise of ye H. Spirit:
Next, they should look to their own calling, to bear witness of him to the
world. We heard how before his Ascension he blessed them: we heard of the
manner of his Ascension, it was very sensible and visible, He went a little
space from them, and was taken up, and received in a cloud, he was taken out
of their sight, and carried up to heaven: This was done, the ^oth The Apostle
themselves might be persuaded, and also with greater boldness and assurance
persuade others of His Ascension. We heard, that when He was taken out of their
sight, He was placed at the right hand of God, and exalted to that sublimitie
of glory, that all the creatures in heaven and earth are subdued to him. And
last we heard what was the behavior of The Apostles, In the mean time they
worshipped him, and looked steadfastly to ^he heavens. This day by Gods grace
we shall follow out and put an end to this history. In the words which we
have read, we will s^e what falls out, While the disciples are looking up to
the heavens, two Angels are sent to them by Christ, who partly reproues them,
and partly comforts them We will see likewise what the disciples do after
this, They retu^ne to Jerusalem with great joy: when they come there, they go
up to an upper chamber: but they stay not there, but they go to the Temple,
and remain there continually praising and lauding God: and last they went out
and preached the Gospel every where, and the Lord gave them a good success,
for He wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signs that followed.
Luke, in the Acts, tells us, that while they looked steadfastly toward heaven,
as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel. As they were
worshipping Him, the Lord sent incontinent from His Heavenly Throne Legates
and Ambassadors: And who were they? eue^ Angels: two in number, and in form
and outward shape like to men, and therefore they are said to be two men, and
were clothed in white and glorious apparel. Mark the lesson in a word. Christ
sits no soone^ down at the right hand of the Father, but He makes His disciples
(whom He left in the earth behind Him) not only to know yt He had a kingly
power, whereby He commands the very Angels themselves; but also to know, that
singular care and affection that He carried to them, which He testifies, by
sending these Angels from heaven, for their cause and for their consolation.
This kingly power of Christ, and this care that He has of His own, continues
eue^ this day in the Kirk, and every of ye faithful find the proof and
experience of it to their great joy and comfort. Now, let us see, what these
Angels say to ye Apostles: in their speech to them: First, they reprove: then
they comfort them: first, they said, Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gazing unto
Heaven: they reprove them, because they stood idly gazing and looking to the
heaven, whereas the Lord had commanded them to return to Jerusalem, that there
they might wait for the Spirit, that was promised them, that having gotten the
Spirit, they might go out to the world* and preach the Gosp^l to every
creature, as the Lord had commanded them. This reproof of The Angels imports,
that they contented themselves too much with idle looking and g^^ing, and that
they were too unmindful of that great and high calling whereunto the Lord had
ordained them. Of this reproof we learn this lesson: it is not the Lords will,
that any man should be idle in the world, nor that he content himself with a
bare and idle contemplatio^ of ye creatures of God: No, not of ye best of them:
it is not the Lords will, yt we stand idly gazing upon the very heavens
whereunto the Lord has ascended, and now is in glory: No, it is His will, that
all men all their days be painfully exercised in some calling, wherein they
may both glorify God, and do good unto men. Indeed, it is true: it is the
Lords will, that men should always have their affections set above, and their
hearts lifted up to heaven, and that they have their eyes set upon God, upon
Christ, upon that glory which is to be revealed: but in the mean time, while
men are thus exercised, they should be exercised likewise in some honest and
lawful calling. The Apostle Paul by his practice lets us see, what should be the
behavior of a Christian: While he looked not to the things that are seen,
but to the things that are not seen, 2. Cor. 4.18. While he choosed to remove
out of the body, and to go and dwell with Christ, 2. Cor. 5.8. While he minded
not earthly things, but had his conversation in heaven, from whence he looked
for his Savior, even the Lord Jesus, Philip. 3.20. contented he himself,
think ye, with this speculation? Was he in the mean time idle? had he not
another calling? Yes, he was very diligently exercised in the Ministry: For,
says he, we covet, that both dwelling at home, and remoouing from home, we may
be acceptable to Him: for we must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, that every man may receive the things which are done in his body,
according to that he has done whether it be good or evil: and therefore
knowing that terror of the Lord, we persuade men, and bring them unto the
faith, 2. Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. So Paul, when he was looking to heavenly things, he
was in the mean time diligently exercised in his Apostleship, in bringing men
to Christ: eue^ so it becomes every faithful man, so to have his heart and his
affections set upon heaven, and heavenly things, yt in ye same mean time, in
some honest and lawful calling, he may be doing some good in y^ earth: and on
the other part, when he is busy laboring and exercised in his calling, he
should have his eyes lifted up to God, and should have his heart, his affections
and conversation in ye heavens: for except that in all things which we do, we
have ye Lord and His glory before our eyes, it is not possible, yt we can do
any thing well and uprightly. Then in a word, ye see here ye Lord by these
Angels, co^demnes idle speculatio^ and co^templatio^, without any exercise in
any lawful calling. This serves to condemn these idle bellies, ye Monks of ye
Roman Kirk, who content themselves with bare and idle speculatio^, having no
regard in ye mean time, yt they may be exercised in any lawful calling, wherein
they may either glorify God, or do good to me^: yea, they are so far from doing
good, yt by ye contrary they hurt ye Kirk of God exceedingly by bringing in
their dreams and fa^tasies yt they have devised in their idle brains, to
corrupt and pervert men's minds: ye Lord never allowed nor blessed such a life:
ye Lord abhors such idleness: and if ye Angels reprove ye Apostles for gazing to
heaven, where they saw with their eyes ye Lord Jesus to ascend, which by
appeara^ce to ma^s judgment, was a very good exercise, to have their hearts
fixed on Christ, and their eyes upon ye place whither He ascended; what would ye
Angels say to these idle belly gods, who withdraw themselves from all honest
callings, and live upon ye sweat of other men's brows, under ye pretense of
spiritual exercise? now after ye Angels have reproved ye Apostles: next, in ye
2. part of their speech, they raise the^ up, and co^forts the^, while they say,
This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as ye have
seen Him go into heaven. They comfort them, by putting them in hope, that He
shall return: yea, return in glory: and such a glory, as they saw Him ascend
with: and so upon hope of His glorious returning in that great day: they will
The Apostles to comfort themselves against all trouble and distresses, that they
might be subject unto ye time of their remaining in ye earth: Whereupon we may
perceive what is the ground whereupon the solid consolation of a Christian
soul arises. It arises even from the hope of the glorious returning of the
Lord Jesus again to Judge the world. There is nothing that furnishes such joy
to the faithful soul, as this hope does. Indeed, it is true, the Lord gives
us other grounds of consolation while we are here: and namely, He gives us His
Spirit, to counsel and guide us through all the difficulties of our pilgrimage:
and the joy that the faithful find in His presence is very great: He gives us
Faith also to comfort us, whereby in some measure presently we feel the
presence of Christ, and His spiritual graces in our souls: but except with ye
Spirit and Faith, we had a hope, yt the Lord Jesus should return again in His
own time in glory, we could not have solid joy and consolation: for if in this
life only we hoped in Christ, and had no hope yt He would return again in
glory, and raise our mortal bodies from ye dead: the^, as ye Apostle says, of
all men we were most miserable, 1. Cor. 15.19. and why should not ye hope of
this returning comfort our souls, and make them to rejoice? for at His
returning, we look and hope for ye glorifying of these our bodies, and for
eternal life. Paul says, That from the heavens we look for the Savior, even,
the Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto His glorious body, Philip. 3.20.21. And when it shall be made manifest, we
shall be made like Him, for we shall see Him as He is, 1 John 3.2 Yea, we have
greater cause of joy and comfort of the hope of His returning again, tha^ all
ye Apostles had of ye sight of His ascending to heaven in their presence: for
ye ascension of ye Lord, albeit it was very glorious and comfortable to the^,
yet it changed not their bodies, nor made the^ like His glorious body, but His
glorious returning again from the heavens, shall change both their bodies, and
our vile and corruptible bodies, and make them conformable to His glorious
body. Now happy is ye man, who earnestly looks and waits for the blessed and
glorious coming again of the Lord to judgment: for yt hope shall comfort and
uphold him in all his troubles and distresses. Now, come to yt disciples part:
we have sundry things expressed what they do: and ye first is, after ye Angels
reproved them for their standing and gazing to ye heavens, it is said, They
returned to Jerusalem with great joy. They take well with the reproof they
stay no longer gazing there, but according to ye Lords direction they go to
Jerusalem, to wait for yt Spirit which He promised to them: they obey ye Lords
commandment, and they obey with great joy. But what made them so to rejoice?
This joy proceeded partly from ye sight of His glorious ascensio^ into heaven,
which they saw with their eyes: partly, from yt which they heard by ye Angels
of His glorious returning, and descending again out of ye heavens, yet all this
which both they saw and heard, would not have wroght so great a joy in the^,
except ye Lord Jesus who was sitting in ye heavens, at ye right hand of ye
Father, had bin effectual in them, and had powerfully wroght this joy in their
souls: for this joy that ye holy Spirit works in ye hearts of ye Lords Elect,
is a sure argument, and infallible demo^stratio^, yt ye Lord Jesus is reigning
in ye heavens: for the Kingdom of God is righteousness, and joy, and peace in
the holy Gh^st, Romans 14.17. Now, if ye will compare this joy, which at this
time they had, with all the joy yt ever they had before: yea, even when ye Lord
Jesus was walking with them in the flesh, and they enjoyed His bodily presence,
ye shall find yt this joy surpassed, by many degrees all their preceding joy:
whereby we may learn this lesson, that neither ye bodily presence of ye Lord
Jesus augments or perfectes ye joy of ye soul, neither His bodily abse^ce
stays or hinders any wise yt joy, but yt all this joy which ye faithful find,
proceeds from the effectual presence and powerful operation of ye holy Spirit
in the soul. The gross and carnal Papists think, they cannot have matter of
rejoicing, except in ye Lords Supper they have ye body of Christ bodily, and
locally present: that is, except yt with ye mouth of the body they eat, devour
and swallow up the very body and flesh of Jesus Christ, and except that after
that same manner they drink His blood: but vain Papist, thou deceiuest thy
self: for neither does the bodily presence furnish joy, neither does the
bodily abse^ce hinder joy, but all true joy that the soul finds, proceeds
from the effectual presence and operation of the Spirit. Yet to speak
something further of this purpose. It would be narrowly considered, what could
be the cause and ground of this joy of the Disciples: for if we look to it by
the outward appearance, they had little matter or cause of rejoicing at this
time when the Lord is gone from them. Indeed, when the Lord Jesus was with
them, when He led them out into Bethania, any man might think they had matter
of rejoicing, to follow such a gracious guide: but now, when He has left the
earth, and ascended to heaven, and left them behind Him, what matter could they
have of so great joy in their returning to Jerusalem? I answer:
notwithstanding they wanted now the bodily presence of Christ, yet they wanted
not matter of great joy: for in stead of His bodily presence, the Lord gave
them Faith and Hope, Faith apprehending and taking hold of the Lord Jesus,
sitting in the heavens, in glory at the right hand of the Father: Hope waiting
constantly for His blessed and glorious returning again in the appointed time
to Judgment. This Faith and Hope that the Lord gives us in this pilgrimage,
recompenses sufficiently the bodily absence of the Lord Jesus from us: if we
have Faith and Hope, we have evermore matter of rejoicing: where Faith and Hope
is, they bring ever with them patience and joy, even in the mids of all
afflictions. The Apostle Paul declares this by his own experience, For the
Gospels sake, says he, I suffer these things, but I am not ashamed: for I know
whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which
I have committed to him against that day. 2. Tim. 1.12. There he lets us see
what made him to be so patient under afflictions, to wit, the sense of the
power of Christ, which he found in his soul by faith, by the which power he
was persuaded, that Christ was able to keep in the heavens that life which he
had committed unto him, and the hope that he had of His glorious returning in
that great day, wherein the Lord should render him that which before he had
committed unto him to be kept. The soul yt has this faith and hope, has no
cause to complain of His bodily absence, for they recompense it abunda^tlie:
but if thou want this faith, apprehending thy Savior with all His graces, and
this hope waiting patie^tly for His returning, thou can have no true matter
of rejoicing, albeit thou had al y^ outward benefits of ye world heaped
abundantly upon thee. Now come to ye next thing that the disciples do when
they are returned to Jerusalem: it it said, that they went up into an upper
chamber (then is reckoned out particularly who they were) where abode both
Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartlemew, and
Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas James brother:
and after he subjoynes in a general word, The women, and particularly, Mary the
mother of Jesus, and his brethren. These were they who most familiarly
conuersed with Jesus, and whom he kept together while he was in the world: and
now when he is gone out of ye world, and ascended to heaven, they abide
together. And what was their exercise? They all continued with one accord in
prayer and supplication. This was an holy exercise: they severed themselves
from ye rest of ye world, and withdrue themselves from worldly impedime^ts, and
kept themselves alone together, to the end they might entertain and nourish yt
joy which they found of the beholding of yt glorious Asce^sion of Christ, and
through ye hope yt they had of his glorious returning again to judgeme^t,
whereof The Angels had instructed the^. Then mark the lesson, they yt rejoice
together in Jesus, desire to be severed from the common society of me^, and
from outward distractions and impediments, and desire to remain and live
together. The children of God delight and take pleasure in the society one of
another: and good reason they so do, for when this life is ended, they shall
remain and live together in heaven without any seuering. Yea, further, al
spiritual graces are acquired and entertained only in the society of the
Saints* and without this society no faith, hope, joy, nor grace of Christ ca^
be gotten or entertained (al grace yt is given a man, is given to him as a
member of yt body, as to one of the Saints. Therefore when Paul speaks of any
grace or benefit yt the Lord is to bestow on any faithful man, commonly he
uses to say, that that grace is withal the Saints: as when he wishes to the
Ephesians, the sense of the breadth, the length, the depth, and the height of
that love of God in Christ, he wishes they might be able to comprehend it with all the Saints, Ephesians. 3.18. Likewise when he prays yt ye Thessalonians, might
have their hearts established in holiness before God, he craves that this
establishme^t might be with all the Saints, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. and speaking of ye
riches of ye glory of ye inheritance, he says, you shall never get it but among
ye Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. for as one member being cut off from ye body, can receive
no sap nor life from it: even so if thou be cut off from ye socitie of ye
Saints, from ye Kirk of God, you shall never get any grace of Christ: and to
conclude, our joy and blessedness will be perfected in the kingdom of heaven in
ye society and fellowship of the Saints. Many me^ despise and disdain ye
society of ye Lords Saints here on earth, they count them vile, contemptible
and the offscourings of the world: they scarcely will give them a countenance:
yet in the mean time they flatter themselves foolishly, that they shall be in
heaven, as soon as they: but if thou have no pleasure in their society here
in earth, thou shall find, thou shall never get that privilege, to enjoy any
grace or blessing with them in the heaven: I give thee this doom, and the Lord
shall ratify it one day. Now when the disciples are met together in the upper
chamber, they stay not there, but Luke, in the last words of his gospel says,
that They were continually in the Temple praising, and lauding God. And this is
the third thing that ye disciples do, after they have stayed for a space in ye
upper chamber, occupied in holy exercises, in prayer and supplication: they
begin to be more bold, and they take greater courage unto them, and they go
out into a public place, to the Temple, to use these same spiritual
exercises, which they used in the upper chamber: for the Apostles, with the
Lords brethren, with Marie his mother, and other holy women assembled
publicly in the Temple, and there praised and glorified God. We see here,
what are these means whereby spiritual graces are entertained and increased in
ye society of ye Saints: to wit, the preaching of the Gospel, prayers and
supplications, praising and blessing of God in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual
songs, and holy communication: without these holy exercises, no faith, no hope,
no joy, no grace of Christ, can either be obtained or entertained and
increased: if thou contemnest and despisest these exercises, thou need never
to look for grace. Again, we see here, yt they assemble as freque^tly, in as
great number as they may or can in ye most public and solemn place they could
find: for they came together with one accord in ye Temple: and this they do, to
ye intent, yt both greater glory might redou^d to ye Lord, and greater joy and
comfort to themselves: the more frequent that ye assemblies of ye Saints be,
the more public and solemn the place of their meeting be, the greater and the
more effectual is the Lords presence among them, the greater is their joy, the
greater glory redounds to God: for if the Lord has promised, That where two or
three are gathered together in his name, there he will be in the mids of the^*
Mat. 18.20. Much more where the Saints are frequently and in great number
gathered together in a public and solemn place for spiritual exercises,
will the Lord manifest His powerful presence among them. The fourth and last
thing that The Apostles do is set down by Mark in the last verse of his
Gospel, where we have two things expressly mentioned: First, the going out of
the disciples to preach to the world: Next, the success that the Lord gave to
their preaching: These two points comprehend the sum and substance of all the
history of th'Acts of The Apostles. Then first he says, They went forth and
preached every where. That grace yt they got themselves, they are careful to
communicate it to others. But when was this that they went out into the world?
Was it immediately after the Lords Ascension? Was it before they received the
holy Spirit, and were sufficiently furnished with grace themselves? No, but
they stayed still in Jerusalem, according to the Lords commandment, til they
got that promised Spirit, with His graces: Then as soon a^ they have received
the H. Spirit with His graces, and were sufficienly furnish^d themselves, they
go out to communicate that grace to the world, wherewith they themselves were
replenished, beginning at Hierusa^e^ then going throughout all Judea, then to
Samaria, and last, to the utmost parts of the earth. This doing of the disciples
serves to teach these who intend to ent^r into that holy calling of the
ministry, how they ought to behave the^s^lues. They must not sudde^ly and
rashly go out to preach the Gospel, before they be well furnished themselves:
but they should keep themselves close using holy means and exercises, till
they find themselves to be furnished with grace in some measure: but being once
furnished with grace, it is the Lords will that they keep themselves no more
close, but that they go out and communicate that same grace unto others: for
the Lord gives them no spiritual graces to keep to themselves: but to the end
that they may employ them to the weal and edification of others. Men should
beware of these two extremities: first, that they presume not to go out to
preach to others, till they be first well furnished themselves: next, when
they are furnished with grace, that they let not Gods graces rest within
themselves, but that they use them cheerfully for the benefit of the Kirk.
But if we consider more narrowly this going out of the disciples, we will find
it to be extraordinary and miraculous: it fell out altogether unexpected of
the Jews no, the Jews never thought that things should have fallen out so,
either concerning Christ Himself, or His disciples: for as concerning Christ,
they thought they should never have heard any more of Him except cursed and
detestable speeches of Him: for they had now handeled Him shamefully, they had
railed on Him, and crucified Him, putting Him to an ignominious death: and
after He was buried and risen, they persuaded the guarde, yt watched the
sepulcher, to noise abroad, that his disciple^ had come by night, and stolen
him away: so they thought there should have been no more of Him: But behold,
upon a sudden, the Lord (unexpected of them) by His powerful providence,
makes His glory to be sounded throughout the whole world: and whereas they
thought He should have been buried for ever in shame, He is exalted to a
wonderful glory. And as concerning the disciples, The Jews thought they durst
never have presumed to have opened their mouths again to speak of the Name
of Christ: for they thought they were all but silly based bodies, who sled
away when their Master was taken, and were offended at His ignominious death,
and terrified and astonished with that sorrowful spectacle that they saw, when
He hung upon the cross, neither durst they presume to meet together again
openly for fear of their lives. But while the Jews are thus thinking, and
believe that there shall never be any mo^e word of Christ, behold, upon a
sudden, when they think nothing less, His disciples come out publicly in
their presence, and before the whole world, holding out, and bearing before
them yt crucifi^d man, boldly charging the world to believe in Him. From
whence comes this, that they who before were so d^shed and based, that sledde
away before, durst now meet together so openly, and preach with such boldness
and liberty Him of whom before they were ashamed? Even from that
incomprehensible and vvonderfull power of Christ their King, who was now
sitting in the Heavens in glory, and who according to His promise sent upon
them His holy Spirit, and endued them with power from an hight. Now the last
thing is the success that the Lord gives unto their preaching: He says, The
Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signs that followed. If
ye read th'Acts of The Apostles, ye will see the success has been marvelous:
for within a short space, by their Ministry, they brought great multitudes,
not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles, to the obedience of Christ,
and by them suddenly the face of the world was changed. The cause of this great
success th'Euangelist marks to be the Lords vvorking with them, and
confirming the word that they preached with signs and wonders. When it is
said, that the Lord wrought with them, we may not think, that they were the
chief workers, and the Lord but an helper to them: No, the Lord is ever the
chief worker, and His faithful servants but work together with Him, in the
building of that spiritual house unto the Lord, He being the chief builder,
and His servants but work with Him: So Paul calls them, workers together
with God, 2. Cor. 6.1. All the success of the Gospel is His, His servants are
only instruments, using the means: Paul plants, Apollo waters, but God gives
the increase, 1. Cor. 3.6.9. Now as we saw in their going out to the world, and
in their preaching with boldness, that Christ's power was wonderfully
manifested: even so in this great and glorious success that they have in their
preaching, that same power of Christ is as wondefully manifested. If we compare
this success which the Gospel had in that first age of the Kirk of Christ,
with that success which it has now adays, we will find a great difference:
Many more were called then, than there are now, for then at one preaching
thousands were converted: but now, at many preachings scarcely will one be
converted. And what means this, seeing the Gospel is taught now in that same
sincerity that it was then? Even this, that by all appearance the Lord has
gathered in already the most part of them who are to be saved, and the number
of these that rest to be called and saved, is few in these days, in respect of
that great multitude of them who were called and saved in the days of
The Apostles: The great harvest is gathered in already, only glaininges now
remain. And on the other part, it importes, that there is a great number
ordained to wrath and destruction, and therefore they are not converted by the
preaching of the Gospel. If our Gospel, says Paul, be hidden, it is hidden to
them that perish, 2. Cor. 4.3. Now to end here: Seeing all the success of the
Gospel proceeds from the powerful presence of Christ by His Spirit, the Lord
grant, that so long as He gives us liberty to use these outward means, He
would make us find the powerful working of the Spirit, concurring with the
means; that we may turn to Christ, and so be assured, that we shall be
saved from that wrath which is to come in that great day of the appearing of
the LORD JESUS: To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all praise,
Honor, and Glory for ever and ever: AMEN.

FINIS.

