AN EXPOSITION ON THE FOVRTEENE first Chapters of GENESIS, by way of Question
and Answer.

COLECTED OVT OF Ancient and Recent Writers: Both briefly and
subtilly*propounded and Expounded.

BY ABRAHAM ROSSE of Aberden, Preacher at St. MARY'S near South-Hampton, and
one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

LONDON.

Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Anth: Vpphill, and are to be sold at the
White-Lyon* in Paul's Churchyard. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, FRANCIS, Lord VERVLAM, Lord high Chauncellor of
ENGLAND, etc.
In this Universe (Right Hon:)
THere are only two things that are the objects both of Contemplation and of
Admiration, that is, the Creator, and the creature: amongst the Creatures only
two, Angels and Men; in Man only two parts; the body and soul; in the soul,
only two faculties, the mind and the will; (...) the mind, two things only;
GOD (...) his word: the Word of God is twofold; internal and external: the
external word is twofold; spoken and written: the written word has two
parts; the old, and new Testament; the old contains two, Moses and the
Prophets; and Moses speaks of these two we formerly mentioned, which only
are the objects of our contemplations; even the Creator, and the creature: the
Creator we know via negationis, eminentiae, and causalitatis? but we know the
creatures, if they be sensible, Cognitione sensitiua? if not, intellectiua: but
properly in this life we know not God, in regard of his Essence, (for how shall
we know him, of whom there can not be framed either Species intelligibiles or
sensibiles, seeing that knowledge is perspecies;) yet in part we know him, in
regard we have some knowledge of his personal and essential properties, of
his effects and operations.

Which knowledge is but small, because our finite science cannot comprehend
that infinite Essence. For if a shell cannot contain the Sea, which is a
creature; much less can our souls him, that is our Creator. The cause then
why the Owl can not behold the Sun, is in the eyes of the Owl, not in the
Sun: so, that we cannot know God perfectly is not in God, who is most
perfect, but in us that are imperfect? and quidquid recipitur, recipitur
admodum recipientis, non ad modum recepti. Then our knowledge is so weak, that
we neither know the first effector, whose essence is most excellent; neither
his first effect (I mean the first matter) whose existence is most impotent.

Yet a more eminent knowledge of our Maker have we than the Pagans, who only
know him by his works, but we by his words: they by contemplation; we by
inspiration: they by senseless Images, we by his essential Image: they by
painted and carved stones; we by that stone which the builders did refuse,
which became the head of the corner, which was cut out of the mountain without
hands, which brake all their Images to powder, upon which are seven eyes, even
that tried and precious stone, that was laid in Sion: by him (I say) in whom
the Godhead dwells bodily, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
know ledge, have we the knowledge of our Creator; without whom, our science is
but ignorance, and our meditations, vexations.

This is that internal word, (...), by whom, and by whose spirit was spoken
and written this externell word contained in the Scripture, (...), in the which
word, the Creator and the creature is only to be known, not only in all, but
in every part thereof, no less than the soul is all, in all the body, and all
in every part of the same: so is knowledge in this word. Now this external
word differs from Christ the internal word of the Father, as in us the word,
which is in our mind, does differ from that, which is in our mouth and books:
our internal speech and reason, is generated in the soul, and of the soul,
and is coetaneall with the soul: so is Christ begotten in the Father, and of
the Father, ard is coeternall with the Father; but the word that is in out
mouth and books, is accidental, and the effect of our internal word; so is
that word, which is in the Scripture, and in the mouth of Christ's servants
accidental, and the effect of Christ the internal word of the Father; who is
both ratio and oration patris, for (...) is both our souls, cognitione directa,
do understand many things that are without the soul, but cognitione reflexa,
she understands her self, and then, idem est intelligens and id quod
intelligitur; so God does know all his creatures, which are but his effects:
but in understanding himself from all eternity, he does beget that knowledge
of himself, and in himself, which is himself, even Christ* his own wisdom
and knowledge.

Yet there is great relation between Christ, Gods internal Word, and the
Scripture, his external word, for as none knows the Father but by the Son,
his word internal; so none knows the Father and the Son, but by the
Scripture, his Word external. As the internal word was, Principium essendi,
the beginning of the creatures; so the external is Principium cognoscendi, the
beginning of knowledge. As nothing did exist before the word internal, so
nothing was spoken before the word external. As by the internal Word the
world was created: so by the external word the world is instructed. As that
word was conceived of the holy Ghost: so this word was inspired by the holy
Ghost. As that word was persecuted by the Jews, and crucified by the Roman
Pilate: so this word has been falsified by the Jews, and wounded by the
Roman Prelate. As it was held unlawful for the People to co^uerse with that
Word^ so it was held unlawful, for the Lay people to converse with this word.
As the Jews did more regard their traditions than that word; so the Romans do
more regard their unwritten lies, than this Word. As that Word was bu^ied in a
garden* and kept sure from his Disciples: so was this word buried in an
unknown tongue, and kept close from Christians: and as this word, in despite
of the Jews* was restored to life; so this word, in dispite of the Popes, is
brought ^orth again to light.

This is that word, the Author, object, subject, end, and ground whereof, is
God, for verity admirable; for antiquity ^enerable; for sanctity incomparable;
for ^tility inestimable: here is light for the ^lind, life for the dead, food
for the ^ungry, drink for the thirsty: here is the ^ee of life, the fountains
of living wa^rs, Manna the food of Angels, pearls and other rich Jewels; here
is a banquet of many dishes; an Apothecaries shop with many medicines; a sweet
garden* of many flowers; an Armour-house with many weapons; here is salt to
season, milk to strengthen, wine to comfort, and honey to sweeten; here the
cold may be warmed, the weary refreshed, the naked clothed, and the filthy
cleansed. If thou desire light and perfection, here is V^im and Thummim; if
the sight of thy sins, here is the golden candle stick, if thou will wash thy
hands and feet, here is the brazen lauer? will thou be Purged from they
Leprosy? here is the river Jordan; will thou florish*like a Bay tree? thou
must be planted by this riue^* will thou bring forth much fruit? thou must be
sown with this seed; will thou sacrifice thy sins to God? thou must kill them
with this sword; will thou go to the kingdom of heaven? this is the only way;
here is the fiery Pillar and the cloud to conduct thee to Canaan; and ^ere is
the Star that will lead the to find out the Son of righteousness, Jesus
Christ that bright morning Starte, with whom we shall shine in eternity of
glory, as Stars in the firmament.

In this word then must we conucrse both day and night, not in curious
^earching, and prodigious speculation; but in serious weeping, and religious
a^oration; neither must our minds be op^ressed with terrestrial and infernal
occupations: but they must be filled with ^elestall and supernall meditations.
Therefore if we will profit here, we must last off all carnal affection, that
we ^ay receive for our weary souls eternal refection: for if no beast could
^uch the mountain, and hear Gods ^aw: why should beastly minds touch ^e
bible, and read Gods Law? And in ^arching this Word, let us not in it ^arch for
riches and honor to our selves, which is to seek for dirt among^ Jewels, and
poison amongst medica^ ments, to overthrow our selves: but l^ us search for
him, who only is sufficien^ to content our souls within our bodies* as he was
the only efficient to present our souls into our bodies. Therefore w^ conclude
with Augustine, Scripture and creatura ad hoc sunt, vt ^pse qu^ratur, ipse
diligatur, and qui ipsam creauit, and q^ illam i^spirauit.

The internal and eternal generation of the word, was not known to the
Gentiles: but was obscured with an obscure fable of Minerua, begotten of
I^piters brain, by the which also they di^ signify learned notions conceived
i^ the mind, and expressed by word or writ.

Then, to be short (right Honorable) here I do offer to your tuition an^
fruition my Miner^a, not begotten o^ my brain, but in my brain; neither i^
she armed with a helmet, (...), and (...) spear to terrify M^mus; and
therefore ^e more desirous she is to shelter her^lfe under the shadow of your
Honors ^tronage, being persuaded that you ^e both a Patron and a pattern of
lear^ng, the fruits whereof have not only ^freshed the-hearts and ears of
great ^rittaine: but with Dedalean wings they ^ue bin transported beyond the
Ocean; (...) that Rhodan^s, Betis, and Rhen^s, have ^asoned their silver
streams with the ^licious taste of your learned fruits. ^hen what remains,
quam vt ocior Icar^

Visas gementis littora Bosp^ri,
Sirt^sque Getulas c^norus,
Ales Hypereb^rosque campos?
Moreover, your Honor being a Father ^d Patron of justice, if any wrong be
^fered to her by M^mus, she may bold^ fly to the Chancery for succor: there^re,
I hope, that as your Honor has ^rmitted your glorious titles to grace ^r
Frontispice; so you will not refuse to beautify her with your gracious aspec^
and respect. That GOD, which hat^ exalted you to so great dignities in thi^
world, preserve your body and soul, and crown you in the World to come with
blessed Immortality.

Your Honors, in all duty, ever to command* ALEXANDER ROSS^

THE ARGUMENT.
Q. WHo wrote these books of Moses?
A. Himself: proof; he was the first ^at writ in the world. Secondly, The
holy ^host testifies the same, Exo. 24. 4. Deu. ^1. 9. and Christ, John 1. 45.
and 5. 46.

Q. When wrote he this first book;
A. Before the Israelites went from E^ypt: R^as. 1. Because then, feeding his
^ather in-lawes sheep 40. years, in Ma^ian, he was most at leisure to write.
Rea. 2. ^o comfort the Hebrews, being oppressed ^ith Egyptian servitude; for
in this Book (...) read the life and death of their Anceours; their courage;
patience; virtue affliction, Gods promises to Abraham, that after 400. years
serui^de in Egyp^ they should be delivered, and enjoy the la^ of Canaan.

Q. How came Moses to the knowledge of these things contained in the Book?
A. Either by revelation from God, (...) by tradition of his Ancestors: for the
knowledge of these things Moses ^ad from Joseph's children; they of Joseph; he
of Jacob; Jacob of Isaac; he of Abraham and he of Shem; Shem of Noe; h^ (...)
Methusalem; and he of Adam, with wh^ be lived 243. years.

Questions on the first Chapter.
Questions.
WAs the world created, or eternal?
Answ. Created. 1. There can be but one eternal. 2. Almost all the
Philosophers are against the eternity of the world. 3. They that hold it
^ternall, can bring no sound reason. 4. The most ancient monuments or records
amongst ^he heathen, are not so old as the f^ood of Noah.

Q. Could God make more worlds then one?
A. Yes: for he is Almighty, and he made it ^ot of any matter: for that should
have bin ex^austed: but more he would not, because he ^eing one, delights in
unity.

Q. Why in Hebrew says Moses, Gods created? joining the noune plural, with
the verb singular?
A. To signify the mystery of the Trinity, one essence in three persons. 2.
It is the property of the Hebrew phrase.

Q. Why in the beginning of this book, speaks Moses only of heaven and earth?
A. Because by the name of heaven, he comprehends all celestial bodies, and by
the name of earth the 4. elements: for water is in the earth, and fire and
air, as witness the springs, exhalations, or earthquakes, and burning
mountains, or hot waters.

Q. Did God create the earth moveable or not?
A. Immovable* Job. 38. Psalm. 39. and 104. this is understood, in respect of
the whole earth: yet it is moved in respect of parts, by earthquakes. Job. 9.

Q. Of what figure is the earth?
A. Round, Esaias the 40. This figure is most perfect, capable, ancient.

Q. Is the earth under the water or not?
A. Under, because heauiest: yet Exo. 20. Ps. 24. and 136. it seems the water
is under the earth; but it is to be understood, that a great part of the earth
was made higher then the waters, for man's habitation.

Q. Why cannot the whole earth move?
A. Because he is in his natural place, which if it should move, it should
ascend: and this is against the nature of the earth.

Q. What is understood by the spirit that moved upon the waters?
A. A wind, which often in Scripture is called a spirit, or the holy Ghost, or
the power and mighty operation of God: which also is often called by the name
of Spirit: in this sense the Spirit of God is said to carry Elias to heaven;
and to have caught away Philip, Acts 8.

Q. Why is God brought in, speaking in the creation?
A. To show his absolute power, whose word is his work. 2. The second person
in Trinity, the word essential of the Father, by whom the world was created.

Q. Why was the light first created?
A. To beautify all the rest of the creatures. 2. The world was created in 6.
days, which could not be distinguished without the light and darkness.

Q. Was this light spiritual, such as God is said to inhabit, as Christ is
called the light of the world, and the Apostles light, the regenerate light?
A. No: but corporal and sensible, first, the darkness that went before, was
sensible: ergo, light. 2. By this light the 3. days were distinguished before
the creation of the Sun: but they were sensible. 3. This Narration of Moses is
historical, not allegorical.

Q. Then what light was this?
A. Not the light of the elementall fire, nor of a light cloud, nor of water,
but of the Sun: which was the first day diffused through the whole hemisphere:
the 4. was collected into the globe of the Sun we see. The 1. day this light
had but one common property to illuminate: the 4. it had particular virtues to
bring out particular effects. 3. The light, the 4. day began to be cause of
generation and corruption, the measure of time, the cause of increase, and
decrease in the Moon.

Q. How did this light before the 4. day, distinguish the day from night?
A. In moving from cast to west; and from west to east, by the motion of the 1
sphere.

Q. In what place of heaven was the light ^reated?
A. In the East, for this light returning to this same point of the east, from
which it went, made a natural day.

Q. When was heaven and earth created?
A. Before the first day, in respect of their substance and matter, but in the
six days, in respect of their form and perfection.

Q. What is meant by the firmament that separateth the waters from the waters?
A. The air, and starry heavens, with all the spheres between, which do
separate the watery clouds, from these waters below: but properly the lower
region of the air does separate these waters, which are generated in the
single region, from the waters below, which low region is called by the name of
the whole firmament.

Q. What are these waters above the firmament?
A. Not Angels, as Origon, not waters properly so called, above the stars, as
Basil would have: for their natural place is below, and there is no use of
them above the stars: neither the heaven called the Christalline, which has
neither the substance, similitude, or qualities of water: but by these waters
we understand the watery clouds, above this lower region in the air. These
waters in other places are said to be above the heavens, that is, above the
air, which in Scripture is called heaven.

Q. How made God dry land to appear?
A. By causing the earth, which before was plain, to swell with mountains. 2.
By the waters which before were spread over the whole earth, to betake
themselves to one place.

Q. Then were there mountains before the flood?
A. Yes: for the flood rose 15. cubits higher then the mountains: the
mountains are called eternal, Psa. 76. Wisdom is ancienter then the
mountains, Pro. 8. They make the earth the comelier, more fruitful, more
commodious for man and beast: they hold out the seas from ouer-flowing the
earth: out of them springs and Rivers proceed: they defend the Valleys from the
raging of the winds, that without them, the earth could not be before the
flood.

Q. Is the earth or seas highest?
A. The earth: for all rivers run into the seas naturally, because they flow
downwards. 2. Men are said to go down into the seas in ships, Psalm. 107.
Again* if the seas were higher, ships should sail swifter to the land then
from it. 4. The farther we were in the sea, we should see the land the better.

Ob. But Psalm. 104. and 33. it seems that the waters are higher then the earth.
A. In Psalm. 104. David speaks of the springs that are generated in the
mountains, or of the watery clouds that cover the hills: in Psa. 33. David
speaks of the miraculous standing of the red sea.

Q. Were briers, thorns, and poysonable herbs created before man's fall?
A. Yes: because these are parts of this world. without which it is not
perfect: and although poysonable herbs are not fit for meat, they are good
for physic.

Q In what time of the year was the world created?
A. In the Autumn, because the Jews before they departed from Egypt, began
their year in Autumn, and also before the flood: for the flood began in the
second month, that is, about the month of November. 2. The Jews Exodus 23. are
commanded to keep the feasts of Tabernacles in the end of the year, that is,
in Autumn, when fruits are ripe: and also this same feast in the beginning of
the year, Chap. 35. nature also shows, that Autumn is the end of the year,
by the maturity of the fruit, and falling of the leaves from the trees. It is
also the beginning of the year, as the young seeds budding out of the earth
do testify. Lastly, in the creation the fruits of the trees were ripe, and
ready to be eaten.

Q. Were the stars created the fourth day?
A. Yes, in respect of their light, motions, and operations: but they were made
the 1. day in respect of their substance, for they are the thicker part of the
spheres.

Q. Why were the stars created after the planets?
A. Because God will show his power, which in producing of plants, does not
depend on the stars. 2. To keep the people from Idolatry, whom he knew
would be bent to worship the stars, when they consider their beauty, motion
and operation, in producing herbs: now they are inexcusable, because this
virtue they have in producing herbs, is from God, who in the beginning did
create herbs and plants, without the help of stars.

Q. Did God create the Moon in the Full, or in the Change?
A. In the Full, because God created his works in perfection: now the moon is
perfitest in the Full. 2. She was ordained to illuminate the night, which she
does most perfecty in the Full.

Q. Have the stars their light wholly from the Sun?
A. No: because they have different effects, therefore different light. 2.
There is one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another of the
stars, 1 Cor. 15.

Q. Why are the Sun and Moon called great lights?
A. Not in respect of quantity: for some stars are greater: but because they
appear to be greater. 2. In respect of their light, which is greater then the
light of other stars.

Q. Of what figure is the heaven?
A. Round: for this figure is most apt for motion. 2. The Scripture witnesses
the same. Eccl. 1

Q. How many heavens are there?
A. The Philosophers speak of ten heavens, the Scriptures only of three, to
the which, the former ten may be reduced.

Q. Shall the heavens be abolished in the day of Judgment?
A. Not in respect of their substance which is incorruptible, but in respect of
their motion, influence, and diverse operations in this inferior world: for of
these then there shall be no need, because man shall be translated to a better
life, and other living creatures shall be abolished.

Q. Are the stars innumerable?
A. Not in themselves: for they are natural bodies, but in respect of our
ignorance. 2. These stars of greater note are innumerable: for the
Mathematicians have reduced the 1022. stars, to six degrees of magnitude:
for these of lesser note are not numbered, because not known.

Q. Is the Sun hot or cold?
A. Neither: but he begets heat here below, because of his great light, and
not because of his motion.

Q. Have the stars life reasonable, because God is brought in, speaking to
them in Scripture?
A. No: if they had, they should be capable of virtue and vice, life or death
eternal. God is brought in, speaking to them in Scriptures, and so he is to
insensible creatures* as the earth, seas, wind, etc. to signify our
stupidity, which are duller to hear, and obey him, then senseless creatures.

Q. Do the stars move of themselves, as it seems by these places, Psa. 19.
Job 9. Ios. 10. or are they moved by the spheres*
A. By their spheres: but the Scripture speaks rather of the stars then
their spheres, because the stars are better known to us, for the spheres we
see not.

Q. Is the heaven and the earth corruptible or not?
A. They are incorruptible in regard of their substance: so witnesses the
Scripture, Eccle. 1. and 3. chap. Psalm. 149. and therefore shall not be
abolished, but renewed to a more perfect state: for the fervent desire of the
creature waits when the sons of God shall be revealed. Those Scriptures
that speak of the destruction of the world, are to be understood of the
alteration of some qualities to better.

Q. Shall the Sun and other stars move as they do now, after the day of
Judgment?
A. No: for now they move, to distinguish night and day, Summer and Winter: but
then of these things there shall be no need to man glorified.

Q. How are the Sun and Moon signs?
A. They are natural signs of fair and foul weather, health and sickness,
sowing and mowing, etc. and supernatural signs of Gods wrath: for there shall
be signs in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, before the last day. Luke 21.

Q. Were the stars made for signs to the Astronomers, to foretell things to
come?
A. They neither should, nor can foretell by the stars. 1. They should not,
because prohibited by the word of God, Iere. 10. Deuteronomy. 18. Leu. 20. Secondly,
condemned by the Canons, decrees and Councels of the Church, and refuted by the
Fathers. 3* They cannot foretell by these Scriptures, Esaias 41. 44. and 47.
Chap. Eccle. 8. and 10. Chap. Prou. 27. 1 Cor. 2. Again, the most part of
Apollos oracles were false, as witnesses Porphirius. lib. de oraculis.

Q. Why is this kind of Astrology condemned?
A. Because it euerts Gods providence, abolisheth the liberty of our will,
makes all the mysteries of Christian Religion to depend on the stars; it is
the cause of all villainy and neglect of Gods works; yea, it makes all the
miracles of the old and new Testament, such as the flood of Noah, the fire of
Sodom, the birth, actions, and death of our Lord, to depend on the stars.

Q. Can the Astrologers foretell things to come by the stars?
A. No: because they know not the form, matter, motions force and effects of
the stars in the things here below, they cannot explain the hid causes, and
properties of herbs, stones, and living creatures: yea, they know not what is
doing now in other countries: and if they know not things present, much less
things to come.

Q. But if they had the perfect knowledge of the stars, could they no^ tell
what is to come?
A. No: because we cannot have perfect knowledge of particular effects, except
we know their particular causes: now the stars are but general causes. 2.
If this doctrine were true, then twins borne under the same star at the
same time, should be of the same nature and disposition: but this is false, as
witnesses the birth of Jacob and Esau. 3. It should follow, that all those
that are killed in the wars at the same time, should be borne at the same
time: which is most false. 4. That all those that live according to the same
laws and religion, should be borne at the same time, under the same star.
5. That all the actions of man's free will, should be known to them: which
cannot be, seeing man can alter and change his will* when he list. 6. If men
could tell by the stars what is to come, they should be had in great
esteem: but it fares otherwise with them; for the greatest, both Divines and
Philosophers confute them, Kings and Magistrates condemn and punish them. 7.
If they can tell what befalls to man, much more can they foretell what shall
befall herbs and trees, which are more subject to the stars then man: but
this is false: for they cannot foretell how many Pears a Peare-tree shall
bring forth.

Q. Are not then the stars natural signs of things to come?
A. Natural signs are rather the causes or effects of that they signify, but
the stars are neither. 2. How can the stars which are still the same, be
the signs of so many innumerable accidents as fall out in the world? yet I
except Comets, which are not natural stars, but Meteors generated of
natural causes, yet they are supernatural signs of things to come.

Q. Can the Astrologers foretell nothing true?
A. Yes: oftentimes ehey foretell things truly, but that is not because of
the stars, but by the instinct of Satan, with whom they have commerce: and
he can foretell many things, partly, by Revelation from God, and partly,
because he is a subtle spirit, and of long experience, and he makes those men
foretell things to come, rather by moving their fantasies, or by dreams, or
by offering to their eyes the shape, or to their ears the words of those
things he will foretell, or by characters. 2. They can foretell things to come,
because God permits them, for the greater destruction of those that curiously
consult Soothsayers: so he suffered Balaam and his Ass to prophecy. 3. Men
that are of subtle spirits, may foretell some things by looking diligently
into the life, manners, and dispositions of men: as one may foretell, that a
tyrant oppressing his subjects, shall be killed. 4. They may foretell some things
which may fall out true, because of the credulity of those that consult with
them; for if they foretell good success to any, this oft-times falls out,
because of the fervent desire, and using of all means to attain the same:
which does fall out, not because it was foretold, but because he to whom it
was foretold, used the means to have it.

Q. Is it not lawful then to consult with Astrologers and Soothsayers?
A. No: because in consulting with them, we derogate from Gods glory, and
honor them, in thinking that they can foretell all things; which is proper
only to God. 2. If it be unlawful to converse with an excommunicate person,
much less should we have commerce with Satan, who is excommunicated from
heaven to the place of darkness, and is the pernicious enemy of God and man.

Q. Whether are the beasts or fishes perfectest?
A. The beasts, because they have more perfect senses, beget more perfect
blood in our bodies, than fishes, have more commerce with men, and are docible
in many things; fishes are not.

Q. Why then were they created before the beasts?
A. As nature begins at that which is most imperfect in generation, so God in
the creation did keep this course: for man the little world and pattetne of
all the creatures, was not created till the sixth day. 2. God keeps that
course in the 3. last days, which he did in the 3 first: in the first he
created heaven, and in the 4. did replenish it with stars: the 2. he made he
seas, the 5. replenished it with liuin^g creatures.

Q. Why speaks Moses of the creation of some particular fishes, and not of
trees and beasts?
A. Because these fishes are greater then any earthly creatures, therefore we
should the more extol Gods glory in considering them.

Q. How do the waters bring forth the fishes?
A. The waters are not the efficient cause of the fishes, but the material,
yet but in part, for fishes are compounded of the four elements,
notwithstanding the waters are the predominant matter of the fishes, not in
respect of their substance, for that is earth: but in respect of quality,
moist and cold. Secondly, the temperature of the fishes are waterish. Thirdly,
Water is the place of habitation, generation, and conservation for the fishes.

Q. Why were the birds created the fifth day with the fishes, and not the sixth?
A. Because they were created of the water as the fishes. Secondly, because of
the great resemblance between the birds, and fishes, both in respect of their
place, water and air: for both these elements are perspicuous, humid,
moveable, and easy to be changed one into the other. Secondly, In respect of
their bodies, for both are light and swift: the finnes of the fishes answer to
the birds wings, and their scales to birds feathers; they both want ears,
paps, milk, bladder. Thirdly, Many kinds of birds dwell in the waters, as the
Sea-meawes, Swans, etc. Fourthly, their moving is alike: for as the fishes
swim, so the birds fly. Fifthly, They both use their tail, to guide their
flying and swimming.

Q. Were the Birds created of the Water?
A. Yes: but not of the thickest of the water, but rather of a watery vapor,
between water and air, therefore the Birds converse in the water and air.

Q. But it seems the birds were created of the earth the sixth day, by these
words of the 2. chapter. (And the Lord having formed out of the ground every
beast of the field, and every bird of the air, brought them to Adam.)
A. If God had created them the sixth day of the ground, Moses had not spoken of
them the fifth day. Secondly, in these words alleged, the conjunction ( and)
has no reference to the word ground, as though both had been formed of the
ground: but to the word formed: so the meaning is, that not only the beasts
that were formed of the ground: but the Birds also which God had created, were
brought to Adam.

Q. How does the earth bring forth living creatures?
A. Not actiuely, but passiuely: for the earth is not the efficient, but the
material cause of earthly creatures.

Q. What difference is there between the beast* cattle, and creeping thing?
verse 25.
A. By behemah, in Hebrew, is understood the great beasts, as Job 40. 15. By
chaiah, the wild beasts, in whom there is seen most liuellnesse: by remesh,
creeping things, such as have no feet at all, as Serpents; and they that have
short and little feet, as Ants.

Q. Why did not God bless the earthly creatures, as he did the fishes?
A. Moses did omit this for breuities sake. Secondly, the blessing of the
fishes does belong also to the beasts. Thirdly, man is blessed, and in him the
beasts, as when he was cursed* the earth was also, Genesis 3. And when he was
punished, the beasts were punished also, Genesis*.

Q. Why was man particularly blessed?
A. Not only for multiplication: but also because of the elect. And thirdly,
because man's copulation is oftentimes sinful, and inordinate.

Q. Did God create in the beginning, imperfect creatures, as Bees, Waspes, and
such like?
A. He did not create them actually, as he did the perfect creatures, but he
created them in their causes, as he gave that faculty to the fiesh of an
horse, to beget Waspes being dead.

Q. Were Mules now created, or not?
A. They were not. First, because they were found out by Anah, Genes. 36.
Secondly, they are barren: but God created all creatures with his blessing to
be fruitful, etc. Genes. 1. Thirdly, this kind of procreation is against
nature, but God created every thing according to his kind, Genes. 1. Fourthly,
this is against his own law, Leuit. 19.

Q. Why was man and the cattle created in the same day?
A. First, Because they both dwell in the earth. Secondly, The earthly
creatures are more familiar with man then others. Thirdly, they are more
profitable to man then other creatures. Fourthly, They are most like to man of
all other creatures.

Q. How does Gods goodness and wisdom appear in the creatures?
A. Many ways. First, In the variety of so many thousand diverse kinds of
creatures. Secondly, In the comely order that is seen amongst them. Thirdly,
in that all things that serve for the perfection of the world, is in the world;
nothing can be added, or impaired. Fourthly, In the sympathy and concord that
is amongst some, and the discord and hatred that is amongst others of the
creatures. Fifthly, In the pulchritude and comeliness that is in every
creature, as may be seen in the body of man. Sixthly, In the admirable
government and administration of the world, in the which there is nothing so
evil (whether it be natural evil* as the defects of nature, or voluntary
evil, such as is the evil of punishment, and of sin:) but all serves for the
glory of God, and the perfection of this Universe.

Q. How is the power of God seen in the world?
A. First, By creating it of nothing. Secondly, By sustaining it with his
power, Heb. 1. Thirdly, By working many things miraculously, above the course
of nature; in which we see, that God does not work of necessity. Fourthly, He
is not tied to the second causes.

Q. Could God have made the world better then it is?
A. Yes, for his power is not limited: therefore he might have made it sooner
then he did, and larger, and fuller of Creatures.

Q. Why was man the last of all the creatures created?
A. Because God would make all things fit and prepared for him. Secondly,
because he is the Lord and end of all other creatures. Thirdly, Because he is
most perfect: and in order of generation, that which is most perfect, is last.

Q. Wherein did man exceed all other creatures?
A. First, In that he had dominion over them all. Secondly, In that God
prepared a most pleasant place for man to dwell in, to wit, Paradise. Thirdly,
Because of his knowledge and wit, in giving names to the creatures according to
their natures. Fourthly, In respect of his holiness and innocence. Fifthly,
Because he was made immortal. Sixthly, Because God took special care in the
creating of man above the other creatures. Seventhly, Because the whole Trinity
does consult about the making of man, as about a matter of great weight.

Q. Why speaks God in the plural number, Let us make man?
A. Here is the mystery of the Trinity: for, the Father does not here speak to
himself, as the Jews, nor to the Angels, as some heretics think; but the
Father speaks to the Son and holy Ghost.

Q. But how do we know that he spoke not here to the Angels?
A. Easily: Because the Angels cannot create neither soul nor body, for they
are but creatures. Secondly, There is no mention in the Word, that Angels
created, but that God only created man. Thirdly, Man was created according to
Gods Image, and not according to the Similitude of Angels. Fourthly, God says,
To our Image: but the Image of God and Angels are not the same, but infinitely
diverse.

Q. Was man only created to the Image of God?
A. The Image of God does shine in every creature in part, but in man most
perfectly of all other creatures; for, he has not only existance and life,
but also reason and wisdom.

Q. Wherein does the Image of God consist?
A. The Image of God is most in the soul, which has existence: secondly,
life; thirdly; sense; fourthly, reason: again, it is incorruptible; secondly,
immortal; thirdly, it is endued with understanding, will and memory;
fourthly, it has free will; fifthly, it is capable of wisdom, grace and
glory; sixthly, it has power of all other creatures: in all which consists
the Image of God.

Q. Whether is the Image of God most to be seen in Angels or men?
A. In Angels, if we respect their nature absolutely: for they are of a more
excellent nature than Man; but if we respect the dignity of Man's nature (the
which is sanctified and assumed by Jesus the essential image of the Father,)
the Image of God is most to be seen in Man.

Q. If man be created to the Image of God, may he not be called the Image of
God?
A. No: for Christ is only the Image of God, because he is of that same
nature with the Father, but Man is of another nature; and therefore, he is not
the Image of God, but created to the Image of God.

Q. Is the Image of God seen in the woman as in the man?
A. Yes, equally in both, if we respect their nature; yet the Image of God is
seen in man more perfectly; in respect that man is both the beginning and end
of the woman. Et finis est praestantior finito.

Q. Can the Image of God be abolished by sin?
A. If we take his Image for that righteousness wherein Adam was created,
then we say, that Gods Image was abolished by sin; but if by the Image of
God, we understand man's reasonable soul with the faculties thereof, then his
Image is not utterly abolished, but defaced by sin.

Q. Why did God create man to his Image?
A. First, to manifest his singular love and goodness to Man: Secondly, that
all creatures might reverence Man the more, in that he carries the Image of
God, as his badge and arms: thirdly, that Man might love and serve God the
more, for he wears Gods Image as his Liuerie: sourthly, that Man might know
the nature and properties of God more perfectly; for there is no creature
wherein we may contemplate the nature of God more fully, than in ourselves:
fifthly, that God might have some of his creatures with whom he might be
familiar, for his delight is with the sons of men, Proverbs 8. Sixthly, that
Man might be the more capable of eternal felicity, and more assured of Gods
love: seventhly, that Gods power might appear the more, in that he created
such an excellent piece of work, at which all the creatures may admire.

Q. Had Man before his fall, dominion over the creatures?
A. Yes, Genesis 1. Psalm 8. Secondly, he gave names to them, in token of his
power over them: thirdly, Euah conferred freely with the Serpent, without
fear: fourthly, it stood with the order of Nature, that some should be
superiors* and some inferiors; and man was fittest to govern, because of his
Reason and Wisdom.

Q. Had man also dominion over the creatures after the Fall?
A. Yes, Genesis 9. Secondly, because we kill them, and make them serve for
our diverse uses: thirdly, all kind of creatures were subject to Noah in the
Arc: fourthly, the Lions were familiar with Daniel, but man's dominion over
them before the Fall* was natural, this miraculous: secondly, that should have
continued, this is but a while: thirdly, that did belong to all men, this only
to some.

Q. Should not man have had rule over man in the state of innocence?
A. Yes: because amongst multitudes there can be no order, where there are not
some superiors, and some inferiors: but the subjection of man to man then, had
bin voluntary, pleasant, civil, not servile, and by constraint.

Q. Why then does not God speak of this domn ion of man over man, but of man
over beasts?
A. Because the dominion of man over the beasts, is a part of Gods Image, and
did belong to all men, as men; but the dominion of man over man does not agree
unto all, as they are man, but as wiser* or better, etc.

Q. Should the wife have been subject to the man in that state of innocence?
A. Yes: but this subjection of the wife should not have been unwilling,
bitter, trou, blesome, as it fell out afterward by sin.

Q. Should mankind have been multiplied by carnal copulation, as now?
A. Yes: but without sin, for the soul and her faculties should have been
subject to God, and the body to the soul; therefore God distinguished in man,
male and female: secondly, he says, Increase and multiply: thirdly, it is
said, They shall be both in one flesh: which is only in respect of copulation.

Q. Should man have only eaten of the herbs, and not also flesh in Paradise?
A. Only herbs: first, because Gods permission is only extended to the
herbs: secondly, the herbs were most natural and simple food for that happy
estate, and man was not made for food, but food for man: thirdly, the herbs
were sufficient, because, before the earth was cursed, there was great store of
all sorts of herbs; and those very powerful, and good to feed man: but after
the Fall, they lost their force and former goodness.

Q. Should the wild bedstes, such as Lions, have fed on flesh, before the
Fall, as they do now?
A. No: but on the herbs only: first, because here is no flesh mentioned, but
only herbs: secondly, if it had been permitted to them to eat flesh before
the Flood, then those ravening beasts that were in the Arc, should have eat
flesh: but in the Arc there was no flesh for them: therefore they did feed on
the herbs.

Q. How comes it now, that these kind of beasts do not feed on herbs now,
but on flesh?
A. Because the earth does not yield such comfortable and nourishing herbs as
then: secondly, the temperature of the creature is not so sound now as it was
before the Flood.

Q. How is it understood, that all which God made, was very good?
A. All things were good: first, in respect of their substance which is
unchangeable: secondly, in respect of their perfect estate they were created
in: thirdly, in respect of their accidents or properties: fourthly, because of
their operations, which brought forth perfect effects.

Q. Why did not God see that all things were very good, till man was created?
A. Because man is the eud of all the creatures: secondly, in him, as in a
little world, ^n to be seen all the creatures: thirdly, because Christ, who is
essential goodness, was to sanctify the nature of man, in taking upon him
his flesh.

Questions on the second Chapter.
Q. DId God create the world at the sa^ instant, or in the space of six days?
A. In the space of six days: first, because Moses narration is historical,
and therefore he speaks of six distinct days: secondly, Moses, Exodus 20.
and 31. urges the Jews to work six days, and rest the seventh, because God
created the world in six days, and rested the seventh; this reason had been
ridiculous, if GOD had made the world in an instant* thirdly, if we understand
Moses in this place allegorically, then we must make this whole history an
allegory: fourthly, if the seventh day had been the first (and in it God had
created the world) then how is it understood that God rested the seventh day?
fifthly, how could so many diverse kinds of creatures be created in the same
instant of time? yea, then we must say, that man was created and brought into
Paradise, and was cast asleep, and E^ah was formed of his rib the same instant.

Q. How then is that understood. Ecclesiast. 18. He that lives for ever,
created all things together?
A. It is to be understood of that confused mass that God created in the
beginning: out of the which afterward he created the rest of the creatures in
their distinct days.

Q. Why did God spend so much time in making the world?
A. Not because he was weak, and could not make it in less time, but that we
might the more seriously consider the order of the creation, distinction, and
replenishing of the world; and in these, the omnipotency, wisdom and
goodness of God.

Q. Did God make the world of necessity, or of his own accord?
A. Of his own free will, because he made it at that time and manner he
thought fittest: secondly, because he, in creating, wrought otherwise than the
course of Nature does; for he made the heavens without light, then made light:
first, imperfect; afterward, perfect: and he made the herbs before the Sun.

Q. Can it be gathered from hence, that as God created the world in six days,
and rested the seventh: so likewise the world shall continue si^ ages, or six
thousand years, and after shall be (...) perpetual Sabbath?
A. No: for this computation is but a conjecture, or fixion of Elias* not the
Prophet, but the Rabbin, having no ground. Secondly, (...) this were true, we
should know how long the world should continue, and fully know the time of
Christ's coming: which cannot be: for his coming shall be as a thief in the
night, as Lightning; his coming shall be a^ the coming of the flood: of this
hour knows no man, not the Angels; the Father has put in his own power the
times and seasons.

Q. Were the Angels created, or are they eternal?
A. Created, Psalm. 149. Revel. 4 and 10. Col^s. 1. The Church confesses; the
Fathers confirm; and general Counsels establish this point. Secondly, only
God is eternal. Thirdly, They are parts of the world, therefore created.

Q. Are the Angels real substances, or only good and bad motions in the
mind, as thought the Sadduces?
A. They are individual substances. First, Their names do show this, for they
are called Messengers, Watchmen, etc. Secondly, their actions and operations,
which only belong to personal substances: for, they serve God; come to us;
comfort us; gather together the Elect; an Angel wrestled with Iaacob;
conferred with Abraham; they were received by Lot, etc. Angels declared Christ's
Nativity to the shepherds, his Resurrection to the women. Thirdly, some of
them stood, some fell, therefore substances. Fourthly, we shall be like them:
Ergo, they are not bare motions.

Q. What is meant here by the Host of Heaven and earth?
A By those of Heaven, is meant the Angels, for they are called the heavenly
host, Luke 2. also the Stars, Esaias 34. Therefore the Stars in their courses
fought against Sisera, Judges 5. By the host of Earth, is meant all the earthly
creatures: therefore God is called the Lord of hosts.

Q. Were the Angels created before this visible world?
A. No: because God created all things in the beginning: ergo, Angels, and not
before, or else this had been no beginning. Secondly, They were created for
the use of man, but man was not before the beginning: ergo, nor Angels.

Q. Were they created after the six days?
A. No: for God rested from all his work the seventh day.

Q Then what day were they created?
A. The first, that they might be the beholders and admirers of Gods power and
wisdom in creating the World. Secondly, They are called Angels of Heaven in
Scripture; not only because they inhabit, but also because they were created
with the heaven the first day. Thirdly, this is manifest in Job 38. where it is
said, that the Sons of God (that is, the Angels) did sing and showte when God
laid the foundations of the earth.

Q. Where were they created?
A. In Heaven: for some of them fell from thence; And Christ saw Satan like
Lightning fall from Heaven: therefore they are called the Host and Angels of
Heaven.

Q. Why does not Moses speak distinctly of the creation of An^els?
A. Because he did accomodate himself to the rude capacity of the Jews;
therefore he does only speak here of the creation of visible creatures.

Q. What is meant by Gods rest on the Sabbath day? was he weary?
A. No: but by his rest, is understood his desisting and ceasing to make other
creatures.

Q. Did God rest from all his works?
A. Yes, of creation, but not of preservation: for yet the Father works with
the Son, John 5.

Q. Did God create no other creatures since the Creation?
A. No: for whatsoever seomes to be created since, it was created before,
either in the matter thereof (as Worms, Flies, Bees, and such like) or else,
in that God gave faculty to some creatures of diverse kinds, to produce a third
kind, as Mules of the Horse and Ass; and power he gave to the Stars, to
produce some creatures of putrified matter: yet some creatures he does still
produce, either by generation, as all particular men, and other creatures that
are generated, or by creation, either ordinary, as the souls of men, or
extraordinary, as the Star that appeared to the Wise men, and the Dove that
descended on Christ: so then God rested from creating new kinds of creatures,
but not from producing the individual creatures of those kinds that were made
in the Beginning.

Q. Why is it said here that God ended his work the seventh day, seeing they
were ended the sixth day?
A. The creatures were perfected the sixth day, in respect of their substance,
qualities, and properties; but in respect of their operation, they were not
perfected till the seventh day, for they did not begin to produce effects till
after the sixth day: and seeing operation is the end of the form, they were
not fully perfected till they began to work.

Q. How do you understand that God sanctified the Sa^bath?
A. In that he separated it from the other days, and consecrated it for holy
uses, he would have this to be a Day of rest, and wherein we might wholly
addict our selves for his service.

Q. Did God inioyne Adam to keep this day holy?
A. No: but this was afterward commanded by Moses: for in that happy ^state it
had not been needful to appoint one day for Gods service, seeing every day
should have been a day of rest, and Sabbath for Adam to meditate on Gods
works. Secondly, it was not needful for man then to rest from seruill worket,
because in that happiness, man's labor should not have been wearisome.
Thirdly, we read of no commandment that was given to Adam: but only one,
concerning not eating the ^orbidden fruit. Fourthly, if this law had been
given to Adam* it should have tied, all his posterity to the observation
thereof: but we do not read, that any one of the Fathers before Moses, did
observe the Sabbath. Fifthly, if the Sabbath had been kept by the Fathers,
Moses would have mentioned the same, as a strong argument to persuade the Jews
to kee^e it* Sixthly, the soundest of the Fathers are of this opinion.

Q. What is meant here by she day wherein God made the heaven and the earth?
A. By the day is meant, the whole 6. days: so, often in the Scriptures, day
signifies time, as the day of salvation, the day of Judgment.

Q. What is meant by a mist that watered the earth?
A. Not a fountain: but a vapor, which is the matter of rain.

Q. What is me^nt by this, that God made man of the dust of the earth?
A. By man is understood his body: by dust, the matter of his body, to put us
in mind of humility, and of this bodies frailty: by earth, is understood the
4* elements: for man is perfectly composed of all: but earth is only expressed,
because in man's body there is more earth then any other element. Secondly, when
man dies, his body is desolued into earth. Thirdly, he lives upon the earth.
Fourthly, he takes his clothes and food from the earth.

Q. Why was not the body of man rather made of heavenly then earthly substance,
seeing the soul is so excellent?
A. Because the soul of man did require such a body as was capable of senses,
by the which as by instruments she might work in the body: but the celestial
bodies are not capable of senses: for they are not capable of the first
qualities.

Q. Wherein does the body of man exceed the bodies of other creatures?
A. First, in that the body of man is made straight: that he may behold heaven
his country, that his senses might use their function the better, his hands
might be employed in working, not in walking. Secondly, in that his senses are
more perfect then of other creatures, not in the quicker apprehension of the
sensible object: for other creatures have perfecter senses in this regard: but
that man can discern more perfecter by his senses, the differences of objects
than other creatures. Thirdly, in that man's body is more perfectly compounded
of the 4. elements, then other bodies: for the bodies of the creatures are more
earthly, or more waterish.

Q. Of what age created God Adam and Eua?
A. In the prime and flower of their age. First, because God created all things
in their perfect estate. Secondly, because God commanded them to increase and
multiply, which they could not have done, if they had not bin created of a ripe
age.

Q. Whether was the body or the soul of man created first?
A. The body: for God did keep the same course in man's creation, which nature
does now in man's generation: for first, the body is formed in the mothers
womb, and then the soul is infused.

Q. Why is the creation of man's soul called a breathing?
A. First, to show us that the soul was not taken out of the power of the
matter: but was created of nothing, and infused in the body. Secondly, to teach
us Gods power, who did as easily create the soul, as man does breathe.
Thirdly, to show the excellency of man's soul, which seems as it were the
breath of Gods own mouth.

Q. Is the soul of man, of the essence of God?
A. No: if it were, it should be either a part thereof, or the whole: it is not
a part; for Gods essence cannot be divided in parts, neither is it the whole:
for then all men should be but one soul. Secondly, if man's soul were a part
of Gods essence, then a part of Gods essence should be sinful, and subject to
the wrath of God, and pains of hell

Q. Why did God breathe the soul, rather in the face, then in any other part
of man?
A. Because, in the face are all the senses, which are the organs of the soul.

Q. Why in the nosthrils rather then in any other part of the face?
A. To teach us, that he is the only author of our breathing: secondly; to
show the weakness of our life, which depends from the nosthrils: thirdly,
because the nose is the most commodious instrument of breathing, by which the
soul is kept in the body.

Q. Did God create one soul in man, or three?
A. Only one: first, because one body can have but one essential form:
secondly, the power of growing* feeling, and reasoning, are not three souls,
but three faculties of one soul: thirdly, the Scripture never speaks but of
one soul.

Q. Were the souls of men created long before the body, as thought Plato and
Origines?
A. No: for God created all things perfect, but the soul of man, being a part
of man; without, the body could not be perfect: secondly, now in generation
the body is no sooner formed, but God infuseth the soul; the same order did
God keep in man's creation: thirdly, the souls in all that time should have
either done good or evil: but Jacob and Esau did neither good nor evil before
they were borne, Romans 9. 11. Ergo.

Q. Seeing the soul does exist, after the corruption, why did she not exist
before the creation of the body?
A. She does exist after the dissolution of the body, of necessity, being
immortal: but it was not fit she should exist, before the creation of the
body, seeing she is the natural form, and essential part of man.

Q. Whether are the souls of men infused in the bodies, or are they derived
and propagated one of another?
A. By creating they are infused, and by infusing created: for man's soul being
incorporall and indivisible, cannot be propagated of any other soul, nor
multiplied, that is plain by Zach. 12. 1. and Coloss 12. 7.

Q. Is the soul of man immortal?
A. It is, because a simple essence void of contrarieties, and bodily
accidents: secondly, It is created to Gods Image: and man's soul is not like
God, only in that it is capable of all sciences, and in that it has an
appetite infinite, which cannot be filled, but with God; and that it has a
will free and indifferent to all particular good: but also in that desire which
it has of immortality: thirdly, man has dominion over the creatures, which
consists also in this, that his soul is immortal, theirs are not: fourthly,
Man's soul is not produced of any matter by generation, but is induced in the
body by creation, the souls of all other creatures were procreated of the
Elements, for the earth brings out beasts; and the waters fishes: this is also
manifest by many places of Scripture.

Q. Is the soul of man immortal by nature, or by grace?
A. Internally: that is, as it is a simple immateriall substance, it is
immortal by nature: but externally, as it depends on God, has it being and
subsistence in him, it is immortal by grace.

Q. In what place of the world was Paradise?
A. Not in any other earth separated from ours, by the Ocean; nor higher than
the supreme region of the air, as some Fathers thought: but in Mesopotamia and
the bordering countries to it: for Paradise was planted on the East side of
Eden, which is in Mesopotamia: secondly, that is manifest by the Rivers Tignis
and Euphrates, which spring out of the mountains of Armenia, and flow through
the countries of Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Chaldea, and run into the Persian
gulf, and these are the Rivers of Paradise.

Q. Should man have remained in Paradise only, if he had not sinned?
A. No: for Paradise was not so large as to contain all mankind, being
comprehended within the limits of these countries aforesaid: secondly, man had
power over the whole earth; and all the herbs of the ground were given to him
for food; and therefore he was to replenish the whole earth: thirdly, how
should the earth be trimmed, manured and made fruitful, if man had dwelt in
paradise?

Q. Then to what end did God make Paradise, seeing he knew that man should
presently fall, and be cast out of it?
A. He made it, that Adam, so long as he obeyed God, might enjoy it: secondly,
that it might be a figure and type of the heavenly Paradise, and joys of the
life to come: thirdly, to put him in mind, after his fall, what great
blessings he had lost, by losing Paradise.

Q. Is Paradise yet extant, ^r not?
A. It is not extant: for Paradise was in these Countries of Mesapotamia,
Assyria, etc. through the which Tigris and Euphrates the Rivers of Paradise)
did flow: but those countries are still populous, and no sign now of
Paradise: secondly, the Flood, Genesis 7. was fifteen cubits higher than the
mountains, therefore it was also defaced with the flood.

Q. Why was the tree of life called so?
A. Because it was the Sacrament or sign of life, both natural in Paradise,
and spiritual in heaven: or as some think, because it had power, being eaten,
to preserve the life of man, a long time* but not for ever: for man was not to
live still a natural life. Again, the body of man was corruptible, because it
was made of matter the subject of corruption, of contrary elements and parts;
as also because the natural heat of the body, by degrees is extenuated, and
the radical humor exhausted: and in these respects, although this tree had
that virtue to preserve the life of the body a long time, yet not for ever.

Q. Why did God forbid man to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil?
A. Not because it was evil in it self, or hurtful to man: but because by
this command, God would try man's obedience.

Q. Why was the tree, called the tree of knowledge of good and evil?
A. Not because it had power either to beget knowledge in Adam, or to augment
his knowledge, as the Hebrews and Josephus do think: for Adam was created
with perfect knowledge: neither can corporal fruits produce spiritual
effects in the soul: but it was so named from the event: for man knew now what
was good and evil by experience, having transgressed in eating of this tree.
Secondly, it was so named, because of Satan's false promise, who enticed them to
eat of it, promising they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil.

Q. What rivers were those, that Moses calls here Phison and Gehon?
A. They were parts of Tigris, and Euphrates, which river is sometimes named
one, because they flow together, and are joined in one below Babylon: sometimes
two, in respect of the place, from whence they spring and where they end.
Sometimes four, in respect of their four heads, whereof two spring out of the
mountains, and other two empty themselves in the Persian sea.

Q. Then Phison is not Ganges of India, nor Gehon, Nilus of Egypt?
A. No: for Ganges springs out of Caucasus of India, Nilus out of the
mountain of inferior Mauritania* but Phison and Gehon, out of Armenia: Nilus
exonerateth her self in the Mediterranean sea: but Phison and Gehon into the
Persian Gulf.

Q. What country is this Hauilah?
A. Not a country in India, but bordering upon Palestine, and Assyria, as may
be gathered out of Gene. Chap. 25. 18.

Q. What is Bdellium?
A. It is a black Tree, the bigness of an Olive tree, from the which there
runs a kind of sweet Gum. Plinius. lib. 12. Chapt. 9.

Q. How is that understood, that God did put Adam into the Garden?
A. Either by the inward persuasion of God he was led thither, as Christ was
led to the wilderness, Math. 4. or he was caught by the Spirit, as Henoch,
Habh^cuc, and Philip, or else by an Angel, in the shape of man, he was led to
Paradise.

Q. Why did not God create Adam in Paradise?
A. To let him know that Paradise did not belong to him by nature, but by
grace. Secondly, to teach him to be the more circumspect in obeying God,
considering he might be as well put out of it, as he was brought in, if he
brake Gods Law. Thirdly, that he should have no cause to accuse God of
cruelty, in putting him out of that place, which by nature was due to him;
therefore he returns to the place from whence he came.

Q. Then why was Euah created in Paradise?
A. Because Adam, out of whose side she was taken was now in Paradise.
Secondly, she is not now properly created, but formed and framed out of Adams
rib: for when Adam was formed, she was created potentia in him, in respect the
body of Adam was the matter of her body.

Q. Should man have wrought in Paradise?
A. Yes: but not for need, and with trouble as now: but with pleasure, to keep
himself from idleness. Secondly, thereby to stir him up the more to
contemplate heavenly things. And thirdly, to try the diverse natures of
grounds, and of those things that grow on the ground.

Q. Does these words, You shall eat of every tree of the Garden, contain a
precept or a permission?
A. Not a precept, but a permission: for if God did command Adam to eat of
^uery tree, he should have been tied to it* Secondly, man has no need to be
commanded to eat, when he is hungry: for he can do that by nature. Thirdly,
he knew that all the trees were created to that use, therefore he needs no
commandment to eat.

Q. Was this commandment of not eating the tree of Knowledge of good and
evil, enjoined to Eua also?
A. Yes: for so she confessed to the Serpent. Secondly, if she had not been
commanded to abstain from it, she should not have sinned in eating of it.

Q. How could this precept belong to Eua, seeing she was not yet created?
A. It was first given to Adam, and then by Adam it was delivered to Eua.

Q. Why did God forbid Adam to eat of this tree?
A. First, to let him know, that he was but a creature and servant, and
therefore had a Lord whom he must serve and obey. Secondly, to let him see,
that he had free will and power both to choose and refuse any thing he
pleased* Thirdly, to exercise him in obedience.

Q. But seeing God knew that Adam would violate this precept, and bring
himself and his posterity to perpetual misery, why would God inioyne it to
him.
A. To make him inexcusable: for he made him upright, and gave him grace to
obey, if he would: dedit Adamo posse, si vellet; non, and velli, and posse.
Secondly, Although God knew that man would sin, yet he did permit him,
because he was to convert that sin of Adam to his greater good, in sending
his Son into the world. Thirdly, he suffered him to fall, that his Mercy and
Justice might appear the more.

Q. How is it understood, that whatsoever day Adam should eat of the Forbidden
tree, he should die?
A. He did not die actually, as soon as he had eaten the forbidden fruit
but now he was subject to death, and the necessity of dying is laid upon him*
Secondly, he may be said to dye actually that day, because then the infirmities
of body and soul, which are the forerunners and causes of death actual, did
seize upon him: and so mortuus est morte inchoata, sed non completa.

Q. Why did not God expressly threaten Adam with death eternal?
A. Because God in the old Testament speaks but sparingly of death eternal,
and under shadows. Secondly, death corporal is better known to man (not
only by faith and reason, but also by experience) then death eternal, which
only is known by faith. Thirdly, he would speak of such a death, as did not
only belong unto him, but to all his posterity, although they did repent: and
this is the death of the body, whereof all are partakers.

Q. Why did God threaten Adam with death?
A. Because death is the greatest and most fearful misery that can happen to
man. Secondly. The name of death comprehends all the miseries and afflictions
that do befall man in this life, because they are preparations to death: Nam
vt via ad generationem est generatio, sic via ad interitum est mors.

Q. Then what death is mean^ here?
A. Both of body and soul, temporal and eternal.

Q. How can death corporal be a punishment for sin, seeing it proceeds of
natural causes, as of contrary qualities?
A. It is not the punishment of sin, as it proceeds of natural causes, but
in respect that God ordained Adam to live immortally, if he had not sinned: now
having sinned, death follows as the stipend of sin.

Q. Why was it not good that man should be alone?
A. Because man without the woman could not procreate children, and so
mankind could not be multiplied. Secondly, Christ could not have come in the
flesh. Thirdly, the Elect and Church of God could not have increased, if Adam
had been alone.

Q. How were the creatures brought to Adam?
A. Either by the help of Angels, or by that natural instinct which the
Greeks call (...), by the which every creature perceives what is good and bad
for them.

Q. Why did God bring the creatures to Adam?
A. First, To let him see how much he did excel them, and how much the more he
should be thankful. Secondly, Because he was the Lord of the beasts, God
would have him to see his servants. Thirdly, that he might name them. Fourthly,
that posterity might know, what excellent knowledge Adam had, in giving names
to the creatures according to their kinds.

Q. Why were not the fishes brought to Adam?
A. Because they do not so much resemble man as the beasts: secondly, because
they could not be such a help to man as the beasts: thirdly, because they
could not live out of the water.

Q. Had Adam the knowledge of all things, as soon as he was created?
A. Yes, because he was created perfect, as well in regard of the gifts of his
mind, as of his body: secondly, he was to be the Father, Teacher, and
Governor of mankind, which he could not have been without excellent
knowledge: thirdly, knowledge was a part of Adams happiness, and he could not
have been perfectly happy, if he had been at any time ignorant: fourthly, if
God prepared food and all things needful for his body; then much more, science
and understanding, which is the food of the soul.

Q. Should Adams Pesterity* in the state of innocence, have knowledge
ingrafted in them without labor?
A. No: for it is natural to man to attain to knowledge by his senses and
experience, therefore the soul has received a body with senses, which the
soul may use as organs, to beget knowledge; yet man in that happy estate
should have attained to knowledge sooner, and with greater ease than now,
because the wit was most excellent, the senses more perfect, the life longer,
the body healthier and stronger, and there should have been no impediment to
learning as now*

Q. Had Adam the knowledge of supernatural things?
A. Yes, or else his knowledge had not been perfect: secondly, without this
knowledge he could not have known God, nor the Angels, nor the end of his own
creation.

Q. Had Adam more wisdom than any man ever since?
A. Yes: except Christ. And Adams wisdom did excellours: first, in that he
knew all natural things, we but some: secondly, his knowledge did proceed of
the causes of natural things, but ours from the effects: thirdly, his
knowledge could not be lost, but ours is often; partly through the infirmity
and corruption of our natural senses, partly by idleness and ceasing to
study; and partly by the contrary habit of ignorance and false opinions.

Q. Had Adam the knowledge of the heavens, and their operations, as he had of
earthly creatures?
A. Yes, because his mind was perfect: and knowledge is the perfection of the
mind: secondly, the power, wisdom and providence of God is seen in the
heavenly bodies as in the earthly: thirdly, Adam could not have had the perfect
knowledge of earthly things, if he had not had the knowledge of heavenly: for
the knowledge of the earthly things, depends from the knowledge of the heavenly.

Q. What were the effects of that original righteousness, in the which Adam
was created?
A. The effects thereof are many, especially these four: first, the holiness
of his will and reason, which was wholly subject to God: secondly, the
uprightness of the inferior part, that is, of the flesh and senses, which
were perfectly obedient to the superior part of the soul; thirdly, perfect
inclination to do good, and eschew evil: fourthly, a perpetual joy of the
mind, and peace of conscience, raising from this holiness.

Q. Has Christ brought us more happiness by his Iucarnation, than Adam lost
by his transgression?
A. Yes: for although sin did abound, yet grace did more abound, as the
Apostle disputes, Romans 5. Therefore* Foelix fuit Ada culpa cuius delendae
causa, tantum habemus Redemptorem: says Gregorius.

Q. Was Adam mortal or immortal before his Fall?
A. He was immortal, not simply, but conditionally, if he did obey God, if
not, then he should die.

Q. How was he immortal?
A. Not as God, who is altogether immortal, both internally and externally,
because in him there is no mutability: nor as the Angels, who are immortal,
because they are not compounded of a matter, which is the subject of
corruption: nor as the heavens, which though they have a material substance,
yet this is not the subject of contradiction and contrary qualities, as the
sublunary and elementall bodies are: but Adam was immortal by grace, and the
power of God, who would have preserved him supernaturally from corruption,
although naturally he was subject to corruption.

Q. Then this gift of immortality which Adam should have inioyed, was not
naturally due to him?
A. No: for if it had bin natural, it should not have bin taken from Adam: but
sin did neither abolish nor diminish man's natural gifts. Secondly, that
which is against nature, cannot be due to nature: but for the body to be
immortal, is against the nature of man's body, seeing it is compounded of
contrary qualities.

Q. Why would God form Eua of Adam sleeping?
A. That Adam should not feel any pain in losing his rib. Secondly, to
signify a great mystery: for as Eua was formed out of the side of Adam
sleeping: so the Church was reformed by water and blood, out of the body of
Christ dying.

Q. Why was Eua made rather of the side, then of any other part of the body?
A. Because the side is the middle of the body; to signify that the woman must
be of equal dignity with the man, therefore she was not made of the head,
nor of the foot, for she must neither be superior, nor inferior to him.

Q. Of what side was she taken out?
A. It is probable, that she was taken out of the left side, for the heart
inclines to that side^ so man and woman should embrace each other with hearty
love. And as the left side is weakest, so is the woman the weaker vessel: also
the males are conceived in the right side, the females in the left; and as the
sides are defended by the arms, so must the woman by the husband.

Q. Why was Eua made of the man, and not of the earth, as Adam was?
A. Because Adam should love his wife the more, not only because she is of that
same nature with him, that she is joined with him by carnal copulation, that
she does bring him sorth child^en: but also because she is a part of his own
substance. Secondly, Eua was made of Adam, to show that Adam is the beginning
of the woman, and of all mankind. Thirdly, that we might learn from hence,
that mystical conjunction betwixt Christ and his Church.

Q. What is meant by the rib?
A. Not the bare bone: but bone with the flesh thereof, as Adam testifies:
Thou art bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh.

Q. How did God of one rib make a whole woman?
A. Either by rarefaction, or multiplication of the same rib, or by some
addition of some new matter: as Christ did feed 5. thousand men with 5. loaves:
for God can of nothing, or of every thing make any thing.

Q. Was this rib, whereof Eua was created, one of Adams natural ribs, or was
it a superfiuous rib?
A. It was one of Adams natural ribs: for ^ow else could he have said of Eua,
Thou art bone of my bone? or how could Eua be said, to be formed of Adam?
Neither was Adam imperfect, although he wanted his rib: for God did fill up
that place with flesh.

Q. If Adam lost one of his ribs, how comes it* that the posterity of Adam
have all their 24. ribs?
A. Although Abraham was circumcised: yet he begot his children uncircumcised;
and a maimed man does beget a whole man: for nature, if she be not hindered,
retains her own force and vigor, and brings forth the perfectest effects she
can.

Q. How come it, that Adam* in losing his rib, did not feel pain?
A. Either in regard of his deep sleep, for those that are in a lethargy.
do feel neither stripes nor wounds; or else, because God did suspend, and
hinder the act of feeling, which is in the nerves.

Q. Why does not Moses speak as well of the creation of Eua's soul, as of her
body?
A. Because her body was otherwise created, then the body of Adam: but the
manner of the creation of her soul, is all one with that of Adams, therefore
there was no need of repetition.

Q. Why was Eua brought to Adam?
A. To signify, that she was Adams companion. Secondly, a help to him to
beger children. Thirdly, that the man is not for the woman, but the woman for
the man. Fourthly, this bringing signifies, that they are now contracted and
married.

Q. Had Eua ^ reasonable soul as Adam had?
A. Yes: because she was made for a help to man, which she could not have bin
without a reasonable soul: secondly, both receive a Law, upon both was
inflicted punishment for the breach thereof; both their bodies are alike:
redemption is promised to both; and both do expect glory.

Q. Why did not God create Eua as soon as Adam?
A. That Adam living a private life a while, might the better perceive the
comforts of the married life. Secondly, that he might love God the more, who
provided such a comfort to him, when he was alone.

Q. Is man and woman of the same kind?
A. Yes: for male and female make no essential difference. Secondly, if they
were not of the same kind, how could they procreate children? Thirdly, they
both have the same definition and essential properties. Fourthly, we read
that maids have become boys, which could not be if they were of diverse
kinds, Plinius lib. 7. Cap. 4. Gellius. lib. 9. Cap. 4. etc.

Q. How could Adam and Eua be married, seeing they were so near a kin?
A. The neerenesse of kin, which forbids matrimony, is that which arises of
carnal copulation, and Eua was not begotten, but created of Adam: therefore
she was not his daughter, but his wife.

Q. Why was there but one woman created?
A. Because that one woman is sufficient to be a help to one man. Secondly,
to teach posterity, that God does hate Polygamy. Thirdly, that the love of man
might be the greater to his wife.

Q. How is man and woman one flesh?
A. Because they are joined together to live one commonlife. Secondly, in
respect of their carnal copulation. Thirdly, in respect of procreation of one
flesh: for the child is the flesh and substance of the father and mother, and
both their flesh is united in their children, Fourthly, because of the right
and power the Husband has over the body of his Wife, and the Wife over her
Husband, 1. Cor. 7.

Q. Why was not Adam and Eua ashamed of their nakedness?
A. Because that externally, neither heat nor cold, nor any thing else could
hurt their body, internally there was no inordinate affection in the soul: but
perfectly the inferior part of the soul did obey the superior. And thirdly,
because there was nothing to be seen in their bodies, but that which was
comely and decent; and therefore, Nihil putabant velandum, q^ia nihil (...),
Aug. (...). 11. de Genesis Cap. 1.

Questions on the third Chapter.
Q. WHat is meant by the Serpent?
A. Not the devil: for so these words should be metaphorically understood:
but this is a history, and no allegory, nor the image of a Serpent, for it was
not a picture, but a real Serpent that was cursed, neither was it a natural
Serpent that did speak: for speech and reasoning do naturally belong to men,
not to beasts: for they neither have reasonable souls, nor the instruments of
speech: but it was the devil that spoke in the Serpent, using the same as his
instrument to deceive. So then, there was both a Serpent, which is proved both
by the speech of Moses, and the punishment inflicted on the Serpent; and
besides, the devil, which is known both by his speech and reasoning with Eua,
as also by the testimony of Christ, calling the devil a manslayer from the
beginning. John 8.

Q. Why was not Eua afraid to confer with the Serpent?
A. Because the serpent ( as all other creatures) was subject and obedient to
man, neither durst they, nor could they afray him or hurt him, neither was
there any place for fear in that happy estate.

Q. Why did Satan use rather the Serpent, then any other creature?
A. First, because God did not suffer him to take any other creature. Secondly,
because the Serpent, of all other creatures, is most subtle, deceitful, prone
to hurt, and deceive a man: the Serpent is prudent to save it self: therefore
it is said, Be wise as Serpents, Math. 10. and crafty to deceive others, as
Paul says, The Serpent by his craftiness deceived Eua, 2. Cor. 11. Chap.

Q. Seeing it was the devil in the Serpent, that deceived Eua, why does not
Moses signify so much?
A. Because Moses writes a history, and not a commentary, therefore all that
is spoken here, he does attribute to the Serpent, because Eua saw the Serpent,
and conferred with the Serpent: but Satan we saw not.

Q. What do these words mean, Your eyes shall be opened*
A. This is meant of a further degree of knowledge, which Eua had not as yet:
for the eyes of the body were opened already, and good and evil is not the
object of bodily eyes, but of the mind, which is the eye of the soul.

Q. What is that, You shall be as Gods?
A. By Gods, may be understood Angels, which are called Gods in Scripture: But
here is rather meant the persons of the Trinity: as verse. 22. Behold, Adam is
become as one of us.

Q. Did not Eua see that this tree was good till now?
A. Yes: she saw before but simply, but now she sees it with an ardent desire
to eat of it.

Q. Why did God suffer Eua to be tempted?
A. That there might be an occasion for the manifestation both of Gods justice
in punishing the wicked, and of his mercy in saving the repentant. Secondly, to
show us, that although she had all happiness in that estate. yet she should
not have been free of temptations. Thirdly, that we might learn to arm our
selves against Satan: for if he durst tempt in the estate of innocence, and in
Paradise, what will he not do to us now, being driven out (...) Paradise?

Q. What was the first sin of Eua?
A. Incredulity, in not believing God threatening. Secondly, Pride, desiring to
be like God. Thirdly, alye, saying, that Godd forbid to touch the tree.
Fourthly, Gluttony, desiring the fruit which was forbidden. Fift^* scandal, in
drawing Adam to the same sin. Sixthly, a foolish excusing of her sin to God.

Q. Why was the Devil so earnest to tempt Eua?
A. Because he hated God, and would not have man to glorify, but to anger him.
Secondly, because of his pride and envy: for he could not abide that man should
be in such happiness, himself being in misery.

Q. Why did Adam eat of this fruit?
A. Partly, through the instigation of his wife; partly, through curiosity,
desiring to try what kind of fruit this should be, which God did prohibit: so

N^timur in vetitum semper cupimusque negata. Q. Was Adam deceived also, as the
woman was?
A. No: Adam was not seduced, but the woman, 1. Timo. 2. For Eua did not
deceive Adam, because she thought all was true that Satan spoke: but Satan
deceived Eua, because he made her believe that, which he knew himself was
false. Secondly, Eua confessed that she was deceived, but Adam does not say
that he was deceived, but, The woman gave to me, and (...).

Q. Was the same of Adam and Eua the greatest, (...)?
A. If we do consider one sin with another, then we say, that Adams sin
was not the greatest, for the sin against the holy Ghost i^ greater; but if we
respect the circumstances of Adams sin; to wit, the place, Paradise, where no
occasion of sin was; the time when he sinned, immediately after his creation,
at the first encounter yielding to his enemy; the excellency of the person
that sinned, Adam, being created to Gods own Image: if we regard also that
infinite hurt and misery that has fallen upon mankind, by that sin of Adam;
we must confess, that it is the greatest sin that ever man committed.

Q. Whether was the sin of Adam or Eua greatest?
A. If we consider both their persons, then Adam did sin more grievously,
because he was wiser and stronger than Eua, and he was the head af the woman:
for this cause says the Apostle, that by one man sin entered into the world,
Romans 5. yet in two respects, Eua's sin was greater than Adams: first, in that
she did believe the Serpent more than God; which Adam would not have done:
secondly, in that she did entice Adam to the same sin.

Q. How were their eyes opened after the eating of this fruit?
A. They were not blind before, nor ha^ they now more liberty of will than
they had, or greater knowledge: but now they know ^uill by experience, which
before they knew by science; and their eyes are said to be opened, because
they perceive, their nakedness is ignominious, and their affections
inordinate, which before were decent and holy.

Q. Why did they cover their members, after the eating of the forbidden fruit?
A. Because they were ashamed of their nakedness: secondly, by this they
thought to hide their sin, but in vain: for none can hide sin but God;
therefore blessed is he whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32.

Q Why did they cover their privy members?
A. Because their inordinate lust began most to appear here: secondly, these
are the instruments of generation, which then became sinful; therefore all
people are ashamed to see those parts, because sin comes by generation. Hence
circumcision (the sign of generation) was on this part of the body, Genesis 17.

Q. Why did they (...) the leaves of the Fig tree?
A. Because the leaves of the Fig Tree are broadest, or else, because their
guilty consciences accusing them; and being in fear, they took of the leaves
of this tree which was nearest.

Q. What is meant here by the noise of God?
A. This sometimes signifies thunder, Exodus 9. sometimes any sound. Ezekiel. 12.
sometimes Gods distinct voice like thunder, John 12. here it signifies some
fearful noise and sound, by which God would signify; that now he was coming
to encounter with Adam.

Q. What signifies the wind of the day?
A. This is a description of the evening: for at the going down of the Sun
in those places, that are near the Mediterranian Sea, commonly the wind does
blow from the Sea; and as God came to judge Adam in the evening, so will he
come to judge all mankind in the evening of the world, with the sound of the
Trumpet.

Q. How did God speak to Adam here
A. God speaks in Scripture sometime internally by his Spirit, sometimes
externally, either by Angels, or by men. Here then it is like, that Christ
spoke in the form of man; for in this form he did oftentimes appear to the
Fathers of old; and in the fullness of time, this word was made flesh, and
dwelt with us.

Q. Why did not God accuse Satan, as he did the man and the woman?
A. Because Satan was already condemned for his pride, but the other two were
to receive the sentence of condemnation; therefore he would not condemn them,
till he had convicted them.

Q. Whether did God curse the Devil, or the Serpent?
A. He cursed both: the Devil mystically, and the Serpent literally; the
Devil as the principal agent, and the Serpent as his instrument: but this
Curse is pronounced of the Serpent only, because it was the Serpent that Eua
did see and speak to, and the Devil did lurk within the Serpent.

Q. How could the creeping on the belly, and the eating of the dust, be a
punishment and a curse, seeing this was natural to the Serpent before man's
fall?
A. The Serpents creeping before, was pleasant, now it is painful; then it
was comely, now it is base, execrable, and contemptible.

Q. Why did God curse the Serpent?
A. To augment Satan's grief the more, who used him for his organ in this
wicked tentation. Secondly, because the Serpent being Satan's instrument, was
the occasion of man's fall; as the beast with whom any man did lie, was to be
stoned, Leuit. 20. Thirdly, because by this God will show, how much he
abhors sin, in punishing for man's wickedness dumb and senseless
creatures: therefore the Earth was cursed, for Adams sin; the beasts and
fowls were drowned, sor the sin of the first World; the Cities that entice
the Israelites to Idolatry, must be burnt; yea, the Cattle, and every thing
in those Cities, Deuteronomy. 13. yea, the dumb creatures, for man's sin were daily
offered up in sacrifice.

Q. What is meant by the Woman's Seed, and the Serpents seed?
A. By the Woman's Seed, is meant especially Christ, the Woman's Seed, according
to the flesh; and with him, all the faithful: by the Serpents seed, are meant
both the ravenous beasts, which naturally hate mankind, as also wicked men,
which are called Serpents in Scripture, and generation of Vipers.

Q. What is meant here by the Head, and the Heel?
A. By the Head of the Serpent, is meant the power of the Devil, sin and
death; by which he wounds us: by the Heel, is meant the humanity of Christ,
and his members, which Satan did hurt, by the death of the Cross; and wounds
yet, by persecuting his members.

Q. How can the multiplication of the woman's consceptions be a punishment for
sin?
A. The conceptions of the woman are a punishment, because sometimes their
conceptions are imperfect and deformed: secondly, many children being
conceived, do perish before they come to maturitie: Thirdly, many children are
wicked and rebellious, not regarding the womb that bare them with anguish, nor
the pappes which suckled them with danger. These are great punishments
inflicted on women for the sin of Eua: fourthly, her conceptions are a
punishment; for many infirmities do accompany a woman that is with child, as
swimmings in the head, tooth-aches, perturbations in the mind, vitiosities in
the stomach; as to refuse good and wholesome meares, to desire to eat those
things which Nature (being sound) abhors.

Q. What is the reason that women do bring forth their children in sorrow?
A. Gods decree in punishing the sin of Eua: secondly, the narrow passage of
the belly, with a dilatation and stretching out of the internal parts thereof,
causes most sharp and sensible pains: hence the Scripture compares exquisite
sorrow and pain, with the sorrows of the child birth, Psalm. 48. Mica. 4. Reu.
12. but this pain should not have been in the state of innocence.

Q. Wherein was the ground cursed for Adams sake?
A. In that it did not bring forth fruit of it own accord, as it should have
done, if Adam had not sinned, or at least, with little labor. Secondly, in
that it brought forth noxious, and fruitless, and poysonable herbs after the
Fall.

Q. Why did Adam call his wife Eua, the mother of living?
A. Because by this name he would testify his faith, in believing that
Christ, the Seed of the woman, should bring that life again to man, which he
had lost by his sin.

Q. Did God make coats of skins for Adam and his wife?
A. Yes: but whether God killed some beast, or whether he created the skins
of nothing, or of some matter, it is uncertain; howsoever, by those skins he
did put Adam in mind of his mortality, and that he had need of clothing, both
for his body, which now was to be subject to infirmities, as also for his
soul, which now was defiled with sin, and therefore must be clothed with
the righteousness of Christ; which garment he did put on by believing that
Christ, the Lamb of GOD, should be killed to clothe his naked soul, as this
beast was killed to clothe his naked body. These skins also do signify our
mortification; for, as these beasts were killed, so we must kill our sins:
for this cause, the skins of the Sacrifices were given to the Priests, Leuit.
7. Elias and John Baptist with many other Saints, did wear skins, Hebr. 11.

Q. Why did God clothe them with skins?
A. First, to show them that it was lawful for them to kill beasts, although
not to eat, yet to clothe their bodies. Secondly, to teach us sobriety; for
those were Skins, not Silk, Purple, or Cloth of Gold, which are not worn so
much for necessity, as for pride. Thirdly, that this first Adam might in some
sort be a type of the second Adam, JESUS: for this was clothed with the
skins of dead beasts, so Christ with our dead sins; for he became sin
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: and so our
Jacob took our flesh and skin, and in it received the blessing for us.

Q. Was it needful that Adam should be clothed now after his Fall?
A. Yes: first, to hide his nakedness: secondly, to desend his body from the
injuries of the air: thirdly, to assure him, that although he was a sinner,
yet God would not quite forget him, and cast him away.

Q. Why did God say, that Adam was like to him?
A. By these words, God would show how worthy Adam was to be scorned, who
thought to be like to any or the three Persons in the Trinity, for eating of
the forbidden fruit: so this word (us) does not signify Angels, but the three
Persons of the Trinity.

Q. Why did God drive Adam out of the Garden?
A. To let him see how foolishly he had done, in giving more credit to his
Wife, than to him. Secondly, to keep the Tree of Life from him, lest he should
abuse it, by thinking to have life by it, seeing he had now violated Gods Law:
for although this Tree was a sign of life before his Fall, now it is none.
Thirdly, that by driving him from this Tree of Life, he might seek for a
better life than this Tree could yield, even that heavenly life, which is hid
with Christ in God.

Q. When was Adam cast out of Paradise?
A. That same day he sinned: for he being now a sinner, and rebellious against
God, was not fit to stay any longer in that holy place: but what day of the
week^ he was cast out, is uncertain; yet it is thought, the eighth day after
his creation, he was cast out, in the evening of that day: for Satan did not
suffer him to stay long there vntempted: yet I do not hold that he was cast
out that same day he was created: for so many things as fell out between his
creation and casting out of Paradise, could not be done all in such a short
space as a piece of a day; for the beasts were created the sixth day, before
man was. Secondly, in such a short time Adam could not have perceived the
pleasures and happiness of that place; therefore he was not cast out that same
day he was created.

Q. Why would God have Adam to till the ground?
A. Because now the ground was cursed, and would not yield fruit without hard
labor. Secondly, by this seruill work, he would put him in remembrance of
his sin, which brought him to this misery: yet afterward God mitigated his
hard labor, in freeing every seventh year from his tillage, to put them in
mind^ of that ease they lost by sin, which was restored again spiritually by
Christ.

Q. What is meant here by the Cherubins and the siery Sword?
A. Not fearful visions, nor the torrid Zone, nor a fire compassing Paradise
like a wall, neither the fire of Purgatory, as Treodorotus, Aquinas, Lyranus,
and Ambrosius do imagine but by the Cherubins we understand the Angels which
did appear often times with wings as Daniel 1. 9* and the figures of these
were wrought in the tabernacle, Exo. 25. By the fiery sword we understand most
sharp and two edged swords which the Angels in the form of men did shake by
the which shaking and swift motion the swords did seem to Adam to glister like
fire for more terror lest he should attempt re-entrance there the Angels also
have appeared at other times with swords in their hands as we read Numbers 22.
of the Angel that met Balaam: and of that Angel that David did observe with a
sword in his hand* 1. Chro. 21. 16.

Q. Why are these Angels called Ch^rnbins?
A. Because they did appear with wings in the Tabernacle and the Temple they
were wrought with two wings: they appeared to Esaias, with 6. wings, who are
called in the 6. of Esaias, Seraphins because they are inflamed with the love of
God: they appear with wings to signify there swiftness and diligence in
executing Gods commandments.

Questions on the fourth Chapter.
Q. WHat is the subject of this Chapter?
A. Concerning the propagation of mankind, especially of Caine and Abel; in
who^e persons were to be seen the wicked, and the Church of God. Caine
signifies Possession: this is a fit name to the wicked; for they seek nothing
else but Possessions and Honors in this world; and therefore Came built a
City: so the wicked labors to be secure, to have rest and ease in this
world. But Abel signifies Vanitio and Sorrow: so is the estate of the godly,
their life hee^e is but vanity, and they account all things but vanity; their
life is sorrow, they weep for their sins, and for the vanities of this
world, and because they are persecuted by the posterity of Caine.

Q. When was Caine borne?
A. After Adam was cast out of Paradise; for the^e ^ee remained but a short
while: neither was it ^it, that in Paradise, a place holy, and the type of
Heaven, any carnal copulation, which now was sinful, should be committed.

Q. Why did Eua say, I have obtained a son of the Lord?
A. Because she was glad, thinking she had borne the promised Seed, that should
tread down the Serpents head: but she was deceived; for he was rejected,
although he was the first borne, and therefore a King and Priest; and Abel,
whom she counted vanity, was chosen, and his sacrifice accepted.

Q. Why is it said, that Abel was a feeder of sheep?
A. To signify that Abel was the figure of Christ: for as he was killed by
his brother Caine, so was Christ of his brethren the Jews: as Abels sacrifice
was received, so was that perfect Sacrifice of Christ accepted of the Father,
as a full Propitiation for our sins: and as Abel was a shepherd, so was
Christ the true Shepherd, that laid down his life for his sheep sake.

Q. Wherein was Abels sacrifice better then Caines?
A. In that it was of the best and fattest; signifying, that the best things
must be given to God: secondly, it proceeded of faith and love that Abel
carried to God, Heb. 11.

Q. How did Cain know, that God respected the sacrifice of Abel?
A. By some visible sign, as by fire from heaven consuming the sacrifice; for
so he used to show afterward, that he liked the sacrifice by sending fire, as
Leisit. 9. Iud. 6. 1. Chron. 21. 1. Kings 18.

Q. Why does God say, that Abels desire should be subject to his brother?
A. Because Caine was the first borne, and therefore, by nature, had great
privileges over his younger brethren; which words God speaks, to restrain
him from hurting Abel* for though God accepted Abels sacrifice, yet he would
not take away the honor of Caines Birthright, and the privileges that
followed the same.

Q. Why did Caine kill his brother Abel?
A. First, for Envy, because God accepted his sacrifice; and therefore he
thought, that Abel should have obtained his birthright: secondly, by the
instigation of Satan; who considering the holy life of Abel, thought, that of
him should com^ the promised S^de; so he began (...) to persecute Christ.

Q. Wherein was Caines answer to God, evil?
A. In ^hree things: first, in that it was a lie: secondly, in that it was
impious; for he lied not to m^, but to God: thirdly, in that it was (...), Am
I my brothers keeper?

Q. Why is it said, that Abels blood did cry to God?
A. To express the wickedness of this sin. In Scripture four kinds of
sin do cry to God: first, Murder, as in this place: secondly, that
fearful sin of Sodom, Genesis 18. thirdly, the oppression of the poor,
Exodus 3. fourthly, the keeping back of the laborers hire, James 5.

Q. What is Caines punishment?
A. First, he was accursed; that is, deprived of Gods love and favor, and hated
of all good men, and he was the first man that was cursed: as the Serpent his
father was the first creature that was cursed, because both the Devil and
Caine were murderers; Adam was not cursed, but the Earth for him. Secondly,
the Earth also is cursed for Caines sin, and made unfruitful. Thirdly, he is
made a vagabond, and fugitive; signifying, that he should be so troubled with
the sting of his guilty conscience, that he should be in continual fear.

Q. Was Caines sin^e greater than he could hear?
A. No: for his sin was not greater than Gods mercy, and his punishment was
not greater than Gods justice could inflict: and so, by these words he either
accuses God of injustice, in saying his punishment is greater than he can
bear; or else he despaireth, if he say, his sin is greater than he can
bear: and so he sins now more fearfully than before; for before, he sinned
against his neighbor, here he sins against God.

Q. What means Caine, when he says, he shall be cast out from Gods face?
A. By Face, either he means his presence in the Church; and in this sense, to
be cast out from Gods face, is to be excommunicated out of the Church: or by
his Face, we may understand his favor and protection, as often in Scripture:
also in this sense, to be cast out from Gods face, is to lose his love, care,
and favor; as to have his face, is to have all blessings.

Q. Why wa^ he afraid to be killed, seeing there were no more men now but Adam?
A. Although Moses does not mention other men at this time, because his drift
is to speak only of the propagation of the Church, yet we must know, that now
when Abel was killed, mankind was multiplied; for he was killed the 129. as
some, or the 130. year of the World, as others do think.

Q. What is meant by the seuen-fold punishment, that they shall suffer who
shall kill Caine?
A. By this is either understood, that they shall be punished to the seventh
generation; or else, by seuen-fold is understood manifold, as often in
Scripture* So then, he that did kill Caine, should be most severely punished,
not only for murdering a man, but also for murdering such a man as was
marked by God, that he should not be murdered.

Q. But why would not God have Cain killed?
A. First, to show that he abhorres murder: secondly, he would have him to
live long in fear and torment: thirdly, that by him, living so long in torment
and misery, others might be warned to abhor murder: fourthly, that he
might have the longer time to repent him for his sin.

Q. What mark was this, that God set upon Caine?
A. Whether it was a mark on his body, or madness, and fear in his mind,
it is uncertain; yet it was some real and visible sign, that men might be
warned by, not to meddle with him.

Q. How is it understood, that Caine went out from Gods presence?
A. Here his presence does not signify his knowledge and power; for none can
flee from that: as, Whither shall I ^lee from thy presence? Psalm 139. and
Jonas thought to have fled from this presence, Jonas 1. But his presence does
signify here, the place of his worship, where he showed his presence, and
that is his Church; or else, he went out of Gods presence, that is, he was
deprived of Gods love and favor.

Q. Why did Caine build a City?
A. For his better security, for he was in continual fear: secondly,
because he was worldly-minded, placing his happiness in the cities and forts
of this world, and not looking for that city whose builder and maker is God:
thirdly, that he might the more securely tyrannize and prey upon other men's
goods and lands: for he is the first King and Conqueror in the world: and
therefore Kings should not delight in Conquering kingdoms with blood, least
they be counted the suc^ssours of Caine and Nimrod, that mighty Hunter; for,
Magna imperia sunt magna latroci^ia.

Q. When did Caine build this City?
A. Not when Henoch was borne; for then there was no great need to build,
seeing there were but few persons in the world: but in his old age; for Caine
lived a long time, and now mankind was greatly multiplied.

Q. Why did ^ee call his City Henoch, and not by his own name, Caine?
A. Because his own name was odious to the world, in respect of his murder;
therefore he would not disgrace his City, and those that dwelt therein:
secondly, because he loved Henoch exceedingly; therefore he would immortalize
his name.

Q. How is it understood, that Iabel was the father of them that dwelt in
Tents, and had Cattle?
A. He was the inuenter of Shepheardry, and of feeding of Cattle now Abel
being dead: for Tents here signify such Tents as Shepherds do use, and not
those that Soldiers do use in Wars.

Q. Who were the first Inuenters of Music, and Smiths Craft?
A. Not Pythagoras, Linus, Orpheus, or Uulcan; but Iubal, and Tubal-Caine, the
posterity of Caine: so we see, that in external things, Caine and his
posterity were blessed, as the wicked are generally in this life; but the
inheritance of the Saints is in heaven.

Q. Was it lawful for Lamech to have two wives?
A. No: for it was against the first institution of Marriage: secondly, against
the Law of Nature; which does show, that one should be content with one:
thirdly, this plurality of wives did arise of incontinencie and lust, and not
of desire to propagate to the increase of the Church, as many Saints have done.

Q. What is meant by these words, I would slay a man in my wound, etc?
A. Heer^ Lamech perceiving that he was hated for his cruelty, b^aggeth to his
wives of his strength, That although he were wounded, yet he were able to kill
a man: this he did speak, to make his wives and others fear him the more.
The Hebrews think, that Lamech did kill Caine in the Wilderness, thinking
him to be a wild beast; and perceiving that it was Caine, he killed also the
young man that deceived him.

Q. What means these words, If Caine shall be avenged seuen-fold, then Lamech
etc.
A. Either he speaks this, to affray others from killing him, although he
was a murderer, and so making a derision of Gods judgment he had laid upon
Caine; as if he would say, If he that kills Caine, shall be punished
seuen-fold, then he that kills me, shall be punished seventy seuen-fold,
that is, a great deal more: or else, by these words he seems to repent for
his murder; as if he would say, Was Caine punished so hardly for his murder?
then I am worthy of a seventy seuen-fold worse punishment.

Q. Was Sheth the third son of Adam? or had he any more besides those three
mentioned in Genesis?
A. It is credible, that in the space of an hundred and thirty years, (for in
the hundred and thirtieth year Sheth was borne) Adam had many more children
than those three; because that Adam and Eve were created perfect, and apt for
procreation: So also it was necessary that the world should be multiplied,
according to Gods Decree, Increase and multiply. But these three Moses only
names, because of all the rest, they were most eminent: Abel, the type of
Christ, and the Church, which are Abels, that is, mourners in this life: Caine,
the type of the Devil, and his Church, and the father of the wicked: Sheth,
the origin and root of the Church, the Father of Christ; yea, the origin of
all mankind, after the flood: for Abel was killed, and Caines posterity
drowned.

Q. Why does Eua say, that God has put another Seed to me, in stead of Abel;
speaking of Sheth, and not of any other of her sons?
A. Because Sheth was likest Abel. of all Eua's children, both in Religion
toward God, uprightness of life toward men, and in love and reverence toward
his Parents.

Q. What did Enoch signify?
A. Sorrowful, or miserable: he also was a type of the Church; which is
pressed, although not oppressed with sorrow and misery in this life.

Q. Why does Moses say, that in his days men began to call on the Name of the
Lord?
A. To signify, that now men began to worship God more publicly then they did
before, to exhort the people to repentance, to preach openly. But we must not
think, that God was not worshipped at all, till now: for Adam did worship God,
and taught his sons Abel and Came to sacrifice; and Sheth also was an holy
man, and a type of Christ, and of the Church.

Questions on the fifth Chapter.
Q. WHy does Moses rehearse the ten generations of Adam?
A. First, to show the Genealogy of Christ, the promised Seed: Secondly,
because he is to speak of Enochs translation, therefore he would show his
generation: Thirdly, to show that amongst these multitudes* God had his Church,
although it was then small; for God has never wanted some, since the Creation,
who do worship him, and call upon his Name.

Q. Why does Moses say here, that God did both create and make man? and what is
meant by Adam here?
A. He does distinguish creation from making: for to be made, is to be formed
of some pre-existant matter; but to be created, is to be produced of nothing:
then both these words he used, to signify the diverse producing of the soul
and body. The soul is created, because it is produced of nothing; the body is
made, because of something. And by Adam, he means both the man and the
woman* giving them one name, to signify that they are both of one flesh.

Q. How is it understood, that Adam begat a son after his image?
A. First, by his image, we understand his nature and substance; secondly, his
reason and power he had over all other creatures; thirdly, the corruption of
his nature: so that now Adam being sinful and mortal, begets sinful and
mortal children. Then Sheth was begotten after the image of Adam* a man endued
with reason, and dominion over the creatures; subject to sin and death, as
Adam.

Q. Why is it not said, that Adam did beget Caine and Abel after his image?
A. Because a part of this image does consist in bearing rule over the
creatures; which dominion Abel had not, being taken away by untimely death: and
from Caine this power was taken away, because he was accursed; and the Earth
commanded, not to yield her increase.

Q. What does this name Sheth signify?
A. To be set, or appointed in stead of Abel; and as Abel was the type of
mortality, so Sheth is the type of our resurrection: for Adam seemed to be
dead* Abel being killed, and Caine accursed; but in the birth of Sheth, he
seems to revive again: and as he in Sheth was revived, so we all in Christ
shall be made alive; and in that Adam gives the same name to his son that
Eua did, they both testify their faith and hope they have in the promised Seed.

Q. Why are the years of Adam and the rest called Days?
A. To signify, that although our life be never so long, it shall consume as
days; for all years are composed of days: therefore every day we should be
mindful of Mortality, and think, that every day is the last; and we must
beseech God, that he would teach us to number our days.

Q. What is the cause, that Adam, and the rest here named before the Flood,
lived so long?
A. First, because they lived soberly, and were contented with simple diet; not
pampering their bellyes, as now, with variety of Dishes. Secondly, the
constitution of their bodies were better than ours, stronger, and not subject
to Diseases. Thirdly, they had more experience and skill in the nature of
Herbs and Fruits which they did eat, than we have. Fourthly, the Earth then
brought forth excellenter Herbs for the food of man, than it has done after
the Flood: Fifthly, God would have them live so long* that Mankind might the
more be multiplied. Sixthly, that man might the more commodiously find out Arts
and Sciences; which they could not do, without long experience. Seventhly, the
moderate temperature of the air was then greater. Eighthly, they did live so
long, that Adam night teach them the Creation of the World, his happiness in
Paradise, and reiection from thence, etc. that the knowledge of God and
Religion might the better be established amongst them, and propagated by them.

Q. What kind of years were those that Moses mentions here?
A. Not the years of the Moon, which we call Months: for by this
computation, we should confess, that Kenan and Enoch did beget sons and
daughters before they were seven years old; and that Abraham being 17. years
of age, was a very old man: but Moses means the years of the Sun, which
were equal with our years; as we have proved in the Preface, upon the second
book of our Jewish History.

Q. Why did Moses subioyne unto every one of their lives this Particle (and he
died?)
A. First to show the inevitable punishment and consequent of sin upon all
Mankind. And from hence we may conclude, that every one that dies, is a
sinner, even children; for death is the wages of sin: I except Christ; who
dyed, not because he sinned, but because he came to destroy sin, and death,
and Satan, that has the power of death. Secondly, to show the vanity of this
life, which is so short. Thirdly, to put us in mind of our mortality, that
we might prepare our selves for our end. All must die; even those are gone,
that lived so long: and although that we think they lived many years, yet we
may truly say, that they did not live one whole day; for none of them lived
1000. years, which to God is as one day.

Q. What is the cause of the great difference between the Hebrew Copies, and
the translation of the Septuagints, in the computation of the years between
Adam and the Flood?
A. We cannot say, that those seventy Interpreters, which Ptolomey did employ
in translating the Hebrew Bible into the Greek Tongue, did err in their
computation, seeing they use no figures, as the Greeks and Latins do in this
computation, but they use the names of their numbers. But rather we think,
that those that copyed out the translation of the Septuagints out of Ptolomeus
Library, did err, in mistaking the Greek figures; for one letter, or figure,
may easily be mistaken for another: or else they were somewhat negligent,
because they thought these numbers of years not to be necessary. But we must
adhere to the Hebrew verity: or else, if we follow the Septuagints in their
computation, we must yield, that Methusalem did live after the Flood sixteen
years, which is directly against the truth of Gods Word; which affirms, that
eight souls did only escape the Flood, that is, Noah and his Family.

Q. Did Henoch die* or not?
A. He did not die: so witnesses Paul. Heb. 11. and Moses also in this place:
for he subioynes to every one of their lives that lived before and after
Henoch, until the Flood (and he died;) but of Henoch he speaks no such
thing.

Q. Why did God translate Henoch, that he should not see death?
A. First, that he might assure the faithful of their resurrection, and life
eternal: secondly, because the World did degenerate, and came as it were to
the height of impiety; therefore he took him away, lest he had been desiled
with their wickedness, and so be made partaker of their plagues: thirdly,
because God would show the World, how highly he esteems those that walk with
him; that is, that obey, love, and fear him.

Q. Whither was Henoch translated?
A. Not to the earthly Paradise; for that was destroyed with the Flood: but he
was translated to that heavenly Paradise, whereof Christ speaks to the good
These on the Cross, and whither Elias was caught: now, although he dyed not,
yet his translation was in stead of death.

Q. What signifies Noe?
A. Rest: which name his father Lamech gave him, because of the comfort he
should have of him, thinking that he was the promised Seed, that should tread
down the Serpents ^ead; or rather, because that he perceived by the Spirit of
Prophecy, that he should be the type of Christ: for as Noe restored the World
after the Flood; so did Christ, after the flood of his Fathers wrath, restore
the World to spiritual life: secondly, as Noe did build the Arc; so has
Christ built the Church: thirdly, as Noe offered sacrifice, whereby God smelled
a savor of Rest, and said he would curse the ground no more; so in Christ's
Sacrifice which he offered on the Cross, is the Father well pleased, and he
will not be angry with his Church for ever.

Q. How was Noe a comfort to Lamech, concerning the sorrow and work of his
hands, and touching the Earth, which the Lord cursed?
A. By Sorrow, and the works of our hands, may be understood Sin, which is
our own work, as holiness is the work of God; by the Earth, which was
cursed, we understand the barrenness of the Ground and the hard labor of the
Husbandmen: for the Ground was cursed twice; once for Adams sake, and once for
Caines: but now Lamech comfort himself, that Noe shall be acceptable to
God; who* for his sake, appointed times and seasons for sowing and reaping, and
gave Noe the skill to find out Wine, that comforts the heart (...) man: and
also, in his time, God did sweep (...) way the sins of this age, which did
grieve (...) mech, with an universal Flood.

Q. Which of Noes three sons were eldest?
A. Iapheth is the eldest; as it is plain, Genesis 10. 21. Cham the youngest,
Genesis 9. 24. but Shem is first named: First because in dignity he is preferred
before his brethren, Genesis 9. 26. so Abraham is named before his elder brother,
Genesis 11. 26. Jacob before Esau, Genesis 28. 5. Ephraim before Manasses, Genesis 48.
20. Secondly, Shem is first named; because of him, Abram and his posterity, the
Israelites, descended: of which Moses is purposed to speak most.

Q. Why did the Patriarchs here named, ^staine so long from begetting children;
as Noe, till he was 500. years old, etc?
A. As they lived longer then we, so they were not ready so soon to beget
children, as we are: for now, when a man is thirty, he is in the prime of his
years; but then, none was said to come to man's estate, till he had bin a
hundred years and more. Secondly, Moses drift here is not to set down the
names of all the sons of these Fathers, but of such as Abraham and the
Israelites came; and therefore he omits those first borne, of whom Abraham came
not, and ^peakes of the youngest: as Matthew, in describing Christ's Genealogy,
speaks of Isaac, not of Ismael; of Jacob, not of Esau; of Judas and David,
not of their elder brethren, because of them came not the Lord.

Questions on the sixth Chapter.
Q. WHat is understood by men, that began to multiply?
A. By men, we understand the sons of Caine: who, because they took many
Wives, did increase faster then Sheths posterity; and as they multiplied, so
did their sins multiply: for the multiplication of mankind is a blessing; but
we see, the more blessings God bestows on us, the worse we are.

Q. What is meant here by the sons of God?
A. Not Angels, neither good nor bad, neither with bodies, nor without bodies:
for they being spirits, are not moved with carnal lust; neither was it to
drown them, that God sent the flood, but to destroy man: therefore by the
sons of God, is understood men; for of them only does God speak here,
throughout all the Chapter.

Q. What sort of men were these, that are called the sons of God?
A. Some think, they were very tall an^ mighty men: therefore they are called
the sonn^ of God* as the Mountains of God, the Cedar^ of God, that is, high
and tall Hills, and Cedars* others think they were the sons of Princes* and
Judges, which are called gods in Scripture^ others again say, that they are
those whereo^ Paul speaks, Romans 8. They that are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the sons of God* that they were holy and just men: but they are of
soundest judgment, that by them understand the posterity of Sheth; who
although they degenerated, yet Moses gives them that honorable title, to show
their ingratitude, in forsaking their heavenly Father.

Q. Why is the posterity of Sheth called the sons of God?
A Because God had separated them from the rest of the World, as a peculiar
people to himself; they did serve him and reverence him as their heavenly
Father: secondly, because Sheth, their father, was an holy and just man, and by
consequent, the son of God, both by ad^ption, and imitation; therefore God
does honor his posterity, in calling them the sons of God, for their father
Sheths sake: So we see what an honor it is, to have holy Parents.

Q. Was it unlawful for the sons of God to take to themselves wives of the
daughters of men?
A. Yes: for those daughters of men were Caines posterity, excommunicated from
the Church; for they were the sons of old Adam, because they were not borne
again by the immortal Seed of the Word: now it was unlawful for Sheths
posterity to marry Caines daughters, being of a contrary Religion. This kind
of Matrimony was forbidden afterward, Exodus 34. and Deuteronomy 7. For this
cause, Abraham and Isaac would not have their sons marry with Canaanites.
Secondly, they took those wives, not for multiplication of Mankind, but to
satisfy their immoderate lust; therefore this copulation was unlawful: for
they should not have defiled their bodies; as knowing they are the Temples of
the Holy Ghost.

Q. How do we know, that these were not Angels, which are called here the
sons of God?
A. Because Angels are Spirits, not composed of any Physical matter, nor
enclosed into bodies, as the souls of men* therefore they cannot be moved with
carnal lust.

Q. Some do think they have bodies, and therefore are here understood to have
taken them wives of the daughters of men: how then is it, that they have no
bodies?
A. If they had bodies, they should be either Celestial, or Elementall.
Celestial they are no^ for heavenly bodies have but one kind of motion, which
is to turn round; but Angels ascend and descend, and have all other kinds of
moving. Elementarie they are not: for whatsoever i^ composed of Elements, is
corruptible; but the Angels are not. If they say, that Angels have in them but
one Element; then I would know, which it is: again, they should grant, that
the bodies of Angels are more ignoble then the bodies of men; because in
sublunarie bodies, the more Elements they are composed of, the nobler and
perfecter they are: and if their bodies are baser, then their minds are
imperfecter; for there is a proportion between the form and the matter.

Q. Cannot Angels beget children?
A. No: for they have no seed fit for procreation, because they feed not; for
seed is a part of our food. Again, if they could procreate children, they
should be distinguished in male and female; for both these must concur in
procreation.

Q. What is meant by these words. My Spirit shall not always strive with man?
A. By the word Spirit, is not understood Gods providence, nor God himself,
taken essentially; nor his wrath and indignation; nor man's soul: but Spirit is
taken for God himself personally, or for the Holy Ghost, the third person in
the Trinity; by which Spirit, Christ preached in Noe, to the disobedient
spirits of the old World, 1* Pet. 3. The meaning then is, My holy Spirit shall
not contend always (or a long time) with sinful man, by exhorting,
conuincing outwardly, and inwardly by the checkes of conscience, because he is
but flesh, that is, fleshly-minded; walks after the flesh, and not after the
spirit.

Q* What then is meant by flesh here?
A. Not flesh properly so called: secondly, nor as it is taken for the nature
of man, as John 1. 14. Christ the Word, is said to be made flesh; but here it
is taken for the corruption of man's nature. Here then God calls man, whom he
has made to his own Image, flesh, to make him ashamed that he has so
miserably fallen from his first integrity: for Adam was made a living soul.

Q. Why says God, that the days of man should be an hundred and twenty
years, seeing that after the Flood, many did live till they were above?
A. It is true, that Sem lived five hundred years after the Flood, some four
hundred, some two hundred; and many, till Moses time, lived an hundred and
thirty years. So that these words must not be understood, as though God,
after the Flood, did prolong man's life only to an hundred and twenty years;
but these one hundred and twenty years, are meant of that time that God gave
to the first world to repent in: so long Noe preached, and builded the Arc.

Q. It seems there was an hundred years from the uttering of this speech,
till the Flood: for Sem, after the Flood immediately, was an hundred years old;
and he was borne when this speech was uttered.
A. From the uttering of this speech, until the Flood, there was an hundred
and twenty years: but this was spoken when Noe was four hundred and
fourscore years old, that is twenty years before he was five hundred* and
before Sem was borne: yet Moses speaks of Sems generation, before the
uttering of these words; because speaking of the generation of the Fathers,
from Adam, until the Flood, he would not leave out the generation of Sem,
although he was borne twenty years after the uttering of these words of God.

Q What were these Giants that are here mentioned?
A. They were men of great stature of body, and therefore strong and
powerful; as also cruel, wicked, ambitious: in Greek they are called
Gigantes, that is, engendered of the Earth; not as though they were the sons
of the Earth, as the Poets thought, but because of a great deal of earthly
substance they carried about in their bodies; as also, in respect of their
minds, being earthly-minded: in Hebrew they are called Nephilim, from falling,
because as Apostates they fell from God; and being cruel, they fell on men,
and caused many, by fear, to fall before them.

Q. Then is it true, that there have been such mighty men of great stature,
which we do call Giants?
A. Yes: both sacred and profane Histories do testify so much. Augustine
says, Lib. 15. de Ciuitate Dei* That he saw a Tooth of a man as great as an
hundred of ours. Pl^nie records in his seventh book, That in Creta, out of a
Hill, was dug the body of a man, of six and forty cubits. The Spies that
were sent to Canaan, reported, That they seemed Grassehoppers, In comparison of
the Giants of that I and, Number* 13. The y^on Bed of Og* King of Bas^an, was nine
cubits long, and four cubits broad, Deuteronomy 3. Goliath of the Philistines,
was a mighty great Giant: And many more examples might here be alleged.

Q. But were these Giants begotten of Devils and women, as some have thought?
A. Seeing these Giants were of the same substance and nature that other men
are, differing only in the quantity of their bodies from others, which is no
essential, but accidental difference, they were men, and begotten of men and
women* secondly, if devils had begotten them of women, they had been neither
men nor devils, but a third kind, different from both; for when two of diverse
kinds couple together, they bring forth a third kind, different from both: as
the Horse and the Ass beget a Mule, which is neither Horse nor Ass: now,
devils and women being much more different in nature, could not bring forth
Giants, seeing these were men: thirdly, devils being spirits, cannot procreate,
as is already proved.

Q. What was the sin of the first World?
A. Moses in the fifth verse of this Chapter describes their wickedness, that
it was great: secondly, it was universal, and not amongst a few: thirdly, it
was volu^tary, of purpose; their whole s^udy was bent to wickedness: fourthly,
it was not for a while, but all the days of their life. So then, it was not
without cause that God sent a flood of water, to cleanse the earth from that
flood of sin, with which it was ouerflowed.

Q. How is it understood, that God was sorrowful, and repented?
A. God properly repents not, 1. Sam. 15. for it is contrary to his
prescience: neither is he moved with sorrow, because he is unchangeable, Iam.
1. 17. But these, and such like speeches, are attributed to him, after the
manner of men: for man, when he repents, changes his deed; so God is said to
repent, when he changes that which he did before: and as man, when he
destroys that which he loves, is grieved; so God is said to be moved with
sorrow, because he comes to destroy man, whom he so highly loved, and
advanced over all the creatures.

Q. Why did God say he would destroy the beasts and the fowls?
A. Not because they sinned: but because they being created for man's use, man
their Lord and master being punished, they must also suffer with him: for by
this, God will show how he abhors sin, in punishing dumb beasts for man's
sin: so the beast that lies with man, must be killed, though it have no wit,
Leu. 20. 2. When man was drowned, there was no use for the beasts. Thirdly, to
augment man's punishment, and make it the more fearful; when not only he, but
all his goods and possessions are seized upon by Gods wrath.

Q. What mean these words; Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord?
A That is, God was favorable and merciful unto him. So this phrase is used of
Lot. G^n. 19. of Moses, Exo. 33. of David* Acts 7. of Mary, Luke 1. Here we
see, Gods children shall not want their commendations, howsoever the World
despises them: Noe is here hated of the World, but he found grace in Gods
eyes. Secondly, we see, that God will not destroy all mankind, but will save a
few, for propagation of his Church. Thirdly, there was no time so corrupt, in
which God had not some to worship him.

Q. Wherein did Noe find grace in Gods eyes?
A. In that he was preserved from the flood, when the World was destroyed.
Secondly, in that Mankind was preserved and restored by him. Thirdly, in that
his dominion over the creatures was restored, as it was to Adam. Fourthly, in
that he received a larger Patent then Adam had, to eat flesh. Fifthly, in that
God did smell a savor of Rest in his Sacrifice. Sixthly, in that God makes a
Covenant with him, conf^ed by the Rainbow, that he will never destroy the
World again with Water-Seuenthly, in that he was a type of Christ and his
Church. And many other prerogatives had Noe, which were as many pledges of Gods
favor to him. In Hebrew, Noe signifies Grace, the order of the Letters being
changed.

Q. What is meant here, by the Generations of Noe?
A. His offspring, and things that befell him: of which he does not speak
immediately, but of his virtues, that he was a just and perfect man, etc. And
at these words the Hebrews do begin a new Section, which reaches to the 12.
Chapter: so that they divide the whole Law into 54. Sections, or Lectures,
which they read in 52. Sabbaths; and Genesis is divided into 12. Chapters, or
Lectures.

Q. How is Noe called a just and perfect man?
A. Not absolutely so, but in respect of that ^roward generation. Secondly,
because he endeavored to be so, and made a conscience of his ways: for God
accepts the will, for the deed; and a part, for all. Thirdly, because of his
Faith: for we are justified by Faith, and the just lives by Faith. Now Noe
was made heir of Righteousness, which is by Faith, as it is in the Hebrews
11. And this does the more commend Noes righteousness, that in such a ^roward
age, he was just and perfect.

Q* H^w is ^ understood, that the Earth (...) before God?
A. By the Earth, we understand Men, both because they are the inhabitants of
the Earth, as also because they were earthly-minded: and here* to their
disgrace, they are called Earth, as before, Flesh, who should have been
spiritually and h^auenly-minded (before God) that is, openly, in his sight. Or
Elohim may signify Princes and Judges, here: so that in the open sight of
their Judges, they wrought wickedness. Hence then we see, that it was not the
Stars, or any natural causes, that raised the ^oud; but only God, being
provoked by sin.

Q. Why is it said now, that God looked on the Earth?
A. Not, as though he did not look before, (for all things are naked before
his eyes:) but now he is said to look on the Earth, because he comes to
punish the Earth. And this shows us, that God did not rashly and unadvisedly
punish the Earth, but he looked upon it first; that is; he did seriously
consider, there was great cause to punish Mankind?

Q. What is meant here, by all Flesh?
A. Mankind, (...), and not the beasts also, as the Jews thought; for they
cannot properly be said to corrupt their way, because they want reason. Laws
are not made for them; they are not capable of life eternal, they are not
subject to sin, and not liable to punishment.

Q. What is meant by Way?
A. Their Religion, and Faith; as Acts 18. secondly, their Manners, and course
of Life: as Malice is called the Way of Cai^; I^de, verse 11. Covetousness the
Way of Balaam. 2. Pet. 2. 15.

Q. How is it understood, that God destroyed the Earth?
A. The Earth was destroyed for the sin of man; as in other particular
judgments, men's goods perished with them, Numb. 16. 32. Ios. 7. 15. yet the
Earth was not destroyed, in respect of her substance, but of her ornaments and
fertility; which was much diminished by the salt water.

Q. Why would not God save Noe by some other means, but by the Arc?
A. Because, by this means, God would have the World to see, that his
judgments were coming, when they beheld the Arc preparing: and if they would
not repent, they might, at least, be made inexcusable; who both seeing the Arc
in making, and hearing Noe preaching, did not repent. Secondly, because by this
means he would exercise Noes Faith the more, which was very great; that
although the rest of the World did scorn him, and followed their own courses,
yet he believed that God would perform his promise. Thirdly, although God at
all times may work miracles, yet most times he works by natural causes:
therefore in the Desert he fed his people with Manna, when he might have fed
them with nothing; so he might have given them Canaan, without their own
help, yet he would have them fight for it: and here he might have preserved N^
more miraculously, but this way he thought fittest.

Q. Was this Arc like our Ships?
A. No: but this was like a Chest or Cos^in, made not to sail, but to swim;
and this form was most commodious, and capable of so many kinds of creatures:
and this Arc was admirable, both in respect of the long time it was in
building, in respect of the greatness thereof, of the end, it was made to
preserve all kind of creatures; of the wonderful preservation thereof in that
dangerous Flood; as also of many things, whereof it was the type. Concerning
this Arc, the Poets have stolen much out of this place.

Q. What kind of Tree was the Arc made of?
A. The word Gopher does signify the Cedar, Fur, and Pine-trees; so it is
uncertain which of those it was made of, neither is it much material: but
this word is not found in any other place of Scripture.

Q. How large was the Arc?
A. The length was 300. cubits, the breadth 50. and the height was 30. cubits.
Now a cubit is the measure from the elbow to the fingers end, containing a foot
and a half: but if the men of that time were bigger then now (as it is like)
then the cubit was also bigger. Then we must not think with Origin, that
those were Geometrical cubits, whereof every one contains 6. common cubits;
for Moses does not speak here of any other cubits, then he does elsewhere:
and of no other kind of cubit do we read in Scripture, then of those common
cubits aboue-named* as Ex^. 27. Deuteronomy. 3. 1. King. 17. etc. So then the Arc, by
this reckoning, was six times as long as it was broad, and ten times so long
as it was high. But how so many creatures could be contained in so little
room, was not impossible for him, that miraculously sent the Flood, and
delivered Noe from the ^ame: yet if we duly consider the bigness of the
Arc, we shall find there was room sufficient for them all.

Q. How could Noe and his three sons build so great an Arc?
A. Although they were the chief builders, yet we must think, there were many
more under them hired, who labored in building for their wages, although they
believed not, and so they perished with the rest.

Q. Was there a Window in the Arc?
A. Yes; but the Hebrew word is Zohaer, which signifies Light: therefore the
Hebrews thought that this was no Window, but some precious Stone that was
hanged in the Arc, to give light to the creatures therein. Yet we must not
deny, but that there was a Window; for Noe, in the eight Chapter, is said to
open the Window, and let out the Raven and Dove. Others say, that this Zohar
was a Lamp, or Candle, appointed to burn so long as Noe was in the Arc,
because the Sun did not shine all that time: but this is fabulous.

Q. What is this (And in a cubit thou shall finish it above?)
A. That is, Thou shall bow the roof of the Arc but a cubit, so that it may
be almost flat; but yet so, that the water may easily slide off.

Q. How many Rooms, or Stories, were there in the Arc?
A. Three Rooms: the highest, for Man and the Fowls; the next, for all kinds
of meat and provision for the creatures; the lowest and third room, for the
beasts. These three are only mentioned here: therefore Origin was deceived,
that thought there were five Rooms. As in this Arc there were three Rooms,
so in Moses Tabernacle, and Salomons Temple, were also three. The Church also
(figured by the Arc) has three states; before the Law, under the Law, and
under Christ.

Q. Why would Gool establish his Covenant with Noe, before the Arc was built?
A. To confirm Noes Faith the more: for he had need of such a promise, that
went about such a hard and dangerous work, as the building of the Arc was.
And here we see, that God never imployeth his servants in any hard work, but
he gives them comfort, strength, and courage to perform it: And so it is our
part, to rely on Gods promises, with Noe, and not to incline either to the
right or left hand.

Q. What Covenant was this, that God made with Noe?
A. That he would preserve him and his Family in the Flood: and this is a type
of the Covenant which God has made with us in Christ. Now this Covenant
belongs to Noe, and his Family: so all Gods Covenants to the faithful, and
their children also. As for Noes sake, his Family was saved: so for the
company of one holy man, many shall escape in the day of Gods wrath. For Paul's
sake, all that were in the ship were saved. Here, this is called Gods Covenant,
because he binds himself to save us: so elsewhere it is called our Covenant,
Zach. 9. 11. because on our part, we are bound to believe and obey him.

Q. What sorts of creatures was Noe commanded to receive within the Arc?
A. All those that could not live in the water; as Men, Beasts, and Fowls:
Fishes then and (...), that is, those creatures that can live both on the land
and in the water, were not received. Secondly, the perfect creatures; that is,
such as are procreated by commixture of male and female (for the male and
female are here mentioned.) Then Mice, and such like, as are engendered of
corruption, were not received. And here Noe is commanded to receive two of
every sort, which in the next Chapter is better explained: for of the
unclean, two are received; of the clean, seven; three males and females for
generation, and one male for the Sacrifice. Here we see, that God, for Noes
sake, saves all those sorts of creatures; extending his mercles even to the
beasts, for his servants sake.

Q. How did Noe gather together all these creatures? did he hunt for them?
A. No: but they came of their own accord, the Lord leading them thither; and
here they are brought to Noe, as before to Adam: yet, although God brought them
to the Arc, notwithstanding, Noe must bring them within, and place them in the
Arc. Noe is the type of Christ's Ministers: who do not lead Christ's Sheep to
the Church; because, being moved by Gods Spirit, they come of their own
accord^: yet the Minister gathers them together, and does unite them by the
Word and Sacraments.

Q. If all kinds of meat were laid up in the Arc for the creatures; then
whether, or not, was there also flesh for those creatures, that lived only on
flesh?
A. First, before the Flood, neither man nor beast did eat flesh; but this
power of eating flesh, was given after the Flood: secondly, we do not read of
any beasts that were brought into the Arc, for meat, but only for generation
and sacrifice: thirdly, if there had been beasts in the Arc, for eating, and
so many as might serve for a whole year, surely there could not be room
enough for them; besides, their flesh would have putrified, and that had been
filthy and loathsome to man: therefore they did not eat flesh at that time,
but either grass, fruits, or seeds; for these they fed upon, when flesh was
wanting. Besides, God, that caused them to come to the Arc, of their own
accord, and to remain so long obedient to Noe, could also sustain them so
long without flesh, only upon herbs; for those were better, at that time,
then now, and the temperature of those ^easts was sounder.

Q. Why was God so careful to provide food for those dumb creatures?
A. To let us know and admire his infinite Goodness, in not only creating
them for man's use, but also, in preserving them to the same end: secondly, that
by this carfulness of his, we may be enduced to love him the more: thirdly,
to depend on him in our extremities; for if he had a care of them, when they
could not care so themselves, much more will he be careful of us, in our
necessities: fourthly, he would not save them in the Arc, as he did the
Israelites in the red Sea, and as Jonas in the Whales belly* miraculously; but
he would have here both man and beast, to use the means of the Arc, and of
the food he gave them, for the preservation of their life: to teach us, that
we should not despise the ordinary means that God has appointed for the
conservation of our life: fifthly, to teach all Christians that have children,
wife, or family, to provide for them things that may sustain their natural
life: seeing God had such care to maintain the life of these creatures, which
are not so dear to God as men are.

Q: What is the commendation that Noe has here in the end?
A. That he did according to all that God commanded him; therefore he became
heir of the Righteousness that is by faith, Hebr. 11. Then here was his glory,
not in that he knew Gods commandments, but in that he did them: secondly, he
did not a part, but according to all that was commanded him: thirdly, his
faith and obedience was wonderful: if we should consider the circumstances
thereof; as the bigness of the Arc, the long and tedeous space of an hundredth
years, cutting and bringing together so many trees, the taunts and scorns he
did endure of men, the fear he was in, for preaching they should all be
drowned, the care and solicitude he had, to gather together so much provision
for man, beasts and fowls: yea, to bring into the Arc so many sorts of wild
beasts; and lastly, to enclose himself therein for a year, as in a Sepulcher:
all these being considered, shall make us acknowledge, that his Faith and
Obedience was worthy of eternal commendations

Q Whereof was Noe and the Arc a ripe or figure?
A. Of Christ and of the Church: for Noe was the tipe of Christ, in that Noe is
rest: so Christ is our rest, and in him we have rest for our souls, our
consciences have rest from the gilt and punishment of sin, from the
condemning and commanding power thereof, and after this life, we shall rest
from our labors, even in the bosom of Abraham Secondly, as Noe preserved some
from the flood, so has Christ from the floods of Gods wrath. Thirdly, as Noe
in the Arc of wood did save them, so Christ upon the Cross of wood, has
saved us. Fourthly, as out of the Arc there is no safety, so out of the Church
there is no salvation. Fifthly, as the Arc was made of diverse sorts of trees,
so is the Church of diverse sorts of men. Sixthly, as the Ark was a long time in
building, so has the Church a long time in making. Seventhly, as in the flood
God drowned s^nners, so in baptism^ (whereof the flood was a tipe) God drowneth
our sins. Eighthly, as the plankes of the Ark^ were joined together with
pitch? so should the member^ of the Church be joined together with love.
Ninthly, as Noe not only built the Arc, but entered therein* so Christ not only
built the Church, but dwells therein* Tenthly, as in the Arc were all sorts of
creatures, so in the Church are all sorts of Christians. Eleuenthly, as in the
Ark were more beasts then men, so in the Church are more bad th^n good.
Twelftly, as in the Arc was all kind of corporal food for the creatures, so
in the Church is all kind of spiritual food for Christians. 13. As in the Arc
was a window to give light to the eyes, so in the Church is the word to give
light to the minds. 14. As there was a door for the creatures to enter into
the Arc, so Christ is the door, by whom we enter into the Church 15. As in
the Arc were diverse rooms or stories, so in the Church are diverse degrees and
orders. 16. As the Arc was great and large for all sorts of beasts* so is the
Church for all sorts of men. 17. As there was out one Arc, one door, one
window? so there ^s but one Church, one Christ, one Scripture. ^8. As the Raven
went out and came not again, but the Dove could find find no rest, till (...)
returned to the Arc? so the wicked care not for the Church: but the godly, who
represent the nature and qualities of the Dove, can ha^ no rest for their
souls but in the Church. 19. A^ the Arc was tossed up and down in the water
with the wind, yet was vpheld by God: so the Church is tossed up and down in
the sea of this world, with the winds of Satan, of sin, of wicked men and of
the flesh: yet the Lord vpholds her. 20. A^ the Arc at last rested on the
mountains of Armenia? so shall the Church on Moun^ Sion, in the Kingdom of
glory, when the waters shall settle, and the winds shall cease? then those that
seemed to be dead in the Arc, shall come out of the graves? and with joy shall
enjoy that happy Immortality.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND REVEREND FATHER in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE Athenians while they were in doubt whom they should choose to be the Patron
of their City, at last (...) that (...) was preferred, because of her wisdom
and learning to Neptune the rich god of the great Ocean, for they thought their
could be no greater glory then to have a learned Patron, therefore they
preferred her peaceable Olive, to his warlike horse, her pear to his
three-forked Scepter, her virginity, to his ample authority, her Dragon to
his Triton, and her learning to his vaste dominion, and good reason, for
according to the Comic: (...). Even so this little Book could not find a
fitter Patron to grace and defend her, then your Lordship, in whom wit and
learning, greatness and goodness, science and conscience have met together.
Truly, God has enriched your Honor, with a great measure of learning and
other excellent parts, that it was not without just cause, that our great
Mecenas and immortal glory of the Muses has advanced your Lordship, that
under him you might see learning advanced. Whose Life so long as the God of
Jacob does continue we need not fear, that illiterate Lacedaemonians, or
ignorant Thracians, shall bear rule either in our Church or Commonwealth,
(...), no Marius shall be countenanced, to condemn the Greek, Latin and
Hebrew tongues; no Caligula to abolish the verses of divine Virgil and Homer,
or the works of Liuius and Seneca; no Caracalla to persecute Philosophers and
burn the works of great Aristotle; no Licinius to account learning the
pestilence of the state, but the Muses shall sit and sing securely upon
Helicon, and knit garlands of Laurel to Crown his sacred head, and sing
eternal Peans to the honor of there great Peacemaker, Qui Musis haec otia
fecit, and amongst the rest,

Si quid mea carmina possunt,
Nulla dies vnquam memori eum eximet ^uo.
Receive then Right Honorable, this Athenian client unto your tuition, in whom
although there be neither (...) nor (...), yet if your Lordship be pleased to
approve her, she cares not who reprove her. So beseeching God who has made
you great in this kingdom, to make you also great in his Kingdom; I humbly
take my leave and will continue,

Dum res, and aetas, and Sororum,
Fila trium patiuntur atra.
Your Honors to command, Alexander Rosse.

To the Reader.
WAspes we know can sting, although they can neither make honey nor wax: so
now adays there are many carpin^ Critickes, who can reprove and censure the
works of other men, when in the mean while, either they can not, or at least
they will not bring forth the like fruits, whereby they may profit the Church
and Commonwealth. Nil tam facile quam otiosum and dormientem de aliorum labor
and vigilijs disputa^e. Hieron. in Oseam. These men says Augustine, Magis amant
vituperare Aug. (...) dom. in mo^.
and damnare quam emendare and corrigere, quod vitium vel est superbiae vel
invidiae. Therefore I doubt not but such Vitilitigatores will give their
sensure of this book, before they read it: affirming that because some have
written already of this subject, therefore there is no use of it, but I desire
them first to read and confer this with others, for according to the Greek
proverb, (...), then after they have read and conferred let them censure. For
(...) is a foul vice, and let them remem^ that the proverb is true: (...).

QVESTIONS ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
Question. WHY would God have Noah and his family to enter into the Arc?
Answ. First, to preserve them from the flood: For this was the ordinary
means which God used to Save Noah, although he could have saved him; without
this means, and as out of the Arc they could not be preserved; so out of the
Church we can not be saved. Secondly, God by this does show his care to his
Saints, that in their greatest dangers he is readiest to help them; for now
the flood was at hand, and Noe had most need of comfort now. Thirdly, he saues
the family for Noes sake. So then God for one just man's sake does bless a
great many.

Quest. How was Noah righteous before God?
Ans. Not by the works of the Law, for so no flesh is just before God, Romans 3.
but by Faith, Heb. 11. believing in the promised Seed, and that God would
perform his promise in sending the flood, and Noah was just, not before men,
as hypocrites are, who desire only to please men, but he was just before God,
only studying to have his approbation, now God saved him not because he
deserved it, but because he would crown his own work.

Q. How many clean beasts were rere and in the Arc?
A. Not fourteenth of every kind as Justinius Martij, Origin, and others do
think, but seven of every kind, that is three couple for p^ocreation, and
one Male for sacrifice, ^ow to think that fourteen were brought into the
Arc, is vain, both because so many of every kind would have ouercharged the
Arc, as also because seven were sufficient.

Q. Why would God have more clean then unclean beasts in the Arc?
A. The unclean were preserved only for propogation, but the clean. First,
for propogation. Secondly, for man to eat. Thirdly, for sacrifice. Therefore
God would have more clean then unclean, besides, by this God would teach us
two things. First, that there should be more clean then unclean in the
Church, as there was in the Arc, that is, more good then bad; for we are
chosen to be holy and without blame. Ephesians. 1. although it falls out otherwise
that in Christ's field there are more weeds then corn. Secondly, his love and
care, in that he will have but few of the unclean saved, because the most part
of them are wild and cruel to man; and hurtful to the clean beasts,
therefore there are more Doves then Hawks, Sheep then Woolfes, yet some of
these Sauadge beasts he would preserve, that he might use them as instruments
to punish man's rebellion.

Q. How is it understood that some beasts are clean some unclean?
A. By nature all beasts are clean because good. Genesis 1. 31. and there is
nothing unclean of it self, Romans 14. 14. but some are called unclean,
because men do account them so. Secondly, because they are not used for meat.
Thirdly, because afterward by Moses Law they were excluded from being offered
up in sacrifice. Fourthly, because in them are some evil qualities and
properties which God will have us to shun.

Q. Was there any distinction of clean and unclean beasts before the flood?
A. Yes, Moses indeed did establish this distinction, but it was in use amongst
the fathers before him, and many things else. As, offering of the first fruits,
Genesis 4. building of Altars. Genesis 8. paying of Tithes to the Priest. Genesis 14.
yet all things that Moses commanded, were not observed by the Patriarckes. For
Moses did forbid to marry with two sisters: yet Jacob did with Leah and
Rachel. Genesis 29. and he commanded to abstain from some kinds of flesh, yet God
gives permission to Noe to eat of every kind of flesh. Genesis 9.

Q. How kn^w the fathers before Moses which were clean and which unclean?
A. Either by tradition of their Ancestors, or by revelation from God, and not
by any positive law; yet we must observe that this distinction was not in use,
in regard of meat, for it was lawful to eat of any flesh. Genesis 9. but in
regard of Sacrifice, and so Beeues, Sheep, and Goats were only clean for
Sacrifice of beasts, and of fowls, only Turtle-doues, and Pigeons.

Q. Why would God have seven clean beasts saved, and neither more nor less?
A. Besides that the number of seven signifies sufficiency and perfection in
the Scripture, especially in sacrifices, as Numb. 23. 1. 14. ^9. 1. Chron. 15.
26. etc. these seven did contain three couples and one odd: one couple for
procreation, an other for food, and the third for sacrifice, the odd one
which was a Male was ordained for that sacrifice which Noe was to offer
presently after the flood: which was rather a Male then a Female, because the
Male is perfecter, and so all that we offer to God must be perfect.

Q. Why in the sixth Chapter speaks Moses but of two, and here of seven?
A. Here he speaks of the number of the clean which is seven; there he
spoke not of the number, but of the order how they should be received, which
was two and two, that is, the Male and his Female; and not either more Males or
more Females.

Q. How were so many kinds of creatures brought into the Arc?
A. Noe did not wander up and down the world to gather them as Philo thought,
for that required long time, and intolerable labor; neither did they swim
to the Arc when the flood came as others think, for they were in the Arc
before the flood came, and the door of the Arc was shut upon them also before
the flood, but they were driven thither by the power of God, and the ministry
of Angels, Non hominis actu, Sed dei natu says Augustine. lib. 15. de Ciuit.
cap. 17.

Q. Why was God so careful that every Male should have his Female?
A. By this, God does the second time confirm marriage, for he has ordained
it in Paradise, and confirmed it now; which to prohibit is impious, Christ did
honor it with his first miracle, it is that type of that Union between Christ
and his Church, it is the means to propagate mankind and enlarge the Church,
and a remedy against fornication, etc. therefore as here every Male has his
Feamale, so every man must have his wife.

Q. Why does God give to Noe yet 7. days?
A. Not that Mathusalem should be honorable buried and mourned for seven
days as the Jews do babble; but first that Noe now may make all things the
sooner ready knowing the certain day of the flood: secondly, to show how
unwilling God is yet to destroy the world, if they will ^epent, therefore he
gives yet seven days, to see if they will forsake their evil ways.

Q. Why would God have it rain forty days.
A. So long time God did send rain because he would destroy all the creatures
with water: secondly, he would not drown all the world at an instant, but in
the space of forty days, that they might now have the more time to consider
how just God was in performing his promise, and that it was no Fable that Noe
did preach to them concerning the coming of the flood, and as God was forty
days in pooring down his wrath, so was Moses, Elias and Christ forty days in
fasting, forty years did the people wander in the Desert, forty days respit
was given to Niniue, forty days did Ezechiel bear the sin of Judah, forty
days did Christ converse with his Disciples after his resurrection, and thrice
forty years, that is a hundred and twenty were given to the old world to
repent.

Q. What year of the world was the sloud s^nt?
A. The 1656 year of the world, which was the 600. year of Noah in the which
year Mathusalem died, then the computation of the Septuagints is false, which
makes their year to be the 2242. year of the world.

Q. What month was this which Moses calls the second month?
A. Some do think that this is not the second month of the year but the
second month of Noah's life, So that now Noah was 600. year old and two
months. Others again think that this is the second month of the year, the
which had two beginnings, the one at the moon which was next the equinoctial
vernall: -- the other at the equinoctial autumnall, that beginning of the
year was sacred and appointed by God. Exodus 12. 2. this beginning wa^ civil,
then in ecclesiastical matters, April was the second month, but in civil
affairs, October was the second, and which of these two Moses means here it
is uncertain, yet it is most probable that he means of April. 1. to ex^ol
Gods power the more, who did then send the blood when naturally the springs do
begin to dry, and the air to be clearer from clouds. 2. to aggrauate their
punishment the more, who then were drowned when the earth began to be most
pleasant and glorious. 3. to ^each us, never to be secure but still watching,
for Christ will come as a thief in the night, and when the wicked do say peace
then shall sudden destruction come.

Q. What is meant by the great deep?
A. The deep sometimes in Scripture signifies the Ocean sea. Job 38. 16.
Psalm. 106. 9. Sometimes the waters that are under the earth. Deuteronomy. 8. 7. Psalm.
33. 7. but in this place the deep signifies both.

Q. What is meant by the windows of heaven?
A. This speech is metaphorical and it signifies the wonderful falling of the
violent waters from above, these (windows) then may signify the clouds, and
(heaven) the middle region of the air. Some have thought that these waters
were above the heavens, but it is absurd to think that waters can be above the
heavens, and that they should break through so many heavens of the planites,
and that of the fixed stars, for it is against the nature of the waters to
consist so high, seeing the lower parts of the world are his place, and it is
against the nature of the heaven to be broken or opened with rain.

Q. What does this flood signify?
A. 1. The afflictions of the Church, for as this flood lasted but for a while,
so does afflictions; as this flood was sent only by God, so are afflictions,
the higher the flood lifted the Arc, the nearer it was to heaven, so the more
we are afflicted, the more we loath this world and seek for heaven. Noah is
saved and the wicked are drowned in this flood, so afflictions are means to
save the Godly but destroy the Wicked, therefore great afflictions are called
waters, Psalm. 69. 1. 2. 15. verse. Secondly it is a type of our baptism, 1.
Pet. 3. 21. and both the flood and our baptism are types of our* spiritual
regeneration, for as Noah was saved and the wicked drowned. So we are saved and
our sins are drowned in the blood of Christ.

Q. How high was the water of the flood?
A. 15. Cubits it was higher then the mountains, yea Olimpus Atho and other
mountains of whose incredible height many false things has been recorded,
were drowned in the flood, so then Gods wrath spares not the mountains,
neither will he spare the mighty potentates, learned and ^ise men of the
world, how great and emi^ent soever they seem to be, when his anger (...)
kindled.

Q. Did all the creatures dye that were not (...) the Arc?
A. The Rabbis think that the fishes also ^erished because the waters did
wax hot, ^ut this is uncertain, we know that all that ^id breath died, but
the fishes do not breath, because they want the instruments of breathing. 2.
There is no air in the water for them to breath. 3. If they would breath in
the water, so could men and other creatures. 4. If they did breath air in the
water, then they would not dye when they come out of the water into the air,
therefore it is probable that they were not killed; but whether these men that
were drowned were also condemned eternally or not, it is not for us to inquire,
yet those that did repent were doubtless saved; as the thief on the cross.

Q. Was this flood all one with that of Ogyges and Deucalion.
A. No, for this flood was universal, that of Ogyges was only in the country
of Attica, and that of Deucalion in Thessalia. 2. The flood of Noah was in the
1656. year of the world, but that of Ogyges was almost 540. years after,
which was about the 90. years of the Patriarch Jacob, and the flood of
De^calion was almost 770. years after the deludge of Noah, that is 230. after
the flood o^ Ogyges about the 50. year of Moses.

Q. Was this flood sent by Gods immediate power, or was it wrought only by
natural canses?
A. It was not wrought by nature, 1. because that which nature works, comes
to pass of necessity, without any intent of good or evil, now this flood was
sent because of the iniquity of that time, which nature knows not. So that if
this flood had only depended upon nature, it would have come whether the world
had sinned or not; 2. if the stars were the cause of this flood, then they
may be the cause of an other universal flood; but they cannot. For God has
promised that he will not destroy the earth any more with water, Ergo. 3. the
stars cannot extract, and the earth cannot yield such a quantity of vapors as
may suffice to make anvniuersal flood to rise 15. cubits higher the the
mountains: 4. as the flood did not cease by the power of nature, but by the
power of God that sent out a wind to dry the ground, so it was not sent but by
the power of God, (...). in this narration God is only nominated ^s the sole
author of this flood, the refore it ^as by his power only that the flood was
^ent.

Q. How long did the flood prevail upon the ^arth?
A. A hundred and fifty days, but whether these days are to be reckoned from
the beginniug of the flood, as Lyrane, Ambrosius and others have thought, or
else from the end of these 40. days, in the which it did ^aine as Chrysostom,
and some of the Jewish Rabbis do think is uncertain, but if we mean the
mountains and all other parts of the earth, over which the waters did
prevail, then we must not reckon these days from the beginning of the flood,
for all the earth was not so suddenly ouerflowed with water, but by degrees,
therefore God did cause it to rain forty days, at the end of which forty
days these hundred and fifty take their beginning, for so long did the water
prevail over all the parts of the earth.

Questions on the eighth Chapter.
Q. HOw did God remember Noah and the creatures?
A. Remembrance is the knowledge of things past, but to God all things are
present, therefore properly he does neither remember nor forget, but these
words are used for our better understanding, then because God did suffer Noah
to remain so long in the Arc as in a dungeon amongst stinking beasts, and
tossed with the flood, he might be said to be forgetful of him: and now
because he helps and delivers him from his troubles and miseries, he is said
to remember him, here we see the Lord will not forsake his Saints altogether,
he may leave them for a while, but in his own good time, he will come again
to them for their everlasting comfort.

Q. Why did God remember also the beasts?
A. Not for their own sakes, but because they were ordained for the use of
man: yet two ways God remembers the creatures. First as they are the works of
his hands, so his providence is extended to all things, for a sparrow cannot
fall to the ground without the will of our father. Mat. 10. Secondly, as they
are made for the use of man, and so God has a more special care of them then
if God remember the beasts, much more will he be mindful of man.

Q. Was this a wind that God used to dry the earth, or was it the immediate
power of the holy Ghost?
A. The Hebrew word Ruach signifies both a spirit and the wind, but here it
signifies a wind only, which he uses to dry up the waters, as afterward he
did to divide the red sea for the people of Israel; yet we cannot say that this
wind was generated of natural causes, as other winds are; or that naturally it
had that power to dry up all that huge quantity of water, but this wind as it
was sent extraordinarily by Gods immediate power, so it had an extraordinary
and miraculous force to drive away the waters from the face of the earth, yea
contrary to the quality of other winds which causes the water to rage, but
this wind did assuage them.

Q. Why did God stay the rain and stop the windows of heaven?
A. First, because now it was time, and he had sufficiently revenged himself
upon that rebellious world: secondly, to show his wonderful goodness, and to
teach us that he will not shut up his mercy in displeasure for ever: thirdly,
to show his mighty power, for at his command the fountains of the deep, were
broken: and the windows of heaven opened, and at his command they are stopped
and the rain restrained: fourthly, to teach us obedience, for if these dumb,
deaf, and senseless creatures do with such alacrity obey Gods command, much
more ought man endued with sense and reason: fifthly, to show us what we should
do with our sins, as God stopped the fountains that the water should flow
no more, so should we stop the fountains of sin, least they burst forth
into great floods and drown both body and soul in everlasting perdition.

Q. What mountains are these which are called Ararat?
A. They are hills in Armenia, which country lies near Assyria and
Mesopotamia, these are thought to be certain tops of the hill Cancasus, and
though the Arc rested there, yet it follows not that these were the highest
hills in the world. And it is also ridiculous to think that some fragments of
the Arc were found here in Hieromes time.

Q. How do we reckon this seventh month in which the Arc rested?
A. Some reckon it from the beginning of the flood, but it is more probable,
that it is to be understood from the beginning of the year, for so Moses does
use it every where in this narration, and to think that Moses should
elsewhere in this natration speak of the months of the year, but hereof the
months from the flood, were to make him speak ambiguously and doubtfully.

Q. Why did Noah open the window for the Raven and the Dove, and did not look
out of it himself?
A. First, because he was so stricken with fear of that fearful judgment
that he durst not: secondly, because he could not see far and remote places,
whether they were free from the wate or not, but these fowls could fly abroad
and so discern.

Q. Why did Noah send out the Raven, rather then any other foul?
A. Because the Raven delighting in dead bodies, would be allured by their
smell to fly abroad, and so to give a sure warrant of the settling of the water.

Q. Did the Rauin return again into the Arc or not?
A. The Latin and Greek translations have, that she returned not, but by the
Hebrew it is doubtful, yet it is thought of the most learned that she did not
return. The Rauin does resemble the Law which gives no evidence to man's
conscience, that the waters of Gods wrath are settled, because we cannot fulfill
the Law; but the Dove resembles the Gospel; who returning with an Olive leaf
does signify the glad tidings of peace, and reconciliation, which Christ on
whom the holy Ghost descended in the form of a Dove, has brought into the
world.

Q. How is it understood that the Dove could find no rest for the sole of her
foot?
A. Indeed the tops of the mountains were seen forty days before, yet
although the waters were diminished and gone, the earth notwithstanding was
slime, and mire as yet, therefore the Dove would not rest in the ^e, and dirt,
and she resembles Gods Saints, that can find no rest, but in the Church.
Again here is the spectacle of Gods fearful judgment, that the Dove can
not have so much room as to rest her foot, where before there were so many
pleasant rooms for all the creatures to rest themselves, so the end of sin
is Gods wrath, and the end of this is desolation.

Q. What sign did the Dove give to Noah that the waters were abated?
A. She brought in her mouth one Olive branch in the evening. That Dove
resembles the Preachers, the Olive branch the Gospel, which is the tidings of
peace; her mouth the preaching thereof, and the evening, this latter age of the
world, now it is thought because of Hieromes translation that this branch was
green, and this is probable enough, for though the waters did all this while
prevail upon the earth and deface the same, yet the Olive might be preserved,
because it is one of these kind of trees that are still green, the Jews
prate that the Dove flew to Paradise and got this branch, because that only
was free from water, so Rab. Lenni. babbles that this branch was brought from
the mount of Olives, because that Judea was not drowned with the flood, but
these dreams are scarce worthy of recitation, much less of refutation.

Q. Why did Noah send out the Dove so often?
A. Because he will not venture to come abroad till he be fully assured that the
earth is dry, which now he knows fully, because the ' Dove returned not, so
he would not rashly cast himself into danger, although he had been so long in
the Arc as in a stinking dungeon; but patiently did wait till the earth was
dry, and the Dove was often employed because of his good service; this should
teach servants to be faithful to there Masters as the Dove was to Noah, and
not to be like the Raven. 2. This often returning of the Dove does show us that
when God is reconciled with us, he will make his dumb creatures to comfort us
rather then we shall want. 3. This practice of the Dove does teach us
gratitude, for he labors to comfort and bring good news to Noah, because of
the care he had of him being in the Arc, so we should never forget a good
deed. 4. We must be loving and merciful even to the beasts, for we know not
what extraordinary comfort they may afford us. 5. As the Dove returned no more
into the Arc, having done her message, so when we have finished that service
which God has enjoined to us, we shall leave the Arc of this Militant Church
and shall go thither where our reward is reserved for us.

Q. How can this stand, that the ground was dry in the first day of the first
month of the 601. year, as it is set down in the 13. verse, and the next
verse shows that the earth was dried on the 27. day of the second month?
A. Both is true, for the first day of the first month the earth began to
dry, so that the waters were quite removed, but the earth was not perfectly
dry till the 27. day of the second month, and by this reckoning also we see
that Noah was in the Arc a full year, that is, 365. days: for he entered the
Arc the 17. day of the second month in the 600. year, and there continued
till the 27. day of the 2. month in the year 601.

Q. Why did not Noah go out of the Arc till God spoke to him?
A. Although it was now time for him to go, seeing the earth was dry, yet
such was his modesty and obedience, that as he did not enter the Arc without
a warrant from God, so he will not go out without the same warrant, so should
we depend on Gods mouth and do nothing but what he commands: for obedience
is better then sacrifice: secondly, we see that many are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord desiuereth them out of all; Noah had suffered much
grief, sorrow, and fear, but now behold here is an end.

Q. Did the beasts also come out of the Arc at Noah's command?
A. Yes, for these dumb creatures were obedient to Noah, because he was
obedient to God. Again, the beasts came out that they might increase and
multiply, this blessing was given to the creatures in the creation, and the
same is now renewed in the restoration of the world, and in that none of the
creatures did wagge till Noah gave way, and came out first himself, in this we
have the pattern of a well-ordered family, for there is the grace of God where
the servants obey their Masters, the Master fears God, and all are joined
together in love and concord.

Q. What is the mystical signification of the coming out of the creatures?
A. The Arc may signify the Sinagogue, the beasts clean and unclean, the
Jews and Gentiles, their coming out does signify that both Jews and
Gentiles which believed in Christ, should come out of the Sinagogue, that is,
forsake the Jewish ceremonics.

Q. Why did Noah build an Altar to God?
A. That by offering sacrifice on it, he might testify his thankful mind unto
God, 2. to teach his posterity how they should serve God for any blessing
received, he offered sacrifice for his deliverance upon an Altar of earth, and
we must offer the sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving upon our Altar Christ.
He offered to God the clean beasts, and we must offer to him clean souls
and bodies, which is our reasonable serving of him, his sacrifice was a burnt
offering, and ours must be a broken spirit.

Q. Of what matter was this Altar made?
A. It is most like that it was made of earth, for this law was given after by
Moses; Exodus 20. verse 24. An Altar of earth thou shall make to me: secondly,
this kind of Altar was most usual, even amongst the Gentiles, Hic viuum mihi
cespitem, hic verbenas pueri ponite thuraque, Horat. lib. 1. od. 19. thirdly,
by this Noah will teach us, that God delights not in external pomp and
splendour; he loves the giver more then the gift, and the widows mite more
then the rich man's sins. For nunquam est manus vacua a munere, si area cordis
repleta sit bona voluntate. Gregory in Hom.

Q. Had Noah any express command to build an Alter?
A. We do not read that God did expressly command this, yet we may gather
by consequence that Noah did not this without warrant. First, it was ancient to
serve God after this manner, as we see in the persons of Caine and Habel.
Secondly, Noah did nothing without Gods warrant, without this he did not build
the Arc, nor enter therein; nor come out from thence, much less would he
build an Altar. Thirdly, we see that God smelled a savor of rest in his
sacrifice, which could not be if it had been offered without Gods direction.
Fourthly, Noah knew that the seventh beast was received into the Arc not for
procreation but for Sacrifice. Fifthly, he did questionless believe in Christ
our perfect Sacrifice, therefore he could not testify his faith better then to
build an Altar and offer a sacrifice.

Q. Why would God be worshipped by Sacrifices?
A. First, because he will have them by this kind of exercise, to use
themselves to be thankful to him, for though he be a spirit and delights
more in a contrite spirit, then in burnt offerings, yet because of their
dullness, he would have them worship him with visible offerings. Secondly,
these sacrifices were types of Christ, whose body was to be offered for them;
and no sacrifice without relation to Christ could be acceptable. Thirdly, Least
the people wanting these visible signs, should fall to idolatry, seeing other
nations used sacrifice and they not.

Q. Where did Noah offer this sacrifice?
A. The Jews think it was upon Mount Sion, where Cain and Abel did offer
before; and on which Isaac was to be sacrificed, but it is more probable that
this was done upon the mountains -- of Armenia, where the Arc rested.

Q. What does it signify that God melled a savor of rest in Noah's sacrifice?
A. That it was acceptable unto him, not in respect of the offering it self
(for it is impossible that the blood of calves and goats should take away
sin. Heb. 10. 4.) but God did accept of it; because it was offered in faith,
secondly, with a willing mind, thirdly, because it had relation to Christ, who
had given himself to be an offering and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto God. Ephesians. 5. 2.

Q How is it understood that God would curse the earth no more for man's sake?
A. That is that God would not at any time over whelme the earth with water;
deprive her of her fertility, inhabitants and ornaments as he had before, yet
this does not exclude particular cursings upon particular houses, towns, or
countries, nor that universal fire by which the world shall be purged in the
last days; and this covenant that God made with Noah concerning the waters, is
the figure of that everlasting covenant of peace which the father has made
with us in Christ.

Q. Which is the imagination of man's thought evil from his youth?
A. Because of original sin; which all men draws from Adam, for he was the
root of mankind, and such a nature we have from him, as he had himself;
that is corrupted with sin: then all mankind is subject to this evil,
because all are from Adam. Secondly, all the nature of man, that is his body
with the parts thereof, his soul with the faculties thereof are defiled.
Thirdly, it binds all men to death both temporal and eternal. Fourthly, it
depriues us of Gods image and of all his blessings, and is the cause of all our
infirmities and of all our actual sins.

Q. Why will not God destroy all living things as he did?
A. Because man's imagination is so evil from his youth, that if he should
punish him as he deserved, he should every age send a flood, for there is none
that does good, no not one. Psalm. 12. So then that he spares us, it is to be
attributed to his mercy, not to our merits.

Q. Is God the cause that man's imagination is evil from his youth?
A. No, he made man holy, but he fell of his own accord, God then is the
cause of man's heart and of his imaginations, but not of the corruptions and
vitiositie thereof, and yet he does permit sin, because he uses it for a
scourge to the wicked, and for a means to advance his own glory.

Q. What does God besides promise Noah?
A. That all the days of the earth, seed time and haeruest heat and cold,
etc. should not cease, in which words he shows us the renouation of the
world, which answers to the creation. Before the creation there was confusion
and darkness, and so likewise before this renouation, in the creation God
made the lights of heaven, now he restores them: then he gave man dominion
over the creatures, now he restores the same, as God gave man food then, so he
does now, man was then created to Gods image, and the same is now mentioned,
God made a law then that man should not eat of the forbidden tree, and here
he commands that man shall not shed blood, they received a blessing then to
increase and multiply, the same they now receive?

Q. Shall there be summer and winter, night and day, etc. so long as the earth
remains?
A. Yes, so long as the earth remains in that state it does now; subject to
generation and corruption in the parts thereof, and obnoxious to many imperfect
qualities, which at the last day shall be abolished, the substance remaining
for ever, and then the summer and winter shall cease. Again, that which is
spoken here, is meant of the world in general, and not of particular countries
and times, for there was neither seed time nor harvest for the space of three
years six months in Eliahs time, and in the land of Egypt there was no
distinction of day and night for three days, because all that time there was
darkness, and in the days of Joshua the sun stood still a whole day.

Q. Why does God speak only of summer and winter, and not of the other two
parts of the year?
A. Because these are the two principal parts of the year and most opposite,
the other two depends on these, and participates of their qualities, the spring
then and harvest being both hot and cold, in the one they agree with Summer, in
the other with Winter. So likewise here is mentioned only heat and cold,
because these two qualities are more active and forcible in generation, and
because more sensible, then moist or dry, so seed time and harvest are only
named, because sowing and mowing are the most usual and profitable actions
amongst men.

Q. Does God promise to Noah only these temporal blessings, as heat and
cold, summer and winter, and not spiritual?
A. He promises these temporal blessings, and under them spiritual. For as
the stability of the world is promised, so the stability of grace in Christ is
included, and usually in Scripture under earthly shadows spiritual blessings
are couenanted. Canaan was a type of heaven. David's kingdom of Christ's
spiritual kingdom. Solomon's temple of Christ's Church, therefore altars,
priests, and sacrifices of Christ our golden Altar, our high priest, our sweet
smelling sacrifice, again we must note that oftentimes God alters the
seasons and qualities of the air, but it is for our sins, therefore when we
see cold summers, hot winters, raging storms, excess of heat and cold,
dryness and moistness, let us leave to trouble God without sins, and he
will leave to trouble us with his plagues, moreover let us not fix our
chiefest happiness in these temporal blessings. But let us look to him that
is the giver and the end of all, even Jesus Christ the author and finisher of
our faith. And lastly, let not these blessings be motives of security, but
rather stir us up to be thankful to him, that prouides all things necessary
for this life, and a crown of righteousness for the life to come.

Questions on the ninth Chapter.
Q. Why does God first of all bless Noah with increase of children?
A. Because of earthly blessings this was the greatest, the earth being now
void of mankind, and Noah knew not till now, whether it was lawful to beget
children, seeing God had destroyed mankind. Secondly, to teach us to account
our children chief effects of Gods blessing, and to be thankful to him for
them, behold children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb his reward. Psalm. 127. 3.

Q. Is this blessing all one with that which Adam had in paradise?
A. Yes, in respect of the matter, but not of the manner, for then procreation
of children should not have been painful. Secondly, not inordinate, thirdly,
not imperfect.

Q. How could this blessing belong to Noah, seeing he had no children after the
flood?
A. Although this blessing was fulfilled in his children, yet it is given to
him, because he being the root, their increase was his increase. Secondly,
because he was found righteous before God, and God smelled a savor of rest in
his sacrifice. Thirdly, to let his children know that this blessing did belong
to them only for their just fathers sake.

Q. Is every increase the blessing of God?
A. All that are lawfully procreated are Gods blessings both in respect of the
child begotten, and in respect of the manner of begetting, but those that are
not begotten in marriage do not proceed of Gods blessing, in regard of the
manner of procreation, howsoever in themselves they may be the effects of Gods
blessing. Secondly, the increase of all other creatures do proceed of Gods
blessing, but for man's sake for whom they were created.

Q. Which is the second prerogative that God gives now to Noah and his sons?
A. That their fear and terror may be upon all the beasts, fowls, fishes and
creeping things, this dominion had Adam, but after a more excellent manner, for
the creatures were subject of their own accord, now of fear and by
constraint, and although that man has power to rule over the beasts with
fear, yet great men must not rule their inferior brethren with fear, but
rather with love, for Viri sancti non praeesse gaudent hominibus sed prodesse.
Greg. mor. lib. 21, cap. 11.

Q. Has man this dominion over all the creatures and at all times?
A. No: For the wild ass derideth the multitude of the City, and hears not
the cry of the driuer, Job 39. 10. the Unicorn will not serve, nor will he
tarry by the crib, verse 11. the hawke does not flee by our wisdom; neither
does the Eagle mount up at our command, verse. 29. and 30. we cannot draw out
Leuiathan with an hook, neither pierce his Jaws with an angle Chap. 40. ver.
20. and 21. Again, many beasts are fearful to man, and often times noy some,
as Lions, Woolfes, Bears, etc. God threatens to send wild beasts amongst his
people which should spoil them. Leu. 26. 22. the Prophet was slain by a Lion.
1. King. 13. 24. two Bears did tear in pieces 42. children, 2. King. 2. 24.

Q. Then how is it that the fear of man is upon the creatures?
A. First, in that they cannot do that harm to man which they would, because
God restraines their power: secondly, they do not offend man but when he
offends God: thirdly, in respect that every nature of wild beast, etc. has
been tamed of the nature of man. Iam. 3. 7. fourthly, even the most sauadge
beasts stand in fear of man; they flee his company, they shun his arts and
snares, they fear his voice and shadow: fifthly, because they serve man and
submit themselves to his will, the Horse yields his mouth to the bridle, the
Ox his neck to the yoke, the Cow her dugges to our hands, the Sheep her
wool to the sheerers, etc.

Q. Seeing then God has delivered the creatures into our hands, may we use
them as we lust?
A. We may use them, but not abuse them: first, we must not cause them to
travel on the Sabbath day, Exodus 10 10. secondly, we must not covet our
neighbors beast. Exodus 20. 17. thirdly, we must not use them unmercifully,
for we shall not muzzle the Ox when he treads out the corn. Deuteronomy. 25. 4.

Q. Which is the third prerogative that Noah has?
A. That it shall be lawful for him to use every living thing for meat:
whereas before the flood it was not usual to eat flesh, because the herbs
were sufficient, and the people were then of a stronger constitution of body;
but now God gives liberty to eat flesh: first, because man's strength began
to decay: secondly, the earth was not able to yield that increase of herbs
which it did before: thirdly, because God will encourage Noah and his family
the more, being out of heart to see the miserable state of the earth* fourthly,
because he will tie them to be more thankful to him; for the more blessings
we receive, the more are we bound to serve God: fifthly, because he will by
this teach man that it is abomination to worship any beast in respect that we
must eat them, and that which we eat cannot be God.

Q. Is flesh more convenient for man's body then herbs?
A. Yes, else it had been no great blessing to have received the use of flesh,
and that flesh does nourish more it is known by the Physicians, who prescribe
flesh to their patients but not herbs: secondly, we see by experience that
those who feed most on flesh, are more lusty and strong, then they who feed
on herbs: thirdly, that is best food which is most near to the nature of
him that eats it, but flesh is nearer to the nature of man's body, then
herbs: fourthly, that food is best, which is most temperate in heat and
cold, because mansbody is of this temperature, but this is flesh; for herbs
do exceed in the qualities of heat and cold, dryness and moystnesse:
fifthly, those that do macerate their bodies, do use commonly to abstain
from flesh and not from herbs and fruit.

Q. Is it lawful then to eat flesh?
A. To him that is pure all things are pure; Gods children may eat any thing
if it be received with thanks, for the beasts were created not only to serve
but also to feed man; and good reason has man to kill the beasts for his
food: both because God has given him authority so to do. As also, because
Noah preserved in the Arc the beasts from drowning, and man does yet preserve
their life in providing and caring for them. Therefore he should receive this
benefit of them; but as for the wicked they have no interest other then civil
in any of Gods creatures, they eat and drink not by right, but by usurpation,
if we consider the freedom of grace.

Q. Was it not lawful before the flood, to eat flesh?
A. In my opinion it was lawful, because there was no law against it:
secondly, the beasts were created to be eat: thirdly, their flesh then was as
nourishing as now: fourthly, they before the flood had their flocks of sheep
not only to cloth their nakedness with their skins: but also to satisfy
their hungers with their flesh: but although it was lawful, yet it was not
much usual, especially amongst the Saints: first, because they had no positive
law to eat flesh as now: secondly, the earth then being in her full vigor
yields store of excellent herbs: thirdly, man's nature then was stronger, but
now after the flood his strength begins to decay and his years to shorten. For
before the flood some lived till they were 900. years and upward; but after
the flood, Arphaxad who was first borne, lived little more then 400. years,
and after Abraham none lived longer then Isaac, and he did not exceed 180.
years, and Moses consesseth that in his time their years were 70. Psalm. 90.
10.

Q. How shall we lawfully eat flesh?
A. First, if we eat it with thanksgiving, acknowledging God the benefactour.
Secondly, if we eat it with sobriety, not with riot. Thirdly, if we eat it
not at these times which are prohibited by the Church and the Magistrate.
Fourthly, if we eat it so that we be not unmindful of Christ when he is
hungered in his members. Fifthly, if we remember that God gave us power to kill
and eat flesh after the flood, that we may learn to kill and destroy our
fleshly nature, after our Baptism.

Q. How is it understood that blood is the soul or life of the creature?
A. Blood is not properly the life, but because it is the sign of life,
therefore it is called life figuratively: as bread is called Christ's body.
Secondly, because the animal life is in the blood, and preserved by the blood:
therefore here continens is taken for contentum.

Q. Why is the life preserved in the blood?
A. Because the life consists in heat and moisture, and such is the
temperature of the blood: secondly, the vital spirits wherein the life does
most consist are generated of the blood: thirdly, because the life cannot
continue without nourishment: but blood is the last and chiefest nourishment of
the creature.

Q. Why did God prohibit the eating of blood?
A. Because by this he will teach us to abstain from murder and cruelty:
secondly, in that the life consists in the blood, he will teach us that he
has only power over the life, and therefore over the blood: thirdly, to
shun Idolatry and offering of blood to images. For if we must not eat the
blood much less may we offer it: fourthly, to teach them sobriety in eating:
fifthly, by interdicting of blood he will accustom them to be obedient to him,
to acknowledge him as their Lord. Therefore he will have them to eat that
which he pleases, and to abstain from that which he prohi^its; for this cause
he did forbid Adam to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil: sixthly,
because he has given it to be offered upon the Altar to make an atonement for
our souls. Leuit. 17. 11.

Q. Is it not lawful for Christians to eat blood?
A. Yes, for abstinence from blood was ceremonial amongst the Jews, which is
abrogated by Christ's coming: therefore not only have we power to eat blood,
but Christ also says, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, ye can have no life in you. Ioh. 6.

Q. Then why did the Apostles prohibit eating of blood. Act. 15.
A. Because the Jews did abhor the eating of blood: therefore least they
should give an occasion to the Jews to separate themselves from the Church;
they in wisdom thought it fit that the Christians for a while should abstain
from blood, so then in matters indifferent we must be careful that we offend
not our weak brethren, otherways that which enters in at the mouth cannot
defile the man. Matthew. 15.

Q. What is meant by this, that God will require the blood of our lives?
A. This is the reason why he will not have them to eat blood: because he will
not have them to shed man's blood: which if they do he will require it, that
is, he will seek it out and punish the shedding of it; so then God is he that
makes inquisition for blood. Psalm. 9. 12. And by this we see his fatherly
care of us, who is our defender and the revenger of our blood: secondly, that
none has power to revenge shedding of blood, but God and his vi^gerent the
magistrate: thirdly, that it is a fear full sin to shed blood, whether it be
our own or the blood of others. For God will surely inquire and punish it.

Q. May we not then shed our own blood upon a just occasion?
A. No occasion should cause us to shed our own blood. For if we cannot
murder our brother, much ^esse our selves: neither must we murder our selves
because Sampson did so; for he did not intend to kill himself by pulling down
of the house, but to kill the enemies of God. Again, he was an extraordinary
person, and the type of Christ in this, and therefore not to be imitated,
neither must we kill our selves upon pretense to be with Christ, because we
must so long remain in this warfare till our captain Jesus commands us to
depart.

Q. How is it understood that God will require our blood at the hands of beasts?
A. By the beasts here we understand not the devils, as Origen^s, nor cruel
and savage men as others do think, but these words are to be understood of
beasts so called properly, that if they shed man's blood, they shall be killed,
as it was afterward ordained by Moses law, if an ox gore a man, he shall be
stoned, etc. Exodus 21. 28. and this should teach us to abhor shedding of
blood, for if the beasts shall be killed for shedding blood, much more shall
man.

Q. How will God require the life of man at the hand of a man's brother?
A. By brother here is meant any other man, for God made all mankind of one
blood. Act. 17. 26. and this word brother does teach us mercy and love, for it
is unnatural for one brother to kill another, and if all men be brethren by
nature, much more are Christians in Jesus Christ, and therefore hatred and
murder amongst them is more fearful then amongst others that knows not
Christ.

Q. Shall his blood be shed that sheddeth the blood of man?
A. Yes, it should be shed both by the laws of God and man; this same is
mentioned. Mat. 26. Reu. 13. yet oftentimes it falls out that murderers do
escape the magistrate, notwithstanding they cannot escape the hand of God; for
men of blood shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55. 24.

Q. Then what shall we say of the magistrate that sheddeth blood, and of him
that sheddeth blood against his will?
A. The magistrate is Gods vicegerent appointed not to shed the blood of man,
but the blood of the manslayer, he bears not the sword in vain, for he is
the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Romans
13. 4. as for him that kills unawares, the Cities of refuge were provided
that they might fly thither. Number. 35. 11. but he that presumptuously kills,
must be taken from the Altar that he may dye. Exodus 21. 14. and if this kind
of murder be prohibited, much more is that whereby we murder our brothers
soul, either with poisoning them with false doctrine, or else by provoking
them to sin, therefore Satan is called a manslayer from the beginning.

Q. Why must not the blood of man be shed?
A. Because he is made in the image of God, therefore he that spoils and
abuses the Kings image disgracefully, does abuse the king himself, and much
more is God abused when his lively image is defaced. Secondly, we see that the
image of God in man after the fall is not utterly abolished, but some relics
yet do remain. Thirdly, it is not for any worthiness in man that God will
have his life preserved; but because of his own image. Fourthly, if man be
made to Gods image, then let not the rich despise the poor; nor the learned
the ignorant, nor the wise the foolish, nor great men their inferiors, because
they were all made in the image of God.

Q. Why does God again repeat this blessing of increase and multiplication?
A. To signify that even for this he does abhor murder, because it is an
hinderance to multiplication. Secondly, to teach us that as multiplicgtion
proceeds of his blessing, so destruction and mortality does ensue of his
wrath. Therefore when God hinders multiplication, either by famine, plague, or
sword, we may be sure that he is angry with us.

Q. Why did God make a covenant with Noah?
A. To confirm his faith the more, although his word is sufficient, yet for
our comfort and strengthening he many times is forced to confirm his promises
by oaths and covenants. Therefore he will not have Noah and his posterity to
think, that suppose he sends clouds and rain many times, that he will
destroy the earth any more with water. Secondly, by this covenant he signifies
and represents the internal and eternal covenant of grace, made and confirmed
by the blood of Christ. For if he be careful to save our bodies from water,
much more to save our souls from eternal fire. Thirdly, in that he makes his
covenant, not only with Noah, but with his seed. It shows that our children
are not excluded from the covenant of grace. Fourthly, in this covenant we see
the largeness of his love who is not contented to make it with one person,
family or country, but withal Noah's posterity, then who is able to comprehend
the breadth and length and depth and height of the love of God.

Q. Why did God make a covenant with the beasts and fowls?
A. Not for their own sakes, but for man, for as God made them for his sake,
so for his sake he blesses them and makes his covenant with them; Secondly, to
teach us that if he has such care of the beasts; far greater care will he
have over us, Oh we of little faith.

Q. Why did God confirm his covenant with a sign?
A. For the confirmation of our faith and strengthening of our memory, as
commonly he uses; so he confirmed our mortification by circumcision, heaven by
Canaan, the death of Christ by sacrifices, our regeneration by water; our
spiritual food by bread and wine, etc. and these are the signs of grace, or
rather seals different from these miraculous signs of glory, as the fiery
pillar, the cloud, the fiery bush, the rod of Moses; the drying of the red sea,
the rock that yielded water.

Q. Which was this sign of the covenant?
A. The rainbow which is called his bow. First, because he made it, secondly,
because of the wonderfulnes thereof; therefore it is called by the Poet
Thaumantia proles, thirdly, because he by his special ordinance did ordain
it; to be a sacramental sign of mercy; again it is called the rainbow,
because it is in the cloud, in the day of rain. Ezech. 1. 28. Secondly,
because it signifies that the world shall never be drowned any more with rain,
moreover, it is called a bow, because of the likeness it has with a bow.
Secondly, because as a bow in Scripture is used for a sign of wa^s, so the
rainbow naturally is the sign of waters, although God has now made it a
sign not of waters, but of deliverance from waters.

Q. Why did God set his bow in the clouds?
A. That it might be the more conspicuous and in the sight of all. Secondly,
because it is a watrie meteor generated in the clouds by the reflection of the
sun. Thirdly, for our greater comfort, for there God would place it, where
the greatest fear and danger of water is, to wit in the clouds. Therefore
now we need not fear the clouds, because their waters are sealed with this
bow, that they shall not any more drown the earth. Fourthly* the clouds are
oftentimes the sign of Gods presence and favor, as here the bow is set in the
clouds, a cloud went before the Israelites, the Lord gave the law in a cloud
upon mount Sinay, the Tabetnacle was filled with a cloud, and in a cloud God
appeared in Salomons Temple, the clouds are his pauilion, Psalm. 18. and his
charret. Psalm. 104. Christ was transfigured in a cloud; in a cloud he ascended,
and in the clouds of heaven he shall come again to judge the quick and dead.

Q. Is that opinion of Ambrose sound, who thinks that this bow is not meant
of the rainebow, but rather figuratively of the secret power of God?
A. No: for here it is expressly meant of that bow which is in the clouds, which
is none else but the rainebow; Secondly, this narration of Moses is
historical, but that opinion of Ambrose is allegorical. Thirdly, his opinion
is contrary to the opinion of all the greek and latin Fathers.

Q. Does the rainbow naturally signify that the earth shall not be drowned
with water?
A. No: for although the rainbow in respect of the matter and generation
thereof be natural, yet as it is a sign of Gods mercy and deliverance from
water, it is supernatural, then there is no natural relation between the
rainbow and an universal flood, because such a flood cannot proceed of
natural causes but only by Gods power, yet naturally it does signify some
moderate rain to follow, because it is generated not when the whole face of
heaven is covered with thick clouds, but when there are some thin and dewey
clouds opposite to the sun.

Q. Why did God rather make the rainebow the sign of his covenant, then any
thing else?
A. Because amongst the celestial bodies, there is none more wonderful,
conspicuous and glorious then this; and therefore fittest to be the sign of
such a covenant between God and us; Secondly, the covenant is, that God will
restrain the waters from drowning the earth again; this is seen in the bow,
wherein there is water but temperated with light, with light heat is joined,
and heat is that which restraines immoderate rain: thirdly, the effect of his
covenant is peace and reconciliation, and this is signified by the Rainbow;
which wants both string and arrow. For he shot his arrow against the first
world, and has broke the string because he is reconciled to us: fourthly, the
Rainbow naturally signifies a moderate rain, therefore it was fittest to
signify supernaturally restraint from inordinate rain; fifthly, the flood
proceeded from the clouds, and this Bow is generated in the clouds: therefore
fittest of all to assure us that we shall not be drowned with the immoderate
raining of the clouds.

Q. Was the Rainbow before the flood or not?
A. It was in respect of the matter thereof. For seeing before the flood, the
Sun and the Clouds were, which are the causes of the Rainbow, it could not
be but that the Rainbow was also. Yet it was not till now, in respect of that
sacramental relation it has with Gods mercy, for it was no sign of the
covenant till now.

Q. Shall there be no Rainbow as some have thought, forty years before the
last judgment?
A. If this were true, then the time of the last judgment should be known;
but of that hour and day knows no man: secondly, if in that space there
should be no Bow, then there should be neither rain nor clouds: but famine,
misery and mortality, but Christ testifies the contrary, for men shall be
eating and drinking, marrying, etc. and therefore there shall be great joy and
plenty: thirdly, the Rainbow is the sign of that covenant which God made,
not only with Noah, but with all his posterity, and therefore shall continue
till the end of the world.

Q. What relation is there between the Rainbow and Christ?
A. As the Rainbow is the sign of that old and temporary covenant, so is
Christ the Angel of the new and eternal covenant: secondly, as the Rainbow
is generated of the light of the Sun, which light is all one with that, which
is in the body of the Sun. So is Christ begotten of the substance of his
Father, light of light, God of God, from all eternity: thirdly, as the
Rainbow does consist of the light of the Sun, but somewhat* obscurer,
because covered with a cloud: So Christ does consist of the nature of God,
which for a while did lurk under the veil of his humanity: fourthly, as God
did manifest himself unto Ezechiel in the Rainebow; so he has revealed
himself to us in his Son Christ: fifthly, as the generation of the Rainbow
is wonderful; so is the twofold generation of Christ more wonderful. Yea his
name shall be called wonderful, Isaiah 9. 6. sixthly, as in the Rainbow
there are three colors, so in Christ there are three offices, to wit of a
King; of a Priest, and a Prophet: seauenthly, as in the Rainebow there is the
color of fire and water, so in Christ there is fire to purge us, and water to
cool and manure us: eighthly, as the Rainbow ( Revel. 4.) did compass the
throne round about: so does Christ, with his power and providence defend the
Church which is his throne: ninthly, as we should look upon the Rainbow, and
comfort our selves, when we fear any inundation of waters; so should we with
the eyes of faith, look upon our Redeemer when we fear the inundation of his
Fathers wrath.

Q. What use should we make of the consideration of the Rainbow?
A. First, it should comfort: for if God was so careful to confirm this
temporal covenant with a sign, much more careful will he be to confirm that
covenant which he has made with us in Christ: secondly, when we see it, let
us with the Jews lift up our hands and hearts to him; that not only made the
covenant, but has also ever kept it till now: thirdly, let us learn to fear
him, and avoid sin; that as we have escaped the s^ood, which is signified by
the waterish color; so we may escape that devouring fire which shall destroy
the beauty of this world, represented to us by that fiery color which we see
in the rainbow. Fourthly, let us acknowledge our own imbecility and
incredulity seeing God is compelled to confirm his covenants and promises by
such like external signs. Fifthly, as the rainebow has no light nor beauty,
but that which it has from the sun. So let us acknowledge, that we have no
grace nor perfection but that which we receive from the son of
righteousness. Sixthly, let us in beholding of the rainbow, acknowledge that
the mercy of the Lord is above all his works, for in a little wrath and for
amoment he hid his face from us, but with everlasting kindness he has had
mercy upon us. Es. 54. 8.

Q. How will God remember Noah when he sees the bow?
A. God does not properly remember, because he does not forget, and he cannot
forget, because he is most perfect, and all things are present to him; yet for
our better understanding he is said to remember and forget after the manner of
men, yet this and such like attributes are in God not subiectiue as they are in
us, but Causaliter; then he will remember, that is, he will cause us to
remember.

Q. Nhy does Moses make mention of the three sons of Noah?
A. First, to let us see the effect of Gods blessing in the multiplication of
mankind, how that of these three the whole world was so suddenly
replenished. Secondly, to let us know the propagation and increase of the
Church, which is his chiefest drift. Thirdly, to let us see the wickedness of
Cham to his father, and the cruelty of his posterity against the Church of God.
Fourthly, that we might know that the propagation of mankind does not depend on
fortune, or the stars, or that they were from eternity.

Q. Had Noah any more sons besides these three?
A. No: for if he had, the Scripture would have named them, as well as the
children of other Patriarchs, at least in general, that they begat sons and
daughters. Secondly, Moses in this and the next chapter shows that these
three did multiply the world, therefore it is not likely that he had any more.

Q. What was the cause that Noah had no more children?
A. Not because he was gelded by his son Cham as the Hebrews think, for that
is fabulous. But first because these three were sufficient. Secondly, he was
now very old and not fit for procreation. Thirdly, he did enjoy the blessing of
multiplication in his children Fourthly, because of his chastity and temperance
which he did more regard then the propagation of children.

Q. Why amongst all the children of Cham, only Canaan is named here?
A. Because amongst all Chams children, Canaan and the Canaanites were most
notorious in wickedness. Secondly, because Canaan and his posterity were
cursed, of which he speaks here, verse 25. Thirdly, to animate the Jews (for
now the time was near, that they should take possession of their land) to go
with courage against them, seeing they were an accursed nation.

Q. Was Canaan borne in the Arc as Chrysostom thinks?
A. No: for eight persons only went into the Arc, and only eight came out
from thence; Secondly, in that doleful time that they were in the Arc,
neither man nor beast did give themselves to procreation.

Q. How is it understood that Noah began now to be an husbandman?
Q. Not that he was none before, but that now he began again after the flood
to follow that calling, so we read that Christ began to say, Luke 12. 1. and
he began to cast out them that bought and sold in the Temple. Mark. 11. 15.
that is, he did say, and did cast out, etc. or, he began to be an husbandman,
that is, he invented some other way to till the ground then before, or thirdly,
he began, that is, he did more painefully till the ground then before, because
it was made more barren by the flood: here then we see, that although Noah was
righteous and an old man, yet he does not give himself to idleness, and
neglects his calling, so no pretense should hinder us from following our
vocation so long as we are able.

Q. Was Noah the first inuenter of drinking wine?
A. Yes: for if it had been in use before the flood, Noah had not been
overtaken with it immediately after the flood. Secondly, we do not read that
there was any drinking of wine till now. Thirdly, seeing the earth did bring
forth most excellent and comfortable herbs, and the fountains did yield most
pleasant waters, and the bodies of men were stronger, there was no such need
of wine before the flood as after; yet we deny not but there were grapes before
the flood, and men did eat of them, as they did of other fruits?

Q. But seeing the earth was spoiled with the flood, whence had Noah vines?
A. As other herbs and trees did spring out of the earth being warmed by the
sun. So questionless did vines, although not so excellent as before the
flood; and Noah by his tillage and husbandry made them better, but we must not
think that he gave himself altogether to planting of vines neglecting other
trees and herbs, but here is only spoken of vines, because Moses is to speak
of Noah's drunkenness, and the effects thereof.

Q. Why was Noah so desirous to plant a vineyard?
A. Because he knew that the strength of man's body began to decrease, and wine
does strengthen. Secondly, the earth did not yield that increase which it did
before. Therefore wine would supply in a manner the defect of herbs and
plants. Thirdly, he knew that wine did comfort the heart, and at that time he
stood in need of it, because questionless he was much given to sorrow and
grief to see the desolation of the earth.

Q. Did Noah ill in drinking of the wine?
A. No: for who planteth a vine and does not eat of the fruit thereof? 1.
Cor. 9. 7. it is lawful to use the creatures of God with thanksgiving, for
every creature of God is good, etc. 1. Tim. 4. 4. Wine was created to comfort
man's heart. Psalm. 104. Yea Paul desires Timothy to use a little wine for his
stomachs sake. 1. Tim. 5. 23. Christ did drink wine himself, and ordained
that in the sacrament under the sign of wine, we should drink his blood,
then Noah did not sin in drinking, but he sinned in not regarding the manner
no^ the measure of his drinking?

Q. Did Noah drink wine a purpose to make himself drunk, as our Priests of
Bacchus now adays do, that altogether do sacrifice their throats and bellies
to him?
A. No: for he till now, knew not the force of wine, but they know it by daily
experience. Secondly, he was exceeding old and weak at this time, therefore
was quickly overcome, but the most part of them are young and strong to drink
wine. Thirdly, he never drinking wine before, knew not how much he should
drink, therefore was suddenly overtaken, but they by drinking every day do
know what should be their measure; and yet do drink beyond all measure.
Fourthly, he was drunk but once, but they are drunk daily. Fifthly, he
repented for his sin and was ashamed, but they both glory in their sin, and
do defend it.

Q. Is Noah then to be excused for his drunkenness?
A. No: for although he had been ignorant of the effect and force of the wine,
yet ignorance excuses no man. Secondly, he being a learned man doubtless
and wise, could not be altogether ignorant of the virtue and power of grapes;
as of other herbs and fruits. Thirdly, excess in eating and drinking in all
creatures is a sin. Fourthly, if he had been excusable, then God had not
punished him by suffering his own bowels to mock him, yet because he did not
drink of intemperance, but to comfort his heart, neither had used to drink
wine before, he may be partly excused, for ab in experientia profecta est
ebrietas, Noe, non ab intemperantia, Theod. q. 65. in genesis

Q. Seeing Noah a just man fell into this sin but once, and that partly of
ignorance, why would not Moses conceal it?
A. As the virtues of the Saints are set down in Scripture for us to imitate,
so their vices are not omitted, that we might learn to slay and eschew them:
secondly, that we may all learn to see our own imperfections; for the
iustest man that is, does fall seven times a day; our righteousness is like a
stained cloth: thirdly, that we might see what a damnable vice drunkenness
is, even a short fury and a voluntary devil, as Chrysostom calls it: Yea
cause of sickness in the body, disquietnesse in the mind, poverty in our
goods, negligence in Gods service, want of reason, and in a word, the root of
all mischief: fourthly, that we may see from whence proceeded the misery of
the Cananites, even from Noah's drunkenness: for drunkenness was the cause of
his nakedness* nakedness of derision, derision of Canaan^ curse: fifthly, to
show the sincerity of Gods word, that neither for fear nor favor will
conceal the truth.

Q. What relation is there between the sin of Adam, and this of Noah?
A. Adam the father of the first world, sinned shortly after his creation, and
Noah the father of the second world, sins shortly after his preservation:
secondly, Adam transgressed by eating the fruit of the forbidden tree, and
Noah transgresses by drinking the fruit of the vine tree: thirdly, the sequel
of Adams sin was nakedness, and the sequel of Noah's sin is the same:
fourthly, Adam was ashamed, and the shame of Noah is delivered: fifthly, Adams
nakedness was covered with skins, and Noah's nakedness is covered with a
garment: sixthly, a curse upon Adams posterity, is the effect of Adams eating,
and a curse upon Canaan, Noah's posterity, is the effect of Noah's drinking.

Q. Wherein did the greatness of Chams sin consist?
A. First, in that he did not reverence his father, in covering his nakedness:
secondly, in that he took pleasure in seeing those members, whereof all men
by nature are ashamed: thirdly, in that he mocked him that was not only his
father, an old man, and him who was righteous before God, but also him, for
whose sake he was preserved from the flood: fourthly, in that he had so soon
forgot the judgments of God upon the first world for such like sins:
fifthly, in that he did not only mock his father, but also told his brethren
of his fathers nakedness: sixthly, in that Cham at this time was no child,
but a man of an hundred years and upward, therefore should have had more grace
and discretion: seauenthly, he was a father himself, therefore should have
known what was the duty of a child: eighthly, in that he was so quick to
spy the moate in his fathers eye, and could not see the beam that was in his
own, I mean his witchcraft, malice, contempt of religion, leacherie, and
other vices which are recorded of him.

Q. Wherein were Shem and Iapheth worthy of commendations?
A. First, for their piety in covering their fathers nakedness: secondly, for
their modesty in going back-ward least they should defile their eyes in seeing
of his filthiness. Wherein we see that Sem the younger is first named: because
it seems he was principal in this business: secondly, we see the difference
of Noah's children, and suppose he was a good man, yet he is plagued with a
wicked son: thirdly, in these children we see the state of the Church. For if
amongst these eight persons that were delivered from the stood, there was one
hipocrite, what wonder is it to find in the Universal Church many thousand
hypocrites: fourthly, in Cham we see the type of wicked children, and in Sem
and Iapheth a pattern for good children: fifthly, if Sem and Iapheth were so
careful to honor their earthly father, then much more diligent should we be
to reverence our heavenly Father.

Q. How could Noah know what his younger son had done to him?
A. Either by revelation from God, or else by the relation of Sem and Iapheth:
and here we see that as Cham is younger in years, so he is younger in grace and
manners: secondly, in Noah's awaking we see the state of the godly, that though
they sleep and fall, yet they awake and rise again: thirdly, in Noah's
sleeping we see the state of the world, for when men are drunk with wine, that
is, filled with worldly blessings, then they fall asleep and wax careless
and secure: fourthly, in that Noah awoke and knew what was done: we should
learn to do good to all men, and not to harm them either sleeping or waking,
for there is nothing so secret which shall not be revealed.

Q. What reward had Cham for scorning his old father?
A. He was accursed by his own fathers mouth, which curse he uttered not of
malice or in his anger, but being moved by Gods spirit, did speak it by way
of prophecy: secondly, we must consider that he uttered this with no small
grief of mind; that he should be compelled to curse his own child for his
wickedness, who not only was his child, but his youngest, whom he loved most
dearly, and having but these three, who were with him wonderfully preserved in
the Arc, and that he should utter this curse not only against him, but also
against the Canaanites his posterity: thirdly, here we see the zeal and
constancy of Noah, that makes no bones to curse his child because he
dishonored God, yea more zealous then Brutus that killed his son for the
love he carried to his country: fourthly, in this we see what a fearful
thing it is for children to dishonor their parents: who to them are instead of
God, certainly the fruit of this sin is a curse.

Q. Why is Canaan cursed and not Cham?
A. In that Canaan is cursed, Cham the father is not exempted, but rather his
curse is aggrauated, as Sem is not exempted from the blessing in the verse
following: although God be named, so Jacob is said to bless Joseph. Genesis 48.
15. when properly he blessed Joseph's children. verse 16. and Canaans name is
here used, not Chams, to let him see the greatness of the curse; which did not
end with him, but did increase as his posterity increased: secondly, because
Canaan did follow his fathers foote-steps in wickedness: thirdly, for our
instruction, that we may learn to fear him, for his judgments are a great
deep, they are past finding out, his wrath is like a consuming fire, and when
he curses, he will not only curse us, but also the fruit of our body. Deuteronomy.
28. 18.

Q. Wherein was Cham accursed?
A. Not only in that he was a servant, but also a servant of servants, and
that unto his brethren, and although this servitude could not be presently
seen in the posterity of Cham, yet at last it was fully manifested, when the
posterity of Sem had the full possession of the land of Canaan.

Q. Is it then a curse to serve?
A. There is a fourfold service. 1. divine, which all creatures owe to God by
right of creation. 2. natural, which is nothing else but the subjection of
inferiors to their superiors proceeding of love for order sake, and this
should have been in the state of innocence: thirdly violent, when men are
constrained to serve, and this kind of service is hateful and bitter: first,
because it is contrary to the liberty of man's nature: secondly, because it is
contrary to the end of man's creation, for man was created to rule and not to
serve: thirdly, it is repugnant to the image of God, a part whereof does
consist in ruling and commanding, and this service is a curse laid upon man for
sin: the fourth kind of service is diabolical, when a man does serve his
sins and mancepate himself to his own affections, for whosoever commits
sin, is the servant of sin. Ioh. 8. 34. and he that serves such masters
may be called a servant of servants, and such servants were the Canaanites,
serving not only their brethren, but also their own abominations, for which
their land did spue them out.

Q. Seeing then inuoluntarie service is the effect of sin, is this a pretense
for servants to reject altogether there service?
A. No, for many things have and do proceed of evil causes, which God does
turn to good uses: secondly, service is a punishment for sin, and therefore
should not be rejected, but with patience endured: thirdly, it is a means to
beat down our pride, and contempt of God; and this means God used against the
Israelites, when he caused them to serve the King of Aram eight years, and
Eglon King of Moab 18. years. Judge. 3. Servants then should comfort
themselves, that though in external and civil matters they are inferior and
subject to there masters; yet in spiritual blessings, and in respect of
Christ, they are equals: secondly, Masters should not be cruel to their
servants, seeing they also have a Master in heaven. Ioh 6.

Q. What reward has Sem for covering his fathers nakedness?
A. First, he is blessed of his father, which is no small matter. For the
blessing of the father establishes the houses of children. Eccle. 3. 9.
Secondly, he has this honor, that he is the first man that is blessed under
the name of God expressly: thirdly, by calling God the God of Sem, he shows
that only Sem and his posterity shall only worship and know the ^true God:
fourthly, of Sem came Christ according to the flesh; who here is called the God
of Sem: fifthly, in this blessing is included the land of Canaan, which then
Sem in his posterity did enjoy, when Canaan became his servant: sixthly, in
that he does not bless Sem in his own name, but under the name of God, it
shows that eternal life is implied herein; for God has prepared for them a
City of whom he is not ashamed to be called there God. Heb. 11. 16.

Q. What is the reward that Iapheth has for his duty to his father?
A. First, that God will enlarge him, that is, multiply his posterity, for he
had more sons, then either Sem or Cham, and these sons of his did spread
over more nations then Sem or Chams children: to wit over Galatia, Scythia,
Media, Graecia, Italy, Spain, Mosco^ia, Thracia, and many more countries:
secondly, that Iapheth shall dwell in the tents of Sem, that is, that the
Gentiles Iapheths posterity, shall embrace the religion of the Jews Sems
posterity: and this was accomplished when the partition wall was broken down
by the preaching of the Gospel, then the Gentiles that were afar off were
made nigh by the blood of Christ. Ephesians. 2. then, as Christ foretold, Ioh. 10.
there was but one Shepherd and one sheepfold: thirdly, that Canaan should be
his servant, which then was fulfilled when the Graecians and Romans Iapheths
posterity had subdued the most part of the world habitable, but if by Canaan
we understand the wicked; and by Sem and Iapheth the Church; then it is most
true, that the wicked nill they will they, are but servants to Gods children.

Q. What is meant here by the Tents of Sem?
A. The Church of God, which is called Tents: first, because Tents are
mooueable, and not still in one place, so is the estate of the Church in this
life, for here we have no continuing City Heb. 13. 14. secondly, Tents are
most used in wars, and our life is a warfare, Job 7. 1. thirdly, Tents are
weakly built, and not able to resist those injuries of the a^re that houses
can: so the Church in her self is weak, though in the Lord she be strong,
and these weak things God has chosen to confound the things that are mighty.
1. Cor. 1. 27. fourthly, the Church is called a Tent, in relation to Moses
Tabernacle. For as there God was worshipped, sacrifices were offered, and the
presence of the Lord was to be seen: so in the Church we worship God, offer up
spiritual sacrifices, and do enjoy the presence and comfort of his spirit.
Again the Church is called the Tents of Sem, because he was the father of the
Jews, amongst whom God only had his visible Church; so she is called the
Tents of Judah. Zach. 12. 7. the Tents of Jacob. Mal. 2. 12. and also the Tents
of the Saints. Reu. 20. 9.

Q. Wherein was Noah the tipe of Christ?
A. As Noah built an Arc, so did Christ the Church: secondly, as Noah did
offer a sacrifice, whereof God smelled a savor of rest, so did Christ:
thirdly, as God for Noah's sacrifice did curse the ground no more, even so for
Christ's sacrifice, God did curse the Church no more: fourthly, as Noah planted
a vineyard, so did Christ plant the Church which is his vineyard. 5. as Noah
was drunk with wine, so Christ who is the true wine, and who troad the
wine press alone, who turned water into wine, and who was counted a drinker of
wine, was drunken with the wine of his fathers wrath, in commemoration whereof
he has commanded us to drink wine in the sacrament: sixthly, as Noah after his
drinking fell asleep, so Christ after he had drunk of the Cup which his
Father gave him, died; for death is a sleep: seauenthly: Noah was made naked
in his sleeping, and so was Christ in his suffering: eighthly, Noah was mocked
by his own son, and so was Christ by his own people the Jews: ninthly,
Noah fell asleep in his own Tent, and Christ's died in his own country Judea.
tenthly, Sem and Iapheth covered Noah's body with a garment, so Joseph and
Nicodemus covered Christ's body with linen clothes: eleuenthly, Noah awoke
from his sleep, and so did Christ from his grave: twelfthly, Cham was cursed
for scorning his Father, and the Jews are yet accursed for killing their
Savior.

Q. How long lived Noah after the flood?
A. Three hundred and fifty years, even till Abraham was about fifty years
of age, or 58. as the Hebrews, and others do think, and in that Noah lived so
long after the flood, it shows us, that long life does neither depend from
the stars, the temperature of the air, the constitution of the body, the
excellency of meat and drink, nor any thing else, except from Gods blessing,
for neither had the Stars that influence, nor the air that temperature, nor
man's body that strength, nor the herbs that nutriment, which they had before
the flood, yet Noah lived after the flood 350. years, and his son Sem 500.
secondly, God would have him live so long after the flood, not only to see the
effect of Gods blessing in the multiplication of his posterity, but also to
instruct the world with the knowledge of the true God; and of these things that
were done before the flood.

Q. How old was Noah when he died?
A. Nine hundred and fifty years, the oldest man that ever lived, except
Iared that lived 962. years, and Methus^lah that lived 969. years, yet for
all his long life, he is not exempted from death; Nam omnes vna manet nox, and
calcanda semel via lethi Again, what was all this long life of Noah, but a
long tragedy full of sorrow and misery, he was vexed with the wickedness of
the world before the flood; and made a mocking stock, in the Arc tormented
with the horror of that fearful judgment; after the flood, mocked by his
own son, and grieved with the idolatry not only of Cham and Iapheths
posterity, but also of Sems family, whom he had so highly blessed, and this
was not a small grief to see wicked Cham whom he had cursed with his
posterity, so to flourish and abound in wealth and power. Surely we are made
says Job, to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed
to us, therefore let us learn to contemn this foolish world, for the grave at
last must be our house, and our beds must be made in the darkness. Job. cap.
7. 3. and cap. 17. 13.

Questions on the tenth Chapter.
Q. WHat is meant by this word Generation, which is so often used in the
Scripture?
A. First, it signifies the original and beginning of things, as Genesis 2. 4.
these are the generations of heaven and earth: secondly, the history of a man's
life and of those things that doc befall him, as Genesis 6. 9. these are the
generations of Noah: thirdly, a genealogy or supputation of ones posterity,
as here in this Chapter, these are the generations of the sons of Noah:
fourthly, it is taken for the people that do live in such or such an age; as
Genesis 15. 16. in the fourth generation they shall come again: fifthly, for an
age it self as Matthew. 24. 34. this generation shall not pass, etc. sixthly,
for ones nativity, as Mat. 1. 18. the generation of Christ was thus,
seauenthly, for a nation as Matthew. 12. 39. an evil generation seeks after a
sign, eighthly, for a kind or fashion, as Luke 16. 8. the children of this
world are wise in there generation, etc.

Q. Why does Moses set down this genealogy, seeing Paul does command us not
to give heed to genealogies. 1. Tim. 14.
A. Paul does condemn these genealogies that are endless, and which minister
questions, not edifications: secondly, he does command us not to give heed to
them; neither to account them apart of Gods worship as the Jews did, but this
Genealogy of Noah and such like in Scripture, are profitable for us to know,
and therefore are not condemned.

Q. What profit is it for us to know the generations of Noah's sons?
A. They are profitable. First, because by them we see how the world is
multiplied. 2. by them we may refute the fabulous genealogies of Poets,
Philosophers, Egyptians, Aethiopians and others that do brag of their
antiquity. 3. in this genealogy we see the effect of Gods blessing in
multiplying mankind. 4. by this genealogy we know so much the better what
these nations are, that are often named in the Scripture. 5. we know also from
hence how Christ came of Sem according to the flesh, and how Noah's curse took
effect in the posterity of Cham.

Q. Was this propagation of mankind by Noah's three sons in so short a time,
miraculous?
A. Miracles are those works which do exceed the power and force of nature,
and these are of two sorts, pure miracles which in all respects exceedes the
course of nature, as the standing of the sun in the days of losuah, his
going back in the dial of Achaz. the conception of the Virgin, etc. or else
they are mixed miracles, which in respect of the thing it self which is
produced are natural but in the manner of producing, and in respect of other
circumstances are supernatural: such as the thunderings that discomfited the
Philistines at Samuels prayer. 1. Sam. 7. 10. the rain that fell at the prayer
of Elias, 1. King. 18. 45. and such like, then this propagation of mankind in
so short a space is a mixed miracle, for it is natural in respect of the work
it self, but in respect of shortness of time, and the multitude that were
begotten, it is supernatural.

Q. Does Moses rehearse here all the heads or fathers of the Nations?
A. No: but those only that were most famous; Then of Sems progeny he
reckons 26. of Chams 31. of Iapheths 14. which in all are 71. and many of
these names here mentioned, were changed by the Greeks, who not only changed
their rites and ceremonies; but also in sign of servitude altered their names.

Q. What order keeps Moses in rehearsing this Genealogy?
A. He begins first at Iapheth, because he was last spoken of in the
precedent chapter; and here he speaks last of Sem, because the rest of this
history is spent about his posterity, and in the middle Cham is placed, which
does represent to us the state of the Church visible in this world, which has
in her bosom many hypocrites and reprobate Chams.

Q. What was Gomer?
A. The father of the Cimmerians as Herodotus thinks, or rather as Josephus
the father of the Galatians, who first were called Galls, and having left
their own country, seated themselves in Asia-minor, where being mingled with
the Greeks, they were called Gallo-greci, and afterward Galatae; unto these
Galatians, Peter writ his first epistle; in this country Paul traveled sundry
times and preached, afterward he being captive at Rome, from thence writ an
epistle to them. Gomer also was the name of Diblaims daughter the wife of
Hosea, Hos. 1.

Q. What was Magog?
A. The father of the Scythians, a rude and barbarous people, inhabiting many
countries in the north part of the world, from them the Turks have their
original, which now to the great shame of Christians, and overthrow of our
religion, have by our unnatural discords, obtained those kingdoms and
glorious Churches in Europe and Asia: sometimes famous and sanctified with the
presence of Christ, and preachings of the Apostles; beautified with miracles,
adorned with all arts and sciences, illustrated with the learned pens of many
orthodox fathers, and besprinckled with the blood of many thousand martyrs but
now alas their habitation is desolate, their Churches are become habitations
for devils, the holds of every foul spirit, and cages of vnc^ane and hateful
birds. Magog is taken for the hid and secret enemies of the Church. Eze. 38.
2. and 39. 6. Reu. 20. 8.

Q. What people came of Madai?
A. The Medes, a mighty people, who did inhabit the country lying between
the Caspian sea and Persia, they were first subject to the Assyrians, afterward
refusing the government of the effeminate Sardanapalus, they made Arbactus
their King, who with his successors for the space of 350. years did govern
Media until Cyrus the Persian, who obtained the Empire of the East. Then Media
was annexed to Persia and Assyria; in the cities of the Medes the Israelites
were kept as captives. 2. King. 18. 11. to the Medes and Persians the
Babylonian Monarchy was given. Dan. 5. 28. the Medes who were at Jerusalem
with many other strangers heard the Apostles speak in their own language.
Act. 2. 9.

Q. Of what people was Iauan the father?
A. Of the Greeks, a people sometime infamous for their inconstancy and vanity,
yet glorious for their laws and government, their arts and sciences, their
mighty towns and cities, for the Monarchy of the world that was stablished
the^, but especially for the light of the Gospel, but now in stead of science
there is nothing but ignorance, in stead of ciuility, light and liberty;
barbarity, darkness and thraldom have seated themselves there, so that they
have forgot to speak their own language, and where the Muses sometimes did
reign, now there is not a school to be seen. First, they were a free people,
till they warred one with another, then they were made servants; for Cyrus,
Xerxes and other persian Kings did vex them; the Macedonians did subdue them,
afterward the Romans, then the Empire being divided, they became to be under
Constantinople, till the Goths, Bulgares and Saracens had wasted them; and at
last they are subdued and live in slavery under the Turk the Christians
scourge, except a few Islands subject to the Venetians. The Grecian King is
resembled by a Goat, Dan. 8. 21. unto the Grecians the Israelites were sold.
Joel 3. 6.

Q. What people came of Thubal?
A. The Italians as the Jews think, and Spaniards as Josephus, which people
inhabited that country which of old was called Hesperia, which name was common
both to Italy and Spain; it has been fatal for these many years, for
Thubals posterity to be great; the Italians in subduing the old world, and the
Spaniards in subduing of the new, not known nor heard of by the ancient
Romans. So then we see that God has enlarged lapheth, and not only* has
persuaded him to dwell in the tents of Sem: for now Jesus Christ the son of
Sem is known amongst the barbarous Indians, but as Thubal was an enemy against
the Jews in Ezechiels days. Ezech. 38. 2, 3. so Thubal is an enemy still
against the Christians, who do not approve of their doctrine and ceremonies.

Q. What people came of Meshec?
A. The Moscouians, who first dwelt in Asia, afterward they removed farther
North; and do at this day inhabit that great continent lying between
Tartaria, Liuonia, Polonia and the North sea, they are of the grecian religion,
they give the sacrament in leauened bread, and do not deny the cup to the
lay people; they think it in vain to pray for the dead, they believe no
purgatory, they read the bible in their own language, Augustine, Ambrose,
Hierome and Gregory, are in great request amongst them, their Metropolitan is
subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople, and above all things they cannot
abide to here Rhetorical sermons in their pulpits, accounting these verbal
preachers, which do study more for fine words then true divinity, not worthy
of the name of preachers, and I wish they were so accounted amongst us; who no^
being contented with the plain and simple style of Gods word do spend much
time in filling the itching ears of fantastical people with their own words.

Q. Who were the sons of Thiras?
A. The Thracians, a people sometimes famous for their strength in wars, they
do inhabit the country Thracia, otherwise called Romania, where
Constantinople is situated, the Gospel shined sometimes in this country, and
happy might they have been, if they could have known their own happiness,
but by their miserable discords they have lost their ancient glory, and
Constantinople which was the Queen of the Eastern Cities and sometimes the
house of God and vineyard of Jesus Christ, is become now a cage for Mahomet,
the devil and his excrements, the Turks who as it seems were only borne to
be a plague to Gods people.

Q. Which are the three sons of Gomar here mentioned?
A. Ascanaz of whom came a people which did inhabit* Ascania, a country in
Asia-minor, in which there was a lake of the same name, even in the time of the
(...) Kiphath of him came the Paphlagons, a people also in Asia, which name
they had of Paphlagon, the son of Phi^eas. Thogar^ of him came the Phrygians,
a people in Asia* near to Bithinia, Lydia and Misia* they are called by the
Hebrews, as Josephus says, Thygrammanes from this Thogarma.

Q. Which are the four sons of Iauan?
A. The first is Elishah, of him came the Aeolians, a people of greece, who
leaving their country went to Asia, and seated themselves in Mysia, which they
called Aeolia, from their own name. Elishah sold blew and purple to the
Tyrians, Ezech. 27. 7. His second son is Tharshish* whose posterity inhabited
Cilicia, now called Turcomania, where that famous City Tarsus was built as is
thought by Sardrnapalus, in which Paul was borne. Act. 21. 39. hither (...)
fled, (...). 1. 3. the people of Tharshish were famous for shipping. Ezech. 27.
12. therefore Pompeius used their help in his sea fight against Caesar, and
the medeteranean sea is called Tarsis, from them, Psalm. 48. 7. The third son
is Citti^, of whom came the Cyprians, who did inhabit the Island Cyprus, not
far from Syria and Cilicia, therefore the Island was called Citica, the
Hebrews call it Chitti^, and here was the city Citiu^. This Cyprus was many
years under the government of the Venetians, but now they are under the
servitude of Magog the Turk. His fourth son is D^danim, of whom the Rhodiant
came, who inhabited Rhodus an Island in the Carpathian sea, famous for the city
Rhodos, which was possessed by the Christians many years. But at last proud
Nabuchadnezzar the Turk, by our negligence took both the city and the Island.

Q* What is meant by the Isles of the Gentiles?
A. Not only the plots of ground which are compassed about with the sea, but
also countries and regions within the continent, for the whole earth may be
called an Island, because it is all compassed with the sea; the Isles are given
them with the rest of the earth to the sons of men, the Isles are invited to
praise God. Isa. 42. 10. The Isles shall wait for Christ. Isay 51. 5. the kings
of the Isles shall offer gifts to Christ. Psalm. 72. 10. and this was
accomplished when God persuaded Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Sem. Gods
children in this world may be likened to Isles, for as Isles are separated from
the rest of the earth, so Christ has chosen his Saints out of the world. Ioh.
15. Secondly as Isles are compassed about with the sea, and most subject to
storms, so the the Saints in this world are most subject to afflictions. Ioh.
16.

Q. Which was Chams first son?
A. C^sh, the father of the Aethiopians, of whorn mention is made. Isa. 11.
Ezec. 29. and 30. Amos 9. Nah^m. 3. Soph. 2. and elsewhere, but the name of
Aethiopia is sometime given to Arabia, sometime to India, because of the
commerce that was between the Aethiopians and these countries; as also because
they in s^merare both black, but Aethiopia properly (...) in Africa, under
which name not only the country of the Abissines is comprehended, but also the
Southeast part of Africa, from the meridionall line, to caput bon^ spei, and
this confusion of the name has caused many errors amongst the learned, then
this name of Cush and Aethiopia so often used in Scripture, is rather to be
understood of Arabia which was near to India, then of the remote countries of
Africa, therefore Moses wife being a Madianite is called an Ethiopian, Numb.
12. Theodoretus thinks that the Queen of Saba who came to see Solomon, was
Queen of Aethiopia. Quest. 22. in Number. The Aethiopians did use to call their
Queens Candaces, whose chief governor the Eunuch was converted by Philip.
Act. 8. Mathiac the Apostle did preach the Gospel to the Aethiopians as
thinks Sophronius?

Q. What was Mizraim?
A. The father of the Egyptians, who are still called by this name in the new
Testament; but in the old Mizraim, and because Mizraim was Chams son, therefore
in Scripture* Egypt is called the land of Ch^. Psalm. 105. 23. and 78. 51. If
Mizraim was the father of the Egyptians, they need not brag so much of their
antiquity. This country was first governed by their own kings, wh^ they called
Pharaoh, then they were subdued by the Aethiopians in the days of Hezekias.
After that Cyrus the Persian overcame them. But under Darius Nothus, they fell
away from the Persian and were governed by their own kings, till Alexander
subdued them. After his death it fell to Ptolomeus, by whose name their kings
were called, till Cleopatra, after whose death the Romans made it a Province,
after them the Saracens had it, and now it is under the Turkish slavery. This
country was famous for Abraham, Joseph, the Patr^kes, the birth of Moses, the
delivery of the Israelites, for arts and sciences, fruitfulness and riches,
towns and schools, for Christ and his mother who fled thither, for many
Martyrs and Christian professors, for the first Monks and Eremites who from
thence did ouerspreade all Europe. But as before it was infamous for idolatry,
so now it is for Mahomet^ blasphemous herefie.

Q. What people came of Phut?
A. The Lyrians, a people in Africa, near Mauritania, where there is a river
called Phut. They are called by this name. Eze. 27. and 38. cap. But they are
called by the name of Lybia. Act. 2. and Dan. 11. in Lybia there has been
famous Churches, but especially Carthage renowned for that learned Bishop and
glorious Martyr Cyprian.

Q. What was Canaan?
A. The cursed son of Cha^* of whom came the Canaanites, which did inhabit
that land, which was called Canaan, the land of promise, Judea, and now the
holy land, it was divided in Judea, Samaria and Galile, in it God was once well
known, but now instead of God Mahomet is worshipped.

Q. What was Seba?
A. The son of Cush, and father of the Sabeans, a people in Arabia-felix, but
there is a twofold Sheba; the one in Arabia, the other in Aethiopia, this in
Hebrew is written with S^mech, that with Shi^, from this the Queen of Saba
came to Solomon, from that the wise men came to worship Christ, both these
places are mentioned. Psalm. 72. 10. the Kings of Sh^ba and (...) shall give
gifts?

Q. What other sons had Cush?
A. Hauilah the father of the Getulians, Sabtah of whom came a people called
Sabath^i dwelling in Arabia-felix, Raamah and Sabtecha, whose posterity also
did inhabit Arabia-felix, and mingled themselves with the Sabeans.

Q. What sons had Raamah?
A. Sheba, whose posterity dwelt in Aethiopia, and Dedan whose offspring did
possess a part of Arabia-felix, not far from Idumea, of Ded^n mention is
made. Ier. 49. 8. Ezech. 27. 15. and 38. 13.

Q. What was Nimrod?
A. He was also the son of Cush, and the first tyrant in the world, who is
mentioned here apart, not because he was a bastard, as some think, but because
Moses is to speak of his tyranny and greatness. Secondly, Nimrod here is
said to be mighty in the earth, that is, bloody and cruel, for power and
greatness is from God, and therefore good, if it be free from cruelty and
blood: but so was not Nimrods greatness, and all bloody conquerours are
Nimrods successors. Thirdly, Nimrod being of the posterity of Cham, should
have rather been a servant then a Lord, but it falls out many times that the
wicked in this world do flourish like a green bay tree, when as the godly are
appointed as sheep to the slaughter.

Q. Why is Nimrod called a mighty hunter before God?
A. Because he was a persecutor and oppressor of his brethren, for such are
called hunters in scripture, and sometimes fowlers; for as hunters and fowlers
use all the snares and tricks they can to take away the life of the beasts and
fowls, so do the mighty tyrants to kill and destroy men. Of these fowlers,
David speaks. Psalm. 61. 3. and Psalm. 1^4* 7. of the hunters, Ier. 16. 16.
where such persecutors are called alfo fishers (before God) that is openly and
without fear of God, so tht now he became shameless in oppressing, and cared
not though God took notice of his wickedness, this is the quality of impudent
Liars.

Q. Is Nimrod all one with Belus, of whom profane histories make mention?
A. Yes: for both are said to build Babylon: Secondly, both were mighty men and
oppressors: thirdly, they are both said to live about 200. years after the
flood in Babylon: fourthly, they were both the inuenters of idolatry: fifthly,
as the histories acknowledge no king in Babel before Ninus but Belus, so the
Scripture acknowledges none but Nimrod.

Q. Which are the four^ cities that were subject to Nimrod?
A. Babel the chiefest city of Chaldea, where Nimrod began the Tower. Belus his
successor built the city which was amplified by Semiramis the wife of Ninus,
and at last Niniuie being conquered, was reedified by Nabuchadnezzar. The
second i^ Erech a city beyond Euphrates, otherwise called Edessa and Hie^. The
third is Accad, otherwise called Nisibi^, a city upon the river Tygris. The
fourth is Caln^th a city of great note as we may see, Amos 6. 2. this was
called Seleucia and Cresiphon: in this town the Parthian kings did use to
winter, and these cities were built in Chaldea and Mesopotamia called here the
land of Shinar, and Mich. 5. 6. the land of Nimrod.

Q. Who was the builder of Niniuie.
A. Assure the son of Sem, who to avoid the cruelty of Nimrod left Shinar,
and for his greater security built Niniuie, which afterward was the chiefest
city of the Assyrian Monarchy, and here we must not think that Assure was a
mighty hunter like Nimrod, in that he built a strong city; for he did not
build it to that intent, that Nimrod built Babel; but only to secure himself
from the cruelty of Nimrod.

Q. When was Niniuie built?
A. Three hundred years after the flood, and 2000. before Christ, about the
time that Abraham was borne, by Assure whom the histories call Ni^; this City
was famous for the greatness, beauty, and riches thereof; and for the
preaching of Jonas. It did continue in great glory for the space of 1400.
years and more, till it was destroyed by Nabuchadnezzar, at this day Niniuie
has many goodly buildings and spacious streets in it, compassed about with
walls, the inhabitants thereof are for the most part Nestorians.

Q. What other cities built Ashur besides the great city Niniuie?
A. Recoboth, a city by the river Euphrates mentioned also Genesis 36. 37. Chalah
the chiefest city of the country Calacina in Assyria Resen, the city Bess^ra
also in Assyria.

Q. What sons had Misraijm?
A. He begat Ludim or the Lydians mentioned. Ier. 46. 9. who inhabited the
country of Lydia in Asia-minor, famous for that rich King Craesus, and the
river Pactol^: secondly, Anamim, they did inhabit as it is thought the
country Pentapolis in Lybia: thirdly, Lehabim, they possessed Libia in Africa:
fourthly, Naphtuhim, they were the people Napatei in Aethiopia: fifthly,
Pa^sim, they were the people Pharusij in Africa beyond Mauritania, mentioned
Esaias 11. Ezech. 29. sixthly, Casl^him, they inhabited the country Casiotis in
Syria, from them the Philistims came who possessed the land of Canaan. Amos 9.
7. where they remained, not cast out to the great grief of the Israelites:
seauenthly, Caphtorim a people called Cappadoces, who did destroy the
Philistims and dwelt in their land. Deuteronomy. 2. 23. Ier. 47. 4.

Q. What posterity had Canaan?
A. Of him came Sidon father of the Sidonians, he built the city Sidon in
Phenicia, which was after allotted to the tribe of Asser: secondly, Cheth of
him came the Chethites, or Hittites, who inhabited the places about Bersabae^,
and of whom there were Giants, their land only is promised to the Israelites.
Ios. 1. 4. because they were most afraid of them: thirdly, Iebus or the
Iebusite, he founded the City Iebus, which after was called Salem, and last of
all Jerusalem. Judge. 19. 10. Genesis 14. 18. they were not utterly subdued by
Israel, but continued till Salomons time, who made them Tributaries. 2. Chron.
8. 8. fourthly, the Emorite or Amorites, a people high as Ceders and strong as
Oaks, Amos 2. 9. whose King was Og, they were dispersed into diverse parts of
the land, for some of them possessed Libanus, some Mount Galaad, and others the
hilly country of Pharan. Therefore the whole country bears their name,
Genesis 15. 16. when the Prophet would express the sins of Israel, he says
their father was an Amorite. Ezech. 16. 3. fifthly, the Gergasite or Gergasins.
Matthew. 8. and Gadarens. Luke 8. sixthly, the Hiuit^ of whom came the Gibeonit^s
whose lives were spared by Joshua. Josh. 11. 19. seauenthly, the Arkit^ who
dwelt in the city of Arc^ in mount Libanon: eighthly, the Sinite or the people
of Sinai mentioned by Josephus, 1. Antiq. 6. ninthly, the Aruadite, from them a
part of Canaan was called Aruad, mentioned in Ezech 27. 8. tenthly, the
Zemarite, they inhabited ^emarim which after fell to the Beniamites. Iosu. 18.
22. eleuenthly, the Hamathite from whom two cities bear the name, the one is
Annochia, which Amos cap. 6* calls Hamath Rabba, or Hamath the great, once
the Metrapolitan of Syria, the other is Hamath the less, called also Epiphania
from Antiochus Epiphanes, this city stood on the north side of the Israelites
ground. So these are the eleven nations that came of Canaan: in the 15. chapter
of this book, there are reckoned up but ten, and Deuteronomy. 7. 1. Act. 13. 19.
there are counted but seven, for it seems that some were wasted or mixed
confusedly with the rest, before the Israelites did possess the land.

Q. Which were the borders of the land of Canaan?
A. Sidon on the North-west allotted to the tribe of Aser. Gaza on the
South-west, a city which befell the tribe of Judah. Sodom with the other cities
that were destroyed. Genesis 19. on the South-east, and these are the bounds of
the whole land of Canaan. Joshua only describes the West part thereof. Josh.
13. 3.

Q. Why is Sem called the brother of Iapheth here, and not also of Cham?
A. Some are called brethren by nature, as Jacob and Esau, some by nation, as
the Jews were Paul's brethren, some by affinity as Christ and his kins-folkes.
Matthew. 12. and some by religion and affection as all Christians. Then Iapheth
and Sem are called brethren, because they were not only so by nature, but also
in affection. So Si^eon and Leui brethren for their affection in evil. Genesis
49. Then though Cham by nature were Sems brother, yet God accounts him not so,
because he was not of his affection and religion, even so wicked and profane
Christians though they are accounted our brethren in the judgment of the
world, yet they are not so in the judgment of God.

Q. Why is Sem called the father of the sons of Heber only, seeing he had more
sons then Heber?
A. As Cham is called the father of Can^an only* because his curse was visibly
executed on him, so here Sem is called the father only of Hebers sons,
because his blessing was visibly powered on them. Genesis 14. 19. Secondly, because
they only retained the faith and religion of Sem: thirdly, by this God will
show that Sems blessing did not belong to all his posterity, but only to
those that retained his faith. Neither can we be partakers of the blessings of
our Elder brother Christ, except we be followers of him, and holy as he is holy.

Q. Which are the sons of Sem?
A. Elam of whom came the Elamites, so called from him, but afterward Persians
from Perseus their governor: secondly, Assure, father of the Assyrians who were
enemies to Israel. Assure is also the name of a city in Judea built by Solomon:
thirdly, Arphaxad, his genealogy and country are not spoken of in Scripture,
but that he is the Father of Christ. Luke 3. yet it is thought that Chasdin or
the Chaldeans are of him: fourthly Lud, of him came a people in Africa near
Aethiopia: this I know is contrary to the received opinion, for this Lud is
thought to be the father of the Lydians in Asia, and Lud the son of Mizraim
is thought to be the father of this people in Africa: but we must not think
that the world was so divided among the sons of Noah, as though Sems
posterity did only possess Asia. Iapheths Europe, and Chams Africa precisely
without entermingling, for as Madai thought Iapheths son did inhabit Media
in Asia, and Canaan who came of Cham did possess Palestina in Asia; so why may
not Lud though Sems son inhabit Lidia in Africa: fifthly, Aram of whom came
the Syrians, called Aramites from him, and their land Aram in the old
testament, but Syria in the new; the chiefest city of this land is Damascus.

Q. What sons had Aram?
A. Hus whose sons possessed the land of Hus: Jobs country, Job 1. 1. which
was a part of Idumea. Lam. 4. 21. secondly, Chul he inhabited Armenia: thirdly,
Gether he dwelt in Caria a country in Asia-Minor, between Licia and Ionia:
fourthly, Mash whose posterity inhabited the hill Masius above Nisibus and
they were called Masiani.

Q. What sons had Arphaxad?
A. In the Hebrew text Selah is called his son, but the Greek has Caman
which Luke follows in his 3. chapter, for there as also here in the Greek
Selah is called the son of Cainan and Cainan the son of Arphaxad, some
think that Selah was the adopted son of Cainan, and the natural son of
Arphaxad, but it is like that Luke in a matter of so small moment would not
disagree from the Greek text, because it was in great account amongst the
people: then according to the Hebrew text, Selah is the son of Arphaxad and
father of Heber.

Q. What sons had Heber?
A. Peleg, in whose days the earth was divided, that is, the inhabitants of
the earth who before were of one tongue, and one country, are now divided into
diverse tongues and regions, and therefore because when he was borne this
division fell out, he is called Peleg, which signifies diuision^ some think
this name was given to him before he was borne by way of prophecy, but it is
like he had it from the event that fell out when he was borne, neither is
their opinion sound, who think this division to have been in the end of his
days, which was in the 48. year of Abraham's age; and 38. years after the
death of Ninus, for at that time the world was replenished with people, with
diverse languages, Kings and kingdoms, and therefore this division was long
before the last year of Peleg. His other so^ is Iokta^, who has here 13.
sons reckoned, but because they seated themselves in remote and unknown
regions beyond the East Indies and fell away from the God of Heber to worship
unknown Gods, therefore they are little mentioned in Gods word, and they do
yet remain unknown to us.

Q. What countries did Ophir and Hauilah possess?
A. Ophir did possess the land which from his name is called Ophir, doubtful
whether it be Cephala in Aethiopia, or Chersomsus in India, or Peru in America;
but we know that Salomons ships fetched store of fine gold from this Ophir.
1. Kings 9. and 10. chapt. Hauilah did possess India, as Josephus and Hierome
do affirm.

Q. What are Mesha and Sephar?
A. Mesha is a country in India where the sons of (...) dwelt, so called as
it is thought from Mash the son of Aram. Sephar is a hill in India also, and
Luther coniectureth that this may be the hill Ararat or I^anus.

Q. Was there such a division of nations before the flood, as now is after?
A. Before the flood their was a division amongst men in respect of qualities,
for then some were good, some bad, etc. Secondly, in respect of religion, for
the posterity of Set^, who are therefore called the sons of God, did only
worship the true God* but Cains posterity were Idolaters, or rather Athiests.
Thirdly, in respect of place. For Cain removed from the place where he was,
and dwelt on the East Side of Eden. Genesis 4. and there his posterity planted
themselves apart from Seths progeny, yet their was not so great a division
before the flood as after; because after the flood the world was divided in
diverse tongues and speeches, sects and religions, laws and governments, towns
and regions, arts and occupations, orders and degrees, etc. And in this we may
see the providence of God. By whom and not by fortune these things come to
pass: for it is he that has made of one blood all nations of men, for to
dwell on the face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed,
and the bounds of their habitation. Act. 17. 26. Secondly, although amongst us
there be many divisions in religion, in laws, in speech, etc. yet because we
came all of one stock, we should all study to unity; for these divisions
came of sin, but unity is more ancient, for it was from the beginning,
before sin came into the world.

Questions on the eleventh Chapter.
Q. WHat was that one speech that was spoken before the confusion of tongues?
A. Not the Egyptian tongue, as the Egyptians, nor the Phrigian, as the
Phrigians* nor the Syriac as Theodoretus. quest. 59. in Genesis nor the Chaldee as
Philo lib. de confus. ling. would have: but the Hebrew. For the Syriac and
Chaldee tongues, are but Dialects of the Hebrew. Secondly, the names that are
mentioned in Scripture before the confusion of tongues are Hebrew and
significant. Thirdly, there are many words which all other tongues have
borrowed from the Hebrew, as Sac, Babel. etc. Which do testify that this
tongue is most ancient. Fourthly, the most of the Fathers, and all the Recent
writers are of this opinion.

Q. Did the Hebrew tongue remain in use after the confusion?
A. Yes, but only in Hebers family, therefore it is called the Hebrew tongue:
Yet all Hebers posterity did not use this tongue, but only Peleg and Reu, and
those that were in the straight line of whom Christ came, and it seems in that
this language was not changed; that Heber did not consent to the building of
Babel. This then is that tongue in which God spoke and gave his Oracles, both
before and after the flood. It was spoken also by Angels, and by his own
people the Jews; it did not proceed of sin, as other tongues, but was from
the beginning even in Paradise; it is that tongue that does contain the
mysteries of our salvation, and like enough it shall be that tongue which we
shall speak in heaven: yet though this tongue was not confused at the building
of Babel, it was notwithstanding confused in the captivity of Babel. And since
that time Hebrew did cease to be in common use among the Jews; and Syriac or
mixed Hebrew came in place: so that the tongue which Christ and the Apostles
used amongst the Jews, was not Hebrew but Syriac.

Q. Why did the people remove from the East into the plain of Shinar?
A. They removed from the East, that is, from the hilly country of Armenia,
where the Arc rested, into the plain of Shinar or Chaldea. First, because
they were now exceedingly increased, and an 100. years had been pinned up in
that country, therefore now seeing all fear of the flood was gone, they
thought good to descend to the plain and enlarge their habitation. Secondly,
because the plain was more fertile, pleasant and commodious for them. Thirdly,
because their minds were not content with their present estate, therefore they
begin to covet for more ground and a richer soil; and this covetousness has
been the cause of so many wants, transmigrations and confusion of tongues?

Q. Of what matter did they build their Tower and City?
A. In stead of stone they used brick, because in that plain country stones
were scarce* and because of the abundance of clay they had matter enough to
make brick of. Secondly, in stead of mortar artificial; they used natural
mortar, or a kind of slime that was found in their pits and rivers, of the
nature of brimstone, which Se^iramis did use for the building of Babylon; and
here we may see their forwardness in exhorting one another to this wicked
work. A shame for us, who are not so earnest to build up the Church of Christ,
the heavenly Jerusalem, as they were to build up their earthly Babel. Secondly,
although they wanted matter, that is, stone and mortar to build their Tower
with, yet rather then they will give over, they will make matter to themselves,
and in this we see the nature of the wicked, who will leave nothing un*
attempted to bring to pass their wicked designs. A^dax omnia perpetigens
^umana ruit per ve^itum nef^. Thirdly, this sin is most fearful; for it is
intolerable pride against the Majesty of God; and it is not amongst a few,
but universal, and that so soon after the flood.

Q. Of what height did they inte^d to build their Tower?
A. It is Hyperbolically spoken here, that the top thereof may reach to heaven,
as the cities of the Anakims are said to be walled up to heaven. Deuteronomy. 1. 28.
(...) tree to reach up to heaven. Dan. 4. 18. Caper^ to be exalted to heaven.
Mat. 11. 23. That is exceeding high, for it is not like they were so foolish,
as to think they were able to raise a tower to the heaven. For as Phil^ says,
the earth being the Center, cannot either in the whole or in the parts thereof,
touch the heaven which is the circumference, and in respect of the huge
distance between earth and heaven, though the whole earth should be set on an
heap, it could not reach to heaven; much less a Tower; yet it is like they
did resolve to build it so high that the top thereof might exceed the
highest mountains; that so they might be preserved from the flood. And this
counsel is thought to have proceeded from wicked Nimrod, to whom the rude
multitude gave speedy consent, now how far they proceeded in their work,
none is able to define: the Jews have idly coniectured that it was 27. miles
in height; but it is probably recorded, that in Hieromes time, some part of
this huge building was yet extant.

Q. For what end did they build so high a Tower?
A. For two, the one to get a name, that is, to be made famous to posterity,
or rather infamous, as he that burned the Temple of Diana. For such is the
desire of glory in man, that rather then he will be buried in oblivion, he
will do those things that are most odious both in the sight of God and man,
that he may be spoken of after death: and this sin is derived from Adam to all
mankind, for he desired to be like unto God, and we do all desire that glory
which is only due to God. For this cause so many Piramides and Towers,
Collassus and triumphant arches have been erected; yea whatsoever noble ^orke
is done, yet amongst men it is for this end: and what will not a man do to
immortalize his name. For, Pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier hic est,
but we ought rather to consider what the Prophet says. Psalm. 49. Man being in
honor abides not, he is like the beast that perishes, like sheep they are
laid in the grave, death shall feed on them, their beauty shall consume in the
grave from their dwelling, when he dies, his glory shall not descend after
him, etc. The other end why they build this Tower is, least they be scattered
abroad: a fear which did arise from their guilty consciences, for the wicked
fly when no man persueth. Prou. 28. 1. Yet though this building of this Tower
proceeded of pride, and the intent of the builders was to dishonor God, and
get themselves a name, we must not for this condemn the building of Towers and
Forts, which are for ornament and defense.

Q. What does the Tower and City of Babel signify?
A. As Jerusalem is the type of Christ's Church, so is Babel of the devils
Synagogue* and therefore as Christ's Church and Satan's Synagogue are contrary,
so is Jerusalem and Babel. Jerusalem signifies the vision of peace because the
King thereof is the Prince of peace, and the subjects are at peace with God,
with men, and with their own consciences. But Babel signifies confusion, for
as there is nothing amongst the wicked but disorder and confusion, so to them
there is no peace. Secondly Nimrod out of his pride built Babel to glorify
himself, but Christ by his humility builded the Church to glorify his father.
Thirdly Babel is built in a low plain, for the wicked seek those things that
are below; but Jerusalem is a city built upon a hill, for the conversation of
the godly is in heaven. Fourthly Babel is built with brick and slime, but
Jerusalem is built with gold and precious stones. Reu. 21. Fifthly, diversity
of tongues was a means to leave off the building of Babel: but diversity of
tongues was a means to begin the building of Jerusalem. Act. 2. Sixthly* the
building of Babel was the cause why the people were dispersed and separated,
but the building of Jerusalem is the cause why they are conjoined and united:
seauenthly Babel is fallen and is found no more, for the memorial of the
wicked shall perish, Prou. 10. 7. But Jerusalem shall dwell from generation to
generation, Joel. 3. 20. For they that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount
Sion, etc. Psalm. 125. 1. Eighthly Babel is the hold of every foul spirit, and
a cage of every hateful bird, Reu. 18. But Jerusalem is that holy city coming
down from God out of heaven, Reu. 21. Therefore let us come out of Babel,
least we be partakers of ^er sins, and receive of her plagues, Reu. 18. 4.

Q. Did God descend locally from heaven to see the Tower?
A. No: but when he brings out some extraordinary effect of his power and
providence, whether it be of justice or mercy, he is said to descend: so he
descended to see Sodom, Genesis 18. 21. He descended to deliver his people from
Egypt, Exodus 3. 8. He descended on Sinay, Exodus 19. 11. So he is desired to
descend, Psalm. 144. 5. Esa. 64. 1, etc. So here because he would manifest the
effect of his justice in confounding their tongues and dispersing of them* he
is said to descend, but if we say with many of the ancient fathers that Christ
oftentimes did assume the form of man before he had fully united it to
himself in the Virgins womb, then we must also say that God here did descend
locally, though not as God, but as man. But howsoever here we see that God will
not strike till he descend and see their wickedness: that is, make it be seen
and openly known, both a notable example of patience, and an excellent
president for judges, who first must examine before they condemn.

Q. Why are the builders of the Tower called here the sons of Adam?
A. To put them in mind of their base original, which was red earth, that
their pride might be cast down, who being but dust and ashes, yet durst
attempt to build a Tower against the God of heaven their maker: secondly to
teach us and all posterity, that we do not arrogate any part of divine honor
to our selves, or attempt any thing against him, who may redact us to nothing;
for he is Almighty and we are but the sons of Adam: therefore when we do
forget our selves, he can drown us with (...), kill us with (...), turn us
into beasts with (...), and resolve our bodies into lice with Herod: thirdly,
that we do not too much admire and adore the Potentates of this world; for let
their power be never so great, yet they are but the sons of Adam: therefore
Vide vnde es homo et erubesce.

Q. How is it understood that the people (...) one?
A. Not only in place and speech, but also in consent and affection; and this
union made them the more forward to begin that work; so that they would not
willingly be restrained from that which they had imagined to do: and here we
see that the wicked have their unity* but it is altogether against the Lord and
against his anointed, Psalm. ^. Therefore such union cannot stand, and if the
children of darkness be at such union amongst themselves, much more should
the children of light, who have but one father, one mother, one head, one
redeemer, one spirit, one word, one baptism, one bread which we eat, one cup
which we drink, one common enemy, and one hope of inheritance. Secondly we see
their steadfast resolution that they think nothing can restrain them from
their building: so confident are the wicked in works of darkness. Thirdly we
see that God is not idle, he notes and observes their doings, he that sits
in the heavens does laugh them to scorn, Psalm. 2.

Q. How, and to whom did God speak here, when he says let us go down?
A. Properly speech belongs not to any thing but to man, who only has the
instruments of speech, yet there is an internal and mental speech in spirits,
which is nothing but the reasoning and discoursing of the mind; and this
speech is imperfect in respect of man; for none understands what is in the
mind of man but himself; in Angels it is more perfect, for they understand
one another by this mental speech; but in God it is most perfect, for after an
incomprehensible manner, he speaks to himself, and the three persons in the
glorious Trinity do understand one another after that manner which we cannot
conceive, much less express. The^ as our minds internally and spiritually can
speak to God although our tongues do not move, so can the Angels speak to
one another, so can God both to them and us. In times past God spoke so to the
Prophets, and oftentimes by his Spirit he speaks so to his Saints still, yet
God may be said to speak, when he frames audible voices in the air, as Mat.
3. Or when his Angels assuming men's bodies, do speak in his name, as often in
Scripture and most excellently did he speak when his only begotten Son did
assume the whole nature of man. By this essential word he has spoken to us in
these last days. Now because the Father speaks here to the Son and Holy
Ghost, we can neither define nor divine how he spoke; yet this we know, that
he being eternal and incomprehensible, did speak after an eternal and
incomprehensible manner.

Q. To what end did God come down?*
A. To confound their language, for this was a speedy way to overthrow their
building, which he might have done other ways, but this way he thought
fittest: both because it was a means to disperse them abroad, as also in that
he would have this diversity of speech to be a testimony to all ages of their
intolerable pride. And this confusion of tongues did take away that union which
was amongst men, and has been the cause of hatred and contempt amongst
nations. Therefore when we cannot understand one another, let us call to mind
the pride of these builders, for whose sin God has laid this great labor on
the sons of men.

Q. Were their tongues so divided that every man who was there did speak a
particular language?
A. No: for so there had been no society amongst men, if none could have
understood another speech, and so the world could not have been replenished
with people but it is probable according to the opinion of the Ancients, that
their tongues were divided according to the number of the families, so that
every family spoke a language, which those that were of another family could
not understand. Now this confusion of speech is the third universal punishment
with which he does correct the world, for the first was mortality, denounced
against Adam and his posterity: the second was an universal flood: and this
an universal confusion of tongues; and that division of tongues is a great
judgment, we may see in the 55. Psalm. 10. where David does wish it against his
enemies.

Q. What relation is there between this division of tongues, and that which
was visibly done upon the Apostles?
A. This division was the punishment of pride, but that of the Apostles was the
reward of their humility* secondly as this division was a means to disperse
men abroad and fill the world with inhabitants, so that division was a means
to disperse the Apostles abroad, and fill the Church with Christians: thirdly
in this division one speech was divided, amongst many men, but in that division
many speeches were united in the mouth of one man: fourthly by this division
the people were separated into diverse regions, by that division the people were
^nited into one Church: fifthly in this division God comes down in his wrath
to punish these builders, but in that division the holy Ghost comes down in
mercy to comfort the Apostles.

Q. What did follow upon this division of tongues?
A. They were scattered abroad upon the face of all the earth; so then the
evil is brought on them, which they sought to prevent: for that which the
wicked fears shall come upon him. Prou. 10. 24. Again, as God came down and
dissolved this wicked communion, so Magistrates and Ministers must destroy the
works of the Devil* and although they leave off from building their City,
yet about an 100. years after it was repaired and amplified by Semiramis.

Q. Why was this tower called Babel?
A. It is so called not from Belus, but from Balal, that is confusion, and this
name God gave it, to be a perpetual monument of their wicked attempt; and
because this name of Babel or confusion, has been ever hateful, let us in
all our actions shun it; but especially let the Church be free from it; and
let all things there be done with order and decency. Again, let us fear and
tremble to attempt any thing against the God of heaven, for he is not far
from every one of us, he that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that
formed the eye, shall he not see. Psalm. 94. Truly the Lord looks from heaven,
he beholds all the sons of men: he considers all their works. Psalm. 33.
Yea he knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. Psalm. 94. Therefore
as he came down now to punish these builders, so he will come one day, but
with the sound of the trumpet and the Angels of heaven, there shall he render
to every man according to his works.

Q. Why are the generations of Sem set down here?
A. As in the fifth chapter of this book Moses rehearses ten Patriarckes from
Adam to Noah; so in this he reckons ten from S^m to Abraham. First, to let
us see that even in these most corrupted times God has his Church, although
but small, therefore we need not doubt to call the Church Universal in
respect of time, for it has bin even from the beginning, although not still
apparent in the eyes of men. Secondly, that we may know the age of the world,
therefore to every one of these names, the years of their life are subioyned:
for else we should not have known how much time was between the flood, and
the making of the covenant with Abraham. Thirdly, that we may know that Christ
came of these fathers according to the flesh. Fourthly, although many more
descended of Sem, yet here they are not thought worthy to be reckoned in Gods
book, because they did not continue in the faith of Sem. Fifthly, although
Arphaxad be here named, and in the tenth chapter, after Elam and Assure. Yet it
follows not that he is younger then they (for so we must grant that Noah had
these three sons in two years, which is not needful,) but Arphaxad is
rather the elder: For the Scripture does not observe the order of times in
setting down names.

Q. Whether shall we hold with the Hebrew text, that Selah was the son of
Arphaxad, or with the Greek which affirms that Selah was the son of
Cainan, and grandchild of Arphaxad?
A. Rather with the Hebrew, for that is the original fountain and of
undoubted verity, the Greek is but a translation, and therefore the
Translators might have mistaken themselves in putting in Cainan, between
Arphaxad and Selah. Secondly, all the Hebrew coppies affirm that Selah was the
son of Arphaxad, but all the Greek coppies do not affirm Caman to be
Arphaxads son, for there are some Greek coppies, which in the 1. of Chron.
1. 18. Make no mention at all of Cainan, but only have (...) Arphaxad begat
Selah. Thirdly, although Luke chapt. 3. mention Cainan, yet some Greek coppies
there are which in that place do not at all mention Cainan, as Beza witnesses
in his annot. upon Luc. cap. 3. Fourthly, the putting in of Cainan here, has
for the most part changed the time of each fathers procreation in the Greek,
least the Gentiles (as it is thought) for whom the Bible was translated first,
should know their true genealogy.

Q. How many years li^ed Sem, after he begat Arphaxad?
A. Five hundred years, even till Isaac was fifty years old, and so he saw
ten generations after him, before he dyed. Then true it is, that he who
honors his father, etc. his days shall be long in the land, etc. And
although good Sem was vexed to see not only others, but also his own posterity
fall to idolatry, yet he is comforted before he dies to see the Church renewed
again in Abraham and Isac, and no less comfort was it for Abraham and his
son to enjoy the society of old Sem, who saw the first world, the flood, the
building of Babel, who questionless did instruct them with the knowledge of
the true God, and of those things which he had both received of his father
Noah, and which he had seen by his own experience.

Q. What sons had Terah?
A. Abraham, Nachor, and Haran, where Abraham though youngest is first placed
for honor and dignities sake, as before, Sem is put before his elder brethren.
Secondly, Abraham is not only mentioned here, but also Nachor and Haran, for
the better understanding of the history of Lot the son of Haran, and of
Rebeccah Isaacks wife who was of Nachors house.

Q. How do we know that Abraham was the youngest of these three?
A. Because he was borne when his father Terah was a hundred thirty years old,
for Terah dyed two hundred five years old, verse. 32. of this cap. Then
Abraham departed from Charran 75. years old. Genesis 12. 4. therefore if Abram
was 75. years old at the death of his father, it is manifest that he was borne
the 130. year of his fathers age, and so consequently he was younger then
Nachor and Haran who were borne before this time: for Milcah Nachors wife was
the daughter of Haran. verse 29. therefore questionless Haran was the eldest.
Again Haran died before his father. verse 28. If then he died and had a
daughter who was married before Abraham was 75. years old, then doubtless he
was the eldest, if then Abraham was borne when Terah was 130. years old, Haran
must needs be borne when Terah was 70. For at that time he begat, that is, he
began to beget children. verse 26. Therefore by this also we may gather that
Nachor was elder then Abraham.

Q. What shall we say to the Hebrews: who hold that Abraham's age of 75.
years, is not counted from his birth, but from his departure from Vr of
Chaldea?
A. If this were true, that Abraham was borne when his father was 70. years
old, we must admit that he was 135. years old, when he departed from
Charran; which is contrary to Genesis 12. 4. Again, by this supputation it would
follow that Isaac was born 35. years before Abraham came to Canaan; for
Abraham was 100. years old when Isaac was borne. Genesis 21. But that is false,
for Isaac was borne in Canaan. Yea if this fiction of the Hebrews were true,
we must be forced against the Scripture to admit that Abraham was 160. year
old when Isaac was borne, and that he lived 100. years, whereas he lived but
175. Genesis 25. Neither need we with Augustine, Quest. 25. in Genesis That Abraham
came twice to Canaan, once when his father was living, and then he remained
there 60. years, and another time after his death; for the Scripture both
here, and Act. 7. Mentions only of once coming to Canaan, and that after his
fathers death.

Q What signifies Vr of the Chaldees here?
A. It may either signify fire properly, and so the Hebrews think that Haran
died in the fire, but that Abraham was wonderfully delivered from thence, which
savors of a fable because neither mentioned by Moses, nor Paul. Heb. 11.
Neither by Josephus nor Philo, who have written much of Abraham. Secondly, This
Ur may signify metaphorically, persecution and affliction; which often in
Scripture is called fire, as Psalm. 66. 12. Lam. 1. 13. And so Abraham was
delivered from the afflictions of the Chaldees. Thirdly, it may be here the
name of a City, as the Chaldee paraphrase takes it; or a country as the
Greek translateth it, and this is most proper: then Vr was a City or Country
in Chaldea, so called either from the fire which they saw come from heaven upon
the fathers sacrifices, or else from the sacred fire which was kept there, for
fire was holy amongst the Gentiles, especially amongst the Chaldeans, Persians
and Romans, or it might have been called so, because it stood in a low place
or valley, which the Hebrews call Vr. In this country then or City Haran
died, before his father, that is, his father being yet alive, and from hence
Terah took Abraham, Lot, and Sarai, to go to Canaan.

Q. Was Sarai Abraham's half sister, by his father Terah, and not by his
mother, as thinks Clem. Alexand. lib. 2. Strom.
A. No, but she was the daughter of Haran, and sister to Lot and Milcha, which
Milcha was grandmother to Rebecca Isaaks wife. Genesis 22. 20, 23. Then though
properly she was his brothers daughter, yet she is called his sister. Genesis
20. 12. As Lot is called his brother. Genesis 13. 8. For the Hebrews use to call
their kinsfolks brethren and sisters; and though properly she be Terahs
grandchilde, yet according to the Scripture phrase, she may be called his
daughter. For grandfathers, are called fathers in Scripture, as Jacob calls
Abraham his father. Genesis 48. 15. 16. She was then Abraham's sister, that is,
his brother Harans daughter by the same father Terah; but not by the same
Mother, for Haran was Terahs son, by an other woman: so that he was but half
brother to Abraham. Here then we see how careful Abraham is now, and other
fathers here after, to take them wives of their own kindred, and not strangers
being Idolaters, and this they did, when as yet there was no positive law, to
forbid them, as afterward it was commanded by Moses. Deuteronomy. 7. 3.

Q. What was Iscah, whom Moses calls the daughter of Haran?
A. This Iscah is no other woman but Sarai, for else it had been impertinent*
to have spoken of her in this place, the signification also of the word so much
imports. For both Ischai and Sarai signify the same thing: to wit,
principality or rule. Then Sarai we see had two names, as many other in the
Scripture, and though Abraham married her being his mothers daughter, yet we
must not think that marriage unlawful in him, for it was not exhibited by
law, yea after the law we see it was in use, by the practice of Othniel, for he
married with Achsah the daughter of his brother Caleb. Judge. 1. 13. Yet
although this marriage was not unlawful in Abraham and Othniel, because it was
permitted them, being extraordinary persons, we must not put it in practice,
for many things were lawful to them which to us are unlawful. And though
Moses does not expressly forbid it, yet by analogy and consequence it seems to
forbid such kind of marriage. Moses Lev. 18. does not in express terms
forbid the grandchild to mary with the grandmother; or with the wife of his
grandfather, or a man to marry with his mothers brothers wife, and yet these
marriages by proportion are unlawful. Moses only there sets down expressly a
few unlawful marriages, that by those we may judge of the rest that are
unlawful in such distances.

Q. Why is there mention made here of Saries barrenness?
A. To put us in mind of the wonderful birth of Isaac, that so we may the
more admire the power of God. Secondly, to make a way for the subsequent
history of Isaacks birth; and in this we may consider the state of the Church.
For as God out of barren Sarai brought out Isaca, so he did out of her, as out
of a dry stock procreate his church: therefore when the Church seems to us as
it were utterly lost, let us not despair, for God of stones can raise children
to Abraham, Mat. 3. When we doubt, then let us look unto Abraham our father,
and unto Sarah that bare us, Esa. 51. 2.

Q. Was Terah the cause why Abraham took his journey to Cainan?
A. No: but Abraham was rather the cause that moved Terah, for the calling did
especially belong to Abraham, Genesis 12. 1. Therefore his faith is particularly
commended, Heb. 11. 8. And though Abraham acquainted his father with Gods
oracle, and so under God moved him to go, yet because Terah was his father,
this honor is given to him, that he is said to take Abraham, etc. from
Chaldea. Secondly, in that Abraham went with his father and kindred. We learn
what was his love to their good, and what our care and love should be to our
friends, in drawing them from Chaldea, that is from the world. But as Abraham
was resolved if they had not gone, to have forsaken them: So must we forsake
parents, friends, country, yea all we have, to follow Christ. Thirdly, these
fathers before they departed from Chaldea were Idolaters, as we may see, Joshua
24. 2. And in them we may behold what we are before our calling, even the
children of wrath. Fourthly, in that not only Abraham, but the rest also went
out from Vr. We see that this was no fire but the name of a city, for if they
had all been saved from the fire, the Scripture had ascribed it to the power
of God, which it does not, as we see afterward it does, speaking of the three
children in the fiery furnace. Fifthly, Sarah here is called Terahs daughter
in law, therefore she could not be his own daughter. Sixthly, Sarah is called
here Abraham's wife, therefore could not be his sister, for such a marriage were
altogether unlawful.

Q. Whether went Nachor with Abraham and the rest of his kindred from Vr, ornot?
A. If he had gone with them, he had been here named, as well as the rest,
therefore it seems he stayed behind and would not leave his Idolatrous
country. In whom we see the nature of the wicked who cannot be persuaded to
leave the world; and though he went not at this time, yet afterward being
either troubled in his conscience, or else banished from that place as Augustine
thinks, lib. 16. de ciuit. dei. cap. 13. He departed from thence, but went
no further then Mesopotamia, for he dwelt in Nachor. Genesis 24. 10.

Q. Why did Abraham and the rest of his company stay at Charran, and went not
immediately to Canaan?
A. Because his father being old not able to travel so far as Canaan;
therefore he was driven to stay there with his old father till he dyed, but
after his father was dead, he removed from thence to Canaan Act. 7. 4. In
Nachor, Terah and Abraham we may see the threefold estate of men; some like
Nachor remain in Chaldea, and will not forsake the vanity of this world.
Others again are like Terah who in their journey from Chaldea to Canaan, from
the dominion of Satan and power of sin to the kingdom of grace, stay in the
middle way, and so dies, but the third sort are those true Christians, who
with Abraham do not stay in Chaldea; or if they do, it is but a short while,
but run on with patience the race that is set before them. Let us then with
Abraham walk toward Canaan while we have the light, least darkness come
upon us, Ioh. 12. 35. I mean that darkness of death where the light is as
darkness, Job 10. 22. For he that goes to the land of darkness, that is
to the grave shall come up no more, Job 7. 9.

Questions on the twelfth Chapter.
Q. IN that God does call Abraham particularly from Chaldea, does it follow
that there was more excellency and worth in him then in the rest?
A. No: for before our calling we are all by nature the children of wrath.
Abraham was an Idolater, as well as the rest of his kindred, Ios. 24. 2. For
how could he else choose, being borne of Idolatrous parents; and bred amongst
an idolatrous people, and wanting the means to know the true worship of God,
till God himself did wonderfully call him. Yea if he had been free from
superstition, wherein had the mercy of God appeared in calling him? then
Abraham being in the same estate of misery that others were, is the more bound
to God for his merciful calling: for it was of his mere love that he called
both him and his seed, because he loved their fathers, therefore he chose
their seed after them, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 37. And as God called Abraham from
Chaldea, so does he call us from the power of Satan, not because of our
foreseen merits, but because it was his pleasure, for it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16.

Q. How and to what end was Abraham called?
A. He was called effectually, for he is not of the number of those who are
called but not chosen. Mat. 20. 22. But of these who called in time,
predestined before time, and shall be glorified ofter time, Romans 8. 30.
Secondly, he was called not by violence, as Paul, nor by affliction, as
oftentimes the Israelites were, nor by present benefits, as those who were
healed by Christ and the Apostles, nor by working of miracles as many in the
Gospel, but by the bare word of God, Get thee out of thy country, etc.
Thirdly, he was called not because of his foreseen faith, much less because
of his foreseen merits, for both these follow calling; Non praecidunt
iustificandum, sed sequuntur iustificatum. But he called him, because it was
the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1. 5. Fourthly, he is not called only to
a private office or function, as Saul was to the kingdom, and Judas to the
Apostleship, and neither of them to grace: but he was called both to be a
Father and Prince on his people, as also to be a member of that City which he
looked for; whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10. Fifthly, he is not
called as he was, who first desired to bury his father. But as Peter and
Andrew, lames and John were, who leaving their ships, their fathers and their
nets followed Christ, Mat. 4. So Abraham departed as the Lord had spoken.

Q. How often did God appear to Abraham?
A. Nine times. First, now in Chaldea, where he is bid leave his country.
Secondly, when he came to Canaan, then God promised to give his seed that land,
Genesis 12. 7. Thirdly, when he departed from Egypt to Canaan; being separated
from Lot, then the Lord promised to him and to his seed the land of Canaan,
Genesis 13. 14. Fourthly, in a vision, when God promised to multiply his
posterity, as the stars, Genesis 15. 1. Fifthly, when Abraham was 99. years
old, then he changed his name from Abram to Abraham, and instituted
circumcision the seal of the covenant, Genesis 17. 1. Sixthly, in the plain of
Mamre, setting in his tent door, then he received the three Angels, Genesis 18.
1. Seauenthly, when he was commanded to cast out Ishmael, Genesis 21. ^2.
Eighthly, when he was commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac, Genesis 21. 1.
Ninthly, when he stayed him from offering of his son, Genesis 22. 11. And by
all these apparitions we may see how highly God did account of his servant
Abraham, and how happy and honorable they are whom God loves, although they
are contemptible to the world. Secondly, God appeared oftentimes to Abraham,
and so he does still to his Saints, although not after that manner, that he
did to Abraham, yet in his spirit he is with us to the end of the world.

Q. How did God appear to Abraham and the Prophets?
A. Here it is not expressed how God appeared or spoke, but we know that God
has been both seen and heard of his people, not in regard of his essence,
which is most simple, free from accidents, infinite, incomprehensible, neither
must we imagine with the Anthropomorphits, that God has a body and members by
which he is made visible, for no man has seen God at any time, Ioh. 1. No man
can see him and live, Exodus 33. No: in the kingdom of heaven we shall not see
his essence with our bodily eyes. We may see him with the eyes of our minds as
the Angels do now, for we shall be like to them. Yet we shall see him perfectly
with our bodily eyes, but in the person of his Son our mediator; for the
godhead dwells bodily in him; then neither Abraham nor any Prophet has seen
or heard God in himself, but only they have enjoyed his presents in external
signs, as Moses in the fiery bush, the Israelites in the cloud and fire* in
smoke and voices, thunders and lightnings, the Priests in the mercy seat, in
the Arc, in Vrim and Thummim. The Prophets sometimes in the shape of a man,
sometime they did enjoy him without any external sign, immediately by his
spirit working upon the understanding and will, and they have seen him
sometimes by dreams, sometimes awaking, sometimes in a trance, as his Majesty
thought good, but there never was, nor is, nor shall be a more excellent way to
see him, then in his son Jesus. For he that has seen him, has seen the
Father. Ioh. 14. Then we know not how he appeared and spoke to Abraham, it is
sufficient for us to know that he appeared in some external image. Quam
voluntas eligit non quam natura creauit* Ambros*

Q. Why does God command Abraham to teaue his country?
A. Because he will try his faith and obedience. Secondly, because he will
weane him by degrees from the love of the world. Thirdly, because he will have
him to be a Preacher amongst the Cananites, to show them the knowledge of the
true God. That he may win some to salvation; and make the obstinate
inexcusable. Fourthly, that he may take possession of that land in the name of
his posterity. Fifthly, that he may flee from the Society of the Idolatrous
Chaldeans, and shun all those that were hinderers to him in Gods service;
especially his friends and acquaintance. Sixthly, to teach us what we should
do, when we are called; even leave our own country, kindred and fathers
house, that is, the world, our sins which are so dear unto us, and the
dominion of Satan, that we may follow Christ to the heavenly Canaan.
Seauenthly, that Gods power might appear the more, in defending Abraham, in
preserving and multiplying his posterity, amongst the midst of their enemies
in a strange land, and at last giving them the full possession of it, then for
these reasons Abraham forsook his country, friends and acquaintance, which
was hard for flesh and blood to do, yet by faith he went out, not knowing
whither he went. Heb. 11. 8.

Q. Is it lawful then for us to forsake our countries and friends, if they
^inder us in Gods service?
A. Yes, for if we prefer father or mother, or any thing to Christ, we are
not worthy of him, for this cause therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
soiourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country. Heb. 11. 9. Lot
forsook Sodom, the Israelites Egypt; Moses refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter. Heb. 11. 24. Elias and John Baptist lived in the
wilderness. Christ also did retire himself commonly to the ship, the mount
and the desert: the Disciples forsook all and followed Christ. Math. 18. 28.
And many holy men in the Primitive Church, of whom the world was not worthy,
as The Apostle says, wandered in deserts and mountains, in dens and caves of
the earth. Heb. 11. 38. And truly as the society of the wicked, hinders the
service of God, so nothing fitter to advance it, then a private life, free from
the multitude. Amongst whom we both see and here these things, which do not
bring us to God, but draws us from him; yet here I do not commend the idle
life of the Monks, which is undertaken more for superstition then religion,
for the belly then the soul, amongst whom for the part: gluttony;
covetousness and intemperance do reign, instead of sobriety, meekness and
continency, as Helias Abbas did complain, although I find nothing in that
kind of life contrary to true Christianity, if so be it were purged from
error and superstition, and corrected according to the pattern of that life,
embraced by the Primitive Church, and so highly commended by the fathers. For
indeed their Monasteries were the seed-plots and seminaries of the Church, and
free from these errors and abuses, which now adays have filled our
Monasteries. Now, though Abraham left his country, yet this must not be a
president for us upon every occasion, to forsake our country and friends, or
to think that God can only be served abroad and not at home, truly many holy
men, who never forsook their country and friends, have served God sincerely.
And it was the praise of Noah, that he was righteous before God, in that wicked
generation wherein he lived. But if we see that we cannot live amongst our
friends without indangering our salvation* let us rather loose and forsake all,
then loose our souls.

Q. In what country was Abraham now when God called him?
A. Not in Mesopotamia, or in the way between Chaldea and Charran, as
Augustine thinks, lib. de ciuit. Dei. 16. cap. 15. For he is called out of
his country* which is not Mesopotamia, though S. Steven says, that he was in
Mesopotamia, but there he calls all the country beyond Euphrates, Chaldea,
Syria, Babylonia by this name. Secondly, no^ in Charran, for this was not his
country, and to say that he was twice called, once in Chaldea* for that was
his country, and from Vr in Chaldea he was called. Genesis 15. 7. Then to think
that he was commanded to leave his country, after that he had left it already
is ridiculous, neither must we think that either Mesopotamia strictly taken,
or Charran, could be Abraham's country, seeing he did but soiourne there but a
while like a stranger, his mind in the mean time being still in Charran.

Q. How did Abraham leave his kindred, seeing they went with him?
A. Of all his kindred, none went to Ca^an with him but Lot his brothers son,
for Terah died in the way of Charran, Nachor went not from Chaldea. Secondly,
suppose his father went with him to Charran, either because he hated the
Chaldeans Idolatry, or else because he would not loose the society of his
son Abraham. Yet Abraham was so disposed and resolved, that although his
father had not gone, or if he had labored to diswade him, yet he would have
gone whether the Lord did call him. And in this he shows a singular faith
and obedience, both in that he was so resolute to go, howsoever his friends
were disposed, as that he would leave a certainty for incertainties, his own
friends and country, for a land he knew not: for although in the former
chapter Moses names Canaan. Yet it does not follow, that Abraham as yet, knew
that he was to go thither, for Moses of himself does ^ame it by the figure
Prolepsis.

Q. What are the blessings that God does promise to Abraham?
A. First, that he would make of him a great nation, which he performed in
his children by Agar, but more wonderfully in the Israelites by Sarah, being
old and barren, but above all in the spiritual Israelites. For he is the
father of all them that believe, Romans 4. 11. Secondly, That he will bless
him, and so he did in earthly things. For he was very rich in cattle, in
silver and gold* Genesis 13. 2. and 24, 25. But specially in spiritual things.
Gal. 3. 14. Ephesians. 1. 3. Yea in all things God blessed Abraham. Genesis 24. 1.
Thirdly, he will make his name great; (not as the Hebrews think by putting to
the letter (He) and of Abram, making it Abraham, for this conjecture is
ridiculous) but he will make his fame and person glorious. For the name is
often taken for the person it self, as thou have a few names in Sardis, that
is, a few persons. Reu. 3. 4. And Gods name is in Scripture taken for himself,
then Abraham was great and famous, for his faith and obedience, for Gods care
to him for many blessings he had of God, in his son Isaac, in barren Sarah,
in his posterity the Israelites, in the faithful, whose father he is; in
that God calls himself, the God of Abraham. But specially in that Christ
came of Abraham according to the flesh, so then Abraham's name shall be so
great, that he shall be a blessing to others. Fourthly, he will bless them
that blesses him, and curse them that curse him; so Lot and Ismael were
blessed for his cause; Pharaoh was plagued, the four Kings overthrown, and
Abimelec terrified for his sake; but this cursing and blessing has been
always seen executed upon the friends and enemies of the Church; the
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, Roman Monarchies, have been cursed for cursing
her. But the mid-wiues in Egypt, the whore Rachab, the widow of Serepta, and
many others have been blessed for blessing her. Fifthly, in him all the
families of the earth shall be blessed, that is in his seed. Genesis 22. 18. Which
the Apostle expounds of Christ. Gal. 3. 16. For the blessing of God is come
to the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. Gal. 3. 14. God has sent Christ to
bless us, in turning every one of us from our iniquities. Act. 3. 26. Yea in
Christ God has blessed us, with all spiritual blessings, etc. Ephesians. 1. 3.
Here then we see how bountiful God is to Abraham for his imperfect obedience,
thus he deals with his Saints, for brass he brings gold, and for iron,
silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron, etc. Isay 60. 17. And we
must observe, that from the promise to the law are four hundred thirty years,
Gal. 3. 17. And all this while the Israelites dwelt as strangers in Egypt,
Exodus 12. 40. Yet not in Egypt only, but some part they spent in Canaan, and
because they did spend the most part of it in Egypt, therefore Moses only
mentions Egypt.

Q. How old was Abraham when he went from Charran?
A. Seauenty five years old, and in this he deserves singular commendations,
that although now he was old and feeble, yet he would not descest from going
his journey. Secondly, in that he went as the Lord spoke unto him, we do
learn how to guide our actions, for this is true piety, to undertake nothing,
but what God has commanded, and* to do it no other ways, then as he has
commanded; this is only true obedience, which God more regards then
sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15. 22. Thirdly, in that Lot went with him, we may see what
his affection was to true religion, who being but a youth, and having Nachor
in Chaldea his uncle, who like enough did diswade him from going, yet he had
rather go with Abraham although he knew not whether, then to remain amongst
idolatrous company.

Q. What company took Abraham with him to Canaan?
A. Sarai his wife, a notable president for women, who should not with Lots
wife look back to Sodom when they are called, nor hinder their husbands from
going to the wedding feast as she in the Gospel, Luke 14. 20. Nor infect their
husbands with idolatry, as Salomons wife, nor deceive them with flattering
words, as Sampsons wife, nor induce them to break Gods commandment as Eve;
nor desire them to curse God as Jobs wife, but rather let them imitate Sarai,
Rebeccah, Lia, Rachel, Debora, Ruth, Abigal, the Queen of Seba, the widow of
Serepta, the blessed Virgin Mary, the widow Anna, Elizabeth, Lydia, the women
in the Gospel who ministered to Christ, who accompanied him to the cross, and
did visit him in the grave, and many other holy women mentioned in Scripture,
in whose lives they may see a pattern of devotion to God, love to their
husbands, faith, wisdom, patience, charity, and many other excellent virtues.
Secondly, he took Lot his brothers son, a notable youngman, whom the young
men of this age should imitate, who are so far from following Abraham for
religions sake to a strange country, that they will neither follow the holy
life of the Saints, nor the counsel of their preachers in their own country.
Thirdly, he took all the souls, that is, those persons or servants, whom he
and Lot had gotten in their possessions, in Charran, where we may see that
Abraham was no base fellow, but a man of might, for he had many servants, even
318. trained soldiers, Genesis 14. Again, here we see his care to their souls,
who would bring them with him, a pattern for masters, who must be careful to
procure the weal of their servants souls, and in that, they went with him,
we have here an example for servants, who should be ready to follow their
masters in goodness.

Q. Did Abraham well in taking with him to Canaan, all the substance that he
had gathered?
A. Yes: for God would neither have him beg, not be burdensome to those
amongst whom he was to dwell, our calling then does not hinder the lawful use
of riches lawfully gotten; for those that were called by the Apostles, did not
altogether leave their possessions, but sold them as well for the use of others
as for their own, Act. 2. and Abraham as all the Saints may lawfully possess
riches, for they are the gifts of God, the effects of Gods blessings; and the
instruments of learning, virtue and alms, yet we must take heed, that our
riches be not unlawfully gotten. Secondly, they be not abused to luxury and
pride. Thirdly, that we do not put our confidence in them. Fourthly, that we
do not hide them, with that unprofitable servant, when we should use them to
the comfott of our selves and poor brethren. Fifthly, that we do still
acknowledge God to be the Author and giver of them. Sixthly, that whenever
occasion serves, we be ready to leave them, if God do so require of us for
the greater advancement of his glory and true religion, and so it is to be
understood that the Apostles forsook all, and they are promised to be highly
rewarded, who leaves these things for Christ's sake. Mat. 19.

Q. How far traveled Abraham through the land?
A. To the place where Sichem afterward was built, a city in the tribe of
Manasses, belonging to the priests and not far from the hills Hebal and
Garizim, where the Israelites heard the blessings pronounced, Deuteronomy. 27. 12.
This place in Abraham's time was called the plain or Oak of Moreth, for it
seems that here was a grove of Oaks. And here we see that Abraham even in this
promised land, is but a pilgrim, for he is driven to wander as far as Sichem,
which is toward the desert. Truly God would teach both Abraham and us by this,
that our lise here on earth is but a peregrination.

Q. Did this land belong of right to Abraham, Because he descended of Sem?
A. The Hebrews think that Canan by Noah was given to Sem and his posterity,
but Canans sons took it by violence from them, which is false. First,
because the Scripture mentions no such thing. Secondly, if this country had
belonged to Sem, and so consequently to Abraham, this had been no free gift.
Thirdly, is the Cananites had taken it violently, then this had been cause
sufficient to have driven them out, but we read only that their wickedness
was the cause of their expulsion, Leu. 18. 24. Fourthly, God would not have
deferred four hundred years to drive them out, but presently would have put
Abraham's seed in possession of it, which he did not, for their iniquity was not
yet full. Fifthly, Moses mentions no other cause, that moved God to bring
his people to Canaan, but only because he loved them, Deuteronomy. 4 37. And as God
brought Abraham now to Canaan, the country being replenished with Canaanites;
so did he afterward to his posterity, for when they they were brought hither
from Egypt, they did find the Cananites in the land. Again, as the Cananites
was in the land, so the Cananites are in the Church, and as Abraham lived a
stranger amongst them, so do the Saints amongst the wicked, but as there came a
time when the Cananites were driven out, so the day shall come when the wicked
shall be cast out into utter darkness, Mat. 8. 12.

Q. Which of the persons of the trinity appeared here to Abraham?
A. Not the father, for as he is of none, so he is sent of none* nor the holy
Ghost, for he visibly only appeared in a done on Christ in Jordan, and on the
Apostles in fiery tongues, but Christ the second person, the Angel of the
covenant, who has from the beginning been a mediator and the ambassador of
his Father. Some to uphold image worship, do think this wasian Angel
Personaliter: but God by representation; and therefore he is called Lord. But
this is false, because the name Jehovah which is in the Hebrew text, is never
given to any creature, for it is Gods proper name, Esaias 54. 5. Amos 4. 15. If
the name Elohim had been used here, they might have had some show for their
opinion, for that name indeed is sometimes given to the creatures, Psalm. 82.
6. But the essential name of Jehovah is here expressed, which is only proper
to the creator. Secondly, if this had been an Angel, it is not like that
Abraham would have built an altar to him; for building of Altars was a part of
divine worship.

Q. To whom then did Abraham build thi^ Altar?
A. To Jehovah that appeared unto him, and in so doing, he testifies his piety
to God, even amongst the midst of Idolaters without fear, Religio esse non
potest, vbi metus est. Lact. Firm. lib. 4. Love drives out fear. Secondly, he
shows a thankful mind to God, not only in building an altar, but building it
without command of his own accord. Thirdly, he did not build it to any of the
Idol* gods, he knew his God to be a jealous God, and who would give his glory
to none. Far otherwise do they who build Churches and Chapels to the honor
of dead men, Hon^randi sunt sancti propter imitationem non adorandi propter
religionem Augustine. I deny not but any religious house may bare the name of a
Saint or Martyr deceased, provided always that we derogate nothing from the
Lord, or arrogate any thing to them contrary to Gods word.

Q. Whether removed Abraham from Sichem?
A. To a mountain on the East of Bethel, so called by Jacob, but otherwise it
was called by Luz, Genesis 28. 19. This mountain was between Bethel and A^, a
city which Iosuah destroyed, Ios. 8. And upon this mountain, a Temple was
built by the permission of Alexander Macedonia, of which hill the woman of
Samaria speaks, Ioh. 4. It had two tops, Hebal and Garizim, whereon the
blessings and cursings were pronounced. Here then Abraham stays a while, and
yet not long, for he is forced to travel toward the South, as having no
certain abode enen in that promised land, he was then, and the godly are
still but strangers in this world, and as he went toward the South as toward
the Sun: so do the godly in faith and grace, the way of the righteous shines
as the light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prou. 4. 18. But
the wicked travel toward the North, from whence a plague shall be spread
upon them, Ier. ^. 14. Because the way of the wicked is as darkness, Prou. 4.
19.

Q. Why went Abraham down to Egypt?
A. Not because he distrusted of Gods providence, for he was assured that God
could miraculously feed him, as afterward he did the widow of Serepta and
Eli^h. Secondly, not because he was inconstant and mooueable, as many are, who
can never settle themselves in one place, but like wandering stars, and
carried up and down from place to place. Thirdly, neither fled he for any
villainy he had committed or murder, as Moses did from Egypt. Fourthly, nor to
increase his stock as merchants do. Fifthly, nor curiously to increase his
knowledge in humane sciences, as Pythagoras, Emsedocles, Democritus and Plato,
who for this end traveled so far countries; but he went, first because of
the famine in the land, therefore he would not tempt God by neglecting lawful
means. Secondly, because he would propagate the knowledge of the true God in
Egypt, as Saint Chrysoftome thinks, Hom. 30. in Genesis And for this end the
Apostles traveled through the world, now although this was a very fruitful
land, Deuteronomy. 8. 7. Yet God made it barren for the wickedness of them that dwelt
therein, Psalm. 107. 34. Barrenness and mis^ery are the fruits of sin, let no
man glory in their fruitful Islands, for sin will make them barren as Sodom
and Gomorrha. Again, when Abraham thought to have ^ase and wealth he is
frustrated* for he is feign to fly for hunger, so God does exercise his
children wiith such punishments, that his care and their faith may appear the
more: so he did pinch Isack, Jacob, Joseph, Elias, Eliseus* and other Prophets,
Paul and other Apostles with hunger. Moreover Abraham for the sins of this
land fared the worse; and so many times Gods children dwelling with the wicked
are partakers of their plagues?

Q. What did the going down of Abraham into Egypt signify?
A. That as he went thither so should his posterity after him, and the most
part of the circumstances do agree. First, as famine was the cause that
Abraham went to Egypt* So famine was the cause that moved Jacob and his sons
to go thither. Secondly, as Abraham was now troubled: so afterward Israel was
more afflicted. Thirdly, Pharaoh for Abraham's sake is plagued, and Pharaoh for
Isreal's sake was drowned. Fourthly, Abraham was used ^ell for Saraies sake, and
so was Israel for Joseph's sake* Fifthly, Sarai Abraham's wife was fair to look
upon, therefore she was e^ticed to lie with Pharaoh, so Joseph* Isreal's son
was a fair person, therefore was enticed to lie with Po^iphers wife. Sixthly,
Abraham departed rich from Egypt, having sheep, beeues, asses and Cammels, so
did the Israelites having spoiled the Egyptians of their silver, gold, and
raiment.

Q. Wa^ Sarai beautiful at this time?
A. Yes: and her beauty was extraordinary, seeing it was not diminished,
neither by her long iournies, nor by her age, for now she was 6^. years old,
ten years younger then Abraham. And as Sara^ was beautiful in the eyes of
Abraham, so is the Church fair in the eyes of Christ her well beloved. But
this beauty of the Church does not so much consist in external splendour, as in
internal grace, for the kings daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13.
This beauty of Sarai made Abraham give her counsel to say that she was his
sister, and not his wife, for he knew what danger there is to have a
beautiful woman. And truly oftentimes beauty has been the cause of murder
and mischief, the wife of Vriah, Lucretia, Helina, and many more can testify,
therefore beauty is not so much to be regarded as virtue. Abraham then had good
cause to fear the Egyptians, because they are blacker then the Cananites, and
when they see a fair woman, which is scarce in that hot country, they are
exceeding prone to defloure her, he knew also that the abundance and plenty
in Egypt, brought out incontinance and intemperance among them.

Q. Did Abraham sin in persuading his wife to say she was his sister?
A. He did not sin in saving his own life, seeing nothing is more precious
then the life, especially Abraham's, because all nations should be blessed in
his seed. Secondly, neither altogether did he lie in saying she was his
sister, for she was his brothers daughter; and such as are near a kin, the
Hebrews did use to call brethren and sisters. Thirdly, no^ yet did he sin
^in giving this hard censure of the Egyptians, for what he spoke of their
cruelty and lust, he spoke it by experience, though not in himself, yet in
others he knew what the nature and qualities of barbarous people are, without
the knowledge of God, yea it seems by the event he speaks this as a Prophet.
Fourthly, neither can we altogether say that he sinned in hazzarding his wifes
chastity, if we look to his faith. For we may think that he who in greater
matters depended upon Gods providence, did also in this; and was assured that
God would rather deliver her, then suffer her chastity to be abused, as the
event shows: yet we will not deny but some humane infirmities are mixed with
this action of Abraham, for he did not call Sarai his sister in that sense that
Pharaoh understood her to be. Secondly, in that he did seem too much to
hazard his wives chastity, having no such warrant from God. Thirdly, in that
he was too fearful of death, when he should have rather assured himself, that
God who had preserved him hitherto, would not leave him now destitute.
Fourthly, in that he gave an evil example to others by counselling his wife to
dissemble. Yet these and such like infirmities in the Saints, are not to us
matter of imitation, but of humiliation rather, considering that there is a law
in our members, warring against the law of the mind, Romans 7. 23.

Q. What happened to Abraham when he came to Egypt?
A. His wife Sarai is commended by the Princes to Pharaoh, and she received
into his house, here then ws see that Sarai did as Abraham desired her, and in
this she showed her self a loving and faithful wife, who will rather hazard
her chastity, then suffer her husband to be killed. Secondly, in that the
Princes commended her, we have here the nature of flattering courtiers set
down, who accommodate themselves to the humors and vices of their king.
Thirdly, we see in the Egyptians the nature of carnal men, who are more moved
with external shows and beauty, then with internal virtue and grace. For
Sarai is sought not for her virtue, but for her beauty. Fourthly, in that
Abraham is the first of Hebers posterity who went to Egypt, we gather from
hence that the Hebrews are not descended of the Egyptians, as Josephus in his
books against Apton does prove. Fifthly, from hence also we gather, that the
name of Pharaoh is every ancient, seeing the Egyptian kings were generally
called Pharaoh. In the time of Abraham, and this name remained amongst them
till the return of the people from Babylon, then in the beginning of the
Grecian Empire, they were called Ptolomees till Cleopatra being overcome,
Augustus did redact it into the form of a province; but after the Empire was
divided, Egypt being governed a while by the Grecian Emperors; and weary of
that servitude, they did choose Calipha the captain of the Saracens to be their
King; from whom the Egyptian kings for almost the space of 447. years were
called Caliphae, afterward the kings of Egypt were called Sultans after the
death of Melechsala.

Q. How was Saraies chastity preserved?
A. By the hand of God, for Pharaoh and his house were plagued with great
plagues because of her; then questionless^ as God had a care to keep her
chastity from Abimelech, so now he hieth to keep it from Pharaoh, though here
it be not directly expressed as there, because shortly after mention is made
of Isacks birth, whom some would have thought to have been Abimelechs son,
and not Abraham's. Secondly, here we see the care that God has of his children
in their extremities, he suffers no man to do them wrong, Psalm. 105. 14.
Thirdly, Kings must take heed by this Pharaoh, that they do not oppress and
offend Gods children. for he has reproved kings for their sakes, Psalm. 105.
14. Fourthly, we may see here the fierceness of Gods judgments, who for this
sin of Pharaoh did plague his whole house: so many times for the wickedness
of a king, the whole land is punished, Quicquid delirant reges plectuntur
Achiui. Fifthly, God plagued Pharaoh for Abraham's wife: even so whore-mongers
and adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. Examples we have of Pharaoh here,
Rubin. Genesis 35. The Beniamites, Judge. 19. David, 2. Sam. 11. The Israelite with
the Moabite woman, Number. 25. 6. If God plagued Pharaoh who ignorantly took
Sarai, what plagues must they look for, who take a pride and pleasure in
committing adultery. Seauenthly, not only Pharaoh, but the Princes that
counseled him are plagued: even so shall all wicked counselors be handled,
Malum consilium consultori pessimum, Then let none wonder why they are also
punished, Quid mirum ^os regiae penae fuisse participes, qui regis in patrando
flagitio fuerunt adiutores, Chrysostom.

Q. Did Pharaoh commit adultery with Sarai?
A. No: for he is plagued before he touched her, or else to what end had he
been plagued after he violated her. Secondly, it was not the custom amongst
these nations for kings to take them wives before they had purified themselves
certain days, yea a whole year as we may see in the book of Hester.
Thirdly, although Pharaoh had touched her, yet properly we cannot call that
copulation adultery, because she yielded not of her own accord, but was
compelled both by her husband to save his life, as also by Pharaoh. So Abraham
did lie with Agar, and yet we cannot say he committed adultery, seeing he did
not of lust, but by the counsel of his wife to beget children, yet the surer
way is to hold that she was not touched. Fourthly, we may collect here by
Pharaohs words, that if he had known Sarai to be Abraham's wife, he would not
have taken her, Qui prat^ndit ignor antiam condemnat intemperantiam, Ambros.
lib. de Abr. cap. 2. This profane king had learned so much continency, even by
the law of nature. Fifthly, it is like that Pharaoh was warned by God in a
dream, as afterward Abimelech was, that Sarai was the wife of Abraham.

Q. Why did Pharaoh give charge to his men concerning Abraham?
A. Because he would not have any to do him wrong, and like enough the
Egyptians did envy him, because for his sake the king and court was plagued: as
also, because he grew very rich amongst them in that short time he remained
there. Secondly, because he would not have any violence offered to Sarai, for
he knew how prone to lust his people were. Here then we see that the hearts of
kings are in the hands of the Lord, Prou. 21. 1. Secondly, Abraham in this
tentation lost nothing, but gained both riches and honor, then true it is that
all things work together for the best to them that love God, Romans 8. 28. Now
whether Abraham taught the Egyptians astrology or not, is uncertain, yet like
enough he did, although he did not remain their long, for it is very probable
that Abraham did labor to bring them to the knowledge of the true God, which
he could not better do, then by the knowledge of the visible celestial
creature; and truly no man fitter to teach them then Abraham, being bred
amongst the Chaldeans the only astrologers in the world, having also himself
the true knowledge of God; and none fitter to learn this science, then the
Egyptians, who were naturally invited thereto, because of the perpetual
serenity of their air, being altogether free from clouds, which do take
away the light of these celestial bodies oftentimes from us.

Questions on the thirtenth Chapter.
Quest. HOw is it understood that Abraham went up, out of Egypt into the South?
A. He is said to go up out of Egypt, because this country lies lower then
Canaan. So in the precedent chapter, verse. 10. He is said to go down to
Egypt. Now Abraham going to Canaan from Egypt* is said to go unto the South,
not as though Canaan did lie Southward from Egypt, for it is Northward. But by
the South here Moses understands the Southern parts of Canaan. As Canaan was
a type of heaven, so is Egypt of the kingdom of Satan. Abraham came out of
Egypt to Canaan, so must we from the power of Satan to the kingdom of grace;
he went up from Egypt, so we must ascend by faith, and seek those things that
are above, he went unto the South, as to the sun, so we must follow the son
of righteousness, and walk in the light while it is day, he took his wife
and Lot with him, so we must help forward our friends in this spiritual
journey, he was very rich when he went up, so we must be rich in faith, Iam. 2.
5. Rich in good works, 1. Tim. 6. 18. Rich in understanding, Col. 2. 2. Rich
in all utterance and knowledge, 1. Cor. 1. 5.

Q. Why did Abraham return again to Bethel, where he was before?
A. Not to pay his debts, which he had contracted going to Egypt, as Rabbi
Salomo prateth, but because he knew this place better then others. Secondly, he
had more acquaintance here then elsewhere. Thirdly, he received here some
blessings from God: therefore his affection is more bent to this place then to
any other. Fourthly, this place had been consecrated already by building an
alter and calling upon the name of the Lord: therefore he would not seem to
neglect that place which was once consecrated for Gods worship, teaching us not
to despise the public places dedicated to Gods service. Fifthly, he would not
seem to be a vagabond rouing up and down when there was no need, teaching us
that upon every trifle we must not remove from place to place, for that which
he enjoined the Apostles, Luke 10. He also enioyneth us to do, that we
remain in the same house, where we are received, and that we go not from
house to house. Sixthly, as Abraham returned to his first altar, and there
served God: so must we remember from whence we are fallen, and repent, Reu. 2.
5. And forsake the Idols of Egypt, Ezech. 20. 8.

Q. Why could not Abraham and Lot dwell together?
A. Because their substance was great, where we see that Lot also had great
riches, and questionless the more for good Abraham's sake, with whom he still
did keep company till now. Secondly, these two whom neither poverty, long
iournies, nor famine, could separate their great substance and wealth, do
separate, such is the nature of riches, when Rome was poor, there was great
concord, but when it waxed potent and rich, then followed division and rent of
the Empire, so there was no distinction and heart-burning between Judah and
Israel, till they waxed rich, and the Christians while they suffered
persecution and poverty, they did maintain love and concord amongst them, they
were of one heart and mind, yea had all things common, Act. 2. But after the
Church grew rich, they who should have beat their swords into plow-shares, and
their spears into pruning hooks, did beat their plow shares into swords, and
their pruning hooks into spears. Thirdly, in that Abraham must depart from Lot
his kinsman, whom he loved so dearly, it was no small grief to him, thus God
did cast him down, lest his riches should too much puff him up. Fourthly, the
cause of this strife was without doubt scarcity both of pasture ground and
water for their cattle. Fifthly, servants oftentimes do breed quarrels
amongst themselves, which are the cause of strife between their masters, as we
may see here in these heards-men. Therefore let masters take heed that they
take not too much pride in the multitude of servants, for too many servants
brings but confusion: nor too rashly to credit their servants reports.

Q. Why is it added that the Cananite and Perezite were in the land?
A. To signify that this was a maine reason that moved Abraham not to strive
with Lot: because having then such strong enemies as these were, it had been
their utter ruin to have contended. Secondly, lest by their idle contention
they should be given to go to law before the unbelievers, which Paul does
dislike in the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. Thirdly, lest Abraham should give them
any occasion of offense or scandal, seeing he was in some account amongst them
for his learning and wisdom, it seems that the Perezites were not a
several nation distinct from the Cananites, but rather a family of the
Cananites, for they dwelt with them in that part of the couutry which fell to
the tribe of Judah, Judge. 1. 4 Now as Abraham was loath to strive with Lot,
because they had strong enemies, so let us take heed lest we give occasion to
our spiritual Cananits and Perezites, to overthrow us by our contentions. And
truly we have greater cause to maintain love and concord amongst our selves,
then Abraham and Lot had. For our spiritual enemies are more and stronger then
the Cananites and Perizites were.

Q. Why says Abraham to Lot, let there be strife, for we are brethren?
A. Because he would by these words move Lot to give over contending with him,
and in this he shows both wonderful wisdom and meekness, who although in
all respects he was Lots better. Yet he does submit himself for concords sake
unto him. Secondly, he shows his exceeding love to peace, when not only does
he labor to maintain peace, between himself and Lot: but also between their
servants, which all good peacemakers should do. Thirdly, he brings a reason
why they should not contend, because they are brethren, that is, natural
kinfemen. Yea brethren in faith and affection, if then Abraham was so careful
to maintain peace, lest he should offend the Cananites: how should not we
maintain the same, lest we offend weak Christians. Secondly, as he thought
it no disparagement to submit himself for peace sake, so should not kings and
great men, but they ought to be meek and humble as Christ was. Thirdly, if
they would not contend because they were brethren, much less should
Christians, who are not only the sons of God and brethren with Christ, but
also the members of the same body.

Q. Wherein is the plain of Jordan commended?
A. In that it was well watered every where; even as the garden of the Lord,
that is, earthly paradise wherein Adam was placed, watered with Euphrates, and
like Egypt watered with Nilus, and hereby is signified that this plain was
very fruitful: as all grounds are which are watered with fresh rivers; but
this plain did not continue long pleasant. For God destroyed it with fire from
heaven about a year before the birth of Isaac, and 20. years after Lots
coming thither, so then God turned this fruitful land into barrenness, for
the wickedness of them that dwelt therein, Psalm. 107. 34. And as this plain
was once pleasant and well watered with Jordan. But now there is nothing to be
seen but barrenness and a stinking lake, so was Judea once well watered with
the Oracles of God, the doctrine of Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, but
now it lies wast and barten, being ouerflowed with the stinking puddle of
Mahomets doctrine.

Q. Why did Lot choose the plain of Jordan?
A. Because of the fruitfulness and pleasantness thereof, and in this he
seemed to regard too much his profit, looking too much to the goodness of the
ground, and not considering the wickedness of that people, therefore he was
twice punished for it; once when he was taken prisoner, the other time when God
destroyed the cities of this plain with fire. Then was he feign for succor to
^lee to the mountains, and as he was as it seems to greedy to settle
himself here by Jordan, so afterward were the tribes of Rubin and Gad, who did
solicit Moses to give them the country on this side Jordan, before the other
tribes had passed over the river: so they regarded their profit more then
their safety: for although that country was ^at and pleasant, yet of all the
countries in Judea: it was most dangerous, because most obnoxious to the
neighbor enemies. Numb. 32.

Q. Wherein did the river Jordan exceed all other Rivers?
A. Not in power, riches, deepenesse and largeness, for Tibris, Nilus,
Euphrates, Da^, and others have in these respects been more famous then she,
but in miracles and mysteries she yields to none, for she divided her self
to let the Israelites pass over. Josh. 3. In her Nahaman was cleansed from his
leprosy. 2. King. 5. She was divided twice with Elias mantle. 2. King. 2. In
her the iron did rise from the bottom, and swim at the command of Elisha. 2.
King. 6. In her many were baptized by John, confessing their sins. Matthew. 3.
Yea Christ himself did sanctify her with his bodily presence, being baptized
there, and in her the holy* Ghost descended upon him; and whils he was there,
the heavens were opened, and the voice of the Father heard. Matthew. 3. This.
Jordan flowed from two springs in the foot of Libanus, the one is Jordan, and
the other Dan, and emptieth her self into the dead sea, so called because no
creatures can live there, the very fowls that fly over it, fall down dead:
this lake is about some 36. miles long, and in some places 8. or 12. miles
over: whatsoever is cast into it does swim not sink, as Vespatian made
trial, upon the banks grows fruit, fair to the sight, but being touched,
are nothing but dust within.

Q. Why would Cod have Abraham and Lot to be separated?
A. For the further good of them both. First, to prevent that discord which was
like to arise, by their dwelling together. Secondly, that the knowledge of God
may the further be defused in Canaan by Abraham, and to the five Cities by Lot,
so we read Acts 15. That when Paul and Barnabas could not agree about Mark,
they departed asunder. Paul to Syria and Cilicia, and Barnabas to Cyprus, and
so the Gospel by this means was enlarged. Thirdly, God would have Abraham to
stay in Canaan, but Lot to depart, because Abraham's posterity the Israelites
was to enjoy this land, but not the Moabites and Ammonites, who came of Lot.
And here we may observe that Lot did not choose the better part: for though that
country was pleasant, yet the inhabitants were wicked; and where he thought to
have found pleasure, he met with trouble and sorrow, for he vexed his righteous
soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds. 2. Pet. 2. 8. Such is the
foolishness of this world: for whiles men hunt altogether for pleasure, they
fall into grief and sorrow. Vbi mel, ibi fell. Again, in Abraham we may
observe singular wisdom, who though he loved Lot most dearly, yet rather
then by his company he would offend God, he does most willingly suffer him to
depart, and so must we cast away every thing, that is offensive to God, be it
never so near and dear unto us. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out,
and if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, for better it is for one of the
members to perish; then that the whole body be cast into hell. Matthew. 5.

Q. How is it understood that the Sodomites were sinners before the Lord?
A. That is openly and boldly, without either shame of men, or fear of God,
even as the earth. Genesis 6. 11. Is said to be corrupt before God, and Nimrod,
(Genesis 10. 9.) Is called a mighty hunter before the Lord, the sins then of
Sodom were many and fearful, as pride, fullness of bread, abundance of
Idleness. Ezech. 16. Even that unnatural sin of Sodomie. Genesis 19. Yea they
were contumelious against men, impious against God, unmerciful to the poor,
cruel to strangers, Iosep. lib. 1. Antiq. And questionless Idolatry did
reign amongst them, and many more sins, and here they are called sinners,
not as though they only were sinners, (for by the disobedience of Adam we are
all made sinners. Romans 5. 19.) But because they were notorious and open
sinners: therefore this title is given them, so Psalm. 104. 35. Let the sinners
be consumed, etc. and Matthew. 26. 45. The son of man is betrayed into the hand
of sinners, and 1. Tim. 1. 9. The law is made for sinners, and here we see
that though these Sodomites inioyed pleasant and fruitful grounds: yet they
sin exceedingly against the Lord. Thus the wicked do abuse Gods external
gifts, and the more they have, the more unthankful and sinful they are, when
the Israelites waxed fat, they spurned with their heel. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. This
made Solomon unwilling to seek riches, lest he should deny God. For it is
hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Secondly, let not the
godly envy the riches and pleasure of the wicked, but behold the end, and they
shall see them consumed with Sodom. Thirdly, let not the wicked rejoice in
their riches, and pleasures, for though God spare them a while, yet the day
will come, when with Sodom they shall be consumed with fire and brimstone.

Q Did Abraham's posterity enjoy no more ground, then that which Abraham did
now see?
A. Yes, a great deal more, even from Dan to Be^rsheba, which Abraham at once
could not see, then Abraham did not only enjoy that which he saw, but that
also which he went through in length and breadth. verse 17. And as God showed
the land now to Abraham, so did he afterward to Moses, but neither of these
could at once see all the land, but God points out the limits and corners of it
to them both, and as Moses saw the land upon Mount Pisgath: So it is like that
Abraham saw it upon Mount Garizim, they both see this land, but neither of them
do possess it, now Abraham is grieved; doubtless for the want of his dear
friend and brother Lot, but behold God comes to comfort him, showing him the
land, thus God deals with his Saints heaviness may be for a night, but joy
shall come in the morning. Secondly, we see here that Abraham did well in
parting from Lot, or else God had not come to comfort him: thirdly, God came
not to Abraham till this strife with Lot was ended: neither will he come to us,
so long as we are at variance. Fourthly, Abraham saw the land now, but did not
enjoy it, so we by faith do see the heavenly Canaan, but hereafter we shall
possess it.

Q. Why does God again renew the promise of giving to him this land?
A. To confirm his faith, which was often assaulted with many crosses, and
such is the weakness of our faith, that of it be not often confirmed with the
word of God, it will faint, and although Abraham had no inheritance here except
that field and cave which he bought to bury Sarai in; yet he did possess it
all in hope, even as we are now already saved by hope. Romans 8. Again, he did
possess it, if not in himself yet in his posterity, so Jacob was Lord over
his brethren. Genesis 27. 29. Which was accomplished not in him, for Jacob does
call himself Esaues servant, and Esau his Lord. Genesis 33. 14. But in his
posterity the Israelites, who were Lords over the Edomites Esaus posterity;
so Jacob foretold many things. Genesis 49. Which should befall his children, which
did not happen to them; but to their posterity, then Abraham being the chief
head of the Israelites, receives this blessing for his posterity, which they
did begin to enjoy 370. years after the death of Abraham, but they did
possess it not for their own worthiness, but for the faith and obedience of
Abraham.

Q. Whether was Abraham heir only of this land, or ^ls heir of all the
world, as Paul scemeth to affirm* Romans 4.
A. The seed of Abraham is twofold, some after the flesh, and some by promise,
Gal. 4. These who were only after the flesh, possessed only Canaan, but the
spiritual seed, those that are Abraham's sons by promise, and heirs of his
faith, are also heirs of the whole world, for to them the world does belong of
right, although the wicked have the possession of the most part thereof, yea
we may say, that Abraham's spiritual seed has possessed the whole world from
the beginning, for the Church which is Christ's kingdom, and the seed of
Abraham by promise, is universal: neither is it tied to any particular place
according to these Scriptures. I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for thy possession, Psalm. 2.
8. He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of
the earth, Psalm. 72. 8. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and
of his kingdom there shall be no end, Luke ^. 33. This is that stone cut out
of the mountain without hands, which became a great mountain and filled the
whole earth. Dan. 2. 35.

Q. How long was Abraham's seed to enjoy this land?
A. For ever, that is a long time, for so this word is often used in Scripture,
so in this sense circumcision is called an everlasting covenant, Genesis 17. The
Sabbath a sign between God and his people for ever, Exodus 31. The servant
whose ear is boared must serve his master for ever, Exodus 21. Now this cannot
be understood of eternity, for the Israelites are long ago expelled from
Canaan, circumcision, the Sabbath, and other ceremonial laws were abolished
by the coming of Messyas, the servant was tied to serve his master no longer
then the year of Iubili^, then so long did they possess this land, as they
walked obediently before God, for it was given to them upon condition of legal
obedience, otherwise if they did not obey, the land was to spue them out, Leu.
18. 28. Abraham and his seed were to enjoy this land for ever, but Abraham was
to keep Gods covenant, he and his seed after him for ever, Genesis 17. 9. If then
they have not enjoyed this land for ever, they must not accuse God, but
themselves, who have not kept his covenant for ever; Gods promises do then still
include the condition of our faith and obedience, as, whosoever believes in
the Son, shall not perish but have everlasting life, but he that believes
not, is condemned already, Ioh. 3. And here we cannot deny but that under this
earthly Canaan, promised to Abraham's carnal seed, is understood heavenly
Canaan, which belongs to his spiritual ^eede: then this word ( ever) is
attributed to ^he sign which does properly belong to the thing signified, and
thus the Scripture uses ^n all sacramental speeches, to ascribe that to ^he
type and figure, which does only belong to the thing signified, as the lamb
is called the passover, the blood of goats and calves ^s said to hallow and
purge, the bread is called Christ's body, and here Canaan is promised to
Abraham's seed for ever, which yet shall not continue for ever, for the world
shall be destroyed, and all the works therein, then earthly Canaan was possessed
of the carnal Israelites for ever, that is, a long time, but the true
Israelites shall possess the heavenly Canaan for ever and ever.

Q. Why says God that he will make Abraham's seed as the d^st of the earth?
A. God does use this hyperbolical speech to stir up the mind of Abraham,
for he knows how dull and hard by nature we are to hearkento him: for which
cause the Scripture does use many such kind of figurative speeches, as the
top of Babel is said to reach to heaven, the cities of the anakims to be
walled up to heaven, to birds of the air are said to carry our words, if we
speak ill of the king, the world cannot contain the books which might be
written of Christ; and many such like, therefore they are foolish who think
that there is no figurative speech in the Scripture; but that all must be
understood simply. Secondly, by this speech God would signify unto Abraham,
that out of his loins should proceed an exceeding great multitude of people,
which was fulfilled in Moses time, for he says, they were as the stars of
heaven in multitude, Deu. 1. 10. and 10. 22. And Balac said that they covered
the face of the earth, Number. 23. 5. Yea Balam is forced to acknowledge their
great number when he says, Number. 23. 10. Who can count the dust of Jacob, and
the number of the fourth part of Israel. Thirdly, although Abraham's carnal
seed were great in number; yet his spiritual seed is greater; the number of
the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be
measured, Hos. 1. 10. Which is meant of the spiritual Israelites, and John saw
a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people and tongues before the rhroane, etc. Reu. 7. 9. Fourthly, as the carnal
seed of Abraham considered in themselves were many, yet but few in respect of
all other nations, for the Cananites, the Hittites, etc. Were greater and
mightier then the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 7. 1. Even so the spiritual children of
Abraham, though many in themselves, yet are but few in respect of the wicked,
for many are called, but few are chosen, Mat. 22. 14. The way that leads to
destruction is broad, and many go in thereat; but the gate that leads to
life is narrow, and few there be that find it, Mat. 7. 13. Fifthly, although
the seed of Abraham be innumerable to man, yet it is not to God, who tells
the number of the stars. Psalm. 147. 4. And from hence we may collect that
increase of children, and a great posterity, is a special blessing of God, as
we may see, Psalm. 128.

Q. Why would God have Abraham to walk through the land, in the length and
breadth of it?
A. To augment both his faith and joy, in that his children should have the
possession of that land, whereof he had now made a full survey. Secondly, this
continual walking up and down, God would exercise his patience, and let him
know that he was but a stranger in his own land. Thirdly, that by this means
the knowledge of God might be the further propagated. Fourthly, that by the
consideration of the length and breadth of that land, he might be able to
comprehend the breadth and length, and depth, and height, and know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. Now, as all the life of Abraham
consisted in walking, so does the life of a Christian. Enoch walked with God,
Genesis 5. Abraham is commanded to walk before God. Genesis 17. Noah walked with
God, Genesis 6. Abraham confessed that he walked in the sight of God* Genesis 24.
Jacob confesses that Abraham and Isacke walked in the sight of God, Genesis 28.
God requires Israel to walk in his ways. Deuteronomy. 10. They are blessed who
walk in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 119. Even so we must walk in the newness
of life, Romans 6. We must walk honestly as in the day, Romans 13. We must walk
by faith, 2 Cor. 5. We must walk in the spirit, Gal. 5. We must walk worthy
of our vocation, Ephesians. 4* In love, as children of the light* Ephesians. 5. Worthiness
of God, Col. 1. And if we pass our life in walking, so we shall hereafter
walk with him in white, Reu. 3. Who walks in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks, Reu. 2.

Q. What plain was this, which is here called the plain of Mamre?
A. It is a plain or an oak groaue not far from Hebron, which city of
Hebron was also called Mamre, Genesis 23. 19. Therefore from the town this plain
is so called, and this town was called Mamre from a certain Amorite of the
same name, with whom Abraham made a covenant, Genesis 14. 13. Where there is
mention made of him and his two brothers Eschol and Aner. In this Mamre,
Abraham lived a long time, and near to it, he and his wife Sarai, Isack and
his wife Rebecca, Jacob and his wife Leah were buried in one grave, Genesis 49. 31.

Q. What was Hebron?
A. A city in Canaan, which was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt, Number.
13. 22. Which Zoan is thought to be Tanis, and it is supposed that this Hebron
was builded by Heth the son of Canaan, whose posterity the Hittites inhabited
in it till Iosuahs time; it was sometimes possessed by Giants, whom Caleb drove
out, Ios. 15. 14. It was a chief city in the tribe of Judah, and after called
Kiriatharba, Ios. 14. 15. From one* Arba a great man amongst the Anakims. This
town became the inheritance of Caleb, Ios. 14* 14. And was made a city of
refuge. Ios. 20. 7. Here David was first anointed king, and reigned there
seven years, 2. Sam. 2. This town then was both a seat for the kings and the
priests also, and it was called Hebron, from Hebron the son of Caleb, and
some think it was to this city that Mary came to visit Elizabeth, which Luke
calls a city of Judah in the hill country. Beza in annot. in Luc. cap. 1.

Q. What did Abraham when he came to the plain of Mamre?
A. He built an Altar to the Lord, both to sacrifice thankfully to God, as also
to sanctify this place where he was to remain, and this is the third Altar we
read that Abraham built. He has set up three altars, as three testimonies of
Gods love to him* and his thankfulness to God, and that in three famous
places, one at Sechem, the other at Bethel, and the third at Hebron. Now as
Abraham whether soever he went, did build altars and sacrifice thereon to the
Lord: so should we at all occasions be ready to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
praise and thanksgiving, the calves of our lips, Orationum hostias, et
miserecordia victimus, says Lyranus, To pray every where lifting up pure hands
without wrath and doubting, 1. Tim. 2. 8. For God delights not in outward
sacrifice, nor in burnt offerings, for the sacrifice of the Lord are a broken
spirit, he is pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, Psalm. 51. 16, etc.

Questions on the fourtenth Chapter.
Quest. Why does Moses so carefully set down the wars of these kings?
A. That we might consider the excellent carriage, and happy success of
Abraham, in warring with so many kings, with so few men, and that with such a
happy event, that both he overcame them, and took their goods; and rescued
Lot. Secondly, that we might see the reward that Lot has, for desiring to
dwell with such wicked company himself is taken prisoner, and his goods taken
from him. Thirdly, that we might see how merciful God is, and slow to destroy
those cities in the plain because of their crying sins, had already deserved
fire from heaven. Yet God by this small overthrow will warn them, if they do
not repent, a greater punishment is at hand. Fourthly, that we may see the
cause of this, and all other wars for the most part, to wit, pride and
ambition; for ambition moved Chedorlaomer to subdue so many nations, and pride
moved those nations to shake of his government. Fifthly, to teach us how God
oftentimes, uses the service of the wicked, to punish the wicked, that the
punishers themselves may be punished; as Assyria the rod of Gods anger, is sent
to punish hypocrites, but God will punish the stony heart of Assyria. Isa. 10.
Sixthly, that we might know that the Sodomites were justly overcome, because
they resisted the ordinance of God, and refused to be subject to the higher
powers, for there is no power but of God. Romans 13.

Q. What kings came against Sodom, and the other cities of the plain?
A. Amraphel king of Shinar, that is, of Babel, and this is thought to be
Ninias the son of Semiramis. Secondly, Artioch king of Elasser, that is, of
Persia as some think, and not of Pontus. Thirdly, Chedarleomer king of Elam;
the Elamites were a people that dwelt in the upper part of Persia. Fourthly,
Tidal king of nations, that is, of a people gathered together of diverse
nations, so Galile is called Galilec of the nations. Esaias 9. Matthew. 4. These
four kings came against the five cities of the plain, which here are
forewarned of God, by these warnes, but afterward were burned with fire from
heaven, except Zoar, which was spared for Lots sake. Genesis 19. And for the
smalnesse of it was called Zoar: for this cause also it seems that Moses does
not here name the king of this City, because it was so small.

Q. Where did these kings join battle together.
A. In the valley of Siddi^, which is the salt sea, and it was so called
afterward from the event, for at this time it was a pleasant plain, but
afterward it was turned into a salt sea or lake, for the Hebrews call every
collection of water, sea, and as this part of Canaan was turned into a barren
lake, so now that whole land is made barren of all spiritual graces: and as
this plain for sin is turned into a sea of salt, so was Lots wise for
looking back, turned into a pillar of salt; because neither this country nor
she were seasoned with grace and obedience, to teach us how we should be
seasoned; we must have salt in our selves. Mar. 9. 10. All our sacrifices must
be seasoned with salt. Leuit. 2. 13. Yea our speech must be seasoned with salt.
Col. 4. 6.

Q. May kings lawfully and with a good conscience make war.
A. If their cause be good, their affection sanctified, their authority
lawful, and if they find there is no other means to suppress the enemy, to
secure themselves, and advance Gods glory, they may lawfully raise wars, for if
it is lawful to defend the poor, to relieve the oppressed, to punish the
wicked, to preserve our selves, friends, children and goods, if the Magistrate
bears not the sword in vain, if God himself has prescribed the manner and
form of fighting, if Abraham, Moses, Iosuah, David and other holy men have
made wars; then it is lawful for Kings and Princes to raise wars, the
former conditions being observed, but because peace is better then wars, as
says the Poet. Pax vna triumphis innumeris potior; Kings must be slow to
undertake wars: as Hozekias was with the kings of Assyria, and some injuries
must be winked at, which does show the magnanimity of a King, not for every
small injury to be inflamed with wrath, but rather to forget them, as Caesar
by Cicero was commended that he did use to forget nothing, except injuries,
and above all things cruelty in wars is to be hated; for Pax homines: suas
trux decet iraferas.

Q. But may Christians under the Gospel raise wars?
A. Yes, but they must be very careful to avoid wars, and to use all the
lawful means they can to maintain peace. For Christ the Prince of peace,
has left his peace with us. Ioh. 5. It was foretold that we should beat our
swords into plow shares, and our spears into pruning hooks. Esaias, 2. It was
Christ's commandment that we love one another. Ioh. 15. We must not resist
evil, Matthew. 5. We must not revenge, but give place to wrath. Romans 13. Our
greatest strife and wars must be against our spiritual enemies, therefore we
are exhorted to put on the whole armor of God. Ephesians. 6. This spiritual armor
did the Christians use in the Primitive Church, to subdue the greatest
Monarchs in the world, and to propagate the Gospel* Peter is commanded to put
his sword into his sheath. Matthew. 26. And we are all commanded to love our
enemies, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us. Matthew.
5. Which testimonies do allege, not altogether to condemn wars in case of
necessity, but to show how loath Christian Princes should be to raise wars,
and how rather they should loose some of their right and dignity, then to
trouble the peace of Jerusalem, to shed the blood of their brethren, whom
Christ has bought with his own blood; to bereave parents of their children,
and wives of their husbands, to defloure virgins, ouerturne Churches and
Chapels, destroy religion, extinguish learning and discipline, laws and
justice, and to make away for the Turk, the Devils eldest son, the professed
enemy of our Savior, the scourge of Christians, and the rod of Gods
indignation, to sweep away that little remnant of the Christian world which is
left, and to overthrow all with that, not Egyptian, but Tartarian darkness
of Mahomets doctrine, as he has already done these glorious Countries and
Churches, which we have shamefully lost, through our pride and contention. Heu
quo discordia ciues perduxit miseros?

Q. Why did Chedorlaomer raise armies against these other kings?
A. Because they rebelled against him, and here we may see, that it is not
lawful for any people to rebel against their kings, although their government
be unjust. Secondly, they deserved to be tributaries and servants to a strange
king, because they were the servants of filthy and strange sins, neither are
they worthy to be a free people, whom the son has not made free. Thirdly,
the truth of Noah's prophecy may here be seen, that Canan is Sems servant;
Chedorlaomer of Sem is king at this time over the Cananites. Fourthly, here we
may see what a dangerous thing it is, for a people to rebel against their
kings, for by this means unity is broken, order and discipline is euerted,
laws and religion are extinguished, and all things turned vpside down; and
therefore the authors of rebellion, have been most fearfully punished, as the
examples of Core, Dathan and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron: Absalom and Seba
against David, and many more can witness. Therefore kings must be obeyed in
all matters indifferent, but not in those things that are against the glory of
God* for it is better to obey God then man, and they who do not obey their
kings in matters against God are not to be accounted rebels, except we will
make Moses and Aaron, who resisted Pharaoh: Christ, John Baptist, and the
Apostles, who resisted the Jews, the Christians who resisted Idolaters to be
rebels, which to think is impious.

Q. Why did the king of Elam with his confederates, kill the Rephaims?
A. These Rephaims or Giants with the Zuzims, Emims, and Horites took part as
it is thought with the Sodomites, and did hinder the king of Elam from taking
Sodom, and Moses here mentions their overthrow, to show us of what great
power the king of Elam was then, that he was able to overthrow so many nations,
now these Rephaims were a people then dwelling in Canan. Genesis 15. And are here
overthrown in Ashteroth, a city in Basan, where Og afterward was king, Josh.
13. 31. The Zuzims are these people as it is thought, who in Deuteronomy. 2. 20. Are
called Zamzummims, and they are overthrown at the city Ham where they dwelt,
the Emims were a great people and accounted Giants, Deuteronomy. 2. 10. These are
overcome in Shaneth or the plain of Kiriathim, the Horites were a people that
dwelt in Seir, where they are now overcome. Esau and his sons afterward drove
them out from thence, and this mount was called not Seir at this time, but
afterward had this name from Esau. Seir signifies Heary, these then were
chased by Chedorlaomer his confederates unto El-paran, or the plain of Paran,
which is a barren or comfortless wilderness near to the desert of Sinai, and
here the Israelites wandered thirty eight years.

Q. What was En-mishpat?
A. The name of that place where the Israelites were judged and reproved by
God, because they murmured for want of water, for En-mishpat does signify the
well of judgment, this is called also Cades, which is a city in Arabia, where
Mirian Moses sister was buried; the desert next adjacent is called Cades, and
Cades-barne, from whence Moses sent the twelve spies to Canaan. Hither
Chedorlaomer returned with his confederate kings, and smote the Amalakites and
Amorites in Hazezon Thamar a city in Canaan, which afterward fell to the tribe
of Judah, and was called Engedi, Ios. 15. 62. Here we may see what happy
success Chedorlaomer has over his enemies, which is neither to be ascribed to
fortune or his courage, but to him who is the Lord of hosts, there is no king
saved by the multitude of an host, a mighty man is not delivered by much
strength, Psalm. 33. 16. Yet this we must commend in him, that he used such
diligence and expedition in suppressing these rebels before they grew stronger.
It was the praise of Alexander Macedo, that whatsoever battle he undertook,
he did it with wonderful celerity and expedition, Curtius, lib. 5. And that
was a means that in so short a time he did subdue so many nations; and from
hence we must learn with all expedition to subdue our sins. for, Periculum
est in mora.

Q. What success hvd Chedorlaomer and his confederates against the Kings of
Sodom and Gomorrha?
A. The kings of Sodom and Gomorrha fled and fell into the slime pits, not of
ignorance, for they were better acquainted with that ground then their enemies,
but of purpose, that so they might escape the fury of their enemies: in these
pittes questionless a great many perished, and others of them fled to the
hills. Secondly, all the goods and victuals of Sodom and Gomorrha were taken,
which was a very great spoil, because in Sodom there was both riches and
abundance of bread. Thirdly, Lot is taken captive, and his goods taken from
him, which was the cause that Abraham made war against them and overcame
them. Here then we see that many are killed in the judgment of God, and some
escape in his mercy. Secondly, the goods and the victuals of Sodom, are made a
prey to the hungry soldiers in Gods just judgment; because they did not use
them either to Gods glory or the comfort of the poor; but to pride and riot.
Thirdly, Lot is taken, and so he is partaker of their misery, because he
desired to be partaker of their fruitful country.

Q. What league made Abraham the Hebrew with Mamre, Eschol and Aner?
A. Abraham the Hebrew (for so he is called from Heber, because he retained his
faith, or else from Habar, because he passed over Euphrates, from which his
posterity are called Hebrews, to put them in mind of their original) made a
covenant with these three men, or rather they with him, because he was so
highly beloved of God, which covenant was not of the nature of those covenants
that conquerours make with the conquered, which are nothing else but laws,
which the conquered must obey according to the pleasure of the lawmakers:
neither was this covenant to desist from wars, and maintain peace, for there
was no wars between them, but it was only a partition between themto defend
and maintain one another right against their enemies; and questionless this
covenant was made by the special direction of God, for the comfort of Abraham,
who being a stranger there, had notwithstanding the aid and assistance of
these great men when occasion served, and we must note here that Abraham is
called an Hebrew, and his posterity Hebrews, which name signifies a pilgrim
and stranger, to put us in mind what the children of God are in this life,
even pilgrims and strangers. By which they show that they seek a country,
Heb. 11.

Q. But did Abraham well to make a covenant with these Amorites being infidels?
A. Whether these three were infidels or notit is uncertain, and I rather hold
that they were not, both because Abraham made 2 covenant with them, rather then
with others, as also because we cannot deny but there were some in these
parts, who knew the true God. As Melchisedech who conuersed in these countries,
was both a king and priest of the most high God, it is very like that his
servants and many more were of his profession; and if there were, why should we
think that these three who were Abraham's special friends to be infidels,
seeing the holy man made a covenant with them, but suppose they were infidels,
yet we cannot reprove Abraham for this covenant made with them because as yet
there was no positive law to the contrary. Secondly, the iniquity of the
Amorites was not yet full. Thirdly, Abraham could not live amongst them if he
had not had mutual commerce and made some covenants with them. Fourthly, in
this covenant Abraham did not offend God, seeing otherwise he could not have
lived peaceably among them, and in this he gave no advantage to the Idolaters
to blaspheme God. Fifthly, many holy men have made such covenants with
infidels, and are not reproved, as Iaeob with Laban, Genesis 31. Isaac with
Abimelech, Genesis 26. Solomon with Hiram, 1. King. 5. Yea the Israelites
themselves had power to make covenants with their neighbors nationst except
with those seven mentioned, Deuteronomy. 7.

Q. Was it lawful for Abraham being both a private man and a priest, to raise
wars?
A. A private man cannot raise arms, except he will be counted seditious, now
Abraham was no private man, because by Gods own mouth, he was appointed Lord
of this land; and it was his by right, although not by possession, neither were
these three brethren private men, with whom Abraham was confederate. Yea
although Abraham had been a private man, yet this fact of his is no president,
for private men to raise arms, except they have the same measure and direction
of the Spirit that he had, for if he had not been directed by God, it is
unlike that with three hundred and eighteen domestic servants he would
pursue four mighty kings. Moreover, although Abraham was a priest, and a
prophet also, yet he rayseth arms lawfully, being called by God, so did Moses
and the Levites fight against the worshippers of the golden calfe, Moses killed
Og king of Sihon, and Samuel Agag king of Amelec, yet these are not presidents
for the ministers of the Gospel to raise arms, for they were called
extraordi^arily unto this function, but the preachers ^f the Gospel are not.
Again, the prea^ers of the Gospel must eschew all things that hinder them in
discharging of their fun^tion, especially wars, which if they follow, ^hey
must neglect prayers, preaching, and ec^lesiasticall discipline. Besides, the
Apostle ^heweth, that the weapons of our warrefare ^re not carnal, but mighty
through God, ^asting down every strong hold, 2. Cor. 10. Yet I deny not but
the preachers may ex^ort the magistrateto raysearmes against the enemies of
God, for the priests under the law ^ounded the trumpets and carried the Arc,
when the people went to battle.

Q. How far did Abraham pursue his enemies?
A. As far as Dan, a place in the North of Canaan, and one of the springs of
Jordan, a hundred and four miles from Jerusalem, it was of old called Leshem,
but being won by the Danit^s it was called Dan. Ios. 19. 47. And it seems
that either Moses now gives it this name by way of prophecy, or else Ezer as
who set the books of the old Testament in order, did change the old name
being out of use into this other name D^. Here it was where Iereboam set up
the golden calfe, and Peter confessed Christ to be the Son of God, and where
the woman was miraculously healed of her bloody flux, in memory of which
miracle the woman caused a pillar to be erected in that city, on which the
image of Christ was set, and the woman behind him, touching the hem of his
garment; but Julian caused this Image to be pulled down, and his own to be
erected in the same place, which shortly after was thrown down with thunder
from heaven. Eusebius. lib. 7. eccles. hist. cap. 14. This town was also called
Cesaria-Philippi, by Philip Tetrac^ of Traco^ites, in honor of the Roman
Casars, Agrippa also enlarged this City, and called it Neronia in honor of
Nero. Iosep. ant. 20. cap. 6. Now we must not think that this was rashness
and temperitie in Abraham, with so few men to follow so great an army so
far; but rather true courage and fortitude, because he was led by Gods
spirit, and because he was assured of Gods help, therefore he knew there
were more with him then against him, besides the justness of the cause, the
good end, that Abraham did aim at in this fight; his upright life, and the
testimony of his conscience made him bold to despise death it self. Sapiens
non metu frangitur, non potestate mutatur, non extollitur prosperis, non
mergitur tristibus, Amb. ad Simpl. And if any thing make a man fear, it is the
guiltiness of his conscience, Nam ^imidum nil facit animum nisi
reprehensibili^ vit ae conscientia. Sen. 4. de virtut.

Q. What success had Abraham in this battle against the four kings?
A. He smote them and persued them to Hoba, he rescued Lot and his goods, the
Sodomites and their goods, and here we may see Abraham's policy in dividing his
servants, and that in the night: to teach us that it is lawful to use policy
and subtlety against our enemies, if there be no falsehood and injustice
^ound in it. We know that God commanded Joshua, to lay an ambush behind the
City Ai, for to take it. Josh. 8. 2. He came suddenly upon the five kings in
the night. Josh. 10. 9. Gedion used the stratagem of trumpets, pitchers and
lamps, to overcome his enemies. Judge. 7. 16. And David the means of an
Amalekite to overcome the Amalekites, 1. Sam. 30. 15. For if it be lawful upon
just occasion to raise wars against our enemies, it is also lawful to use
such stratagems, as may further us in obtaining the victory. Secondly, we
must not attribute this victory of Abraham's to his strength or policy, but to
the Lord who made him rule over kings, and gave them as the dust to the sword,
etc. Isay 41. 2. Thirdly, God would have Abraham to bring back the Sodomites
and their goods, that both God might show his wonderful mercy and patience, as
also make them inexcusable. Fourthly, this Hoba into which Abraham persued his
enemies, was a village in Hieromes time, where certain Ebeonite Hebrews
dwelt. Fifthly, as the four kings troubled Canaan, but are overcome by
Abraham. So, the four great kingdoms of the world have troubled the Church,
but are overcome of Christ the Son of Abraham.

Q. What was Melchisedec?
A. Not the holy Ghost, as some heretics have affirmed, for the holy Ghost is
not a man; nor king of Salem, nor a priest, nor priest of the most high God,
except we will make him inferior to God. Secondly, not an Angel, for the
Scripture shows no such thing, neither is an Angel a priest, for every high
priest is taken from amongst men, Heb. 5. 1. Thirdly, not the Son of God, for
he is not Melchisedech the priest, but a priest after the order of
Melchisedech, Psalm. 110. 4. Fourthly, not Sem the Son of Noah, as the
Hebrews affirm, rather of malice then sound judgment, because they cannot
endure any stranger should be thought superior in any thing to their father
Abraham, for is Sem was Melchisedech, Moses had not concealed it, being an
honor to have such a noble progenitor. Secondly, Melchisedechs genealogy is
not mentioned in Scripture, but Sems is. Thirdly, Melchisedechs descent is not
counted from the Hebrews progenitors, Heb. 7. 6. Which plainly shows he
descended of another stock then the Jews did who came of Sem. Fourthly, all
this country in which Melchisedech reigned, was possessed by Canaans posterity.
Therefore Sem could not bare rule here, to be both a king and a priest among
them. Fifthly, if we should yield that Melchisedech was Sem, we must be forced
to deny a chief relation between Melchisedech and Christ, which Paul
touches, Heb. 7. Which is this, as Melchisedech being a stranger from the
family of Sem, was notwithstanding a priest and king; so Christ though a
stranger from the tribe of Leui, which only was appointed for the priesthood,
is notwithstanding a king and priest for ever. Sixthly, Melchisedech had no
successor in his priesthood, but Sem had, for Abraham was a priest, so was
Isaac, Jacob, and the children of Leui. Seauenthly, if Melchisedcch was Sem.
Then, whereas Leui paid tithes being in the loins of Abraham, he being also in
the loins of Sem, (because Abraham came of Sem) did pay tithes to Sem, which
is absurd. Eighthly, if this be true, then we must confess that in the person
of Sem, both the priesthood of Aaron and Melchisedech was joined together, for
Aron was in the loins of Sem, and so we must yield that Christ in that he was
a priest after the order of Melchisedech, he was also after the order of Aaron.
Ninthly, if Melchisedech had been Sem, it it is very like that Abraham all
this while that he was in Canaan, would not neglected to have sought him out,
and conuersed with him, both for his further comfort, strength and instruction,
then the fifth opinion is soundest, which holds Melchisedech to have been a
Cananite, yet a true worshipper of God, for it is very like, that as God had
his priests amongst the Jews, so he had some amongst the Gentiles, and as
Aaron among the Jews was eminent, so Melchisedech among the Gentiles, for God
is the God of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews, and besides that Philo and
Josephus are of this opinion, the chiefest of the ancient Fathers do defend
the same.

Q. Where did Melchisedech, and the king of Sodom meet Abraham?
A. At the valey of Saves, not far from Jerusalem, where Absalom set up his
pillar, 2. Sam. 18. 18. This valley is called the kings dale, either because
the kings and princes did use to exercise themselves here in running, or else
because of the excellency and pleasantness thereof, being a place fit for
kings. Herein the king of Sodom though a profane man, we see great humanity
and thankfulness, that he would go to meet Abraham, and rejoice with him at
his happy success, humanity and gratitude are commendable in all, for,
Be^eficiorum memoria non debet senescere, Senec. lib. de benif.

Q. Of what place was Melchisedech king?
A. He was king of Salem, which afterward was called Jerusalem, from Iereth and
Salem, that is, the vision of peace, for Abraham called the hill on which he
would have sacrificed his Son Iebouah Iereth, Genesis 22. Then Iereth being put
to the old name Salem is made up Jerusalem, after Melchisedech the Iebusites
had the dominion of this city, and from them it was called Iebub, Ios. 18. 28.
Iud. 19. 10. But afterward David conquered it, and did enlarge it with many
goodly buildings, so that it became the most famous city in all the east, Plin.
lib. 5. cap. 14. This is that city governed by Melchisedech, repaired by David,
beautified by Solomon, with the goodliest temple in the world, adorned with the
miracles and preaching of the Prophets, sanctified with the life, miracles,
doctrine, blood and resurrection of our Savior; and with the sending down of
the holy Ghost, honored to be the figure of Christ's Church millitant in the
old Testament, and of the Church triumphant in the new, watered with the blood
of Steven, James, and other holy Martyrs, and happy in that the light of the
Gospel did first shine there; for out of Sion came the law, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem, but most unhappy in that she killed the Prophets, and
stoned them that were sent to her, in that she would not be gathered under the
wings of Christ, therefore many years ago she is left desolate, Mat. 23.

Q. Wherein was Melchisedec the type of Christ?
A. Melchisedec was a king, so is Christ the king of kings. Secondly,
Melchisedec was a priest, so is Christ a Priest after the order of Melchisedec.
Thirdly, he was King of peace, so is Christ the Prince of peace. Fourthly, he
was King of righteousness, so is Christ Jehovah our righteousness. Fifthly, he
was without father and mother, so is Christ, as God without a mother, as man
without a father. Sixthly, as he was without generation, so none can declare
Christ his generation. Seauenthly, as he was without beginning, or end, so is
Christ, because he is the beginning and the end. Eighthly, he was an
extraordinary Priest, not being in the line of Sem, so was Christ not being of
the tribe of Leui. Ninthly, he was a greater priest then Aaron, and so was
Christ. Tenthly, he was not anointed with external oil, neither was Christ,
but but with the oil of gladness. Eleauenthly, he refreshed Abraham with
bread and wine; so has Christ with his own body, which is that bread of life
that came down from heaven. Twelfthly, he in his Priesthood had no successor,
neither Christ, but has an everlasting Priesthood. Thirtenth, he blessed
Abraham; and so has Christ us withal spiritual blessing. Fourteenth, he was
made like to the Son of God, and Christ is the true and only begotten Son of
God. Fifteenth, he was king of Salem which is Jerusalem, so was Christ
anointed king upon the holy hill of Sion, which is Jerusalem. Sixteenth, he
did not bless Abraham till he returned from the slaughter of his enemies,
neither will Christ us, till we have overcome our spiritual enemies;
Seauenteene, Melchisedec* did use to sacrifice at Jerusalem, so did Christ
sacrifice his blessed body on the cross at Jerusalem.

Q. Why did Abraham give tithes to Melchisedec?
A. To testify his thankfulness to God, who had sent such an excellent Priest
to bless him, for he was bound to minister to him in carnal things, seeing he
was pertaker of Melchisedechs spiritual things. Romans 15. 27. Secondly, he gave
tithes in sign of homage, and to show how inferior he was to Melchesedec,
consider how great Melchisedec was, to whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the
tenth, Heb. 7. 4. Thirdly, he gave tithes because he knew, (although not by a
positive law as yet, but by divine inspiration) that the tithes did belong to
God; and to his Priests, and therefore was sacrilege to keep them back, for
we must give unto God, that which is Gods. Matthew. 22. 21. Fourthly, because it
was the custom even before the law amongst holy men, to pay their tithes, even
as sacrificing, building of Altars, distinction of clean and unclean beasts,
therefore we read here not only of Abraham, but also of Jacob that promised
to pay tithes of all he had to the Lord. Genesis 28. 22. Fifthly, he paid his
tithes as other holy men use to do, because he knew that those who serve at
the Altar, must live by the Altar. 1. Cor. 9. 13. Sixthly, he paid his tithes,
because he knew that God would give an hundred fold more then his tithes were
worth, according to that, bring yea all your tithes unto the storehouse, and
prove me says the Lord; if I will not open to you the windows of heaven, and
pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room y^ough to receive it.
Malac. 3. 10.

Q. What kind of tithes were used amongst the Hebrews?
A. Hierome upon Ezechiel cap. 5. and 40. Affirms that there were some tithes
which the people did owe to the Levites. Again, there were other tithes which
the Levites, that is, the inferior order of ministers, out of their tithes,
did owe to the Priests, also there were other tithes which every one of the
people put a part in their barnes, appointed to be eat by the Priests, Levites
and people together, in the entrance of the Temple; moreover there were other
tithes which were laid up for the poor, but Vincentius in spec. moral. lib.
1. distinct. 66. Makes mention only of three sorts of tithes, used in the old
Law: the one sort were these which were paid to the Levites, spoken off Numb.
18. 24. The other sort were these which were publicly eaten in the Temple,
mentioned Deuteronomy. 14. 23. The third sort were these which were laid up at the
end of every three years, for the poor and strangers, spoken of Deuteronomy. 14. 28.
Of these three sorts of tithes, the first only remains amongst Christians,
the second sort which were publicly eaten and sacrificed, are abolished, being
a mere ceremony, the third sort also for the proportion is taken away, for
we are not bound to give the tithes of our goods to the poor, but to relieve
them according to our ability, and give them such as we have. Luke 11. 41.

Q. Then is it lawful to pay tithes to the preachers of the Gospel?
A. It is not only lawful to pay them, but sacrilege to withhold them, for
we must give unto God that which is Gods, and he who bestows all things
onvs, does require no more but his tithes of us, for the tithes do not
principally belong to the preachers, but to God; and he who sets them a
work is their play master. Therefore he who withholdeth the tithes from the
preachers, does not so much wrong the preachers as God, to whom they properly
belong. Moreover, the precept of paying tithes is not altogether ceremonial,
but partly moral, partly judicial: moral, in that the labourer is worthy of
his hire, especially they who labor in the word are worthy of double honor,
for he that serves at the Altar must live by the Altar. Judicial, in that the
paying of tithes to the laborers in the word, belongs to the external
government of the Church and common wealth, and therefore Christian Kings and
counsels have established, that under pain of excommunication the tithes
should be paid to the ministers, as a due which God himself has demanded.
Constantine and Charles the great did command the same, the counsels
Ma^isconense held anno. 587. can. 5. Duriense, an. 779. can. 10. Moguntinum,
an. 813. c^n. 38. And other famous synods have most strictly enjoined the
paying of tithes, then seeing tithes are both commanded by God to be paid, as
also by the civil magistrate, it is both sacrilege and contempt against the
magistrate (whom we must obey for conscience sake) not to pay them, truly if
it had not been the special will of God, even in the time of the Gospel, to
pay tithes to the preachers, Christ had not commended the Scribes and Pharisees
for paying of them, which he does, Mat. 23. 23. Again, it was necessary in the
old law to pay tithes to the Levites, much more needful is it now in the
Gospel, for the preachers are not only the Levites successors, but also
their calling is more honorable, and their charge is greater. Besides our
righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, or
else we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, but their righteousness was
so great, that they did not omit to pay their tithes, even of the least things;
therefore much more careful must we be to let the preachers have their due;
the Gentiles also led by the law of nature, were careful in this practice, as
Cyrus king of Persia, having overcome the Lydians, paid the tithes of his
spoil to Jupiter, says Herodotus lib. 1. The Romans paid tithes to Hercules,
Cicero lib. 2. de offic. The Arabians paid tithes of their incense to Sabis.
Plin. lib. 12. cap. 14. Lastly, the punishments executed upon these, who have
defrauded the Church of her right, are sufficient testimonies to prove how
dangerous it is, to withold the tithes from her, famine and poverty, are the
effects of this sin, Hierome in Malach. 3. They are guilty of the murder of
souls, before Gods tribunal, who are pertakers of it, August. de doct.
Christ. they are punished with present and eternal plagues. Chytre^ in cap. 7.
Iosuae. Eagles feathers being mingled with the feathers of other fowls, are
said to consume these and themselves also, even so the tithes have eat up and
consumed patrimonies, and estates of many men, as daily experience teaches
every where, but especially in the kingdom of Scotland. Truly, to meddle with
the Church goods after this sort is to meddle with aurum Tolosanum. Eras. in
Adag.

Q. Why is God called the possessour of heaven and earth?
A. That by this title, he might be distinguished from false gods, therefore
these and such like titles are given him in Scripture, he is said to sit in the
heavens. Psalm. 2. To make the heaven and earth. Psalm. 124. To stretch out the
heavens above. Esaias, 44. To stretch them out like a garment. Psalm. 104. To lay
the foundations of the earth and the corner stone thereof, Job. 38. He is
called the Lord God of heaven, Ion. 1. The earth is said to be his, and the
fullness thereof, the world, and they that dwell therein, Psalm. 34. And Jeremy
concludes that these gods who have not made the heavens and the earth, shall
perish from the earth, Ier. 10* 11. Now by the heaven and earth are understood
all things therein contained, and this may abate the pride of these who have
great possessions, which if they be compared with heaven and earth they are
nothing. Again, they are not permanent, for when man dies, he shall carry
nothing away, his glory shall not descend after him, Psalm. 40. 17. Besides, let
a man's possession be never so great, yet as Philo says, the right of
possessing all things belongs unto God only, man has but the use of these
things which he does possess. Secondly, if God be possessor of all, then the
Sons of God have right and interest in all the creatures, the wicked have
none. Thirdly, because he has the possessions of all nations, we must wish
well to all, and despise none. Fourthly, if he be possessor of all, then he is
by his power and providence in all things, he is not far from every one of us,
Act. 17. 27.

Q. Did Abraham well to swear that he would take nothing from the king of
Sodom?
A. Yes: for by this oath he both satisfies the king, that he dealt simply
and plainly with him in delivering the person and the goods, as also the people
who^ might have thought that Abraham for hi^ own gain did undertake this
war, and not for love of his brother Lot; in such cases then it is lawful to
swear, both for the advancement of Gods glory, and confirmation of the truth,
for we honor and love God, when we swear thus, Qui iur^, aut veneratur, aut
diligit eum per quem iur^, Aquin. in Math. Then seeing swearing is commanded by
God himself, Exodus 22. Yea oftentimes used by him and by Christ also. By the
Saints and by the Angels, for we read that all these have sworn Christ did
not reprove the high Priest for adiuring him: swearing also tends to the
honor of God and the profit of our neighbors: therefore the Anabaptists are
ridiculous, who oppose this doctrine, yet we must take heed that we do not
swear at all times rashly for every trifle, so Gods name shall wax vile and
common. Secondly, that we swear not to do any thing contrary to Gods will,
for such an oath is evil, but the action is worse; as we may see in Iephthes
now, and Herod's oath. Thirdly, that we do not forswear or swear to confirm
a lie, for that is highly to dishonor, God if we make him a witness of our
lies. Fourthly, that we do not swear by the creatures, for that is to
attribute Gods glory unto them, neither can that be an oath properly which is
sworn by the creature, because men swear by the greater, Heb. 6. 16. But
there is no creature greater then man. Fifthly, that we do not swear
deceitfully, using ambiguous words, speaking one thing, and thinking another,
for an oath is used to make an end of strife, Heb. 6. 16. But such oaths do
increase strife. Sixthly, that we swear not by the name of Idols, or false
Gods, for that is also to attribute Gods glory unto them, and they that swear
by them do seem to put their trust and confidence in them, if then we swear
at all, let us swear only by God, as Abraham did here, who lifted up his hand
in testimony thereof, for we know that the Gentiles did honor their false gods
by using their names to confirm their oaths, as the Romans by Fides Plut. in
numa. The Vestall Nymphus by Vesta, the Carthaginians by their country gods,
some by Jupiter and Hercules, others by Castor and Pollux did use to swear,
much more should we then seek the glory of the true God by calling upon him
in our lawful oaths.

Q. Did Abraham well to refuse the king of Sodomes offer?
A. Yes: because he would not have him think that it was for his own profit
he undertook this battle, neither would he have any think, that he would
be so much beholding to a profane king, neither did he stand at this time in
need, because he was sufficiently rich. Besides he would let him and all ages
see how little he did regard riches, and how little we should, seeing our
treasure is laid up in heaven. Yet this fact of Abraham's is no president for
any to refuse gifts when they may lawfully take them, for Abraham did not
refuse the gifts of Pharaoh, nor Joseph the present of his brethren, nor
Solomon the gifts of the Queen of Seba, neither did Ezechia refuse to take
gifts from the king of Babel, nor Jeremy from the captain of the guard, nor
Daniel from Nabuchadnezzar, nor Christ from the wise men. Notwithstanding, we
must know, that taking and giving of gifts, is not always lawful, for it is
dangerous and suspicious for any subject to receive any gift from a for^aine
king, because no man can serve two masters. It is also unlawful to receive
gifts from the poor, and those that cannot spare them, for we must give to
the poor and not take from them: no less preposterous and impious it is for a
judge or magistrate to receive gifts to do injustice, for, Oblatio muneris
tinea est regiminis, Cassiod. in epist. But most of all intolerable it is to
take or give gifts for remission of sins, for deliverance from purgatory, for
heaven and for the graces of the holy Ghost, as that old verse shows, Templa
sacerdotes, etc. And not much inferior are these gifts, that are given and
taken for spiritual benefices; truly we live in a golden age according to
that, Aurea nunc vere sunt saecula, plurimus auro, venit honos, auro
co^ciliatur amor, To many now adais are like to Midas, who desire that
whatsoever they touch may be gold. But I will not seem too much to exclaim
against this abuse, because the time will come, when the reeds will proclaim
it, as they did the long ears of Midas. Besides Harpocrates teaches me that,
Tutum est silentii praemium, Now to return to the matter, no gift is to be
given or taken which is contrary to true piety, or Gods glory, for such a gift
blinds the wise and peruerteth the words of the righteous, Exodus 23. 8.
Secondly, it peruerteth the natural affection of men, so that Judas for a gift
sold his master, the soldiers for a gift did belly Christ, saying, that his
disciples stole him by night, and Dalilath for a gift betrayed Sampson, Quid
non mortalia pectora cogis, auri sacra fames? Thirdly, it is an enemy to
liberty, for he that is corrupted with gifts, has his hands bound from doing
good, and his mouth from speaking truth. Fourthly, it is the cause of
injustice, therefore cursed be he that asks a gift to slay an innocent
person, Deuteronomy. 27. 25. And woe to them which justify the wicked for a gift,
Esaias 5. 23. 5. It is a hinderance to true happiness, for, not he that takes
bribes, but he that shakes his hands from taking of bribes, shall dwell on
high, etc. Esaias 33. 15. Sixthly, the reward of these that take such rewards is
fire, fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery, Job 15. 34. For these
causes therefore many holy men have refused gifts, as the man of God refused to
take a gift from Jeroboam, Eliseus from Naaman, David from Araunah, Daniel from
Belthashar, and Peter from Simon the sorcerer. And here I end this second
book, in which I have not set down every question that can be moved, for I
know that many frivolous questions may be moved, which are not worthy the
answering, Plura potest Asinus interrogare, quam respondere Philosophus. Yet I
have not omitted these questions which are most eminent and worthy of our
pains, notwithstanding I have passed by as much as I could, these which have
been handled by others, lest I should seem (...).

FINIS.

