LECTVRES UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE COLOSSIANS. PREACHED BY THAT
FAITHFVLL servant of God, Master ROBERT ROLLOK, sometime Rector of the
University of Edinburgh.

COLOS. 3. 16, 17. 16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves, in psalms and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord.

17 And whatsoever ye shall do, in word or deed, do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God even the Father by him.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, dwelling in Paternoster row, over
against the sign of the Checker. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND MY VERY CHRISTIAN FRIEND, Master William Scot of
Ely, all goodness in this life, and in the life to come everlasting happiness.
SIr, in many things God has been pleased to link us together, as in nature,
in nation, and in honest familiarity or Christian acquaintance, and sundry
such like: yet in none of these, has this great grace of his, more plainly
and plentifully appeared, then in the band of the holy Religion which we
profess. As the thing it self has been, is, and I trust shall for ever be,
the greatest glory and best comfort, that God has affoorded us in this world:
so we cannot but make much of the means, and think well of the men, by which
this and many other graces, have been offered unto us, (...) ^ffected in us.

(...) means are the Word, Sacraments, and Prayers of the Church, together
with many other good helps and aides, both public and private which are good,
not only because they proceed from God, From whom alone flows every good
and perfect gift, and is all only goodness himself: but also because they
tend, to our spiritual benefit in general, and in special are, the strictest
band, to tie us together one with another, and to hold us fast in the blessed
fellowship of the saints. The men are G^^^ faithful servants, laboring in the
ministry of Gods holy word and doctrine amongst us. Who howsoever they be of
themselves infirm and weak, and have Gods blessed treasures but in earthen
vessels, and therefore many times even in both these respects, not only
despised, but ill entreated in this evil world, yet are they made unto ^s and
the rest that believe, the savor of life unto life, (...) Christ.

Amongst others, whom God in this last age has vouchsafed unto us, who may we?
or who mould we more continually remember, or more reverently regard, then that
worthy Country man of ours, Master ROBERT ROLLOK, who, what he was in
himself (I mean for his life and conversation) I suppose verily, you of any
man living best know, and can and will most truly relate, as time and occasion
shall be offered, because you were not only the longest, but most inwardly
acquainted with all his cariages. And what he was, and has been to the Church,
his worthy works left ^^^ind him, besides his daily labors in the Pulpit and
Schools, can more then sufficiently testify* What to men in the world, is
manifested by many things. But not by any more then this, that hitherto envy
it self, has not opened her mouth, neither ever shall be able so to do, his
conversation was so Christian, and his judgment so sincere. This worthy
instrument of his glory; God graciously offered, nay liberally lent a long
while to our Church: but we (...) so reverently esteeming him, as we should,
nor ^^^refullie profiting by him, as in deed we ought, God in great mercy
toward him doubtless, though in no small judgment to us ward, has been
pleased to retraite him to himself, out of this wretched world, and to bring
him to, yea to place him in celestial and heavenly joys. Which whatsoever he
was doing, he did hunger and thirst after, yea groan and (...), and as we may
say in another man's speech, (...) another matter, he did eat, drink, and
(...) eternal life, every thing in him in a manner assuredly testifying, that
here was not his hope, but that he looked for a city, eternal in the heavens.
All which graces God gave him, not only for his own consolation, but in deed
for our imitation, if happily we can strive thereto, that he being in some
measure, both in life and death made conformable, to his head and Savior
Christ, we might learn in deed, and that by an example in frail flesh and
blood, to purge our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit, and
to finish our sanctification in the fear of God* Wherein, that the Lord might
the better instruc^ ^s, he has thus far graciously provided for us, that
though he be departed from us, as in regard of the body, yet he is present
with us, in respect of his spirit; yea to say truth he lives, and that not
only with God, and innumerable Saints and Angels, in the heavenly places,
where is the fruition and fulness of joy for evermore, but even with men, yea
holy men upon earth, and speaks to them, though not in a bodily voice, yet in
the sound of his Lectures, and fame of many excellent things of his, provoking
the good every day to be better, and admonishing the wicked, every where to
turn from dead works, unto the living God, that so they might repent, and be
saved. And this he does amongst others, even in these Sermons or Lectures,
which now I present unto you, as a posthume birth, after the Fathers decease,
or as an Orphane destitute of earthly parents, not only to receive, as it were
breath and being from you, for that it has done already, as without whose
good means in deed, it could never have beheld this light, but all good
supportation beside, it lying in you, not only for your self, but with
sundry others, by reason of the good credit you have among all, specially
with the godly, to give it voge, and passage.

Take it therefore I pray you into your good patronage and protection, and
receive it, as it is in deed yours: yea, yours I say, if not in many good and
gracious respects besides, yet in a double regard at the least. One in
consideration of the author, whose things whilst he lived, yea and after life
and death also, were yours, as yours again his, but all in Christ. Another, in
that it is produced to the view of all, by your means, without which it should
have been, as bed-reden, notable to move hand or foot, nor to see or speak,
or should have perished inter blattas and tineas, as we say; but now comes
forth into the world, clothed as it were with your countenance, and to be
vpheld by your credit.

In this holy love of yours, hold on I beseech you, and increase with the
increasings of God, and show it effectually, not only to his, which yet
remain amongst us, as you have bountifully done, and yet do, that so that
may be verified in you, in the days of your pilgrimage, which was auerred of a
right worthy person in former time, he cease not to do good to the living,
and to the dead: but even to all the Saints and Servants of God in this world,
you manifesting it, to these especially, by sending abroad other fruitful
labors of his, for the blessed building of them up in sound knowledge,
steadfast faith, and all unfeigned obedience of truth. Assure your self (good
Sir) that this labor of love in you toward them, shall not be left
unrequited, neither of God himself, nor of his dear people: for besides that
God, who leaves not a cup of cold water vnrecompensed, given in his name to
one of the little ones that believe in him, will render it seven fold into
your bosom, even in this life, as he shall see good, but specially in the
resurrection of the righteous, his Saints upon earth, will more and more pursue
you, with all holy love, and as a sure pledge thereof, vouchsafe you their
daily prayers, and perform all other favors and furtherances that they can.
Nay I will say more, the Saints in Heaven, and particularly our ROLLOK shall
abound, not only in right and sound, but in perfect affection to you: and good
reason, because if when the Saints that dwell here amongst us, do unfeignedly
love one another, they cannot but in Heaven perfectly love all that are there,
and their fellowseruants on earth, as well because Heaven freeth us from all
corruption bodily and spiritual, as also because it is the place to and in
which God has appointed, fulness of all joy, and perfection of all graces. But
whither am I carried? It is time to end, specially since I doubt not but the
wisdom of the Word will teach you, and the power of the blessed spirit will
enable you to perform these and all other good things, to the glory of God,
the good of his people, and the comfort of your own conscience thorough
Christ. In whom I rest assuredly yours, now and for ever.

James Hamelton.

The Epistle to the Christian Readers.
THe City Colosse was a very ancient, populous, rich, Zenophon. lib. 1. de
expeditione Cyriminoris, ad Colossas venit, celebrem vrbe^, magnam, and
opulentam. Plin. lib. 5. c. 32
and flourishing City; but much Herodotus lib. 7. qui inscribitur Polymnia.
Xerxes praetergressus vrbem Anaua inuenit Colossas Phrigiae oppidum. So Strabo.
li 12
decayed (as some report) long before the birth of Christ. And since this
Church of Christ was founded among the Colossians, these three Cities mentioned
in this Epistle, Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colosse, were much shaken, if not
utterly ruinate with an Earthquake (which happened in Paulus Orosius. lib. 4.
c. 10. Ioh. Call. ep. ad Coloss.
Neros time) a fearful spectacle, and judgment sent of God, for the Exodus 5.
3. 1. Cor. 11. 30. Number. 14. 11.
contempt of the Gospel, as we may see the City of Corinth for the same
cause, even then, smitten with the Pestilence, for the instruction, no doubt,
of all succeeding ages to the worlds end.

As touching the writing of this Epistle, albeit this blessed Apostle had
travailed twice or Acts. 15. 32. and 16. 18. 23.
thrice thorough Phrigia, where these three Cities were, yet came he not to
Colosse, for that Epaphras, Onesimus, Tychicus, with others, had first planted
the Church of Christ in those parts. The reason is rendered by himself, when he
says, I Romans 15. 20. 1. Cor. 3. 9.
enforced my self to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was, least I should
have built on another man's foundation. Being therefore afterward occasioned,
as is most like by Epaphras and Tychicus, with other servants of Christ, he
wrote this worthy Epistle, being prisoner in Rome, to the Colossians for their
further instruction and confirmation in the faith of Christ.

The argument is this in effect: Because the turbulent and superstitious Jews
disquieted the peace of the Colossians, intending, as else where often, to make
a mixture of the Law and the Gospel: therefore the Apostle gives The argument
of the Epistle to the Colossians.
in this Epistle, a short abridgement of all the heavenly doctrine of our
salvation, describing unto us in a most lively manner what Christ is in his
natures and offices, working most powerfully in all his living members united
unto him: and not to be (as the world imagines) a dead, deformed, idle,
painted, Popish Christ. So that this Epistle will teach Christians, soundly and
truly, to discern between the shadow and substance of true Religion, between
the true Christ and fained, and consequently between the true and false
professors of the Gospel.

There are seven parts of this Epistle: I find them so Seven parts of the
Epistle to the Colossians.
set down in Master Rollocks latin Commentary, very briefly and truly
observed as follows. 1. verse 1, 2. 3. verse to the 12. 12. verse of the
first chapter, to the 23. of the same. in the faith, and admonishes that they
take heed of false teachers, from the 23. verse of the first chapter, to the
end of the second chapter. In this part he intermingleth admonition with
exhortation, for verse 23. of the first chapter, he exhorts to perseverance
in the faith: verse 4. of the second chapter, he admonishes them to take heed
of false teachers, and in the sixth verse of the same chapter, he returns
again to his exhortation: but verse 8. he falls again to his admonition, and
does insist therein to the end of that chapter. 1. and continues to the
seventh verse of the fourth chapter. This part contains exhortations to
holiness of life. And here ye have again admonitions partly general,
concerning all Christians, from the first verse of the third chapter, to the
18. of the same, partly special, which concern certain particular states of
men, as of Husbands and Wives, Children and Parents, Servants and Masters,
from the 18. verse of the third chapter, to the second verse of the fourth
chapter, where he returns again to general exhortations, which be continued
to the seventh verse of the fourth chapter. Tychicus and Onesimus, who should
report of all things unto them as they desired.

Moreover, as concerning Master Rollocke and his works: because this is the
first fruit of his labors, published in the English tongue: he was (as may
appear by many testimonies) a most reverend and faithful servant of Jesus
Christ. His name is very precious and great in all reformed Churches and
Nations, which have received the Gospel of Christ. His learned and holy
Commentaries on the Prophecy of Daniel, on the Gospel of John, on the Epistle
to the Romans, Ephesians, Galathians, Colossians, Thessalonians, with his other
works extant in the Latin tongue, testify abundantly of his gifts and
graces. And least any should except against my judgment, Epistola in Tractar.
de vocatione efficac. ad D. Iohnston.
which I confess is but mean, or nothing, hear one to speak for all, whose
wisdom and learning is reverenced of all the godly Churches (I mean Master
BEZA) concerning this man's works. He says, That his labors on the Epistle to
the Romans and Ephesians, be as a rich treasure sent from God to his people.
Next (says he) without all flattery be it spoken, I have never as yet read
any thing written in this kind, more brief, more eloquent, and more
indicious. And then he proceeds, saying, When I had viewed his works, I
could not contain my self, but as I was bound, I gave God thanks for him,
rejoicing for his blessing on the Churches.

This part of his works, I mean these Lectures on this Epistle, they were
first preached in the Scottish tongue, not much differing from our speech
specially in the North parts of this land; but now they are published in the
most common and usual English phrase, for the comfort and edification, I
trust, of all such as understand not the Latin tongue in both kingdoms. I
could wish in mine heart, that all Preachers in both Churches, would learn of
this man to Preach the Gospel of Christ; who, wanting neither wit nor learning
to set forth his exercises: yet respects he (as the Apostle taught him) neither
excellency of words nor humane wisdom, nor desires to savor of any thing, but
of Jesus Christ and him crucified. His continual care is so to speak, as that
the spiritual power and grace of the 1. Cor. 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Gospel, might speak only to the consciences of the hearers to work in
them: and not himself by any persuasions of his learning and eloquence. These
works are now published after his death, so that he has not performed what he
could and would have done, if his own hand had been last upon them. The
Christian readers will therefore pardon (I doubt not) all faults lovingly,
which have past in this first impression. And thus having commended this work
unto thee, recommend me and it unto the protection and blessing of the
Almighty in Christ Jesus.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Henry Holland.

MASTER ROLLOCKS LECTVRES UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
THE FIRST LECTVRE.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by
the will of God, and Timotheus our brother,

2 To them which are at Colosse, Saints and faithful brethren in Christ: Grace
be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 We give thanks to God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always
praying for you:

4 Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of your love toward all
Saints,

5 For the hopes sake, which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye have
heard before by the word of truth, which is the Gospel,

6 Which is come unto you, even as it is unto all the world, and is fruitful,
as it is also among you, from the day that ye heard and truly knew the grace of
God.


I Have chosen (brethren) this Epistle which the Apostle Paul lying in bands at
Rome, wrote to the Church that was at Colosse: even for this cause chiefly,
because as you shall see in the deduction, it shows all grace to be in Christ
Jesus our Lord, all wisdom, knowledge, mercy, and whatsoever a sinful
creature stands in need of, is to be sought and found in Jesus Christ, and
nothing to be sought without him. But to come to the purpose: briefly the
Colossians were so called of Colosse, a town in Phrygia in Asia the less,
whom Epaphras (not an Apostle, but an Evangelist inferior in rank to an
Apostle) had converted to the faith of Jesus Christ. After him enters in
certain deceivers to subvert the ground of faith, which faithfully and truly
Epaphras had laid, mingling with the Gospel vain Philosophy, the rites of
the Law of Moses, voluntary worshipping (as it is called) not content with the
simplicity of the Gospel. In the mean time the Apostle lies at Rome in
bands, he had never seen them nor been among them, because they were not
founded by him, but by Epaphras, who comes to him and communicates to him the
estate of the Church at Colosse, how he had founded it, and how false teachers
had crept in. Wherefore he desires the Apostle to write this Epistle to them,
to exhort them to stand to the true doctrine that Epaphras had taught them: and
not to believe the false teachers. And this is the occasion of the writing of
this epistle.

The Principal parts of it are these. First, the salutation of Parts of the
Epistle.
the Apostle with Timothy to the Church of Colosse. Secondly, the preface
wherein he indeuoureth to purchase the good will and attention of the
Colossians. Thirdly, the doctrine it self (short, but exceeding effectual) of
the Lord Jesus and his office, as we shall hear hereafter. Fourthly, after the
doctrine, he comes to the exhortation, exhorting the Colossians to constancy
and perseverance in the faith and doctrine of Jesus Christ. Fifthly, he
admonishes them to beware of false teachers: these things are handled in the
first two chapters. Sixthly, he comes to certain precepts, partly general,
partly particular. Seventhly, he ends his epistle with some salutations.

As touching this first chapter, first, we have to observe in it the
salutation: secondly, the preface of the Epistle: thirdly, the doctrine:
fourthly, the exhortation. As for the salutation, because it is common to the
rest of his epistles, therefore I shall pass through it briefly. The persons
that wish health and welfare to the Church of Colosse are first Paul the
Apostle sent immediately by Jesus Christ, by the will of the Father: first, the
will of the father goes before, then the son the Lord Jesus sends out this
Apostle, for he did nothing without the will of the Father. The second person
is Timothy a brother, so he names him, not an Apostle, but an Evangelist, and
fellow labourer, following Paul, watering where he had planted, for the office
of every Evangelist was to water where the Apostles before had planted, and to
build where they had laid the foundation of the true doctrine of Jesus Christ
the Savior. The persons unto whom this health and welfare is wished, are those
that were at Colosse: to wit the saints, the faithful brethren in Jesus
Christ, that is to say, the Church of God that is made up of faithful men and
saints, all brethren in Jesus Christ, at that time in Colosse. The thing wished
by Paul and Timothy is first grace, even that grace, even that mercy that is
showed upon the world in Jesus Christ the Lord of grace and mercy: without whom
there is no grace to any nation, tongue, nor person upon the earth. Then the
second thing is peace that follows on grace, for his grace once obtained in
the remission of sins: upon it then follows that inward peace of the soul
and conscience especially toward God, and all felicity both spiritual and
corporal. And without that grace there is no true peace nor blessing of God,
all is but a curse to thee though thou had all the world.

Now to come to the preface, upon the which we mind by Gods grace to insist,
passing over the salutation, and the rest before. In the preface of the
Epistle, the Apostle procures and conciliateth to himself the good will and
affection of these Colossians, to this end, that they liking of the person of
the writer, should esteem the more of the doctrine, exhortations, precepts,
and directions that after follow. For the liking of the person of the teacher
and writer, serves much to the embracing of the doctrine that is taught: and
by the contrary, the misliking of the person that teaches the word of God,
hinders the faith of the hearer. The Apostle knew this, and begins with a
preface to allure and conquer their favor and good will. The arguments whereby
he labors to do this, are two. The first is, he lets them understand that
he thanketh God for them. The second argument is, he lets them understand
that as he thanketh God for them, so immediately he prays for their happy and
prosperous estate in Christ Jesus. So there are the two arguments whereby he
will procure their good will and attention to this his doctrine. We thank God
(says he) even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, there is the first
argument: always praying for you, there is the next argument. In the text
following he expounds every one of them in their own room.

Then to come to the proposition of the argument: we thank God (says he) even
the Father. In thanking God for them he congratulateth with them for that
blessed state that they stood in, in Jesus Christ. Note.
Our rejoicing should go up to heaven, from whence that blessing descended and
came down. This manner of congratulation is not in this place only, but
through all his epistles, and it is far different from the rejoicing of the
Ethnickes that never speaks one word of God. The flattering Lowne will say to
the Emperor, it is your wisdom, you have done this or that: and never a word
of God. So that as many congratulations as you read in these profane men they
are all as many blasphemies against God, giving the praise due to God, to a
creature that is but vile and stinking, though he were an Emperor, or a
monarch over the whole earth. And as this was the fashioning of the Ethnickes
congratulation that knew not God: it is even so with men in praising men now in
our days forgetting God. How many be there which flatter men as though all
were done by them, and not by the author of grace? what is that but blasphemy
against God?

praying (says he) ardently for you. We are not bound to pray only for our
selves, but we are bound to pray for others also. Self-love draws us so
near our selves, Self love.
that it makes us forget others. Thou art not bound only to pray for thy
self, but if thou be a member of Christ, thou art bound to pray for the body
in general, and particular: and all the benefits of God bestowed on any person
on the earth temporal or spiritual, should be to thee a matter of praising
God. Brethren, if we had that zeal to the glory of God, and that love to our
neighbors which we ought to have, there would not be a blessing of God that
fell to our neighbor, but we would glorify God for it, as if it had fallen to
our selves. These are the latter days, and worst days, wherein zeal to God,
and love to man is clean departed out of the hearts of men. This is a cursed
generation. To whom gives he the thanks? We thank God (says he) even the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ: mark the words, he says, not God only, but
he tells us what a God this is, God said he that is the Father of Jesus, to
let us see that it is unlawful for thee to acknowledge another God, but only
that God that manifests himself in the son. The knowledge of God in Christ
is the very key Seek the face of God in Christ, and Christ in the Gospel.
that opens the gate of heaven, and makes thee to get entry into that light
that has no access. Know thou God in Christ? then have thou an entry to
him. Otherwise thou know him not, nor thou shall never be able to enter into
heaven. The Turk for all his speaking of God got never access to God. The
Jew for all his boast of the knowledge of God, knows him not, nor never
shall know him nor see him, without Jesus Christ. God that sittes in heaven
will not look upon thee without his son: he is no father to thee neither
will be, neither will he show any spark of love to thee, but in his only
son the Lord Jesus. Therefore say not that thou know God or that he is thy
Father, except first and above all thou know the Lord Jesus: thou shall never
know him, but to thy utter overthrow and wrack, if thou know him not in
Jesus Christ. Now to come to the second part of the proposition containing his
prayer: he thinks it not enough to thank God for them, but he will pray for
them instantly. Paul was often on his knees praying. Men wot not what it is to
have to do with God. I bow my knees to God for you Ephesians 3. 14. So learn of
him that it is not enough to thank God for the prosperous estate of his
Church, that is but an half duty to thank him; but with the thanking of God,
thou must join prayer for the continuance of the blessing of God upon that
person, Church, and Commonwealth, for whom thou thankest God. There is no man
so perfect in happiness or in any blessed estate, whether it be spiritual, or
temporal, but yet so long as he lives in the world he has want: there is a
lack even in the greatest Emperor and King, yea even in temporal things. And
he that has begun well, will fall back again a hundredth times in a day, yea
he will run faster backward, then ever he went forward if the Lord withhold
him not. Therefore pray for him that he go not backward. Then when he is
going forward in the good course begun, he may not stand still, but he must run
ever looking to the end. There is no man so long as he lives that puts an
end to his course, his course ends with his life. Has any man a life? He is in
the race, he is in the way and journey toward the But, or as the Apostle
calls it, the price of the high calling of God, Phil. 3. 14. In the progress
he is not able to go one foot forward except the Lord take him by the hand and
lead him. Therefore seeing there is no progress to heaven, without God his
especial grace, nor thou art not able to lift thy foot without him; with
every foot that thou liftest, thank God for his own benefit, and pray to God
for the continuance and increase thereof. Pray fervently for thy self, and for
those that thou would have to continue.

Thus much for the proposition: Now follows the declaration of that wherefore
he thanks God: he thanketh God for them but not without cause, he saw matter
of thanks giving in them, and a vain thing it is to thank God for that that
is The matter of the thanks giving.
not in a man. What saw he in them? We hear (says he) of your faith first,
and then of your love to all the Saints without exception. It is not possible
but if thou love one Saint, thou must love all. And if thou hate one Saint as
a Saint, it will Love to the Saints.
pass thy power to bear affection of love to any: so, love one, and love all,
otherwise thou can not love one. Then he sees matter in them wherefore he
thanketh God, and it is for no earthly thing, but that these Colossians were
conquered to that kingdom of Christ. It is better for thee to be conquered to
Christ then to conquer the whole world.

Then the spiritual matter of rejoicing (if thou would rejoice,
congratulate and praise God) stands in spiritual graces; if thou would
rejoice for thy friend, look if he have spiritual graces; look if he have
faith and love: if he has not To rejoice for friends.
these, neither have thou matter to rejoice for, nor he, if he had all the
world: away with all thy gratulation: all his praises, and congratulations, are
as many curses if he want faith and charity, for there is no blessing where
they are not. Wot ye what faith is? It ioynes thee with the head: woe is thee
that art severed from him, and if thou had all the world: woe is that soul
that is not joined with Christ, and being joined with him, then art thou fast.
The earth shall be shaken, and the heaven pass away before thou shall loose
thy gripe, and hold of Christ, or he twine and part. Who shall separate us
from the Faith apprehends. Christ.
love of God, says the Apostle Romans 8. 24? there is faith and the virtues
thereof. What does love again? As faith makes the union with the head, so
love is the band that makes the communion with the Saints, which you rehearse
in your belief: and if thou be not joined here with his Church, there is no
salvation for thee, nor life: thou shall never see the life of Christ. Then
when we see a man standing first in this union with Christ, and secondly in
this communion with the Saints, we may say blessed is that soul, for cursed
are they that are not joined this way. Conioyne thy self with the head and the
members: there is not a member of the body with whom thou ioynest thy self by
this communion, but so fast as thy heart cleaues to it, so fast will it cleave
to thee again. Wherefore rejoices Paul with the Colossians? because they
loved the Saints, and so he being a Saint his heart ioynes with them. Thou art
a cursed body when a man loves thee, if thou will not love him again.
Wherefore was it that they had first this faith in Jesus Christ, next this love
toward the Saints? what gained they by faith and love? the Apostle says, For
that hopes sake that is laid up in heaven, it is not for nothing: there is a
rich reward of faith and love. Faith and love will get thee a fairer thing and
richer reward, then all the things in this world. Fie upon them they are but
dirt and doung, only see that thou have faith and love. Stick by these two
and thou shall get thee a richer and more glorious thing, then all the things of
this world can be to thee. You may learn the^, it is the respect that a man
has to a rich reward, and hope that is of the riches of glory, Ephesians. 1. and
not of this peltry in the earth, that makes a man to stick with Christ, and to
have a communion with the Saints. Otherwise if thou have not this to look
unto, and this respect to that joyful end, fie on thee (it is kept to thee
Heb. 11. 26
well enough as Peter says, thou have no more to do but to hold thine eye
upon it) if thou have it not: it shall pass thy power to keep thee with
Christ, and to be joined with the Church militant, for there shall come such
jaws and billows of temptation, iaw upon iaw, and billowe upon billowe, that
thou shall perish. But contrariwise, holding thine eye Phil. 3. 20. ever
waiting for the coming of thy Savior the Lord Jesus (I confess there be a
thousand things to draw it down, but if thou strive to hold it up)
certainly thou shall stick fast with Christ, and stand with the Saints of
God: but if thou carry thine eye from heaven like a moule or muddewart
grountling on this earth, thou shall tyne and lose Christ, and the union with
his Saints. Thou shall lose thy life and that fair heritage, and then woe is
thee for ever more. To come forward, how got they their sight and knowledge of
this life? Note.
It is a looking to this life that must keep the gripe and hold of Christ, and
make thee to love the Saints. But how got they it? of the which you have heard,
says he: look the word. Then they got it by hearing. Well, you that count so
little of hearing, take heed to your selves, they got it by the very ear and
that of the Lord. They knew it not before they heard of it. No knowledge of
life everlasting by nature. Thou shall not know that, Thou that would live
after this life and after the fashions of it. Indeed thou shall know that thou
shall perish and dye everlastingly. Adam knew this when he fell from God:
death seized on him, and this was his knowledge of good and evil that he got,
that he knew what blessing he had lost, and into what damnation he has fallen.
But no sight of his rising before he heard; so no light by nature of life after
this life, but a sight of everlasting death and damnation. Long may a sinner
lie still dead in sin before he think of life, he is no more able to think
of it then a dead body. How got they it then? by hearing. What heard they? a
word: the object to the care is a word, or sound. What word: not a word of
lies, of men, of dreams, of fables. No, how be it thou hear a thousand years
all the inventions and dreams that Monks in their cloisters have dreamed,
build and rest on them as thou would, yet thou shall never see life by them.
What kind of word must this be then? the word of truth: a true word must let
thee seethe heavenly life. What truth is this? the truth of the Gospel. Every
science has it own truth: but there is no truth that will save thee and make
thee see that inheritance, but only the truth of the Gospel: and therefore
the Gospel for the excellency thereof is called the word of God, and for the
excellency of the truth of the Gospel, it is called the word of truth. Then
in a word to speak homely and familiarly to you: the charter and the evidence
of that heavenly inheritance is the Gospel of Christ. Thou have no other
evidence (look The Gospel is the only evidence of salvation.
to thy charter chest) in heaven, earth, or hell; thou shall never get an
evidence of thy salvation, but the evidence of the Gospel. Will thou keep the
charters of thy land, and heritage on earth, and close them fast up in a sure
chest and read them at all times; and forget this only evidence of thy
salvation, and not care for it, nor take pleasure to read on it? I denounce
unto thee, what ever thou be, that thou shall never see life, but thou shall
be shut out of heaven. To do this, it is not a work of thine own power nor
of thine own nature and grace, to draw thee with some delight, to turn over
the evidence of the Gospel, to hear it, and to take pleasure in it, in some
measure so long as thou art from the full fruition of heaven and life
everlasting. Thou shall never brook it in heaven, and thy pleasure be not in
some measure on this evidence whilst thou art here on earth. I denounce over
again, and that by the ministry of this word, thou shall be shut out, thou
shall not have a furrow of land in heaven. Count of hearing as you will, by
hearing is your life; and there is no pleasure but in the word of life, and the
often turning of it over. When he has spoken of this Gospel he falls out in a
commendation of the Gospel: you shall find this in Paul when he falls in
speaking of the Gospel he cannot be easily drawn from it. No question he
found the power of it so forcible in himself, and saw it also so effectual
in others, that where he speaks of it he cannot go lightly from it. He loved
it so well and it was so sweet to him, yea as it is said Psalm. 119. It was
sweeter to him then the honey, and the honey comb. Well then, he commends
the Gospel to them, and there are three arguments of the commendation thereof.
First, which (says he) is come to you. Brethren the Gospel comes to us and
we The Gospel comes to us and we go not to it.
never go to it, and it comes unsent for, it would bide long from us if it
stayed till we went for it, and though thou wentst for it, I tell thee thou art
no more able to bring it then thou art able to bring the sun out of the
heaven. For except the Lord send it to thee in his mercy and free grace, thou
shall never get it. But to come to the purpose. Do you scar at this Gospel,
that you have heard because it is Epaphras that has founded you? you do
evil, would he say. Therefore he says ye heard of him nothing but that which
is spread throughout the world. And Epaphras his Gospel is that that is my
Gospel, which I have preached unto others, which is the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Take out here a lesson, would thou have a note or token whereby thou
would know that the Gospel which thou hear and that we preach this day,
is the true Gospel? the Gospel that must save the world? look if it be the
same Gospel that was spread through out the world in the days of Observe.
these Apostles, or if it be that Gospel that Paul and Peter preached. How
shall you know if it be that Gospel of the Apostles? It is a long time since:
where shall you know it better then by their own writ? Paul nor Peter
preached nothing but that which they wrote. Never a sentence of salvation was
preached by Paul, but all is written. He preached the whole counsel of God
Act. 20. I say and will affirm and will dye with it, that Paul preached the
whole counsel of God, and wrote every word of the same. Away with the clouted
inventions of the Papists, and that rabble of the cloister. Then I pray you
examine all our preachings by the rule of this written word. And would to God
brethren, that they would suffer that to be the only touchstone. Oh vain
Papist! thy cause would perish, if thou would take thee only to this
touchstone. Thou should find all their inventions to be but lies. But thou will hold thee by lies, and therefore thou shall perish and they both. Then
thou that find this Gospel that is preached, to be the written word of the
Apostles, hold thee by it, and take it for the true word of God, the word of
life and salvation. Now I pray thee as thou would find life and grace in it,
put away all prejudice of the minister, whether he be come Prejudice against
the Preacher.
from Rome, from the Pope or not, and the Gospel that he preached be as good
as the Gospel of Paul and Peter; if it be no other, stand not upon the man: if
thou countest more of the man, or of his calling, then of the Gospel, thou
shall never see that life. Notes to know the true ministry.
God either ordinarily, or extraordinarily to send it to thee, with whatsoever
man thrust out for that effect. Epaphras. I shall give you an argument that it
is the Gospel that I have preached, look if it brought out fruits in you (as
it has done in the world) of life and regeneration: if it has done this, scar
not at it. for many are called but few are chosen) whose hearts it pleases
the Lord to open, as he did the heart of Lydia, this true regeneration and
renewing the soul, how few soever the number of them be, as it did in the
days of the Apostles. O this Gospel must be the true Gospel for this is sure,
false doctrine will never regenerate thee. The inventions of men will never
renew thee. Nay further good moral precepts will never alter thy hard heart.
Read Plato, Isocrates, Cicero, read them if thou will ten thousand years,
all thy reading and hearing of them will not work in thee the obedience of the
heart to God. They may well make thee an Hypocrite. What Reading of profane
authors their best moral can not conuers the heart. Psalm. 19. 7.
were all the Philosophers? as many Hypocrites, counterfeiting humility, and
the rest of the virtues. This ground shall stand then: that there is no
renewing doctrine which can change the soul but only the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, because it is accompanied with the spirit. I shall send to you the
comforter (says Christ) and he shall give you my word John 14. Only this
Gospel then has the privilege to make thee a new man. Therefore let thy rest
be on this Gospel, if thou would be renewed: and renewed must thou be or
else no life for thee, nor sight of Christ and of heaven and of the joys
thereof. Stick fast I say to this blessed and glorious doctrine of the
Gospel, that must renew thee by the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
with the father and the holy spirit be all honor, praise and glory,

Amen.
THE SECOND LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians, beginning at
the end of the sixth verse.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 6 From the day that ye heard and truly
knew the grace of God.

7 As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servant, which is for you a
faithful minister of Christ.

8 Who has also declared unto us your love, which ye have by the spirit.

9 For this cause we also, since the day we heard of it, cease not to pray
for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding.

10 That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things,
being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God,


THe last day Brethren we entreated of the preface of this epistle of Paul to
the Colossians; and to the end that his doctrines, exhortations, and
admonitions, should be the more effectual in them he conciliateth to himself
their favor, and good will, and that by two arguments: the first showing that
he thanked God for them: the next showing that he prays continually for
them, that they should continue, persevere, and grow in that grace received. We
entered into the declaration of these two arguments of benevolence (to call them
so.) And first we begun to declare the first argument of his thanksgiving, as
it is first in order in the text. The thing that moved him to thank God for
them was nothing in this world, no, no earthly grace or benefit: but first
their faith in Jesus Christ: next their love to the Saints. He sets down
the cause of their faith and love. They had a respect and to-looke to that
everlasting life, and glorious in heritance that was laid up for them (and all
that believe in Jesus) and kept to them with Christ in God, as the Apostle
speaks: teaching us that except we have respect to another life, and glory
when this life is done, it cannot be possible to cleave to Christ, and love his
Saints; because there are so many impediments and temptations to draw us from
him, and from the love of the Saints. Then he goes forward and shows by what
means they had this respect and to-looke to this life and glorious
inheritance. It bred not in their breast first, but by hearing: and if thou
hear not, thou shall not understand that there is another life. And what a
hearing and whereof? Of a word. What word? not of lies and vanities, of the
inventions of men, nay hear till the day of doom these vanities, thou shall
never get by it the hope of another life, and of glory hereafter. What a
hearing then is this? the hearing of the word of verity which he calls the
Gospel of the blessed God, which for the excellency thereof (for it excelles
all the words of the Philosophers, yea the law of Moses it self) it is
called the word of truth. Then he recommendeth this Gospel which they heard by
the ministry of Epaphras, least the person of the man should make them to
despise the doctrine. As for the Gospel which ye have heard, doubt not of it,
it is the true Gospel, and I shall give you a token: confer it with the
Gospel that has past through the world, if it be the same Gospel that has
past through the world, let not the person of the minister scar you from
receiving it. Then he gives another argument of this commendation of the
Gospel, look if it fructifye in you and brings forth such fruits as
sanctification, humility, charity, and such fruits of the spirit as it does
in the rest of the world; doubt not of it, for it is the true Gospel of Jesus
Christ. And therefore let not the person of the minister scar you.

Then he comes to the last argument, whereat we left you the last day, and he
calls them to the remembrance of the sudden effectualnes of the Gospel
preached by Epaphras amongst them, of the continuance which it had with them,
and says, from the day that ye heard and truly knew the grace of God, Verse. 6.
remember you not that the first day ye heard of it, it begun to fructify in
you, and ever since it fructifies in you. Therefore if you will look to the
suddenness of the effect, and the continuance of it amongst you, it argues
plainly that it is the truth of God. Upon this last argument learn this
beside the fruit, that the Gospel brings out in the heart of man, in the
circumstance of the time of the hasty working of the Gospel in the hearts of
men, even in that same hour that man hears it first, he finds it so
powerful in him, and the continuance of it working still in him, that it is a
sure argument to him and a note, not only of the truth of the Gospel, but
also that it is the very truth of God. If any has found this sincere working
in his heart by the Gospel, this is a sure argument that it is the truth of
God which you hear, though all the world, and the Pope himself should cry
against it. Briefly, as in these words he commends the Gospel; so he commends
the Colossians, because they received it, and continued in the same. The spirit
of God when he gives thee a grace, he will fall out in commending of thee, and
this testifyeth a wonderful love and mercy in God, and of his liking of them
to whom he gives his grace: he will give them such a praise as if they God
commends and crowns his own graces in us.
were something, and yet they are nothing, this should make us to meet him
with thankfulness, to praise him for something, when he praises thee for
nothing. When he has done with the Gospel, he comes to the person, they might
have said, what is this man that preaches the Gospel, he is no Apostle? Paul
answers in effect, whatsoever the man be, he has taught you the truth; and
then he commends the man, as for the man I will tell you he is a fellow
labourer with me, howbeit I be an Apostle, he is no servant to me; but with me,
he has his own room: and why? he is a minister of Jesus Christ: more, he is
beloved of me, I tender the cause, he is a minister, and a faithful minister,
he is sincere in his calling, and as for you he is wholly for your behoof and
profit, he is sent to you, and for you a faithful minister in Jesus Christ.
And he has shown indeed that he is for you, for he has testified True love.
of you, and of your hearty love, and he calls it the love of the spirit,
thereby highly commending their love, because if love be true it must not only
proceed of thy affection, but it must proceed of the spirit of Jesus. Thus
for the words, mark then when we see a man faithful in any calling, whether
in the Church, or commonwealth, this same recommendation Observe.
that Paul makes of Epaphras, teaches us to recommend that man that
discharges a faithful duty according to the grace given him, that they may
have the better lyking of him: I say he is a minister of Satan, that seeing a
man faithful in any calling, goes about to sever them and him, to put a
misliking in the hearts of the people, to sever them whom God has joined
together.

Now to go to the next argument, hitherto have you heard of the first argument
touching, thanksgiving, the next follows in prayer. Therefore says he from
the first day that I have heard of this grace incessantly I pray to God for
you: Mark first that same very grace of spiritual love and charity wherefore
he thanketh God, moves him to pray to God for them. Then (brethren) in any
grace whether it be faith, or love, or patience, etc. there is matter both of
thanksgiving, and prayer to God: as thou art bound to thank God for the grace
received, so thou art bound to pray for the same; and Prayer to God.
the more graces we see in a man, the greater care ought we to have to pray to
God to keep him in those graces. But the time is to be considered: even as
soon as he heard of their faith, and love, he begun to pray, and from that
day to this day, his prayer abides. This teaches first that after a man has
received a great grace from God, he should ever pray that that grace received,
may abide with him, and he with it, according to the example of Paul: for such
is the frailty of man's nature, that every moment he is ready to fall from
grace, except the Lord hold him up. Again, mark this: when he would have the
grace kept in the heart, what means uses he? prayer: immediately he prays
to God for them. Then in a word, earnest and fervent prayer to God is the
means to get grace from him, to keep it, either in thy own heart or in
others. If thou would have any grace of God, and have it abiding with thee
fructifying in thy heart, pray to God. Prayer.
Prayer is the only mean to effect and obtain of God whatsoever thou stand
in need of, and when thou have gotten any thing, prayer is the means to
procure a blessing to the same, that it abide with thee. What prays he for to
them? It is no grace that they had gotten already. Wherefore then? that you
may be filled. Mark the words (for there is exceeding great pith in them, and
would to God we could attain to the force of them) that ye may be filled
(says he) with grace: as if he would say, grace is begun with you already,
now I pray that you may be filled with grace: you are not full yet: for so long
as thou live thou may get grace, but I say thou will never be filled with
grace here in this world, but there will ever be some emptiness and wastnes in
thee. There is ever some want in the regenerate man. Learn another lesson.
Wherein stands thy felicity, and blessedness? even in this, in a filling up
of that wastnes and emptines within thee: alas if thou saw and felt thy own
voydnesse and want of grace in thy heart, thou would never cease but ever
be seeking and crying for abundance of faith (for an empty heart will perish)
Surely if thy heart be void of grace, go as gallantly as thou please
casting thy head in the wind, if thou have not grace, and a fullness of grace,
in the end thou shall perish, look to it as thou will. Think ye not that our
blessedness is to be in likeness with God, and Jesus Christ our head? God is
full. O what fulness is in God! Jesus Christ is full; we saw him says John 1.
14. Full of glory. Then it must follow, if we would be truly blessed, we must
be full as our head is full; and as the Apostle to the Colossians says, we
must be filled with that fullness of God: Blessed are they (says Christ Matthew.
5. 6.) that hunger for righteousness, Col. 3. 19.
for they shall be filled. Then hunger ever for righteousness, that thou
may be filled: for to be filled is the blessedness of man's estate. But what
stuff must this be wherewith we must be filled? it is not thy happiness to
be filled with every thing, as with meat and drink; often times when thou art
fullest after that manner, thou art emptiest of grace: He prays that they
should be filled with knowledge, with light, even with that that they have most
need of. O the darkness that is in man! naturally he is full of that black
smoke of darkness; he is choked full of it lying wallowing in it: so that of
all things, he has greatest miss of light. If thou were lying in a pit, thou
would think it a great benefit to get a glimse The natural blindness of
man. Ephesians. 6. 12. 13.
of light: O but if thou sawst thy own darkness in thy soul, thou would
never be joyful whilst thou gatst this light which the Apostle prays for.
So the^ the thing we need most, is the spiritual light of God: for God is
light, and dwells in light that has no access. 1. Tim. 6. 16. What is then
thy blessedness? to be filled with this light; to be partaker of it in some
part, as thou art able to be filled with it. So the thing promised in the
scripture, is knowledge and light; and the first thing the Apostle prays for,
is to get knowledge of this mystery of Christ. The second word is to be
marked, that you may be filled with all knowledge. This speech lets us see
that it will not be a part of knowledge that will fill a man, but he must be
filled with all knowledge: how beit the heart of man be but of a small room
and capacity; yet if his heart be sanctified, it is a wonderful thing, the
length and the depth of the grace that it will receive; howbeit it be finit,
yet unspeakable, how infinite a thing it will receive. God shall dwell and be
all in all in that heart that is once sanctified: so infinite a thing it will
be capable of. Take it in the own nature thereof, ye find it in A sanctified
heart.
experience in common sciences it is not capable of things that are finit: but
get it once sanctified, it will take apprehension of that infinite majesty and
riches in him. That you may be filled with all knowledge: whereof? there are
many things better not to be known then to be known. Adam would feign have
known the mystery of the forbidden tree, and it had been well for him that he
had never known it. Whereof then must this knowledge be? of his will: what a
will is that? Even that will, that Jesus his son coming out of the bosom of
the father has revealed to the world, that was the best and ioyfullest
revelation that ever was: So it must be the knowledge of the will of God
revealed. Where was this will (some will ask) all the time preceding the
coming of Christ? look 1. Cor. 2. 7. It was a wisdom in a mystery hid, and
never fully revealed while Christ came: which was appointed (read the place)
unto our glory.

Then he comes to that that was contained in that mystery, The things (says
he) that the eye never saw, the ear never heard, neither entered into the heart
of man (love him if thou will) which God has prepared and revealed to us by
his spirit. If thou have his spirit, thou will pierce into the gulf of his
love toward thee in Jesus Christ, and of his riches. And in the epistle to the
Ephesians 1. he opens the mystery more clearly: well, it is no small matter
to get the eye of thy mind opened. Thou will think it a great matter to get
the eye of thy body opened, that thou might see the visible creatures of
God. But what is that sight and the opening of the bodily eye to the sight of
the soul, and opening of the eye of thy soul, whereby thou shall see God, and
the things of God for thy weal? There is no match here. Therefore the Apostle
to the Ephesians explaines this mystery more clearly, where he says, that
You may see what is the hope of his calling: yet he goes further, and what is
the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints: and then he goes
further; And what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us. And if
thou have faith, thou shall taste of such an excellent grace, that thou shall
wonder that that same sorry and silly heart could gripe and attain to such
unsearchable riches. The effect of his will is this: the way of redemption to
the lost world is revealed: the way of remission of sins, how to be made
holy, and the rest of the graces revealed in Jesus Christ. True wisdom.
This is the will of God. Note then, what call you true wisdom? Men would be
wise, man inclines to nothing more then to have knowledge. Then what is true
knowledge? To know the way of thy redemption. And if thou want this, the
greater knowledge thou have, the greater fool. Be a fool, man, to come to
this knowledge. Come down thou art that scansing and soring I wot not where,
come down, come down I say, if thou know not Jesus thou art a fool: thou
shall never reach to the wisdom of Christ; thou must come down and leave thy
foolery and proud conceit of knowledge, if thou will be truly wise.

In the end of the verse, when generally he has spoken of this knowledge, he
lays it out abroad, and says, With all wisdom and understanding. By wisdom
briefly he understands all that knowledge that consists not so much in doing,
as in contemplation. By understanding, he means such knowledge as stands in
doing: for religion and that true Philosophy and wisdom is not a bare
meditation; for a man to sit in his chamber all the day, and like a Cloister
Monk, and in the mean time to do nothing thereby to profit the Church of
God; it is nothing, it auailes not. But religion is a knowledge, and a
meditation and a doing. Practice thy religion, or else it is not worth a penny.
And if it shine not in thy life, it is but dirt: so you have the parts of this
knowledge, wisdom Wisdom in meditation, understanding in practice.
in meditation, understanding in practicing to profit the world. You see first
this knowledge is spiritual, in quality, not earthly. It is of things that
never shall take end: it is parted, it stands in wisdom and stands in
practicing, will you come to degrees? It is perfect in degrees, and then it is
perfect in parts, in the which there is nothing that wants or is superfluous.
This is that knowledge that we have in Christ: howbeit, the Apostle would seem
that he prays that they should get this faith here: yet is it sure that it is
never gotten in this life, if thou should live Methusalems days. It must be
that thou grow in filling up this faith every day thou live more and more;
but so long as thou brookest this mortality, this fulness, whereof the Apostle
speaks, shall never be: for this mortality must be swallowed up of life. If
thou would have this faith, thou shall never get it till the day of the
resurrection, at which time God shall be all in all. 1. Cor. 15. 28. thou shall
rise up glorious, and this vile body shall be made like to his glorious body,
Matthew 13.
and then it shall shine more brighter then the sun at noone day. O the
glory of the Saints! when he shall fill them so that they shall not need a
temple, nor meat or drink, as it is said in the Revelation 21. but he shall
be al to thee, because he shall be in thee, and thou shall be are him in thee,
thou shall be a tabernacle to him; then shall this fullness be: and until then
it shall be but in a growing to that perfection. Blessed be that soul that
grows and feels that heavenly liquor dropping day lie into the soul, be
assured thou shall get this fullness of the light, and God shall dwell in thee
for ever. You see then he has prayed for wisdom and knowledge; to what end
is all this? will God give a man knowledge or wisdom, or will a man pray for
it, except he wot wherefore? wherefore is it then? That you may walk, says
he. Wherefore is light given, but that a man should walk? wherefore shines the
sun, but that thou might walk? The sun is not given thee to Similitude.
sleep: he is but a swinger but a lubber that will lie idle in the day light,
and the sun shall witness against him in that day: much more that heavenly
light, that sun of righteousness shines he for nothing? If thou have gotten
this shining light, walk, go, and travel, be exercised in thy calling, and
be Vocation.
not idle: will this sun in the firmament testify against thee if thou be
idle? what will the light of the son of man do trowest thou, if thou be idle
in thy profession? O woe worth thee that ever thou sawst it! I see there must
be a walking, but thou must not walk as thou will. In deed there be many that
are over busy, and that were better sleeping in their beds then walking as
they do in wantonness and wickedness. And there is over many reeling here
and there as wantons, about I wot not what. The very day light craves that thou
walk according to the light, Romans 13. 12. thou must have a very comely
behavior in the shining of the sun, and thou must not play the fool, the
drunken man, the harlot, the murderer, and the thief: I tell thee and thou
do it, the sun shall witness against thy evil deed to thy condemnation.
And if the sun in the world and firmament craves this comely behavior of
thee, and that thou walk orderly: then much more must thou walk by a rule in
thy light Jesus. What is the rule? Walk worthy of the Lord: as if he would
say, is it the Lord that shines? stain not that Lord of light by your evil
behavior. This imports: as this light shines in thee, so thou should see
him. See him as thou will, he shines on thee: and if thou get a sight of this
light, blessed art thou. Alas these filthy persons if they saw theeye of God,
trow ye that they would puddle on this sort? all stands on this, that howbeit
God see them they see him not. Happy art thou if thou can say when thou
risest, Lord thou see me, now Lord give me an eye to see thee, and Heb. 12.
14 Genesis 17. 1
by the seeing of thee to walk as it becomes me in thy presence, never to
stain that glorious light by my profane life. Now in the next words he tells
more plainly what it is to walk worthy of the Lord: it stands in this: to
please him in the whole actions of our life. Well is that heart that can in any
measure be set to please God, and well is the mouth that can say, I would
please thee O Lord: Lord give me grace to please thee. No no, let not a thought
that thou think will displease him, break out: hold it in, and say, Lord
slay it by thy Thoughts.
spirit: but fie on thee, when thy filthy thought falls out into a filthy
deed. Therefore set thee to please the Lord in thought, word, and deed. O the
joy in thy heart when thy conscience bears witness to thee, that thou
would please the Lord! thou shall never have joy in thy heart while then:
When we have set our heart to please him, it is but a meeting of the 2. Cor. 1.
12.
Lord. The Lord has set himself before thee, to pleasure thee: fie, fie then
that thou will not set thy self to pleasure him. Do what thou can, thou
shall never be able to pleasure God in respect of his pleasuring of thee. Thou
art but an unprofitable servant: yet happy art thou if thou endeavor to
pleasure him, as he will, and wrestling and striving as it were through a
thornie hedge to get this cankered heart subject to pleasure thy God: and say,
as thou have pleasured me Lord, give me grace to pleasure thee. Note.
Now the Lord give every one grace to please him in some measure. To whom be
praise and honor.

Amen.
THE THIRD LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians, beginning at the
midst of the tenth verse.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 10, 11, 12. 10 Being fruitful in all good works, and
increasing in the knowledge of God,

11 Strengthened with all might through his glorious power, unto all patience,
and long suffering with ioyfulnesse,

12 Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the Saints in light.


WE heard brethren the preface of this epistle, it stands first in
thanksgiving: and secondly in prayer. We have heard this other day of
thanksgiving, and of the causes of it. We entered into the prayer. The Apostle
shows that the first day that ever he heard of the grace of God which the
Colossians had received, he not only thanketh God for it, but immediately
prays for them. The effect of his prayer was, that they should be filled
(they were not full yet) wherewith? with knowledge, and not simply that, but
with all knowledge: of what thing? not of every thing, but with all knowledge
of his will, of the will of God reucaled most clearly to the world, by the
son himself, who is in the bosom of the father, and who manifested himself
in the fulness of time, in the nature of man, and with his own mouth revealed
the will of his father. Then he lays out this knowledge in the parts of it:
In all wisdom (says he) which consists in contemplation of heavenly
things; and in all understanding, which consists in practizing that
contemplation. All wisdom, not earthly but spiritual; all understanding, not
earthly but heavenly, touching the love of God, and the salvation of man in the
blood of Jesus. Now to what end should they be filled with all this wisdom,
that they should sit idly in the world? no, no, but that they should walk and
travel: and how? according to the rule. A misruly life dowes not, it auailes
not. The rule is, as it becomes that Lord of light, as it becomes that
glorious Gospel, this revelation of the God of glory, as it becomes so
glorious a calling. Then he shows what it is to walk worthy of the Lord, it
is to please him in all things, in all our actions and cogitations to study to
please him, to make him a meeting as the Apostle speaks, seeing he has set
himself to please us, we should go about every way to please him. Now
brethren thus far we heard the last day briefly: in this text, first we have
four points, or heads, in the which consists the pleasing of the Lord. Then
we are to enter into the third part of the epistle concerning the doctrine to
the Colossians. The first part of the pleasing of the Lord is this, fructifying
(says he) in every good work, there 4. points wherein we ought to endeavor
to please God.
is the first part. The second is, growing in knowledge. The third is, to be
strengthened with all might through his glorious power. The fourth and last is,
being strengthened with all might unto patience under the cross, to thank him
cheerfully and joyfully. These are the four points wherein the pleasuring of
God stands. To come to the first, it is to fructify in every good work:
mark it, the speech is borrowed from a tree that brings out good fruit. We
know the pleasure of the Husbandman is, when he sees a tree in his garden
fruiteful and bringing out good fruit in due season: Even so the pleasure of
the Lord is when he looks down to thee as unto a tree planted in his garden,
and sees thee fructifying in every good work, that is his pleasure. But here
the difference betwixt the fruitful tree and the godly man, is this. The tree
that is most fruitful S.
will bring out but a kind of fruit only: an apple tree will bring forth
apples; a pear tree, pears; and another, his kind of fruit; and so forth in
the rest: but thou that art a fruitful tree in the garden of the Lord, thou
must not be bound to one kind of fruit; but as the Apostle speaks, you
must bring forth all good works, both of soul and body, for the Lord will not
have the fruit of the one without the other. But if thou be planted in the
garden of the Lord, thou must bring forth fruit to the pleasure of God, both
of soul and body. Again, you know a tree has the season, but thou art not
bound to one season, to summer, winter, or harvest; but thou art bound to bear
fruits continually. So briefly brethren, there is the first point of the
pleasing of God: would thou please him? look that thou be fruitful, be
not barren; work, be not idle, be occupied, and well occupied: do no evil,
but good; not one sort of goodness, but all the good that is possible for thee
to do. Now to come to the second point of the pleasing of God: it stands in
growing in knowledge, and that is faith. This point flows from the first,
mark it. A man that fructifieth in good works, he feeds upon his own
works: by the very juice and sap of the works, Growth in knowledge.
knowledge or faith is nourished. It is true in deed, good works must come of
faith, and there cannot be good works where faith is not first: they must rise
of faith in the heart, and faith (as the Apostle says) works by charity,
Galath. 5. 6. Even Good works. Note well.
as good works come of faith; so good works nourish, augment, and intertaine
the mother of it, that is faith. This is the difference betwixt the fruitful
man, and the tree. The tree brings not forth the fruit to it self, nor
feeds on it: It is not so with the fruitful man. In deed it is true, the
good works of a man which are the fruit of faith, they serve first to the
glory of God, and next to the good of his neighbor. But there is further use
of them, he gets the best himself. Do thou a good turn to any man? thou
have the best of it thy self: and thou feedest more on thy good work, then
the person does upon whom thou bestowdest thy good work. So this is sure, good
works nourish faith; even as evil works sour and bitter fruits (whereof
this land is full) foul thoughts in thy heart, foul and filthy speeches in
thy mouth, cruel and barbarous deeds in thy hand, nourish unbelief in the
filthy and wicked person. Trowest thou all is gone from thee, when thou have
suffered a foul word to pass out of thy mouth, and an evil deed to pass
from thy hand, that thou art quit of them? No, no, it comes back upon thy
self, and leaves a foul black spot behind it: and if thou be an infidel,
thy infidelity increases in thy heart, and thou art nourished by it. Alas!
the best of us all is subject at all times to one evil or other. If thou be
faithful, the very evil deed will come back upon thee and anger thy heart.
The very evil deeds if thou go forward in them shall extinguish thy faith,
or feeling, as the Apostle says, 1. These. 5. 19. So thy fruits shall either
augment thy faith, or else extinguish thy faith if thou continue. Therefore
take heed to thy doings, that they wound thee not to thy heart: and if thou
would please God, fructify in good works: and secondly by them grow in
faith. The third point follows, being strengthened with all might through his
glorious power: and this follows from the second, for every one follows
from other. We know that the tree that grows, as it fructifieth; so it
grows strong, a growing thing grows ever to strength, as a decreasing thing
fails more and more to weakness, and the more the fruitful tree grows, it
is the stronger: so a man growing in faith and good works, he grows to
strength. For except the tree grows to strength, it may well fructify for a
time, but it is not able to fructify long, the summer will wither it, and the
winter will rot it: even so a man except he grow in faith, and in the fruits
of faith to a strength, till he be strong, and grow in strength of well doing,
he shall not be able to stand and abide all. He shall not be able to abide the
dint of persecutions, the sword, hunger, imprisonment, and such other
afflictions. I say he shall not be able to abide these things, except he grow
to a strength of God: but the heat of persecution shall make him to perish and
wither away. He is not content with this simple word of strength, but he adds
to all might. A christian man must not be content with one sort of strength in
this life. In deed were there but one calamity, one affliction, and one
persecution, one sort of strength might suffice; but seeing there are manifold,
yea a thousand fold, thy strength must be a manifold strength, thou must have
al strength. Then to mark it briefly: I see a perfection of all things craves
to be in a christian. Will thou speak of knowledge? the Lord craves all
knowledge. Will thou come to works? he craves all manner of works. Will thou come to strength? he craves all strength. Well brethren, it may be that
we attain not in this life to this perfection, but certainly these words are
not in vain, but they let us understand thus far, that once we shall attain
to perfection; grow here, and hence thou shall have a perfection; grow in
knowledge here, and hence thou shall have perfect knowledge: but if thou grow
not in knowledge, and in the rest of the graces of God here, thou shall never
attain to perfection. But when shall thou have it? read 1. Cor. 15. and there
ye shall find it. Then he comes forward and lays down the ground, and
beginning of this strength: He craves it not of flesh and blood, he bids them
not be strong in them selves: the stronger that one is in flesh and blood, the
weaker is he in the spirit, and the more unable to receive knowledge and to
believe, and to bring forth the works of the spirit and faith: for as the
Apostle says, Galath. 5. 17. The flesh fights against the spirit, yea the
flesh (as experience teaches us) over comes the spirit. Therefore he says
not, be strong in all might, in your selves; but he says according to the
force of his glorious power, as he speaks to the Ephesians 6. 10. he craves
that they should be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Then
thou man be strong in the glorious strength of thy God; not in thy self, nor
in thy own arm, nor in things earthly, but in the strength of God. But how
get we it? Read Ephesians. 1. 19. where he says, what is the excellent greatness
of his power in us that believe: and 1. Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept (says he) by
the virtue of the strength of God: and how? through faith. Then look how the
strength of God comes down to thee (there is a far space betwixt thee and
God) believe in God through Jesus Christ, apprehend him, behold him by faith in
his glory, spare not, pass through the glory of God: if thou get a gripe of
him by faith, thou shall suck down that power and glory that is in God, and
thou shall be filled with it. Note.
Ye read of Steven in the Acts chap. 7. 5. when he is persecuted and accused,
his eye is in heaven: they are looking to him, but he is looking to heaven: his
faith pearceth through the clouds to the presence of God, and suckes down
strength and comfort to him now in the heat of his persecution, even when his
affliction is at the height, and is sorest upon him: what says the text? He is
filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 7. 55. so that his face shined as an Angel:
so ye see the glory of God what it is. Now in the words following, he is not
content generally to speak of this strength, but he lays it out abroad
clearly setting it out in three parts. First, in all patience, the second long
suffering. Thy patience must not be for a time, but it Patience and joy under
the cross.
must be in long suffering. The third is in ioyfulnesse of heart, patience
without joy, without willingness to suffer avails not, if joy be away burn
thee, rack thee, rent thee, all is for naught. So in a word, who is the strong
man? men would think that he is strongest that is ablest to persecute, to
oppress, to afflict and to trouble the Saints of God. The King of Spain is
counted very strong, and the Pope is counted very strong, because they have a
strong hand to persecute the silly ones of Jesus Christ. But who is the strong
man? that body that A strong man.
suffers the sword, the fire, and all manner of affliction patiently for
Christ's sake, and has continuance in patience, and with patience, ioyfulnesse
of heart: there is the strong man. The strength of God is not so much in doing,
as in suffering: so that thou that suffer most in patience, and in the joy
of thy heart, thou art strongest, and it is thou that gettest the Romans 8. 37.
victory. Thou that art undone in the sight of the world, thou art the strong
man, and not he that slays thee. The filthy murderers are slaves, the man
that thou oppressest is the strong man, and thou art the slave, and shall dwell
with the devil that great slave, when as the afflicted shall triumph and be
with God. Well, if thou have this strength of God, and patience in afflictions,
thine afflictions shall not make thee weak, but the stronger to endure. To
come to the last point, giving thanks unto the father. This flows out of the
third, a man in persecution strengthened with patience. O the mouth of that man
is opened to praise and thank God, though it were in the fire burning! So you
see this rises out of the other. Mark it, wherefore shall ye thank him? it
is a hard matter that a man exercised by the hand of God (for the persecutor
is but the hangman of God, if he were a King, and the Lowne shall be hanged in
the end, and the scourg shall be cast into the fire) should thank God in the
midst of persecution. The words following lets thee see wherefore thou
should thank him, to wit, for thy calling. This christian calling, to be
heir of Which has made us meet.
heaven, is the matter of thy joy, upon the which thanksgiving does arise. So
in the midst of affliction, of persecution, of martyrdom, the remembrance of
thy calling to be a christian, and to be heir of heaven, should make thee to
rejoice, and to give thanks to the Lord of glory, and should ever hold thee
up, and should make thee to open thy mouth, and praise the Lord, Romans 5. 2. We
glory in hope. O that glory ministers joy in all the afflictions in the
world. Then mark Nose of a man truly pleasing. God.
a lesson out of all this, who is he that pleases God? (woe is him that is in
no measure about to please him. O woeful wretch, though thou were an Emperor of
the world, if thou be not in some measure set to pleasure him, woe is thee for
ever more!)

Now follows the third part of the Epistle containing doctrine, both fair and
sweet, opening a glorious mystery, and that briefly. You that would have
riches, he opens up the riches of Jesus Christ to you, that was so long hid up
from the beginning to his coming. The first thing he begins at in his
doctrine, it is this christian calling, it is the first grace and Our calling.
The first grace we receive in time.
blessing that in time we get in Christ. I say in time, because our election or
predestination is before all time. So the first grace we get in Jesus Christ in
time, is our christian calling. In the epistle to the Ephesians he begins
higher, but in this epistle he does not so: he begins not for the height but at
this blessing, that is first in time, to be called to be a member of Christ.

Note.
Now in speaking of this benefit of our calling to be a christian, he speaks
not simply of it, but in speaking of it he is thanking the Lord the father who
has made us meet for a part of that glory: for you shall mark this of the
Apostle, he can never speak of the graces of God, but he ever thanks God. And
in the first epistle of Peter. 1. 3. to teach thee when thou speak of the
graces of God, to remember to praise him, and to give him hearty thanks for
his blessings. Now to come on first in this doctrine of this christian calling,
we have the author of it. Whom thanks he? Thanking, says he, the father:
Author of our calling.
so he gives the glory of our calling to the father of our Lord Jesus, the
father of glory; he gets the first praise of our calling. The son himself
speaking of his own calling; he gives all glory to his father: So all the
godly give the glory of their calling, first to the father, because he is the
beginner of all grace. Then he comes to the benefit it self, he says not,
thanking the father who has called us, but in steed of the word calling, he
puts the definition of calling, the effect of the calling, who has made us
meet, or sufficient in effect: then mark the words, they import first this.
That then when the father has put his hand to work, to call thee, thou wast
unmeet: if he made thee meet thou wast first unmeet 2. Cor. 3. 5. thou wast
unmeet, even if it were to think a good thought: when he began to work, thou
had no power once to think of this calling. Then What our calling is.
wherein stands our calling? not in a bare name, as you would calaman, but it
stands in a change. When he calls thee, he changes thee wonderfully, and
makes thee that, that thou wast not. Thou wast an old crased creature, a faggot
for hell: thou wast nothing because of thy sin: and except the Lord make thee
a new thing, better it were for thee to be turned to nothing, for thou shall
be turned down to hell. Romans 4. 1. he calls the thing that is not, as
though it were. This is the calling of the Lord: when he calls a man, he
changes the heart of him. The free will of the Papists, that poisoned doctrine
of theirs, that a man has some grace by nature (howbeit unable to receive
grace of God) will never stand in the day of the Free Will.
Lord: and if thou will defend it, thou shall never find this effectual
calling of the Lord. If thou renounce not thy own sufficiency, thou shall
never get grace. He thanks God that made us sufficient of insufficient, meet
of unmeet, of dead men quick men: would thou thank God from thy heart?
(for thanking of God must rise from the heart) there is the first ground of it:
the feeling of thy own want, of thy own misery, and that great lack of
grace in it, and that must be the deepest sense in thy heart, and lie at the
root of thy heart: and thy prayer must rise from that step, and from that
Thanksgiving.
step to come to another step, to the sense of that mercy that God has
showed thee, that is the next. The first is a sense of thy misery: the second
is a sense of the mercy of God, of these two breaks out the thanksgiving. So
that if thanksgiving begin not at the sense of thy wants, I tell thee it is
but a thanksgiving from the teeth forward. Take it for a sure rule, if thou
have not a true sense and feeling of thy own wants and miseries, and then of
the mercy of God; thou can never thank God aright: nay thou can never in
any measure seek to God truly. So to return I say, as thou would have
grace, begin at this, that thou art nothing in thy self, that God may have the
glory: there is your calling and the effect of your calling. But whereto are we
called? A man that is called, he is called to some thing. The Lord calls not,
but to some end. He has made us meet for a part: whereof? A part of a lot,
that is, of an inheritance that falls by lot. Then would thou understand
whereto thou art called, and made meet? to wit, for heaven; to make thee able
to brook that heavenly inheritance: so thou art not called to nothing, but to
an inheritance. So if thou find that thou art called and a change is made in
thy heart, of an unmeet man thou art made meet, and if thou find a change,
look certainly for an heritage, fail not to look for it, for the heritage
shall not fail thee. Thy sufficiency had not been wrought, if thou had
not been propped up for that heritage: yet the word would be noted. He calls
it not an heritage, but a lot: by the which he will let thee see, that thy
heavenly heritage falls out to be by lot. Ye would think that a man called
should merit to himself an heritage, that he might work for it here. No
says the Apostle, thine heritage falls to be a lot, when thou art called.
So a benefit is not a merit of another benefit; our sanctification is not a
merit of our justification; but all is of grace, and our inheritance is but a
lot, that is, a grace or gift of God without deserving. Yet further: whose is
this inheritance? he says that it is the lot of the Saints of God. God has
giving it them, and none other has gotten it, or shall enjoy one foot broad
of it, but the Saints. Thou may inherit here a kingdom, an earldome, a
Lordship, though thou were as a devil: but in heaven thou shall have none if
thou be not first a Saint, and a holy one here on earth. Mark this lesson: ere
ever thou get a share of heavenly inheritance of the Saints, thou must come
creeping to that communion of Saints; be joined with them here if thou mind to
have any part with them in heaven: separate thy self from that society of the
Church of God, thou shall be debard from heaven: thou shall never get a sight
of it. Look the epistle to the Ephesians, where he shows wherein the riches
of the glory of this inheritance is. Where is it? he says, it is among the
Saints, Ephesians. 1. 18. So then associate thy self to the society of the Saints
in earth. Men may pass their time, and what reckon they of a Church? It
smelles in their nose, what should they speak of it? it is a stinking word,
mockage and scorn to them: but I say glad shall thou be to be of that number,
or else I shall debar thee from all society of the Saints in heaven. Thou
shall be excommunicated out of heaven, if thou excommunicate thy self here
from the Saints. Now where lies it? you take heed where your heritage lies, and
you will look to your charters, and evidences diligently; for that cause, you
will look the situation of it. He says that this heritage of the saints is
in the light; there is the place, a lightsome and a joyful pleasant place. The
line of pleasant places says David, Psalm. 16. 6. is fallen to me. It lies
then in the light, it is in heaven, as Peter says in his first Epistle 1. 4.
It is kept and laid up where God dwells: it may well content thee to dwell
where God himself dwelles. Yet where is it? Thy life is hid with God, says
he. O then thy heritage is in God! what can be said more? A fair heritage
lying in so fair a light, even in heaven with God, and in God. I see then all
our life and joy either in this life or in the life to come, is in that light
of knowledge, in that spiritual knowledge: so that a man that has his mind
enlightened to see, as the Apostle says to the Ephesians, the hope of his
calling, the riches of the glory of the inheritance of the Saints; the man
that has this light, he lives and enioyes a great inheritance, howbeit he has
never an ynch in this earth; and his joy is a true joy. And again, a man that
is in darkness, not seeing the face of God; in no measure, knowing nothing:
that man living he is dead, if he were an Emperor, a King, and a Lord. This
country is full of dead stinking carrions, because they want this light, and
they would pull out their eyes that they should not see this light. But woe to
them in the end, when this darkness shall bring an utter darkness, when thou
shall be a dead stinking dog in hell. Get thou this light if ever thou would
see heaven, and have a part of it, which is not in darkness, but in the light
of God. To whom we give all honor, praise and dominion for ever.

Amen.
THE FOVRTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 13, 14, 15. 13 Who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear son,

14 In whom we have redemption through his blood, that is, the forgiveness of
sins.

15 Who is the image of the invisible God, the first borne of every creature.


THe last day, well-beloved brethren, the preface of this epistle being ended, we
entered into the doctrine. The Apostle in his doctrine begins at the first grace
that a man or woman gets in this world in Jesus Christ. The first grace or
blessing of God in time after they are borne into the world (for our grace and
mercy begins before all time ere we be borne, our election began before the
foundation of the world was laid) but the Apostle begins at ye first grace in
time, the first grace in Jesus Christ (for all is in him, nothing without him)
is this christian calling from darkness to light, from that foul puddle of
sin, wherein we lie by birth and nature (nay if thou were borne a king, thou
lie in the foul puddle of sin) we are taken out of hell, for our birth is
in hell, and to hell we go if we have no more but nature. Thou art taken out
of hell and put into heaven, there is the first grace in time. Now to come to
the text, ye heard ye father he gets the first glory of our calling.
Thanking (says he) the father. He is the fountain. Then we heard wherein the
calling consists, not in a bare naming, as one man would call another, but
the Lord in calling us makes us meet; of insufficient for heaven, he makes us
sufficient; of unable, he makes us able; of dead men, he makes us lively; that
is the effectualnes of our calling. Then we heard, whereunto we are called. Our
calling is not in vain, we are called to a lot, a fairer heritage then all the
kingdoms of the world: nay ye poorest soul is called to be an heir of
heaven. Such as are called are called to the kingdom of heaven, all other
heritages are but dirt and draffe. And who owes this kingdom? It is the
kingdom of ye Saints. It is distributed among the Saints: and if thou be not a
holy one, and in their society, thou shall never see that heritage: laugh at
them so much as ever thou will. Where lies this heritage? To wit, in the light
of God: thou never saw such a light. It lies in God, for God is thy light,
and thy life: and if thou be an heir of this kingdom, thy life is hid with
God in Christ. To go forward, yet the Apostle insisteth in this first blessing
of our effectual calling, and makes it more plain in this verse. His words
are, who has raught us out, that is the force of the word: From whence? From
the power of darkness. What more? And he translated us. Whereto? To the
kingdom. What kingdom? Of his son: the son of his love, his dear son,
the Lord Jesus. Now brethren, it is clear, but I shall briefly insist on the
words, to let you see the force and power of every word: for they are of
weight. For the words that speak of heavenly things are not the words of men.
Then the word he has pulled us out; with a force or strength, with a
constraining. I hold it not a simple delivery. Then look to thy calling. It
begins at haling of thee. Thou art so fast holde^ bound, when thou art called,
that if thou be not pulled out with a strong hand, thou will never come out:
and that Christ himself says, No man comes to me (no not one) except the
father draw him, Ioh. 6. 44. Thou will never see heaven, if thou be not drawn.
So our calling must begin at our drawing: and all the powers in the earth will
not draw thee to heaven, if the hand of the Lord draw thee not.

To go forward. He has drawn us out. From whence? From under a power: then
the cause of thy drawing is this. Thou art holden straight, and thou art holden
by a strong power. There was never man holden in iron bands, and prison so
straight, as thou art holden by sin: for as light as thou will skipt and
leap, and as nimble as thou seem, when thou art leaping lightest thou art
fast holden; and the more thou leapest in sin, the faster and the faster thou
art holden: so ere thou get out, there must be a power, and a greater power
then it that holds thee. No man (says Christ) will enter into a strong man's
house before he have first bound the strong man, and then divide the spoil,
Mark. 3. 27. No man will take thee out of sin that strong man, except he have
a power that is stronger then sin. What a power is this? The next word tells
thee; It is the power of darkness. Alas that darkness of Ignorance! O that
terrible clowd of darkness and ignorance, that is in the soul of every man
naturally, without the knowledge of God, of Jesus Christ, of life, and
salvation! O miserable is that soul that lies in that darkness! Then it is the
power of darkness, a strong power, and the strongest power in this world, that
holds thee fast. If thou be fettered with darkness, then in deed thou may
say, thou art fettered fast.

Brethren, there is but two great powers only (as for the power of a King, out,
out, it is nothing but draffe and dirt: the power of the flesh is nothing)
There are but two kingdoms only: The first is, the kingdom of God; the
kingdom of light, is a kingdom in deed. The second, is the kingdom of
darkness, the kingdom of hell, to call it so; yea and all the Kings of the
world shall be under one of these two, either a slave of darkness, or else a
son and heir of the kingdom of heaven. Now the kingdom of darkness next
after the kingdom of light, it is the strongest in this world: and to speak
plain to you, this kingdom of darkness is but the pit of God, a dungeon and a
prison house, wherein the devil first lies all chained; of the which they are
princes lying in bands abiding their damnation: and next them are the
reprobate, Caine, Judas, and the rest, and in the which the devils and the
reprobate shall be tormented everlastingly. So the kingdom of darkness serves
to this kingdom of light, and they who are in it are but the executioners of
God, and rods of his fierce wrath. Now then, it is Jesus Christ that Prince of
light that has drawn us out of that dungeon of darkness, and ignorance. He is
that strong man, whose strength is above all strength of the devil, sin, and
hell. It is he then that has done this: and what more has he done? He (says
he) has translated us, taken us from one place, and removed us to another
place; nay it is not enough to be pulled as it were out of hell, except thou
be taken away and translated as far from it, as thou may look to it. Thou will go back again, if thou be not translated and kept far from it.
Whereunto has be translated us? he says, to a kingdom: we shall hear more
of this kingdom hereafter. A kingdom must keep thee: It is impossible to be
kept, if thou be not kept in a kingdom. The power of a King is required to
keep thee. Whose kingdom is it? not Caesar's, no Emperors in the earth: nay
the kingdom of Spain, France, England and Scotland will not keep thee;
fly, as thou will fly. Whose kingdom must it be then that must keep thee?
The kingdom of his own son, and more, of his own dear son; the son of
his love, that is, the kingdom of his son that he loves so dearly. Well,
and if that be the kingdom that thou be translated unto, thou shall be well
kept: it is the only kingdom that is able to keep thee. For first behold the
King. Who is the King? The King is the son of God, a strong King, Ioh. 10.
28. No man shall take you out of my hand. O the strength of the son of God! He
is God himself: then he is more, a son, and a king, that is so loved of the
father, and in him he loves all within the bounds of this kingdom. So see
first the power, and then the love; and no question thou may say, that thou
shall be well kept. Blessed is the soul that comes to this kingdom: And if
thou be not yet translated to it, strive to it, as thou will be safe. In a
word, will you have wherein our effectual calling stands? I say to you, it
stands in this: In taking us out of one kingdom, and putting us into
another: in translating of thee from the kingdom of darkness, and putting of
thee into the kingdom of heaven: in translating of us from a kingdom, wherein
we live as slaves (fie on it, thou live as a slave here, a bondslaue to
Satan and thy own foul affections) to a kingdom wherein thou raignest like a
king. There is never a slave there, but all are kings in this kingdom: never a
slave there, all are sons; and if they are sons, they are heirs, as Paul
reasons Romans 8. 17. It is a translation from a kingdom of smaller power,
howbeit of a great power, to a kingdom that is infinite. No kingdom is
infinite but Christ's; this is comfortable. Find thou thy self translated
and called to be one of this kingdom? See the infinite power of it, that is
able to keep thee, that thou shall never fall back again to the kingdom of
darkness. And if a man be effectually called, it is impossible that ever he
shall fall back again, no more then the devil is able to take the sheep out
of Christ's hands. Therefore in the Epistle to the Romans 11. 29. Paul says,
The gift of God is without repentance; so that the gift of thy calling is
without repentance: Blessed is that soul that finds it.

To come to the next verse, In whom? to wit, in Jesus Christ the son of God:
What have we in him? A fair grace: we have redemption. Through what? Through
his blood, a dear price. What is this Redemption? Remission of sins. Well,
well, think thou it a small thing to have thy sins forgiven thee? Now weigh
the words, for in the words he comes to another blessing, a second blessing
even the remission of our sins, that is the effect of the former: but to
begin at the first word, In whom. This second blessing is not without Jesus:
no, no; no grace, no mercy, no blessing without Christ; this is plain talk,
would to God we could fasten to him: so he says, In whom, that is in the
dear son of God. Brethren, being once translated, that is, effectually
called and drawn to him, we live not as other subjects under a king. Subjects
would be far Similie.
from their king, and some there is that will not once get a sight of their
king in all their life time: but being translated to the kingdom of Christ, we
are joined near to our king: nay never Courtier was so near a king of this
earth, as we shall be when we are translated to the kingdom of Christ Jesus:
he will not rest till he have us in him. O the tender affection of Jesus
Christ that he bears to them that are in his kingdom! he will have us
ingrafted in him, as the grafts in a tree: he will not let thee stand behind
him, but he will have thee in his body, and joined with him as a member of his
body, and he will have thee feeding in him, that is, upon grace flowing from
him as from the head. So blessed is the estate of that body that is translated
to the kingdom of Christ: as by the contrary, miserable is their condition and
estate, that abide in darkness and ignorance. When thou art in him, what will thou get? he says, we have redemption. It is impossible but if thou be once in
him, thou must have grace of him: once effectually called to his kingdom,
which is that first grace, of force thou must pass to the next grace, which is
the Redemption, and all the graces that are in him; and so no end of grace to
thee. Get me the first grace, get thy heart once entered; I shall promise there
shall be no end of grace, until thou be glorified without end. O then, what is
the next grace which follows thy calling? It is a blessing called Redemption.
A word sounding in our tongue commonly, would to God you understood it aright:
As soon as thou find in thy heart thy self to be effectually called, as
soon will the father say; O sinner, I absolve thee from thy sins. That is
the next blessing. There is none who finds themselves effectually called, but
they will find as it were this sound, I absolve thee from all thy sins. If
thy conscience testify thy calling, it will testify also that thou art
absolved, and redeemed from sin. Let no man speak of these things but they,
who feel in their hearts daily their effectual calling.

Now I shall speak of this Redemption as the Lord will lead me, not
digressing into a common place. What is then this Redemption? to speak it
plain, it is nothing but a delivery. The redemption of a sinner is nothing
but a delivery of a sinner, a setting of him at liberty. So a sinner when
once he be translated unto the kingdom of Jesus Christ, when the father
looks as it were from his tribunal, and sees the sinner ingrafted into
Jesus, so soon will he shake the fetters from him. For in this kingdom there
can be no captivity, no slavery, no bondage of sin and death; they cannot
be in the kingdom of Christ. Indeed in the kingdom of Satan, there is
nothing but slavery, and all are but slaves: but in the kingdom of Christ
there is nothing but liberty. The kingdom of liberty cannot abide a slave:
but all must be free, free from sin and death.

The next thing in this redemption: if we be delivered, from what is it that we
be delivered? (a man that is delivered is delivered from some thing) from
slavery; if thou were a King, thy horse rubber is not so ill as thou art, if
thou be not translated from thy nature and from sin. Thou art delivered from
this when once thou art called: for after we be called and translated, sin
has no more dominion over us. Yet Romans 6. 12
when we are in Christ, we are not free of bands, 1. Ioh. 3. 78. A sinner in
his conversion, albeit his sins be pardoned with God, yet there is a time of
further humiltation given him to feel the seal of the pardon of sins put to
his heart. Confer 2. Sam. 11 with Psalm. 51. Romans 8. 15. Ephesians. 4. 30. Hebr. 6. 1.
no never till the sentence of the absolution come out from the tribunal of
God, and say to thee, I absolve thee.

But to go forward: how is this procured? upon what ground proceeds it? it
is no small matter to get absolution at the mouth of God. What procures it
then? thou must be ransomed: thy ransom is not without a price. The word (...)
imports a ransom, and deliverance by a price of redemption. For brethren, you
must understand that the justice of God cannot be impaired: the infinite justice
of God cannot suffer the delivery of a sinner, except there be a ransom paid.
Thou art conceited of mercy, and never have recourse to that blood that has
ransomed thee: No, no, seek to the price and blood of Jesus, otherwise thou
shall never be absolved: yet this ransom preiudiceth nothing the mercy.
Indeed if the ransom were taken of thee, out of thy own purse; then thou
should never have got mercy: but because it is the Lord Jesus that paid the
ransom, therefore it is mercy and grace to thee. What ransom must this be?
you think much of silver and gold, and would to God the blood of Christ was as
much esteemed of by you, as you esteem of your gold and silver. But I tell
thee, be thou a sinner, all the kingdoms of the earth will not ransom thy
life, the whole kingdoms of the world will not ransom the life of one sinner;
yea not of the poorest lad and less in the world. I speak thus plainly, to
teach you to think of better things, then the things of the earth. Fie on
those things; we should not esteem them precious to us, but to be paltry, the
dirt of this earth, and vanity of this world. What must be the ransom then?
It must be blood. It is impossible that a sinner can be ransomed without blood;
the silliest of you all cannot come to heaven without you be ransomed with
blood. Therefore in the epistle to the Hebrews 9. chap. 22. it is said,
Without blood no remission of sins: And if there were but an evil thought,
no ransom of it without blood; else shall thou dye everlastingly, and the
wrath of God shall feed on thee as fire upon sticks; or else thou shall bring
for thy ransom the blood of another. Then whose blood must this be? surely one
must dye; the justice of God must be satisfied: it must not be thy own blood,
nor the blood of any sinner in the world; take them altogether and offer a
sacrifice of them all, crucify them all, all shall not make a ransom for
sin. Indeed it is true, the wrath of God must feed upon the blood of a
sinner, and upon the reprobate: but that shall not be a ransom for one sin;
so he shall never be redeemed by his own blood. A ransom must have a
redemption, but the blood of a sinner will not do this: for sinners are in
hell, and in hell there is no redemption. So, will thou be ransomed? say not I
will reedeme my self with my own blood. The Lord will take the blood, but
thou shall never be ransomed, but die everlastingly. Whose blood must it be
then? By his blood (he says not by our blood) that is, the blood of the son
of God. And this blood of Jesus Christ is that blood only that can be the
ransom: none in heaven or earth but his blood only, is able to make thy
ransom: and this blood stands best both with the justice of God and mercy
of God, because it is the only blood of Christ that satisfies the justice of
God. Why? by reason of the worthiness of the person, he is a man, a holy man,
without all spot of sin. It will not be thy stinking rotten blood: it must be
that blood of Christ, that holy blood, that must satisfy the wrath of God. It
stands with the mercy of God: for when the wrath and justice of God has
gotten that precious blood, then it is well satisfied: then mercy reaches
from heaven to the sinner; if thou can present that blood, then the Lord will
say: I have nothing to say against thee, I have nothing but mercy and grace to
give thee, I forgive thee all thy sins. Many think this but words; but you
shall see one day what these words mean. In the last words of the verse, that
that he has spoken of redemption, he sets out in a plain term and common
word, even the remission of sins. In the Epistle to the Ephesians 1. 7. when
he has spoken as he has done here, of the remission of sins; he shows
that it is through the riches of his grace. What is all thy remission to thee,
but a free remission through the riches of his grace? thou have not paid a mite
for it; but Christ has paid the price. So these two stand in thy redemption:
In respect of him thou art redeemed by a price; and in respect of thy self it
is nothing but free pardoning. So give him the glory and praise, for I assure
thee, it is of an unspeakable mercy and love, that he has forgiven thee, and
taken the blood of his dear son for thy sin. Have thou not great matter of
praising and glorifying of him? O would to God this cankerd generation could
see and consider this work of our redemption!

Now you have heard of your calling and redemption, two great works and
benefits of God bestowed on his elect, in Jesus Christ his dear son. There
follows now a higher point of doctrine (speeches of the highest things in the
world are either of Kings or Queens, or else of some other great novelties; yet
all are but dirt in respect of this speech of the Apostle uttered according to
the spirit of God. For he speaks of the highest things, that is, even of the
king of glory: so this speech must be a high speech: and yet not so high, but
a man may attain to the knowledge of it, so far as may serve to their
salvation) when he has spoken of this great king, and of his blood by the
which we are redeemed, to let us see how great a king he is, and how precious
his blood is, he falls out into a digression, and he brings out an high
description of the Lord of glory. He may well blabber of him, but more he
cannot: he is so high and excellent in all majesty. All the wits of men and
Angels are not able to express the excellency of the glory of the son of
God: but I leave that. The first part of his description, is from his Godhead;
Who is (says he) the image of the invisible God, the first begotten of every
thing created. Here we have to consider, first how God is called invisible.
And next, how the son is called the image of the invisible God: understanding
these two, we shall get the meaning of the Apostle. We find this often in the
Scripture, especially in the new Testament, that God is called invisible. No
man (says John in his first chapter verse. 18) has seen God at any time: and
in another place he says; No man has known him. And Tim. 6. 16. He dwells
in light that has no access. How is this then to be understood? Look how he
is invisible. This is to be understood of the Father, the first person of the
Trinity: Note.
He is invisible, he cannot be seen, neither by Angel, nor all the Angels in
heaven, neither by man, nor by the eye of the body of man, no not by the eye
of his mind. No creature no manner of way can see him: yet God forbid but we
see him. But how is it that he cannot be seen? He cannot be seen immediately
in his own person, no not all the Angels can get a sight of him immediately. It
is only the son of God that has that sight; for he is in the bosom of the
Father: and therefore no man nor Angel gets a sight of God (I say immediately)
because that all the sight that man and Angel has, is by a mediate person,
the son of God. This is the first.

Secondly, how is it that the son is called the image of the invisible God? I
will not insist here, to bring in all the differences, and sorts, and images,
because it pertaines more to the Schools, then to this place. But thus far I
tell you, I cannot get here in the earth a better example, to let you see how
Jesus Christ is the image of the invisible God in some measure (for who can see
it in a fulness?) then the example of an earthly son. You see an earthly son
will represent the person of his father, in the shape of his body, and in the
linaments thereof; and that not only in the outward accidents, but in the very
substance that he has taken from him, and out of him. No image will come so
near as that image; so that he will represent him in all these three, in
stature, shape, and substance.

Now to come to the son of God, you must understand there are no accidents in
God. All is substance and essence. He will then represent him, first in his
personage, even in a kind of portraiture: for how be it, he be distinct in
person; yet nothing is so like the person of the father, as the person of the
son. Therefore in the epistle to the Hebrews 1. 3. He is called the
character and the very stamp of the father: and he will not only represent
him in person, but in substance also. So that secondly he represents God the
father in a substance taken from him: for the son of God has taken his
substance from his father, in that eternal generation. And thirdly, which is
higher, and this passes all comparison, he represents him not only in a
substance, but in that same substance, in number: so that there is not two
Gods, but one God. Nay the father and the son is but one substance, and one
God in number: and therefore he says, the father and I am one, in the gospel
of John 10. 30. No earthly son may say so, I am in the father, and the father
in me: nay, no son in the earth, how verily so ever he represent his father,
may say so as Christ says: so the likeliest, the quickest, and the best
representing of the image of God, is the son of God. There is no comparison,
and therefore in John 14. 9. to Philip he says, In that thou have seen me,
thou have seen the father also. Why? because I am the brightness of his glory:
so that if thou see me, thou see the father, and without the sight of the
father, there is no life. And thou must begin that sight of him here, or else
thou shall never see him. And if the son were not so lively an image of God,
it were impossible to be content with the sight of the son, but because he
represents the whole majesty of his father; therefore the sight of the person
of the son, contents us, and we rejoice in him. O if we had that sight of
him, as we should have it, then should we rejoice unspeakably: so to end, the
words imports this, when he says, that he is the image of the invisible God,
that he is visible. Then I ask the question, how is the son of God visible?
mark briefly, in his manhood; that is, in our flesh he is visible; because
Jesus Christ in the flesh, is as well seen with the bodily eye as a man; and
when we shall see him in heaven, we shall see him in the very body; so there is
no question of his humane nature. But how is that Godhead seen in the son?
that is a greater question (I will assure thee it must be seen, or else no
life for thee.) But how is it seen? first I answer, with the eye of the mind.
A man has a bodily eye in his head, and again he has another eye in his
soul, which when once it is illuminated by the spirit of Christ, then that eye
shall see better than a thousand bodily eyes: it will pearce up through the
very heavens, and never rest till it come to the sight and presence of God.
Indeed if it be not illuminated, it will see nothing; but being illuminated,
it will pearce through the very heavens, and enter into the light of God, and
see him. So the son of God is seen in his Godhead, by the eye of the mind,
and held fast by the heart, and felt of the heart. What means this sweet
apprehension, that a man will have of the mercy of God, of the wisdom, and
justice of God? what means it? Nothing but a sense of the Lord Jesus Christ;
all is in the feeling of Jesus Christ, who dwells in the heart by faith, as the
Apostle to the Ephesians 3. 7. says: so there is the first way how he is
seen. But yet would not the eye of the body see him? Certainly I would see
him with this same bodily eye. And there is no faithful man, but their
yearning is to see him with their bodily eye. Now how shall I get a sight of
him with a bodily eye? I shall tell thee how thou shall get a sight of him with
the bodily eye. Indeed thou will not get it immediately, but thou must look in
through the veil. There must be a veil hung down over betwixt thee and that
glorious majesty: now through that veil, that glory of God shines in that
flesh of Jesus: so the beams strikes so far, that they pearce within thee,
because thou will see the glory of God through this veil, and thou will not
only see the person of the son in the veil, but through him thou will see
the glorious father. So in a word, when thou come to heaven (thou will now
go here and there on the earth to see glory, and wilt gaze on heaven) I say
unto thee all the glory of heaven will be closed in Jesus Christ; if thou
turn thy eye from him, no sight of glory: so all thy pleasure then will be,
to hold thy eye upon that glorious son of God, and that will be our heaven, and
our joy, through the son to see the father, and to see the glory of the Lord
Jesus clad with our nature, sitting at the right hand of his father. To whom,
with the holy spirit, be all praise, honor and thanks for even,

Amen.
THE FIFTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 15, 16, 17. 15 Who is the image of the invisible God,
the first borne of every creature:

16 For by him were all things created which are in heaven, and which are in
earth, things visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him,

17 And he is before all things, and in him all things consist.


WE showed you the last day (well-beloved in the Lord Jesus) the Apostle when he
ended his preface, he entered into the doctrine, and in it he began at the
first grace and blessing that we get in Jesus Christ in time, which is our
effectual calling, and deliverance from under the power of darkness, wherein we
are conceived and borne. Every man and woman is borne naturally a slave to the
devil, hell, and darkness. The best of us all a slave to hell, the devil, and
darkness: so by this benefit of our calling, we are taken out from under this
slavery, and translated to another kingdom, not of slavery, but of liberty
and light, to the kingdom of his dear son, the Lord Jesus Christ; that is
the first grace and benefit which the Apostle handles. Then from this he
comes to another benefit, and he calls it redemption, or otherwise remission
of sins. Being now by your effectual calling translated to the kingdom of
Christ Jesus, and being ingrafted into him: the next benefit and grace we get
is absolution; we get a free remillion of all our sins, and consequently we
are freed from death and damnation, that follows upon sin. This absolution and
setting of us at liberty from sin and death, is not without a price. The
justice of God, the wrath of God against sin, cannot suffer a sinner to be
absolved, without a ransom and price: so our remission and absolution must be
by a price, and paying of a ransom. But let us see who paies it? Indeed if
we our selves were bound to pay the ransom, never any of us could be safe: no
all the blood of men and Angels, and it were all shed to be a price for sin,
would not redeem a sinner. Then, who paies the ransom? It is said, we have
redemption, not through our blood, but through his blood. It is then the blood
of Christ that is the ransom for our sins; the Lord Jesus has bought us
dear. There was never from the beginning of the world, nor shall not be unto
the end of the world, such a dear price given, as is the price of our ransom,
which the Lord Jesus has given for us. So that which he has dearly bought to
us, is nothing but a free remission. Now, to speak familiarly, we have not
paid a farthing for it, but as it is said in the Ephesians, It is the riches of
his grace toward us; so it is nothing but mercy and grace to us.

Then to come forward: The Apostle when he has spoken of the second benefit,
which we received in Christ, to let us see that this blood is no small thing,
he passes out as it were, in a description of the Redeemer, whose blood this
is: That first we may see the worthiness of that personage. And secondly,
considering his worthiness, may see the preciousnes of his blood, by whom we
are redeemed. And thirdly, that considering these two, we may see how fast and
sure our redemption (made by that blood) stands immovable. It is no small
matter to know how fast thy redemption stands: for if thy redemption were
quarrelled or excepted against, thou would give if it were all the world for
to know the assurance of thy redemption: for Satan and his instruments are
chiefly busied about thee, to make thee distrust of thy redemption, in the
blood of Christ. Therefore the spirit of God in this place and other places, is
busied to confirm thee of the certainty of thy redemption, that Satan nor
his instruments deceive thee not.

Then the first argument of the description, is taken from his Description.
divine substance, he is the image of the invisible God, that is, an essential
image of God his father; and he is one God with the The first part.
father in number, howbeit distinct in persons. Then there is the first ground
of our redemption in the Mediator the Lord Jesus, to wit, the Godhead of
Christ. It is not upon the manhood that our redemption is first grounded, but
upon Jesus Yet ever remember he is a Mediator in respect of both natures, and
not one only, divine, or humane.
Christ, God equal in glory, and majesty with the father. This being the
ground, then it must follow; that his blood is a most precious blood, as it is
called Acts 20. 28, the blood of God. It being so precious, of necessity the
redemption of man, that is made by that blood, must hold and stand fast. And
all the world, yea all the devils in hell, be not able to shake it, nor to move
it out of the place: keep this for a sure ground, when thou art tempted about
thy redemption, and the certainty of it.

Now follows the second part of his description, in these The second part.
words: He is the first borne of all creatures. This argument is from his
eternity, he is without beginning. The Redeemer by whose blood we are
redeemed, as he is God, so he is from all eternity: he has no beginning. So
the second ground of our redemption is his eternity: and if he had been but
in time, and not from all eternity, the price of his blood would not have
redeemed thee. But the Redeemer being first God, and next being from all
eternity, the blood of our redemption must be precious. Yet to insist: The
first borne, I seek no other Commentary to explane this, then the words which
hereafter follow verse. 17. and he is before all things: which is to the same
effect, and it is that that is written Ioh. 1. In the beginning was the word.
In these words, this his being and substance is set down by a certain
allusion to those, yt were first borne in the families of fathers, under the
old Testament: for as they were first borne, and the rest borne after them;
even so the first borne of God the only begotten, he is not only before all
the rest, as Romans 8. 29. but before all creatures men and Angels, borne from
all eternity, Who can declare his generation?
unspeakably. This would be marked, speaking of the eternity of the Redeemer,
he sets it not down simply, saying, he is from all eternity, but he sets
down his eternity in comparison with the creature. Wherefore does he this?
The eternity and the glory of God our Redeemer, appears best by a comparison
with the creature. All things are ever best seen and known of us, by
comparing them with the contrary. The vileness and naughtines of the creature
appears best, in comparison with the majesty and excellency of God.
Therefore the Scripture when it sets down the glory of God, it sets it down
in a comparison with the creature: and by the contrary, when it sets down the
baseness of the creature, it sets it down by a comparison with the Creator;
that the baseness of the creature may be the better seen. Nay thou, who
think ever much of thy self, thou never saw God: if thou saw God, thou
would stink in thine own eyes. All the creatures are but stink and
vanity, in comparison of their maker.

To go forward. In the verse following, when he has set down the eternity
of Christ, he proves it. The argument is, because by him all things are made.
Then never any thing escaped his hands, all past through his hand: the soberest
creature in the world past through his hand. There is the argument. He by whom
all things were created, he must be before all things: but so it is, by our
Mediator, our Redeemer, the Lord Jesus all things were created: Ergo, the
Redeemer must be before all things, and consequently eternal. There is the
argument. The manner of speaking imports, that the Father is the original of
the creation, and it is he who creates, and that by his son, as the dispenser
of the creation: not that there is difference in creation; nay the father and
the son had one power, Ioh. 5. verse. 19. What ever the father does, the same
does the son. But how? Equally in power, howbeit the father be first in
order; and then next the son; and in the third place the holy spirit: yet all
concurres with one equal power and majesty. Now as this is the reason,
proving the eternity: so it is another part of his description: and the third
argument, taken from the creation. Then here thou see, the third ground of
thy redemption, is thy Creator. He who redeemes thee, created thee; thou have
not one Creator, and another Redeemer: nay, he who redeemes thee, is he who
created thee. Then, thy Redeemer being the glorious and omnipotent Creator, the
blood wherewith thou art redeemed must be precious. Mark it (ye who count so
little of the blood of Christ) it being so precious a blood, thy redemption
must stand sure and fast: for it is founded upon the omnipotent Creator.

But to go to the text, when he has set down generally this work of the
creation, he descends to speak in particular of the creatures, and he lays
out them as it were abroad; and the first difference he makes of them, is from
the place of their habitation. Some are in heaven, and othersome in the earth;
he made all these earthly creatures, man, and beast; yea he created the Toade
it self; al is made by his omnipotent hand. Will you look to the heavenly
creatures? the Sun, the Moon, the Angels, thy Redeemer made them all. The
next difference he makes, is from their substance and nature, some visible,
that may be griped and handled; some invisible, amongst the which is thy soul,
that thy own eye cannot see: thy soul is a glorious creature. Then lastly,
among these invisible creatures, he makes a difference, and it is not taken
from the degrees of them, as though he would make many degrees; that is but a
fantasy of men. But it is from the styles of honor. He has made all these
invisible creatures, call them as you will, call them Thrones, Principalities,
Powers, and whatsoever ye please, thy Redeemer has made them all: none has
escaped his hands. Look not that I will curiously scan upon Curiosity.
these words; nay this is not the mind of the Apostle: It is but curiosity to
satisfy a vain headed body, in laying abroad the diverse sorts of these
creatures, made by the Lord Jesus. Whereto tends this? While he does this, he
lays out the glory, not of the creatures, but of him that made them, thy
Creator, thy Redeemer. Therefore when we look to the glory of any creature,
we should be so far from that, to take the glory of the maker and give it to
the stinking creature (as men have done, who by nature are so inclined to
Idolatry, to pull the glory from God, and ascribe it to the creature) that by
the contrary, seeing he is the maker of all, we should take all from the
creature, and give it to the God of glory: though he were an Angel, a king, a
fellow, or servant, we should take all from them, and give glory to the
Creator of them. Stick never upon the creature, but run to the Creator: for
if the creature be glorious, O how glorious is he that created him! For I
assure thee, that never creature has the thousand part of that glory, and
majesty, that is in God the maker of all: nay it is a vanity to enter in
comparison, all the glory of men, Angels, and of the firmament, that are very
glorious and beautiful creatures; yet all in comparison of their maker and
Creator, they and their glory both, are but dirt. When that glory of God
shall show it self, they will be ashamed to enter into comparison with so
glorious a majesty: nay the very Angels hide their face for shame, they do
not behold the glorious majesty of their maker; and will thou then, vile
stinking creature, take this glory of God, or any part of it, and give it to
the creature? O the Lord shall take thee one day in his wrath, and throw that
proud neck of thine asunder, and shall show himself glorious to thy
everlasting shame and confusion! O these Idolaters shall be ashamed then of
themselves, and of these creatures; to whom they have given such worship, which
only belongs to God!

In the end of the verse, when he has fallen out in the particular creatures,
he reiterates again: All things are made by him; so he turns back again, he
tires not to tell it over again. Brethren, will you look to the heart of the
man that speaks? (for these words are come from the heart of the man) These
words rise upon a deep apprehension of the Creator, that glorious majesty. He
has created all things: and again, He has made all things. For when the
heart of man or woman is full of the deep apprehension of the glorious
majesty of God, the mouth is full of sounding, and setting forth his praise.
When thy heart is empty of God, thy mouth will be empty of his praises: and
if thy heart be full of God, thy mouth will be full of his glory.

Now when he has repeated these words to the praises of the Redeemer, the
Creator of all things Jesus Christ, he turns to the fourth part of his
description: All things were created for him, that is, a further point of his
glory, then the former: he The fourth part.
made all things, and that for his own honor, that he himself might be
honored in them. That is a higher degree indeed. If the Creator had made them
for another glory, his glory had bin the less: but seeing al is made for
himself, O the glory of him! nay, all the tongues of men and Angels are not
able to express the thousand part of his glory. All that men and Angels can
speak of it, is but like the blabbery and babbling of a child: so infinite and
incomprehensible is the glory of that high majesty. All then is for his
honor, and all honor and glory be to him for ever, Amen. You see a Craftsman
will build up a fair building, but not to himself; but to a more honorable
then himself. The Lord is not such a builder, because there is none more
worthy then he himself. Then you have the fourth ground of your redemption,
as it is builded upon one God, and upon one eternal God, and one Creator: So
all is built for his honor, he is Alpha and Omega. Then precious must the
blood be, wherewith thou art redeemed. The blood being so precious, the
redemption so honorable, thy redemption must stand fast and sure. Yet to
insist upon this: You see the son of God, who with the father made all things
of nothing. The chiefest respect that he had in the creation, it was all to
himself (and why should not that glorious God have respect to himself?) and
as he had chief respect to himself, so it cannot fail him: nay there is
never a creature made with his hand, but al shall come about and serve to his
honor. He shall be honored by the very gnat, and the fly; for he cannot be
disappointed. Look that circuit Romans 11. 36. Of him, through him, and for him
are all things: all goes about and turns again to him. Seeing this is his
respect, thou, who art his creature, look that thou have that respect to him,
and that above all things; yea above thy life. Prefer the honor of this God
thy Redeemer, and if thou do it, honored shall thou be with him. Would
thou look to it (I appeal to thy conscience) can there be joy in thy heart,
and in thy conscience, when the Lord is not in thy heart? It is true, thou
may be like a beast, have a beastly pleasure; but thou that have not the
glory of God before thine eyes, all the pleasure in the world, will not make
thee have a joyful heart. And if thou will not respect his honor, thou shall
never be honored of him. Yea I tell thee (and the world shall not bring it
back again) thou shall be shamed and shent, if thou were an Emperor: thou
may well run and range for a time, but the Lord shall honor himself in thy
everlasting shame and damnation, be assured of it. Brethren, this is a deep
mystery of Jesus Christ, and I say to you, that ye may think of the glory of
the Redeemer more highly then you do. Fie on these miscreants that know it
not. Mark it, there was never thing done in time, nor out of time, but all was
done for him, and for the honor and glory of the Lord Jesus thy Redeemer. And
not for him, and his glory, as he is the son of God only; but I tell thee
more, all was done for the man Christ, for thy flesh and blood. Thy
predestination that is before all eternity, this election of men and women to
life everlasting (as Paul Romans 8 29. says) tells thee, it was all for him and
his glory as man. There is the end of it then, that he might be the first
borne among many brethren. Will you come to that that was done in time, the
creation of all creatures? All was done for the man Jesus Christ. The fall of
man was suffered for the glory and honor of Christ the man, that thou
might be redeemed with his precious blood; so that the redemption of man is
for the glory of ye man Christ. I shall tell you the ground of it. That
inco^prehensible God in his unsearchable wisdom has laid this plot, that he
would be glorified in his son man; and therefore he would have all to be done
for the honor of that man Jesus Christ. Our predestination, our election, our
creation, redemption and all he would have so done, that they might serve for
the honor of his son clad with our nature. Therefore think thou, that the
end of all is his own glory: Nay, we know not the glory of Christ, we know
not how all things serves for his glory; and therefore we count so little of
all things.

Then again he repeates that part of the description, from the eternity. And
he was before all things: as he said, All things were made by him; so he says
he was before al things. This cannot go out of his mind, few words cannot
content him: would to God we could follow him, and the men of God in this
point. They tire not to speak of him, and of his glory in his creatures: so
deep is their apprehension which they have of him. O it is for fault of
apprehension, that we let the praises of our Redeemer Jesus Christ go by us so
lightly! Well, well, Love to meditate of the excellency of Jesus Christ, and
to speak of his praises.
I tell thee O man, if thou find Jesus Christ at thy heart, and saw his
glory in the creatures, thou would not so lightly pass over his praises.
No certainly, but men they never felt Jesus, nor never apprehended him, as the
men of God of old did. Therefore what is Christ to them, but a word that
pearces the ear and no more? But woe is me for thee, that in this wise
esteems of thy Redeemer. I pray you all in his name, as ye would be saved,
seek to apprehend Christ, and never rest while you find him, in a manner
sensible in your heart; and then I assure thee, thou shall never rest to speak
of his praise, and to glorify him in his creatures.

Now after this, follows the other part of his description. Before he has
described him from his essence, eternity, creation, and from the end of things
created: now in the fifth room he describes him from that, that he sustaines
the creatures. The The fifth part.
hand that made them, holds them up. A man that builds a house, as soon as he
has builded it, he takes away his hand: In like manner, a man that builds a
ship, when he has built her, he holds her not up, but incontinently he takes
away his hand from it. It is not so with our Lord Jesus who has made all
things: nay the Lords hand is still with the work that he has made, and he
holds it up continually. For if he take his hand from thee, and hold thee not
up, thou would fall down in ye dust and turn to nothing. Nay the hand of
his majesty is even with thee when thou art dead, his hand shall keep the
dust of his own: And if thou should cast it in the air, in the water, and
where thou will; yet he shall gather it together, and shall keep the least
pick of dust, that thou shall be resolved into. Then there is the fifth ground
of thy redemption: As it is builded upon a Creator, so it is built upon a
preserver and keeper. Thy Redeemer being such an high personage, the blood must
be precious wherewith thou art redeemed; and thy redemption must stand fast and
sure. Thou may well shatter and shake, but thou shall never fall from it; for
if once thou have griped it by a lively faith, thy redemption shall stand ever
sure and immovable. You see here then a passing majesty in our Redeemer. He
is a God, an eternal God, a Creator, the end of all creatures, and the
preserver of all creatures. Whereunto should I tell this? The majesty of Jesus
Christ passes in glory and excellency. The fulness of God is in him; yea,
even in thy nature. The eternal God is in him; what is it that thou would
have, that thou shall not find in him? Seek nothing without him; and thy
redemption behooued to be wrought by such a person; and the price of thy
redemption behooued to be by the blood of such a person: otherwise thou
would never have been redeemed. Alas, fie on their mouths that speak so
lightly of this blood! Seeing then it behooued to be such a majesty, and such
a blood, that Swearers.
should redeem thee; it tells thee two things. It speaks as the Apostle says,
Heb. 12. the first thing that it speaks is of sin. O sin is a great thing
that procured such a blood, if it were no more then a foul motion in thine
heart! it is so great, that Use of the former doctrine.
it cannot be taken away without this blood. Must it not then be a great thing
that cannot be forgiven, except thou get such a blood?

Amen.
THE SIXTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 18, 19. 18 And he is the head of the body, that is, of
the Church: he is the beginning and first begotten of the dead, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence.

19 For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell.


YOu have heard (well-beloved in Jesus Christ) the Apostle when he had spoken of
the benefit of our redemption and remission of our sins in the blood of Jesus
Christ, he falls out into a fair and glorious description of him, and all to
this end, to let us see the pretiousnes of that blood, wherewith we are
redeemed: that thereby consequently, we might see the surenes of our
redemption by that blood. It being of such value, of necessity we must be
redeemed by that blood, and our redemption must stand fast and stable for ever.
You heard in the description of Christ, first he called him the image, the
essential image of the invisible God: then he styles him the first borne of
all creatures: then he calls him such a one, by whom all things were created:
next, the end for whom, and for whose honor all things were created that are
created: and lastly, he calls him the preserver, vpholder, and keeper of all
things created. So, will you compare him with that invisible God? he is equal
in glory with him, the image of the invisible God, equal with God whom he
represents. Will you compare him with the creature? there is no comparison; for
he is the Creator of all creatures in heaven and in earth; and he infinitely
passes in glory all the creatures both visible and invisible. Now when he
has set him out in these points of glory and majesty, he stays not here:
for as yet he has not told all of him, and he has not set out all his glory:
but in this text he goes forward, and sets him out further in more points of
his glory. This is the difference betwixt the points counted already, and the
points of his glory that follow in the text. Before he has described him as
he is God, the son of God from all eternity; for as he is God properly, he
is the image of the invisible God, whom he represents as the lively character
of his person: so that the points Heb. 1. 2.
passed, are the points of his glory, as he is God. The points which follow,
are of his glory, not only as he is God, but as he is man also clad with our
flesh and nature.

There have past already five points of his glory, as he is the son of God;
there follow other five points of his glory, as Five points of glory of
Christ manifested in the flesh.
he is God and man in that personal union. These are they briefly: He is the
head of the body of the Church: there is one. Secondly, he is the beginning
and the first borne of the dead. Thirdly, he has pre-eminence among all
creatures that ever were, or shall be in the world. Fourthly, he is a man full
of God. Fifthly, in office he is the Mediator, the midman betwixt God and man,
by whose blood the reconciliation of man is made with God his father.

To go forward in that order, as they are here set down, first he is the head
of the body of his Church: these are the words. Brethren, every word would
furnish great matter of speaking; but I am not minded to digress into a common
place. Only I purpose to speak so much for the present, as the words will
furnish. He is called the head. The word head that is given to him imports
sundry things in him: Jesus Christ head of his Church.
greater graces in it then in the body? so the word imports a superiority
full of grace and honor. Even as you see the head of a man, because of the
excellency of it, it is a Lord and a superior, and a commander to the body.
Paul to the Romans says: Who shall separate us from the love of God in Jesus
Christ? As though he would say, not any thing. Nay, if Jesus Christ become once
thy head, be assured he will never part with thee. The Church.
and the body of man: otherwise it cannot be called a body. The body of man
is subject to the head: even so the Church of Jesus Christ is subject to her
Lord, Ephesians. 5. 23. She is his subject, and he is her Lord. The body is
straightly joined with the head; the Church is more straightly joined with
Christ. The head gives life to the body; even so the Church of Christ is dead
without the head the Lord Jesus. Lastly, ye see the body accomplisheth the
person of a man; the head will not make a man, but the body joined with the
head makes up a man: even so the Church fills up the whole man Christ, made of
the head the Lord Jesus himself, and of the body. This for the words.

If this point of the glory of Christ be weighed, that he is the head of the
Church, it is a high point of glory. The Lord has greater glory by this that
he is the head of the Church of the godly and holy ones men and Angels, then
by that, that he is the Dominator over all creatures, over the devil and all
the multitude of reprobates. And as it is high, so it is in communicable, no
not the Angels gets this honor to be called the head of the Church. Let be
stinking flesh, will thou set up a Pope, and call him the head of the Church? A
plain derogation of Christ's honor. Thou will come out with a ministerial
head in the Church: Away with thee and thy ministerial head both: there is no
such thing. Look the whole Scripture No ministerial head in Scripture.
through, thou shall read of a Minister in the Church: but thou shall never
read a word of a ministerial head or Vicar of Christ. But would you know how
he comes to this glory? Yea to speak it so, before he came to this glory,
there was much ado and great stir and business in heaven and earth, and a
great hardness. The Pope he will start up to it at the first dash: before Christ
came to this glory, heaven and earth was moved with a wonderful motion:
before he was exalted to it, he was wonderfully humbled. If you will make a
comparison, it was an easy thing to be the image of the invisible God, to have
created all things, and to preserve them, all was easy: but when he comes to
this, there must be a great change, this son of God is humbled, and his
glory is wonderfully obscured. Read Philip. 2. 6. 7. and there you shall see
the whole manner of it: Jesus (says he) was in the form of God, and he
thought it no robbery: to be equal with God: yet he is not the head of the
Church; what does he then. The Apostle says, he emptieth himself of his own
glory, he makes himself of no reputation. How does he that? In taking on him
the shape of a servant. What an humbling is this, to clothe himself with the
form of an abject servant? Thou think it nothing, but surely it a
wonderful matter, if ye consider it rightly: so then there is a wide step, a
strange step, that he steppeth down from his glory, wherein he stood equal
with the Father. Yet he goes another step downward, being found in the habit
of a man: he to whom all other creatures gives obedience, of his own will
becomes obedient to his father. Wherein stands this obedience? not in doing
only, but in dying. What death? The death of the Cross, an execrable death:
the bitterest death that ever was: nay, never man died so bitter a death as
Christ died. All the death of men and Angels is not comparable to that death of
Jesus Christ, that he died for the redemption of sinful man: There is his
humiliation.

Look now to his exaltation; Therefore (says the Apostle) the father raised
him up to a wonderful highness, and gave him a name above all names, that at
his name all knees should bow. In the Epistle to the Ephesians 1. 20. 21. the
degrees of his glory are set down: first, he raised him from death: secondly,
he has set him at the right hand of his father: that is, he has given him all
power of heaven and earth: and he declares this power. Then he turns to the
Church in particular, and calls him head of the Church: for he could not have
been the head, except he had had flesh and blood. Trowest thou that thou can
come to that honor to be a member of his body, before thou be humbled
first? No, no, thou must answer in proportion to him, in his humility;
otherwise thou shall never be partaker of his glory. This for the sixth part
of the description of the Lord Jesus: in the which mark this, as before we
heard many grounds of redemption made by his blood: so in this point of the
glory of Christ, there is another ground of our redemption. As thy Redeemer is
the image of God, the creator of all things, and so forth, as you heard him
defined before: so thy Redeemer he is the glorious head of the Church; yea he
is thy own head, and thou art a member of him; so thou see not only a
glorious Redeemer, but a sib, a kinsman redeemer. Therefore precious must that
blood be, and of necessity if thou believe in this blood thou must be redeemed.

To go forward. Here follows the seventh part of his description, and the
seventh point of his glory. The beginning and the first begotten of the dead.
Ye heard he was called the first borne of all creatures, because he was before
them all; and not for that only was he called so, but because he gave the
being to all creatures. All creatures were created by virtue of him, and by
participation of that being that is in him; for the first borne in the families
of old, communicated the special blessings to their brethren: even so Christ
because he communicates to the rest of his creatures such special blessings,
as pleases best his wisdom, he is called the first borne of many brethren.
Now he is called the first borne of the dead, because he was the first that
rose from the dead, for there was never man that died that rose before the Lord
Jesus. 1. Cor. 15. 20. He is called the first fruits of them that sleep,
because that al yt shall rise, they shall rise by virtue of his resurrection.
Then what will you have? He was the beginning of the creation: now he is the
beginning of the resurrection of the dead. Then all mercy and glory must come
out of him. No creation without him, no resurrection without him. If you will
consider this, it is a great matter: when he had created man, man by his fall
lost the creation: nay, by thy fall in Adam thou have lost thy creation, and as
thou wast made of nothing; so by this fall of Adam thou turnest to nothing (and
well were that man that is out of Christ if he were turned into nothing.) No,
no; he shall not be turned to nothing, but he shall be turned to worse then
nothing. So man by his fall lost his creation, and death seized upon him, and
leaves him not till he turns him into dust and powder. And if Jesus comes not
in, now after that man has lost his creation, he would never be a creature
again. Therefore the second benefit, which is greater then the first, is; that
my body shall rise again: so in comes Jesus Christ, and that creature that
was brought to nothing, he creates him anew again, and raises him up more
glorious then ever he was before. And if thou be in Christ, thou shall be made
more glorious then ever Adam was in the first creation. Then, would you have
another ground of your redemption? Would you now have the preciousnes of it?
Thy Redeemer is the first borne amongst the dead. All dead bodies shall rise by
virtue of him, and so that blood is precious; and if thou believe in that
blood, of necessity thou must be saved. Yet he leaves not of (for who can
speak enough of the glory of Christ Jesus?) He subioynes: That in all things
he should have the pre-eminence: Even as he is man, he goes before all the
Angels of heaven, and they are subjects to him. This is one dominion and
lordship he has. You heard before that he is the Lord of his Church, but in
these words is understood a more universal dominion, reaching even to all
creatures that ever were created: that among all he should be the first, and
have the pre-eminence. This is that universal dominion that he takes to
himself: There is given to me (says he) all power, Matthew. 28. 18. And Roman.
4. 9. He died and rose again, to the end that he should be Lord over both the
dead and the quick. Such like to the Ephesians 1. 2. He was placed far above
all empire and dominion. And in the Epistle to the Philippians 2. 9. He was
raised unto a wonderful height. So this is a general Lordship, and it is not
only as he is God, but as he is man. This is a great glory to a man, to be
set above all the creatures, and to rule them with a fleshy hand. The Lord Jesus
Christ he rules all creatures, even with a fleshy hand now glorified. Whereof
comes this dominion so large? of his resurrection. He rose to be Lord: nay, be
thou sure if Resurrection.
thou risest from the dead, thou shall rise to be a Lord. For the end of thy
rising from the dead, is to be a Lord: a King greater then Caesar. But Jesus
Christ, he rose not only to be Lord, but to be the Lord of lords, because he
rose first from the dead. Who ever rose or shall rise, they rise by virtue of
him, and his resurrection; and it must follow therefore by good consequence,
that he by whose virtue we rise, must be Lord of lords: he must be the first
and foremost in the rank. The Lord Jesus, he goes before all creatures that
ever were created. So, would thou have another ground of thy redemption? Thy
Redeemer is not only the head of the Church, and Lord of it; but he is Lord
over all creatures: yea even over the devil thy very enemy. The very hand of
the Lord Jesus hales him hither and thither, as it were in a rope: he carries
him, he pulls him, he draws him here and there, as he pleases where he will.
Must not that blood be precious, must not thy redemption be sure? Only believe
in that blood, and thou shall be saved. Romans 3. verse. 25. God has set forth
Christ to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. Away with merits
paltrie; fie on thee and thy merits both. Thou think thou can not be saved
but by thy merits, as though the blood of Christ were not able to redeem thee
without thy merits: away with such vanity. The blood of Christ is sufficient
to redeem ten thousand worlds; yea ten thousand millions of worlds.

To come to the end. In the verse that follows, the Apostle insists upon this
dominion universal of Christ, and lets thee see by two arguments, that the
Lord Jesus must be first of all creatures, and have the pre-eminence over al.
The first argument is taken from that fair and glorious personage. The second
argument is taken from that excellent office that he bears. Never creature
bare such an office, to be the Mediator and reconciler of God and man. In this
doing he meets with that that might be objected. Is he not a man? what office
has he above other men? and what a large dominion is this? He answers,
indeed he is a man; but a man full of God: and as for his office, he is the
great Mediator, such an office as never Angel bare, and therefore he is the
Lord of Lords. Then the first argument proving the dominion universal, is in
these words: For (says he) it has pleased the father that in him should
allfulnes dwell: there is the words. The ground both of the excellency of the
personage, and also of his office is this: It has pleased God the father. If
you will ask how is it, that he is so excellent a personage? He answers, it is
of the good pleasure of God. It is a pleasure, and a good pleasure, that
blessed will, that decree, that has passed from all eternity before all time.
It pleased the father, that Jesus Christ should be such a worthy personage,
and a Mediator: so the person of Christ and his office has a far fetch, and
it comes of a decree as old as God himself, even from the eternal good will
and pleasure of God, from his eternal decree. So then, we learn it comes not
by chance, that Jesus was made such a personage, as men think, of things in the
world; but it was ordained from all eternity. Then again, it comes not by
chance that Christ should be a Mediator: but there is a decree past on it. In
a word, never thing fell to him, but by a counsel and plat from all
eternity. The crucifying of him past by a decree. There was never a nail
stricken into his hands or feet, but all was done by a decree. Then not to be
curious, to ask why was it that Christ should be filled with God? the Apostle
will have thee to leave thy curiosity, and he answers thee, that it was the
pleasure of the father: so this one word cuts away these thorny questions
concerning the mysteries of Jesus Christ. For there is a thousand things in
him, that should not be inquired of. And it were alms to ding thy teeth in thy
throat, that curiously wilt go Curiosity in vain questions.
and search out the reasons of all things in Christ, and why he did this and
that, and suffered this or that. May thou not vain body be content with
this answer, It has pleased the father so? It has pleased him, that the
fulness of the Godhead should bide still in Jesus Christ for ever: for it is
said, that the fulness of God dwells in him. And ye know that he that dwells,
bides still. Now what a fulness this is, you shall hear hereafter. In him
(says he chap. 2. 3. of this same Epistle) is all treasure of wisdom and
knowledge. And again verse. 9. In him is the whole fulness of the Godhead bodily
dwelling. Then the fulness that is in Christ, it stands not only in these
graces, with the which the man Jesus Christ is endued above his fellows (never
man gat or will get such graces, as the man the Lord Jesus has gotten: never a
one has gotten such wisdom, such knowledge, and such holiness: nay, all the
Angels have not gotten such graces as he has.) But it is not only these
graces, wherein this fulness stands, but he is filled with the fountain of all
grace. The fulness of the Godhead it self is in him; that is his fulness; such
as never creature got, or shall get in heaven or earth. It is a vanity to
speak of the graces of Angels; in comparison of him, all the graces of men or
Angels, they are as it were but rivers and streams that flow from that
glorious head, that is full of God. So there is no comparison of his fulness.
We have received (says Ioh. 1. 6.) all of his fulness. So all our fulness
stands in his fulness, that is derived into us. As this is the reason proving
his dominion; so it is a part of his glory. Look to the glory of that
personage thy Redeemer, he is not only a man, but a man full of God; and so
must not this blood yt comes from him be precious? Therefore it is called the
blood of God, Acts 20. 28. Yet only believe, and I assure thee in his name of
thy redemption, if thy sins were never so great. Fasten thy heart once on
him, and thou shall find mercy. Take his blood in thy hand, and sprinkle thy
heart with it, and thou shall find grace Heb. 9. 14
and mercy to flow to thee through the same, otherwise it had bin better for
thee, that this blood had never been shed. As for the rest I leave it till the
next day: concerning the Mediator only thus far.

As the glory of the image of the invisible God, and the rest ye have heard me
speak of, is infinitely excellent: so this, that he is a man full of God, this
is the glorious personage of thy Redeemer. It tells thee, that that blood that
came out of that body, was more precious then all the things in the world. That
blood yt was powered out of his foot, out of his hand and side, al tells thee
that it is excellently precious, and beside that, of great necessity. And
further, it tells thee, that sin against God is great, and greater then thou
can consider. Fie on thee vile creature; if thou wist what it were to sin
against God, thou would shake and tremble: nay never a joint of thee would
bide fast, for fear of that fierce wrath to come on thee. And again, if thou
knew the virtue of this blood that takes away thy sin, thou would cleave
fast to it, and make much of it; but thou considerest not this; and therefore
thou know not the preciousnes of this blood: for if thou know not thy
sin, thou shall not know the preciousnes of that blood of Christ that takes
away sin. And again, it tells us of that passing justice, and of that
infinitnes of the wrath of God (O that infinitnes of the wrath of God!) O
wretch, thou wottest not The wrath of God for sin.
what it is: but if it lighted on thee, it would rush thee to hell. So the
precious blood that was shed for sin; without the effusion of the which thou
could not be redeemed: It tells thee, I say, that the wrath of God for sin
is infinite, and if it were but an evil thought. It strikes upward, and
strikes the Lord in the nose, and kindles his wrath against thee: therefore
fear and study to mortification. And more I tell thee, that notwithstanding
thou art once redeemed, and by this blood of Christ freed from sin and death,
by such a ransom; yet if thou take delight in sin, the murderer in his
murder, the oppressor in his oppression, being once redeemed, thy sin if it
were but an evil thought, it is a thousand times the greater by reason of thy
redemption. For why? it brings with it the contempt of the blood of Christ. And
thou sinner, who takes pleasure in weltring in the foul puddle of sin, what
do thou? thou go on with thy foot, and treads the precious blood of the
Lord Jesus under thy foul feet. And therefore thou shall be challenged in that
day, not only because thou wast a murderer, an oppressor, and a harlot; no,
no, there shall be thy challenge, villain thou treadest under thy foot the
blood of the covenant, the precious blood of thy Savior, that should have
redeemed thee from thy murder and sin: and therefore well were it for thee,
if thou had been a Gentile that never had heard of this covenant; and
therefore if thou mindest not to leave off thy sin, in pain of thy life,
thou come not to hear a word of Christ. For why? the more thou hear, the
greater shall be thy damnation. And there is not one word spoken this day, but
if it be not effectual to change thy evil life, so that thou begin to leave
off thy sin, but it shall increase thy damnation in that day. Therefore take
my counsel, either amend your lives; or else come not to hear one word of this
Gospel. For this word, as the Apostle says, shall be either a savor of life
unto life, or else a savor of death unto death, and it shall slay thee with a
greater dead stroke, then if a thousand rapiers were thrust through thee. I
beseech the Lord Jesus to touch thee with his word, that it may be effectual
in the hearts of the hearers; so that they may amend their lives to their own
weal, and his glory. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be praise.

Amen.
THE SEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 20. 20 And through peace made by the blood of that his
cross, to reconcile to himself, through him, through him (I say) all things,
both which are in earth, and which are in heaven.
YE remember (beloved brethren) the Apostle, when he had set down that great
benefit of the redemption of mankind by the blood of Jesus Christ, he falls
out into a high description of the son of God, tending to this end, to let us
see the preciousnes of that blood. He set him to be first the image of the
invisible God, a high style. Secondly, he styles him to be the first borne of
all creatures. Thirdly, he styles him to be the Creator himself, by whom all
things in heaven and earth were created. Fourthly, he calls him to be the end
of the said creation of all creatures, for whose honor and glory all
creatures were made. Fifthly, he styles him to be the preserver and keeper of
all the creatures made by him. Sixthly, he comes forward, and considers him
not only as he is the son of God, God from all eternity; but as he is man
also: and he makes him to be the head of the Church, as he is God and man. Then
he calls him the first borne of the dead, as he is man; who by his power shall
raise up all men that shall rise from the dead. Then he calls him the
universal dominatour of all the creatures; not only calls he him the Lord of
his Church, but he calls him the universal dominatour of all creatures in
heaven and earth: yea the Lord over the very devils themselves. He has the
pre-eminence before all creatures. Now he insists upon the last point, and he
gives two arguments to prove him to have the pre-eminence of all creatures, and
before all creatures. The first argument is taken from the worthiness of his
personage, In him (says he) is all fulness. And God the Father decreed, that
all fulness, not only of the graces of God, but of the Godhead it self, should
dwell in the man the Lord Jesus. The second argument is taken from the dignity
of his office; he is the Mediator by whom reconciliation is made betwixt God
and man. So brethren, this day (by Gods grace) we have to insist in the office
of Christ's mediation.

We have then in the first verse a description of the Mediator. He says not
simply he is the Mediator, but in place of the name he gives a description of
the name. The Mediator is The office of the Mediator.
he, by whom it has pleased the father to reconcile to himself all things in
heaven and earth, by making peace through the blood of his cross. Now because
the Mediator is defined here from the benefit of our reconciliation: therefore
we shall speak of this benefit only, so far as the words shall furnish. If
you will look what is before, and weigh the words of this text; you shall find
these things, namely to be considered, concerning this benefit of our
reconciliation. First, the word of reconciliation, what it means. Secondly,
who is the reconciliator, to wit, the Father. Thirdly, who moves him to
reconcile all things. Fourthly, who are they that are reconciled. Fifthly, to
whom they are reconciled. Sixthly, by whom, to wit, the Mediator. Seaventhly,
after what manner. All these circumstances are in the text, partly before, and
partly after, in these words read. Now for the word of reconciliation, it
signifies agreement, and atonement, and friendship made betwixt two parties
that were at variance together. This way generally is the word taken; even so
our reconciliation with God: It is an agreement betwixt God and us that were at
variance, enmity and open war together; fighting in such sort, as never two
contrary parties fought together. When we were enemies (says Paul, Romans 5.
10. we were reconciled by the death of his son. Yet brethren, the word
imports more, not only it imports an agreement, but (to speak it so) it
imports a reagreement, and a renewing of an old friendship between two that
first were friends, and then became foes by offense done against the other
party. Even so our reconciliation, it is a renewing of the Reconciliation what
it is.
old friendship that was betwixt God and us in the creation; and because
thereafter we offended him, first we become enemies to him, and through sin
fight against him most cruelly. So this word includes three things within it:
first it includes an old friendship we had with God, as old as our creation.
For we were created in the beginning friends to God, and he was our friend,
and we were his friends. Secondly, it imports a variance that followed the
creation, and that by our foul defection in breaking of the covenant. Thirdly,
it imports a renewed friendship after that enmity, and that by the Mediator
the Lord Jesus Christ. I remember Paul, writing to the Ephesians 1. 10. he has
a word that he calls recollection, which imports a gathering together of them
that were scattered, and it includes all these three, that we have spoken of
reconciliation. First, it imports a union, which we had with God at the
beginning. Secondly, that after there was a scattering. Then it imports a
gathering together of us by the Mediator. Now this for the word.

In the knowledge whereof, you may learn the three estates of man from the
beginning. First, we stood in friendship and amity with God: he was ours and
we were his; and we were bound with him in a covenant. Why should we not
remember this our first estate and condition in our creation? we stood then in
amity with God, such as never was betwixt creature and creature. It has no
comparison in this world. Secondly, we learn our enmity, the state of
variance and disagreement. Enmity with God.
The estate of battle and of war with God: a miserable estate! For like as
it was the felicity of man to be at one with God (for if thou had all the
world, and all the confederacy with all the Kings on the earth, and with the
devil himself; thou have no part of blessing, thou have no happiness, if thou
be not at one with God) even so our enmity with God is our misery: cursed is
that creature that is enemy to God. Thirdly, in ye word we learn our last
estate, our renewed amity with God again. We began with friendship, we fell
into emnitie; we return again to friendship, and this is made by the
Mediator. If you will compare this friendship with the old friendship, it is
both greater and better then the old friendship. The new friendship that is
gotten by this reconciliation The reconciliation we have by Christ is
unchangeable.
is unchangeable: the old friendship was changeable. We became his enemies,
and he became ours: but this new friendship it must stand, and shall stand
immutable in the Mediator, and it shall be immutable to thee: and if thou be
truly reconciled to God, thou shall never be an enemy to him again, nor he
to thee. For Jesus Christ, who has made the peace, shall hold fast the band of
peace betwixt thy God and thee: never any was truly reconciled with him, but
he shall stand firm and stable in that reconciliation. For Christ makes
intercession for thee; and thy reconciliation shall stand as long as his
intercession stands, which is everlasting: therefore thy friendship shall stand
everlastingly. It is a plain blasphemy to say that a man once truly
reconciled to God, can fall from grace again: and it is as much to say, as
that Christ shall not continue in his intercession. So our last estate is most
blessed: only hold thy eye on thy Mediator that makes intercession for thee,
and I will assure thee thou shall never be severed from him: nay heaven and
earth shall go together ere thou be rent from that God. Thus briefly for the
word.

Now to come to the second point; who is the Redeemer, and the author of our
reconciliation. In the verses preceding The second circumstance.
it is said, It has pleased the father that in him all fulness should dwell;
and that by him all should be reconciled to himself: so the author of our
reconciliation is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who was the author of
the enmity? who was the cause of the variance? where begun it? Man himself he
begun the variance. But who begun the friendship? began man it again? Ioh. 3.
16.
began Adam the reconciliation? thought he of it? No, he never thought of it to
begin it again. God the father, who called upon him when he was run away,
began the friendship. Thou begans it not: nay, there was never such a thing as
a thought of it. The father he began it, even when thou wast running headlong
to thy destruction, turning thy back upon God. Thou may be at odds with God
when thou will; but thou will not be the beginner of the friendship again,
except The love of the father the fountain of reconciliation.
he of mercy begin it with thee: so it is the father that is the author and
fountain of our reconciliation. Yet brethren, what is this that the father
begins the friendship, being the party adversary, and the greatest, and the
worthiest party? This is a rare thing, that one of two parties adversaries,
and the worthiest, should seek reconciliation of the other, that is nothing in
comparison of him. So this lets us see a passing love and mercy in God, that
began first to seek thee. But yet what a party adversary was he? to wit, he
was that party adversary that was offended by man: he did no offense to man,
but man offended him. Indeed there had been less matter of marueiling, if he
had begun the feude and enmity: but he brake not a jot to man of his part, of
the covenant made with him. But man, false man, kept never a point of his part:
and therefore as man is called a lier after that breach of promise to God his
maker; so this is found that he who has received the wrong, and the more
strong and worthy party, that that party will begin the amity again. This
is that incomparable love, that in the Romans 5. 18. is spoken of. There is not
such a love to be found in heaven or earth, that the party that is offended
and has done no offense, that he should begin the peace: yea more, should
give his only begotten son, his dear son, to be a ransom for the offense
done to him. There is that incomprehensible love of God toward man. What
tongue is able to express yt thousand part of that love? Nay, all the wit of
men and Angels is not able once sufficiently think of it. Let be to express
it as it is in thy self. Thus far for the second.

Now the third is, what moved the father to enter into new friendship with man?
saw he ought in me, in thee, or in any man, to move him to be reconciled with
me, or thee, or any man? It is said: It has pleased him: then it was his own
pleasure, (...), beneplacitum eius; this was it that moved him to be reconciled
with us. This pleasure, it was not a thing in time, What the love of the father
is.
but it was a decree that past in heaven from al eternity. A decree, that
proceeded of mere love and grace, and not of a foresight of any good that
either he saw the^ presently in man, or that he foresaw should be in man
hereafter; but it was of a free grace, without any merit of man. And therefore
in his own time for the fulfilling of this decree of reconciliation, he sent
his only begotten son into the world, to preach this word of reconciliation
to the world. So this word, It has pleased him, excludes all merit and
worthiness in man; and it lets thee see that that friendship was without thy
merit; yea to speak Merit.
it so, against thy merit. I know not a merit that thou have, but the merit of
hell and damnation.

Come to the fourth circumstance, who were they that were reconciled? It is
said, It has pleased him to reconcile all things. The fourth circumstance.
And then in the end of the verse, he lays this universality in the parts of
it, All things both in heaven and earth. This universal particle All things,
extends not to all creatures; yea it extends not to all reasonable creatures;
it extends not to the devils; no reconciliation with the devil nor with the
Angels that made that foul defection. I tell you more, it extends not to all
men and women: no reconciliation with the reprobate for ever: they are in rank
with the devil himself. This reconciliation, it extends then to the blessed
Angels, who have stood from the beginning. It extends to men and women, not to
all, but to the chosen and elect ones from all eternity. Now there is no
question of sinful man. All will grant that man, who was chosen to life,
howbeit before he was an enemy to God, yet now in time he is reconciled to
him. But all the question is about the blessed Angels that fell not from God.
How can it be said, that they are reconciled to God? Well, I will not be
curious, if you will consider these blessed Angels in themselves Whether the
elect Angels be reconciled to God by Christ, or what benefit they have by him.
apart, from the body which is the Church; indeed it is true, they cannot
properly be said to be reconciled, because they were never at feud or enmity
with God (for reconciliation, as ye have heard, imports a feud) but if you
consider them in the body, in a manner they may be said to be reconciled in
the body: for howbeit they be bound up without the body, yet they must ever
be considered to be in the body, and so in the body they get a new
conjunction with God, through the Lord Jesus Christ. The estate of the blessed
Angels before the coming of Christ it was this: They hung as it were by the
head (to speak it so) by a stitch, as certain members severed from the body:
when Christ comes in, he couples them together, he makes man and Angel all up
together faster then ever they were before. So to leave this, you may see the
very blessed Angels, who fell not from God, they got a benefit by the
Mediator, as man does. I say the blessedness of the Angels was not perfected,
till Christ came: They were indeed blessed, but they had not a firm blessing,
while Christ came, who established their blessedness. And therefore as it is
said, ye Abraham long before the Lord Jesus came into the world, saw him and
rejoiced; so the Angels they saw the Lord Jesus long ere he came; and when he
came, they rejoiced at his coming. And it is said in 1. Pet. 1. 12. that it is
their pleasure to look in through that veil to see and behold the Lord Jesus.
Thus much concerning the Angels.

Then the thing I note for our selves is this. Will you mark what care God
has had of man? God, he would not perfect the blessedness of the Angels without
man: he would not give them that blessing till Jesus Christ the man the
Mediator came, and joined them with man. So you may see the care of God
toward mankind, to have been very great and very loving. The Apostle to the
Hebrews 11. verse. 39. 40. comparing the old Church with the new, says; That
the Saints that suffered before, they got not the thing promised, because God
had a respect to us: Even so he did with the Angels, he would not give them
their full blessing without us, vile stinking sinners. What regard is this that
thy God should have of thee? Lastly, I will speak this to thee, that esteems
so little of the communion with the body of the Church. O miserable creature!
vain lowne! thou shall never be blessed till thou be joined with the Saints
of God in the Church. Vain soul, if thou be not joined with the body of
Christ which is his Church, thou shall perish for ever, thou shall go to hell,
I give thee this doom.

Now follows the fifth circumstance of this reconciliation. The fifth
circumstance.
To whom is it made? It is said to himself, not to another. It has pleased
him to reconcile all things to himself. Then all blessedness is in that
conjunction with God: join thy self with Blessedness wherein it consists.
him, and thou shall be blessed; if thou be not joined with God, thou shall
never be blessed; seek blessedness here and there, yet no blessedness but with
God. The Angels have no blessing, but in that they are conjoined with God
through the Lord Jesus Christ: yea, I tell thee, the earth, and the heaven have
no blessing, but in that amity and friendship with the creator. O what vanity
is it to think thou have any blessing without the conjunction with the
creator! But to speak of man: thy reconciliation must be with the father, with
whom thou art at enmity, to whom thou wast an enemy, whom thou offendedst:
therefore thy reconciliation must be with God. Mark it: a sinner, sin
against whom he will, slay and it were all the world; in so doing, he sins
not so much against man, as against God. No, no, it is against God himself, as
David says, Against thee, O Lord, have I sinned and done evil in thy sight,
Psalm. 51. For sin is the transgression of the law, 1. Ioh. 3. 4. O foul
butcher! O oppressor and sacrilegious thief! Thou that do any evil against
a man, thou do it not so much against the In every sin a man fights against
God.
person of the man, as against God himself that is in heaven: and so man that
sins, must be reconciled with him, because it is against God that the sin
is committed. The creatures also that stood and fell not, are at enmity with
thee: for when thou wast enemy to God, thou wast enemy also to the very
creatures, and God and the creatures were enemies to thee, (O well had it been
for thee, who art a Reprobate, that thou had been made a stone, when thou
becamest an enemy to God through thy sin! for thou made not only God to
be thy enemy, but thou made all the good creatures of God to be thy enemy:
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars and firmament, the Angels in heaven; yea
these very senceles things of the earth, and the beast, and the foul of the
air) the earth groans under thee, and it would be quit of thee, as of an
enemy: it will not bind up friendship with thee, if thou be an enemy to God.
So if thou be an enemy to God, thou art an enemy to all the good creatures of
God, and they are enemies to thee: but if thou be in band and conjunction with
God, the heaven and all the creatures will be friends to thee. The enmity and
friendship that stands with any creature, it depends upon the feude and
friendship with God: so that if thou All the creatures in enmity with all
unbelievers.
be at feude with God, all the creatures will be at feude with thee; and if
thou be at friendship with him, all the creatures will be thy friends. Mark
this well: marvel not that the Sea should drown thee, and thy house smother
thee, that art at strife with God through thy villainous life: wonder not, it is
a wonderful thing; that they that are at feude with God, dares enter into a
house or go out of it, or venture on the sea. But the consciences of men are so
locked up, that they will not understand nor fear this: but the vain sleeping
lowne, says peace, peace. Oh but the judgment comes with such a rattle about
the ears of the lowne, that he cannot get once space to say, God is
merciful! Have you not marked this in these bloody murderers and the rest?
Nay thou that criest peace to thy soul, when thou art doing all the mischief
and villainy thou can, and if thou go on so, the fierce wrath of God and
terrible judgment shall oppress thee, ere ever thou be aware of thy self.

Now follows the sixth point or circumstance to be considered in
reconciliation. By whom is it made? There must be a mediator, or else it cannot
be made. Indeed the first friendship was made without a mediator, because man
and woman they were created at the beginning holy, without spot of sin: but
at the making of the next friendship, because of the offense there must needs
be a mediator to pass betwixt thee, and that fire that was ready to devour
thee: for thou thy self dare not appear and sue for it immediately: for thou
art not able to stand in the presence of that terrible God, before whose face
there goes a fearful fire that would consume thee at an instance. So there
must be a Mediator. It is true that the Father made this reconciliation of his
free mercy, and of a passing grace he bare to mankind. Would to God we had
a sense of it; but I tell thee, this grace and mercy was dear bought (it is
not an easy thing to a sinner that has violated so holy a majesty to get
access again.) This mercy, from whence this reconciliation comes, it springs
out of the Lord Jesus, as a fair green tree in a garden: it springs out of
the very blood of the Mediator the Lord Jesus. For why, the mercy could never
have been nor had place, if the wrath and justice of the Father had not bin
satisfied with that blood: there could never have been such a thing as mercy
to the world, if that blood had never been shed: and so say, I, this mercy and
grace springs up sweetly and graciously, out of the blood of Christ. So,
would thou have mercy? lay hold on the blood of Christ; and as thou
would have part in heaven, rest never while thou find that blood sprinkled
in thy conscience, and thy heart washed with it. Now from whence comes this
Mediator? how is he given to thee? The father (says the Scripture) loved the
world, John. 3. 16. So the Mediator, upon whom this new band of mercy and
grace rises, is given of the father to the world, and that in love. There is
nothing in this new band, but mercy upon mercy: mercy in the beginning;
mercy in the progress; and mercy in the end. Indeed it is not without
justice and wrath; but thou art spared, and the justice and wrath it strikes on
the Mediator; so that that is justice and wrath in the Mediator, it is mercy
and grace to thee. Nay he has not spared his own son; yet he has spared
the stinking sinner. Wilt not thou be thankful for this benefit? Well, if
there be not a sense of the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, look not for
heaven. I warn thee that art a King, an Earl, a Lord, a Baron, a subject,
man, wife, less, and lad; if ye have not a sense of this mercy of God in
Jesus Christ, ye shall never see heaven.

Now to come to the last circumstance: after what manner is this reconciliation
made with sinful man? The manner is set down in these words, making peace by
his blood shed on the cross. The father reconciles us to himself after this
manner, by making peace with us in the blood of Christ. Brethren, when two men
are at variance, the third man will step in and entreat the person that is at
variance with the other, to be friends with him, and he will obtain it,
especially if he be an entire man. But O that son of God! that dear and that
well-beloved! when he comes in, it is not fair words, it is not supplications,
that will do the turn; but him it behooued to go to suffer death: and that
dead stroke of hell, that should have lighted on me, and thee, and should have
bruised us everlastingly, he casts in his head, and that stroke lights on him.
It cannot be holde^ off thee, by no other buckler, but by his head and blood
shedding: without blood no remission, Heb. 9. nay, nay, either shall thy blood
pass for it, or else the blood of the Mediator. O it is a terrible thing, to
have to do with the wrath of an infinite God! there is nothing can satisfy
him, but the precious blood of his own dear son: and no other death can
satisfy him, but a cursed death, the death of the cross: a painful death to
be nailed quick to a cross. It was the figure of the death of hell. He was
pained upon the cross with the pains of hell. If he could not escape such a
death who was an innocent, how will thou, who art a sinner, escape that
terrible death? O what death shall abide thee, if thou be not in him! These
words then teach us two things: first, the greatness of the enmity, that could
not be removed but by the blood, and execrable death of the Mediator. For if
this enmity had bin but a silly and small feude, what needed all this, that
the son of God should dye such a death? Wherefore should all this ado have
been? wherefore should he have suffered such extremity? So, if there were no
more to tell thee the greatness of sin, the death and the blood of Jesus Christ
shed on the cross tells thee. O sin is great! and yet the world will not
hear it, but the soul stinking sinner will wallow in it more and more. O
sinner! sin is foul and fearful. An evil thought is a great and terrible
mountain. The first world had experience of this greatness of sin, being
without Christ. Our Gentles in Scotland with the rest felt it. I tell thee,
before this blood came and the full time came, there was nothing to hold off
the dint of the wrath and stroke of God, that that world found before the
coming of Christ. What, was it a small matter to be an enemy to God? was it a
light thing to sin? No, no, for all that time before Christ's coming, for the
greatest part, God was doing no other thing, but striking and hashing on
sinners, slaying her, and slaying him. Sin reigned all the time to death,
says Paul Romans 5. in the end all perished, and went to hell for the most part,
except some very few. And I tell you, this world thinks there is no hell, and
very few get this grace: for so long as that old Tabernacle stood, few got
entry to grace. So they, miserable souls that lie now in torment, they
testify and cry the horriblenes of sin: and O the preciousnes of the blood
that has freed now the souls of men from sin! Now when he came into the
world, I put it out of question, The calling of the Gentiles increased the
number.
whereas one was saved before, hundreds were saved after. For Christ says, for
once the blood was shed, men and women thronged into heaven, Matthew. 11. So all
tells thee the blessedness of thy estate that has fallen in this time. If thou
had any sense, if thou were sent out naked to beg thy meat, thou art
happy, considering this time wherein thou art borne. O the happiness of this
time! when the blood of Christ runs abroad as a river to save sinners: but
we are blinded, and (as I said before) that number is drawn in, and beginning
to be abridged, and the force of the blood is drawn in and begun to be
lessened; and the force of faith is nothing now, in respect of the former time
of the Primitive Church and days of the Apostles: and therefore as it began
with a handful; so it shall end with a very handful: and blessed is that man
that can strive to throng into heaven, through this blood of Jesus. Now the
Lord work this in our hearts, that as we seek for the kingdom of heaven; so
we may throng in at it, through this blood of Jesus. To whom be praise and
honor,

Amen.
THE EIGHT LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 21, 22. 21 And you which were in times past strangers
and enemies, because your minds were set in evil works, has he now also
reconciled,

22 In that body of his flesh through death, to make you holy and unblameable,
and without fault in his sight.


THese days past (beloved in Jesus Christ) we have heard a high description
of the Son of God the Lord Jesus, in the which he is painted out in a
marvelous glory. In the last part of this description, ye heard it was said,
that by him, as the Mediator, it pleased the Father to reconcile to himself
all things both in heaven and earth, making the peace by the blood of his
cross. In the which words the Apostle turns over upon the whole Church, that
he has spoken of the son of God. For all his glory tends to the weal of
his Church; all to the reconciling of the Church with God the head, in him as
the Mediator. Now brethren, in this text that we have read, verse. 21. he
applies this blessing of reconciliation to the Church of the Colossians in
special; And you also (says he) has he reconciled. In the which words, as
before he turns over the whole glory of Jesus Christ upon the universal
Church; so now he turns it over upon this particular Church of Colosse. For
the glory of Jesus Christ the son of God, as it is the glory of the whole
Church; so it is the glory of every particular Church: and in so doing, no
question he applies it to every particular person in the Church: so that the
glory of the son of God is mine, and thine. Beleeuest thou in him? All this
glory is thine. There is no point of it in him, but thou shall have the use of
it: so that no man or woman that is in the Church, needs to envy this glory in
Jesus Christ. It is natural to men and women, to envy the glory that others
have above them: yea, subjects will envy the honor and glory of Princes
above them. But thou who art a subject in Christ's Church, thou needs not to
envy Christ's glory. All his glory is thine; yea thou ought to have no
pleasure but when thou look upon his glory and exaltation.

But to come to the words. We see then in these words, there is a particular
application of this benefit of reconciliation to the Church of the Colossians.
The text first offers us to be considered, who is the reconciler. Now (says
the Apostle) he has The Reconciler.
reconciled. Who is this that has reconciled the Colossians to God: Before
speaking of the reconciliation in general with the whole Church, he said, It
has pleased the Father to reconcile all things to himself in him: but now
plainly in the text the Reconciler is changed. It was the father before; now
the son of God, the second person of that glorious Trinity, he is the
Reconciler. Wherein the Apostle lets us see that in this work of
reconciliation, this son of God is not only a patient, not only a Mediator
to suffer for our sins; but he is an agent, a doer, a reconciler. As he is
the Mediator of the reconciliation, he is not only a sacrifice, in the which
the reconciliation is made; but he is a sacrificer offering himself in a
sacrifice to God for our sins. For look how willingly the father offered him
a sacrifice for us, as willingly, gladly, and joyfully offered he himself for
us: for if he had not died willingly and gladly in the nature of man, but
against his will as men will dye, his death would never have done men good, nor
ransomed their sins. So this is a point of our belief, that as we believe
he died; so we believe he died willingly: and that Christ died willingly.
they who crucified him, were not so willing to crucify him, as he was willing
to offer himself to be crucified. If thou have not this faith, thou have no
good of the death of Christ. So the person reconciler, is Christ. Then to
amplify this benefit of reconciliation, he calls them to remembrance of their
miserable estate before they were reconciled. What were they before? Who were
in times past (says he) strangers and enemies, meaning to God: and where was
this enmity? In the inward mind. And why? Because their minds were set only
upon evil works. He will not speak to them of this benefit of
reconciliation, before he aduertiseth them of that estate they stood in before
they were reconciled. Mark it: there is no sight of the mercy of God in Jesus
Christ, no presence of mercy and grace, except The misery of man without
Christ.
in the mirror (to say it so) of the past misery we were in: so that except
thou look to that, thou shall never see, as thou should see, the benefit of
mercy and grace in Jesus Christ. There is no sinful creature that is able to
ponder and weigh aright in the heart, the greatness of the blessing of God in
Jesus Christ, except he take the blessing and mercy, and put in a balance
with the misery, and see which of them weighs down: otherwise thou shall
never know the weight of mercy, and glory, if thou take it not from the
misery of that stinking nature, and filthiness of thine; neither shall thou
ever be touched with that sound joy, except the sense of misery go before. He
that has never found himself in hell, has never found himself in heaven:
for all the sense of heaven breaks out of hell.

Now to weigh the words. The first word wherein he sets down their miserable
estate is this: Sometime (says he) ye were strangers far off. From whom?
From him, who should have bin their greatest friend; whose domestics they
should have bin, from God, and so from the Commonwealth of Israel, from his
Church. If thou be a stranger from God, and then from his Church, there is no
life in thee: thou art but a dead rotten member in sins and offenses, Ephesians.
2. 1. Live as thou will, breathe as thou will, have thy senses as quick as
thou will; fling here and there, and leap as lightly as thou please; thou
art but dead, and more then dead, and dye shall thou everlastingly. Yet mark
the words: he calls not them simply strangers and aliants; but he says, they
were made strangers; to let us see that all this strangenes from God, is not by
our creation: we were created friendly with him, and his domestics; but by our
own defection, we have made our selves of domestickes and household children,
strangers. And therefore it is said in Esai. 59. 2. Your sins have divided
between me and you. So it is thy sin, it is not that natural substance of
thy soul and body; but it is the corruption of the substance that makes thee
a stranger from God. Yet mark the words, he says not that God was estranged
from them; but that they were estranged from him. No, no, the Lord is not the
beginner of this strangenes, he turns never first upon thee, but thou turnest
thy back first upon him: he never draws from thee that sweet countenance of
his, first; but thou drawest thy countenance from him. For brethren, to speak
the truth; when thou have turned thy back upon him, and estranged thy self
from him; yet if thou be one of his elect, his love toward thee shall never
leave thee nor turn from thee. O that love of God! he loves a sinner that is
as it were spitting upon Gods love.
him: for the love of God is inalterable. And when thou have played thee with
thy own counsel, served thy lusts in thy own time, the Lord vtters that love
toward thee and calls thee home again. So there is the first degree of their
misery. Yet it is not all said: he comes on with another degree, and higher
then the first; Sometime ye were strangers, yet more, enemies. One man may be a
stranger to another, and yet not his enemy; but says he, ye were not only
strangers, but you were enemies also. The words import not only a secret
hatred, but a plain and open hostility: they fought against him: there was
never so hot a battle betwixt man and man, as was betwixt God and us, before
the reconciler came: there was never Before the calling of the Gentiles by the
Gospel.
so much blood shed, as was from the time of the fall of Adam to the coming of
Jesus Christ. So there is a higher degree of misery; not only strangers, but
enemies, fighting against heaven with an vplifted hand. This degree must follow
the former. It is not betwixt God and man, as it is betwixt man and man. One
man may be a stranger to another, and yet not his enemy; but if thou be a
stranger to God, thou art his enemy. A stranger to God is an enemy to him.
For Christ says, He that is not with me, is against me. Beware then of the
first. Turn not so much as thy foot from him: but strive to be at home with
him, and to creep to his house, and to creep under his board: otherwise thou
shall take up a banner against him.

Now to go to the words: where begun this strangenes and enmity? where is
the first seat of it? which is the fountain whereof it springs? It is not the
body first: it is not in the eye, howbeit it be an enemy to God; if thou
stand in nature thou will lift up a proud eye, testifying that thou art an
enemy to God: it is not in the mouth, howbeit thou blaspheme God therewith: it
is not in thy hand, suppose thou fight therewith against the heavens; but it
begins within thee, and the chair wherein it sits is thy soul. If thy soul
were not an enemy, thy eye and the rest of thy members of thy body could not
be enemies: It comes out of the heart that defiles the man, says Christ Matthew.
15. 18. Then again it begins not at the inferior powers of thy soul, at the
sensual appetite: it goes further, it begins at the mind of man; so says the
Apostle, that is to say, at the chiefest power of the soul, the Ephesians. 2. 3
mind, the eye, and the light of thy soul. The Mistrisse, the Queen, that
should have kept all clean, she has set up a vile whore, and troubles the
whole soul. This reason which should have made the soul to see and know God,
she is the first enemy Very reason in the natural man an enemy to God.
of God. The very reason whereby thou not only excels the beast, but even thy
self is become a whore, and greatest foe that God has in man, and abuses the
whole soul of man with her foul cogitation: and it defiles the whole parts of
the body, the eye, the hand, and all the rest with her motion. What is the
cause of this, that the first seat of this enmity is in the mind and reason
of man? because all her musing is upon evil works; she is set upon them. Nay,
muse what thou will, if thou be but in nature, all thy musing and thinking
shall be but enmity against God. For thou shall muse nothing but of evil
works. Ye know (brethren) the first deviser of any mischief, is the first
enemy, and not the executor: he that abuses others is the first enemy and
lowne, and should first dye. But so it is, the first deviser of all evil
works is this corrupt mind of man. If it come not first in thy mind, would
thy hand commit the evil? No, no, it is first in thy mind, and then she puts
it out into the inferior parts of the body. And therefore if thou gets not
grace, the first thing that the Lord shall torment, shall be thy mind: and he
shall so torment it, yt thou shall cry, would to God when I had had a
reasonable mind, that I had been a beast. Let the Philosophers speak of it as
they please, as Plato that sets up the mind as a Queen, and the Pope with his
philosophical reason disputing so finely, as he troweth, extolling nature, and
free will to good. Note.
That mind of his and his rabble, shall one day be wrung and rent in pieces,
with such torments as the tongue of man and Angel can not express. And
therefore it is that Paul commands so earnestly the Ephesians, to be first
renewed in their minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. The greater reason not sanctified, an
argument of greater damnation.
It is the mother of all mischief and Idolatry: thou have not to glory in
thy reason, if so be it be not sanctified; yea the greater conceit thou have in
reasoning, the greater damnation, except it be sanctified in that spirit of
Jesus Christ. This is the estate they were in before they were reconciled,
which the Apostle remembers them of, that it should never go out of their
mind. Let never the stink of nature go out of thy mind, but Let never the
soul sent of thy natural corruption go out of thy mind.
weigh it diligently, that thou may give thanks and praises to God for his
grace and delivery. Next he shows the manner how he reconciled them to
himself and his father; for all is alike: mark the manner. It is twofold.
First, in that body (with an emphasis) of his flesh. The meaning is this, he
reconciled you by assuming and taking to him a true fleshy body: he calls
it, The body of the flesh: to let us see, that the body which Jesus Christ
bare in the world, and that he bears now in glory at the right hand of the
father, is not a fantastical body, or an appearance of a body without
soliditie (as the Heretics called it) a mathematical body, a maiestaticke
body. All is but vanity; but it is a real body, as real as ever the body
of man was, or is, of flesh, blood and bones: otherwise The body of Christ a
real body.
he could never have been a Mediator to us, and we could never have been the
better for him, either in his death or life. Then the first manner of our
reconciliation is the assuming of this flesh, of this body of man: he is
first the son of God, Body and soul.
then he takes to him the body, the flesh, and the soul of man. The next word
is, by death, that is, by becoming a sacrifice in that body which he took to
him. For otherwise if he had not offered up his body, he could have done us no
good: for it is the pierced body, the shed blood, the vexed soul, the
tormenting of the man that redeemes and saues thee. And therefore Christ
suffered in soul.
when thou have recourse to Christ, go not to him, as he is in heaven, or as
he was going up and down in Iewrie; but go to him hanging on the Cross, that
is, to his blood to sprinkle thy soul; otherwise he shall never profit thee.
The Father was not appeased in his wrath until he got his blood; nothing will
pacify the conscience, but only this blood of Jesus. Now mark: the Father
reconciles us to himself; the Son again he reconciles us to himself. This
is common, but in this work there is a great difference betwixt the Father and
the Son. The Father when he reconciles us, he never changes nor alters his
condition; he sits still in that majesty on his throne of glory, keeping that
kingly majesty of his. What does he? He humbles his son (for be assured that
thy reconciliation could not be purchased, but by the humbling of God, not in
God must be humbled before thou could be reconciled unto him.
the person of the father, but in the person of the son) and therefore the
son he leaves his throne, and steps down from it, to reconcile us to his
father; and comes down here to the earth, and as it is said in the Philip. 2.
7. He abased himself, by taking unto him a vile flesh (howbeit it be clean
without sin, yet it is vile in respect of that glorious majesty) he takes on
him the shape of a servant. What more? In that flesh he becomes obedient to his
father (that sits still on the throne) to the death. And what a death? to the
death of the cross. So there is the difference. The father wrought it not,
altring his majesty and glory, but the son wrought it, altring his
majesty: and that so obediently, that the Angels wonders at it; yea they can
never wonder enough, to see that glorious majesty of the son of God so
humbled as he was. Now, howbeit it differs in the The father as merciful as
the son.
manner, yet the father and the son are equal in mercy. The father is as
merciful as the son, and the son is as merciful as the father; they are
equal in glory in this work: the father gets as great glory in this work
as the son; and the son gets as great glory as the father. Now to the
father and the son be all honor, glory, and praise for ever and ever, Amen.

Before (brethren) when he spoke of the reconciliation in general, ye heard
the whole Church in general was reconciled by this blood and death of Jesus
Christ. Now ye hear that this particular Church at Colosse, is said to be
reconciled by this same blood and death. Yea more, I say not only this, a
particular Church (as for example the Church of this town) Every one of gods
elect reconciled by the blood of Christ. Christ's eye set upon every particular
person.
reconciled by that blood, and death of Christ, but there is no man or woman
that is chosen, but they are redeemed by that blood. And this is a true saying;
when the Lord died on the cross, and shed his blood, his eye was not only in
general spread abroad, throughout the whole earth; but distinctly set upon
every particular person. It was set upon this same Church of Colosse, and upon
this Church of Edenborough (as certainly as ever it was on any, that was
present at his death.) Howbeit, it was not a Church at that time, yet his eye
was set upon it; and he said in his heart, I will die for the Church of
Colosse, and for the Church of Edenborough. Yea his eye was set upon every
particular body; yea upon the poorest elect lad, or less, now presently
living, or which shall live hereafter. And he said, I die the death for this
particular person; otherwise if he had not said it, that he would die for me,
and die for thee, thou, nor I, could not have been saved. I give thee a token
to know that his eye was upon thee in the time of his death. Find thou
reconciliation and redemption in thy heart? say then he had an eye to me, and
the force of his death has comen to me. For what auailes a general knowledge
of his death, if thou have not a particular applying of it to thy self?

A question may here be moved; how is it that it is said that Christ shed his
blood for the Colossians, seeing they were not as yet called, but remained
enemies till Epaphras came amongst them, and preached the word of grace, and
salvation in Jesus Christ, and by his travel has drawn on some to the faith
of Jesus? I answer, the reconciliation made in the blood of Jesus
Reconciliation by the blood of Jesus of two sorts.
is of two sorts; there is one made by the merit of his death: there is another
made by the efficacy and powerfulnes of his death. When he suffered, that same
very time and hour of his suffering, all nations that ever were to be
reconciled to the end of the world, were reconciled by the merit of the blood
of Jesus Christ. But if you will look to the effectualnes, it followed long
after. Scotland, Edenborough, that abode long after enemies, at that same
hour, by his merit were reconciled. For why? that blood that was shed, merited
that salvation: but the effect of that merit followed. A man that will have the
merit, must feel the efficacy and power of it. When he is following his own
lusts, lying out at his whoredom and villainy, at that same time (it may be
said truly) he has the charter of the merit in his keeping: howbeit until the
time he look about him, and begin to see Jesus, the virtue of Christ's merit
vtters We must feel and find the virtue and power of Christ's death working in
us, Romans 6. 2. 3. 4. 5. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.
not it self unto him. But when he finds it, then he remembers he had the
merit. Howbeit, he wist not that ever he had it, till he found this working.
Then he rejoices that Christ suffered on the Cross for him.

In the last words he sets down the end of their reconciliation. The end is,
that thou may be presented holy, unreprovable, without spot or wrinckle, as
he says in Ephe. 5. 27. First then, we are reconciled to the end we should be
holy; cleansed of that filthiness and sin, wherewith we were polluted before;
and The end of our reconciliation is holiness.
being clenfed, we should be unreprovable; for the cause of reproof is
sin: It is sore to abide a reproof of God. This holiness is not gotten
perfited in this life, but we must strive to it continually. Then think not
that thou art reconciled with God in effect, if thou find not holiness begun in
this life: if thou find no holy motions in thy heart, and actions in thy hand,
think not thou stand in friendship with God. For as ever two stand
together, these two must stand together unseparably, reconciliation with God,
and holiness of life. And if Holiness and reconciliation inseparable.
thou have not a sanctified heart and life, thou abidest a rebel to God. Thus
for the first end.

The other end is expressed in the same words; That you may (says he) be
presented before him: that is, that you may get his presence, and he yours: and
being presented, ye may get your felicity for ever. For brethren, that full
blessedness of man stands in the sight of God. Then mark this lesson; upon this
holiness follows our presenting before God: So it is he or she that is holy,
that gets the presence of God. If thou be not sanctified, if thou live not in
some measure in a holy life here, I Heb. 12. 14 Mat. 5. 4. 5
give thee this for doom, thou shall never see the face of God, that is, thou
shall never be blessed; but shut in hell for ever. But to stick upon the
words, the word in it own language, to present a man personally in such sort
that he has the eye of him upon the Judge, and the Judge upon him. then these
words import, that we shall one day be personally with the same body and
soul, and no other, presented before the Lord Jesus Christ. No, no, there
shall not be such a thing as one shall Every man must personally present
himself naked before God
appear for thee, but thou shall personally present thy self, and stand naked
before God there. If thou stand up in holiness, and see thy Lord thy Judge with
a holy eye, he looking on thee with a holy eye, there shall be a mutual
pleasure: for if thou be presented holy, thou shall find such a joy in thy
heart, as it is wonderful to speak of, and God shall rejoice of thee, Luke
15. So there shall be mutual joy on both parts: we shall be presented before
Jesus, not as before a Judge, but as a The faithful presented to Christ as a
bride to the bridegroom.
bride before the bridegroom: so speaks Paul 2. Cor. 11. not as folk to
abide the trial: nay, there is no judgment for thee that shall be presented
as a bride to thy bridegroom, with whom thou shall live in joy and pleasure
for ever. You see when a bride is presented to a bridegroom, there is joy. O
the joy that thou shall have, when thou shall be presented to thy Savior Jesus
Christ as a bride! who can express and think of the greatness and excellency
of that joy? Then as thou would have this infinite and unspeakable joy with
thy husband Jesus, strive to holiness, and seek to be presented to him, and
then it shall be well with thee. Now in this Jesus with the Father and the holy
spirit, be all praise,

Amen.
THE NINTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 23. 23 If ye continue grounded and stablished in the
faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have
heard, and which has been preached to every creature, which is under heaven,
whereof I Paul am a minister.
WE have heard (brethren) from the beginning of this Epistle, first the
salutation the Apostle uses to the Church of Colosse. Secondly, his preface
before the doctrine. Thirdly, we came to the doctrine it self, wherein ye
heard propounded briefly the benefit we have in Jesus Christ, our calling to
this estate of grace, our redemption in the blood of the son of God. Then
after to let us see the pretiousnes of this blood, and the necessity of this
redemption by this blood, he fell out into a fair and high description of the
son of God, setting him out in many points of his glory, partly as he is
God, the son of God only; partly as he is both God and man the Mediator,
the Lord Jesus Christ. Of the which whole points of his glory, we concluded
the blood of such a glorious personage, must be exceeding precious; and so it
behooued that this blood should ransom us, and ransom the world. Yea if we
look to the preciousnes of it, it is not only sufficient to ransom a world;
but to ransom ten thousand worlds.

Now (brethren) we ended the doctrine the last day: it follows in this text,
that we have now read in your hearing, that Verse. 23.
we speak of the exhortation that the Apostle uses, and subioynes to the
doctrine. The exhortation is in a word, Abide in the faith, persevere, stand,
and keep it fast; for it is a precious thing. The first argument he uses to
persuade them to this Perseverance in the faith and constancy in religion an
infallible argument of our reconciliatio^ with God.
perseverance, and abiding in the faith, is from that benefit of
reconciliation, whereof he spoke before. And he reasons after this manner: If
you abide in ye faith, you are reconciled, you stand in amity with God, you
are friends to him, and he to you: and therefore if you count of such a
benefit, stand fast in the faith.

Now to come to the faith, and to mark such things as God will give the grace,
and time will suffer. If so be (says he) you abide in the faith. As if he
would say: you are reconciled, and stand in friendship with God, under this
condition and restriction; If you stand in the faith: if you stand in the
faith, you shall persevere in the friendship with God. Then ye see, it is the
perseuering in the faith of the Mediator, the sticking fast by the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the Mediator of our reconciliation, that makes a man to stand
in the reconciliation, and friendship with God. Stick to him, by whose blood
thou art reconciled to God, and thou shall stand fast in that friendship with
God: As by the contrary, so soon as a man lets the hold go of the Mediator,
he shall fall from the friendship of the father; and falling, his last estate
is worse then the first. If he were miserable before the reconciliation, he
becomes ten times more miserable then ever he was. And it had been better
for him, that he had never believed, nor bin reconciled to God; but as he was
an enemy, so he had continued an enemy. So you see what it is to stick to
Jesus Christ by faith in him, unto the end.

Again, he says not, if you persevere in well-doing, in holiness, 2
Perseverance in the faith. Sundry kinds of perseverance.
but in the faith. The perseverance he craves, is in the faith of Jesus Christ.
There be sundry sorts of perseuering: we are said to persevere in faith, in
hope, in holiness, in weldoing, in a godly life; and finally there is not a
grace, but we are said to persevere in it, and exhorted to persevere in it.
But the first ground of all perseverance is, In the faith of Jesus Christ.
Mark it well. And if this ground be laid down, the abiding in Jesus by a true
faith, all the rest follows willingly. Keep me faith, and stand in faith,
thou shall keep hope of necessity: keep Faith the eye and light of the soul.
faith, that eye and light of thy soul; thou shall keep holiness, thou shall
walk in the light, and bring out the works of light. On the contrary, let go
or forsake faith, thou shall let go hope of life; let Christ go out of thy
eye once, he shall go out of thy hand: and look never to do any good turn. A
faithless body cannot do a good turn to pleasure God: yea though it should
seem the best thing in the world; yet wanting faith, all is but dung before
God. So you see, what should be the first thing we should begin at: to wit, at
a standing and perseuering in the faith of the Mediator. Abide in this, and
all shall follow of their own will, holiness, weldoing, and the rest.

In the words following, he shows us the way, how to persevere in faith; If so
be that you abide in the faith, grounded, founded. The word is borrowed from
building on a ground stone; How to persevere in faith.
the second word is, and established, even as you see a man set down in a
chair, resting without moving or wagging, sits still immovable. If thou will abide in faith, thou must be grounded and set down, and must not go
wagging, fleeting and flowing, as you see some do. Then what is this
foundation whereupon thou must be grounded? It is even this same faith: Thou
must be grounded on it, or else thou shall not abide in it; and if thou be not
built upon it as upon a building, thou shall not abide in it. Faith then must
be the ground. It must not be built as it were upon thy heart; it is the
falsest ground The heart must be built and rest on faith.
that ever was; but thy heart must be built on faith. For faith in Jesus is a
fast and established ground. Now what is the seat? even this same faith. Faith
must not sit upon thy heart, which is but a ioggling seat, a loose seat; but
thy heart must be turned over upon the faith of Jesus Christ, that is a fast
seat: so that all the powers in the world will not move it. In a word, if Rest
not night nor day till thou seele thy faith lying under thy heart, and thy
heart resting firm and stable on it.
thou abide and persevere in the faith of Jesus Christ, be built on it; rest
never while thou rise up upon it as a building. Rest not night nor day till
thou feel it lying under thy heart: rest not till thou find thy heart settled
without staggering, sitting down as it were on a fast stool and seatc. If
thou be once settled and builded, all the waves of temptations shall not once
move thee, thou shall stand fast like a house built on a strong rock: but if
thou be not built and settled on it, the least blast of wind of false doctrine
and of affliction, will blow thee from Matthew. 7. 24. 25.
thy faith; and thy faith from thee like chafe. Alas, see we not this
inconstancy in fleeting and flowing? A vain lowne, he is here to day, and
away to morrow; a Protestant to day, a Papist to morrow; a Christian to day, a
Turk or Pagan to morrow, and what ye will have him. What is the cause of this?
O that heart of thine, was never established by grace! A vain and empty
heart, was never grounded upon faith in Jesus Christ. And therefore it is that
these miserable creatures are carried away as they are: and be assured, let thy
heart abide in that miserable estate of inconstancy till the Lord come, thou
and it shall be turned into hell headlong, as the lightest and rottennest thing
in the world. Thus much for this first perseverance in faith.

He ads to another perseverance, and he says; If you be not 2 Perseverance in
hope of the Gospel.
moved from the hope of the Gospel; that is, if you persevere in the hope of
all these fair graces and mercies, especially of that life everlasting,
promised in the Gospel. Now (brethren) would you know what this Gospel is?
The Gospel of Jesus Christ is like a mirror or looking glass; so the Apostle
calls it, 2. Cor. 3. 18. In the which we may see many fair things. First we see
Jesus Christ the Lord of glory: and then all the fair graces that follows on
him; thy remission of sins; thy justification; 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4.
thy sanctification; the heaven and life; and all things: what would thou
have more? Now the eye that looks in it, is not the eye of the body, but the
eye of faith, quicker and cleerer than all the bodily eyes in the world. The
hand that holds up that mirror, is faith: faith is an eye and a hand; it sees
and holds. Now as faith is looking in the mirror to Jesus Christ, and to all
the graces that follows him, and to that life and glory that never shall have
end; in comes this hope, and she awaiteth constantly for the accomplishment of
all those graces, Hope what.
and of that life everlasting, that faith sees in the mirror: and she awaites
till Christ come with that life in his hand, with the glory in his hand, that
he shall bring with him for them, who awaits for him. As soon as he comes, the
mirror falls down: The word goes away; there shall be no more preaching, when
he comes. And as thou sawst him before in the mirror; so then thou shall see
his glorious face as he is: so the mirror shall go away, that faith of thine
shall go away. What shall be then in steed of all this? Thou shall get that
that Paul says 2. Cor. 5. 7. Now we walk by faith, but then we shall walk by
sight. Our rejoicing shall be in the sight of him for ever.

Now brethren, you shall mark here briefly: it is not enough to abide in the
faith of the promise, wherein thou have promised to thee life everlasting; but
with the faith thou must have a hope awaiting constantly for the thing
promised: as thou beleeuest the promise, that is, the word; so thou must hope
for himself and his coming; and that life he brings with him. Join these two
together, faith in the promise; and hope in the performance; of necessity thou
shall get life. That hope shall Faith and hope companions. Romans 5. 5. 6.
never make thee a shamed. It is a thing impossible, that a man that waits for
Christ's coming can be disappointed; for heaven and earth shall perish ere that
man be disappointed of that he hoped for: so then says he, if you be not moved
from the hope of the Gospel: I say then, so long as we live, we must not want
Take away the Gospel, ye take away faith and hope.
this mirror of the Gospel. Take away the mirror, thou shall see naught. Take
away the Gospel, thou shall not have faith. Take it away, wherein shines all
these heavenly graces, thou have naught to hope for: and if thou hear not of
a life after this life, thou can not hope for it. So these men in the world
(not only among Pagans, but amongst Christians) Lords, Barons, that have no
pleasure in hearing of the Gospel to look into Jesus, that is in it; trow
ye if thus they continue, that they shall go to heaven? think ye that they
can have faith and hope? no: no more then a dog has, and their death shall be
worse then a dogs death. As ever then you would have life, faith, and hope,
keep the Gospel. Thou will look in a glass to deck thy self, and wipe off
the spots of thy face: but will thou look to the Gospel, thou shall see a
more beautiful face, even the face of Jesus: and the more thou look How
powerfully the power of Christ transforms us if we look upon his face in the
Gospel.
on it, the more it casts out these beams of glory, and transformes thee from
glory to glory. So as ever thou would have the sight of Jesus, let thy
pleasure be to look into the mirror of the Gospel; for he, who takes not
pleasure to look in the mirror, shall never see the Lord Issus face to face.
This is a decree, and I pronounce it against all these contemners of the
Gospel: they shall find it sure, they shall never see Jesus Christ, but to
their damnation. Thou, who contemnes All conte^ners of the Gospel go to hell.
this mirror of the Gospel, thou art the devils slave, and shall be condemned
with him in that great day for ever. O if we should be careful to keep this
preaching of Christ! it stands us upon pain of life and death. See then what
enemies they Preaching.
be that would take this mirror from us, by the which we are Papists.
comforted and kept to life everlasting.

To come to the next words: The Colossians might have said, what a Gospel is
this thou speak of: It is that which Epaphras taught to us. Is it his, in
whose hope we should abide? Countest thou so much of his Gospel? It should
seem that the person of the man offended them. He answers, it is the same
Gospel that Epaphras preached, that I recommend to you. Well, you see this how
ready we are to be offended with the good Gospel of Christ, and to cast off
the word, because of the persons of men, because he is a silly man. This our
nature is a stumbling nature: we have a stumbling heart, stumbling like a
horse. Thou will hear a man, and accept of him and his doctrine: and thou will
hear another, and count little either of him or his doctrine; even as though
thy faith should lean upon a man, and not upon the Gospel. What have thou to
do with the man if he speak the true Gospel should thou be holden back
from the word, because of the baseness of the man? This cannot be gotten away
this day in Edenborough. Ye see again he is very carnest to commend this
Gospel of Epaphras, and to remove the slander that they took up against him.
It teaches all preachers, that every one of them recommend the doctrine taught
by others, so it be the same doctrine, let the person be what he will; this
man has delivered sound doctrine. A good lesson for preachers.
Yea if he have greater graces, he should recommend him which has the
simplest; as Paul recommends Epaphras. So it sets not one minister to detract
another; but if he deliver sound doctrine, he should recommend him, and speak
to his praise: for look what dispraise or reproach thou put to the man, it
turns over upon the Gospel, that the man preaches; as experience this day
plainly proves. For see ye not men, who because of some infirmities of the
preacher, either will contemn the doctrine of the Gospel which he preaches,
so that they will not abase themselves to come and hear him; or else if they
come, they are so preoccupied in mind, that they begin Prejudice against the
person of the preacher keeps many from profiting by him.
to scoff at it. Away with this kind of dealing, and beware what you do,
when ye either speak evil of the preacher, or suffer others to speak evil
of him: for if thou do so, thou shall not fail to loath the Gospel, and so
consequently overthrow thy self.

Now the arguments of the recommendation follows. Ibid you stand (says he)
in hope of the same Gospel, because it is the same Gospel that has been
preached to every creature under the heaven, through the whole world. As if he
would say, Epaphras has not taught a doctrine diverse from mine, and I another
diverse from his; but all is one, and the same doctrine and Gospel, that he
and I both have taught. Then take up the note, which Paul here gives thee of
the true doctrine; seeing our life A note of the true Gospel of Christ.
stands in the truth of the Gospel, we should be careful to know the true
Gospel. Look if it be that Gospel that has been preached to every creature,
to all the world: Christ says, Preach to every creature, Mark. 16. 15. but this
is not enough. The Papists doctrine has been preached throughout all Europe,
and further: yet it is not the true Gospel of Jesus Christ. There must be yet
more then this universality: look if it be in the beginning preached by the
Apostles, and in their days; if it be so, thou art sure thou have the verity
of the Gospel. But thou will say, how shall I know this? Look their writings,
go no further. The surest warrant is their writings. Look Paul's writing,
Peter's writing, and the rest of the Apostles and Evangelists The written word
our warrant.
writings, their books shall testify of their writings: for they have written
no other thing but yt they spoke. There is not a sentence left out that ever
the Apostles taught, that is not written in this book of the new Testament, as
concerning the substance of it. So if thou have their writings, be assured thou
have their Gospel preached by them; and consequently Christ's own words and
his Gospel. And if an Angel would preach to thee another Gospel, then this
written Gospel in the old and new Testament; then say thou, Anathema to it,
Gal. 1. 6.
cursed be thou and thy Gospel both; cursed be thou Papist and thy gospel,
which is nothing else but the vain traditions of men. And as you would be free
of the curses of God, fly from a Papist and his gospel both, he is vain, and
his gospel is the peltrie of men.

Then the next argument of recommendation, is from his own testimony in
particular, as if he would say; It is even that which I have preached, I give
my assent that it is the same with my own gospel. O the testimony of an
Apostle is a great thing! yea greater then the testimony of many thousands,
because they were inspired by Gods spirit, that they could not err. Others
might err and have erred, and there is none now but they may err, and may
teach heresy, and have taught heresy when they past a jot from the written
verity; as especially may be seen in that beast of Rome, and shauelings and
Clergy (O that damnation that abides him for many thousands that have
perished, through his false erroneous doctrine!) Yet I say more, if a holy man
shall give his consent, it avails, if it be agreeable to the doctrine taught
by the Apostles; otherwise it is worth nothing: if it were Paul himself, let
him be Anathema. This for the commendation of the Gospel preached by Epaphras,
I shall end. Paul at this time lay in Rome in bands, and was under an heavy
affliction. Now he considering his bands might be offensive to them; in the
next verse he meets with this slander; Now (says he) I rejoice of those
things which I suffer for you: As if he would say, my afflictions that I lie
in, let them not offend you: It is a marvelous thing how ready men are to
offend, and to take a slander when it is not given. These men were before
offended with Epaphras, because he was not an Apostle: now they are offended
with Paul the Apostle himself, because he is lying in bands. O there is never
a thing, but the devil can make it an offense to the Gospel (he knows how
stumbling a heart thou have) and all to hold thee back from the Gospel.
Blessed is he that has not been offended at any thing, as Christ says, Matthew.
11. 6. How takes he away the offense of his bands? The first argument to revoke
it; he says, I rejoice for these things Verse. 24.
which I suffer for you, or for your sake: as if he would say, be not offended
at my bands, because they are for you. If I had not comen out at the command
of my Lord to preach Christ, what needed me to be lying in these fetters? and
if I had not loved my Lord Jesus and his Church; what needed I to be in The
afflictions of the Martyrs do serve for the confirmation of the faithful in
all ages.
these bands? Well, he suffers for the Colossians, and he never saw them.
Epaphras taught them, I tell thee look whatsoever Paul suffers, or any of
the Apostles or godly Martyrs who suffered, count it all for thee. It was all
to hold in this light which is thy life, and if it had not been kept and
entertained and holden up by their preaching, and sealed by their blood, thou
should never have gotten light. And without this Gospel thou should
never see life. This world is blinded; they know not this darkness they lie in.
If the light of this Gospel slide from thee, thou blind ignorant that lies now
in darkness, thou shall be cast into hell: for the end of darkness here, is that
black darkness in hell. So he says: All that I suffer is for you. Well, if
men thought that the sufferings of the servants of God, which they suffer,
whether it be bands, banishment, or whatsoever it be, if they could think that
all was for them, to hold in that light of the Gospel: alas they would be so
far from that, that the bands and these things should be offensive to them,
and so be offended at the Gospel; that by the contrary, they would kiss
their sufferings, and would take as great pleasure in their bands, as in their
preaching; for they serve as well to thy weal as their preaching. For by their
bands they seal up in thy heart all that they have preached to thee. O if thou
could think of this well! The time will come that these who now preach,
shall be afflicted (and Lord give them joy in their affliction.) Be ye
therefore prepared not to be offended at it. You shall see some steal down
closely from the Minister, when he is caught by the neck; howbeit now, they
will accompany him. Well then, be ready to take part of his affliction, as
Paul says 2. Tim. 1. 8. Yet to recommend his affliction more, I rejoice, says
he: he suffers for a good cause, for the safety of the Colossians. Besides
this, he suffered with joy, 1. Pet. 4. 15. Let no man (says he) suffer as a
murderer, a thief, or an evil doer: which is now the pleasure of men, but
let us make us ready to suffer for a good cause: if thou suffer, see thou
suffer for Gods cause, for this light, the best cause that ever thou suffered
for. Let every man be prepared to suffer for it, otherwise thou shall have no
good of it. It is not the pain will make thee a Martyr; but it is the
quarrel; the good cause, that will make thee a Martyr. And again (he says)
if thou suffer as Christ suffered, rejoice: As if he would say, when thou Joy
in godly afflictions.
suffer for a good cause, look thou have joy and willingness. No, let not
the enemy have greater will to draw thee to the shambles, then thou shall be
willing with joy to suffer. So there is another condition requisite in
suffering; we must not only be content to suffer for a good cause, but we
must be Note.
willing and joyfully willing: Otherwise the good cause will not make thee a
Martyr. Thou must have joy and patience, and willingness, glorifying God. Look
how the Martyrs suffered, and follow them; and then thou shall dye like a
Martyr, and blessed shall thou be. The Lord prepare us for it, that we may
pass from this misery to joy, through the Lord Jesus. To whom be praise and
honor for ever,

Amen.
THE TENTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 24. 25. 24 Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and
fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his body sake
which is the Church,

25 Whereof I am a minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is
given me unto you ward, to fulfill the word of God.


YOu heard the last day (beloved brethren) how the Apostle having ended his
doctrine, he comes to his exhortation, and exhorts the Colossians to persevere
in the faith of Jesus Christ. Secondly, he exhorts them to perscuere in hope:
The argument he uses, is from that benefit of their reconciliation with God.
Now (says he) ye are reconciled, and he has reconciled you, but with this
condition and restraint; if so be that you abide in the faith grounded and
stablished, and be not moved from the hope of the Gospel. Then they might have
said: what Gospel means thou of? is it that gospel that Epaphras has
taught, countest thou so much of it? This he meets with, and says, yea, I
mean of that same gospel that you have heard of that man Epaphras. Then he
falls out into a commendation of that gospel of his. And the first argument
is taken from this, That it is no other gospel but that, Coherence.
that has been preached to every creature. The second argument is, he has
preached naught at all, but that that I have preached. Then they might have
said; what have we to do with thee? we see naught of thee, but a man in bands
at Rome. The Apostle answers: Now (says he) I rejoice in my afflictions for
you. Well, it is true, I am afflicted: but understand this, that my affliction
is for you; it appertains to you, to esteem of my affliction. I rejoice that
I am afflicted for the Gentiles, because I am appointed their Apostle. You are
a part of the Gentiles: therefore in that that I suffer, it is for your cause,
that the Gospel of Jesus Christ may have place amongst you, as among the other
Gentiles.

The second argument: In the midst of my afflictions I The second argument.
The use of affliction.
rejoice, to testify my love toward you: for except I had loved you, I would
not have suffered with joy for you. Brethren, of those that suffer affliction,
Suffer not like a thief or a murderer, as an harlot or an evil doer in any
wise. Alas it is a pain, yea of all pains in the world the greatest, to
suffer for evil doing.

Martyrdom.
the joy, cheerfulnes, and patience joined with the good cause, that makes thee
in suffering to be a Martyr. It is hard to flesh to digest this: how can there
be joy in the pains of most exquisite torments? Brethren, Paul at this time is
lying in bands at Rome, and yet ye see he vtters that in his bands he has joy:
and no question when he came to the very point of death (for 2. Tim. 4. 6. 7. 8.
he was martyred) he had great joy. And certainly, I am compelled to think that
there is more shrinking and sadness at the remembrance of the affliction to
come, then there is in the More grief in the remembrance of affliction, then in
suffering it when it comes.
chief time of affliction. The mind will be more troubled thinking on it,
then when the person is afflicted. For out of question, when the Lord gives a
man constancy to suffer, he will give him patience and joy, which shall
swallow up all the pain: and the experience of Martyrs has proved this. Stir
not, howbeit thou shrink at hanging, heading, scalding, burning and whatsoever
pains most cruel and exquisit devised for thee: yet stir not, for if the Lord
give thee constancy, all the pains shall be swallowed up, and thou shall be
armed to suffer with joy.

To go forward. The third argument, whereby he remoues the offense, they might
have taken at his bands, is this: I (says he) fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ Jesus: as if he would The third argument.
say, mine afflictions are not so much mine, as they are my Lords afflictions:
how can ye then be offended at them? You cannot choose if you be offended at my
afflictions, but you must be offended at Christ's afflictions, because my
affliction is nothing else but the afflictions of Christ, and the fulfilling of
them. Then all these afflictions that are laid upon the members of the body of
Christ, they are all Christ's afflictions: and when they are afflicted Christ is
afflicted. And the Lord counts it his own persecutions, when the members of
his body, Christ must suffer in his members.
which is his Church, are persecuted. Saul, Saul (says he) Acts 9. 4. why
persecutest thou me? He speaks this to Paul, when he was not persecuting him,
but his members. This he calls his persecution? for it was ordained from all
eternity, that the Lord Jesus, who is the head of the Church, should not only
suffer in his own flesh; but also that he should suffer in the members of his
body, which is his Church. So that none of that body should be free from
suffering, no not from the greatest to the least; yea even to the little
finger, all should suffer; and the measure hereof was measured, and ordained in
that counsel from all eternity. Suffer thou much or little? It was
measured to thee ere ever the world was. It was not appointed that every
particular person should suffer al, and every sort of affliction: no, no; but
as the head should suffer one kind of affliction proper to himself; so the
rest in the body should suffer, some in one sort and measure, and some in
another. All shall suffer one thing or other: prepare thee for it; and it is a
token that thou art in that body, if thou suffer something for Christ.

But to stick to the words; he calls them not simply the sufferings of
Christ, but the fulfilling or accomplishment of the afflictions of Christ: I
(says he) fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ. Mark the word well.
Even as the Church of Jesus Christ is the accomplishment and fulfilling of him,
to make him a perfect man; so it is called Ephe. 1. the last verse: Even so the
afflictions that the Church and her members suffer, they accomplish and fulfill
the sufferings of Christ. And as the glory of the head Christ is fulfilled and
accomplished in suffering: even so the sufferings of his members they
accomplish and fulfill the glory of Christ. Wherein we have to mark a love
that Christ bears to us, that cannot be spoken of. The Lord Jesus is perfect
in himself, and he needs us not; no, he has no need of me, of thee, nor of
no flesh to make him perfiter, The love of Christ.
then he is already in himself. He is full, and he fills all in all: yet such
is his love to me, and thee, and to the whole body, that he cannot think that
he is perfect till he have thee joined with him: yea the least member of his
Church, he will have to be joined with him; or else he counts that his glory
and sufferings are not fulfilled. So his afflictions are perfect, and he
needs not thee to fulfill any part thereof; yet such is his love that he will
not have his afflictions perfect without thee. He will have thee made like to
himself in affliction: howbeit, his glory be perfect now at the right hand of
the father; yet he cannot think that he gets the perfection thereof, till he
get all his members glorified with him in heaven. This is his love. Romans 8.


Now let us see how we account of this. We count it a benefit and a grace to be
joined with him, to be the members of his body, and to be glorified with him;
but when it comes to the What a great benefit it is to suffer afflictions.
sufferings, there is the shrinking, there is none that can accord or be
content to be like him in sufferings; but they will fly back, there we fail;
and we cannot think that it is a benefit to suffer, but rather that it is a
curse. So ere thou count it a benefit to suffer, thou must have more then flesh
and blood; thou must have the spirit of Jesus. It is not only a benefit to
believe, but also to suffer, Philip. 1. 29. And Philip. 3. 10. Paul counts it a
blessing to suffer, calling it the communion or fellowship of his affliction.
There he counts it blessedness to suffer with Christ. Look not to reign with
him, except in some measure thou be a companion with him in suffering. Yet to
stick upon the words. The word in the own language is not simply to fulfill,
but to fulfill course about; as he would say, my head has gotten his course;
now comes in my course in suffering. So the word affoordeth a good lesson and
true, all these afflictions go by courses: al men and women are not afflicted
at once; but Afflictions in the Saints go by course.
every man has his turn, every man his course about. Christ begun, and he is
afflicted first. The Apostles are looking to him, their course was not come;
but soon after came their course. Others stood looking to them, but soon
after their own course came also. Brethren, we are but lookers on now; we look
to France, and to men suffering for this Gospel: and we are looking to Italy,
and Spain: for our time is not come yet. The Lord has seen that we are not
yet ripe; as soon as thou art ripe, he will pluck thee like a ripe apple.
Prepare thee, prepare thee, O Scotland, for thou shall find one day thy part
of the sufferings of Christ: thy course is approaching. He says not simply, he
fulfilled the afflictions of Christ his course about, but that in his course he
fulfilled the rest of the afflictions of Christ. The words import the relics
and hinder part, or the residue of the afflictions of Christ. So all the
sufferings of Paul and the rest of the elect, were but as small relics, and
remnants of Christ's sufferings. What we suffer, yea if it were but in the little
finger, we think it great; but if thou were pained in all thy body and soul,
that is but a remnant of the afflictions of Christ. And where this remnant is,
there the body is: but the greater part, the heap and multitude went before.
Who suffered the former part? who was he that suffered the multitude, if Paul
suffered the hinder part? who but the head Jesus Christ? The heap of
afflictions was heaped on him. The dint lighted upon him. The wave or billow of
Gods wrath tumbling down from heaven, lighted upon the head Jesus Christ. All
that we suffer are but flashes breaking off from that wave and billow that
lighted upon Christ. So that if you will compare the afflictions of the Church
to the end of the world, all is nothing in comparison of that that Christ
suffered. Therefore compare thy self never with him in affliction, but when
thou see thy self afflicted, then consider what Christ has suffered. When
thou see a little thing so bitter, then consider what bitterness was in the
whole sufferings of Christ. He drank out the full cup of bitterness of Gods
wrath; but thou only tastes it, to teach thee to count what he has suffered
for thy redemption.

Now in the rest of this verse, he sets down the cause wherefore he suffered.
No man suffers for nothing; as the head Jesus Christ did not suffer for
nothing, so never a member of his suffers in vain. For whose cause then
suffered Paul or Christ in him? for the body. What a body? The body which is
his Church. All these afflictions (says he) that Jesus Christ suffers in me,
are all for the body of Christ. Well, there have been many sufferings for this
body. The Lord Jesus suffered the extremity for this body: Paul and all the
Martyrs suffered for this body; but there is a great difference between the
sufferings of the head and of the members. The head suffered for the redemption
The difference between the sufferings of Christ, and of his members.
of the body, which was in hell unto the time that heredeemed it out of hell:
Paul, Peter, this Martyr, that Martyr, they suffered not for the redemption;
their blood could not be the price of redemption; all the blood in Paul and
Peter's body cannot furnish out a farthing of redemption; but only the blood
of that immaculate lamb is the price, and only the price of our redemption, in
despite of all the Papists in the world: only the blood of God makes out that
redemption. These base bodies they have dreamed a dream of Indulgences and
pardons, and say, that the people will be safe with Popish pardons.
the Pope that lownes pardons: he shall not get pardon himself. What are these
Pardons and Indulgences, which these vain heads have found out to deceive the
silly people with? The Pope he calls it the remission of sins, by the
blood of the Martyrs, this Saint, and that Saint. O vain lowne! is a pardon a
remission of sins by the blood of Peter, and Paul, this Martyr or yt Martyr?
What a vanity is this, that they think that a man should not be content with
the blood of Jesus only, and esteem it sufficient? but they must seek to
their works; and where they fail in this, they must seek to the merits of
the Martyrs, setting this with the rest of their works. And this merit of the
Martyrs, he calls the Treasury: he will send out this his vanity, and this
his doctrine through the world. Woe to thee Scotland if ever this come among
thee. And again I see here plainly, that there can come nothing to the church
without suffering. As for her redemption, which is the remission of sins, it
is not without the blood of the Lamb, the blood of God: that is a great
matter, except this blood of God had bin shed, thou should never have been
redeemed out of hell. But this is a strange matter: when thou art redeemed by
this blood, when thy righteousness is bought; yet thou can not get it without
suffering: and it cannot be ministered to thee, except the minister of it die.
Paul it behooued to die, and it Peter behooued to dye, and all for the
salvation of the body. The devil has such an envy to the salvation of man
(would to God thou knew it) that there is none that would preach to thee of
this salvation, but he will stand up and seek the slaughter of that man. So that
this that we call the Church (which now is come in contempt, the name of the
Saints is scorned at) this Church is a precious jewel, the spouse of Jesus
Christ: be what she will be in her self; yet the bridegroom counts much of
her: otherwise, there would never have been so much blood shed for her. Christ
had notsuffered; Peter and Paul had not suffered, if thou had not bin precious
in the eye of Christ. Dare thou then offer to destroy that that Christ has
dyed for? How dare thou thou dog offer it? He is called an Earl, and a Lord,
and a King, and an Emperor, and what will he do? He will oppress the
professors of the Gospel of Jesus; he will burn, and scald the members of the
body: but if thou knew what Christ is, and what a member of his Church means,
thou would hold up thy hand. But there are many false Christians worse then
Pagans, and in severity and cruelty against Christ and his Church more fierce
and malicious, and more exquisit tormentors of Christ in his members, then
Popish persecution.
ever a Pagan or a Turk would be. The truth of this is evident in the example
of the Martyrs, who find none more malicious against Christ's Church then
these, who would be counted Christians. Well, Pagans and Turks shall find
greater case and less judgment at the coming of the Lord Jesus, then false
Christians. O their pains shall be unspeakable!

To go forward: in the next verse he sets down another cause wherefore he
suffered. Of the which Church (says he) I am made a minister: as if he would
say, I fill out the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my body, because I am
bound and obliged thereto: I am made a minister to it; there is the meaning.
Mark the words, I am made. He says not, I was borne a minister: nay, no man
is borne a minister, howbeit, every man thinks he may be a minister out of
hand. I am made a minister would he say of a very crooked wood, as he testifies
of himself, 1. Tim. 1. 12. 13. He placed me in his ministry when I was a
blasphemer; and a persecutor. Look what stuff I had, and whereof I consisted
before I was made a minister: And if this was good stuff, and a way to make a
minister of me, judge ye. I was of al sinners the first in persecuting Christ
and his members, and blaspheming of him. But (says he) God had pity on me.
Even this Christ whom before I blasphemed and persecuted, he showed mercy,
and put me in his ministry. The Lord can make a minister of a blasphemer. I
am made a minister, that is, a servant to serve the Church, to stand and fill
the cup, and carry it to the Church. Peter and Paul were none other, 1. Cor. 3.
22. 23. All is yours (says he) whether it be Paul, or Apollo or Cephas: ye are
our masters, and we are your servants, and ye are Christ's. So he is but a
servant to the Church, and not a Lord over it. It follows that Paul when he
suffered, he suffered not The sufferings of the Apostles and Martyrs were not
for the redemption of man.
as a Lord of the body, but as a servant: never any suffered as a Lord but
Christ only, Paul and Peter and the rest suffered as servants. Ye see a
faithful servant will die for his master; so the Apostle suffered for his
master, the Church: what were the Apostles but the friends of the Bridegroom?
Of this it follows, that Paul's sufferings was not for the redemption of man:
no, but for his ministry and dispensation of the grace committed to him. It
is a lie to say he suffered for the redemption of man; so it was never for the
redemption and remission of sins to any, yt Paul or any of the Apostles
suffered. For no man, Christ Jesus excepted, was able to abide a lot of yt
suffering for redemption: no not all the men and Angels in heaven and earth were
not, nor are not able to abide one assault of that suffering. That fierce wrath
should have so seized upon the^, that it should have consumed and destroyed
them. He must be an excellent personage, God and man in one person, as Christ
was, that will bear out that suffering: otherwise he shall not be able to
abide one point of it. Well, not to pass by this, I see a Minister is bound to
dye for the Church. Will thou be a Minister? The Minister is bound to dye for
the Church if need so require.
prepare thee to dye for the Church: otherwise thou art but an hireling, a
false deceitful servant. So art thou made a Minister? thou art made a servant
to the Queen the Church: she is greater then any Princess in the earth. Count
thou of a Minister as thou will: the faithful Minister is in greater glory and
honor, then all the servants of Kings and Princes in the world: yea he shall be
preferred to the great Monarchs of the world themselves. Call ye them vain
fellows? They are the Lords stewards; the King of kings Chambermen and
Counselors.

But to speak to the Ministry. Art thou called to be a Minister? thou must
prepare thee for suffering: yea there is no calling in the Church of Jesus
Christ, which is not to suffering. Thou may be called to a political
government, yet not to suffering; but to take thy pastime and to be in honor:
but if thou be called to be a member to Christ, thou art called to suffer, as
it were a sheep to the shambles. Set not thy head within this fold, except
thou think thou must suffer. Peter says, We are called, yea appointed to
suffer, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Then when thou art clapped on the shoulder to be burned,
hanged, headed; yea, and the skin to be flaied off thee, go to it
cheerfully; for thou art bound thereto. Well, if every common Christian be
thus ways bound; how is a Minister bound? I say, the more degrees thou gettest
of Christ, the greater preferment thou have in Christ's Church; the more art
thou obliged to die for Christ, and his members. He is a vain man, that
thinks, when he is a minister, that he is preferred to ease, to greater pleasure
The Ministry no place of ease, but of labor.
then the people: no, no. Is thine honor double? first a Christian, and then a
Minister to serve the Lord Jesus? Thou art bound doubly to suffer, and to
undergo the greater cross for his sake and the Church. I say, if thou
could be slain a thousand times, thou art bound to suffer more then a
common Christian. And if gladly thou be content to suffer, thou gettest double
honor, first as a Christian; and then as a Minister; and thirdly as a Martyr.
Many have been Ministers, but few have gotten this honor that the Apostles got,
Acts 5. 41. when they were persecuted, they departed with such joy, with a song
that they were thought worthy to suffer for Christ. I speak this to make us
ready to suffer, and that with joy. It is no ignominy or shame to thee to
suffer, if it were the most vile death for Christ's sake, and thy Creator sake.
Immediately after that thou shall suffer, thou shall be translated from pain
and misery, to everlasting joy: yea and in the chief time of thy suffering,
thou shall Joy under the cross.
find exceeding great joy, as the holy Apostles and Martyrs found.

When he has spoken of his Ministry, he falls out into a description of it,
and that to this end, that we may see the worthiness of this Gospel: First he
calls it a dispensation and stewardship: then there must be a family; if he
be a steward it must be a great calling. Ye think, to be the master of the
Kings household, is a great office; but to be a Minister, a steward in the
house of the King of kings, and the master of his household, of Ministry what
a high calling.
all offices of honor it is the greatest; and he surpasses all the honor of
office-bearers in the world: and he shall have the fulness of his honor in
heaven, and he were a fool to seek for it here. Secondly, would ye know of
whom he has this dispensation? Of whom; but of the Lord of the family? Who
dares make a steward, but the Lord of the house? Even so who dare make a
steward in Christ's house, but Christ himself? So that he that has not his
calling of God, of Jesus Christ, he is but a hireling and worthy to be hanged.
Then let every one have this warrant in his conscience, that he is called by
Christ, either ordinarily conformed to the rule of the Word and discipline of
the Church of Christ; or else extraordinarily, as were the Prophets and Apostles.

Now what food is this that he ministers? It is called the word of God. Vain
man thinks it is but words that he ministers (as many say this day that a
Minister, what does he for his living? but goes up to the pulpit, and speaks a
few words:) but I say to thee, they are such words that if thou be not fed
with them, thou shall dye and that everlastingly, though thou were a King. A
man (says Christ) lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God, Matthew. 4. 4. But who thinks that the words of a
Minister be the words of God? I say to thee, esteem the words of a Minister as
thou will, if he speak the word of God (as I am persuaded all true Ministers
do) if thou take it not as the word of Gods mouth, thou shall die like a
miscreant and wretch: for he that hears you (says Christ) hears me, and he
that contemnes you, contemnes me, Luke 10. 16. Look to that part of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, where it is spoken of the judgment that lighted on them that
contemned Moses and his testimony, Heb. 10. 28. and you shall find it not a
light matter, to contemn the messenger and Ambassador of Christ, even the
voice of a silly Minister. Then he shows the manner how he received it: he
says, it was given him: he merited it not. No, not one of them,
notwithstanding all their graces, merited such a glorious calling as the
Ministry: not a man can merit ought in his house. But the Apostles they are
called to the Apostleship only of the free grace and love of God; and in such
sort all the faithful preachers of the word, none of them were ever called to
the Ministry, because either of their Nobility (as there is few of that
sort) or for their gifts of cunning and utterance, or any such like thing; but
only of the free grace of Jesus Christ, and his spirit that called them, they
were elected and put apart to the Ministry and the work thereof: therefore
it is a free gift. 1. Tim. 1. 12. Paul confesses the same of himself, I
thank God (says he) that he found me faithful, and placed me in his
ministry or service: O the thanks which he gives for so free a grace! I say
thou art called to a Ministry, wherein if thou respect him that calls thee,
and the office that thou art called to (for what art thou? unworthy of the
smallest room in his Church) thou art never able to thank him enough for it
all the days thou live. Well, to whom got he this Ministry? got he it to
himself, to put his hand ever in the Ambrie to feed himself? The Ministers
of Christ feed not themselves only.
No, no, he is a hireling worthy to be hanged like a thief, that respects
himself only, being not careful to feed the family of Jesus Christ. So
then he gets not this office of Ministry for himself; no, no, thou that art
a Minister gettest not this gift, that thou should take it and lock it up
in thy chest; but thou gettest it, to give it to others: and I say to thee, by
distributing it, it shall not be impaired; yea the more thou distributest, the
more thou shall have. The goods of this Ministry are not like the gifts of
these earthly stewards, as they themselves in office are not alike. The more
these earthly stewards give, the less is behind: but the more the Minister
gives of Faithfulness and diligence in the work of the Ministry how gainful.
the grace of God given to him, the more has he: for it grows exceedingly.

Lastly, the end of this stewardship is set down, to fulfill the word of God.
He is a Minister of the word: To what end? To fulfill the word of God, not
only to fill the family, and every person, man and woman; but that they may
leave behind to fulfill the word, to amplify the food it self. Mark it well,
for the more he gives out, the more it grows; the more the word is ministered,
the more it is increased; and the growth of the word is by the ministration of
it. Who does not find this that ever God has called to that office, but that
the more that he has given of it out, the more it grew, the more was behind?
Therefore let him never go out of the pantrie: stand ever at the door, and be
ever giving out; and so it shall swell and grow: and thou who receiuest it,
shall grow to thy salvation, and to the glory of God whose food it is. To
this God be all honor and glory,

Amen.
THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 26. 27. 26 Which is the mystery hid since the world
began, and from all ages; but now is made manifest to his Saints,

27 To whom God would make known what is the riches of his glorious mystery
among the Gentiles, which riches is Christ in you the hope of glory.


WE heard (brethren) that the Apostle when he had entered into the exhortation
which he subioyneth unto this doctrine, exhorting the Colossians to persevere
and to abide in faith and hope: immediately he falls out again into a speech
concerning his own person. And first he remoues the offense and slanders that
might have been taken at his bands and sufferings, which he suffered at that
present in Rome. Then he falls out into a recommendation of his Ministry,
calling it a dispensation or stewardship in the family of God; which was given
to him as a free gift without deserving; yea and contrary to his deserving,
given to him by God the Coherence and sum of the former Sermon,
Lord and master of the family: and given to him, not that he should keep it
to himself, and not communicate it to others; but given to him to dispense it
to the Gentiles, and amongst the rest to the Colossians, who were a part of the
Gentiles. To this end, that that word of God given to him to dispense, it
should be filled out and accomplished: for ever the more, that men receive that
word, it grows the greater, and the more it increases continually. It is not
ordained to be hid up and smothered, but to be given out.

Now to come to the text, and to go through it briefly. When he has spoken of
this word which he has received to dispense, he leaves it not, but sticks on
it; and immediately he terms it a mystery. A mystery, to speak of it
briefly, it signifies a thing hid from the eyes of men; so that it cannot be
seen, so A mystery.
long as it is hid: especially it signifies a holy thing concerning religion,
and the worship of God, that is the proper signification of a mystery: and in
this place Paul takes it so, as he does 1. Tim. 3. 16. where he says, Great is
the mystery of godliness, that is, not the mystery of every religion, but of
the true religion, which has been hid from the beginning; and now is
manifested among his Saints. Then mark briefly. You see this word of God it is
a mystery, a thing hid, and so kept close, that the natural man could never
so much as have a thought in his 1. Cor. ^, 14.
mind of it, or once to think that there was such a thing in the world, as
this Gospel that we preach to you this day: that the natural soul could not
do so much as once suspect; that there was a Savior. It is a folly to think
that the knowledge of Christ is natural; nay, by nature thou would never
have once dreamed that there has been such a thing. If God had let Adam alone
after his fall, he would not have ever once so much as dreamed of redemption;
or that there was a Christ or a Savior: and therefore this Gospel, it must be
precious, that was kept so close. If a man get a precious jewel, he will
keep it close, and will not let it see Sun nor wind: The Gospel, of all
jewels in the world, it is the most precious; and it has been kept secret and
close this long time: yea men knew not what it meant, til the Lord Jesus Christ
the wisdom of the father revealed it, and opened it to the world, and to his
Disciples: and therefore it being so precious (if we had eyes to see and hearts
to consider) O how highly would we esteem of it! yea, even thou that now
looks so lightly to it! but alas the world perishes for fault of sight and
consideration.

But to leave this, and to go to the next point. In the words following, he
defines the time of the hiding of it; he says, Hid since the world began,
that is, from all eternity. Secondly, it was hid from all generations of men.
The first word means, that before or ever this world was made, it was hid in
God, Ephe. 3. 9. The second word means, that after this world was created, it
was hid from so many generations, even till Jesus Christ was manifested in the
flesh, and then it was revealed. Then mark this. This word is an ancient
thing, a thing before all things. It The antiquity of the word.
came not this day or yesterday; but it was before the world was: and look how
old God himself is, the Gospel is as old, hid in that secret counsel from
all eternity. And if you compare it with the world it self, before this world
was made it was hid, and consequently it was in rerum natura. Then brethren, if
antiquity, if age will recommend a thing; let eternity recommend the Gospel.
It had not a beginning no more then God (in whose breast it lay) has a
beginning: and it is the same Gospel we preach to you this day. Let them call
it a new Gospel. O vain men! this Gospel is the same Gospel that was hid
from the beginning. Then mark again. I see here this world has lien long in
darkness after the creation, and has wanted the light for a long time. For
brethren, I never counted of the light of the Sun, when the light of Jesus
Christ is lacking. Woe is thee! better it were thou had never been borne nor
seen this light of the Sun that shines in the firmament, The light of
Christ's Gospel how precious.
if thou have not seen the light that is in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. All
light in comparison of that light is mere darkness. So then, this world has
been long without the light of the Gospel, and it has been a long night even
from Adam to Christ; in a manner there has never any thing been all that time
but darkness, and night. As for the Gentiles, they saw never one glimse, but
dyed in miserable darkness; they were led blindfold to death and damnation. As
for the Jews their case was better; yet their light was but a glimmering; they
had 2. Pet. 1. 19.
not the light of the Sun. The greatest they had, it was but the light of a
lantorne, that is, the light of the Prophets. O then, this behooued to follow,
that in the old world before Christ came, many dyed in miserable darkness! for
without light and life in Jesus, there is nothing but death. Remove thy light,
thy life is removed: remove the Gospel, thou dyest and perishest
incontinently. And therefore Paul Romans 5. 21. speaking of this estate from Adam
to Christ, he says, Sin reigned unto death: where the light of Christ is
not, there is nothing but the reigning of sin to death and damnation. Well
then, this tells us how we should esteem of the Gospel: Alas, if thou wist
what misery they were in that wanted this Gospel, then thou would account
all thy blessing to be in the having of it.

To go forward: When he has showed how long it was kept close; then he shows
when it was revealed and brought to light. Now (says he) it is revealed to his
Saints. (Now) that is, in the fulness of time, as it is said in the Epistle to
the Galathians chap. 4. 4. and Ephe. 1. 10. In the dispensation of the fulness
of time, that is, when Christ was comen into the world, that was brought to
light. Yet this word (now) reaches further, even to the whole time that the
Gospel is preached, and shines in the world. And it is that, that in Heb. 3.
7. is called the day, saying, while it is day, harden not your hearts: and in
2. Cor. 6. 2. it is called that acceptable time. Then here I see, the world
since Christ came into the world (as we say) is the blessedest come that ever
came. It has bin a lightsome world, and I see the Sun has ever shined, and
that there has never been night, but ever day: no, no interchaunge nor
coursing about; but where Christ's Gospel is, there is ever day. Therefore it
must follow that since Christ came, there have bin many saved. They died and
perished in multitudes before his coming; but after his coming when that
light and that Sun of righteousness rose up: look as in huge heaps before
they perished; so now millions and great numbers are saved. And whereas before
it was but now one, and then one that preased into the kingdom of heaven: now
they come in multitudes striving and thrunging who should first enter into
heaven, Matthew. 11. 12. For it is impossible that this light should be without
life. If thou take a pleasure in the light, it is not possible that thou can
dye: but if thou take no pleasure in it, woe be to thee, a double death The
calling of the Gentiles.
shall befall thee. Woe is to that man, who dies in the light of the Gospel,
without taking pleasure in the same. Well it had been to thee that thou had
dyed in darkness with the Gentiles: for thy damnation shall be doubled. Take
therefore a pleasure in it, and all the world shall not make thee to perish:
and that is that which Paul says; Sin reigned to death, but grace reigns by
righteousness unto life through the Lord Jesus, Romans 5. verse. 21. But look to
the last words of the verse. Unto whom is the manifestation of the Gospel
made? Not to every one; beguile not your selves; for the Lord will not
vouchsafe to manifest himself, and grace in him to every man: but he calls
them his Saints, to whom chiefly he manifests himself. Look your books, ye
that scorn at the name of Saints: if thou be nota Saint, thou shall never see
heaven: then this If thou be not a Saint thou shall never see heaven.
manifestation is not made to every man. It is true (brethren) it is preached
to all, and all hear it, and it strikes in every ones ears: yet it is also
true, all men see not. It is to many as the light of the Sun is to a blind
man; and the great multitude Simile.
gets no more good of it, then a blind man gets consolation of the Sun. Who
is it then that sees it? None but the sanctified one: that is, none but they
that are sanctified by the holy Spirit. Nay, no spirit, no sanctification; no
sanctification, no sight of God: and so thou art no Saint, but the devil
possesses thee. So none sees what this Gospel is, but the sanctified ones,
and that man is he that has gotten the spirit of Jesus to open the eye of his
soul: for it is the spirit of God that opens the soul, to see what the
Gospel of Christ is, and what virtue comes with it, when it comes. If thou
had the quickest spirit that can be, if thou have not the spirit of God, thou
shall not see one whit in God, because as it is the spirit of man, that
searches the spirit of man; so it is the spirit of God that searches all
things, yea the most secret things of God, 1. Cor. 2. 10. So none sees what the
Gospel is, and what it brings with it, but such as are illuminated by the
spirit of God. Hear as long as thou will, thou shall a bide in blindness, till
thou come to a desperate hardness of heart, if thou be not enlightened with the
spirit of Jesus, and this is to be had in and by the Gospel. Therefore
brethren say ever, Lord make me a Saint, make me one of that number, and make
me to cry for the spirit of Jesus to sanctify and Luke 11. 9. 10. 15.
enlighten me: for otherwise thou shall perish for want of the light of God.

Now to come to the next verse, when he has spoken of the Saints, he insists
upon the revelation of the mystery made unto them, and he sets it out in
sundry circumstances. First he shows, who is ye Reuealer, to wit, God.
Secondly, what cause moved him to make this revelation to the Saints, to wit,
his The revelation or manifestation of the Gospel.
good pleasure toward them. Thirdly, what thing is revealed, to wit, this
mystery. And he terms it not simply a mystery, but he calls it, the riches
of his glorious mystery, and not that only, but the mystery of Christ.
Fourthly, among whom is it revealed? to wit, not among the Jews only, but
among the Gentiles also, through the world. All tends to this, to let us see
the glory of the grace of God: as it is said Ephe. 1. 6. So that this Gospel
is shining bright, and abundantly, in such a wonderful great mercy, that
there is not a circumstance, but it lets you see a wonderful grace in God.

To come then to the first. The reuealer of this mystery, is no other but God.
He was the author of the revelation of this The first circumstance.
mystery of the Gospel. The Saints, they begun not to see first, but God
first revealed before they saw, or could see: yea they had never seen one
glimse with their eye, if God had not begun to reveal it: no, thou shall never
see any heavenly or spiritual Flesh and blood can not teach us spiritual
things.
thing, unto the time it please the Lord to reveal it unto thee. Then in that
he is the beginner of grace, herein appears the more the glory of his grace,
and the matter of praising of him: but it stays not here. We will come then to
the next.

What moved him to reveal this mystery to his Saints, both of Jews and
Gentiles? The Lord does nothing rashly, he has The second circumstance.
ever good causes moving him, wherefore he does this or that. He is not like a
vain man, that does, and undoes again; and wots not what he does. Saw he
any thing in these Saints to move him? Some Papist will say, he foresaw some
merit in them. O but the text says, that there was no such thing at all
without himself which could move him: he saw nothing I Nothing in the world
did move God to send Christ and his Gospel unto us, but his own love and good
pleasure.
say in the same, or yet in the world, which could move him, but his own
goodness. His good pleasure, which was ere ever they were Saints, is it that
moved him to reveal this mystery. Then again, they were not Saints before
the revelation was made. There is not a Saint before Christ be revealed to
them. It is the sight of Christ that makes a man holy; so there was never none
holy, but he that first gat that sight of Jesus: the sight went before holiness,
and holiness followed upon the revelation: because holiness is the effect of the
revelation of the Gospel. Then ye see, that as the Lord is the beginner of the
revelation, so it is not our deserving, but his own good pleasure that moves
him thereto. The Lord of his good pleasure showed himself to the world; and no
question this is spoken, that thou should ever glory in God. Alas, would to
God as we have matter to glorify God, that we could answer to the thousand
part of it.

Then to come to the third circumstance. What is the thing The third
circumstance.
that he has revealed? He calls it a mystery, and not barely a mystery, but
a glorious mystery; and not that only, but he calls it the riches, that is,
the infinitnes of the glory of this mystery. Then ye have a glorious
mystery, and a rich mystery of glory; a plenty of glory, such as never
was. I remember in the Ephesians 1. 18. Paul speaking of that inheritance, he
calls it not barely a heritage, but the glory of his inheritance: and not
that only, but his inheritance glorious among the Saints. This let us see
first, that all the graces we have in Christ, are good in substance; they are
profitable: and not that only, but also it The riches of Christ.
lets us see the gloriousnes of them in quality: and not that only, but also
it lets us see the infinitnes of them in quantity. So, what would you have in
Christ? In him thou have good things; in him thou have glorious things; in him
thou have infinite things: infinite in length, breadth, and height; infinite
in deepnes, incomprehensible every manner of way. So in Christ, all things
glorious, and never a thing we have in Christ, but it is a thing of infinite
weight: yea the least thou have, it is of infinite weight. All these earthly
things, in comparison of these, are of no value: the least bit of thy
regeneration is worth them all; so the grace of Christ is incomparable. Howbeit
the Apostle borrows the speeches to express the same in some manner: yet the
grace of Christ is unspeakable. O if we could take some apprehension in heart,
and but once think of it! no, the heart is not capable of it, no more then the
tongue can express it. And in the day of the Lord we shall see these things to
be verified; and happy shall we be if we can strive to know these things of
Christ, and strive to have them in us in some measure. All our strife should be
to prease forward, to take ever a further and further apprehension of these
gifts of Christ in our hearts: then next, to speak of them with a full
persuasion. Alas, our speech is but a tastelesse word, which testifies How we
should speak of Christ.
that thou wotst not what the grace of Christ means. When will thou learn to
call it a glorious Gospel? Yet brethren, mark this Gospel: for as silly as
it seems to you, it is a rich thing, it is the riches of God. Would thou
be rich? Seek the Gospel. Would thou be wise? Seek the Gospel. For if
thou had all the riches under the Sun, if thou want Christ thou art a poor
wretch. And if thou had all the glory in the world, if thou want Christ, thou
art an ignominious body, full of shame. If thou want the Gospel, thou have no
wit; thou art a fool, if thou were never so fine a Mathematician, a Physician,
and a Lawyer. O fool! if thou have not the revelation of Christ, thou have a
foolish head; and thou shall be shut up in hell as a fool. So brethren, there
is nothing to make choice of besides this Gospel, and one day it shall prove
so. And one day you shall see it either to your shame, or to your glory.

Now to go forward. Among whom is this so glorious and so rich a Gospel
revealed? He says, among you who are Gentiles. Not among the Jews and their
nation only: for brethren, so great a light craves greater bounds: who will
go draw in the Sun into a house to make a house the seat of it, and make it
as it were a candle shining in the house? O this passing light of the Gospel,
it must not be drawn into one nation only! but this light that would
illuminate a thousand worlds, it must be set up on high to shine on all the
nations in the world. And therefore he says, it is manifested among the
nations, and so it is extended to this silly unworthy nation of Scotland. O
Scotland! thy only light is the Gospel; and thy only glory is the glory of
the Gospel; and shame and darkness shall come to thee, if ever thou let this
glorious light of the Gospel depart. And I say to thee, let this glorious
Gospel slip, and then of all the judgments that ever came upon a nation or
country, the most fearful and terrible shall light on thee. And therefore as
ever thou will have life, and the joys of heaven, strive ever to hold in this
light. But here the goodness of God appears, that to condemned creatures, he
should have suffered this light to shine: all were condemned creatures, the
sentence was pronounced against all. We of Scotland were of that number,
Gentiles. Alas, if we could once consider this! O wretched man that ever thou
should have seen this sight of the Sun of righteousness, if thou rejoice
not in it! If thou could consider the benefit, that thou art borne in the
days of light, that ye beams of Jesus Christ go into thy heart, thou
would count more of it then of all the kingdoms in the world: yea thou
would say every morning and evening, Blessed be God that I was borne in this
lightsome time; and among all things yt should make thee thankful, this should
be the chiefest, that thou wast borne in the time of the light and grace of
Jesus Christ offered to the world.

Hitherto we have spoken of these four circumstances. In every one of them
shines the glory of God, and that so wonderfully, that God got not to himself
in the creation such a glory, as he has gotten by the revelation of this
mystery of Jesus Christ. For above all his works, the work of this his
mercy is the greatest. Now in the end of the verse, he makes this more
plain, that he spoke of the riches of God and the Gospel. And he comes
down more homely to their understanding, as if he would say: O ye Colossians,
would you know what I mean by these riches? I mean naught but Christ, as
these riches be nothing but Christ. What was hid in this mystery of the
revelation? nothing but Christ, when it was revealed, and the glory of it laid
out abroad, as merchandise is used to be, there was nothing in it but Christ.
For brethren, all this word of the Gospel, is nothing but Christ. Al our
preaching, what is it but Christ? The word of the cross, and then of his
ascension: all our Gospel has no other matter nor substance. And when he has
drawn these riches to Christ, and made him all: then he comes nearer them,
and draws in Christ to them, to their consolation. It is not enough that they
should hear of Christ, and him preached; but he applies the same unto their
hearts and souls: so the lesson is: All the heavenly glory and riches which
thou hear tell of, draw it into In Christ consists all fulness of glory.
Christ: for there is no glory but Christ's glory. For the glory of the
Father and of the holy Ghost dwells in him bodily: and thou shall never see so
much as a jot of glory without Christ. Therefore when thou hear speaking of
glory and riches, call it all Christ's: and then stick not here, but when thou
have drawn all to Christ, then take him to thy self. What auailes me all the
glory of God and of Christ, if I have no part of it? for it is the greater
damnation to thee, if thou have no part of it. The more power he has, the
greater terror is it to thee: the greater mercy, the greater sadness to thee.
So take him and put him in thy heart: and trowest thou not, that God will dwell
in thy heart? The Scripture says, he dwells in the heart, Ephesians. 3. 17. Well
then, take him, and put him in thy heart, and thou shall get the fulness of
glory: and all his glory shall be in every one. So getting Christ, thou shall
get all glory. It is a small matter to know that in Christ is all glory,
except thou get Christ applied to the heart.
him applied to thy heart. O the consolation that will be in the heart that
has Christ! and without him, fie on thee and thy stinking heart both. All the
things under heaven shall not minister joy to thy soul, if thou want Christ in
thy heart. Alas, all other joy is but vanity, and from the teeth forward.

Now in the last words, when he falls out in speaking of Christ he cannot
leave him. Would to God we could find Christ as powerful as Paul did. Alas
we have naught but a castlesse word of him, and away with him. If he were in
thee, as he was in Paul, thou would not speak of him so slenderly, but thy
mouth would ever speak of him in great abundance: and thou would think
that thou could never speak enough of him. And why should we not learn of
Paul, and such holy men to speak as they spoke of Christ? Then (I say) he
falls out, and calls him that hope of glory, as if he would say, that glory
that is hoped for. Jesus Christ is that glory that is revealed in mystery:
Jesus is the riches of that glory, and is that same thing that we look for.
He is glory here in this life, and he is that glory we hope for in the life
to come. Think not that thou shall see another glory in substance, but that
thou see now in the Gospel, as in the mirror of all glory. See thou not
this glory of Jesus Christ in the revelation of the mystery: thou shall never
see this glory after this life. Look if this be a straight band; it binds
thee with life and death. As ever then thou will see Christ's glory after this
life, look that thou see his glory in the mirror of the Gospel. We must see
Christ's glory in the Gospel if we will see him after this life.
O vain fool! will thou take pleasure to look in a mirror to see thy vain
foul face; and will thou take no pleasure to look in the mirror of the
Gospel to see the sweet face of Jesus, that casts his beams not to thy face
only, but down to thy heart also; and makes it light, and illuminates thy
blind mind, and makes a fair soul? Well is the man that has a lightsome
soul. O fool! thou will be careful to have an eye in thy head, but it had
bin good if thou never had had one, if thy soul abide blind. It is ye light
of Jesus that makes a soul a soul. When he shall come in his own person,
thou shall see him no more in a mirror; thou shall hear no more of the
Gospel, but in steed of it, the Lord Jesus shall stand up in proper person,
and the beams of his glory shall transform thy face, and all the parts of
thy body shall begin to be more glorious then the Sun in the noone day.
Thou shall be made conformable to his glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. Hold on
therefore To look on Christ's face in the Gospel, till we see him face to face.
in looking on the mirror till he come. He is coming behind, he is at thy
back; he is at thy hand, the mirror will away, and then he shall shine on thy
face. Hold on therefore, and look in the mirror till he come, and fill thy
soul with glory and honor for ever. Now to this Jesus, with the Father and
the holy spirit be everlasting praise,

Amen.
THE TWELFTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. verse. 28. 29. 28 Whom we preach, admonishing every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus:

29 Whereunto I also labor and strive, according to his working, which works
in me mightily.


I Showed you brethren, the Apostle in the end of this chapter, he speaks
especially of his own person, to the end he might gain authority, and
reverence to his doctrine and exhortation. The sum of the last Sermon.
removing the offense which the Colossians might have taken at them. whom we
preach; that is, the which Jesus Christ that hope of glory (as he termed him
before) we preach, that is, I and the rest of my fellow laborers. So no
question in these words he endeavors to purchase authority to his ministry,
from the subject of his preaching. All his preaching was of the most glorious
things that ever were, or shall be in this world. All his preaching was of
Christ, the riches of that glory that so long was hid, and at the last was
revealed. Briefly, we see of these words of Paul, a Minister of the Gospel of
Christ has gotten in trust committed to him, a fair and precious thing. He
has under his hand The word of reconciliation committed to the Ministers of
the Gospel.
the riches of the glory of God, to wit, Jesus Christ. He is a treasurer (to
speak of it so) and has in his custody a treasure: but such as is the
richest that ever was, is, or shall be in the world. And he has a commission
not to keep it close, but to give it out and deal it to the world, that every
one should have their portion of it. And therefore what is the glory of the
Minister, the Preacher, what is his estimation? All his glory 2. Cor. 5. 19.
20.
and his estimation, all his honor is in this treasure Jesus Christ, that he
has in custody. Mark it. And in what thing consists his honor, and glory,
and estimation? As it is his honor to distribute this rich treasure to thee and
to the world: so here is all thy glory to put out thy hand and take in these
riches to thy self. Thou have more honor to do this, then if thou were
advanced and promoted to the highest honor and dignity under the sun; then
if thou were made a King of all the world: for when thou art made a King, if
thou have no part with Jesus, thy end will be miserable, and woe is thee for
evermore.

To go forward: in the next words, he lays down his preaching in the parts of
it, admonishing and instructing every man; there be the parts: admonishing them
that were out of the way; instructing them that had entered in the right way. It
is Admonition and instruction, how they differ.
not enough to tell a man that he is in the way; but to counsel and instruct
him to hold on: which if he do, to assure him of life everlasting. Then
briefly, all the preaching of Christ stands in these two points, in admonishing
the sinner and telling him his fault, that he is in the wrong way: if he were a
King admonish him of his error, either in manners or doctrine. And then tell
him the high way of his manners and doctrine, wherein he should walk. If the
Minister cannot do this; yea if it were to a King, if he cannot admonish,
instruct, and teach him, he cannot preach Christ: let him therefore be silent,
and never speak a word of Jesus Christ. And what ever they be of the people,
that will not suffer admonition, and will not receive instruction, they shall
never be rich in Christ: if they had all the riches in the world, they are but
beggars, and shall dye like beggars. Who are these that he admonishes? and who
are these whom he instructs and teaches? Mark every word, he says not one
man, two men, this sort or that sort of men only; but every man, and al sorts
of them, Jew, Gentile, Grecian, and Barbarian; wise, unwise, Kings, subjects,
poor, rich. There is never a one exempted from admonition: never a soul
exempted from instruction. Wherein brethren, you may see that universal
dominion and lordship, that Christ Jesus has over every man, and every estate
of them; over Kings and subjects, rich and poor; over them that be in honor
and dishonor. Whatsoever rank thou be of, thou may well exempt thy self
from his dominion; but thou art not exempted in deed, though thou were a King
or a Monarch, the Gospel has a Lordship over thy head. If thou draw out thy
neck from under the yoke of the Gospel, thou shall one day undergo the
heavy yoke even of Gods vengeance and fearful wrath: so then we see the
universality of the Gospel of Jesus Christ over man, and how this ministry
that seems so contemptible to all men, is extended to all. And if thou were a
King, thou art under the ministry of the word; thou must suffer of the Minister
admonition; and thou must receive instruction. If thou were never so learned in
thy own conceit, thou art but a scholar to this ministry, and oughtst to sit
with reverence, and to hear. And lastly, ye see the common misery, that all
stands in in this world: all is out of the way; thou art out of the way by
nature, Every man by nature in the high way to damnation.
and in the high way to damnation. And therefore if thou lay not hold on
admonition, thou shall go to damnation. By nature thou art ignorant like an
Ass; and therefore perish shall thou if thou receive not instruction, by this
ministry of the Gospel. All have sinned, says the Apostle Romans 3. 23. and
fallen Ephesians. 2. 1 2. 3. Psalm. 32.
from the glory of God: and therefore admonition, and instruction extends to
all men. But I would ask, who is he that can admonish, teach and instruct
effectually? Paul says, We teach Christ, admonishing and instructing all men.
I answer then, Who can admonisis.
none can admonish, but he that can teach Christ. Will you say, that a
profane Philosopher could ever admonish or instruct any to frame their life
aright, howbeit he will take it upon him? No, no, only the man that can speak
of Jesus Christ, that man can admonish and teach others, because he only can
speak to thy heart. For brethren, it is the word of Psalm. 19. 7.
God that is able only to reform the heart. All the words under the sun
will not do it. For this word of the Gospel has only the concurrence of the
holy spirit of Jesus, that causes this word to go down to thy heart.

Now what doctrine is this he teaches? Instructing, says he, every man in
wisdom; so wisdom is his doctrine. O but in what measure? in all wisdom,
says he. It is perfect wisdom, there is no lack or want in that wisdom,
that he teaches. He teaches every man, and every rank and sort of men
wisdom, and a perfect wisdom, whole wisdom and full wisdom, even that
fulness of wisdom that was in Christ. O the treasure of wisdom and knowledge
that is in him! In the second chapter of this epistle, verse. 3. it is said, he
is full of wisdom and knowledge. Never any had all wisdom, except Christ; no
not all the Philosophers: only Jesus has this prerogative. This wisdom, this
full wisdom (I say) is given to the Apostles, and to Paul in a high measure;
but so, that they have it of Christ, and not of themselves. And therefore
Christ, as I have said, has only this prerogative, to have all wisdom in
himself. Look next: who teaches this wisdom? Paul an infirm weak man, he
teaches all wisdom. Then mark, Jesus Christ he has put these treasures in
earthen vessels, as it is said, 2. Cor. 4. 7. In a weak brittle body: so that
if thou take it not out of this vessel, Ministry.
thou shall never get it out of Christ: if thou contemn this treasure for the
frailty and ignominy of the vessel wherein it lies, thou shall never get
this riches of God. For the Lord has ordained that thou shall take it out of
the hand of a silly man. Again, you see the blessedness of the scholars of
Christ (O blessed is the soul that is a scholar to Christ!) It was counted a
blessed thing to be a scholar in Platoes school, or Aristotle's school, by
reason of the wisdom they taught: but Plato nor Aristotle never taught all
wisdom, nor true wisdom; but Wisdom.
thou who art a scholar in Christ's school, thou have the true wisdom, and
that not in a measure, but thou have all wisdom to make thee perfect in
knowledge, that is, thy blessedness. Alas, this miserable world knows not the
true blessedness! O would to God we could know what blessedness we are called
unto, by the preaching of this Gospel!

To go forward: What is the end of all this preaching, of this admonishing and
teaching; and that in all wisdom? The fairest end that ever was. What is that
end? That we (says he) may present every one perfect in Jesus Christ. The
meaning hereof is, that we may present every man and woman to whom we preach,
of what estate so ever they be, a perfect scholar, and that in Jesus Christ,
without whom there is no perfection. So this end of this preaching,
instructing, and admonishing is, a presenting of every man in perfectnes and
holiness, especially in the great day of the Lord, before that glorious
tribunal, and to set them up before their Judge. For if you will read Paul,
you shall gather thus much of him, that Heb. 13. 17
there is never a faithful preacher, but in that day he shall bring in his
company, them whom he has converted, and say, Lord, there is my company,
that were converted by my ministry, unto the faith in thy blood. Paul appears
to mean this in these words. Always I mark of this presenting, that all men
and women were once absent from God: if thou art to be presented, then it must
follow that thou wast absent. Nay, all flesh wandered away from his God.

The second thing I mark: what is the end of all this fervent The end of the
ministry.
preaching, admonition, and instruction? There is the end, to bring men and
women that wandered away home again 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19.
to their God in Jesus Christ: to bring thee who wast absent from God, present
to him, and to that sight of that countenance, in the which is the sacietie of
all joy. And in that day when every Pastor shall present so many, as he has
converted by the voice of the Gospel; then he shall see the fruit of his
labors: for let him preach what he will, yet he shall not see what is the
fruit of his travels till that day. Then it shall be said to him, Thou did
win these souls. Then he shall get his reward. He gets not his wages here
modified, as you would modifie them to one that serves you. Nay, nay, but at
that day he shall get a Crown of glory. Paul looked for a Crown, A Crown of
righteousness (says he) is laid up for me, which the Lord that righteous Judge
shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to all those who look for
his appearing, 2. Tim. 4. 8. Who shall be presented? Shall only Kings be
presented, who have heard the Gospel? shall only the rich be presented to
that glory? shall only the honorable? the Grecian, and not the Barbarian?
shall only the wise, and not the unwise, be presented? No, no, every man, from
the King to the very beggar that has heard the Gospel, as they all are
sinners without exception: all hearers of the Gospel of grace, all shall be
presented without exception in that day. Mark it. So thou, who hear this
Gospel, have no small consolation; look for a fair presenting of thee: only
lend thy ear, and thou shall not be frustrate of that glory, howbeit thou be
here ignominious and despised for this Gospels sake: yet shall it make thee
glorious. I promise thee it shall glorify thee, if thou will honor it in this
life. So all the faithful shall there be presented. And in what state? Perfect
(says he.) Brethren, a perfect wisdom, makes a perfect man in all knowledge
and glory; and be assured of it, howbeit thou hear the Gospel in
imperfection, yet if thou will continue in hearing, thou can not but come to
perfection; in the end thou shall be filled with all wisdom; and when thou
shall be presented, thou shall be presented in such a perfection, as the
learned in this world cannot attain unto. Thou art an idiot now in their
conceit; but if thou will hear Christ in his Gospel, thou shall be more wise
then ever Plato The wisdom of the world and of Christ how they differ.
or Aristotle; or the wisest worldling that ever was; and thou shall get
perfect wisdom in the end. And this is that difference betwixt that wisdom
of the Philosophers, and that wisdom of Christ. All their wisdom never
perfected any man, because it was imperfect in it self, as they themselves who
taught it were imperfect: but this wisdom of the Gospel which is the
wisdom of Christ and of God, as he is perfect, so is it perfect. So shall it
perfect the man that hears it, if he continue but a short time in hearing.

In the end of the verse, he shows in whom this perfection is. There is
nothing without Christ Jesus, there is no grace out of him: no beginning of
grace, no progress in grace, no perfection without him. Would thou begin in
grace? Begin in him. Would thou proceed in grace? go on in him. Would
thou be perfected? be perfect in him, and thou shall be perfected. For even in
this life by reason of that coniunctio^ we have with Christ through faith in
his blood, we have perfection even in this imperfection of ours. If thou be
ingrafted in Christ, thou art already perfect in him, and may stand up and
claim it, and say: O my God, I am perfect in Christ. But in that great day,
when we shall be presented (being in Jesus Christ, for the hold we get of him
here shall never let go, thou shall never be severed from him) thou shall have
a double perfection. Thou shall not only have his perfection and his glory,
which shall shadow thee and cover thee as a garment, but beside that, thou
shall then be filled with perfect glory thy self. All thy body and soul
shall be filled with exceeding great glory. So thou shall have no small
vantage in him. All comes to this exhortation, stick by Jesus, and be not
severed from him: for if thou sever from him, thou art severed from thy grace;
and if thou cleave to him, all thy glory and perfection shall never be
hindered. Let them rent thee and tear thee as they will, thou shall be glorified
and perfected in spite of their teeth. Fie then on thee creature, that suffers
thy self to be severed from Christ: cleave to him as ever thou will see glory
and perfection.

Now we come to the last verse. When he has spoken of the end of his
ministry, now he shows he labored to attain to it; unto the which (says
he) I labored. If there was ever any laborious man, Paul was one; he was a
painful man, never resting night nor day, and all to this end, to present many
to the Pains in the Ministry.
Lord Jesus. Then mark the lesson: would a Minister attain to the end of his
calling? let him be painful. A sluggish Minister will never do good; if he be
not painful, he is no loving man; for love is ever painful, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
He that loves, will strain himself, if it were to the death, for the weal of
them he loves. So if he be not painful, I doubt if ever he shall present
himself (let by other men.) Therefore the people should be careful to have a
painful man to watch over them. For the Minister is ordained to present thee
before the Lord, and he cannot do that if he be not painful. I will never
give the people counsel to hold a man, that is not painful to present and
gain them to God. And cursed be that Pastor that takes his ease and rest, and
lets the sheep of the Lords pasture go here and there astray: cursed be he,
and the Lord himself curses him in Ierem. 48. 10. that does the work of the
Lord negligently. Alas, it will not be the studying nor the preaching of a
Sermon, that will make thee to be a painful Minister; but it must be the
continual teaching of thy flock, and every one of them, admonishing them that
are out of the way, and by thy travels bringing them home, and instructing them
that are in Idleness in the Ministry dangerous.
the way of grace to go on, that they go not to the left hand, nor to the
right hand; but that they hold out the high way to Christ Jesus, never resting
till they get his presence; and night and day to be watching, and on his guard
praying for the people; this man is a painful man that does thus. So a
Minister should not be an idle body; neither can he be idle if he have any
whit of conscience in his calling. And I count a sluggish Minister worse then a
thief: he will go and study a piece of a Sermon, and up to the pulpit and
preach that; and then come his way: he thinks he has done enough, and never
more thought nor care has he of the people of God. O vain man! thou art a
sluggard, worse then a thief; thou shall present but few or none at that great
day. And therefore thy damnation shall be the greater: for the blood of all
these souls that through thy default dye ignorant, shall light about thy
shoulders and press thee down like milstones in hell; where thou and they
shall be tormented everlastingly. Yet there is more here, this presenting
craves more then labor or pain. He says, he strove, as a man fighting a
combat, or as a soldier under a banner. And to speak the truth, this man's
life is but a battle, as is plain in the 2. Tim. 4. 7. I have (says he)
fought a good fight: yea, and the sorest fight that is fought, is to fight for
the soul, to bring it out of the devils hands, and to put it in Christ's hands;
to bring it from hell, and to set it in heaven, How hard a thing it is to win
a soul.
from death to life, that is a sore fight. The man therefore that will bring
souls to God, he must not be a painful man only; but he must be a warrior,
and he must oppose himself standing and fighting with every one, who oppose
themselves against Christ, if they were Emperors or Monarchs; and he must
fight the battle to the end: otherwise, if he be not painful and a fighter
also, I doubt if he shall present himself, much less others, in that day to
Christ. A coward that will take a back side, he will not be meet to present
one: he is not for the field; away with him. Of all this I mark: it is a hard
thing to win a soul to God; nay the soul of one cannot be won, but with
great pain, and labor and fighting. Why then labor ye not with striving and
wrestling for the safety of your soul, that you may present it to the Lord
safe and sound. The soul of every body has many enemies, and mighty
enemies. O if thou wist how many enemies thy soul has to stay The enemies of
the soul.
thee from going to heaven, thou would not sit in such ease as thou do,
neglecting thy self and the time both: but thou would ever be laboring,
and painfully laboring and fighting to keep thy soul safe to the Lord.
Again, we see that heaven is a fair thing. For this is true, Difficilia quae
pulchra, The more glorious, the harder to get: so heaven is too fair a jewel
to lose through sluggishnes. No, these things in the world have no joy: A heap
of stones is no jewel: and if thou will lose the jewel of heaven for that,
look what advantage thou will make.

Now let us see what fruit reaped he of his pains, according to his working
the effectualnes of him (says he) who works in me mightily: the end of his
labor was effectualnes: he was effectual in the hearts of them, who heard
him. In despite of the devil and his impes, he drew great multitudes by the
power of the word, out of the kingdom of the devil and darkness, and wanne
them unto Christ. Take pains on thee, meet the devil, fight on to relieve
souls, and be assured thou shall see the effect of thy labors: for there was
never none that strove, but he shall be presented at that day glorious. Yet
albeit men would labor and strive never so much, some will perish. All shall
not perish in that great day; therefore let us fight with pain and labor. To
whom gives he the glory of his labors and effectualnes? ascribes he it to
himself? says he according to my effectualnes? No: how then? According to
his effectualnes that works in me mightily: that is God. So that all power and
all the effectualnes, that is in his hand, is not in himself, but in God, and
of God: and that power of God is craved, and is needful to the recovery of a
soul; yea of the silliest soul of you all. The silliest soul that is, shall
never be safe by any power or virtue of man: of the Minister there is no power
that can free a soul, but the almighty power of God. The power of God only
must free a soul.
This his power comes down from heaven while the Minister is speaking; and it
gains and conquereth the soul that hears the word. Therefore look not to
the man that teaches, but pray that the power of God would come down, and
free thy soul from bondage. And as thou should depend upon God, so when
thou have traveled all thy days, turn back thy praises unto God, and thank
him for it. The Apostle takes nothing to himself. Mark and behold the words,
he says, according to his effectualnes that works by me, that is in a word,
he takes the honor and reputation of an instructor, of a Minister and
servant of God, and God gives him that honor. As the Lord will have the honor
of the principal work to himself (and good reason he have it) so when he
has employed thee, he vouchsafes to impart honor unto thee. He will give
thee a honor that thou art his servant, and therefore 1. Cor. 3. 5. 6. he
says, Paul is nothing, and Apollo is nothing, but God who gives the increase.
When he has given God that glory; then in the fourth chapter verse. 2. he
says, let men so esteem of us, as the disposers of the mysteries of God: so
let men ever give God all glory and praise, and let them be assured the 1.
Sam. 2. 33.
God whom they honor in their calling, shall honor them again. Now to this
God be all honor and praise,

Amen.
THE THIRTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 1. 2. 3 1 For I would ye knew what great fighting I have
for your sakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my
person in the flesh,

2 That their hearts might be comforted, and they knit together in love, and in
all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to know the mystery of God
even the father and of Christ:

3 In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.


YE have heard, brethren, from the four and twentieth verse of the first
chapter of this epistle, how Paul has insisted upon his own person,
purchasing authority to his doctrine yt he has propounded, and to the
exhortation begun. As yet he continues in speaking of himself, from the
beginning of this second chapter, unto the sixth verse thereof. Then after he
returns to his exhortation, exhorting the Colossians to perseverance in that
faith which they had received, The sum of the former Lecture.
and exhorting them from vain traditions, obtruded or laid on them by the
false teachers; letting them understand that there was nothing, except Christ
and his Gospel to be acknowledged or received by them; and that all other
things without him, are but vanity.

Then to come briefly to our purpose, and this text now read: in the last verse
of the chapter preceding, ye heard the Apostle uttered what pains he took,
and what strife he suffered, and all for this end; to present every man without
exception perfect before God, especially in that great day. Now the Colossians
to whom he writes, whom he never saw bodily, nor they him, might have objected
against this his pain, labor and strife which he sustained. Well Paul, thou
pinest thy self; but for whom? what is that to us? It is not for us, thou
never saw us, nor we thee: so all thy labor, fighting and travel,
Objection.
is nothing profitable for us. The Apostle in the first verse meets Answer.
with and answers it, I would you knew (says he) what great fighting I have
for your sakes, and not for you only, but for your neighbors them of
Laodicea: (this is a town in Phrygia) and not for them only, but for as many
(of the Gentiles) as have not seen my person in the flesh. There is his
answer: it is plain: only hereout I shall gather some short notes for our
instruction. Then first I mark in the person of the Colossians, that moves the
question. They thought he could have no care of them, except he had seen them:
so commonly men think that they, who are absent from them, and never see them,
neither know them by their face (as we say, whom they have not seen face to
face) can have no care of them, nor love to them. This is the judgment
commonly of the world, and it is so indeed, for natural men, that have no
more than natural love, will speak thus of them, with whom they have not been
acquainted; I knew him not, what have I to do with them, whom I never saw nor
knew? What good can such men do to me, or I to them? This is the fashion of
the worldly men. But this is all wrong as you The difference between the
regenerate and unregenerate. The love of the Saints exceedes the love of the
world.
shall see, and therefore mark in the answer of Paul, what great difference
is betwixt natural men, and renewed men: the common sort of men, and the
servants of God.

In his answer we learn, that they that are of God, which have gotten that
new birth above nature and contrary to nature, the servants of Christ,
especially such as Paul was, they love them whom they never saw; have a care
over them whom they never knew: yea they will strive and fight to the death for
them. For why brethren, you must understand, concerning them that are conjoined
in the body of Christ, one hand will not know another better, then they will
know one another although they have not seen one another bodily, being far
distant in person and place the one from the other: because it is the spirit of
Jesus who ioynes them together, and gives every one a sure knowledge of the
other conjoined with Christ, as a member of that body. Hence comes this
lively knowledge which one christian will have of another, whom otherwise he
never saw in properperson. For they have not only this fleshly sight of
natural men, and bodily eye to see a man's body and face before them, but they
have a spiritual eye, whereby they can see to the farthest nooke and corner of
the world, and will send as it were the very spirit and soul out of the body
to the utmost part of the world, where they know there is any of Christ's
members. Therefore Paul says 1. Cor. 5. 4. When ye are gathered together and
my spirit, etc. Thou that have no care of the Saints of God, where ever they be
scattered, thou had never this spiritual and heavenly eye of Paul. Suspect
thy self; thou art but a natural man: and if thou have not a love to them to
embrace and fix them as it were in thy heart; alas, it is a token that thou
art not in that body of Christ as yet. Thirdly, in this answer I see it is
requisite that we love them that are Saints, howbeit we never saw them, nor they
us in this world; for when the conscience is touched with a feeling of that
love, there arises The feeling of love in our hearts.
a consolation to the soul. When thou feel in thy soul that the Saints
love thee, thou may be assured that God also loves thee: and therefore it
has pleased the Lord to leave in register the acts of the Apostles, containing
that love and care they had for the Saints, not only for their own time, but
also for all who should live to the end of the world. For Paul he had not only
a care of the Colossians, but also of the whole gentiles, his love and care
extended so far, that it reached out to the end of the world. If thou be a
member of Christ, the care of Paul reaches to thee, as one of that body. Then
lastly I note, it is so requisite that we understand of this love of the We must
endeavor to make our love known to the Saints.
Saints to us, whether we have seen them, or they us or not: that the man that
loves us although he be absent; yet he should strive to make his love known
to us, by a register and putting of it in writing, as Paul did. He writes up
and registers his love to us. It is no shame to Paul to tell us that he loves
us, if so be he have the glory of God and our consolation before his eyes. So
all comes to this in a word: it is a comfortable thing for thee to know, that
the Saints of God love thee; and that thy pastor loves thee; and it is an
argument that God loves thee, and that thou art dear to him. This for Paul's
answer in the first verse.

To come to the second verse, and to go forward word by word, he sets down
the end of his care he had of them, and his strife he sustained for them: the
end is, that their hearts might be comforted, that they might get consolation,
not in their head, Consolation is felt in the heart.
but in their heart. Consolation is in the heart: It is not a fleeting thing in
the head; it is not an imagination or fantasy in the brain: it is not
superficial, but it occupies the whole heart: it takes root in the heart, and
it spreads all the roots of it through all the parts of the same: and this is
the true consolation. Then brethren, you may perceive by these words, that all
men by nature are comfortles: no man by nature has Every man comfortles by
nature.
any consolation. O comfortles miserable creatures are we! if thou were borne a
king, thou art borne a comfortles body, and miserable by nature: for by nature
there is no consolation to mankind after the fall of Adam, but woe and
misery. For as touching these earthly things and benefits, what sound
consolation is in them? The light of the sun ministers no true consolation to
man, that has no more but nature; nay the more blessings, which might minister
of themselves consolation, the more curses to thee if thou stand in nature: the
greater honor, the greater misery, if thou stand in nature only. And again,
all these benefits shall serve to thy welfare if thou be in Christ, through
faith. This preaching of the word, it ministers consolation to thy silly soul.
For the end of it (as this place lets you see) is, to minister true consolation
to the comfortles. And this is the end of all the care, travel and strife that
the Apostle The end of the gospel and ministry thereof is to bring consolation
unto men.
takes to minister comfort unto thee. And therefore John says in his 1 Epistle
chap. 1. 4. These things write I unto you, that your joy may be full. So all
that is spoken and written in the Scriptures, serves this end, that thou may
have sound joy in thy heart. And thou that wilt not take consolation at the
hand of the minister, I denounce against thee though thou werst a king, thou
shall get no consolation in this world, and thou shall see no joy nor
consolation in the life to come.

To come to the next word. By what means come they to this consolation? by
being joined and compacted in one, altogether as the members of a man: there is
the mean to obtain this consolation. This lesson is easy, the mean of true
consolation and comfort, of sound joy, tranquillity and peace of conscience is
this, a blessed conjunction with the members Communion with Christ and his
members brings sound consolation.
of Jesus Christ. This is it that we call the communion of Saints, and to be
joined in the society of the Church here in earth. And thou that wilt stand
thy self alone, if thou cut thy self off as a rotten member, and disdain the
society of the Saints, and run from them, run thy way if it were to the end
of the world, the curse of God follows thee. And therefore this being the
mean of this consolation, without the which no salvation nor joy can be, he
that would have that comfort, let him be joined with the members; and the
minister that would comfort any, let him labor to make them members of that
body of Christ; that the joy of Jesus Christ may flow down from Christ to them.

To come to the next word. He sets down the mean, whereby this coniunctio^ is
brought to pass, being conjoined together (says he) through love. Albeit that
faith goes before by nature, yet I will follow the text as the words lie. The
mean whereby thou art joined with the body of Christ, and stand The first
mean of the communion of Saints. Love the band to bind us with men, but faith
with God.
with that society of the Church in the earth, is love. Would thou be
coupled with the body? love thy neighbor. One member of this natural body
will love another: So if thou be a member of the body of Christ, thou must
needs love thy neighbor truly. And he that cannot love, nor will not love,
he shall never be joined with the body; for wanting love, no band can bind
thee to Christ, nor his Church. A malicious evil body that cannot love (call
him as ye will a christian) he is not in the body; and so has no consolation;
for without the conjunction with Christ, there is no comfort. Therefore he that
will have comfort, let him be conjoined with the body, and he that would be
conjoined with the body, let him love the members of the body. Love God first
above all; and then thy neighbor as thy self. And therefore John in his first
chapter of his Epistle, when he had spoken of this conjunction, he ever in the
rest speaks of love. For without this love, there is no conjunction, nor
society with his Church.

The second mean of this conjunction is in these words, The second mean of
our communion with the Church.
And in all riches of the full assurance of understanding: by these words he
means nothing else, but this faith in Jesus, which by nature in this
conjunction is foremost, and love follows. For (to speak it so) faith is the
master sinew, that binds the members with the head, and this love is the band
which binds up the members among themselves. Then to come briefly to the
matter: here ye see the chief mean of this society with the Church. One
faith in Jesus Christ, not two, or three, or four faiths: sundry faiths will
not make thee a member of the body True faith.
of Jesus Christ. If thou be of another faith then this true faith, which has
this full assurance; then the Church will not be conjoined with thee: it will
be like a brazen and fiery wall to hold thee back from that society. So that
without one faith there cannot be one body. Therefore Paul when he has spoken
of one body, then he subioynes one faith; meaning that there cannot be one
body without one faith. Mark the place Ephesians. 4. 5. All these bands of blood,
of consanguinitie, will not join men together, if faith join them not: if
thou were all my kin, if thou have not one faith with me, we cannot be joined
together. And therefore considering this, whatsoever thou be that would
labor to conioyne a body with the Church, strive day and night to bring that
person to the faith of the Church. For he will never be conjoined with the
body, that has not this faith of the body.

But let us mark the words; All riches (a high word) of the full assurance of
understanding. To begin at this, he calls faith Faith is an understanding.
The woeful state of such as be ignorant of the Gospel.
an understanding. Faith is not ignorance and blindness, but it is an
understanding; and thou that art altogether ignorant of God and of Jesus
Christ, thou have no more faith then a dog. Brag as thou will of it,
ignorant men will begin to crake of faith, as though they knew it. Faith is an
eye that sees more clearly, then all the eyes of the world. It is a light
Faith is an eye.
and understanding, the eye of the soul whereby we see God, and his son
Jesus Christ our Savior: yea faith is more then an understanding, it is a
certainty of the whole truth of God, especially of the promises in Jesus
Christ. When thou art sure that every word of the Gospel is true, that is the
assurance of faith: and with this there is conjoined a hearty embracing of the
heart: for when thou art sure of the promises, O how the heart will fold about
ye promises of God! Have you not assaied it yet? When the heart has assurance
of the truth, O how it will cleave to it! For as it is said, A true saying is
worthy to be embraced. Now faith is not only this full assurance, but it is a
riches. The believer most rich and most joyful.
Ye that would be rich, take heed; faith is not a poor thing, a beggarly
thing. A faithful body is no beggar, but he is rich. But yet more, he calls
it not only riches, but he calls it all riches. So there is no riches without
it: thou that have not faith, have no riches: for howbeit thy hand be full, yet
if thou want faith thy hand is empty. He that has not faith is ever poor,
and the beggerliest creature that is: but he that has faith, give him but a
coat on his back, he is rich enough, and he is the ioyfullest body that ever
was, ioyfuller by ten thousand times, then these worldlings that gruntle on
this pelf of this world. Well, well, then get faith, and think that without
it, thou art not rich: for if thou have an empty bag in thy heart, thou art but
a poor miserable creature.

Brethren, ye heard how Paul speaking of this mystery of the Gospel, he called
it the riches of God hid: now speaking of faith he calls it riches also, and
all riches. So I see all is riches, Jesus is riches, all things concerning
Jesus be riches. That mystery of him, is the riches of glory. This faith and
full persuasion is riches. And therefore will thou be rich? seek to Christ,
seek to this Gospel, swallow it up, seek to faith. And be not content till
thou have got a heartfull of this faith of Jesus Christ: and then I promise
thee thou shall be rich, and more joyful then if thou had all the world,
howbeit thou leave not a penny behind thee.

Now to come to the rest of the words that I have read, they tend to the
declaration of that, that is spoken, especially of the riches of faith.
Defining first the riches of faith, he calls it the knowledge that was hid up
in a mystery; and at last revealed to the world, to the everlasting
consolation of the world. Then I see this faith is a relative to the mystery,
that is, to the Gospel, and to speak it so, the object of faith, which faith
sees and understands, is the Gospel. Now concerning this mystery, you
heard before, it was the riches of glory. Well, if the object of faith be the
riches of glory, of necessity thy faith must be glorious and rich. For a rich
object, makes a rich knowledge. The Gospel the object of faith.
Know thou all the Sciences in the world? all is but beggarly knowledge, if
thou want the knowledge of faith. Therefore thou who would know, strive to
know this rich mystery; for it shall give theefull riches. Now in the words
God the subject of the Gospel.
following he insists upon this subject of faith. It is the mystery of God;
then the subject of it is God: O that is a fair science that speaks of God!
All other sciences that speak of the creatures, it is but of dirt they speak
of, in respect of him who made them all. One will come of, and speak of the
earth, of fishes, and paint out a fair story of this King, or that King, of
corns, of lands, and that will be his subject. Another will go upward, and
speak of the heaven, and stars: but what is all that, in respect of that
glorious Creator, but dirt? So this Gospel of Jesus Christ, is only the
eminent science, that mounts The Gospel the science of sciences.
up above all sciences. And therefore this mystery and this Gospel that
speaks of this subject, must be glorious, albeit the coat of it be but sober
and simple; howbeit it be preached by simple men, and therefore our great men
think nothing of it. But if thou saw the glory and riches that is in this
Gospel; O thou would seek it before all riches and all glory! It would be
thy joy day and night, teach it who will. Well then, take the Lord Jesus, who
is offered to thee in this base clothing, as thou would be partaker of him in
glory, when this coat shall be shaken off.

The Apostle having made mention of God, he leaves not off so; but lays him
out in two glorious personages, and says, God even the father, and of Christ.
God (says he) that stands in these two personages, glorious and equal in
glory, the Father and the Son. So what place would ye have to know the
Christ proved very God.
Godhead of the Lord our Savior, if this place will not tell you? For when he
has set down the Father to be the only true God, he sets down his sone Jesus
Christ to be God equal with him in all things every way. So that Jesus thy
redeemer he is so man, that he is God glorious for ever. I see again there is
no true understanding of God, but that whereby he is known distinct in
persons. It is not enough to know that he The true knowledge of God.
is one in essence, but if thou know him well, thou must know him distinguished
in three persons, the Father, Son, and holy Spirit: all eternal, all equal
in power, glory, and majesty; only one true and everliving God. If this
(brethren) be the true knowledge of God, as it is indeed; O the blindness the
world has lien long in! especially the Gentiles. Plato seemed to have great
knowledge of God, he was called divine Plato, but he had no knowledge in deed:
for he knew him not distinct in persons. And all other knowledge is to
damnation: for there was never a science that made this plain, but this
Gospel of Jesus preached by the Apostles, and left to this day in register to
us. All the science of Philosophers is mere folly, in respect of this science
of the Gospel. The knowledge that the Jews had of God, was but as a
glimmering: for all were under shadows and types; but in the Gospel there is
the full sight. So that as thou see the Sun shining, whereby thou art able
to discern and judge of every object: so thou having this Gospel shining in
thy soul, thou shall see distinctly the God of heaven in his essence, and
shall discern the persons of the Trinity, wherein thou shall find joy.

O the joy that arises upon this spiritual knowledge and sight of God, as he
has revealed himself in his word! Always (brethren) mark the gloriousnes of
this Gospel. It lets thee see clearly and distinctly thy God, thy redeemer:
if thou 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4.
wilt prease to look without it to see him, thou shall be the more blind, and
the more dim, and the further from seeing of him. Therefore strive to get a
sight of God in his Gospel; otherwise thou shall not get a sight of him to thy
comfort.

Now making mention of Christ, he subioynes a description of Christ, In whom,
says he, that is, in Christ Jesus, is all treasure (weigh every word) of
wisdom and knowledge. I cannot see when ever he names Christ, that he can let
him go so, but the heart is so full of him, that his mouth is full of him
also. He before called him that hope of glory: and now naming him, he says,
In whom is all treasure of knowledge and wisdom. Alas brethren, to speak
this by the way, this tastlesse speaking of Christ, testifies that there is
little of Christ in the heart of men How to speak comfortablie and cheerfully
of Christ.
and women now adays. If thy heart were filled of him in any measure, thou
would ever be speaking of him, and so fully as thy heart could devise. Now
the Lord teach us to speak of him so joyfully, as we may ever more and more
take pleasure to speak of his name, to his everlasting praise; that we may
find what virtues be in the Lord Christ Jesus, Amen.

But to come to the words, he lays out the rich merchandise that is in him
(take heed ye that would be merchants) and that The riches of Christ.
that is in him, he calls wisdom and knowledge. I will not be curious to
distinguish them, except ye will call wisdom that hid mystery; and
knowledge, this knowledge of earthly and heavenly things: all is in Christ, he
has this knowledge: these two are distinguished Romans 11. 33. O the deepnes of
this riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! For there is no other
wisdom but in Jesus Christ; for the fulness of God is in him. Now he calls it
not bare knowledge and wisdom, but he says, In whom are the treasures of all
wisdom and knowledge. Many will have wisdom and knowledge, but never a one
has the storehouse of it, save Jesus Christ. Now he says not the treasures,
but all treasures; to show you that there is not a treasure without him. Ye
have heard before of this fulness: In him (says he) this fulness dwells. Now
again he says, In whom are all treasures: And again in a higher style,
hereafter verse. 9. In whom dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily: look what a
Savior ye have, all is included within the veil and nature of man, and shines
as it were through the veil. Then of this I conclude, there is nothing to be
sought without him. Thou that have need, seek nothing without Jesus. For he
that would be wise without Jesus Christ, he would be wise without God, because
the father is in him. So thou that wilt have all fulness, seek it in him.
Brethren, if this Jesus that is revealed this day, were sought earnestly, we
would find it by plain experience in our selves, that there was nothing
lacking in him that might do us good; but he would minister unto us wisdom
and knowledge, and all other benefits. And I charge thee under the pain of thy
life, that thou go to no other, to seek for ought without him. Seek not to
man's traditions, to these deceivers of Gods people. May not their deceits be
perceived by you? May you not see that poison of theirs in their doctrine? Fie
on that man of sin; fie on him that drownes all the world with his foul
stink of traditions. Rest upon this Gospel, and spit at this beast, and this
poison that he offers to the world. Content thee with this Gospel. Would to
God I or thou could attain to the thousand part of this Gospel. If thou wist
what this Gospel were, and what treasures of wisdom were in it, thou would
never let it be out of thy sight night nor day. Thou would spit at all other
doctrine and tradition, that sauoured not of this Gospel. For in this Gospel is
light and life; but in man's tradition, thou shall find no light nor life.
Darkness and damnation shall be the end to them which embrace them. O damnation
to thee o man that leaves the fountain of living waters, and diggest up to thy
self cesternes of rotten water! Woe unto thee that leaves the truth of the
Gospel, to follow the traditions and fantasies of man's brain! Lord deliver us
from that poysonfull doctrine, and they that are in the chains of it, the Lord
deliver them out of the same, and give them this full riches of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, one everlasting
God be praise for ever,

Amen.
THE FOVRTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE Epistle of PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. 4 And this I say, least any man should
beguile you with entising words:

5 For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
rejoicing and beholding your order, and your steadfast faith in Christ.

6 As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him,

7 Rooted and built in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.


AFter (brethren) that the Apostle has spoken at large of his own person, to
purchase authority to his doctrine and exhortation: now in the first verse
which I have read, he returns to the exhortation begun in the first chapter;
taking the occasion of the words going before. For there the Apostle showed
that in Jesus Christ were all treasures of wisdom and Coherence.
understanding hid. Upon this he concludes in this verse, seeing in him are
hid all treasures of wisdom and knowledge, therefore be not wise without him:
seek not wisdom without him. There are false teachers entered in that make you
think there is wisdom without him; but I say unto you, if you would not be
deceived, seek no wisdom without him: for in him is the treasure of all
wisdom and knowledge. There is the force of the argument briefly. Now mark
the order of the Apostle. Before he exhorted them that they should not be
deceived by the enticing of men's words and doctrine, and he lays out the
reason taken from the treasure and riches of wisdom and knowledge that is in
Christ. So the Apostle to the Hebrews 13. 8. being about to exhort them, that
they should not be carried about with sundry and strange doctrine; he lays
down this ground; Christ is today and yesterday etc. therefore be not carried
away from him. As if he would say, there was never salvation without him, from
the beginning of the world; and there shall be no salvation without him to the
end thereof: therefore stick to him. This order teaches us this lesson: that
after we have let men see what is in Christ, after we have opened as it were,
and laid abroad before the eyes of the world, all that store of wisdom and
knowledge that is in him: then it is time to exhort men to leave all their
doctrine and vanity, and enticing words of men; and to stick by this Christ,
in whom there is such wisdom and knowledge. For brethren, you must
understand; men if they see not true wisdom, they will drink in vanity: the
heart must be filled with The heart must be filled with something.
something, if thou see not the truth, thou must drink in lies. And more, when
thou have begun to receive the truth (as these Colossians did) except that
truth be opened and laid before thy eyes as it were to be seen what is in it,
and what is the meaning and true sense of the same: except this Gospel (I say)
be continually taught; O vain man, thou will go to the puddle of men's
fancies; thou will fall again to men's doctrine, The preaching of the Gospel
must be continued.
traditions and vanity; thou will be a Papist, yea and an Atheist to. And
therefore there is nothing more needful then this, that these riches of Christ
be laid out before our eyes, and ever told to us, that in Christ is all
wisdom and knowledge. I ask, what is the cause that this miserable world, all
men, and all nations for the most part be so drunk in men's dreams? (what is
the Popes doctrine but dreams and poison? drink it in, thou shall be poisoned
with it) I tell thee, because these false deceivers close up the Gospel, and
swaddle up Christ in the swaddle bands, this is the cause that these poor
souls see no better; and therefore they are led to damnation blindfolded. O
miserable bodies! these foul spirits send out their poison to dampne the world
withal, as alas the greatest part of Europe this day can tell.

But to stick to the words: The Apostle says, I speak this, least any man
should beguile you with enticing words. (...) are set out in fair flattring
talk. Then ye see here, he opposes to all the treasures of Christ enticing
words: to wisdom he opposes flattring words. There is no wisdom without
Christ, all is plain sophistry, as it is called in the Schools. Then in a
word, all wisdom being in Christ, if thou yt wilt be wise without him, seek
thy wisdom where thou will, run to Rome, run here and there, to the
Jesuits to get wisdom out of them; thou shall be filled with dreams, thou
shall find nothing but sophistry; thou shall not meet with wisdom. All
that thou shall see and find, shall be but enticing words. And what will thou
win by this? He says, that ye be not deceived, and took in a grin. Thou
shall be taken in a grin as a beast, if thou seek ought without him. Alas
brethren, when I remember Antichrist and his woefully deceive souls
this miserable world, it is a pity to see how it is abused by these traitors
and deceivers of men's souls. O that damnation and judgment that shall fall on
that cursed kingdom of Antichrist! For I assure you, this world for the
greatest part are taken in the grins by Antichrist; and so reserved to
judgment. And the more miserable are they, that are in the grin of Antichrist,
that they think that they are in sweet bands; for the end shall let ye see
how bitter the bands were: let them now be to thee as sweet as they will, thou
shall find in the end that of all bands in this world, they are the worst.

To go forward. He has uttered a great care to the Colossians, whom he never
saw nor knew. Therefore they might have said; what care is this thou have of
us? thou never sawst us, nor we thee. He meets with this in the next words: O
ye Colossians (says he) though I be absent from you in the flesh, yet am I
with you in the spirit. Then ye see the Saints the true members of Christ, they
have a sight and knowledge of others, that the world knows not of. This world
and natural men, that have Judgment. and love of the world concerning other
men.
not the spirit of Jesus, think that none can reach out to the worlds end, and
can have knowledge of another, nor any care over him if he see him not with his
bodily eye; but al is vain. For a spiritual man will send his soul to the
end of the world, and upon this he will utter his care unto him by his
exhortation. And this is a token of a greater thing, even of this joining of
the godly together, that one day they shall be together soul and body. If thou
have a heart and care with the Church of God, thou shall reign with her in
heaven for ever. And in deed if thou have not this, it is a venture if ever
thou reign with her.

Now when he has set down this spiritual presence with them, he subioynes
the effect of it, rejoicing (says he) there is the effect of that spiritual
presence, his soul was with them, Spiritual presence of the faithful one
with another.
and with joy he rejoiced to see them. So this presence spiritual, when the
heart of the faithful is with others, it is no fantacie, as a vain head will
think: but I say thou had never such joy, as the faithful will have with
others in a spiritual presence. Thou never knew this joy, that have not
this spiritual presence. And brethren, it is even with the Church, as it is
with Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 8. he says, you have not seen Christ with your eyes,
yet believing in him who is far from us in his bodily presence, and loving
him, howbeit he be away, ye rejoice with a joy that is unspeakable and
glorious. It is even so with the Church, howbeit we see not the members of
Christ in the body; yet if we have the spiritual eye, we shall see them and
they us, and shall have this spiritual joy, spoken of in this place. And this
same joy that is in this life, with the Saints, is a sure argument of a passing
joy, that we shall have with the Church, when we are gathered to our head
Jesus Christ, when with the eye of the body we shall see those glorified
bodies. O vain body! thou never wist what joy, glory, and beauty means,
if thou attain not to this, to be a member of Jesus Christ, and to have a
spiritual presence with others.

Now follows what matter of joy he heard in them. Beholding (says he) your
order: then the stedfastnes of your faith. He saw this in spirit, and not with
the eye of the body. Brethren, certainly the thing that man walks in, if it
be in the joy of the heart, it must be pleasant; it must be a pleasant sight,
that will make a man to rejoice. Ye see when a man sees a thing that is not
pleasant, he will not rejoice. So that except the man of God see that that is
pleasant, he will not, neither can he rejoice in heart. Now what is more
beautiful then the spouse of Jesus, saving the Lord himself, who is the
bridegroom? There is nothing more beautiful to the spiritual eye, then the
Church of Christ; howsoever she seems to be vile in this world.

The first part of this beauty, is Order, that is, a well ordered The beauty
of the Church.
life, holiness of manners, according to the rule of the Gospel: so holiness of
life is the order he saw among them: and thou shall never see a face so
pleasant as holiness is, when it is uttered by a well ordered life. That is the
fairest beauty that a man or woman can have: if thou want this, wash and deck
thy self as well as thou can, thou art no better then dirt and dung, that is
trodden under feet. If a man look upon thee with a spiritual eye, if thou
were a Queen, pamper thy self up as thou will, want thou holiness, thou art
but dirt and filthy dung, for all thy outward bravery of attire.

The second thing that made him to rejoice with them in Faith.
spirit, it was deeper then the first: Holiness is outward: therefore he goes
further down, and in through their life he looks and sees the faith that lay
in the heart: that is to say, of the outward behavior, he gathers more of
their inward faith, from the which holiness proceeds. For certain it is, that
thou can not be holy, if thou have not a good action in thy hand; nor an holy
word in thy mouth, if faith be not in thy heart. So when a man has a
spiritual eye, he will press into the heart, and not stand upon outward
appearances. O then how great is the beauty of faith! Thy outward actions are
nothing without this faith in thy heart; and it is a thing most pleasant to
God, when he sees faith in thy heart, and that thou beleeuest in Jesus. He
calls it not simply faith, but he calls it that solidnes, that stedfastnes
of faith in Jesus Christ. Well, thou that would have faith, thou must have a
solid faith: if thou be wagging and wavering, and nodding here and there; so
that when thou art in Scotland, thou art of the religion there professed; when
thou art in France and Germany, of Travelers into Spain and Italy.
the religions professed there; and when thou art in Spain, Italy and Rome,
thou art of their religion: Is that thy faith? That faith of thine shall do
thee no good, thou art but a vain body, there is no steadfastness in thee;
and except there be steadfastness of faith in thy heart, thou shall never be a
holy liver. Many will profess at this day, I have faith in Christ Jesus, I
believe: but to come to their life, there is no such thing: and this is because
there is no sound faith in their heart; but their faith is only in the tip of
their tongue. For thou that leadest a life contrary to faith, thou have no
faith at al. For the Apostle seeing a godly life in these Colossians, he
gathers that there was a solid faith in them. Then in a word, there is the
matter of joy, that the godly have, when they see first that outward How we
may truly joy in our brethren, when we see them stand fast in faith, and live
godly and righteously.
beauty of holiness and godliness of conversation in thee or in any man; and
then that steadfast faith from whence it springs, there is matter of joy. When
we see a Church live godly, and then have faith steadfast in Christ, here the
joy of the heart will arise: and by the contrary, there cannot be a greater
displeasure, then to see a Church out of order, living a life directly contrary
to their profesion; there is the displeasure and grief of the faithful.

And so to come to our selves, if we would be pleasant to others that never saw
us, let us live after this order, and seek to have faith in Jesus: otherwise
be sure, they that never saw thee, will be witnesses against thee to thy just
damnation, that thou professest one way, and have lived clean contrary to thy
profession.

In the next verses, he returns to his exhortation, and gathers his
conclusion. Therefore (says the Apostle) as ye have received Christ Jesus the
Lord, and begun exceeding well both in life and faith; so walk in him,
persevere in him: there is the exhortation. Note here first, the thing that
should move a Church, or any person to perseverance. What should move thee to
hold on to the end? Have thou begun in holiness of life and faith in the heart?
The beginning should move thee to go forward to the end. A good beginning
would have a good end: otherwise it had been better thou had never begun. I
shall give thee a faithful counsel, either mind never to be a Christian man
or woman, or else beginning once, and taking that name upon thee, hold on,
persevere for ever. For if thou Perseverance.
persevere not, thy damnation shall be double, and thou shall curse the day
that ever thou heardst of Jesus: so Jesus shall be either salvation to thee or
damnation. Peter says in his second Epistle chap. 2. 21. It had been better
for them, not to have known the way of righteousness, the^ after they have
known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto them. It had been
better for thee never to have received this word and doctrine of the Gospel,
then to have fallen back from this holy doctrine.

Then I note the manner of perseuering: Even as thou have received him walk in
him. As if he would say, ye have received him in simplicity of heart, ye have
received the Gospel without the traditions of men, persevere in the same
manner, and put not to it so much as one tradition of any man. The Lord
Traditions
Jesus cannot abide that the invention of man's brain should be foysted into
his Gospel. So either keep the Gospel in the own simplicity, and spit out
the dreams and traditions of men (which they labor to put to it, as though it
were not sufficient;) or else never know it, let it go by thee, and then woe
to thee evermore. Keep it in it own simplicity: for if thou mingle of thy
inventions with it, thou shall lose the efficacy and force of the Gospel.
Embrace once Papistrie, I assure thee thou have fallen from Christ: thou have
but fancied to thy self the name of a Christian. Therefore either lay the
Gospel from thee, and take thee to traditions, or else keep it in it own
simplicity.

Then thirdly I see what faith is. Faith is nothing else but the What faith is,
and perseverance.
receiving of Christ, not with the hand, but with the heart. He is given thee;
thou receiuest nothing but that that is offered. And what is preseuerance? A
walking, and going forward in Christ. Would thou persevere? Thou must not
sit down, thou must not stand still, but thou must go forward in him, and
make progress: at the least thou must strive to go on, unto the time thou
meet with him. A body that sits down shall never mere with him: thou must
therefore go on thy way, and be on thy journey, or else thou shall lose him.
If thou make not progress, thou shall go backward. Therefore run, having thy
eye upon the goal, and count not that thou have done, till thou get the goal,
which shall be in the day of the resurrection.

In the next verse when he has exhorted them to perseverance, he lets them
see how they shall come by this perscuerance. Mark the way, if thou persevere
in him: Thou must be well knit up and fast joined with him; or else thou can
never go on foot for foot with him. This conjunction is set down in two
borrowed words. The first is rooted in him: no, never tree took such root in
the earth, as thou must take in Christ, if thou go with him. And therefore he
borrowed this word from a tree, and if thou be rooted in Jesus, that sap of
life must run from that root, and make thee to grow. The second word is, as
we would go forward with him, we must be grounded upon him, as a building
builded upon a foundation. Nay, there was never building so builded and settled,
as thou must be in Christ, if ever thou will persevere, or else the least blast
of wind shall blow thee away. As the Lord in the Gospel in the similitude of
the house, builded upon the sea sand does declare, Matthew. 7. 26. 27. Then
mark: we must have a straight conjunction with Christ, if we will go forward
with him. Therefore our care should be ever to see, that we take root further
and further in Christ, and to see that steadfast foundation laid up under our
hearts, and that we grow every day more and more on him. Well is the man that
can enter into this count with himself. Then learn thy lesson at the tree,
when thou see it rooted in the earth: say, O Lord let my heart be builded on
thee, and as the building rises, so raise thou A prayer.
up my heart on thee. And the Lord shall make thee a fairer building then all
the buildings in the world. Then that which he has spoken in borrowed
speeches, he speaks it plainly, and he says, established in faith. As if he
would say, it is nothing that I mean, but your stablishing in faith. O the
vnstabilitie of man without faith! O vain man that has not faith! If thou
find any stabilitie in faith, thou shall say; O my heart where have thou been
straggling? there is no anchor that can fasten or stablish thine heart, but
faith and hope in Jesus Christ. When by this anchor thou art anchored on him,
then thou shall stand so fast, that no wind nor wave of the sea shall be able
to remove thee. And therefore except thou would go lose thy self, seek to
get thy heart anchored on Jesus, who is only able to make it fast. A Papists
heart has no stedfastnes nor stabilitie, because it is grounded on the wrong
place; it is founded upon Antichrist.

Now to the establishing of thy heart, he requires two properties. To stablish
thine heart in the faith note two things.
The first is, in the faith that ye have been instructed into, that is by the
Gospel of Christ. Then (brethren) there is nothing will stablish thy heart,
but that faith that is taught out of the Gospel. If thou get not thy faith out
of this Gospel, the Scripture of God, and that only without paring or adding
of men's dreams, thou shall never get it. The Lord shall justify this one day;
seek it where thou will, thou shall not find it without the Gospel. Seek it
in the Councels of the Fathers; seek it among the Popes Clergy; thou shall
not find it amongst them; thou shall ever be the further from it. For the
Apostle streightens them sore: he sees lownes creeping in under the cloak of
Christ, and stealing in traditions of men's wisdom: Therefore he warnes them,
and says, I charge you that ye seek says only out of this Gospel. And this
day also, I charge all flesh from Kings to beggars, to seek faith only out of
this Gospel; and spit at the vile inventions of men: or else thou shall never
see the face of God, nor the joys of that life in him. Therefore stick by
this Gospel, and suffer not thy self to be severed from it: yea rather suffer
thy skin be pulled off thee as the Martyrs did, before thou should be
parted from the Gospel.

The second property that is required to the establishing of thy heart in
faith, is; Thy faith must abound, abounding (says he) with thanksgiving. It
must abound, it must grow abundantly; it must not begin only, but it must
grow degree by degree. For (brethren) O how void is the heart of man of grace,
and full of vanity. It will not be a degree of grace yt will fill thy heart, nor
two, nor three, etc. but there must be abundance. Faith must abound and grow,
so long as thou abidest in this world: thy heart must ever be filling. But alas
thou art ever filling thy body, and forgets thy heart. O but thou must be more
careful to fill thy heart, then thy body! Cry therefore ever to have thy
heart filled with faith in Jesus: and say, Lord, as thou fillest my body, so
fill my heart also. For thy body being Pray that thy heart may be filled with
faith.
filled shall perish: but if thy soul be filled with the faith of Jesus, thou
shall live for ever and ever. And therefore seek this abundance, and be not
content with one degree of grace or two, or six or seven: for there is no
facietie till thou get that sight of the countenance of Jesus in the heaven, as
he is.

Now he ioynes with this abundance, thanksgiving: as if he would say, as thou
find thy faith grow, ever thank him that gives thee it. For these two are
inseparably coupled together; so that if you take thanks away, there will be
no abounding of faith. Thou that can not thank God, thou have no faith: thou
that can not persevere in thanksgiving, thou growest not in faith. For
thanksgiving is an inseperable companion of faith. Growest thou in
thanksgiving? thou growest in faith: True signs of faith.
for it is a plain argument of the growth of faith in thee. Have thou a
pleasure to pray, and to ask, and to thank God? thou can not get a surer
token of the abundance of faith then that. Then thou may rejoice and say,
Praised be God, my faith grows, and I shall get daily a cleerer sight of the
face of Christ, and so shall be made conformable to my Savior the Lord Jesus.
Now the Lord work this grace and earnestnes in our hearts, for this his
Christ's sake. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be praise for ever,

Amen.
THE FIFTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 8. 9. 10. 8 Beware least there be any man that spoils
you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, through the traditions of men,
according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ:

9 For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.

10 Andye are complete in him which is the head of all principality and power.


THe Apostle (brethren) having set down his doctrine, as ye heard in the first
chapter: he adds hereunto an exhortation and admonition. He has exhorted to
perseverance in faith, now he admonishes to beware of false teachers and of
false doctrine. He began his exhortation in the first chapter: then having
spoken something of himself, partly in the first, partly in the second; he
returns and gives this admonition to beware of false teachers. Then after he
returns to the exhortation again, calling upon them to be constant in the
doctrine once received. Now in the text that we have read this day, he
returns to the admonition, admonishing them to beware of false teachers. Then
briefly to come to the words: Beware (says he) least there be any man that
spoils you. The word in the original language signifies, Let no man The sense
of the word spoils.
carry you away as a pray. The word is borrowed from robbers and thieves that
come upon a fold of sheep, and carry away the sheep as a pray. Even so
false teachers are naught else but robbers, brigands, thieves that come upon
the sheepfold of the Lord Jesus, and carry away his sheep as a pray. The
manner how they do this; is not by strong hand or by violence, but it is by
Philosophy, by deceiving of the sheep and snaring of them: first by
sophistry, and then when they have snared them, and trapped them, they bind
them, and so take them on their shoulders, and they go on willingly being
deceived. Therefore, would thou not be a pray to a false teacher? keep thee
from his deceit, keep thee from the Papists traditions, men's Philosophy. For
all their religion is mere peltrie. I say to thee their Philosophy, that is
their deceit, and vanity in doctrine, The philosophy of the enemies of the
Church more to be feared then their violence or power.
is more to be feared then their violence and power, because by it only they
get their pray: if thou keep thee from their deceit, they shall not be able
to take thee as a pray. As for their violence, if they beguile thee not, it
shall never sever thee from the Lord Jesus Christ. Yet to insist upon this; he
calls it Philosophy. A fair name to be called wisdom, but he gives it as
foul a name afterward, when he names it vain deceit, that is, vanity that
deceiues: there is no soliditie in all their doctrine. Search it who will?
Indeed it is true, the wisdom of man so long as it is within the bounds of
things that are earthly and worldly, things natural, things concerning
policy; it will have some soliditie: but so soon as the head of a man, albeit
never so ingenious and learned, reaches without the bounds of earthly and
natural things, and begins to climb up to heaven, and to seek out God and
his worship; there the head of man vanishes and becomes foolishnes. O how
great distance is there betwixt the wisdom of God and man! Therefore Paul to
the Romans chap. 1. 21. speaking of the wise Philosophers seeing to be wise,
says, they became stark fools. Divine Plato, a very fool in the knowledge
and worship of God, and all the rest fools concerning God.

Yet (brethren) he says: This wisdom of theirs is deceiving. Although it be
vain, notwithstanding it is effectual to beguile thee, because it will seem
to be wisdom, and it is dyed with the color of wisdom: so that if thou will look on it at the first face, it will seem wisdom: for outwardly it
has a fairer show, then the greatest wisdom of God. So I note here, alas how
lightly, and with how light a thing is a body deceived? Folly will seem
wisdom, and vanity will seem stedfastnes unto him. There is none borne
otherwise, if he have no more then his natural birth. So there must be a deeper
ground of this matter. What can be the cause that vanity and folly can so
soon deceive a man? Alas, if the cause were not in thee, thou could not so
soon be deceived. Thou art borne with a vain heart, and thou drinkest it up as
naturally as sand does water. If thou had not this nature, and this vain
heart, none would be able to beguile thee. When I consider this (O fie upon the
deceit of the world) I wonder not to see millions of Papists, Popery is a
natural religion.
Kings and nations, to be so blinded this day, at the light of the Gospel: for
that is the natural disposition of all men: but rather I wonder to see one
silly body, to have that change, that he can drink in the truth of God. And if
thou have it thy self, wonder at it, and give him thanks that has showed such
grace and mercy on thee.

To go forward. In the second word, when he has set down this vain deceit, he
specifies it more particularly, and says: Through the traditions of men,
according to the rudiments of the world, and not according to Christ. I ask
the question, what think thou by the vainest doctrine that ever was taught?
I answer out of this place of the Apostle, when he has said Traditions of
men the vainest deceit in the world.
vain deceit, he expounds it men's traditions: so the vainest doctrine in the
world is men's traditions. If thou would be vain, all the fables of the
Poets be not so vain, or will not make thee so vain, as the vain traditions
of the Papists, called their unwritten verities. O vain Papist! I give thee
the sovereignty of the vainest creature that ever stepped upon the ground.

In the words following he declares it yet more particularly, according to the
rudiments of the world. This is one sort of men's traditions. In this chapter,
ye shall see two sorts of men's traditions, one that never was known, such as
the holy Ghost Two kinds of traditions here specified.
never gave, nor was ordained to be preached, as the invocation upon Angels, or
Saints; Satisfactions; Purgatory; such as God never knew. Another sort called
the Rudiments of the world, or the elements of the world, that is, the elements
and shadows of the law ceremonial that God gave to his people; which he
willed should be abolished, when the truth it self which they shadowed should
come; I mean the Messiah: when he came into the world, all these ceremonies
ceased. Learn here that even those ceremonies that were given by God to be
observed, before Christ came into the world; now when Christ is come, are to be
counted the doctrine and traditions of men. And now if God will not know these
ceremonies, which he himself gave; O vain Papist! will he acknowledge thee
and thy dreams, and the rest of that peltrie? No, in that great day thou shall
find the Lord shall say; I know neither thee nor thy doctrine.

In the last of these words opposing to men's traditions, and specially to the
ceremonies of ye Jews, he says, not after Christ; that is, that Christ and
his Gospel has not to do with them. Then would thou have two opposite
things, that will not stand together, where will thou seek them? Thou think
water and fire, a wolf and a lamb be most contrary. No; I must tell thee,
what is more contrary, yea that it will never be glewed together: the sincere
word of the Gospel, the written word of the Scriptures, and their unwritten
verities. Let the Papists endeavor as they will to glue and to soder them
together, they shall never agree together. Heaven and hell shall be as soon
put together, as thou shall put them together. And look how soon thou put
to a part of men's traditions to the Gospel, so soon thou put to a piece
of sower leaven to sweet; and so all is made sower to thee. So thou have no
sweet bread in the Gospel. Put me in a tradition to Jesus Christ, paint him
out in as good intention as thou can, I say in man's tradition Jesus Christ is
nothing but a maine Idol, and thou art an Idolater, and thy death shall be with
Idolaters.

When he has given them the admonition, that they should beware of false
teachers, and their doctrine, whereby they were led away captive as a pray to
perdition; he subioynes a good reason in the next verse, wherefore they should
not feed upon vanity: For in Christ (says he) dwells all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily. As if he would say; would ye be filled? And certainly The
heart desires to be filled with something.
the hearts of me^ naturally crave to be filled, either with one knowledge of
God or other: yea and ere it will want a filling, it wilinuent a God to it
self. Nature tells this. So would ye be filled, says he? Leave not the full
plenitude that is in Jesus Christ, and run to puddles that will turn to
poison in the end. Then before I come to the words in particular, mark this.
There is such a fulness in Christ, that thou need not to be empty, or to
seek to be filled without him, with any thing in this world. Thou art bound to
seek out of this plenitude to be filled, and not elsewhere. That fulness in him
is offered to thee, and if thou seek without him to be filled, his fulness
shall make thy damnation double. Remember I tell thee, the fuller he is of
grace and glory, if thou get not a share of it, the greater shall be thy
damnation in that day: either shall thou get grace; or else his fulness shall
aggrauate thy judgment.

In whom (says he) dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily. Then what is in
him? First not only grace (as we say) by participation, as it is in us; but in
Jesus is the God of grace himself. The deity, the Godhead, Gods own essence,
and nature is in Jesus Christ. He says not simply, the Godhead is in him, but
he says, the fulness of it; not a part of it: so that one part is here, and
another there; one part in him, and another part without him: but he says,
the fulness of the Godhead is in Ioh. 14.
him. He is full of God, the perfect God is in him; yea the Godhead of the
Father is within him. The full Godhead is in him, in substance, nature, and
essence. He says not simply (look every word) that the fulness of the Godhead
is in him, but he All the fulness of the Godhead is in Christ.
says, all the fulness is in him: as if he would say, The fulness of the
Godhead in every sort and manner of way is in him. The fulness not in wisdom
only, in power only, in justice only, in mercy only; but the fulness in all
these together, and every property of the Godhead is in him. In a word, the
whole glory and majesty of God is in him. And not this only, but he says,
it dwells in him. God is not in Jesus, simply to speak it so, in him today, and
tomorrow out of him, but he abides in him everlastingly. He shall never leave
him. Then he says, he dwells in him. How? not after a common manner, but
bodily, that is to say, essentially. So that the very substance of the Godhead
in Jesus Christ, is become corporal in the person of the son: The word was
made flesh, Ioh. 1. 14. The very essence of God is become incarnate, as it
were: a marvelous conjunction there is of two natures in Christ. For that the
nature of man in Jesus Christ is conjoined with the nature of the Godhead; and
the two natures are become one person, to wit, the person of God is become one,
joined with the nature of man. No creature has this prerogative, only Jesus
has it: and so in this respect it is said, the Godhead dwells bodily in him.
This is the meaning of the words. This is the third time that he has spoken of
his fulness. Note.
In the first chapter verse. 19. he says, In him dwells all fulness, and then in
this second chapter verse. 3. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Where ye see in his second speaking, he speaks more fully then he
did in the first. Now lastly in the third room he says, In him dwells dwells
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; there is a more full speaking then
before. So by his example (we that cannot speak as the Apostles and Saints of
God did) we should learn how to speak of God. Paul the more he insists in
speaking of Christ, and his fulness; the more his heart abounds, and the more
How to speak of Christ with grace.
his mouth is filled with words to his praise, degree by degree. So the man's
heart being filled with Jesus, his mouth is filled: and a full mouth speaking
of Christ, will fill the hearts of the hearers. Then brethren learn: the more yt
one speaks of the fulness of Christ and of his glory, the more and more shall
he find his heart abound, and his mouth filled. And it is impossible if thy
heart be full of him, but thy mouth must be full, and thou will speak of him
with a full mouth, and not lightly a word and away. And then who wots, but the
Lord will make that fulness to fill some of the hearts of the hearers? Blessed
is that heart that can get any part of that fulness of Jesus: for thy heart was
never stablished with grace that never got no part of the fulness of Jesus.

All this speaking tells thee Christ is no wind, nor vanity. If thou had no
other thing to know stedfastnes by, this same speaking of Paul tells thee that
all soliditie and fulness is in Jesus Christ. Therefore when thou read this,
mark it, and say: I see here a fulness: Alas, that there should be such fulness
in Christ, and I having so small part of it. Lord let me find this fulness in
some measure. Cease not while thou find it, for it stands thee upon life and
life, and the heart that is not filled with Christ here in some measure, shall
never be filled with his presence and joys in heaven hereafter. And therefore
thou that would have that only fulness, which shall be in heaven, by the
sweet presence of Jesus there, where thou shall see him, as he is in our
nature, full of glory and majesty; which sight shall make thee rejoice
exceedingly: look as thou would have joy for evermore, that thou be filled
with Jesus here on earth in some measure, otherways away with thee, thou art a
cast away, and thy end shall be in everlasting woe, woe upon woe, and ever in
woe. So then you may see all the glory in heaven is in Jesus Christ; there is
not a jot of glory out of him, but all is in him, that is, in thy Savior.
Would thou have a Savior? where would thou get one if thou miss this
Savior? See the honor of thy nature in him. All the glory of heaven shines
through the veil of thy nature in him: thy nature is the very veil, that
hangs about that glorious Christ God manifested in our flesh
majesty, that light that has no access, and it shines to thee through the
veil. I speak this, for this cause, that thou press not to seek heaven, nor
no joy, nor glory therein, but in this Lord Jesus Christ. No, look not here
nor there, but directly set thine eye upon him, that sits at the right hand of
the Father. For in him is all the glory of the Father, and look that thou
imagine not to see any glory, but that that is in thy head. Where is thine
heaven? Jesus is thine heaven. All thy heaven here, and hence is as it were
included in him. Seek it where thou will, thou shall find no heaven without
Christ.

Now to come to the next verse, the Colossians might have said: What is that to
us, that thou have told us of the great fulness that is in him? he is full, but
we are empty: what vantage have we by it? Even as if one would tell of a
glorious King: another will answer, what is that to me? The Apostle meets
with this objection, and says, In whom ye are complete, who is the head of all
principality and power. As if he would say: O Colossians, in him ye are
filled, his fulness is yours: it serves for your profit. So you see, that not
only all fulness of glory is in Jesus Christ, in his own person; but with the
beams of it, as it were all creatures are filled: yea heaven it self is
filled with his glory; and the earth is filled with his glory: and this is
the felicity of all the creatures in the world. Wherein trowest thou stands
the blessedness of the earth? of the heaven? and of all the elements? Note.
Look the eight chapter to the Romans, verse. 21. 22. and there you shall find
that the blessedness of the creature stands in the gloriousnes of Romans 8. 21 22
Christ, one day to be revealed. And therefore Paul says, that the world
groans, sighing for the revelation of his glory: for the glory of the earth
and heaven, is not yet revealed. Peter says in his second Epistle chap. 3. 12.
13. When that the Lord shall come in his glory, that the heavens shall burn,
and be dissolved, and the elements shall melt: then there shall be new heavens
A new heaven and a new earth.
made, and a new earth: So that thou shall see another glory in heaven and
earth, then ever was before, or is now seen. But to speak of man especially;
they that would believe and would be in him, they shall be ingrafted as it were
into him, and set as it were in his fulness, above all other creatures: for they
shall be filled with his own fulness. If thou be set in him as the Sun is in
the firmament, the fulness of the glory that is in him, shall shine in thee,
above the earth, above the Moon, and above the Sun it self. So that this is
felicity, to have a share and portion of the grace and glory of Christ, to
receive of his fulness; for he is full of grace, and verity, says John 1. 14.
It is true indeed, and so long as we live here, this appears not. There is
never a one that believes, but he is a Kings son, and a Kings daughter. But
says John, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. it appears not as yet; but when he comes, then it
shall appear, we shall all shine in glory. And the reprobate that thought
thee but a lost creature, shall wonder that ever there should be such a glory
prepared for thee. Albeit thou shine not now, yet if thou believe, thou have
this vantage: all that glory that is in Christ is thine. I say to thee, a man
is not so surely clad with his shirt, as thou that beleeuest in Christ art clad
with him. He is a garment to thee, have what clothing thou will; if thou had
but a ragged coat, yet if thou beleeuest in him, thou art clad with him. Go
where thou will, if thou cast off thy coat, Jesus will stick by thee: There
is never a faithful Saint wants Jesus. And therefore thou may say, The Lord
is the portion of mine inheritance. Only believe in him, be ingrafted in him
by faith: Only possess him in thy heart. Thou have all his glory and
majesty. And again, you see no man needs to envy the glory that Christ
has in him; for he communicates that glory to us; you see we envy the glory
of earthly Princes. This we have by nature, we would have it all our selves,
and the seed of ambition is in the beastliest body that is upon earth, which
Ambition.
raises all these seditions, tumults, wars and vprores that is now adays,
and has been from the beginning. Such is the envy that every man has against
another man's preferment, his honor, and estimation, that he cannot away with
it, except he have all in himself. And therefore he leaves nothing undone, if
it were to cut his throat, so be it he may get his glory and renown. But thou
that beleeuest, needs not in such wise to envy the glory of Jesus Christ. A
King will not communicate his glory with thee, no not a jot of it; but Jesus
Christ communicates all his glory with thee: and therefore thou should love
him the more; yea and the faithful man, the more he sees God glorified, the
more is his joy: but a reprobate will envy the glory of God. Nay, there was
never such a subject that envied the glory and honor of a Prince, or of his
master, as a reprobate will envy the glory of Jesus. He would if he might
pluck him from his glory: such is the malice of his heart against Jesus
Christ. Yea the reprobate would The reprobate.
if it were possible, bereave the Saints of their glory: and when this glory
of the Saints shall be revealed, the reprobate shall fret and fume: they desire
not to hear tell of the glory of Christ and of his Saints. And when they
hear of it (for they shall hear of it in despite of their teeth) they hear
it with the sadness of their heart; it is no comfort nor consolation to them to
hear of it. And by the contrary, the faithful one rejoices, when he hears
of it, it makes his heart to leap for joy, as John's did in his mothers belly,
when Mary the mother of Christ A sure token of election.
spoke to Elizabeth, Luke 1. 41. Therefore if thou can rejoice, when thou
hear of Gods glory in Jesus Christ, it is a good and sure token of thy
election. And again, seeing that in Jesus there is this fulness, thou needs
never to be empty, or fear to want. Thou that find any wastnes or
emptines, put out thy hand to the ambrie of the Gospel, wherein this fulness of
grace The Gospel is the mean whereby Christ communicates his fulness unto us.
and glory is to be had. A contemner of the Gospel if he were a King, he
shall not taste of this fulness, and of this glory of Jesus, for there is no
way to be partaker of this fulness, but by the Gospel. It is the ambrie wherein
it is contained. And if thou miss it, thou shall never get a cheekefull or
morfell of any fulness in thy soul.

When he has said, And in him ye are filled, he subioynes a glorious
description of him, who is the head of all principality and power. He cannot
leave of to speak of that glorious majesty: he said before, In him are hid
all treasures of wisdom and knowledge: and again, in him dwells the
Godhead bodily, and so forth, as you have heard: now again, when he has cast
in a word of him, he leaves him not so, but he will yet paint him out in his
glory. Then learn to speak fully of Christ. Alas this hungry speaking of
Christ testifies the emptines and voidnes To speak fully of Christ.
of God in our hearts. It is a true saying, Of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. If thy heart were full of him, as I have said, thy mouth would
be full, and thou would speak fully of him: but thy heart being so empty,
what marvel is it, to hear thee speak coldly of this Lord full of glory.
Well, there is no question, but by this description, wherein he makes him Lord
over all, both in heaven and earth, he means this, that he is not only Lord
above them all, but that also they are cast down under his feet, he is
mounted above them all.

Now there be two things that will make us chiefly to account of this
gloriousnes, that is in Christ Jesus. The one Two things do cause us to think
highly of Christ.
thing is his highness, a majesty about all majesty's. There is not a majesty
but that majesty. The other thing is, thy lowlines and thy baseness; thou art
but a worm on earth, he is above all heavens. Is not this a great goodness,
that he that is so high, should so lowly humble himself, so that he should
abase himself as it were, to become a worm? Men would wonder that ever the
God of glory should so have humbled himself; yea the Angels wonder at this,
that ever sinful man should have gotten a share or portion of that grace of
God. So this is my counsel, if thou feel a smacke of grace, of consolation,
or A special consolation.
of faith, if it were but as a mustard seed, count more of it, then of all the
kingdoms of the earth. For it will weigh down all, keep it well in thy
heart, and lose thy life and all before thou will lose it. I counsel thee to
look up to heaven first, and say: yet this Lord will give me more of his grace
and glory: when I shall see him with this eye of the body; then the Lord will
fill me with glory, and I will hope and be content to lose all before I should
lose this. Keep this earnest penny, for it is the joy of the creature, to keep
this earnest penny: for one day thou shall get the full sum and fulness of joy.
If thou keep it not, and have no regard of it, and hold not up thy eye by
night and by day, by looking to Jesus in this Gospel, thou shall never get the
full sum and entire payment. The sucking of the hearts of the faithful, and
the drinking in this milk of the word, is the way to get Jesus to The way to
get Jesus into the heart.
thy heart, and to keep him night and day: yea it is the way appointed from
all eternity. Abraham sought for him, and got faith in him by the word of
promise, which is the Gospel. Therefore it is said, that he saw him and
rejoiced, Ioh. 8. 56. Nay, Abraham never suffered himself to be severed from
that grace that was in him. So the Gospel is the way to bring Christ out of
heaven to thee, and to fill the elect with all joy and glory. To him therefore
be everlasting glory, praise and dominion, for ever,

Amen.
THE SIXTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 11. 12. 11 In whom also ye are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh
through the circumcision of Christ,

12 In that ye are buried with him through Baptism; in whom ye are also raised
up together through the faith of the operation of God which raised him from the
dead.


IN this second chapter of this Epistle (brethren) you have heard how the
Apostle exhorts to perseverance in that faith received: next how he
admonishes the Colossians to beware of false teachers and false doctrine. The
last day ye heard, how he admonishes them that they should take heed that no
man spoil them, or drive them away as a pray, and that through Philosophy,
which he calls vain deceit. His argument was from that fulness that is in
Christ. In him (says he) dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily. Sum of
the former Sermon.
Therefore be contented with him, and seek not to be filled with vain
traditions of men and their deceitful philosophy. Then for that they might
have said, he is full, that is true, let him be full, and let the fulness of the
Godhead be in him, what is that to us? we are never the fuller in regard
thereof. He therefore meets with this objection and says, you are complete
in him, his fulness fills you: if you be in him, you shall receive of his
fulness and be filled. And who is this that fills them? To let them see that
it is no small matter to be filled with his fulness, he painteth him out and
says, he is the head of all the Empire. Well, would you think it a small
matter to be filled with his fulness that is so high?

Now to come to the words which we have read. They might Coherence. Objection.
have said, we want Circumcision (for the false teachers did always beat that
into their heads) and they themselves thought they could have no grace in
Christ, but by Circumcision. The Jews received Circumcision, which was an
entry to grace: we want this Circumcision: therefore we can have no entry to
grace, as the Jews had. In this verse the Apostle meets Answer.
them and says, In whom also ye are circumcised. He grants to them
circumcision in a manner, and says, Complain not, you want not circumcision
in Christ. Never Jew had it in greater effect then you have, and therefore
complain not. Then note here shortly this question of theirs, and his answer
thereto. He says plainly, that we cannot be filled with the fulness of Jesus
Christ, except after some sort we be circumcised; that is to say, except the
foreskinne, not of the body, but of the heart, Our natural corruption must be
circumcised if we be in Christ and Christ in us.
be cut away. For except this original and natural corruption, wherein we are
borne, be cut away, there is no grace for us. For I tell you; if in no measure
it be abolished (it so occupies all the parts and powers of the soul) that
there is no place to the grace of Christ Jesus. Therefore it must be first
thrust out; and think not that the original corruption wherein thou art borne,
and the grace of Christ can dwell together: Simile.
the one expels the other, as water does the fire.

The second thing which I note is this: I perceive there is The second
observation.
nothing that the Jews had, but in effect Christians have the same. Will thou
speak of Circumcision? The Church of Jesus Christ has it in a far better
sort then ever they had. It is true, that they had more Ceremonies, Sacraments,
figures and outward rites in their religion, then we have: but we have no loss
by the want of them, but rather a plain advantage. They had the shadow, we
have the body. Have you not a greater advantage by the body the^ by the
shadow? They followed the shadow going before the body; but thou laiest hold
upon the body following the shadow. Oh would to God the Church of Scotland
could consider this grace we have in the body! that the Jews nor any else in
the old world could get. Thou would wonder at that grace of God in Jesus
Christ. But alas we esteem it not in our days.

Well to go forward, least they should misconster him, he expounds
himself, and shows of what circumcision he meant: to wit, not of the gross
circumcision of the Jews; He says, Ye are circumcised, not with circumcision
made with men's hands, not of that outward skin, but with an inward
circumcision of the heart, that is made by the spirit and finger of God, there
is the meaning. In this you see a difference between the Jews religion and
ours. All things among them were outward objects to the eyes of men; their
religion for the most part stood in an outward glory and show. Things among
them were made by the hands of men, as their Circumcision and their
Tabernacles, as appears in the Epistle to the Hebrews: but the religion that
Christ brought to the world, when he was manifest in the flesh, abolished all
their religion, and stands in spirit and verity. He is not, neither will be
worshipped in this mountain, and that mountain; but he will be worshipped in
spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 21. His religion seeks not this outward pomp. So
when I look to these men that have brought into Christ's Church this outward
vanity, I am compelled to say, that the deceivers of the world have turned
Popery.
Christianisme into Iudaisme; yea into Gentilisme and Paganism. Fie on them; I
may say to them, as Paul said to the Galathians chap. 3. 1. O foolish
Galathians, who has bewitched you? So I say, O foolish man! when thou have
begun with a spiritual thing, will thou end in a fleshly thing? thou shall
never see heaven, if thou make such an end. The Lord began with an outward
thing, and ended with a spiritual thing: but thou will begin with a spiritual
thing, and wilt end with a fleshly and outward thing. O thy end shall be
damnable!

To go forward, he insisteth upon this circumcision made without hands, and he
defines it in plain words, that thereby he would make them understand these
spiritual things (for it is hard to cause a natural man to understand
spiritual and heavenly things) he says, it stands. Wherein? In a putting off,
in an vncloathing of thee, as one would cast off his coat or shirt: so the
circumcision that is not made with hands, stands in this; thou must cast
something from thee. He makes it not to stand in the outward cutting off of
the outward skin, but the inward circumcision of a foul heart: the clothes
that it is clad with, they are pestiferous, and they must be torn and thrown
off, that thy heart may be circumcised. For I tell thee there was never any one
more surely clad with infected apparel, then thy heart is enwrapped with the
botchie corruption of thy nature. And if thou keep it on, it will infect thee,
and steal thee to death and destruction before thou be aware.

But to come to this garment, the Apostle tells thee what garment and clothing
it is that thou have: first he calls it a body, it is a body, then a massy
lump: this is a borrowed word from the body of man. So the garment wherewith
thou art clad by nature, and which must be shaken off of thee, if thou would
be saved, it is no superficial thing. O vain man! Our natural corruption no
light or superficial thing.
thou think it a superficial light thing. No, it is a body and a lump,
with all the dimensions thereof, length, height, breadth, and deepnes: yea
thou art not able to find out the deepnes thereof. Thou may indeed feel
the deepnes of thy body, of flesh, and bones: but thou can not find the
deepnes of thy heart. For as thy soul is compassed with thy body, even so thy
heart is compassed and clogged with an heavy lump, heavier then the whole
earth. One sin is heavier then the whole earth: no marvel then if thou be
drawn to hell, if thou be not relieved.

Now let us see whereof this body is. He calls it a body of sin. O
stinking nature! Then (brethren) ye see the arraignement of nature, a body not
of flesh, blood and bone, but of sin, and of all sorts of sin. Will thou
look into thy heart? thou shall see it full of foul stinking cogitations, and
affections. And if thou had any smell of it, thou would stink Natural
corruption how unclean a thing.
in thy own nose. I forbear to speak of the outward effects, as foul
speeches, and the wicked deeds of the hands, which return to the heart
again, and makes up the stinking body. The heart of man is drowned in the
sink of sin, and if thou relieve not thy self, thou shall be drowned in
sin. The world will not believe this, nor yet learn this lesson.

In the next word he calls it, the body of flesh. Would thou have the
original of sin? it is called flesh, not this outward body that thou
bear; but an inward hid thing, and stinking corruption that is run through
thy whole soul and body, and infecteth them; so that there is not an inch of
thee free. So you see the welspring of this sinful mass; it is not outward;
it is within thee that ayleth thee; the seat of it is in the heart, and
occupies the depth of it, and no part thereof is free, and it spouteth out
vehemently this foul stinking venom of sin, as ever thou saw any spout,
spout out water. So that if thou grow not in regeneration, thou shall grow in
sin, which poisons thee day by day, till at the last thou drop down like a
poisoned body. Therefore root it out, and dig it up: let this be thy
occupation night and day, as Kill sin, or else it will kill thee.
thou would be saved, or else it will destroy thee. So thou see this
garment, this body wherewith thou art so clogged must be cast off; otherwise
of necessity thou must be a firebrand of hell.

In the end of the verse he takes up that which he has spoken in one word, I
mean (would he say) by this of casting off the body, nothing else but that
circumcision of Christ: that is to say, not only that, that he suffered in his
own flesh passive, but that this is made by him active, as we speak. Then
note shortly, that all this, of putting off this foul garment, is not by the
hand of man (all the men in the world cannot get their hand into thy heart, to
pluck off this foul stinking garment) he may open thy breast, and pull out
thy fleshie heart; but there is no hand that can pull off, and draw out that
foul heart, but only the hand of Christ Jesus. Therefore if thou will be
freed of that mortality, crave his hand to pluck Christ alone does circumcise
the heart.
off this garment, and cry, O Lord, put in thy hand, and pluck this foul
heart away: fie on it, it stinkes in mine own nose. When he has thus spoken,
he leaves us not so; but makes it plain, showing the manner how this is
brought about. Thou must not dream of a gross fashion; for the manner is
spiritual. In old time a man would have put to his hand bodily; but Jesus
Christ puts to his hand spiritually.

Now the circumcision of Jesus Christ stands in a conformity What the
circumcision of Christ is.
and likeness between Christ and us. This likeness stands in two points; first
in the likeness with him in death and burial: thou must dye, I tell thee, thou
that would be made like to Christ thy head: Secondly, it stands in a
conformity in life, and in rising again to life; and truly thy life shall be
more sweet and joyful, then ever thy death was sower and heavy. But he
begins at his death, his words are, being buried. Burial presupposes
death: no man is buried but he that is dead. Then understand how thou can
never live with To be buried with Christ in grief for sin.
Christ, unless thou dye with him: think not that ever thou shall rise,
except thou be first buried with him in grief for sin. Well, well, wanton
companions, bury your hearts in tears and holy repentance. Repentance if it
be holy, is thy burial; for who ever rose except he lay down? Can a man rise
from death to life, except he were first dead? Can thou rise to that
spiritual and eternal life, except thou be first spiritually dead? It must be
the death of this body of sin, of this body of flesh that is within thee,
that must bring thee to this burial of Christ. Could thou never sigh for
thy sin? then wast thou never at deaths door; nor dead with Christ. And
except thou sigh continually day and night for thy sins, and dye to them,
and every one of them, how can thou say thou shall rise with Christ? Art thou
a murderer and greeuest not for it, so that thou abstainest from it? then thou
die not, and shall not therefore rise with Christ. Art thou an oppressor,
and repentest not? then thou die not, neither shall thou rise with Christ.
Art thou an evil speaker of thy neighbor behind his back (as this land is
full of such people, who think it no sin) and sorrowest not? thou never wast
dead with Christ, neither can rise with him. O the villain, that will please
himself in this sin and the rest, and yet will imagine to rise as well as the
best men to life in Jesus! But O fool! thou art altogether vain, and thy
cogitations are mere deceits: for Christ will not be a Savior to any but to
such as die with him, mortifying their sins. If thy burial be not with him,
thou shall never rise to spiritual life with him. Thou may indeed rise, but
not to thy comfort: if thou be not buried to sin in some measure in this
life, there shall be no resurrection for thee to that life which is in the
heavens purchased in the blood of Christ Jesus. Men think not hereof; and
those that never mourn for their sins, do suppose that they shall rise
laughing. The promise is made to them that mourn: Blessed are they (says
Christ) that mourn (to wit for sin) for they shall receive comfort, Matthew. 5
4. Men think they shall come to heaven before their feet be cold, and yet
they delight themselves in their sins. Nay, go thy way, crucify thy sin
and thy self to sin, or else thou shall never see heaven nor come to glory.
Would to God this were as well felt as it is known.

Now the means whereby this dying is wrought, is Baptism, instituted by Jesus
Christ, that put away and abolished Baptism not only represents the
crucifying and burying of Christ, but also is powerful in the baptized in the
whole course of his life.
Circumcision, and placed Baptism in steed thereof. I will speak somewhat of
Baptism, but as it concerns the matter we have in hand: It not only
represents the death and burial of Christ, and as often as thou see it, so
often thou see, or at the least should see Jesus crucified and buried: it
has not only the naked representation hereof, but the virtue of that death
and burial. It crucifieth the body that is baptized: it burieth the old man:
it is the very power of God, to the mortification of thy sinful nature: and
the Lord is powerful in it, not only at that instant when thou art baptized
(as the Papists say) but also continues so in thee in the whole course of thy
life. Thou think it is but for children only: nay it is even for old bodies
also: and if thou keep it in thy sight and remembrance, thou may be
persuaded that the Lord will work most assuredly thy mortification, as long as
thou live. Therefore neglect not thy Baptism, as thou would go forward
in the mortification of thy sin, and think ever and The use of baptism in
our whole life.
say: O Lord, I was baptized in thy name, Lord let it not be gone out of my
mind; make it powerful in me to the mortification of sin: and it shall have
force even in thy very death. I speak this because men think there is no more
required but an outward show: but if thou knew the force and powerful
working of the Lord, thou would remember thy Baptism, even as long as thou
live: and if thou did find it to have any working in thee, thou would
reverence it more and more. And so much for the first part of the likeness of
Jesus Christ.

Then he proceeds to the second part of this conformity that is by Baptism;
In whom ye are also raised up. This follows upon the other, as the Apostle
Romans 6. 5. proves this consequence, where ever this burial goes before, all
the world cannot stay thee from life. Thou that find any mortification of
sin, assure thy self of life: but if thou find not the death and burial of
sin, look not to find life. And I say more, there shall be no deferring of
time, for thy comfort, as if thou should first dye a long time before thou
rise to Jesus Christ. Indeed the last resurrection shall be in the last day:
but I say When the life of God begins in us.
thou shall begin no sooner to dye to sin in this life, and find any
compu^ction and heaviness in thy heart for it, but with the death of sin and
the burial and slaying of it, immediately shall come life. This life breaks
up through death, and joy breaks up through sadness, al heavenly joy rises up
through an heanie heart: so that thou shall not feel joy unless thy heart be
pressed down with the heaviness of sin. And this joy, as Peter 1. Epist. 1.
8. says, is unspeakable: so that when a man is sighing most for sin, drawing
sighs from the bottom of his heart, then the quickest and sweetest joy
arises: but when thou art laughing and singing, there is no such thing as joy
at thy heart. Wherefore should I speak of these things? Only learn this, to
be sad and to sigh for sin, that with it thou may get some joy of thy
heart; which is an earnest penny that thou shall be filled with it, at the sight
of that glorious majesty.

Now to go forward: How is this resurrection wrought? Even as death was
wrought by Baptism: for as it represents the death of Christ; so, so often
as thou see Baptism ministered, thou see in it the resurrection of Christ.
Yea, and it raises up the body of him, that is baptized, to life, by virtue
of the resurrection of Christ, who is also manifested in Baptism. Immediately
and in one instant, the Lord will work two contrary things; he will cast thee
down to hell, and then in the same moment he will raise thee up to heaven. And
Baptism has this force continually, so long as thou live, if so be thou
remember it, look for the virtue of it to the last hour of thy death.

In the words following, least they should have thought this sign of Baptism
should have had this force (as we say, virtute operis operati) to have buried
sin and quickened a man again, without any more; he joins, by faith, not
only by Baptism: as if he would say, we are buried to sin, and raised Faith
required in baptism to apprehend Christ and to receive virtue from him.
to righteousness; but this great work is wrought also by faith: so that if
thou have not faith apprehending and taking hold of God, if thou send not faith
to heaven in the ministry of the Sacrament and the word preached, and if thou
want faith to apply grace to thee, the Sacrament and the word preached shall
never do thee good. And if thou get not this faith at one time or other, this
Sacrament shall be a seal to thy damnation, and the word preached shall
aggrauate thy judgment. So if there were no other place to condemn the
Papists error of opus operatum, this place were sufficient to condemn it: for
Opus operatum.
the Apostle means plainly, that Baptism has no force without faith, and
this Gospel has no power to thy salvation without faith. Away then with that
erroneous doctrine of these vain babbling fools of opus operatum. It is
diuellishnes and lying.

In the next words he shows the object of faith: It must lay hold upon
something: for faith is an holding fast: an hand that takes hold apprehends
something. It is an anchor cast out, to hold thee by: so this faith must have
some object to lean upon, otherwise thou would be dashed on every side
Object of faith.
with each wave, till thy ship be broken. What is then the object of faith? The
word is (...), an effectualnes. The Apostle to the Ephesians chap. 1. 19.
takes it to be the effectualnes of the strong power of God, that must be the
thing to stay thee, that must hold thy heart that it fleet not, nor flow not
here and there: that which thou must rest upon, must be nothing else but the
power of God, the efficacy of the strong power of God. Thou must not lay hold
upon Angels, Saints, or upon Princes in the earth; thou will be beguiled: yea
thou and they (going about so to uphold thee) will both to hell together.
Therefore suffer not thy self to be deceived with an opinion of them. I dare
be bold to say, that if the Angels and Saints would take the honor that the
Pope and his Clergy Invocation and worship of Saints and Angels.
would give them, they should all go to hell, and leave the joys which they
now have. So the stay of thy faith, and that which thou must apprehend, is the
mortification of thy sin; and thy quickening to newnes of life: it must not
be by the mediation of man or Angel, or of any Saint glorified; but by the
only and immediate mediation of Jesus Christ; there only thou gettest that
spiritual power that quickens thee to life. It is easy to slay a man (and
men now a days think slaughter but a sport; yea and rather then they will not
slay, they had liefer go quick to hell, as they use to say) but the slaying
of sin must be only by the power of God: Sin must be vanquished by faith,
and without faith thou shall never mortify sin. Therefore continually put
out that hand of faith, and pluck down that power of God, for thy salvation,
and ever cry for this hand of faith. Draw, draw, spare not; for there is no
want in him. That well of his effectual power will never wax dry, and this
blood of Christ will never dry up, all power is through that blood of Christ.
Then first by a true faith lay hold upon Christ on the cross; and then sitting
at the right hand of the Father: and so thou shall never depart with him, till
thy glorious resurrection be accomplished.

When he had spoken of God, when he had said, through faith of the
effectualnes of God; then he subioyneth: Who raised him from death. Having once
spoken of that God who is so effectual, when he names God he leaves him
not, but he subioyneth some glorious description of him; so speaking of him
here, he describes him first, in respect of Christ and his resurrection.
Secondly, in respect of raising of the Gentiles. Thirdly, in respect of the
abolishing of the law, and quickening of the Jews. And in respect of Christ he
says: who raised him from the dead: to wit, by the effectualnes of that strong
power that is in him. The first that ever he raised by that power, is Jesus
Christ. And therefore he is called the first borne of the dead, chap. 1. 18.
For this resurrection from the dead, is first by decree before all times, and
then in time it begun at Christ, who was that lamb that was sacrificed from
the beginning, and gave grace to all other sacrifices; so that they in his
sacrifice Resurrection following regeneration, and both depe^ding on Christ.
were accepted of God: and then his resurrection is derived to all them that
do, or ever shall rise hereafter in Christ: for they that are not in Christ,
have no resurrection for them, because there is no regeneration for them in
this life, and consequently no resurrection for them hereafter. It is true,
that by virtue and power of that Godhead, the most wicked and unregenerate
shall rise; but they shall not rise in him, that is, new creatures, who before
in this life were regenerated, and live the life of Christ. There shall be no
such thing, to follow them in their resurrection. Again, you shall perceive in
the writing of the Apostles, when he would set out that all-sufficiencie of
God, and his mighty power, he delivers it by the effects, for thereby it is
known. Now what an effect chooses he? not the creation of the world, for he
leaves that, and makes choice of the raising of Jesus Christ: as though the
all-sufficient mighty power of God, had never been so powerfully declared, as
in the death of Jesus Christ, and his resurrection. Read in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, chap. 1. 19. 20. where you shall find this manifestly proved, how
God showed this his power when he The greatest power of God manifested most in
Christ's death and resurrection.
raised up Jesus from the dead, and placed him at his right hand, Romans 1. 4.
There was never such a power uttered as this was, in raising Christ from the
dead. What can be the cause of this? Is it not a great power to create a thing,
and to create all things of nothing? Jesus was something lying in a grave. I
answer, that that power was so much the greater, in respect there was never
any so humbled, as Jesus was; so compassed with the bands of death as he; so
that by loosing of those bands, there must of necessity appear the greatest
power that ever was, or should be: for the strongest bands require the
mightiest power to loose them. There were never bands so strong, as Christ God
equal with his Father was bound withal. As for thee and me, the bands of
death wherewith we are or shall be bound, they are but gentle, and it is but
an easy matter to bind any of us. Never any was bound as Jesus; and therefore
a stronger power is required to raise him, then to raise any of us. Well, the
Lord he raised him up by the efficacy of his great power. Now he being
raised, who was bound in such strong bands, despair not thou, but take thee
comfort and say; My Lord, when he was bound with a strong power, God raised
him: therefore it is an easy matter for him, when I am dead and laid in grave
to raise me, in respect of him: if he did raise Christ with his whole hand, he
will raise me with his little finger. But (beloved) learn if by faith thou be
not bound and joined with him in his death and burial (for thou must be
conjoined with him in his death, and thou must lie as it were under him in the
grave) if thou be not so conjoined, thou shall not rise with him. But if thou
be bound with him by faith (as I have said) as he rose, thou shall rise, and
thou shall be pulled up out of that grave with him; otherwise when the Lord
raises him, thou shall lie still. Then seek faith in Jesus, and that blessed
conjunction with him through faith: stick by him in death, and in the grave;
and let him not be raised without thee: fix thy heart to him, and assuredly
thou shall rise with him in that day, and he shall pull thee out so glorious a
body, as that then he and his father shall take pleasure in thee, and thou
shall reign with him for ever and ever. Now to this powerful God that raised
this Lord Jesus, with the holy Spirit, be all honor and dominion,

Amen.
THE SEVENTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE Epistle of PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 13. 14. 13 And ye which were dead in sins, and in the
uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, forgiving
you all your trespasses:

14 And putting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us.


REmember (brethren) the last day we had in hand the circumcision not made with
the hands of man, but standing in a putting off of the body of the sins of
the flesh, he took it up in one word, and termed it the circumcision Sum of
the last Lecture.
of Christ, that is, an inward circumcision made by him, and by his virtue. Now
to make this more plain, he insisteth in the next verse on the circumcision of
Christ: and he made it to stand in a conformity between Christ and us, that
as Christ after his death was buried; so we should be buried with him, that
is, our old man and the corruption of nature should be buried with him. Next,
as after his death and burial, he was raised up to life; so we being dead and
buried to sin, should rise up to newnes of life in him. Now this is obtained
not by the Sacrament of Baptism only, but by faith laying hold on God and his
mighty power. After this, when he had spoken of the effect of this strong
power of God, he abides on it, describing God himself and his omnipotent
power. The description arises of the effects that proceed from him. The
effects of Gods power.
You have heard the first effect: it was in raising Christ from death; in which
work the power of God chiefly appeared: there was never a work that God
wrought from the creation to this hour, or will work to the end of the world;
in the which so mightily appeared the power of God, as it did in the raising of
Christ; because there was never a creature so humbled, and so bound with the
bands and dolor of death as was Jesus Christ.

Now in this that we have read, presently follows the rest of the description
of God in his power; and first we have his The second effect of Gods power
description from the second effect and work of his power. It is the
quickening of the Gentiles (that were dead with Jesus who was first quickened)
namely the Colossians, to whom he writes. Then follows the third effect, the
quickening of the The third effect.
Jews that were as well dead as the Gentiles. But to speak of the quickening
of the Gentiles, and namely of the Colossians, and so to come to the words, he
says, And you, that is, you Colossians and all the rest of the Gentiles, when
you were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of the foreskin of your
flesh; then he quickened you, and raised you up from the death, that ye lay in,
with him, meaning Jesus Christ, whom he raised up first, and that in this
order. He has freely forgiven you all your sins, these are the words. Now
(brethren) this is to be considered; he sets not down the quickening of the
Colossians, and of the rest simply; but he sets it down in a comparison
with their former estate, wherein they were before their quickening, calling them
to remembrance that before they were quickened, they were dead, life follows
death: the first gate to life with Jesus, is to be dead with him; so it
behooued, that before they were quickened they should be found dead.

Now in the comparison and example set down here, mark first, it is the will
of God, whatsoever grace he gives us, we do much esteem it; and if he give
thee life, he will have thee highly account of it. The spiritual grace that is
gotten in Jesus Highly price the least grain of the grace of Christ.
Christ, it cannot be highly enough thought of in the heart of man. For when
thou have put it in a balance, with all earthly things, all is nothing: the
least grain of this spiritual grace gotten in Jesus Christ, is worth them all.
Therefore the Lord that gives thee it, will have thee to make much of it. Now
the way, to weigh aright this heavenly life received in Christ, is this: to
cast thy eye back and look over thy shoulder to that death wherein thou
latest, before thou gottest it: look what thou wast before; look whether thou
wast dead or quick before thou gatest this spiritual life. And therefore
there is nothing more required then a sanctified memory in a Christian.
Remember wealth and woe, both good estate and ill what ever it has bin. Now
look to the working of God; for rather then his own elect shall be forgetful
of their former estate, of their death they lay in before they got life; he will
make ye very stink of their sinful nature, whereof they have yet a remnant: he
will make it I say, to strike them in their nose, and make them feel that
stinking savor. For he keeps still the remnant stinking The remnant of sin
in the regenerate, what use is has.
in them, that they may remember what estate they were in, before they got this
life in Jesus Christ: that they might remember the life they have gotten to be
the sweeter. Nay mark it, thou shall never feel the sweet odor of the life
in Jesus Christ, except thou feel the stink of thy nature. And if thou take a
delight to look into thy own nature, and think it delicate, thou never
thoughtest what grace meant; yea thou shall never account of it: but once
tasting of the life of Jesus and the sweetness of it, then thou shall abhor
that stink of nature wherein thou before delightedst. For when once thou have
tasted of that sweetness, for all this world thou would not return again to
that death of sin, wherein thou liuedst before it was taken away by the
quickening power of God.

But to insist upon the words. When ye were dead, as if he should say: ye
Colossians did imagine that you were quick; but I say ye were dead, not only
ye, but all the Gentiles were dead. Then (brethren) ye may see, a man if he
were never so quick, being out of Christ, he is but dead, as Paul speaks of
the wanton widow, 1. Tim. 5. 6. and the quicker thou think thy self, if
thou be out of Christ, thou art the deader. But here is our misery, we feel
not that we are dead: alas these miserable creatures that wallow in sin, they
have dead bodies, but they feel it not; and certainly there is no man that
gets the sense of the bitterness of that death, or that loathes and is
squeamish at the filthiness of his nakedness, until he be in Christ, and until
he feel the sweetness of the life of Christ, he The sweetness which the
faithful feel by Christ, in their regeneration.
never knows himself to have have been dead, or under the power of death. And
therefore whatsoever ye be, which he dead without Jesus, strive to get a
feeling of the sweetness of that life which is in him. I do promise thee if
thou do it, thou shall have the bitterness of thy nature taken away, otherwise
thou shall never possess a contented heart.

What a death this was he expresses when he says; which were dead in sins:
there is the first cause of this death, sins and trespasses, that is, all the
actual sins of their life, all the foul thoughts of their heart, all the
profane words of their mouth, all unruly actions of their hands, all these be
understood under this word sins, in the plural number. Then (brethren) this
word imports first, the kind of this death Death in sin.
that man lies in before he be in Christ; it is not the death of the body. In
the body thou will seem to be quick enough, when as thou art but dead; but
this death it is the death of the spirit; it is the death of the soul: for
when thou go on in sin, thou do nothing else but stick and goare thy
soul: and besides in the end, thou will slay the body also: so as if thou
continue in it, it shall never leave thee till it slay both soul and body for
evermore. Thou may be a wanton harlot, and a cruel murderer; but yet take
thy delights howsoever thou will, promise thy self as great assurance of life,
comfort and joys, as thou can imagine; yet thy perseverance in sin shall
slay thee with death in this world, and in that to come: For the wages of sin
is death, Romans 6. 28. Then this cause of death imports not only that this
death is spiritual, but also it imports that it is a death exceeding fore,
and withal the dissoluing of this very body into powder and ashes. Death in
general is nothing else but the depriving of life. A man is said to be dead,
when he wants life. Now these sins which he speaks of here, do deprive
thee of the quickest and sweetest life that ever was: and what a life is it
that sin depriueth thee of? even the life of God, the best life that is, or
can be. Woe is thee that ever thou gottest life in the body, if thou want this
life of God, that thou may live with Jesus Christ for ever. Yea woe is thee
for evermore, that thou saw either Sun or Moon, if thou want the life of
God in Jesus Christ: and there is nothing but sin that can deprive thee of
it. And further, it not only bereaueth thee of life, but it makes thee
guilty of eternal death both in soul and body. Thou have these two Two
advantages sinners have by sin.
advantages, delight in sin as thou will; sin ruling in any man, so long as
he lives without Jesus Christ, remission of sins, and sanctification, it
excludes the life of God from him; and more then this, it holds him poor
miserable wretch under the guiltines of everlasting death for ever. You will
ask, how can a man be dead in sins? Is he not lively in actions? is he not
counted the gallantest fellow in all the Realm, and the liueliest, that is the
greatest swaggerer, that can commit most evil? Is he not counted the
liueliest, that is the greatest murderer? I answer thee, the quicker he is
in murdering, in adultery, and such like, the more is he dead: because first
he wants the life of God. And further, all these are but dead actions, dead
works coming from a dead man, and they are as it were a stinking savor from
a filthy carrion: so these men, trim them up as you will, they are but
stinking carrions. O thou murderer, thou defilest the heavens, the earth and
the air! O thou harlot, thou defilest all the house and the bed thou lie in!
Thou oppressor, thou defilest all the world, though thou werst an Earl, a
Duke or a King, thou art a dead stinking carrion worse then a dead dog.

To come to the next words, he ascends to a higher ground of this death, and
he says; they were dead not only in actual sins, but they were dead in a
sort of sin that did cleave faster and nearer to their ribs. You were dead
(says he) in the uncircumcision of your flesh, that is, in your original
sin. He sets down this, by an allusion of the foreskinne; the Gentiles
uncircumcision was a sign of their original sin, which Original sin.
was inherent in them; as circumcision was a sign of the taking away of the
same. Then the cause of thy death in body and soul, is not only these
actions that pass away (as when thou have murdered, the action goes away,
although the guilt remain: for the action that passes, it leaves upon thy
back a guilt which shall bring down damnation upon thee.) The cause I say of
thy death in body and soul, is not only in these fleeting actions, but the
grounded cause of it is original sin, the sin conceived in thy mothers
womb. Thou art borne in sin, and it sticks fast to thee: and therefore it
must follow, that seeing the cause is a sticking and biding cause, the death
must also be abiding death. I called it before a sore death: now I call it an
abiding death, and that greatly increases the misery. You know that a disease
natural that comes of any vitiositie of nature, as of the birth, so many as
have that disease it does still accompany their body: It may well be that they
get it mitigated, but they cannot fully cleanse it: They may procure a relenting
of it, but never be able to take it away. And therefore this death having the
ground in that foul feed that thou art conceived in, by the generation of all
thy forebeers, it will pass the power of the world to get it away. No, the
Angels of heaven will not be able to relieve thee of it: nothing will free
thee of it, but grace, which is contrary to that corruption of nature. You
know the proverb, That which is bred in the bone will hardly be driven out of
the flesh. It therefore thou would be cured of this rooted evil, thou must
cry for grace, and say; Lord send thy spirit of grace into my heart, to rid me
of this corruption of nature. It thou cry not for this night and day, yea and
find it in some measure working in thee, thou shall never be relieved. Cry
therefore and say, Lord, I was conceived dead, I was borne dead, I A good
prayer.
am every way dead: send thy spirit of free grace, and free me of this death
that so sore setleth upon me, that I may once enjoy that life of Jesus. Cry
this way night and day, and all thy time; and then I assure thee thou shall
find deliverance, and shall taste how sweet the life of Jesus is. And this for
their former estate which is miserable, being out of Christ Jesus.

Now follows the estate in Christ: He has quickened you, that is, the father
has put life in you. It is a quickening when death is expelled, and life
comes in his place: but what a life is it that we receive in Christ? Would
to God we could meditate upon this life that is in Christ, you shall know it
best by this; what a death wast thou in? It was a spiritual death, both of the
soul and body, standing in the want of the life of God. Then this life must
be spiritual also, even the life of God, that thrusts out that death, that is,
that corruption, and fruits of the same. If thou have this life, though thou
werst dying bodily, thou will be living in thy soul; and when thou art dead,
thou shall be living: this is the advantage of this life of God. But if thou
want this life dying, thou shall be only dead and naught else: and woe is that
man or woman that is only dead. 2. Cor. 4. 10. Paul speaking of himself
says, Every where we bear about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus,
meaning this dying in the body, but yet (says he) the life of Jesus is
manifested in my body: that is, in dying bodily, I live spiritually. And verse.
16. The more that the body died, the more he was renewed daily. Paul felt this
in himself; do thou not feel this natural life wearing away, the strength
of it decaying daily? Strive the^ with Paul, that with the decay of the one,
thou may feel the growth of the other in thee; and woe is thee, losing the
bodily life, if thou get not the growing of the spiritual life. But if thou
do feel it, keep it well; otherwise thou shall die everlastingly. He says
not simply he had quickened them, but he says, he has quickened them with
him, that is, with Jesus Christ, in this order: First he raised Christ from the
dead: then with him he begins their rising here in this life, which shall be
accomplished in the second resurrection that is to come. If ye will consider
these words, they import three things: Three things in our ^iuification to be
considered.
and separate from Christ, think not to live, conceive not to get the life of
God; and therefore he says, he has quickened you with him. take this
admonition; Would thou have life? stand not alone, but join with thy head
Christ, and then with the body: for if thou be not a member of this body
(though it seem ignominious to thee) thou shall have no life in thee. Creep
then unto Christ, be never alone, be ever in the society of the Saints. And if
Christ be the head, then claim not to be the first to have life, but let Jesus
thy head be first; and then come thou creeping in to him; strive to be next him
as much as thou can: and strive not to be first; for he will be first in
despite of thee. The last is, seek not to get grace and life immediately of God
without Christ, as if there were any life of thy own without him: thou would
be deceived, and in steed of life the curse of God will fall upon thee.
Think thou that the Jews which look up to heaven, and seek life without
Christ; think thou that they will get it? Nay, they get death in steed of
life: but thou that gettest a drop of his grace (which is better then all the
kingdoms of the earth) to refresh thy soul, that is parched, as it were, with
the heat of sin, thou (I say) wilt get life in him; for all grace is in him:
therefore seek for it in him.

To go forward, he lays down whereupon this proceeds: It must be builded
upon a ground, which is a remission of thy sins; which is in effect, the
justifying of thee in Jesus, accompting thee to be a just man, notwithstanding
thy sins: saying, I pronounce thee a just man. Then briefly mark this, and
look by what order thou attainest to life. This is the order to come by the
life of God: first before ever thou get that quickening How to attain life.
spirit (for it is the spirit that quickens) thou must have the blood of Jesus.
For there are two things that come from Jesus, his blood and his spirit; think
not to get the spirit before the blood; but seek the blood, bathe and wash
that foul soul of thine. Wash and cleanse thee again and again in that blood
shed on the cross, to the end that the guiltines of thy sins being washed
away from thy soul (for this is the virtue of that blood to all that believe)
thou may get the spirit of Jesus. For being once washed in his blood, then
thou gettest that that is called the remission of sins, which are washed away
Heb 9. 14.
through faith in the blood of Christ: and having got this free remission, the
spirit will come and will pull out that root of bitterness, and dig it up by
the roots: all the power in the The power of Christ's spirit.
world cannot pull it up, but the spirit of Jesus will do it; it will (I say)
pluck up that root, and all the branches and members of it: howbeit he will
not do it at once; yet he will do it by degrees. Then if thou would have
life, go on in this order, and say to God; Lord forgive me my sins in the
blood of Two petitions.
Jesus; say not Lord quicken me, but say, Lord forgive me my sins, and take
away the guiltines of them in the blood of Jesus. Lord quicken me, give me that
spirit that may pull out this natural corruption, and put life in me. Come on
in this manner, and if thou have a faithful heart, it is not possible but thou
may obtain remission of thy sins, and be quickened. Cry then continually,
Lord forgive me, Lord relieve me of the death which I lie in; relieve me of
this corruption, and put life in me, and all this through thy beloved son
Christ Jesus. For it will not be the life of thy parents that will make thee to
live; cry to root out that poison which thou have from thy parents. Our
gentlemen think it enough for them, if they be descended of such a descent of
people. Ha, ha, thou will die like a dog, if thou have no more: be never
contented til thou have gotten a new birth. For all they that will reign with
him must have a new birth. It is impossible for thee to be one of Gods children
and of Christ's, and to have place in heaven, if thou be not borne anew again,
by the spirit and water, as says Ioh. 1. Epist. 5. 6. And so much for the
second effect of the strong power of God.

Now follows the third effect in quickening of the Jews: The third effect of
Gods power
there must be something supplied in the text: And us, that is, the Jews: so I
shall stand upon these words where he says, he has put out the hand writing.
Note.
The order whereby the Gentiles were quickened, was the remission of their
sins: but the order whereby the Jews are quickened, is otherwise, before
ever they gate life, there must be an hand writing blotted out: and if we look
to it, the Jews were more bound to death, then the Gentiles, because they had
subscribed to their death, and that publicly in the face of the world. But to
come to the words. We have to mark these things: first, who is this that
blotteth out, and scrapeth away this hand writing. Secondly, what is meant by
the blotting out. Thirdly, what is the thing that is blotted out. Fourthly,
wherefore served this hand writing; he tells it was against them, it served
to their condemnation. I shall go through these four as time shall serve. As
for him that is the blotter out, his name is not expressed, it is Jesus Christ
the son of God: for I see here, that which I noted Four points in the 14.
verse.
in the first chapter, the person is changed, he said it is God the Father that
quickened the Gentiles: now he changes the person. There is no fault in this:
for that, that the Father does, the Son does: To let you see that all is
common to the Father and to the Son, The Father works and I work, says
Christ, Ioh. 5. 17. Then what is meant by this blotting out? The word in the
original signifies a perfect scraping out, as it were of an obligation; so
that there remains not behind any memory of that that is scraped out; there
rests not one letter or tittle vnscraped out. Then Christ Jesus is made a
Chauncellor of the Father to cancel, to blot out at his pleasure, and as he
pleases. He has rent the obligation and drawn lines through it: so thou
that would have thy obligation cancelled, get thee to him, for we have
bound our selves to him. Thirdly, what is that that is blotted out? The
handwriting standing in ordinances, that is, in rites and ceremonies. Then it
is the ceremonies or rites that be blotted out, which was an obligation of the
Jews, subscribed with their own hands. Now wherefore serves it? He says it
was against us, not for us; it did us no good, but evil. It bound and tied us
to death, and sealed up to us the guiltines of death and damnation. He
exempteth not himself from this death: he subscribeth it with his own deed.
To make this plain, the Jew in using of circumcision, he protested he had
original sin, and so was guilty of damnation: in using of these washings,
he protested and proclaimed, he was all filthy, and so guilty of the curse
of the law, and so subscribed to his own death. How the Jews in the use of
the ceremonial law proclaimed their own guiltines and death.
And last of all in sacrificing, he protested he was sinful, and that he had
deserved that death, which the innocent beast sustained for his cause: and
therefore guilty of judgment and damnation, and so subscribed to his own
death. Brethren, this was marvelous, the rites and ceremonies were figures of
Christ, and served to lead them to Jesus Christ, to see that blood of Jesus in
a figure, which washes away the sins of the world. How is it then a
handwriting against them? I answer, it is true if their ceremonies be taken as
figures of Christ, they were no handwriting against them, if they had an eye to
the body that is Christ, and sought not life in the ceremonies, but in the
thing figured. But brethren, take them from Christ, take washings, and
sacrifices, as a kind of religion without How the ceremonies were an
handwriting against the Jews.
Christ, all was but a handwriting against them. And whatsoever Jew he was that
looked not to Christ in his Circumcision, in his washing and rubbings, and in
sacrificing, that Jew perished; and all his doings was but the subscribing to
his own death.

Now to come to the Apostle; he takes the ceremonies as separate from Christ,
and so they were a handwriting against them. He was a rare Jew that used them
with respect to Christ, but the multitude took them as a religion without
Christ; and therefore the greater multitude perished. And so I say that outward
ceremonies cannot save us. In coming to the Church think not to get life,
except thy heart pearce into Christ Jesus, all thy outward worshipping shall
not help thee, but shall be an obligation to thy own condemnation, as the
outward Ceremonies of the Jews were to them a handwriting against them to
their own destruction. And if thou abuse these Ceremonies which we have in
religion, in preaching, Spiritual worship.
praying, and outward meeting, I assure thee thou shall not escape the
judgment of God. And therefore beware, and never content thy self with the
outward worshipping; fie on it all, if thou have not an inward worshipping in
thy heart. Again, I see no man that goes to hell, but before he go, he
subscribeth to his own death. I subscribe with my own hand that I am worthy
of death. The obligation passes against thee either secretly or openly in thy
own conscience; and then thy mouth shall be closed, and the Lord shall cast
thy handwriting before thee, and shall say, See thou not thy own handting?
know thou not that thou subscribedst this? And if thou werst an Emperor,
thou shall keep thy mouth close then, and go from him with howling and
scritching. And therefore never rest as thou would have life, till thou get
that handwriting taken away. Thou would be busy to get that handwriting
taken away, which thou see and know will do thee evil here, and that may
trouble thee in thy person, goods, or lands; fie on thee that should be so
busied about trifles and vanities, and forgettest to take away this fearful
handwriting: which if it stand untaken away, may do, and shall do thee more
harm then the loss of this whole world can do. Seek therefore continually
night and day to have this handwriting of thy sin and guiltines taken away,
as thou would stand with joy in the presence of thy maker, at that day. To
whom with the Son and holy Spirit be all honor for ever,

Amen.
THE EIGHTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians, beginning
at the midst of the 14. verse.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 14. 15. 14 Which was contrary to us, he even took it
out of the way, and fastened it upon the cross:

15 And has spoiled the principalities, and powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same cross.


WE insist yet (brethren) on the description of God, and of the effectualnes of
his power. Ye have heard that he is described from his effects, the works that
he has wrought. The first effect and work in which chiefly the effectualnes
of his strong power vttred it self, was the raising Coherence.
of Jesus Christ from the dead: not by remitting him any sin that he had
done, because he never sinned; but simply he raised him by his power. The
second effect is, the raising of the Colossians, and generally of the Gentiles,
when they were dead in sin, and in that uncircumcision of the flesh. But how?
by forgiving them their sins: for there is no life, nor quickening of thee,
but by the remission of thy sins. First that guiltines must be taken away,
before ever that spirit of life enter into thee. The third effect, that we
entered into the last day, and now this day, we shall finish it, by Gods grace,
and it is the quickening of the Jews, who had also as great need to be
quickened, as the Gentiles had. And Paul confesses his own misery, and
wants, naming himself among the rest. But how? by putting away the handwriting
that was against them: for besides the guiltines of sin, they had subscribed
to their own guiltines: for so often as they used the ceremonies of the Law, so
often did they subscribe to their own condemnation. So that before they could
be quickened, it behooued that this handwriting should be scraped out. It
standing, there was no forgiveness to them: so their life is by taking away of
this handwriting.

But to proceed: the last day we opened these words: Having put away the
handwriting of the ordinances that was against us: That is to say, having put
away the rites and ceremonies of the Law (for Christ by his death abolished
them all) the which rites were as an obligation or handwriting, subscribed by
the Jews against themselves, sealing the guiltines of death and damnation for
sin. Now to go forward in the text as it follows, as God will give grace.
Immediately after these words (mark every word, for they have weight) he
subioyneth, which was contrary to us: he repeateth it again, but he took it
out of the way, that is the handwriting of rites that was contrary to us, and
made not for us: the Lord Jesus took it out of the way. It lay in our way, and
it was a sure stumbling block to us, and we were not able to remove it, nor to
take it out of the way: but yet the Lord Jesus, he takes it out of the
midst of the way. So ye see there is nothing but a repeating of that, that
was spoken before: howbeit in other terms; he said before, which was against
us: now he says, which was contrary to us, al is one in effect. Repetition
of a thing is not without cause: for the holy spirit never speaks any word in
vain. Thou and I may often spend words idly, but the holy spirit cannot waste
one jot or syllable. The cause of this repetition is: Paul cannot forget the
thing that he and the rest had done against themselves, and that that Christ
did for them. O, if thou remembredst the benefits of God, once telling the^
over would Repetition not idle in Scripture.
not serve thy turn! and it learneth thee never to forget that, that thou have
done against thy self, and that which Christ has done for thee. By that that
thou have done, thou had dest been undone, if this that Christ has done had
not been done. Besides this, it serves for the greater certainty of that
that was done. He will force an assurance into thee, both that thou have
subscribed to thy own death, and also that Christ has taken away thy
subscription, that thou should not doubt. Woe to that vain doctrine of
doubting, and woe to Doubting.
the doubting Doctors. The dolts will bid thee doubt whether Christ has taken
away that subscription: woe to such Doctors! If we will mark the words, ye
shall see an opposition, that, that thou have done Jew or Gentile, it is
against thy self: that, that Christ has done, is for thee. This lets thee
see, not only the Jew but the Gentile, that thou art more beholding to Christ
then to thy self: thou subscribedst against thy self; and if the Lord
proceed upon thy handwriting, thou shall certainly dye. But Jesus Christ has
put that subscription of thine out of the way: so that if thou be thankful
thou should love him better then thy self: for the greatest enemy that man
has is his own self: And therefore should thou not love him better then
thy self? If thou do it not thou shall dye. But not to leave the force of the
word (for this word imports a greater meaning then the other) the word of
blotting The word (...), putting out. The word (...), to take out of the way.
out was great indeed, ducere transuersas lineas, is a great word; but to
destroy the very tables, paper, and all, and to rent it asunder, is more then
both. Mark it; for it lets us see that his mercy is not halfed; he shows not
a piece of mercy upon us. Men will halfen their mercy toward others: but
Jesus Christ halfens not his mercy toward us, but he perfecteth it. If he
once meant to show mercy, he will not leave that work till he end it: and if he
once mean to remit, he will not leave off till he have freely forgiven: for
that that he does, he does it perfectly, to his glory and thy salvation. The
Pope will make him to halfen his mercy. O vain doctrine! do thou halfen
the mercy of the Lord? thou art a liar; the mercy of The guilt of sin and
the punishment both remitted in Christ.
the Lord is perfect: so that when he remitteth, he remitteth both the sin
and the punishment thereof.

Now to come to the words that follow. In the last words he shows how the
handwriting is taken out of the way. It was not after so light a manner, as a
man would take an obligation and rent it: but before it could be rent, it
behooued the Lord to be crucified. Well (who would be hanged for another man's
obligation?) and he being crucified, he takes that obligation and naileth it
to the cross, and rents it asunder. Now to make this plain, when Jesus Christ
was crucified, he was not crucified alone, but many things were crucified with
him; and many things that same very hour were nailed to the cross with him:
This handwriting of thine, thy indictment that would have condemned thee, thy
sin original, thy actual sins, the death that follows thereon, and
hell, even all these were nailed to the cross with him: finally that curse was
crucified with him; all died together, he died not alone: all depended upon
his death, he died first, they followed. For brethren, the sins of the world
were laid upon Christ; and for that cause he came into the world, to take them
of the back of the world, and to lay them on his own back, as is said Esai.
53. 5. The Lord laid on him all our iniquities, tumbled them on him: so that
when Christ was lifted up upon the cross, there was never such a lift lifted
up. Take all the mountains and lay them on one person, and there was a heavier
burden lying upon his back. For the wrath of God was lying upon him: who felt
it? the Jews? Nay the Lord Jesus felt the weight of that fierce wrath; and he
hanging on the cross all hanged with him, thy malediction, thy obligation, thy
death and curse were on his back and hung with him. Therefore Peter in his
first Epistle and second chapter, verse. 24. says, that he bare in his body
our sins, all hung with him. Now brethren, think ye that his burden was
light? That handwriting of the curse of God for sin, thy sin and every
particular man's sin, that believes or should believe in him, their death and
torments due to them, have they escaped Christ crucified on the cross? No, no,
all were laid on him, and al were crucified with him, and the same nails that
were driven into his hands and feet, were also really beaten into thy sins,
and into that death due to sin, and they were driven through hell, the last
torment for sin. But who did this? The Jews had little mind of this; no not
of their own obligation. Who was it then that crucified them? The Jews nailed
the Lord: but the Lord nailed them. The very death that Jesus dyed was the
nails that were stricken through The Jews nailed Christ on the cross: but he
him seize nailed our sins, the obligation, death and hell to that his cross.
that obligation, and the sins of all the believers, to the utter overthrow of
all things that before had offended his father in the elect, or that should
offend him thereafter. For in that he died, it was not for sin done before
alone, but for sin also that after should be done by any of his elect: for he
is the mediator that takes away the sins of the world for ever and ever: as
he was the lamb of God that was slain from the beginning. O then let never
that powerful death of Jesus go out of thy mind, as thou would be saved,
and have comfort in the day of thy death! The Lord Jesus in his death was the
most blessed agent that ever was, the very death of Jesus slew all the sins
in the world.

Now to go to the next verse. To the end that they should not doubt of the
destroying of the handwriting, the Apostle tells them what more he did, when
he was on the Cross, that seeing the greater thing they should not doubt of
the lesser: for he that can do the greater, he can do the less. What did he?
He took all the devils in hell, he disarmed them, he spoiled them, and led
them in a triumph like slaves, with their hands bound behind their backs, and
he mounted upon the cross, as upon a chariot, triumphing over them, and that
is more. Now to understand this the better, we must understand there were two
things against us (howbeit he speaks of the Jews, yet all may be drawn to
us generally) first there was thine own hand, it stood untaken away: then
there were powers and principalities and devils: there was not one devil but
he Two things against us all.
was against thee, accusing thee upon thine own obligation. There is his
obligation (says he) how can he escape judgment and condemnation? And they
never cease to accuse thee, yea within thy own conscience, and they make it to
condemn thee. Now what does Christ? He takes thy obligation and all that may
be laid to thy charge, and abolisheth it; and then he turns to the accusers
and fights with them, disarmeth How vainly vain men speak of Christ
crucified.
the^, and leads the^ captive in a triumph. O would to God we could weigh ye
mercy of God! O vain body! it is but a word to thee, that Christ was
crucified, as if thou werst speaking of a hanged man, so vainly thou speak
of Christ's cross. Then this I mark generally. I see Jesus Christ, when he
was on the cross dying, he was the most occupied that ever was in any action:
thou when thou art dying, thou do no more, but Jesus Christ when he was in
dying he wrought and sought most busily. So that the death of Jesus was
ordained for the abolishing and destroying the aduersest powers in the world,
thy sin and hell, and whatsoever was contrary to thee and thy salvation.
Brethren, the argument that the Apostle uses, is from the greater to the
less: he has spoiled the principalities and powers; therefore concludes he,
be assured he has taken thy obligation away. When thou hear this, doubt not
but thy sins are forgiven thee; the one thing is the smaller, the other is
the greater. When thou see the devil rages not in the world, when thou
see his dominion empayred: An argument to assure us our sins are pardoned,
because that Satan and sin do not reign in us.
make thy vantage of it, and say, O my sins are forgiven! For be ye assured,
if there were not remission of sins, the devil would reign and rage: and
therefore this restraining of him, is a sure argument that thy sins are
forgiven thee. For if thy hand writing were not rent, he would reign in thee,
as he reigns in such men as rage in their wicked lusts of adulteries and
murders. Thou that art exercised in thy pollutions and murders, and such
like; thou have no warrant that thy sins are forgiven thee, for as yet the
devil reigns in thee. Seek therefore to this Lord Jesus, and the virtue of
his cross, that the devil reign not in thee. O miserable is that creature
whatsoever it be, that walks in sin, whatsoever it be, thou may be
assured: for that handwriting of thy curse, stands as yet against thee, and
will condemn thee in that great day. It will be dashed in thy teeth to thy
shame and confusion for ever.

He says, Having spoiled. The word is stripped, taken off all that clothing
of theirs. Of whom? no small creatures, but of principalities and powers, that
is, the devils, of whom one is stronger then all the men in the world. He were
able to destroy all living men: and there are millions of them. O if thou
knew them, thou would fear continually! Thou will look to a silly
creature and wilt stamp upon it, but thou have enemies above thy head, and if
thou saw them, thou would take little thought of the enimitie of men:
look Ephesians. chap. 6. verse. 12. This power of the devil is restrained only in
the believers, for he rages every day more and more fiercly in unbelievers
toward the end of the world, as Saint John says in the revelation, because
his time is but short.
Then it follows: before Christ was crucified, the devils reigned as armed
men, to the destroying of men. O how much be we beholding to Christ, that live
now in these days, after this restraining of the power of the devils! Now
brethren, it is a thing that one might wonder at: will ye compare him and them
together? The Jews spoiled Christ of his clothes, setting him up naked; what
is he doing in the mean time? They are not so busy in stripping him, as he is
in stripping the devils. They are stripping him, and he is stripping the Lords
that reigned among them. And that ye may think the more of it, by the virtue
of the stripping of him, and the pulling off of the clothes of him he pulls
off the armor of the devils. If Christ had not been stripped, he had not
stripped them; by the over coming of him, binding of him, he overcomes and
binds the devils: To learn you to account much of every particular point of
the sufferings of Christ; for there was no point of it without a power to slay
sin, and to slay the devil. The nakedness of Christ is stronger, then the
armed devil is. And so much for this part.

Then to see again concerning these principalities, since Jesus Christ has
suffered, what are they? Naked creatures: I may speak it boldly, they are
naked creatures, and this is to thy comfort. Think not but that thou must
meet with him once, by day or night. It is his pleasure to have thy heart
wrapped up, and to lull thee a sleep. Then this is thy comfort, when thou have
to do with the devil, thou have to do with a naked creature, whom the Lord
has spoiled. But look to this condition: if it be so, that thou be armed with
the breastplate of faith: that thou be armed with Jesus Christ. Have thou this?
the devil is but a naked body before thee. He may well tempt thee, but he
shall not overcome thee: yea, he shall not be able to dare thee: it shall pass
the power of all the devils in hell to do thee harm. But if thou be naked and
meet him without Christ, thou will meet with an armed man; he will draw thee
here and there: and in very deed he reigns like a Lion in every infidels
heart: howbeit his kingdom be impaired; yet if thou be an infidel, he
reigns in thee like a Satan in unbelievers.
wood roaring lion, and he will draw thee every way from one sin to another,
till by sinning he bring thee to destruction. Ye see daily examples hereof in
such miserable creatures that Ephesians. 2. 1
suffer on scaffolds. Fie on thee that suffer him to abuse thee as he will;
he will abuse the murderer to wash his hands in the blood of his brother; he
will abuse the harlot to commit whoredom; the oppressor to rage in
oppression, and so out of their open and horrible transgressions he brings
them to destruction. Such is the tyranny of his kingdom. Fie on thee that
know this, and yet suffer thy self to be abused with him. Well, well;
seek thy faith in Jesus Christ to be clad with him, as ever thou will be free
of this tyranny of the devil, of his tempting thee, and of his abusing of thee
to commit sin ever at his pleasure. Thus much for the victory which the Lord
gets over these principalities and powers even while he is in crucifying.

Now follows that glorious triumph and progress, which he makes in the
sight of God and the Angels. The words are these, He made a show of them
openly: in the original, he led them thorough openly, thorough the world, they
looking on this side and that side. This manner of speech is borrowed from
Orators that have used to set out glorious triumphs of Emperors in such
speeches: it is taken from them and given to Christ: and no wrong done. Ye know
the Roman Emperors, when they triumphed, they used to be honored with many
points of honor, and to be brief, the manner of their triumph was The Romans
triumph.
this: The Emperor himself was mounted on hie in a glorious Chariot, and all
the people assembled and stood gazing on him: and then the Captives were
brought before him, their armor taken from them, and their hands bound: they
were led foremost, and the Emperor followed. The Apostle alludeth to the same
manner, in this triumph of Jesus Christ. But to come to every word, he says he
led them thorough, as it were thorough a company of men and women. The devils
are led thorough the^: but this is that, that is to be wondered at; Christ is
led to the cross bearing his own cross like a slave, and the Christ's triumph.
people are gazing on him, and he is made a mocking stock: he is raised up
upon that shameful cross, and dies that shameful death. The Apostle turns
this over and says, it is the devil that is led in chains; it is the Lord
Jesus that triumphs, and they are in chains: he goes forward in glory, and
they go in shame. This same turning over lets thee see, that by When the
devil thought to triumph over Christ, he triumphed over him.
that leading him out to the cross so shamefully; he was shaming the devils of
hell, and leading them captives in such sort, that if he had not been shamed,
he could not have shamed the devils. In his shame he shameth the devils.
Indeed it had bin a smaller matter if by his glory he had shamed them: but
this is marvelous, that with the shame wherewith they shamed him, he shamed
them. Ye may see again, it is for our consolation to see the devils dejected.
I showed you before that since that very hour that Christ suffered, the devils
are naked: now as they are naked, so they are shamed, and they are without
power: and so thou have a great vantage over them. The devil blusheth when he
sees thee, his head hangs down. The dastard dares not look up to heaven;
when thou have to do with him, thou have to do with a shamed creature, that
is ashamed to look thee in the face: they are shamed creatures. O but note the
condition! If thou be glorious in Jesus Christ, if thou come out honorably in
him, coming out in his glory, the devils will be ashamed to look on thee,
they cannot abide the sight of thee. The very glance of thee will strike them
blindfold. Indeed they may well push at thee, but they dare not come so near
thee to hurt thee: but if thou come out against them, without the glory of
Christ, in the ignominy of thy own nature, if thou werst a King (thou art but
a confounded creature in thy own nature) he shall cast up his face, and he
shall be glorious above thee (for he is a principality) and he will oppress
thee: So blessed is that man, and that soul that is clad with Jesus, and has
his faith in him: for he shall overcome the devil and find strength in the day
of temptation. Cast Gorgons head, or Medusas: so many as did look on it were
turned into stones, as Poets feign
up Jesus Christ as it were Gorgonis caput, the devil dare not look upon thee:
but if thou appear in thy own nature, without Christ, lying in thy stink, he
will boldly and fiercely set on thee. He will cast up his face and assail thee
mightily, and he shall not leave thee till he destroy thee: for there is no
mercy or pity with him, he is more cruel the^ a Tiger. Well, seek to Christ,
as ye would be saved, and stand fast in the day of temptation.

He led them through (says he) openly. That is, in the sight of God, his
Angels, and all the world, and these that stood about the cross. What auailes
a triumph that is done in secret? The glory of this triumph stood in that,
that it was done so openly. I tell thee his cross was no more open then his
triumph was; his glory was as open as his shame. But thou will say, who was
this? all the Jews and the nations about, saw him crucified ignominiously: who
saw this triumph? alas, if they had had eyes they might have seen it. Whereto
tended his death? but to the vanq^^^^^ng of the devil: so the fault was not in
the cross, bu^ in them that they saw not. If there were no more but that
title, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews, which Pilate would not alter, if
they had taken heed to that title, they might perceive he was triumphing. But
howbeit they all saw it not, yet I doubt not but there were some secret ones
that saw it: both God and his Angels saw it; and Paul looking back again to
the cross, he sees that triumph. There is none of us, but when we look back
to the cross of Christ Jesus, we see in the cross a triumphing King, sitting
in a triumphing chariot, this is Paul's sight, and it is the sight of every
faithful soul. They see it and they feel it daily, and out of my sight it
shall never go, nor out of thy sight that beleeuest in the Lord Jesus.

In the last words he takes up in one word, the triumphing He co^pares Christ's
triumph with the Romans triumphs.
over them: ye know the greatest glory of victory, when men triumph over
their enemies, is to be set above them; and all the Roman Emperors never got
so great glory, as when they got a triumph. But all is nothing to this glory
of the triumph of our Jesus: for he gets the greatest honor, he gets the
triumph, which is worthily called a triumph. What is his triumph? The Romans
got their triumph when they had oppressed men most unjustly, and so it was but
a tyranny: but the Lord Jesus triumphs not, because he oppresses this or
that man; but he triumphs because he oppressed principalities and powers, that
is, the devils. Never a Caesar overcame the devil; but the devil overcame
them, when they were in their greatest royalty; so that the devil was leading
them to hell fastest, when they triumphed most unjustly: but Jesus Christ
triumphs after a just victory. The spoiling of them was most just, and so it
passes all the triumphs of all the Roman Emperors and Caesar's. Their
Chariots are not to be compared with that cross of Jesus. So would thou
triumph with Jesus Christ, and after a just conquest? Alas, alas, seek not to
triumph over men, over this or that King, this body or that; over poor
tenants to shed their blood, to wring thy hands in their heart blood as thou will. O villain, villain, stay! let not that King of Spain, that slave
subjected to that beast of Rome rejoice, in that by his cruelty he triumphs
over many nations. O thou will call thy self a Christian King! learned thou
of Christ to oppress thy neighbor countries? No, if thou werst a Christian
King, thou would learn to oppress the devil, that reigns over thee. But
to leave them and to speak of this victory of Christ: thou that would have
a true triumph, seek to have the victory over the devil, that seeks to
triumph over thee, and that in Jesus Christ: for without him there is no true
victory.

To end in a word: ye would marvel, if you look to this writing of this
Apostle, and I doubt not, that me^ in this world, that know not what Jesus and
his cross mean, would scorn all this language: for the wisdom of God is
foolishnes to this world. What is this he is telling? He is speaking of an
ignominious cross of Christ: and again, he is setting him up as it were a
Caesar. There was never an Orator that spoke more highly of an Emperor, then
he does, speaking of the cross of Jesus Christ. He is making a glory of an
ignominy; and a Chariot of a gallows; a triumph of a man that is hanged.
Brethren, this same speech of the Apostle (would to God we could see as he saw,
it is a triumphing speech of a triumph) testifies plainly, that he felt in
his heart the power of the cross and A triumphing speech in the Apostle of
Christ's triumph.
death of Jesus Christ, as he says, Galath. 6. 14. God forbid that I should
rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, It testifies that his
heart was full of the power of God, and of the death of Christ; and that the
obligation was cancelled, and the devil undone; and by this effectual
feeling, the mouth and the heart are opened. Alas, alas, he would not have
compared the cross of Christ with the triumph of Emperors, if his heart had
not felt the virtue of the cross of Christ. O then, seek a sense of the death
of Christ, and the power of it! otherwise read not these words; for thou will
scorn the Gospel. Again I say, thou will scorn the Gospel, if thou find
not the virtue and power of the death of Christ in some measure sensibly in thy
heart; yea and the wiser thou art, thou will ever account it the greater
folly. Therefore as ever thou will account of it, and speak of the cross of
Christ to thy joy, seek to feel sensibly the power of that death of Christ:
for it is not like a common death. In the death of the man Jesus Christ what
was there? There was the life of the Son of God that quickened the death of
the man. So that it is more powerful then all the lives of Angels or men that
are, or that ever will be. So all tends to this: seek to find the power of
that death, that thou may read it with joy, and hear tell of it with joy.
And certainly, if thou shall feel the power at the hearing and speaking of it,
if thine heart shall leap for joy: it is argument for thee, that Jesus Christ
has triumphed over death to thy salvation. To this Jesus, with the Father and
the holy Spirit, be all glory and honor for ever and ever,

Amen.
THE NINETEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE Epistle of PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 16. 17. 16 Let no man therefore condemn you in meat
and drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the
Sabbath days,

17 Which are but shadows of things to come: but the body is in Christ.


THe purpose of the Apostle in all this place (beloved brethren) it is partly
to exhort the Colossians to beware of false teachers, that had crept in amongst
them; and partly to admonish them. Now, heretofore ye heard, he fell upon
occasion into a fair description of God, and of Coherence.
the effectualnes of his power, which was from the effects: first from the
raising of Jesus Christ from the dead. Secondly, from raising up of the
Gentiles, and namely the Colossians, who were dead in sins and in the
uncleanness of their flesh, from that death they lay in. And thirdly, from the
quickening of the Jews, who had subscribed an obligation against themselves,
sealing up that they were guilty of damnation. Therefore Jesus Christ, the
first thing he does, is the cancelling of the obligation, and putting it out of
the way, by nailing it on the cross: then when he had done this, he turns
him upon the same cross, to principalities and powers, who are the devils that
persecuted mankind, and accused them upon that handwriting. He turns (I say)
to them, and fights with them, spoiling and leading them captives. Then
having spoiled them, he leads them to their shame and his glory in the sight
of God and his Angels, openly in a triumph, he sitting as it were, in his
triumphing chariot the cross, more glorious then all the chariots wherein any
triumphing Emperor ever triumphed from the beginning. Now (brethren) in this
text which we have read, the Apostle returns to his former purpose, and upon
the former doctrine, containing that fact of Christ upon the cross, in nailing
the handwriting to the cross, and putting it out of the way, and vanquishing
the devils; he gathers this admonition. Seeing this handwriting of ordinances,
all rites, ceremonies and all, are abolished by the cross of Christ: therefore
ye Colossians, let no man condemn you for these things. They are not, they are
all abolished, and put away; therefore beware of the false teachers, that would
condemn you for not using of such things: I mean (says he) new Moons,
Sabboths, meats, drinks, and such other ceremonies. If we will weigh these
words well, we shall find in them not only a simple admonition given to the
Colossians, that they should not suffer themselves to be condemned in such
things: but also we shall find an inhibition given to the false teachers,
forbidding them to condemn the Colossians, or any of the Gentiles, in any of
these rites that were already abolished, forbidding them straightly under the
pain of their condemnation to urge them with the same. The very form of the
words shows, that it is a very law: for it is given after the manner of a
law: Let no man. As if he would say, I inhibite that no man condemn you for
these ceremonies of the law already abolished in the death of Christ.

Then briefly (brethren) ye see there is a law given: the holy Spirit gives
it, the Apostle proclaims it, the law is this, An evangelical law.
that no man condemn them whom God absolueth. When God absolueth a man, let no
man condemn him: no, if it were all the Kings in the earth they are over bold
to condemn the silliest creature that God absolueth. Paul to the Romans chap. 8.
33. 34. commands and urges, Who will intend any crime? who will be so bold
to do it? it is God that justifies, who then dare be so bold as to condemn
him whom he justifies, and absolueth? The law is given in general. But to
come to the particulars. There is a law given concerning the Jew, that after
God has rent his handwriting, and abolished all the rites that he was
subject unto; let no man condemn him for not observing of these ceremonies.
And as concerning the Gentile, there is a law, let no false teacher condemn a
Gentile for not observing any of these ceremonies, considering the Gentiles
never received them: they were imposed upon the Jew. As for the Gentile, they
were not imposed upon him, and therefore it is a great presumption to impose
these rites upon them who never had received them. But to come near and speak
plainly. There is a law against the Pope and Papists, that they condemn no
Christian man under pain of condemnation, for not observing of such rites, as
their festiual days, and ceremonies of their own invention. And in the name
of the same Jesus (as the Apostle intimates this law) so do I intimate the
same to them and you that hear me; let no man condemn you for not keeping of
such things, as the Papists would impose upon you. The Lord has made you free
of them. The Lord has given you liberty: He is too impudent to bind you with
the observation of such things.

But let us particularly see the things, in the which he will not have the
Colossians and the rest of the Gentiles and us this day condemned. He calls
them, in meat drink, and holy days, apparently he understands the feasts,
that were most solemn, as the Passover, the feast of Tabernacles, and such
others. And then he comes to them that were not so solemn, as the new Moons
and the rest. And if you will mark the manner of speaking, he speaks of
these rites with a disdaining of them. They are of no worth after the body is
come. I will not insist to speak of the rites of the Jews, only thus far
concerning their meats. Before the Lord came and was manifested, Leuit. 11. 1.
Deuteronomy. 14. there ye shall find that among the Jews there was a difference of
meats, some clean, some Of the Jewish observation of meats.
unclean and forbidden. All was to signify the difference between the Jew
and the Gentile, that the Jew should not communicate with the Gentile. But
that partition wall was thrown down by Jesus Christ at his coming, and all
difference was taken away. Now the false teachers did as much as they could, to
have raised up the partition wall, and so to make void the cross of Jesus
Christ.

As concerning holy days I only touch it, among the Jews there were many
feasts observed, but all were figures of Christ; Holy days.
and when he came, they all took end. And therefore the false teachers, that
pressed the observation of those days, did what they could to annihilate the
coming of Jesus Christ, as though he had never yet come into the world. And
here ye may clearly perceive the nature of erroneous spirits that incline
Erroneous spirits.
to heresy, for the most part they are occupied about trifling things; things
indifferent, as meat, drink, holy days, and such like. O as the Papists here
are busy about meats, holy days of their own making, and such like, from
the which the Lord has freed us: To impose laws necessary to be kept (as
they speak) under the pain of salvation and damnation; as the eating of flesh
on friday: O vain fool! As for things necessary to salvation and the worship
of God, Papists pass over them as frivolous. They will not condemn an
adulterer. Behold their religion (brethren) I think ye desire that I should
speak some thing of the observation of days, and difference of meats. Seeing
this has been handled in the doctrine of the Catechism; it is not my purpose
to insist upon it. Yet I shall show you mine opinion as plainly and briefly as
I may possibly, agreeing with the godly and learned in these days. Ye will
ask, is there any difference between meats, what shall we think of them
that will abstain from meats? I answer, if for policies sake, because of any
politic law, and in regard of a commonweal, thou abstainest from meats, Law
concerning meats.
thou do well. As on the contrary, thou do evil, if thou abstain not:
for the Magistrate is to be obeyed for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. If again
thou abstain from meats, and use not these bodily exercises, that by
abstinence and fasting thou may be the better helped in the exercises
spiritual, as prayer and repentance: whether there be a constitution of the
Church to that effect, or whether of thy own motion, thou do it, thou do
well. But if thou begin to place godliness True fast.
in eating and not eating, putting a necessity in them, and that with the
opinion of merit, that thou deseruest this or that (as the Papists speak) away
with thee and thy fasting. If thou be of that opinion, fast and it were forty
days together, thou art an Idolater, and all thine exercise stinkes in the
nose Superstitious fast.
of God; yea though thou do fast till thy bones and skin came together.

Now as concerning days, what shall we think of other countries, that yet
keep holy days? I shall tell you, the holy days (as they call them) they are
either commanded by God, or instituted by man: God is the author of them, or
else man. The days commanded by God in old time before Christ came, they were
many, as ye may read in the books of Moses: but as touching the days
enjoined by God to be kept of us, after the coming of Christ, read the
Scripture from the beginning to the end, and yet thou shall find but one day
only enjoined thee to be kept, and that by the law Moral, and this day is the
Lords Sabbath: and in keeping of this stands the worshipping of God. So thou
that keep the seventh day, thou do the thing that is acceptable with God;
and thou that do it not, thou highly offendest God. Then concerning the
days instituted by man, whether of old, or of late, they are different. Some
were instituted by man, for the honor of vulgar and common Saints: of some of
the which it may be doubted whether they were Saints or no. Some were
instituted for the honor of the Apostles, indeed they were Saints; yea even
although the Pope would not canonize the^. Some were instituted for the honor
of God and Jesus Christ. Now to go through: as for the holy days appointed for
ye honor of common Saints, I say this (and it is the opinion of the learned)
they are Idolatrous; thou that do run to the bones of Popish holy days.
this Saint, or that Saint, and kissest it, and thou wotest not whether it was
the bone of a murderer, a thief, or an oppressor, or of a Saint: And
therefore the reformed Churches in Europe have abolished these days. As for
the days instituted to the honor of the Apostles, indeed it is true ye
reformed Churches agree not uniformly in this point. Some keep these days,
and yet without peril of Idolatry, because they keep the days only, and yet
without dedication of service to the Saints. But certainly, will ye see the
matter as it is. It wants not superstition (if the Apostles were never so
holy) to dedicate a day to them, and service for them. I will not bring in more
reasons, yet this I say, to celebrate a feast to any man, whether dead or
living, with divine worship to the same, it is Idolatry: for the celebration
of a feast, with service adjoined thereto, is a kind of worship, that
pertains to God only. Read the Law, and ye shall find this. Now will ye
have Gods mind in this matter? When Moses was dead, God takes his bones and
caused them to be buried secretly; that not one of the people should know where
they were laid. And wherefore does he it? To prevent the superstition of the
people, that they should not worship them, and celebrate a feast to them. He
knew the vanity of man's brain, he will make a God of a dead bone: Blessed art
thou that art restrained by the word of God.

Will ye have the example of the Jews, read where ever they made a feast to
Moses, or Aaron, or old Abraham? And if any should have a festival day, they
should have had it: but I neither read nor heard tell, that they got any. Come
to the Apostles themselves, read the Acts, when that idolatrous people would
have worshipped them, they rent their clothes for grief of their
superstition: And this day I trow they should riue their clothes, if they saw
and understood the superstition and worship that is done to them: and if Paul
had accepted of thy feast, O vain Papist! he should not abide in heaven one
moment: for that were to the dishonor of God: they give thee no thank: if
they wist of it, they would not fail to rent their clothes and bodies both,
and to curse thee to thy face, for taking the honor that is due to God, and to
give it them. So concerning this, it is a piece of superstition, and idolatry,
to celebrate a feast, and appoint divine service to the Apostles; I will except
none of them: no, not Mary would not stand in heaven, if she accepted of that
honor that thou give her. Fie on these vain Papists, they rent Gods cloak
asunder, and would put it on another: fie on them and their stinking idolatrous
days.

To come to the next word. In it he subioynes another argument of his
admonition, that none should condemn them of these ceremonies, and it is taken
from the nature and definition of all the old Ceremonies. What are they all,
but shadows? and therefore seeing they are vanishing things, let no man
condemn you upon trifles; let no man find fault with you, nor thrust them upon
you, as though they were necessary points to the service of God. Then no man
should be condemned for a shadow, a vanishing and fickle thing: if thou werst a
King do it not, there is no man so given over into the hands of men. It was
not given to Angels to condemn a man for ceremonies; much less ought thou
to condemn a man, specially for a shadow. And yet for all that brethren, as I
said before, this is the nature of an erroneous spirit, all their censuring
Judging of men by their observation of ceremonies.
proceeds of judging a man for observation of ceremonies, and they will send
him to heaven and hell for every trifle at their pleasure. So mark an
erroneous spirit and a deceiuer: his head is busy about these trifling things,
censuring upon shadows, putting a necessity where there is none, and stepping
over the necessary points of Religion. In a word, ye shall find the devil
has been a sore enemy to this christian liberty, to burden thee with things
indifferent. But as Paul counsels thee, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made thee free, and count him for a false
teacher that would restrain thee.

But to weigh the words better, which are but shadows, that is, no
substantial thing. There is a great difference between the shadow and the
body: for a man going to the East, his shadow strikes to the west; so all the
shadows, when Christ rose in the East, were stricken back to the precedent
times, and for the times since his resurrection, are abolished and done away.
The Sacraments that we now receive, are not shadows, but sure seals of Jesus
Christ already come. Mark what was the estate of the Jew: he lived upon
shadows under the law, and yet he was safe: not by the virtue of the shadows,
but because in the mean time, while he is in remembering of the The Jews
before Christ.
shadows, his eye looks out beyond the shadow to that body that was coming:
So it was hope that saved him. As for those that had no eye to the body, they
got no life but death by the shadow. Thou shall never have life by these
outward exercises of Religion, except thou have the inward substances: for the
outward shall ever turn to thy damnation, if thou have not the inward. And
further, the very estate of the Jews does recommend to thee the blessedness of
thy estate above the Kings, and all the Prophets of old. They embraced the
shadow, but thou embracest the body. Jesus Christ is come already crucified
in the Gospel: so that thy estate is such a blessed estate, yt thou can
never think enough of it. But alas, heavenly things are not regarded! when thou
have gotten some small preferment in the world, thou will make much of it: but
as for this preferment in Jesus Christ thou carest not for it. Yet the end will
commend or condemn all thy joys. Now mark the power that rises from the
shadows of Christ: the very shadow of him, being rightly taken, saves and
comfort the sinful soul. It was his shadow that saved Adam, and all Kings
and people, before his coming in the flesh: but yet, as the shadow must be
still understood to be accompanied with the body, and to have the power from
it. O what power must be in the body when it is standing before thee without
the shadow, seeing the shadow is so powerful! O the wonderful power that is
offered to me and thee! fie on us that find it not: the blame is in us that we
find not this power; and not in Jesus. Seek to Jesus, take hold of him by
faith, and I do assure thee there shall come out of him such a power that
shall quicken thee so, as thou would not want it for all the world.

Thirdly, ye shall see how foolish these false teachers are: they are teaching
to embrace a shadow, when the body is come. See how vain they are. The Jews
did well, that embraced the shadow before Christ came; but after his coming it
was vain to do it: and so it was as much as to bid them embrace the thing
that was not. And admit that the shadow abode still, were it not folly to
comprize the shadow with the body? the shadow goes before, the body comes
after. But brethren, such is the folly of these vanishing heads, this fellow
will seem to be some body, a jolly fellow, as who but he; and yet he will
make thee to think that light and darkness may dwell together, the shadow and
the body to be both in one place. O but all this is vanity! decline thou once
from the truth, thou be come mad, thou will cause the people to err. So
blessed is the man that sticks by Jesus, and stands by the scripture of God:
and if thou do it, thou shall be safe, otherwise thou shall go into
everlasting darkness: As the Apostle Romans 1. 21. testifies, ye shall become
mad fools, and in the end perish with the reprobate, if ye stick not to this
Jesus Christ and his word.

Now to come to the end: they might have said, if these be the shadows, where
is the body? He answers, But the body is in Christ. There are two things
here: first, there is the shadow of things to come: the second is, the body
which is Christ, and follows the shadow. The body that follows, is not this
or that body; not John the Baptist, not one of the Prophets, but only Jesus
Christ. Then note first, there was never from the beginning, nor is nor shall
be to the end, any other subject of Religion, of godliness, but Jesus Christ the
Lord: seek it where ye will, there is no other foundation of faith: No man
(says Paul, 1. Cor. 3. 11.) can lay any other foundation beside that that is
laid, Jesus Christ. Only this is the difference: amongst the Jews he was but
a shadow, now he is the body. So, would thou have a godly man defined? it
is he whose heart is occupied about Christ in some measure: how he was
incarnate, and of his passion. Think thou that this should go out of thy
thought? Alas, if thou thoughtest of thy sin, thou should never get rest,
till thou think of his cross, then of his resurrection. This is the godly
hearted man Paul, 1. Tim. 3. 16. when he had said, Great is the mystery of
godliness, then he comes to the parts of it, God manifested in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, and so forth till he comes to the last, received up in
glory: where we are taught, that the mystery of godliness is only in Jesus
Christ. So that if thou would have thy heart occupied in godliness, fix thy
heart on Jesus Christ: for I assure you this, think of any thing in this
world, or out of it, and leave out Jesus Christ, not thinking of him; thou
shall find that thy heart shall not be sanctified, but profane and wicked. So
there is nothing to make a godly heart, but to think on Jesus. When thou art
thinking of many things, reserve a piece of thy heart for him, give him a
thought; if thou were a King, be not so busy in thy affairs; if thou were in
Parliament, take heed thou forget him not, but ever give him a thought or a
look, otherways thou art not sanctified: yea, if in all thine affairs thou
think not on Christ, and have not a presence of God, the very horse thou
ridest on, is better then thou; and the higher thou art mounted up, the more
miserable, if thou want a thought of God in Jesus Christ. Again, ye see Jesus
is called the body, ye know that by humane reason, a body is a solid thing,
with dimensions, that thou may apprehend solidlie. In a word, Christ has
this prerogative to be called a body: Jesus Christ, of all things is the
solidest and firmest: in comparison of him, there is not a body in the world.
I say to thee, when thou put out thy hand to lay hold on the most solid
thing in the world, thou shall not find it so solid as the heart of the godly
shall by, when it by the hand of faith lays hold on him, for as soon as
Jesus touches the heart, then the heart that before was vain and
superficial, is made a solid body, so there is not a solid heart, but it that
has Jesus closed in it. I tell thee thy heart is but as an empty bag if
thou get not Jesus into it: therefore cry ever, Jesus fill my empty heart.
Nevertheless, fools set not greatly by this, but I say to thee, if thou were
a King thou shall never be solid, thy heart shall never be solid, but a blast
of wind shall carry thee away, if thou have not Jesus Christ in thy heart.
Lastly, I see the religious heart that is occupied upon Christ, is occupied
upon the firmest thing in the world: those that feign would be godly, and
separate themselves from this world, and lay hold on Christ, the profane may
well say of him, what is this body doing, he is a silly foolish body? But if
he were a King, if he knew the estate of that body, he would change his estate
with his: this you may see in the example of Paul, speaking to Agrippa, Acts
chap. 26. verse. 29. Well, as I have said before, the end shall try all, and
they that in this life followed Jesus, and set their eye upon this solid thing,
they shall abide, because they have laid hold on him who is eternal and abides
for ever, and blessed is the soul that apprehends this only solid thing
Jesus. And thou that laiest hold on the things that are seen, on the
pleasures of this world, O they shall vanish, they shall be carried away as
dust! because the things that are seen are momentanie and pass away.
Therefore if thou would live for ever, fasten thy heart upon Christ: it will
not be honor, meat and drink that will establish thy heart when heaven and
earth shall be shaken together, nothing shall establish thee but that ankering
of thee upon Christ, and therefore seek to be ankered upon him. To whom be
all honor and praise,

Amen.
THE TWENTIETH LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 18. 18 Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by
humblenes of mind and worshipping of Angels, aduauncing himself in those
things which he never saw, rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind.
THe Apostle (brethren) throughout this whole chapter admonishes the
Colossians to beware of false teachers, and of men's doctrine and traditions.
The traditions he admonishes them to beware of, are of two sorts: the first
sort is the old ceremonies that the Lord sometime gave to be observed by the
people of the Jews, which at Christ's coming were wholly abolished, and put
away; and therefore the receiving of them again into the Church of Christ, it
was nothing else but the doctrine of men and not Two sorts oferaditions.
of God.

The second sort of traditions are such, as God never gave to any people, nor
will give to the end of the world to be observed: as this: To bid men go
worship Angels: to call upon Saints: they are such as the Lord never knew of,
nor gave to man; he never commanded to worship an Angel, nor call upon a
Saint. We heard the last day of the first sort of men's traditions; and the
doctrine concerning the ceremonies that were abolished by Christ's coming: Let
no man condemn you (says he) in meat or drink: there is the first sort. The
ceremonies of the Jews, in the which the Apostle wills them that they suffer
not themselves to be condemned for not keeping them, because they are already
abolished.

Now (brethren) in this text presently read, we are admonished concerning the
second sort of traditions: namely, concerning the worshipping of Angels. To
come then to the purpose, and words of the text: Let no man (says he to the
Colossians) at his pleasure bear rule over you by submission of mind, and
worshipping of Angels. These are the words, Let no man bear rule over you. The
word is to be considered, in the original it signifies to play the part of a
moderator and of a Judge; and not that only, but it signifies to bear rule,
not for men and their will, but against them, and to their hurt and damage.
This is the force of the preposition ((...)) as if he would say; Let no man
bear rule over you, that is, against you, and to your hurt and damage. The
Apostle uses sundry words, whereby he expresses the action of false
teachers and deceivers. First in the eight verse of this chapter he said, Let
no man spoil you, carry you away as a pray: Then he says, Let no man
condemn you, sit upon you to judge and condemn you. Thirdly, Let no man bear
rule over you. What means this variety of words, and every one worse then
other? All tends to this; to let us see False teachers described.
that there is no kind of evil that one man can do against another, but a
false teacher will do it against man. What thing can any man do against
another bodily, but a false teacher will do against him spiritually? and it is
worse an hundred times to be hurt spiritually then bodily. One man will come to
another, and take him and draw him away bodily, but a false teacher will draw
him away spiritually; and that more cruelly then one man will draw away another
bodily. This man will give him whom he draws, leave to breathe, and to rest a
while: but a false teacher, if once he take a man in his snare, he will not
give him rest night nor day till he bring him to damnation. Again, men will
condemn thee bodily, but false teachers will condemn thy soul. So in one
word, there was never a tyrant from the beginning of the world, that has done
so much evil to the world, as the Pope and his Clergy have done. O the souls
of them that he has made to perish! fie on this world, that sees not this
lowne plainly playing the tyrant daily. Alas, worldly tyrants destroy the
bodies, and goods of men only: but he destroys the souls and bodies of men
for ever. Fie on this world, that will not once see it. And yet to insist on
the word, Let no man bear rule over you, that is against you. The word that
he ascribes to false teachers, lets us see the nature and engine of a false
teacher. He is ambitious, and seeks by all means to bear rule over all men:
not for their weal, but for their woe: woe is them over whom he bears rule.
What matter is it if he sought to bear rule over the body and substance of man
only? but the chiefest thing that he seeks, is to bear rule over the soul:
which imports two things. First, an usurping of the place of God (for God
only is the Lord of the conscience and soul of man: never Angel gate place
to bear rule over the soul and conscience of man.) Note these two things in
false teachers which desire to dominiere over consciences.
Secondly, it imports an everlasting wrack to the soul of the creature, if
he be kept under his government. If thou give thy soul to be under his
government and tyranny in such a clear light, thou shall be sure to perish
both in body and soul. This for the first word of this text.

The second word is, At his pleasure. Let him not bear rule over you, and that
at his pleasure; not according to God and his word, but according to his foul
affections. A deceitful villain looks never to the word of God, but to the
foul affections of sin. I told you before he was ambitious; but now he is a
tyrant, which is the more perilous in that he seeks to bear rule over the
conscience, after the fancy of his foul affections: and if he continue with
thee, thou shall dye everlastingly.

The next words give us to understand, when he is set up in his throne above a
man, what laws he gives out. A Prince or King when he is placed in his throne,
he will give out laws: the words tell you that first he begins at the
submission of mind, lowlines: there is his beginning. A fair preface, and
true in general, that men should be humble and lowly minded. There is no man,
no not the truest teacher that is, that can have a fairer beginning and entry
of doctrine, then a deceiuer, and can lay down some grounds of doctrine more
truly then he: and specially he will begin at that, which is most pleasing to
the people: he will begin with humility, and in the mean time he will
counterfeite such an humility, in his eyes, with his hands, with tricking and
ducking of his head, and in all that he shall speak of, he shall speak as an
Angel of light. This is fair, but look to the end, when he has begun with a
fair preface, where goes he to next? Worship Angels. How gathers he this?
Be humble; therefore worship Angels. How gathers The argument which false
teachers use to move men to worship Angels and Saints departed.
he the conclusion? He gathers it this way: It is a point of pride to pass
to God immediately, and to come in before him at the first dash: therefore sir,
worship Angels, because they are in the gate between thee and God. It is a
foul assumption; It is pride to go to God immediately. Ha, ha, false deceiuer:
it is no pride to go to God, and to pass by all the Angels in heaven: but it
is a point of humility, as it is most clear through the whole Scriptures, in
the examples of the Prophets and Patriarchs. So to be short, ye see what
follows a fair preface; when a deceiuer propounds a fair preface, be sure
of a foul end; when the lowne has commended good virtues, he will fall out
in a filthy conclusion of one thing or other. He will be speaking of things in
general, and will gather a foul particular conclusion: and therefore when he
speaks fairest, suspect him most. When a Papist propounds a point of true
doctrine, he is most dangerous; suspect him then most: when he commends
humility, and that with many a bowing of the body, beware of him, for then
he will subioyne, Call upon Saints, and worship Angels, and doubt of thy
salvation, it is presumption to say, that a man is sure of salvation, humility
bids thee doubt. Now fie on thee and thy doubting doctrine both. So if thou
hear his preface, he will come in with this end: close therefore thine ear
at his general; for he is a Sophister to allure thee in the end, and to draw
thee into the net of destruction. Therefore never account of his beginning, for
the end of it is deceit. Well (brethren) was this point of doctrine concerning
the worship of Angels in Paul's days? Yes. Then I am enforced to grant that
there are some points of the Papists doctrine very ancient; yea as ancient as
the Apostles themselves. Go to the Papist, he will say it is presumption to
go the hie way to God; therefore go to Saints, and Angels. This is very old,
and so it may be that through Popish antiquity.
antiquity their doctrine is commended. Look to the ancients, say they; yet I
say, if antiquity will commend an heresy, away with thee and thy antiquity
both. Well, well, then all their reason from antiquity is to confirm
heresies, that have been damned in hell. I will not insist to show what
heresies they have raised up again (for their religion is clouted and patched
up with all heresies in the world, of Gentilisme and Iudaisme) there is little
pleasure to speak of them or their doctrines either. Now to be short, in the
next words the Apostle falls to the confuting of so foul and false a head of
doctrine, to wit, concerning the worshipping of Angels: he condemns it: let
them defend it as they will. The first argument he uses is from a shameless
pertnes of the false teacher; advancing himself (says he) in things which he
never saw. The words import a violent entering into another man's profession, as
if he would say; where saw the deceiuer any Angels? How knew he that the
Angels make intercession in heaven, the word of God told him never a word of
it, who made him so wise to know that the Angels are mediators? so it may be a
shameless pertnes that he speaks of the worshipping of Angels. Mark then
(brethren) the Apostle notes a false teacher with this note, shameless
pertnes. He rubbeth off all shame of his forehead. Nay know ye not? There is
the first preparation, A note of a false teacher.
in his chamber before he come out to the people, he rubbes off shame from him,
and then he comes out with a vizard on his face shameless, and then he will
speak of things which he never knew, heard nor saw, and that were never
written; yea that are impossible for men to know in this life, he will speak A
notable confutation of all popish sigments.
so frankly of them, as if he had seen them all; he will begin to speak of
Angels and of their orders, and tell you there be so many orders of them. Who
told you that? and then he will begin to speak of Saints, and he will bid you
call on them. Did God command him to bid thee do so? and when he has done
with heaven, he will go down to hell, and will tell you of all the chambers
and places there, of Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, with the rest, as though he had
bin there: And again, with such confidence he will speak of these things, as
if he had seen the^ with his eyes. This then tells us, yt this doctrine of the
Papists, is not a new, but an old heresy; and how like is a new heretic to an
old heretic? Well, to be short, let never man be curious in that which God
has never revealed. If God Curiosity.
has not revealed what the Angels be doing in heaven, what the Saints be
doing, question not of it: where hell is, and what parts are in hell, if God
have not revealed it, be not curious to search it, let it be, leave off
questioning of things that God has not revealed, seeing there are so many
things revealed which thou can not attain unto, if thou should sit night
and day meditating upon them.

Again, let no man be bold to affirm the thing that he knows not, whether
it be true or not; if thou use thy self to shameless pertnes, thou will come
in the end to confirm lies. Ever keep a moderation, and speak according to
thy knowledge that, that thou have seen and heard. And speak (seeing it is
the office of the Pastor to speak) speak assuredly of salvation: for surely
thou must be studious to get the truth, and to speak boldly of it, and to die
in the truth of God. There is the first argument why the Apostle wills the
Colossians, that no man condemn them for meat and drink: learn of it to
answer the Papists after this manner. Thou art a pert and shameless body to
intrude thy self into this point and that point of religion, whereof thou have
no sure warrant, and in that thou never saw, heardest, nor was never
revealed to thee. The second argument is from as evil a ground, even from
pride, and a poor pride, as the words import: for so the Apostle speaks,
blown up, as a bag with wind; no solid stuff. Now after what manner is he
puffed up? Rashly: that is, without cause, having no matter but only wind. For
ye shall understand, that there is but two sorts of pride. There is one that is
called a poor pride, as we say, A proud heart in a poor Two sorts of pride.
breast, when upon a vain conceit men are proud of that which they have not:
Such was the pride of the Pharisie, upon the conceit of his righteousness, and
through it he scorns the poor man besides him, who was notwithstanding more
justified then he was. The second sort of pride is, when one is proud, but has
some matter of it, as a rich man for his riches; a man of science for his
science, whether the matter of it be outward or inward. Of this the Apostle
speaks 1. Cor. 4. 7. What have thou that thou have not received? why then
boastest thou, as though thou had not received it? Alas, no gift should
make one proud! For where that is, it is a toke^ that thou misknowest the
giver. If a man have pride with his graces, all his graces are poison: for
pride is a poysonable seasoning of them, so that they shall never do thee
good. As for example, he that has grace to speak well, if he be proud, he
may well do the people good; but he shall never be able to do himself good.
A man of law Pride poisons all gifts.
that is full of law, even to the throat, if he have pride with it, he may do
thee and the people good with it; but not himself: yea it is a curse to him. A
Preacher that has knowledge in the Scriptures, and can discourse upon them
finely, if he have pride with his gift, all is poison; he may well do the
auditorie good, but he shall never be able to do his own soul good. So it
is no small grace of God with thy gifts to have humility: and grace with
humility is more worth then many graces that are conjoined with pride. Now to
go to the words. Where from comes this pride? this mischievous pride, that
has no matter to be proud for nothing, it is a thing which is intolerable. He
sets down the ground of it. It comes from the mind: there is the mother of
it. It is not without thee: it is not riches, honor and what ever thou have,
that will make thee to have a conceit of thy self: it is not these things
outward, Pride whence it comes.
howbeit they will greatly further thee and help thy pride, as ye may see this
day in the persons of rich and honorable men. What is it then? even the best
thing of nature given to thee, even thy mind; the reason that is within thee,
it poysoneth al thy gifts. A natural man will make a fair discourse in
reasoning, yet with such a pride, that he will not yield to any that says
against him, and his reason. So the best thing in man is his greatest enemy.
Man has reason, a reasonable mind, and that is his preferment above the
beast: but I say to thee, if that reason be not sanctified by the spirit of
Christ Jesus, if thou werst a King, well had it been to thee that thou had
bin borne a dog: yea that thou had bin created a stock, or a stone, if
thou be not sanctified in thy reason. This reason in the mind having pride
conjoined with it, beguiled all the Philosophers, Romans 1. 21. What a mind is
that? a fleshly mind, says the Apostle. If there be any pure thing in man, it
must be the mind. Yet the Apostle calls it fleshly, and Roman. 8. verse. 7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: I say to thee, as the body
is gross and corrupt; so the mind is as gross and corrupt by nature. So that
as the body can feel nothing, but that that is gross: no more can thy soul
apprehend spiritual things, but gross things: So there is the mother of all
mischief. That that Paul calls flesh, the canker of nature, will ye see her
daughters? she begets vain discoursing. Then when she is in conceit of
wisdom, follows false The daughters of reason not sanctified.
opinions of doctrines, as this; that Angels should be worshipped: and then
follows the last child, Pride. So all tends to this, seek mortification,
the slaughter of this mother the flesh, or else she will destroy thee: I say, if
she be not mortified, thou shall die everlastingly. For she shall fill thee so
with wind and puff thee up so, that when the judgment comes, thou shall be
burnt up like stubble. Alas, have thou not thought of mortification? cry for
it, or else thou shall die, and apprehend the death of Christ: for it is the
death of Christ that slays the flesh, and takes away the corruption of thy
nature.

Now to come again to the false teacher. I gave you a mark Marks of false
teachers.
of him before, he is pert, he is shameless, and has a brazen face;
otherwise he durst not affirm such points of doctrine. proud with the wind
of false doctrine; for as humble as he will seem to thee, yet beware of him:
his heart is blown up with pride. There is not a false teacher, but he is
proud; a proud heart in a poor breast, he is a poor devil. I remember a
sentence of Augustine to Paulinus; It is a wonderful thing that a man should
be more proud of humility, then if he were openly proud; and I will assure
thee, a deceiuer will be prouder in his counterfeit humility, then he that is
openly proud. A simple man cannot do it, and of all the proud men in the
world, the deceiuer is greatest. Another thing I mark; false doctrine and
pride are companions together: so that if thou

The last argument of the condemning of this false doctrine, is in these words;
he says, He has not to do with the head Jesus Christ. The third argument of
false doctrine.
He utters plainly, he never wist what Christ was, and that he never tasted
of that power and virtue, which descends from the head to the body: for if
he had tasted of it, O for all the world he would not have put an Angel
betwixt him and Christ! VVilt thou put one between thee and thy head? An
Angel is but a stranger to thee in respect of Jesus. Is not a man's head the
most familiar and best thing that a man has? will he not have recourse to his
head? O would the deceiuer put thee from thy head Jesus Christ! he plainly
testifies that Jesus Christ thy head stood never upon his neck. Jesus stood
never upon the neck of a Papist: speak of him what he will, for if he were
thy head O Papist, and had tasted the virtue that descended from him! thou
would never seek to Angels and Saints, to bid them open their mouth to pray
for thee. But thou that followest after Saints, and huntest after Angels, thou
show that thou never tastedst of the head Jesus Christ: And therefore thou
testifiest that thou art a false teacher: and thou that followest such a
teacher, thou art a false professor of Jesus Christ.

Here I end: only I request you, stick to Jesus, once get him to be thy head,
and I shall promise thee, thou shall never long for Angel nor Saint. For thou
shall find such a power and virtue of life to flow out of him to thee, and
such a sweetness as therewith thy soul shall be contented: and as thou
continuest with him, thou shall find thy self more and more lively and
joyful in thy heart; thou shall suck continually life and joy out of him,
till at the last thou shall see him in his Job. 21. 22
glory, and be filled fully in him; for in his countenance is the sacietie and
fulness of joy: And thou shall not seek to Angels and bid one of them go
betwixt thee and him at that day. O then acquaint you with him! for the Angels
are but ministering spirits at his command. I say, O acquaint you with him,
and stick by him immutably! and thou shall find the joy of thy heart
unspeakable. To Jesus Christ, with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all
honor and praise,

Amen.
THE XXI. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 19. 20. 19 And holds not the head whereof all the
body furnished and knit together, by joints and bands, increases with the
increasing of God.

20 Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why,
as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with traditions?


YE heard (brethren) the admonition of the Apostle, that the Colossians should
not suffer themselves to be abused by false Apostles: especially with the rites
and ceremonies that sometimes were given to the people of the Jews, and after
abolished by Christ's coming. Secondly, that they should not suffer themselves
to be abused by no other kind of traditions, which God never gave to any
people: as the worshipping of Angels, whereon we insisted the last day. This
kind of tradition it came in under the pretense of Coherence.
humility, and it was refuted, and condemned by the Apostle, as ye heard by
three arguments: knowledge; and so it is no more but a blast of a foul proud
stinking heart.

But to come to the words: he says, He holds not the head: that is, the
false Apostle. Then he subioynes, whereof, that is out of the which head (the
Lord Jesus) through joints and bands the whole body is knit, and compacted
together and furnished. Whereof, it imports not only that Christ the head is
the efficient and worker of all grace that comes to the body: but more, Christ
the head of the Church.
that out of him as out of a storehouse, and not elsewhere, all grace and
virtue do flow unto man. So the word has a great force: for as out of the
head of a man flow all the virtues, moving, life and sense that is in the body
(take the head away, no virtue is in the body) even so from this head the Lord
Jesus, to his mystical body, flow all power and moving, that the body, that
is, his Church, and every member thereof, has. Thou have nothing but that that
flows from him. Therefore the Apostle says, in him dwells all fulness: and
again, in him are all treasures: and again, in him dwells the Godhead
bodily: and again, in him we are complete: To let you see that Jesus Christ
is the storehouse of graces. Go thy way to heaven, thou shall not find one
jot out of thy head the Lord Jesus. Thou shall seek all thy time, and thou
shall not get a drop without him. Then he says, that by joints and bands the
whole body is furnished, not a part, but the whole body, and every member,
never a one being excepted, neither rich nor poor. But to insist in the
comparison: even as the whole body of a man, and every member of the body to
the finger and toe, sucketh virtue from the head; and the head is powerful to
cause every joint to live: it is even so with this mystical body. There is
never a member of this body, but it receives some virtue from the head the
Lord Jesus: yea the silliest body of them all receives it own grace, and
Jesus Christ is effectual in every one from the highest to the lowest. If it
be in the body it cannot want grace: It is impossible that any that are in
Christ Jesus can want grace, but the Lord must be powerful in them. Run then
and join thee with the body; for if thou be not of this body, I give thee
this doom, thou Join thy self with the Church if thou will be in Christ
shall never see grace, nor get the spirit of Jesus, which is the worker of
this grace in Jesus. 1. Cor. chap. 12. 7. he says, To every one is given the
manifestation of the spirit to profit withal. And Ephesians. 4. 7. likewise he
says, To every one is given grace according to the measure of the gift. This
imports that Jesus Christ is not only full of grace, but that there is such
a variety of grace in him, that there is not only one or two graces in him,
but he is full of variety of graces. There is not a member but he has gotten
a different grace: I have gotten mine, thou have gotten thine, and every one
has gotten his own different grace. So look what variety there is of the
faces of men, Variety of graces in Christ.
as great variety there is of the graces of Christ; and so there is no grace
out of Christ; seek grace in him, or else thou will never find it. To go
forward; the first thing that ever comes down from the head to the body,
what think ye it to be? What is the first thing that comes down from the
head of a man? It is ye know the sinews, as the first thing: for the head by
them is bound to the body; even so the first thing that comes from Christ,
he calls it bands or ligaments, that go down from him as from the head. So
that there is not a member of the body of Christ, but there is a sinew, a band
coming from Jesus Christ the head to it. Ye will ask what The bands which
knit us unto Christ.
are these mystical sinews? Love is called the band of perfection. Now
brethren, ye must know this moreover, every one of these bands must extend to
every member. There is not a member of Christ's body, but first he must have
the spirit of Jesus: next, faith: and thirdly, love; otherwise thou can not
be a member of Jesus Christ. For if thou want but this love, which is the last,
thou can not be one of Christ's: I say, and affirm, thou have not the spirit,
nor faith, and so art not conjoined with the head. It is true that every one
has his particular gift, different from other: but I assure you, a man may not
want one of these three. Thou may want the gift of tongues, miracles, and
such others: but thou must not want the spirit, faith, nor charity. Want what
thou will, and if thou have not these three, thou can not stand in the body:
thou have not to do neither with Christ nor with his body; therefore if thou
have the spirit, faith, and charity, and do find thy self to have them;
then thou may be joyful.

Now to go through: after he has set down the bands, he sets down three
effects that proceed from Christ by these Three effects proceed from Christ to
every member.
bands down to the body. The first effect is a furnishing of the body;
wherewith? not with earthly furniture, but with spiritual furniture; otherwise
it cannot stand. For as when the body is knit with the head by sinews, and
then down through these sinews, as thorough certain conduits do flow virtue
and power to the body (cut off thy head, thy body nor no member thereof has
any power to move or stir:) even so this mystical body being joined to
Christ by these spiritual means, the spirit, faith, and love, there comes
down through these conduits to us that water of life: and that is the
furniture that Paul in the Epistle to the Ephesians. 4. 16. speaks of. For this
cause calls he them the bands of furnishing, because their office is to
furnish grace, life, moving, and whatsoever How the water of life proceeds from
Christ.
spiritual thing, to the body. To make this plain, there are two sorts of
furnishing; there is one which is common, that every man has: as for example,
life and moving. This thou must have, or else thou can not be a man: so if
thou want a spiritual moving by the spirit of Jesus, thou can not be in the
body. And there is not a natural body, but it must receive life, sense, and
moving from the head: so there is not a spiritual member of the body of Jesus
Christ, but it must receive from the head Jesus, through his spirit, spiritual
life, sense and moving: and if thou stand in the body, this furniture must
flow to thee from the head. This is the first sort of furnishing.

There is another sort, which is of other particular graces, conueighed into
men and women by this spirit, faith, and love; and yet of great variety. I
will get a particular grace; thou will get another particular grace; another
man will get the third: so that it is not needful that thou have this whole
furniture. Seek not all graces, seek them not: for there is none that has
all graces. Has the eye all graces? Nay, the Every man must not have all gifts
of the spirit.
foot has a grace, that the eye has not. Seek then for grace, but so that
it be without an ambitious desire of the grace of others. Be ever providing
that ye want not some of this furniture; strive to excel in the grace of
regeneration with all the world; but in other graces strive not. Then ye see
this first effect of furnishing. It follows, upon the joints and bands, so
that if thou have not the joints and bands, thou can not have the furniture
of grace. Therefore look that thou have the spirit, otherwise thou shall get
no life, sense, moving nor sanctification. I repeat it again; look thou have
the bands, or else thou shall not be in the mystical body of Christ.

So to the next effect flowing from these joints and bands, it is the knitting
together of the body, and every member thereof one with another: as the spirit
of Jesus is the band that The spirit is the band which knits us with Christ
and his members.
knits up the members with the head; so he is the band that knits the members
among themselves; that knits thee with thy neighbor, and makes a mutual band
of love among the members. This effect is wrought by the head, who binds all
so surely together, as is unspeakable: nay, no man can express that sure
conjunction this band will make. The force of the word imports a compact
conjunction: there was never so compact a conjunction as this is. Thou shall
never bind any thing so straightly, as the members of Jesus be bound to the
head, and mutually together among themselves. The word also signifies a decent
compacting together; so that there is no conjunction so well favored as this
is. Therefore the Apostle to the Ephesians. 4. 16. uses a word signifying a
harmony and comely situation of the parts: when thou see that body thou
see a most pleasant situation. To insist in this effect of knitting: this
effect it goes before the other. First, things must be knit together; and then
comes the furniture; so mark this order. If first there must be a
compacting, and then the furniture, I give thee a lesson: look never to get
grace, except thou be conjoined in the body; for then that spiritual grace
shall flow to thee. Let not one that is not knit in the body, seek for grace.
A lowne will scorn when he is cut off from the body by excommunication: well I
say, go and ride where he will, he wants the spiritual life of Jesus, and
shall not get it till he come to the body again.

To come to the third effect: the third effect is growth; and follows the
other two. For after once by sinews the members are knit, and then receive
furniture, of necessity the members must grow, and the whole body must grow
according to the portion of grace given. Read Ephesians. 4. 16. look how he
sets down there the manner of the growing: he says, every member grows
according to the measure of grace given. Think thou that thou can not
grow, except thou grow in all graces? will thou have thy hands growing as thy
feet, to go as thy feet? No, no: but every member grows Every one grows
in his own gifs.
as is given to it, every one grows in his own gift: and thank the Lord for
the growth in thy own gift. Then he says, the body grows as effects to
the body, as if he would say, the body grows in all graces: the member
grows in one grace. So as every member grows to the growth of the body in
all graces: so the body grows in all grace when the members grow in their
particular graces. Then every one should set their mind, that for their part,
they may build up the body of the Lord Jesus. This is the counsel of the
Apostle, if thou carry not stones to build up the building, thou shall never
get to be of that building whereof the Lord Jesus is the head.

Now lastly mark this of the order: first there is the compacting of the body
with the head, by bands and joints. Secondly, there is the furnishing thorough
sinews and bands. Thirdly, there is the growing; and then the building grows
to a full stature. But howsoever thou gettest it not here fully, yet grow in
him daily and never rest, and then thou shall come to the stature of a perfect
man. And as there cannot be a compacting of the members without the bands; so
without the furniture thou can not grow. Therefore cry ever for the
furniture, that thou may grow up in Jesus Christ. First compact thy self in
the body, and then ask graces night and day: I Note this order.
shall then promise that thou shall grow in thy own grace night and day, till
thou meet with Jesus Christ, in whom stands full blessedness.

In the last words he shows, what kind of growth is this? to wit, the growth
of God; it is not common, not natural, but it is a divine growth, God gives
it. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water; but it is God that gives the growth
and increase, 1. Cor. 3. 7. none can give thee growth, but only he: and
therefore when thou art watered by the Gospel, ever seek growth at his hand
only: for all the Angels in heaven have no power to make thee grow a hand
breadth. It is the spiritual work of God, as the creature is of God, even so
the bodily growth of the creature is of God: and how much more is that
spiritual growth in Jesus Christ, of God? Therefore seek it of him. He
calls it the growth of God, because the furniture is of God: for where the
furniture is of God, there must be the growth of God. As the natural furniture
makes the natural growth; even so where the spiritual furniture is, it
makes the spiritual growth: and as the one fails, see that the other grow
daily. Endeavor to grow spiritually, otherwise this life is most miserable, and
a woeful death will abide thee. Therefore have a greater respect to the
spiritual growth, then to this temporal. If it be a great corsiue to this
life to be bereft of visible and earthly things; what a sore sting shall it be,
to be deprived of the life to come, and the joys of heaven, and the sight of
the spiritual things there? There must be sorrow of sorrows, the greatest and
wofullest sorrow that ever was.

Further I see, there is set down here an opposition betwixt this growth of
God, and the swelling up of the false Apostles. Where Jesus is the head, and
furniture sent down from him, Where Christ is.
there is the growth of God: where he is not, and no furniture from him, there
is no solid growth there. There may well be one blown up, with a vain wind
of poison, as a body that will swell foot and hand: he may well swell up in
the womb of sin; but if there be not a furniture from Jesus, thou shall
never grow truly, either in knowledge, or sanctification: thy estate shall be
as the women learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth. Our
Noblemen will take in Jesuits into their chambers, and will give ear to them:
but I say to thee, hear as thou will, there is no solid growth to be had of
his speech. There is no sound spiritual growth in the kingdom of Antichrist.
It may be ye think it grows, because the world follows it (for the kingdom
of the truth of Jesus is in a narrow bound) but I say unto you, there is no
good growth in that kingdom of Antichrist: therefore fly from them, fly from
Babylon; for Babylon shall be destroyed, fly away then from them. Shame shall
befall them that join with them. This for the description of Jesus, and the
growth in him.

In the next verse he returns to his admonition, and he says, be not
burdened: alas, these traditions are a burden of Traditions
such weight, that whosoever will take them on, they shall press them down to
hell and damnation! The argument that he uses, ye are dead with Christ, and by
his cross he has freed you; if (says he) ye be dead with Christ, why should
ye suffer your selves to be burdened with such trifles, as the false Apostles
would have you berthened with? as if he would say, it is a great indignity
done to Christ, if ye do so. He said before, they were buried with him, now he
says, they are dead with Christ: Who ever thou be then, that have any part
with Jesus, thou must be dead with Jesus. There is none but they must be dead
in this world with Jesus, if they would have any part with him. A man that is
quick in this world, gives a token that he has no part with Jesus. But hear
this death described: Ye were dead (says he) with Christ, then he has a
companion: that is a blessed death that has the fellowship of Jesus. It is
better to die with Jesus, then to live with all the world. The word which he
uses, imports further: To die by virtue of his death, so it is his death that
makes us to die. O there is a double happiness! blessed is that soul that
dies by virtue of the death of Jesus. So then it is not so much thou that
die, as it is sin that dies in thee, by virtue of his death.

Yet more, he says, ye were dead with Christ. Where from? from the ordinances,
or elements, that is, the gross rudiments of Religion, that imported a
subjection and a thraldom to the law. Look if this be a burden or not? So in
a word, there is the greatest happiness to die with Christ: for to die with him
is to be freed of the law, and of sin: So, would thou have a blessed
death? dye this death with Christ, for it brings to thee a fair liberty. It
is better to dye with Christ, then to live a slave with sin. And if thou
would live a free man, leave Liberty.
sin, and seek the liberty that is in Christ. He says, if ye be dead with
Christ, why are ye burdened with traditions? somewhat sharply and angerly: Fie
shame, fie shame on thee that go to put thy neck under traditions,
wherefrom thou wast once freed: fie on thee man that make defection to
Papistrie, why go thou to be burdened with such vanities? Now he lets them
see that it was a mischievous thing that they cast off Christ, to live to this
life. This is a miserable case with the woeful and sinful life in this world.
O thou Papist! woe is thee that make this choice, thou that have dyed with
Christ, thou will begin to live with the Pope and his vain traditions. It
shall never make thee to have life, no not in this world, as quick as thou
seem to be. I insist so much the more in this, that ye that stand, should be
moved to stand still: and not to be changed from your Christ, as many do when
they go to these parts of the Popes dominions. O it will be a black day to
you, if ye stand not fast ever by Christ and his truth! Be joyful that ye are
crucified with Christ, and be not wanton with the world; but be sorry: for
sinnefor if sin live in you, ye shall dye: but if thou leave it in the tears
of repentance, thou shall live for ever. I love not a wanton sinner, be
therefore buried and dead with Christ, that ye may live with him. To whom with
the Father and holy Spirit be everlasting praise and glory, for ever and
ever,

Amen.
THE XXII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. verse. 21. 22. 23. 21 As touch not, taste not, handle not,

22 Which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men.

23 Which things have in deed a show of wisdom in voluntary religion and
humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the body, which are things of no value,
since they pertain to the filling of the flesh.


YE heard the last day (well-beloved brethren in Jesus Christ) the Apostle when
he had set down that fair description of Christ the head of the body, he
returned to his purpose, and that admonition which is through this whole
chapter; that they should beware of false teachers and false doctrine, and
especially that they should not take on the^ the burden of ordinances, that is
to say, ye burden of the rites and ceremonies of the law, that sometime had
place in the Church of the Jews before Christ's coming: but now Coherence.
are so abolished, that they become not the tradition and doctrine of God, but
of men. His argument was, Ye are dead with Christ from all these things, by
your death ye are freed. Therefore why should ye be burdened with ordinances?
I insist not upon that which was spoken, but I go to the verse that follows,
wherein he sets down a certain kind of rite, whereunto the false teachers
presses them, to wit, concerning meats; and he brings in this matter by
counterfaiting of the voice of the false teacher: O says the false teacher,
Touch not, taste not, handle not: there is the doctrine of the deceiuer: ye
heard when he admonished them to beware of these ceremonies. The first sort
was concerning rites: from that he past to days. Now again, the only sort of
ceremonies, which here he expresses, is the same concerning meats. This
imports something that he sticks so upon this ceremony of meats. Wherefore
the Apostle specifieth the Judicial ceremony concerning meats.
It teaches us this, that the devil, the enemy of man, specially tempts
men about meat. He begun betimes. Our first parents were not so soon created
and placed in Eden, but he begun to tempt them about meat; and from that hour
to this hour, he never rests to tempt men about meat, either after one
manner or other; either to abstain or else to exceed. He has thus tempted
the world in this subject of meats. What is the cause of this? He sees not a
meeter subject to tempt men with, then meat and drink. It is the thing that we
use and must use daily: therefore he sets his engine to tempt men in this.
Yet to open this matter better: there are two things especially, wherein the
Lord has given men liberty, meat and marriage: In these two the Lord has
given us liberty. And this has ever been the craft of Satan to restrain
this liberty given by the Lord. The Apostle foresaw this in the 1. Tim. 4. 1.
and foretold that in the latter days, men should arise, with a lying spirit,
and should deliver the doctrine of devils. And then he names these two points
of their doctrine, forbidding (says he) meats, and marriage. Now there must be
some cause of this temptation of Satan: he knows well enough there is a
fair The pretense of hypocrites.
pretense for restraining of men's liberty; to wit, the mortification of the
flesh: Abstain (say they) from meat, abstain from marriage, because it
mortifieth the flesh. So having a fair pretense, he tempts men in these
things, and restrains the liberty that the Lord has granted. This pretense
is frivolous, because there is no mean of mortifying, but that that God has
commanded. Therefore if thou should pine and famish thy self to death, thou
shall not be mortified; but the more thou use that dealing, without the
spirit of Jesus, thou shall be the more puffed up in the vanity of thy mind:
for it is a mean to pride to use that which the Lord has not commanded thee.
It is true that Paul said, 1. Cor. 9. 27. he held his body under at a strait
diet, and so do all godly men; this is a good mean, and the Lord has
commanded a diet to be kept: but to abstain from meat as an unclean thing,
thou have no warrant; neither ought thou to follow such as would persuade
thee to the same. Therefore follow no mean to mortification, but that which the
Lord commands thee. And as for that which Paul did, he had the warrant of
the spirit of Jesus: but yet ye shall see there that he places no merit in it.
But the false teacher, as the Pope and his Clergy, they place a merit and
necessity in these things.

But to come to the words of the Apostle: he counterfaiteth the voice of the
false teacher, and speaks as they do, and that with bitterness of heart: O
says the deceiuer, Touch not, taste not, handle not: which testifies plainly
that in the heart of the spirit of God, there is a bitterness against the
hypocrite, yea a bitterness like gall, especially against the false teacher. O
thou shall find one day a bitter voice uttered against thee! Touch not, says
he, that is, lay not thy fingers end upon such meat, hold back thy hand from
it. Taste not, that is, bring it not to thy mouth, let not the tip of thy
tongue taste it. Handle not, that is, lay not thy hand grossly upon it, nor
meddle not with it in any wise: handle not such unclean and forbidden meats.
Brethren, these commandments that are so straight, import that these false
teachers thought there were in certain meats uncleanness, and that they were
poysonable, and had force to infect and make a man unclean: this was their
mind concerning meats, and therefore their sin was manifold. For first they
are injurious to the meat, in accounting the creature unclean, which was
clean. In 1. Tim. 4. 4. it is said, the creature is clean. And Romans 14. 14.
that there is no meat unclean. So they were very injurious against the
creature the meat. And then, that which is more, they were injurious to the
Colossians in taking their liberty from them, and in burdening them with an
unnecessary burden. To bind a man to this meat or that meat, thou snarest
the conscience, and do worse then if thou should strangle that man, whom
thou thus entrappest. What God commands, that thou countermandest, Lastly,
they were injurious to God who created althings clean, and especially to them
that are in Jesus Christ, who sanctified althings, and gave liberty to man to
eat what it liked him: as we see in the Acts 10. 15. when all sort of meat
was offered to Peter, and he being commanded to eat indifferently of all,
refused. Then the voice comes to him half in anger, and says to him, that
which God has made clean, make not thou unclean. O Papist! God has not made
the meat foul, but it is thou that defilest thy self, and the meat both:
the Lord has cleansed it in the blood of Jesus; and thou deceiuer, should
thou stand up and say, it is unclean? O deceiuer! thou art unworthy of meat.
Yet more; ye see in these words, the nature of an hypocrite: A false The mark
of a false teacher.
Doctor, he is the strictest yt ever was in that that avails not; in a trifle
he will be wondrous precise: in the things wherein the Lord has given
liberty, he will be a niggard and close the hand of him. And by the contrary;
in that which the Lord has forbidden, he will be liberal. Come to murder: he
will give thee a pardon before hand; he reckons not of adultery and
oppression, and such gross sins. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. gives this as a note
of the Antichrist, that he shall oppose himself to every thing divine; he shall
be ever in a contradiction to God. So where ye find this opposition, say, here
sits Antichrist. Therefore I say, in the Church of Rome sits the
Antichrist. There he sits and shall sit, until he be abolished by the
breath of the Lord Jesus. This for this point of false doctrine.

In the 22. verse he falls to, and refuteth this doctrine, and he brings in
two forcible and pithie arguments: and first he reasons from the perishing
nature of these things: what are they? They are corruptible things. Who will
set down rules about things that perish, as though religion were in them? Paul
1. Corinthians. 6. 13. in handling this same matter, he says, Meats are ordained
for the belly, and the belly for the meats, but God shall destroy both it,
and them. As if he should say, both the meat and the belly shall perish. Now
this argument taken from the corruptible nature of these things, he
aggrauateth when he says, but in the use they perish. When they are in the
hand and mouth they perish. It is true that all these earthly things appointed
for this mortal life pass away, all goes away that is appointed for the
sustenance of man; yet there are somethings more lasting and more durable then
others: but as concerning meat, and cloth, and such things, they all wear
away by the use. So the Apostle would say, that of all vanishing things, meat
is the most vanishing thing that is. Then note this: Religion, godliness, and
the worshipping of God, it is not in things corruptible; it is not in things
indifferent, as meat, drink, days, clothes, and the rest of these vanishing
things: but true religion stands in things permanent, and in things
necessary. I give thee an example: To eat this, and not to eat that, I will
not count thee the more godly or religious; for that is to be in the kingdom
of Antichrist; but to honor one God only, the true God sincerely, that is
religion. And so go through the whole commandments, and if thou find thy
heart sanctified to obey God in his word, and to follow him only; then I say
to thee, thou art truly religious. Eat what thou please, all is sanctified
to thee; and to keep temperance in the use of them, that is acceptable to God.
But to eat, or not to eat, that is no religion; if thou have not the warrant
of the word of God for thy religion, I will not give a points end for thy
religion: for there is no religion, but that which the Lord has commanded.
And therefore Paul to the Romans chap. 14. verse. 17. he says, that the
kingdom of God is not meat and drink: religion consists not of these
things, but in an vprightnes, peace with God, and with thy neighbor, and joy
in the holy Ghost. Albeit thou should fast all the fridaies and wednesdaies
in the year, yet if thou be a wrangler with thy neighbor, thou have no
religion, thou art an hypocrite. Ye see the religion of the Papists stands in
things corruptible: go to Rome and Spain, ye shall see this; their religion
stands in wearing this clothing and that clothing; in abstaining from this
meat, and eating of that, and such other trifles, wherewith they have troubled
the world. Fie on them, will they never be ashamed of it? Thus for the first
reason of the refuting of this false doctrine: now follows the second.

What are al things says he again, but the doctrine of men? This doctrine,
Touch not, taste not, handle not, was not the doctrine of God: and therefore
says the Apostle, it avails not. For even as these things corruptible, as
meat, drink, with the rest of that sort, they are no matter or subject of
religion: even so the commandment of man, and the doctrine of man that
comes from his brain, is no rule of religion. Live thou after the doctrine
of man? I affirm thou art not religious. Live thou in abstinence at the
command of man? Ha, ha, there is a fair countenance in thee: but I say to
thee, all is superstition, which is ruled by the doctrine of men. In one word,
take all that religion in that Church grounded on the brain of man, not to be
religion, but superstition. Thou shall find out a superstitious Friar by his
habit; go through all their Cloisters, ye shall find nothing but the doctrine
of man: and the doctrine of man will never make a religious body. Secondly,
The doctrine of me^ cannot make any religious.
I perceive in this place, and such others, that men in all ages have busied
themselves to set down doctrine about things indifferent. Look the doctrine
of the Roman Church, ye shall find this true. This testifies whereto the wit
of man inclines, to wit, to be religious in vanities: in eating, drinking,
clothing, and to let thee live as thou would. As for other necessary
points, it will not acknowledge them: as for the honor of the parents, thou will pass by that. O the wicked nature of man! it has no inclination to any
thing, but to vanishing things, and it will have a religion of these things in
any case.

To come to the last verse; having thus confuted this false doctrine concerning
meats by these two arguments, the false teacher might have excepted and said:
O yet there appears some reason in this doctrine of abstinence, because it
has a show of wisdom. Secondly, it has the appearance of the submission of
the mind: and thirdly, it is a mortifying of the The third objection.
body: it spares not the body, but it humbles the body; and therefore this
doctrine must have some reason, and show of wisdom. The Apostle grants
this, but he says, it avails not, because this doctrine is about fleshly
things, the filling of the belly, etc. But briefly to examine the words, which
indeed has the show of wisdom. Mark first a false teacher a Sophister,
howbeit there be no wisdom in his doctrine; yet if it have a fair show and a
glance, it is enough to him. This is the nature of a Sophister, he is well
contented with a show of wisdom, and beguileth the world with this: And the
people are naturally as vain as he. If thou get a show of wisdom, thou will
be content with it: And why? The heart is vain, and vanity may serve a vain
heart, a vain empty heart that has no soundnes, will drink in vanity
greedily as a man drinks in water, 2 Thessalonians. chap. 2. verse. 10. 11. Therefore
(brethren) wonder not to see this world wander after vanity, wonder not to see
so many Papists and superstitious persons to spread abroad, and the people to
follow them: no wonder, because the world inclines to drink in vanity, and
the world is content with a show of truth; but thank God if he has made thee
able to discern betwixt a show and a solid thing: for thou have gotten a great
grace. And therefore if thou hear of Phil. 1. 9.
their vain arguments, thank God that thou have that heart to consider of
them aright, and that thou have an eye that can rightly discern thereupon: for
few has gotten this spirit of God to discern aright betwixt the show and the
sound truth. Again, note there is not one head of doctrine, but it will get a
color of an argument to defend it. There was never an heresy, but it got the
color of truth: never doctrine so foul, but it will take to it a fair show.
Think ye that the devil that can change himself into an Angel of light, that
he has not taught his own to color that vanity of theirs, and to cover over
with sugar their poison spued into them by that foul spirit? No, no, I warrant
you he forgets not that: therefore be not deceived with a color of seeming
probability, but when thou hear a novelty in doctrine, try and prove the
spirit, and hold that that is good. Trust not till thou try, and credit not
lightly; for thou will be deceived, except thou try skilfully, and with time.

Now I pass to the colors of their doctrine. I tell you in general of these
sorts of colors that teachers will put on. There is one that is false in it
own nature, as the doctrine is false. It is a false argument concluding a
false head of doctrine. Secondly, there is another color, that is a true
color, but falsely applied to such a subject, as thou would color a piece
of dirt with fair color; so a false teacher will take a fair color and put
it upon his dirt, upon his dreams, and fantasies. But to come to the
special, and that ye may see this more clearly: the first color whereby the
doctrine of meat is colored, is called voluntary worshipping, that is, such
Colors of false teachers.
worship as is not commanded by God, but invented by the vain head of man.
Woe worth such a worship! when a man follows his own fancy. And how
colored they this head of doctrine? after this manner. This doctrine of
abstinence from meats, is a kind of voluntary worshipping, that God has not
commanded (so ready is man to serve God unbidden) Voluntary worship.
apparently he that tarieth for bidding, deserves no thanks at Gods hands,
as the false teacher would say: but to answer. To worship God unbidden, it
has a false color, and it will not be allowed of God. If thou worship God
unbidden, thou seruest a thanklesse master. He will not accept of thee, nor thy
worship. So there is a false color applied to such a subject.

Come to the second color, humility and submission in the mind, how put they
on this color? O says the deceiuer, the doctrine that makes thee humble, it
must be the doctrine of wisdom. But so it is: this doctrine concerning
abstinence, it humbles thee, and makes thee lowly minded, for meats puff
up: therefore this doctrine must be a good doctrine. I answer, this is a fair
color, humility and submission of mind, a thing commended: so it is a true
color. O but it is evil applied! for as the deceiuer says, that sorrow and
fasting is for humility, he belieth it. No, no, fast all thy life long, having
no warrant of God, it shall not profit thee to humiliation. Will then a false
teacher bid thee abstain from that, that God has commanded, and has given
thee liberty of? I say to thee thou shall never be the more humbled. So it is
a good color, but falsely applied to this foul doctrine.

The last color is the subduing of the flesh. Man consists of two parts, and
this abstinence serves for both, how lays he on this color? That doctrine
is a doctrine of wisdom, that serves for the chastening of the body, I can
it not deny: but (says he) that does the doctrine of abstinence. I say to
thee, that is false; for there is no means will serve thee for that turn, but
that which the Lord has commanded. Put in thorns in thy shoes, put in
pinning stones in thy shoes, scourge thy self: vain lowne, thou shall be
whipped in hell; take penance to thee; do all these things, and such like; I
say to thee, O deceiuer, the more thou use these, the more thou shall be
puffed up. There is none more proud then these of the Church of Rome: for I
tell thee, it is a pride to follow that, that God has not commanded. So it is
a fair color, but falsely applied as a color upon dirt, and all comes to
this. Try well the argument of a Papist; for the argument of a Papist has
ever some falsehood, if thou have an eye to see it, howbeit it will not at the
first appear to thee. And if it be a true thing, which he speaks, look how
he applies it. For ye see that he can take good and fair colors, and apply
them very falsely. Trust never any of these Jesuits; for he will make thee
believe that black is white: be not deceived then with their colors. Now will
ye have the Apostles answer: he is short. He grants all these colors and
shows are true, and says as it were to these false deceivers, your doctrine
will have all these colors: but I answer you, all avails not, they are of
no value, color it as ye will color it: for that which is not good in it
self, it will never be good, use what argument thou will. Thy argument what
ever it be, will never make a false doctrine good. He condemns then this
doctrine of abstinence, that the Papists this day use; for that that is false
in it self, shall never stand true by any color. He gives the reason
wherefore it avails not: because it is a doctrine that serves for the
stuffing of the flesh; as he would say, there is no true religion concerning
things of the belly, nor clothing of the back, nor filling of the purse;
what has religion to do with these things? Eat and drink Papist (look
chap. 1.) while thou burst, keep thy cord and cowle on thy back, what has
religion to do with that? He cutteth it therefore away in one word, it is of
no value. Then brethren take the lesson. The doctrine concerning things that
serve for this life, for thy body, thy flesh, thy belly, thy back and
clothing, and if thou should cloathe it with sackcloath, and in one word
things of this life have not to do with religion, with God, and his worship.
God is not worshipped by these things. There is not one commandment given by
God touching these things. Where read thou it? is there ought concerning
this meat, or that, this garment or that? no, no, all the commandments that
serve for the worshipping of God, are all in the word of God. So then I say
again, there is no doctrine of religion in the things of this life: for why?
the doctrine of religion is about things that concern spiritual life, about
faith, about worshipping of God, about the honoring of thy parents, abstaining
from murder, and such like, as thou have set down to thee in the law of God,
which is the lantern that shines before the feet of his elect ones. So then
brethren, be earnest in keeping and hearing such doctrine as concerns life
everlasting: and when thou hear this doctrine of dirt, turn thy ear away
from it, for there is no godliness in it. And I give you my counsel, hear him
not that speaks of such things, but hear him that will speak of Christ
Jesus and his doctrine, which shall feed thee to life everlasting. It will not
be meat and drink, and the doctrine thereof, which will feed thee; but it
must be this doctrine of Christ, wherewith thou must be fed, and thou must
still feed on it, until thou be glorified in him and with him for ever and
ever. To whom with the Father and holy Spirit, be al praise and honor now and
ever,

Amen.
THE XXIII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 1. 2. 3. 1 If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God:

2 Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things which are
on the earth.

3 For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.


The parts of this epistle already handled.
the preface. special. And he continues so to the seventh verse of the next
chapter. The particulars I remit to the diduction of the text, and I come to
the words presently read.

In the^ there are two exhortatio^s to one thing, together with sundry
arguments, he exhorts in both, to the things above, to heavenly things: and
the foresaid exhortation which he uses for this purpose is to seek them: and
the second exhortation is to know them, to be wise in them, and to understand
them; for that is the force of the word. Then to come to the first exhortation:
If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above. There is the
exhortation, and the first argument, which is, ye are risen with Christ to
life, after that ye were dead to all these beggarly ceremonies, to men's
traditions of meat and drink and such like. Now after ye were dead to these,
ye are risen again to a life, and to an heavenly life: therefore seek the
things that are in heaven. Now to insist upon every word: Ye see here, and in
the chapter before, mention is made of a dying of Christ, and of a burial with
him, and of a rising and living with him: so that when he dies, we die; and
when he rises and lives, we rise and live. Mark it well. In a word, as he
alters, we alter: so many as believe in him, of necessity they change as he
change; when he dies they die, by virtue of his death, to sin and to the
world, and sin dies in them: when he rises, they rise with him, unto that
heavenly life. This alteration is wonderful. What man is high in the world
which will draw others after him after this manner? that when he dies will cause
another to die with him, that never saw him bodily in this life. What is he I
say, look through the whole world, and to all the Kings of the world, whom
will ye find in heaven or earth, that will alter men after this manner by his
death and life? This is one common doctrine, but it would be considered well:
for there are few which understand this doctrine. Then of necessity in Jesus
Christ there must be a great force and virtue. Ye see now, the Heavens,
Planets, Sun, Moon, and the rest, because they by their operation do make
alteration in these inferior things, as in plants, grass, fields, and even in
the body of man; because (I say) of this operation in these inferior
creatures we ascribe a great virtue to them. But all these celestial bodies
cannot work such effects, as Jesus Simile.
his death and life can work. No, no, if thou were once dead, these celestial
signs and planets will not make thee live again. The Sun nor the Moon
cannot make thee live, when once thou art dead; but when thou art dead, Jesus
will raise thee up more lively then ever thou werst before. So there The power
of Christ's death and resurrection.
must be in him a force above all the force and power, that ever God made or
gave to any creature. But mark brethren, concerning this power: he must be a
man in whom this power is, because this virtue cannot come to thee, but through
the nature of man: man cannot die to sin, and live to righteousness, but by
that virtue that comes through man; yet he must be more then a man, and that
a holy man without al spot of sin. He must be more then this: I say, he must
be God, to Romans 8. 11 Phil. 3. 10. 11.
make thee die to sin and rise unto righteousness. This comes of the special
power and virtue of God; for none is able in heaven or earth, to work such a
strange work as this, except he be God. Yet there must be more of necessity,
there must be a conjunction betwixt thee and him; he must be joined Our
communion with Christ
to thee, and thou to him; otherwise his virtue will not come to thee either to
thy death or to thy life: he must be thy husband, and thou his spouse; yea he
must be more then thy husband: for the husband cannot draw the wife after him
by virtue of his death or life, either to live or to die, as Christ can do. He
must be then thy head: he must be as near as thy head is near thy body. That
is the familiar similitude of the Scripture. When the head dies, the body
dies with it; and when the head is lively, the body has sense and being: So
when Jesus dies, the body dies; when Jesus rises, the body rises also. So
the meetest thing to express him and his conjunction with us, is the head and
body of man; and yet he must be more then the head: for there came never such
virtue from the head of a man to the body, as there shall come from thy head
Jesus Christ unto thy soul, when thou art joined to him by faith. He must have
virtue and power to give thee, whereby thou may be able to die or to live.
Now brethren, if there were no more but these effects to flow from Jesus into
us, it tells us plainly, that there was never given such a power to any in
heaven or earth, as there was given to Jesus Christ, man our Regeneration.
head. It tells, that as he is man, so is he God. Look if thou have
regeneration in thee, and thou shall feel this to be true: if we have it, it
will tell us that Jesus Christ is the nearest to me, and thee of all others.
There is none that will make thee to die with them, but Christ only: no, thy
father and mother will not be able to do that: none will draw thee after him
in death and life, save only Christ. So if thou be joined with Christ, it is
impossible to separate thee from him, as thou may be from thy wise and
children, and the dearest things thou have: no, no, if thou be once joined to
him as thy head, there is no separation for thee, he shall be all things to
thee.

Now this much for the first argument, the exhortation follows. If ye be
risen with Christ (says he) seek those things which are above. There is an
action required, and life, and every kind of life must have an action,
otherwise it cannot be a life. The natural life must have an action: the
earthly life must have an action. Then this heavenly life, that we are risen
to, with Jesus, it must have an action, otherwise it cannot be a life. Note.
Thou that art quickened with him, must be a doer; otherwise thou have not his
life: for as his life is the quickest thing that is, or ever was (for it is the
life of God) so it must have the quickest action that is. This action is first
a seeking with the whole heart, and all the affections, and members of the
body. There is the first action, seeking. Every life, ye know, seeks for the
things What the spiritual life of Christ works in his members.
that serve for the sustaining of it. This natural life that perishes, so
long as it abides, it is occupied in seeking for the maintenance of it by
night and by day, by all means possible. Should not then this heavenly life
have a seeking? Should thou sit when thou see this man catching here and
there, seeking for the maintenance of this natural life? Will thou not take an
example of these earthly things and earthly creatures, to seek for heavenly
things to the confirmation and preservation of thy spiritual life? O if thou
had a spark of heavenly life, thou would seek more earnestly for the
entertainment of it, then ever any creature did for the maintenance of this
natural life! Well then, by the example of these earthly things that are
occupied in seeking for the means of this present life, learn thou to seek
spiritual graces, and say to the Lord: O Lord, grant that I may seek heaven,
and heavenly things, for the preservation of this my spiritual life, as al
these earthly bodies seek for these perishing things.

Now come to the things that they should seek, Seek (says he) what? nothing
beneath, meat, drink, and the rest of these things: No, what should they
seek? Things above in heaven that are in Jesus Christ. O the fulness that is in
him! Brethren, all grace first is in heaven, yea above these visible heavens,
where that glorious body is: then it comes down to the earth. Therefore he
sends thee upward to heaven for to seek. Ye know every kind of life seeks
things proper and meet for such a life: The life of a beast will seek for
that, that is proper for the life of a beast; the life of a tree, for that that
is meet for such a life; and the life of a man for such things as are meet
for the life of a man. Every life will seek for things which serve for the
preservation of it: even so if thou had this life of God, thou will seek
things proper for this life. Thou will seek things from heaven, because
heavenly things are proper for such a life. For heavenly things are proper for
an heavenly life. Jesus Christ after his death and burial, or ever his body
was in heaven, the heart of him was in heaven: So if thou have the life of
Jesus, of necessity thy heart must go to heaven; for look whither his heart
went, if thou be risen with him, of necessity thy heart must go thither: and
by thine action measure thy life in Jesus: for if thou have not a heart to
heaven and heavenly things, alas thou have not the life of Jesus: but if thou
have it, thou will ever be seeking for heavenly things; and then, in some
measure thou art in heaven.

Then to conclude this first exhortation and first argument thereof in a word,
and so to come to the second argument. If there were nothing more to move thee
to seek after heaven and heavenly things, but this spirit of regeneration, the
life of the spirit in Jesus Christ, it should lift thee up to heaven as heavy
as thou art. For it is true, thou art a lump: but if thou have the spirit, if
thou werst never so heavy, he will raise thee; and give thee strength to fly
upward, though the body be never so clogged. If thou have a spark of that
life, it will cause thee to mount aloft. Indeed this body will draw thee
down, and must do so; yet be assured, if thou have one spark of that
spiritual life, it will raise thee up, when the other is pulling thee down;
and in the end when mortality is so shaken off of thee, then in a wonderful
manner the body shall be lifted up, and that soul and body of thine shall be
glorified. Therefore mark ever this life by the effect: if thou find thy
heart in heaven and heavenly things, say, thou have the life of Jesus: but on
the contrary, if thou find not thy heart set A true note of the life of God
in us.
on heaven, and seeking for heavenly things, thou have not to do with the life
of Jesus, and woe be to thee for evermore. When thou risest in the morning, if
thou find thy heart upward, O thou risest with joy! therefore never rest till
thou have Ephesians. 4. 18.
gotten the life of God. Lord make us careful to have a sense of this life,
without the which there is no glory, nor joy for the soul of any person
living.

Now to come to the next argument, which is taken from Christ himself, and the
place where he is: Seek (says he) those things that are above where Christ
is. As if he would say, Christ is above, that glorified body with all the
spiritual graces, and that fulness is above; yea above these visible heavens.
Therefore let thy heart go where he is; let it be lifted up above these
heavens. Brethren, the presence of Jesus and the love of that presence should
make us to love heaven, and make us oftentimes to cast up not only the eye of
the soul, but also the bodily eye, to these visible heavens, if we love the
presence of Jesus, who is above these heavens, and to strive to pearce through
them as to his own presence. For if he were not there, what reckoning is
there of these heavens? I would not reckon of them more then of the earth which
we tread on: and I had rather dwell with Jesus in the earth, then in heaven,
for all the glory thereof without Jesus: for all the pleasure that is either
in heaven or earth is in Jesus, and without him, away with heaven and earth
both, I will give nothing for them. And therefore the love of that presence
should make us to love heaven. Ye know if a man love another entirely, he will
love the place where he dwells, and (as we say) he will A note of love.
love the ground he goes on: so if thou love thy Lord, thou will love the
place he treads on; nay thine eye would not be off these visible heavens, at
the least once in the day; for he is above them, and shall abide there, till
his last coming: So if thou love him, thine eye would follow him where he is.
But alas, for the lack of the love of his presence, this love is not to be
found in many men's hearts, and of this it comes to pass that men are so loath
to die: nay if the love of thy soul were with him, thy soul would say with
Paul, I groan to be with the Lord; it will groan within thee to be out of the
body. And take this for a token; where there is not an eye to heaven, alas
there is no love of Jesus Christ in thy soul: and alas, what good thing can
possess thy soul, if it be empty of the love of Jesus Christ?

Now follows in the end of the verse the third argument, taken from the
estate of Christ in heaven; but what is his estate? He is sitting at the right
hand of God. As if he would say; he is in heaven, but not there as a servant
or an Angel; there are sundry in heaven, but in diverse ranks. He is in heaven
exalted to that height; he has such glory as thou never The glory of Christ
in heaven.
saw. All the Angels bow their knees, he is Lord over them all, even as he
is man. Then as the presence of Jesus and love of him should draw our heart to
heaven: so the estate he stands in presently, that passing glory, and that
kingdom he is in, should draw our hearts upward to heaven. If his glory were
dear to thee, thy heart would be where his glory is, and thou would not be
content until thy heart were lifted up to him, and the eye of thy soul set on
him: yea this bodily eye would ever pearce to get that presence of Jesus in the
heavens glorified in our nature. Ye know, if a man, upon whom our life and
comfort depends, were in a strange land, and promoted A sweet similitude.
to be a Lord; thou would never rest until thou were with him, and thy
thought would be ever upon his glory: Now I would to God we could have that
affection to Jesus the King of glory. It is true, we cannot love him as we
should: but (I say) blessed is that soul that has any love toward him,
pearcing through this body of clay. Blessed is that heart that can give once
but a sigh either by night or day, if it were after never so small a measure
for the presence of Jesus: for be assured that soul shall be glorified with
the Lord of glory. Note.
This for the first exhortation, with the three arguments, the life whereunto we
are risen, the presence of Jesus, and his glorious estate in heaven, al which
should make us set our eye upward to heaven, and be occupied in seeking of
heavenly things meet for the spiritual life.

Now to go to the next exhortation, and it is to these same things that are
above. Before he exhorted the Colossians to seek them, now he exhorts them
to be wise in them, to fill themselves with them, to Or to desire that they may
affect all their senses.
sent them with all their senses: to see them with their eyes, and to feel
them sensibly, as it were with their hands. This exhortation is grounded upon
the first argument. If ye be risen with Christ, etc. Then be (...).
wise in the things that are above: that is a common ground to both. This is so
joined with the first, that there can be no seeking without wisdom. How can
thou seek that, that thou know not? If thou have no knowledge of heaven and
heavenly things, how can thou seek them? what desire can thou have of
them? for the proverb is true, Ignoti nulla cupido, there is no desire of that
we know not. Then as before he exhorts to seek; so now he exhorts to
know; and knowledge goes Knowledge.
before seeking: And therefore thou that would seek heaven and for heavenly
things, know them first; and when thou have gotten a knowledge of them, then
let thy affection come after: for if thou seek without knowledge, thou shall
never find them. Therefore ever seek the knowledge of Jesus, and of that
fulness of grace that is in him, and think not that thou have enough of
knowledge already. No, cry ever, Lord open the eye of my soul to see thee
and the things that are with thee, that I may see the things I have not seen,
and that I should see. Hear the word of the Gospel; for knowledge is gotten
by the word of the Gospel. Seek, that thy mind may be instructed, but to the
purpose.

Bewise. As seeking is an action; so wisdom is an action. There is no action
without some sense and knowledge. The life of a beast is not without some
sense; take it away, the beast perishes. The life of a man cannot be without
some sense and knowledge; therefore thou can not have the life of God, except
thou have a sense and smelling of God and of heavenly things. It is a thing
impossible, that thou that have no taste of things above, can either seek or
see them; and if thou think otherwise thou art deceived. Can the life of
Jesus be in thee without a knowledge of heavenly things? No, no, deceive not
thy soul, it is impossible: for Jesus lives not in the souls of men
altogether ignorant. So that if thou get not a portion of this knowledge, of
this heavenly life, and of things above, thou shall never seek for them, nor
have a desire of them: no, I say to thee, if thou want knowledge, thou shall
never get them.

Come forward. Let us see of what things must this knowledge be? He answers,
of things above, that is, of such things as are proper for such a life. I tell
you this earth, and all the things in it, your silver, gold, drink, and all
the rest, the knowledge of these things serves not for the life of heaven: but
if thou will have such a life, thy knowledge must reach to heaven: and howbeit
thy knowledge be finite; yet it will compass things infinite: if thou have the
spirit of Jesus, says the Apostle, it compasses the breadth, and depth of
him, Ephesians. chap. 3. verse 18. 19. Knowledge of heavenly things necessary if
we be in Christ.
So this heavenly life requires wisdom in heavenly things. Jesus Christ when
he rose, the eye of him went up to heaven; he knew no more these carnal
things; all went away, and the mind of him was occupied upon heavenly things:
so if thou rise with him, thy mind will to heaven, and in some measure thou will understand things, and thou will be wise in God. If thou have not this, I
say thou have not risen with Jesus, but art yet filthy, wallowing in thy own
blood to thy eternal damnation.

Now he is not content to exhort them that they be wise in these things above,
but he excludes things of this earth: to teach thee that thou can not be
wise in these heavenly things, in case thou be wise in these things beneath;
yea these heavenly things shall be but foolishnes to a wise man in earthly
things: for they shall be but as a dream and imagination to such: the speech
of the Gospel shall be folly to him. So think not to take both in thy arms;
when thou art looking down, how can thou look up? Think not to compass
heaven and earth both together: for in compassing the one, thou shall lose the
other: Therefore the Apostle sundreth them. This seems to be hard, for how
can we cast all care of this world away, we must eat, drink, and be clothed,
and have some care of these things so long as we abide in the earth? The
Apostle answers in the first Epistle to the Corinth. chap. 7. verse. 29. for
having spoken of marriage, he says, the time is shortened. As if he would say,
ye will not be long in this life. Therefore ye that have wives, be as though ye
had them not. By the which he means not, that we should cast all care away of
this world, but that we should take the things of this earth by the way as it
were: that is to say, let not thy chief care be on them, but so far as they
serve for heaven. Do even as though thou were going on a pilgrimage, ye will
take meat, drink, gold, silver, and such other things to help you forward in
your journey; yet your care will not be on them, but your care will be
chiefly on your journey, ever having your eye upon the end of it. Thou will not
sit down upon thy riches, upon thy meat, and the rest Simile*
while thou art in iourneying; but wilt be ever going forward in thy journey,
using these things by the way: even so the Lord in this our iourneying to
heaven, he will not have us to sit down, and set our care chiefly on these
things in the earth, but to take them as it were by the way, having thy chief
care Matthew. 6.
on him, and the things with him: therefore sit not down upon any thing in this
earth; if thou do, thou shall never come to thy iourneys end; yea thou shall
lose the remembrance of it.

Now to go forward in the words following. There are two arguments to this
purpose set down by the Apostle: the first is to dissuade them from earthly
things, ye are dead. The next is to seek heavenly things; your life is hid
with Christ in God. To speak then of the first argument, which is, ye are dead
to the earth: therefore strive not to be wise in ye earth. Ye know that a man
that is dead, supposing that he had never so great care of this world, and
could never get a fill of the things in it, so long as he lived, yet when life
is gone, the body lies still, and will not give a penny for all the world, all
pleasure goes away, and Simile.
as a man dies, he will begin to spit at the world: yea, a man full of the
honor of it, he will at his dying day spit at it. Even so brethren, the soul
dying with Jesus spiritually (as the body dies naturally) to sin, to the
earth, and to all earthly things, to what end should it care for these earthly
things? Nay, if thou did find that death of Jesus, thou would loath these
things. In deed it is impossible to be altogether void of the care of these
things of the earth, as long as we are in the body here: but if thou be buried
with him, certainly thou will loath all these things beneath, and despise the
wisdom of them, and begin by little and little to seek the things of heaven.
And if thou be thus wise dead, it is a sure argument, thy soul is mortified,
lying as it were in the burial of Jesus, until the time thou rise glorious in
that great day. As by the contrary, if thou be not buried with Jesus in thy
soul and body, thou art living to sin, thou want the life of God, and
have nothing but a sinful life. Brethren, ye heard before, he said they were
living: now he says, they are dead. How can these two stand Objection. Answer.
together? I answer, a spiritual death in the soul, when it dies to sin,
to foul affections, and to earthly things, such a death as that stands very
well with a spiritual life; yea, this death is so joined with the spiritual
life, that except the spiritual death precede, the life of Jesus will not
enter into thee. Think not to enjoy both together at once, the life of sin,
and the life of God; but ere thou get the life of God, the eye thou had to
earthly things must be closed: no, think not to look up and down together at
once. No, no, be dead to the world ere ever thou mind to open an eye to
heaven. So then, the death to the world, and the life to heaven stands well
together.

The last argument follows, persuading to the things above, your life is hid
above with Christ. There are the words, and why should ye not follow him, and
set your heart and your eye upon him, where your life is? Brethren, I see there
are many things to move us to seek heaven, and to be wise in heanenly things.
Now I would to God one of them could move us, but alas! as for a stony heart,
speak and reason with it as ye will, and convince it as ye please, it will
abide hard, and will not be moved. Would thou go down to the things of this
life? that death that thou die forces thee up to heaven; it gives thee
wings to fly upward, and closes thine eyes from the world, and then comes
that spiritual life; which also forces thee upward: will not this move thee?
Then comes the presence of Jesus that is in heaven, he is drawing thee upward
with his hand; the other two thrusts thee upward, but he draws thee by his
spirit: Father (says he) in John chap. 17. verse 24. I will that those which
thou have given me be with me where I am. Will not this move thee? yet there is
more, his glory wherewith he promises to adorn thee with himself. Would not
that yet move thee to seek heaven and heavenly things? O thy life is not here!
In deed thou have begun a piece of the life of heaven, when thy desire is set
upon it; but thy glory is in the heaven, thou art already the son of God,
but yet it appears not what thou art, 1. John 3. 2. Thy life is in heaven.
Then seeing there are so many arguments to move thee to set thy heart and
affection on heaven and heavenly things, to draw thee upward to heaven; O
miserable soul! that yet wilt go down to hell. There is no want of power to
convince, and arguments to move us to seek for heaven and heavenly things; but
alas all the want is in thy miserable heart, to let thee see how great an
induration is in thy heart, that will undo thee so in the light of the
Gospel. The greatest sin that thou can commit, it is not thy murder, thy
adultery, thy oppression, it is none of these that holds thee back from God.
No, no, it is the hardening of thy heart against Hardness of heart how perilous.
so many graces, whereby the Lord would heave thee up to heaven. And so the
special point of thine enditement shall be, that thou hardenest thy heart, and
would have none of his grace. I would have forgiven thee freely, will the
Lord say, if thou would have taken me by the hand when I put it out to thee.
O blessed is that soul that can put out the hand, and take grace of God when
he offers it! Yet I must not pass by the words. Your life (says he) is hid
above with Christ, and in whom? In God. By life is meant that perfection of
glory, that once we shall see, when the glory of Jesus shall ouershadow us,
and make this vile body of ours glorious, as it is said in the Epistle to the
Philippians, chap. 3. verse. 21. There our life (he says) is hid above, it is
not open to be seen. The eye of man has not seen it: the ear has not heard
of it: and all the tongues of the Angels cannot tell you of the greatness of
that glory; neither can it enter into your heart, Hebr. 2. 7. So it is hid
above from the world: the wicked sees it not, and so it comes to pass that
the child of God is least accounted of; and why? because the life of him is not
seen, and the reprobate shall wonder at it, at that day, when it shall be
clearly revealed to him, but alas, to his everlasting confusion; yea the very
sons of God shall wonder at it themselves: for thou see not the glory of
thy estate. Alas, heaven is but as a dream to thee, and is as it were a
glimmering; thou see not the thousand part of it, neither feel the
thousand part of the joy that thou shall have there: but we see it a far off;
and therefore it seems like a mote. But when we draw near it, it shall be
like a great mountain. So it is hid. With whom? with Christ: where he is,
there is thy life. Then it must follow, as it is hid, Jesus is yet hid from
thee; thou live not by sight of him, but by faith in him, 2. Cor. 5. 7. He is
hid from thee, and thou shall wonder, when thou shall see him: When thou shall
see him, even as he is man, he shall make thee astonished. And where is Jesus
hid? He answers, in God. It is not these heavens: it is not this visible
circle, these clouds that hide him. No, take them away, thou can see him
with that corruptible eye of thine. In whom then is he hid? In God. That is, in
a light that has no access. 1. Timoth. chap. 6. verse. 16. where God is
himself, Jesus is hid up. So all the sight of things invisible is in Jesus: So
that no eye can see God, but in Jesus; and if Jesus be hid up, God is invisible
to thee, all is hid up within that veil, and all is dwelling in that veil of
man. So all is hid: thy life is hid, and Jesus is hid up. Therefore wonder not,
although thou can not get such a sight of that life of Christ, and such a
sight of God, as thou would have: for the appointed time is not as yet come.
The Lord has appointed a time, when Christ shall be revealed, and then seeing
Jesus, thou shall see thy life, that was hid up in him: yea then thou shall see
God himself. Now what shall we do in the mean time? I will tell thee, hold
thee by the faith of Jesus, until thou get this sight: that is, stick A sweet
conclusion. 2. Cor. 3. 17. 18.
to the mirror of the Gospel, hold thy eye to it, and ever be looking on it:
and then in a moment Jesus shall stand up before thee, ere thou be aware; and
when the mirror shall go away, Jesus shall stand up in steed of it; and he
shall not so soon stand up before thee, but he shall as soon transform thee,
and shall make this vile body to be glorious. And so soon as this mortality
shall be swallowed up, then thou shall possess that infinite joy
everlastingly, and shall look into the deepenes of that Lord for ever. Now
Lord give us grace to look steadfastly in this Gospel of Jesus till we be
glorified in him, and get his presence to look on for ever and ever, Amen. Now
to this Lord Jesus with the Father and holy Ghost be everlasting praise, honor
and thanks for ever.

THE XXIIII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossains.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 4. 5. 4 When Christ which is our life, shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

5 Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence,


THe last day (brethren) we entered into the exhortation to true godliness and
holiness of life. In the first three verses of this chapter we had two
exhortations, and both were to things that are above, to heavenly things. The
first exhortation was to seek them: the second was to be wise in these
heavenly things. There were sundry arguments which the Apostle used for this
purpose, ye heard every one of them as they occurred in their own place. The
last argument whereby he would move them to be wise in these heavenly things
was, that life that was hid up with Christ in God, even that life which is the
perfecting of this spiritual life begun here. The perfect life of glory is
with Christ, therefore they should set their eye on heaven and heavenly things.
Now to go forward: they might have demanded, when shall we have that life,
and when shall it be manifested? To this, the Apostle in the first verse which
I have now read, answers and says, it shall be revealed to you; yea rather,
ye shall appear as soon as Jesus Christ the Lord of life shall be revealed.
After this follows another exhortation, grounded upon this answer and
promise of life to be revealed, as we shall hear.

To come then to the first part of their demand and question they move: I
mark this first, when once any has begun to taste of that life to come, and
of heavenly things, as the Colossians did, there is a continual longing and
desire to have the fulness and accomplishment thereof. If thou had tasted it,
thou will long for it, and ask when it shall be fully revealed. Such as have
tasted Christ effectually long to see him.
And therefore Paul to the Romans chap. 8. verse. 23. says, We that have
received the first fruits of the spirit (there is the beginning of the life
spiritual and of heaven) we sigh within our selves, waiting for the adoption
even the redemption of our bodies. What thing can be more clear then this? And
in the 2. Cor. chap. 5. verse. 2. We (says he) being burdened with this
mortality, we sigh; not that we would cast away these bodies, but that we
would be clothed upon. Then he expounds himself, that mortality might be
swallowed of life. So the taste of a spiritual life here, has ever a
continual longing and a desire to have it fully manifested, that it might
appear as it is. It is ever enquiring The first observation.
when it shall be fulfilled: but thou that have not tasted it, thou can not
seek after it; and thou that have not tasted it in this life, thou shall never
find it hereafter. But I debar thee from heaven, and this life of Jesus
(play thy part as thou will, and reele here and there at thy pleasure, if thou
have not a taste of heaven and of the life of Jesus here) thou shall never see
it hereafter; I give thee this doom.

The next thing I observe about this demand is: They ask not so soon, but as
soon they are answered; yea they are prevented, The second observation.
and they get no leisure as it were to ask. So thou that seek for comfort,
shall get comfort; and they that seek for that life everlasting, shall get a
meeting, and find a comfortable answer. It cannot fail; at the least while
they be put in possession of it, they shall be fed with the promise of that
life, and shall no sooner ask for it, but the answer shall be made to them:
When Christ shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. And
least (brethren) ye should think these promises to be but bare words: Peter in
his first Epistle and first chapter resolves you when he says, believing in
the promise, ye rejoice with a joy unspeakable and glorious. The faith in the
promise of things that are not yet come, fills the heart with joy, and
brings some sense of that we long for: for the faith in the promise sucketh
that life out of heaven. Therefore believe while thou see, let faith hold up
thy heart until thou be put in the full possession of the things believed in.

To come to the words of the text. The promise is this: Ye shall appear in
glory, and ye shall see your life. There is the promise. The time is defined
here, when Christ shall appear: upon this defining of the time, ye shall note:
Our life depends upon Christ: the time of it depends upon his time, all the
time from the beginning to his first coming in our nature, as he was hid and
was not yet manifested. So that heavenly life lay hid, and shined not in the
world: and more I tell you, few gat it, and few saw it. Then again, when he
begun to come out, and manifest himself in our nature, then our life came out
and begun to appear. Lastly, when he shall come again in this full
manifestation of his glory, that that thou now have, is but little in respect
of that which thou shall see. It was but a small sight the Jews gat, in
respect of that thou shall get then: for then shall thy life appear in the
fulness of it: there shall nothing be hidden, but all shall be made manifest.
And seeing then our life depends on him always, hang thou on him by faith,
and wait for his coming. Alas cannot thy eye once in the day be lifted up to
heaven to wait for him? Paul makes the promise to none, but to those who
wait for his last coming; and so it shall not pertain to thee, if thou wait
not for his coming.

Again, another thing follows clearly of these words, and The third
observation.
this manifestation: The glory of Christ must be in the first place, it must
be foremost. Then secondly follows thy life, and thy glory, as one pendicle
of his glory: for thy life is manifested with him; when he shall appear, who
is thy life, then shall thou appear. So his life and glory goes first, and
then thine follows after. And when Christ shall come in that day, the chiefest
respect he shall have shall be to his own glory. And therefore 2 Thessalonians. chap.
1. verse. 10. it is said, when he shall come, he shall come that he may be
glorified among his Saints. So the end of his coming, is his glory, that he
may be admirable; that all The manifestation of Christ in his complete glory
unto men and Angels with admiration.
the Angels and all the Saints may stand about to give glory to Jesus. Nay
there shall not be such a wondering at the elects glory, as at his glory; he
shall be a perpetual admiration to man and Angel. Then the lesson is: seeing
it is his glory that first shall appear, give it the first place, and let it
be deerer to thee then thy life, and thy glory both. Thou shall not diminish
one jot of that; yea choose rather to go to hell, then that he should not have
his glory: yea if thou account more of thy life, then his of glory, thou
shall neither get life nor glory. In some measure thou must do as Moses and
Paul did, rather then he should want his glory, desire rather to be rased out
of the book of life, and to be Anathema, accursed: for therein thou shall lose
nothing, but thou preferring his glory to thy very life and salvation, shall
find life, glory and salvation for ever; for he loves them decrely that love
him.

In the beginning of this verse, there is a short description of Christ, when
Christ that is our life. This short description contains the cause wherefore
when he shall be glorified and appear, thou shall be glorified: The cause is,
because he is thy life, and then he appearing, of force thou must appear,
because his life is thine. Is not this comfortable, that the glory The glory
of Christ and thy life cannot be parted.
of Jesus and thy life cannot be parted? Thou can not live without him, and
he will not want thee. Again, as soon as his life shall appear, thou shall
appear. It is very comfortable: yet the phrase is to be marked. He says not,
when Christ of whom we have our life shall appear, but he says, when Christ
who is our life shall appear. This is a more effectual speaking, and the very
manner of speech notes this, that that spiritual life that we begin to live
here, is not so much a life different from his life, as it is the very life
that Christ lives himself. Christ has a life, and we have the same in
number, the life of Christ ouershadoweth us. That same very life and no other
extends to us so far as we are capable of it. Brethren, ye may perceive
this to be a similitude. Lives the body another life then the head? No: There
is but one life in the man, and that that the head has, the same the whole
bodiehath, and it quickens every member of the body: Even so is it to be
thought of the life of Jesus our spiritual head. There is a nearer conjunction
betwixt us and him, then there is between this head of ours and the body: so
that of necessity there is but one life of Christ and ours; and we live that
same life of Jesus as members of that mystical body, whereof he is the head.
Paul Galath. chap. 2. verse. 20. he says not, by Christ I live, but he says,
Christ lives in me. And Ephesians. chap. 3. verse. 17. he dwells in me. So his
life is mine: And the 2. Cor. chap. 4. verse. 10. the life of Jesus is
manifested in me. The life of Jesus was Paul's life. What else then is thy life,
but this same life of Jesus? This is comfortable, he has made thee a fellow
companion to himself: he will not give thee another life, but his own life. O
that this miserable world wist what it were to live the life of God, to have
Christ and his life in it! It is no small glory to live the life of Jesus.

In the last words, he says not, when Christ, who is your life shall appear,
your life shall appear: but he says, ye shall appear, even ye your selves in
proper person, and none others for you, but ye your selves shall appear with
Jesus in that day. For their demand would seem to mean another thing; to
wit, that howsoever Christ should appear, who was their life, yet they would
be far to seek, as we say. But he answers them more comfortably, ye your
selves shall appear at that day, and not your life only. For your life shall
not so soon appear, but as soon incontinently thereafter, within the space
of the twinkling of an eye, ye your selves shall appear: so this speech
tells us, that there is a space of time, wherein the sons of God are not
known in the world: the Lord has children here and the world knows them
not; yea The world knows not the Saints.
scarsely they themselves see it, much less the world. Then again, they have
a time when they are made known to be Kings sons, the least of them (every
one is the Kings son) 1. Ioh. 3. 2. 3.
and they themselves will know themselves then. When is it that they are not
known? when his glory is not seen. What difference is there between a Kings
son and another, when he is not in his own place and dignity? So is it with
thee: thou art not in thine own place and honor. When shall thou be known to
be the son of God? when the son of glory Simile.
shall appear, then thou shall be known to be the son of God. Then the
devil shall be compelled to say, there is the son of God; there is a Kings
son, and an heir of the everlasting kingdom. Then again, when appears not
thine honor? when the honor of thy eldest brother appears not: so long as
he is obscured, so long thou art obscured. When shall it appear? when thy
eldest brother shall appear, then thou, if thou be first, second, third,
fourth; yea if ye were ten thousand, the honor of the eldest brother shall
reach to all. Then in one word, the manifestation of the sons of God
depends upon the appearance of Jesus Christ the first borne our eldest
brother. When he shall appear, then thy glory and honor shall appear.
Therefore ye pray, Let thy kingdom come, that is, let Jesus appear in his
glory, and let me next appear. This is the effect of the prayer.

Now to come to the next verse upon this promise of appearing and life to be
manifested: he groundeth his exhortation, and says, therefore mortify your
earthly members; as if he would say, your glory is to be revealed, ye shall
once appear the sons of God in glory and dignity: what shall ye then do
in the mean time? Be occupied (says he) in mortifying the members of your
body, that ye may be found clean; otherwise ye shall not see that life to
come. Now to observe this ere we go further. Such a glorious life requires a
death; thou shall never get it, if there be not a death in thee: think not to
come to it, with all thy lusts with thee, if thou fall not to the mortification
of that hand that has slain thy eldest brother the Lord Jesus; thou shall
never get that life. This vain world thinks to carry up a bloody hand, and
a wicked eye to heaven: no, if thou take it with thee, thou shall not get
entrance, the gate shall be hurled on thy face. The harlot thinks that she
shall get heaven with her harlotrie: No, she and her harlotrie shall go to
hell; no unclean thing shall enter there: if thou be not holy and in some
measure sanctified, and that filthy 1. Cor. 6. 9
lust of thine slain, thou shall never get heaven, deceive not your selves.
Yet to mark the words, he says, mortify, slay. He said before they were
dead, meaning to sin; now he bids them, slay on, and die on: thou that
have begun to die, continue, otherwise thou will not live. This tells us, sin
is not slain in an instant: yea if thou should live a thousand Sin is not
slain in an instant.
years, it will live with thee as long as thou live, ere thou die it shall
not die: it has a quicker life then thou have: thou art but a bubble of water:
all the Kings of the earth cannot slay sin; yea when this life is gone, that
same original sin goes to the grave with thee, and resolves the body into
ashes; Original sin lives after death in the ashes.
and after that, lies in the ashes and leaves thee not, until Christ come
and take up the body; and so sin is not a light thing. Seeing then it is so
hard to slay these affections, continue in slaying them, and think it not
enough thou have given sin a wound to day, and so leave off: I tell thee, it
will slay thee, if thou slay not it daily and hourly. For that is it Paul
says, Romans chap. 7. verse. 18. 19. A wanton girl and a wanton fellow, they
think they are living; but I say there is not a spark of life in them, and
well were they that they had not that life. Therefore continue in slaying of
sin, or else thou shall be slain of sin, and the life of life's shall be
taken from thee. Ye that have bin occupied in slaying of others, slay your
selves, and your affections. But how shall ye slay your affection? It lies not
in thy hand to do it, there is no virtue in thee: thou can not slay one
affection: I will tell thee. The means are two, the first is faith in Jesus,
and in his death, that is the death of Jesus apprehended by faith, draw him as
greedily Two means to kill sin.
to thee, as thou suckest sin. It is the virtue of the cross of Jesus that
slays sin, and thy foul affections; so that if thou have not faith in him
and his death, thou shall never be Gal. 6. 14. 15.
able to slay sin in thee, nor to mortify one foul affection.

The other mean to slay sin and foul affections, is the spirit of Jesus,
that accompanies the cross of Jesus (take away the cross of Jesus, no
spirit.) Then this spirit coming into thy heart, it falls to and puts his
hand in that sin which is within thee, and kills it by little and little:
for as he is a quickening spirit, so he is a slaying spirit of sin. So
Christ's cross embraced by faith, and then his spirit, they are the means to
slay sin in thee. Then thou have no more to do, but by faith to entertain
that cross of Christ and his spirit: for woe Romans 8. 2. 3. 4.
is that heart that is without the spirit of Christ. But how shall this be? I
tell thee faith is by hearing: hear the Gospel then; for if thou take no
pleasure in the Gospel, faith, Christ, and his spirit shall go from thee.
Besides these two, there are other godly exercises, profitable to the same
purpose, continual prayer; for that is the exercise that God delights in:
Means to come by and to increase says.
earnest exercising of the works of charity; if thou leave off these
exercises, thou shall lose Christ and his spirit, and shall grow in sin, and
then thou shall be cast into damnation for ever. Gods judgment shall light on
thy neck, and shall crush thee down to hell, and thy sin both. This for the
word mortifying.

The next is, what should we mortify? He says not thy neighbor: no, no,
but he says, mortify thy cancred affection that moves thee to slay thy
neighbor; slay thy self, that is, that mass of sin, that is within thee,
and cut off from thy body every unclean thing, and slay every member thereof,
and leave not so much as thy little finger unslain. By the members Members of
sin.
I understand the foul affections in thy heart, which run thorough the whole
body, and fill the eye with pride, with adultery, with wrath, and cruelty:
in such sort, that the very look of the eye is defiled, and will run to
uncleanness. The hand is defiled, and runs to blood: the foot is defiled,
and hastes to murder: yea thy foul affections in the heart, they will come
to the tongue, and employ it all in their service; so that thou may perceive,
what a sin lies in thy heart, that infecteth all the members. Therefore this
is the exhortation of the Apostle, slay the foul affections in thy members: if
it be in thy eye, pluck it away, that is, pluck away that foul affection in
thy eye; for better it is for thee to be crooked and blind, then to be cast
into hell, and there to curse thy hand and feet, and all the members of thy
body everlastingly. Now then of this briefly. Ye see how far sin spreads
in man and woman: it is not content to occupy one part only of man: it will
not be content with thy soul, but it runs through all. It leaves not one
part free, but fills all the parts of man and woman. Therefore mortification
must not be in one part; it must not be in the soul only, but as far as
sin Mortification in all parts.
reaches, so far must thy mortification reach. Then begin at thy heart, and
next come to the outward members of the body; for it avails nothing to have
a fair counterfaite face without, if thou have a foul heart within. Yet the
style is to be noted, that he gives the members, he calls them earthly, not
heavenly. All these foul affections are called earthly, because in themselves
they are gross and earthly, and their objects are earthly: And what matter
(brethren) if these affections were made of the best part of the earth, they
are made of the dirt of the earth, of these ofscourings of the dirt, that thou
would loathe to look to. Note.
Indeed there are some that be of the good earth, as eating, drinking, and
sleeping, etc. therefore are lawful being sanctified: but as for these
affections of harlotrie, of concupiscence, of murder, of covetousness, they are
unlawful and unclean: will thou then foster them? No, mortify them, slay
them, and cut them away. Christ came not to make thy harlotrie clean to thee:
no, no, thou lies in thy throat; cut it away therefore, otherwise thou and it
both shall perish. This for the general. Now I come to the particular members.

Because the large dispute upon the particulars fitteth not for this time,
only I will speak so far, as serves for the purpose of this text. He
begins first at fornication. Then he comes to uncleanness. Thirdly, to
inordinate passions. Fourthly, to evil concupiscence. And fifthly, he comes
to avarice: and he would have all these cut away. Now to prosecute every one of
these. The first is fornication, harlotrie, when whores and harlots go
together. Paul to the Romans chap. 1. verse. 24. and Ephesians. chap. 5. verse. 5.
when he counts out the vices of the Gentiles, he begins always at
harlotrie and fornication; and then from that he comes to other vices. In
the first to the Corinthians chap. 6. he insisteth more largely Fornication.
in condemning of that sin, then commonly ye shall find him to do in any
other vice: and he uses for the condemning of it, five or six arguments.
What means this constant doing in condemning this vice? The spirit does it
not in vain, no, not one word comes from that holy spirit in vain. I shall
tell you the cause. This sin was a sin common among the Gentiles, and they
thought it no sin; they thought it a thing indifferent, that might be done
without any fault: they were come to that reprobate sense, that nature
condemns. Therefore the Apostle to let them see that this was a sin, and
one of the first, when he reckons the sins of the Gentiles, he names
fornication first to be the ringleader to the rest, and the more they
extenuate it, the more the spirit aggrauateth it. The more thou shall extenuate
any sin, the more the spirit of God shall aggrauate it to thy conscience.
Will thou say, murder (which now is so rife) is no sin? The Lord will say to
thee, it is a sin, and a huge great sin: if thou do not amend it, thou
shall never inherit the kingdom of heaven. Therefore we learn, that these
sins, the world accounts least of, the Lord accounts most of; and thou
should account most of them, and in condemning of them thou should
insist. This harlotry is ever conjoined with prophanenes: Thou that take
pleasure to defile thine own body, thou growest a profane body, and so thou
art ready to be drawn to al mischief, for thou art left of God. Heb. chap.
12. verse. 16. Let no man be a harlot, or a profane person, as Esau was,
meaning hereby, that a harlot is a profane dog, ready to be polluted with
all vice.

But to come to the next vice. It follows: Uncleanness. Harlotrie is one sort
of uncleanness. But now he subioyneth, all manner of uncleanness: And from the
less member, which is harlotrie, he goes to the greater. This teaches us,
that we are full of filthiness. For if this uncleanness in all manner of ways
were not in us, the Apostle would not bid us mortify the general vice that is
in us: and so though thou were come of a King, thy nature is full of filth, and
uncleanness. No, the sow was never Greater filthiness committed by man then by a
beast.
so unclean as thou art by nature: A sow has not the filth of sin; but thou
have. There was never beast that will fall into such filthiness, as man will
do: will thou read histories, yea the Scriptures? thou shall find greater
filthiness committed by man, then by any beast. This thing and that will make
thee loathe: but if thou had an eye to see thy sin, thou would loathe it
more then all the filthiness in the world. The second thing that we learn here
is this: It is not enough to mortify one sort of uncleanness. In case thou be a
drunkard, it is not enough to mortify that sin: in case thou be an harlot,
it is not enough for thee to mortify this (howbeit it be well done to do it)
but thou must pass from one sin to another, and never leave it alive in
thee; but mortify them all, slay all, cut all away: for I assure thee one
uncleanness will cause thee die; it will cause thee go to hell. The Germans
think that drunkenness is no sin; but I say it is: and it is enough to cause
thee die: as a sickness will cause thee die if thou mend it not, so one sin
will cause thee die, if thou repent not.

Now to go to the next member. He calls it (...), an unruly Unruly affection.
affection what ever it be. Here it is taken for a raging lust, that sets a
man on fire, 1. Cor. chap. 7. verse. 9. So yet I send you to nature, look what
stuff it is made of. There is a fire in nature of foul lust that will burn
thee to death, and in the end put thee in hell, if it be not mortified. May ye
not see this by experience? when ye see that which is fit for ye a bating and
quenching of lust, cannot quench it, but he will run and mingle himself with
harlots; these harlots testify of this fire. Look to the adulterer, there is
a fire. Yet more then that, when this fire has burnt up all the moisture of
the body, and wasted all; yet it burns in the heart. Ye shall see this in
filthy aged men, when the body is decrepit; yet the fire of this lust will be
burning still in the heart, and it loses the tongue to filthiness: fie on
thee, it becomes not an old man to speak foul filthy talk. This is one
thing. I mark another thing by subioyning fiery lust to uncleanness: It
teaches us, that among all vices we should take heed of it. This burning lost
is not the least; we should put out that fire first: for I tell thee, if thou
let it burn, all the things in the world will not quench it. Thou must get the
water of the spirit of Christ to quench it. Therefore cry for that water, or
else thou and it both will burn in hell for ever. When he has spoken of this,
he goes to evil concupiscence. It is not one filthy affection, but all
filthy affections, and every kind of them, which are many in number, Evil
concupiscence.
that he will have mortified. Think thou there be no more but uncleanness and
burning lust in thee? Yea although they were taken away, yet thou art full of
other affections. This lets thee see yet, how foul thy nature is. The
Papist says, we aggrauate the filth of nature over much. Ah filthy creature,
thou have not felt the stink of nature, and therefore thou art Stink of
nature.
the worst teacher of nature: I say to thee, the filth of nature cannot be
spoken of sufficiently enough: yea an Angel can not paint out sufficiently the
mystery of sin, and the filthiness of thy nature. And therefore the Apostle
teaches us to enlarge our mortification; when thou have mortified one sin, two
sins, three sins, yea many sins; think always there are more behind: when
thou have mortified all these former sins, yet avarice is behind: suppose thou
should quit thy self of them all, yet if thou be auaritious, it shall cause
thee die, thou shall not inherit heaven. Then as there is no end of sin: so
let there be no end of mortification of sin. There are more members of sin
within thee, then there are members of thy body; and therefore be slaying one.
And here I end, craving of him, who is able to slay this filthiness of nature,
to grant his holy spirit and faith in Jesus Christ to that effect. To whom
with the Father be all honor and thanks for ever,

Amen.
THE XXV. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians, beginning at the
end of the fifth verse.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 5. 6. 7. 5 And covetousness, which is Idolatry:

6 For the which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience.

7 Wherein ye also walked once, when ye lived in them.


YE have heard (brethren) the first exhortation the Apostle makes to the
Colossians in this chapter was, that they should seek the things above. The
second exhortation was, that they should be wise in them. And we have entered
into the third exhortation the last day, which is, that they should mortify
their earthly members; and after the general he comes to the delivery of
these several foul affections that break out in the body: and the will move
them to this mortification of the lusts of the flesh. The fifth member then he
terms it avarice, or covetousness: Even as before, when he had named the
general vice or member called uncleanness, he subioyned a special member
which he called the inordinate affection, the which member of affection among
all parts and sorts of uncleanness, is the greatest: Even so now when he has
named the general member, which he calls evil concupiscence, he subioyneth,
the special called avarice, which is the worst kind of evil concupiscence in
this world: therefore he makes a choice of it besides al other concupiscences
in the heart of men. For even as that burning lust of the heart is
unquenchable, and cannot be extinguished by any earthly mean; without the
spirit of Christ, it will never be quenched: so this wicked concupiscence of
avarice, it is insatiable; it can never be filled. It is like a devouring
gulf; for though it could swallow in all this world, yet it would be too
little for it. Give an auaricious man the whole world, he will yet crave more:
and this is no marvel; for this world, and all that are in this world are
finite and bounded within terms: but the desire of an auaricious man is in a
manner infinite: And to speak the truth, if it get not God, it will Nothing
can fill the covetous heart but God himself.
never be satisfied. There is nothing that will content or fill it: the more he
has, the more he will crave. In a word, there is nothing that will be able to
fill the desire of man, but that infinite God. And as one said well, alluding
to the shape of this world, and comparing it with the heart of a man: The world
is round and circular; the heart is four cornered. Therefore the covetous man's
heart may fitly be compared to a square which can never be completely filled
up by a circle, though a
circle be of all others the most capacious figure: still there is a corner
void, turn the circle which way thou will within the square: Even so though
the whole frame of the heavens, earth, seas and air, with all that be within
the^ were engrossed in the gulf of a covetous man's insatiable heart, yet would
it never be filled, never contented, never have enough. It is known that a
quadrangle is never filled: even so the heart of an auaricious man, being a
quadrant, it is never filled. The more he has, the more he will crave: the
auaricious heart will never be satisfied, until it drown the man. Paul 1.
Timoth. chap. 6. verse. 9. speaking of them that will be rich, he says, they
drown themselves. There is their end. Brethren, if ye will compare together
these two foul affections, as the special worst members in a man: certainly,
I account avarice far worse and more incurable, then the other. As for the
lust, and that fire, it will grow less; and as a man grows old, it will grow
old and fail with him. But as for this affection of avarice, it grows more
and more: and as a man grows in age, it grows in youth; the older thou art,
it is the younger: for the more thou decayest in strength of thy members, the
more strong grows it, according to the proverb: All vices grow old, but
avarice grows young. Therefore above all wicked affections, this vice of
avarice A proverb.
requires mortification. Now slay it I beseech you, and fill it up once; fill
up that gulf: And wherewith? either with godliness, or else it will never be
filled. Godliness is great gain, 1. Timoth. chap. 6. otherwise thou shall never
have contentation. I tell thee, there is no other mean then to fill thy heart
with godliness: and if thou have thy heart filled with godliness, a little thing
will fill thy heart, a sober supper and a sober dinner will serve thee: but if
thou want godliness in thy heart, avarice shall reign in thee, as a tyrant: and
how beit he had gotten a world of things; yet if he hear of any thing behind,
he can not be satisfied, but requires that also. For his greedines can not be
filled.

Now to go forward: when he has named this avarice, he leaves it not as he
did the rest of the vices before, simply naming it; but he insisteth in it, and
describes it to be idolatry; as he would say, it the greatest vice that is:
it bereaueth God of his honor and worship. Brethren, it is not in this place
only where he calls this vice of avarice idolatry, but in the fifth to the
Ephesians 5. verse, he terms the auaricious man an idolater, and Jesus Christ
in 16. of Luke verse. 13. No man (says he) can serve God and riches. Where ye
may see he attributes that to riches, which is proper to God: for the
auaricious man honors his riches, and is a servant, yea rather a slave to
his riches, whereas he should serve his God. But I say to thee, pretend to
serve God as thou will, thou shall not serve God and riches both: for the words
of Christ mean, that when once thou beginnest to be in love with thy riches,
thou biddest God farewell. For thou will be content rather to be a slave to
riches worshipping them, then to serve God, as he commanded thee in his word.
Brethren, ye may ask of me, what man is he that will adore his riches? (for
he is an idolater that will adore any Idol whatsoever it be) what rich man will
fall down to a piece of money? I say there was never an Idolater took greater
pleasure to look on a graven Image, then an auaritious man Avarice is
idolatry. 1. The covetous man loves his money more then God. 2. Trusts in
his money
will delight to look on a piece of money. The outward eye of him shall be so
fixed on it, that he shall forget his God: such shall be his pleasure to behold
it. But to speak nothing of the outward worship: There was never an idolater
that had greater confidence in his Idol, then the covetous man in his money.
Remember ye not the rich man, who when he had filled his barnes: My soul
(says he) take thy rest: whereon? upon thy riches: there is his confidence,
Luke 12. verse. 9. What Idolater Luke 12.
had greater confidence in any thing, then this man had in his riches? The
auaritious man then can have his confidence in nothing, but in his riches.
Therefore in the first to Timothy chap. 6. verse. 17. the Apostle says, Charge
the rich men in this world, that they be not proud, nor put their confidence in
uncertain riches. And David in the 62. Psalm verse. 10. says, If riches
abound, set not thy heart upon them. David knew well that man would make a God
of his riches. Well, if he put his trust in his riches, and does worship and
honor them, he is an idolater. For wherein stands the worship of God, but in
putting of confidence (which is the inward worship of God) in him? Do not
thou then honor riches, when thou put thy confidence in them? yea
certainly: yea I say, none will go beyond him in that. Look to him that will
put his confidence in an Idol most, an auaritious man shall go beyond him,
and ouermatch him. Ye will move another question: Is there no other vicious man
an idolater? Is not the ambitious man an idolater? puts he not his confidence
in his honor? and the belly-god in his belly? and some in the arm of men?
put not all these sorts of persons, and many more then these, their confidence
in their several vices like Gods? are not these idolaters also? I answer, it
is true indeed, thou that art ambitious, art an idolater; thou that art a
belly-god, art an idolater; and thou that put thy trust in the arm of man,
art an idolater: but I say, certainly not without cause he terms the
auaritious to be an idolater before all other; even because it is most common,
and least counted of, by reason that men most naturally are inclined thereto.
What is he that cannot cloak his avarice? It is thriftines, will the
auaritious man say, and why should I give out my goods to this and that? why
should not I keep them well, when I have them? And so they are most ready to
cloak it with a color. And therefore the Apostle, to let them see it is but
vain so to do, terms this vice the greatest, and more like to idolatry
then any other. So that idolatry is first, and then avarice that is likest to
idolatry succeeds, and then ambition and the rest. And to speak the truth,
it is an harder thing to draw the heart of an auaritious man from this world,
then it is to draw the heart of any man: yea it is easier to win the idolater
from his idolatry, then it is to win the covetous man from his covetousness:
for covetousness is bred in the marrow of thy bones. Then I say again, this
vice has most need to be insisted upon, and aggrauated. For all the world
will not satiate the heart of man: it is only the spirit of Jesus that will
fill it. Now one thing note here, and so I will go forward. Certainly this
aggravating of avarice, and calling of it idolatry, lets us see, that the
chief sin in the world is idolatry. When he would make one sin greater
then another, he will take the greatest sin and set with it: as here, to show
that avarice is a great sin, Avarice and idolatry compared.
and greater then many others, he sets it down with idolatry that is
greater. And therefore it must follow, that idolatry is the greatest sin;
for that sin that is next to the greatest sin, must needs make that that
sin which is before it, to be the greatest sin. But so it is, that
covetousness is next to the greater sin which is idolatry: therefore
idolatry is the greatest sin. And therefore fie on them that leave the true
God, and set up an Idol to worship it. O that true God Idolatry.
shall not leave of to pursue them while they come home again! and all the
Kings of the earth shall not make them to prosper, except they come home
again! O then come home, come home! or else I pronounce it shall not be the
Pope that shall be able to save thee from damnation. It was easy to win the
idolatrous Gentiles, but to win false Christians from their Hard to convert
Papists from idolatry.
idolatry, of al things of the world, it is one of the hardest. Will thou not
be won by the light and truth of the word? that iron rod shall bruise thee
together.

Now to speak something of these members: will ye see the object of
these-foule affections? The objects are two in number. The first is pleasure,
the very pleasuring of the flesh. The second is profit and gain. There are the
two. The lust is occupied about pleasure, and this desire is occupied about
profit; and so the two objects are pleasure and profit. Now it is true, the
Lord that has created all things, has created thee with these affectations of
pleasure, and desire of these things in this world: so that it is natural to
desire the things of this world, and to take pleasure in them. And the Lord
that has created thee so, he has given thee pleasure and profit: and such is
his liberality toward thee, that he allows that thy affections be
satisfied, so be it that thou use all to his honor and worship, whether thou
eat, or drink, or whatsoever thou do; and that in using thy liberty with an
unclean heart, thou defile not the good gift of God: otherwise of necessity
these foul affections must be double sins. Thou sinnest doubly not only in
thy lust, but in the liberality of God: thou sinnest in harlotrie, and in
ingratitude against God. The Lord has permitted thee to have riches. And the
Lord shall say to the harlot, permitted not I thee to have pleasure? but thou
would not take it as I commanded thee: but thou would persevere in
whoredom from one to another, and Inordinate affection.
so pleasure thy self in uncleanness, which I have forbidden thee. And likewise
he shall say to the auaricious, permitted not I thee to have riches? but what
have thou done? Thou have made a god of thy riches and served them, whereas
thou should have known me for thy God, and me only should thou have
worshipped; and therefore thou and thy lust, and thou and thy profit shall both
to hell in my hot indignation: and as one affection that is foul brings many
sins with it; so it brings double judgment with it. Beware then, and mark
well these affections, that they be not in excess and pass measure. This
inordinate affection to the foul lusts of the flesh, and the gain of the
things in this world tells us, that the corruption of nature, and of these
affections, is more bent to an excess, passing measure, then to a defect in
nature. There are some things that are in excess, and some in a defect: but
this corruption that is in man tends more to an excess, then any other
thing. Man is readier to offend in over great desire of riches, then in over
little. Look thou through this age, thou shall find that it inclines to over
great seeking of riches. Again, ye shall find that a thousand fails in over
great desire of pleasure; and so it tends more to an excess then to a
defect. And therefore this mortification has more ado to hold down these
affections, then to draw them forward, seeing they set upon excess on every
side. Bridle then your affection: for will you go to your own experience? ye
shall find more ado in drawing back your affections from this world, the
pleasure and riches of the same, then in putting them forward.

Now to come to the arguments: ye have heard the first from that life hid up in
God: he pointed it out to them, which should move them to mortify their
members, as they would look for the revealing of it. Now in the verse that
follows, the second argument is set down on the contrary. Before, he set
down heaven: now he sets down damnation before them. Note.
For the which things (says he) the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience. They are tumbled into hell for uncleanness; of any sort, men and
women, are thrust daily into hell, not only for them altogether, but also for
any one of these sins, if it reign in them. And indeed there are few in
whom some one of these vices (if not the whole number) does not reign: so that
if he be not auaritious, yet it may be he is a fornicatour, and given to this
filthy uncleanness of the flesh, or some other of these sins. And I say to
thee, there is not one of these sins, if it reign in thee, but it will draw
thee to hell: that is his meaning. So he closes in this mortification betwixt
heaven and hell; heaven on the one side, and hell on the other; mercy on the
one side, and judgment on the other: to let thee understand that if heaven
will not move thee, hell will get thee; if that life will not move thee,
judgment and hell shall devour thee. In the world we are allured with heaven,
and threatened with hell; if thou will not be moved with the one, the other
shall oppress thee; if thou were a King thy estate shall not help thee. And
therefore slay thy foul affections, as thou would have heaven and eschew
hell. And in that he sets hell before them, it lets us see the canker of
our nature; yea even of the regenerate. Thou art not so well renewed, but thou
have need to be chased and compelled to thy grace, and to have the terrors of
hell and of the wrath The best have need to be awakened with Gods terrors.
of God object to thee, to chase thee to heaven, as the Apostle 2. Cor. chap.
5. verse. 11. says, knowing this terror of the Lord, therefore I am faithful in
my vocation, and bring others to the faith. A Minister if he were never so
good; yea if it were Paul himself; yet ye see he has need of this terror of
the wrath of God to be objected to him, that he may be faithful, and wait
upon the glory of heaven. Then again, ye see fornication will procure the
wrath of God everlasting: much more the temporal. Well, thou think simple
fornication, a single man with a single woman, it is but a small fault: but the
Apostle says, fornication, if thou lie in it, it will thrust thee down into
hell. Sin in any sort or measure will procure the wrath of God. There is no
sin, but it will bring the wrath of God against thee, and in the end shut
thee in hell. But this is to be marked; For the which cause (says he) the
wrath of God falls: upon whom? upon the children of disobedience, that is,
upon these persons that will not repent. Therefore it is not every fornication
and uncleanness that will cause thee go to hell, but it is fornication
unrepented for, and uncleanness unrepented for: that is the sin which will put
thee in hell, and upon that sinner that is impenitent the wrath of God falls.
Avarice that is not repented for, and a man that is hardened in heart, that is
he, and that is the sin that will put thee in hell. So to speak it properly,
it is not so much harlotry, fornication, uncleanness, and avarice, or other
sin in it self, that procures the wrath of God, as it is the impenitencie
of the person that cannot, nor will not repent. Alas, could the harlot repent
him of his sin, he would be saved? Could the murderer repent him of his
murder, he would be saved? Could the auaricious repent him of his avarice, he
would not be under the wrath of God? For there is no sin so great, but if
repentance follow, there is grace The greatest sin is pardonable to the
penitent.
for thee. Repent thee then of thy sin, as thou know it, and ask mercy
in the Lord Jesus, and if thou do this thou shall be saved, and free from the
wrath of this great God: for of all sin in the world, the sin that is
accompanied with impenitencie, is the greatest. Therefore set your heart ever
to repent, The least sin unpardonable to the impenitent.
as thou will declare thy faith in Jesus; for faith in Christ can not be
without true repentance. If we should live Methusalahs days, all is little
enough to repent of sin; yea even the smallest that ever thou did, or art
guilty of. Thou that have bin an harlot, spend the rest of thy life in
repentance, and thou shall find grace and salvation. And so likewise, thou
that have been a murderer, an oppressor, an auaricious body, spend the time
ye have behind in hearty repentance; and I assure you ye shall find mercy
and salvation: otherwise I debar you out of heaven. Or I leave these words,
mark: he says, For the which the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience: Supposing that the Colossians had been such men as had walked in
all the sins he spoke of: yet this wrath comes not upon them. Then it is
not the elect that be made a spectacle to the world of the wrath and judgments
of God, but they are the reprobates that are made the spectacles of Gods wrath
and judgments: for they are the children of disobedience. As for the elect
none of them falls under this wrath. O happy is the estate of the chosen
number! and if thou be not one of the number of Gods elect in the Lord Jesus,
woe is thee: thou shall be made a spectacle of Gods wrath. But as for the
elect, he chooses them out to let them see his wrath rather in others, then
that they should experiment it in their own persons. He will take a slave and
torment him in the sight of his elect, and Psalm. 50.
tear, him (as it were) in pieces (O the terrible hand of God!) to make them
to stand in awe: for all the reprobate, if they were Kings, they are but slaves
and vessels of earth, and not of gold, let them cloathe themselves with gold as
they will. So behold the severity and mercy of God; severity for the
reprobate, and mercy for the elect. Ye will ask; makes not God the chosen
sometime a spectacle of his wrath? was not David in a miserable case, and a
fearful spectacle of Gods wrath, when as the sword went never out of his
house all his days? and are there not many daily, that are made fearful
spectacles; and yet no doubt there are many of them that are of the chosen of
God? I answer, indeed it is true, the Lord will chastise his very sore here;
but all is in this world, hang him, head him, burn him, all is naught; and
that that is, is ever conjoined with the mercy of God, and his pain has an
end. But the Apostle speaks here of an eternal wrath. The elect incur not
this wrath: it is proper to the sons of infidelity. And therefore I say, the
elect are never made spectacles of Gods Gods punishments in this world on his
are but chastisements.
wrath, whatsoever the chastisement be that falls upon them. Ye will ask
again: where was there ever such a spectacle seen? In hell. Saw you ever one
tormented in hell with this wrath? saw you ever one tormented in this world
with this wrath? God forbid, I will not judge so hardly of any that suffers,
or are visited by the hand of God. How is it then that the reprobate are made
the spectacles of Gods wrath? I say, albeit thou neither see it, nor thou hear
it, yet there are infinite numbers tormented in hell. But there are some so
pitiful hearted bodies, who cannot hear tell that one goes to hell. O
foolish pitiful hearted body! I tell thee, infinite numbers go to hell, and
shall go; and thou, if thou believe not this, shall go with Hell.
the rest to hell. For if this word will not serve to confirm thee in this
truth, that the, reprobates shall be made spectacles of Gods wrath: the wrath
of God shall serve one day when it shall light on thee, and them both, as
infidels, to your utter destruction.

Now to go forward: ye have heard two arguments serving to mortification. The
first was taken from heaven; the second from hell, as ye heard. The last
follows, and it is taken from these same sins, in the which the Colossians
sometimes walked, as if he would say: ye were such men sometime, these sins all
reigned in you before ye came to Christ; ye were fornicators, idolators,
covetous, etc. all these reigned in you, as they did in any infidel. Therefore
let the remembrance of these sins be matter of mortification to you. This is
the argument briefly. Of the which ye may gather, that men should not look
How to remember our old sins.
idly on their sins wherein sometime they walked: for when thou remembrest
thou wast an harlot and murderer, an oppressor, and an auaricious man, let
that remembrance serve to an earnest slaying of sin to come, and mourning for
thy sins past continually. Fie on thee for evermore, if this be not the
effect of the remembrance of thy sins, and so slay that foul affection that
made thee an harlot, and cry for that blood of Jesus that washes it away. And
certain it is, as all things that befall the elect are for their good: even so
are their sins Romans 8.
for their good, when they begin to repent them of their sin, and to slay it.
David was better after his adultery, then he was before; and he never
remembered his sins (as he ever remembered them) without mortification. For
this is the nature of a sanctified remembrance, it ever works sorrow in the
heart, and a mortification of the sin. O fie on thee, when thou remembrest
thy harlotrie, and wilt not have sorrow in thy heart for it, nor mortify it!
Well, Paul says, Godly sorrow brings forth repentance, which is nothing
else but a mortification of thy sin, sorrowing that thou have done it: and
brethren, sanctified remembrance makes a fresh wound in the heart. If thou
stand in the grace of Jesus Christ, thou will not so soon remember thy sins,
but as soon thou shall be wounded with sorrow and grief for them: and thou
shall not so soon be wounded, but so soon that oil of gladness shall be
powered into thy heart to comfort thee in Jesus and his grace, and shall bring
to thee a joy unspeakable. Therefore this is my mind, and it is true: the
ioyfullest body that ever was or is, is a penitent The joy of a penitent
sinner.
sinner, who with sighs unspeakable groans for sin. O then, there is joy
unspeakable and glorious in that heart! 1. Pet. chap. 1. it refreshes the heart
so sweetly, that the mourning sinner is swallowed up with joy, and blesses the
time that ever he mourned for sin.

Come to the words of the text, there are three things he notes Three points.
in them: they walked in them: that is, in these sins. And thirdly, the time
when they walked in them. As to the first, ye walked, that is, in fornication
and uncleanness, and the rest; ye walked in them, as men are wont to go from
morning to evening. The word teaches us this, that a sinner cannot sit idle
(if sin reign in thee thou can not sit idle) but he must be ever going on;
yea and running on to sin. It is said in the epistle to the Ephesians, that
they gave themselves to wantonness with greedines, striving who should be
foremost. There Ephesians. 4. 19. 20.
was never two in a course of running, striving who should be foremost and
foremost, as a sinner in whom sin reigns, will strive to be foremost in sin
before all others. There is none that went to hell, nor none go or shall go,
but their own Sinners walk to hell, they need no horse.
foot carries them thither; they need not a horse to ride on and gallop
thither. There was never none so ready to go to heaven, as the reprobates are
to go to hell: Would to God we could make as good speed in the way to heaven,
as they do in the way to hell. And so there is none that dies that
everlasting death, but it is according to his own will. Thy perdition is of
thy self, O Israel; but thy salvation is of me, says the Lord. Thou will
run of thine own will to hell, except the Lord meet thee and hinder thy
course.

Ye also, that is, even ye walked after the same manner, as the children of
infidelity did. Look as they walked, so ye walked; as they ran, ye ran;
no difference betwixt you. So the lesson is, before the effectual calling of
God by his spirit and faith, there is no difference betwixt the elect and the
reprobate; the soul of the elect will be as vicious as the soul No difference
between the elect and reprobate before grace.
of the reporbate. So look to the persous, there is no difference until God
make the difference: he will run to hell as fast as he. Then wherein stands
the difference? it stands not in thee, but in yt counsel and purpose of God;
it is in the breast of God: there is nothing in the elect himself, but all in
God: And in his own time he makes the difference. So ascribe nothing to thy
nature and birth, but ascribe all to God, to his counsel, and to his election;
and give him the glory, and say, I thank thee, O God, that have elected me,
and for that thou have called me to thee by thy spirit in time, and have made
me to know thee and thy goodness. Who has distinguished me from thee, and thee
from another? but God. Why then should thou glory in any thing, but in God?
O vile creature and vain! fie on thy nature, it shall turn to thy
destruction: so then, only glory in God, and in nothing besides.

Sometime, says he. Then he makes it clear, when ye lived in these vices,
that is, as outwardly ye walked in them; so inwardly in your souls ye lived in
them. Walking is outward, and living is inward in the soul: so as the ground
of these natural actions, as of going on the way outwardly, is the life of the
soul (for take the life away thou can not go) so the ground of all these
sinful actions, these woeful actions, woe to them all! the ground of all thy
fornication and uncleanness, is a woeful life that thou live. Sin is living
within thee; if sin lived not within, the actions would not appear in thy
body that appears. Thou art dead, and yet sin is living in thee. Thou and
it shall not live both together, Romans 7. says he. Sin is reuined in me. Thou
art dead, and sin is quickened in thy breast. And or ever one be a harlot in
his body, in his outward action, it is first in the soul of him: or ever one
be a murderer with the hand, he is a murderer in his soul: it begins
first there; and then it raises and stirs up the hand to the outward
action. It is so of all sinful actions, they proceed first from the sin
living in the soul; so thou that wilt mortify sin, and the outward actions
of sin, slay first the sin that lives within thee, or else it will slay
thee; either thou or it must die: and I pronounce this, that if thou slay not
the sin that is within, thou shall be slain by it for ever. Begin then in
order to the slaying of sin; for there is an order in mortification, and God
that bids thee slay sin, is the Lord of order. He coming in, bid death
thee first slay the sin that is within thee; he will not bid thee begin at
the hand, the eye, or any of thy members outward; but he will go into thy
heart, and he begins and puts out that life of sin, that lives in
theethere. He first makes thy heart clean, where sin dwells and takes
root; and so he will have thee to root it out that it bud not in thee. This
way God begins in taking away sin and slaying of it, and this is the way
that the elect child of God does. But hypocrites will make a well favored
outward countenance, and who are so holy as they; Hypocrisy begins without.
and in the mean time, will be fostering the filth of this foul life of sin
inwardly in his heart with pleasure. But the holy spirit, who begins to
mortify thee, begins at the heart, and slays the man of sin in thy
heart first; and he will wound it so deeply when he shall strike upon it, that
he shall mortify it, and then thou shall begin to see thine own filth, and
stink in such sort, that thou shall abhor thy self; but the hypocrite countes
all these things, but as words of office. But O that doleful waking, when the
conscience wakeneth thee! It will cause thee say, O foul harlot! what have
thou been doing? walking in harlotrie and deceiving men, with a show of
godlinesie. Therefore happy is the soul that is this wise wakened in time,
and wounded with the sight of thy own filthiness; for it shall procure joy
coming upon sorrow. If thou will be content to restrain thy hand, foot, and
eye for a time, so that thou sin not openly as others do, but that thy life
that lurketh in thee, must utter it self at the last; so as thou may be a
fornicator, a murderer, and an auaritious body (for there is no hypocrite,
but he must utter himself at the last) thou have no true mortification in
thee; and therefore thou shall find no comfort in all thy outward shows:
study then to this (...) mortification. Suppose a man to be bound hand and
foot, and that the man be a harlot in the inward man, so as he had no use of
the outward action in all his life time: admit this, that thou had not the
outward action in all thy time; yet I say, if that life of harlotrie be in
thee, and not slain within thee, thou will to hell. It will not be that
outward abstinence that will save thee; but it must be the slaughter of the
inward appetite, and then the hand nor no other of thy members needs to be
fettered, but all will be peaceable and stand still when once that life of
sin is quenched. Therefore slay ever the sin in thy soul, and let it not
reign; for if it reign, thou will to damnation. We beseech him that is able
to work this work, to put to his hand, and do it; for all the words of the
world will not do it, only he must do it. Now to him be praise and honor,

Amen.
THE XXVI. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 8. 8 But now put ye away all these things, wrath, anger,
maliciousnes, cursed speaking, filthy speaking, out of your mouth.
YE remember brethren the last time we occupied this place; we insisted in the
exhortation that the Apostle has to the mortifying of the sinful members, the
foul affections and actions of the soul and the body: Mortify (says he)
your earthly members, that is, your cankred affections that hold the body
occupied in evil. To this purpose he uses sundry arguments: Coherence.
mortify thy earthly members, slay thy affections; for it is impossible that
they can stand with that life of heaven. life of theirs; they were in life no
better then the children of disobedience. Now certainly, thou that have been a
sinner, and have lived as wickedly as any other, when thou look over thy
shoulder, and see that life thou liuedst in, it should be a motive to thee to
mortify thy members and foul affections; for if thou do it not, thou shall
go back again. Wast thou an harlot? thou shall go back again to thy
harlotrie. Wast thou a murderer? thou shall fall to thy murder again. Wast
thou an auaritious person? thou will to thy avarice again, and be worse in
these sins, then ever thou wast before: if thou mortify not still these thy
foul affections, thou shall back again to these sins and many more.

Now to come to the text, upon this last argument he concludes his
exhortation: therefore put now away all these things, wherein ye have lived
over long; think ye have lived over long in sin, as it is said, 1. Pet. 4.
3. an hour in sin is over long. Alas, if thou could abhor thy sin!
there was never so great a stink, as the stink of sin: thou think thy
The pollution of sin.
dirt to be something to thee; alas, thou will perish and drown thy self in
it, if thou take not up thy self. Briefly, these words contain the same in
effect, that was said before: Put away ye also now. There is never a word here
without force; and for your better understanding, I will note four things in
them to be considered.

To come to the first. The word that he uses, put away, it signifies as much
as to mortify, to slay; for in other places also he uses these words
indifferently. The words are borrowed. The first word of mortifying from things
that are subject to the slaughter: and the word of putting away, is borrowed
from 1 Put ye away.
clothing, that is put away off a man: so brethren, as sin is an old man (as
Paul says) having life (it has life as every thing has life) and therefore
is slain: even so thy sin is a botched clothing, a cloute, and a filthy
garment where with we are clothed naturally; and therefore must now be put
away off us: we must shake it off, as we would see that life of heaven, or else
it will bring thee to destruction. Further, the word imports more then a bare
putting off: it imports also a putting Put off sin so as you never put it on
again.
off of it from thee, that thou see it no more. Thou must not play with sin,
as thou do with thy coat. No, cast it not off now, and then put it on thee
in the morning; nay, rather hold it still: and thou that art a harlot, cast not
thy harlotrie from thee this day, and then put it upon thee to morrow; no, but
continue a harlot still: for if thou put it now off, and now on, the Lord shall
make thee find it, to stick faster to thee then thy skin does to thy back.
Go not then to thy custom again, but if thou once put off or away sin, put
it away forever; meddle never with that sin again. This is the first thing
here to be considered.

The next thing to be noted in this place, is, the things to be 2 All these
things.
put away; not one thing only: manifold are the pleites or foldings of sin,
Lord, if it be not a thick clothing for if thou be clothed with sin, thou
have a thick coat upon thy back: there is such a varietic of sin in thee.
And therefore he bids thee not, put away one of them, and keep another; as
to put away thy adultery, and keep murder; to put away theft, and keep
covetousness: No, play not so with sin; say not, I will shake off that sin,
and keep this: but the Apostle bids thee put all away; yea the least sin
that can be, as well as the greatest. James in his second chapter, and tenth
verse says, he that fails in one is guilty of all. If murder reign in
thee, thou art gone; keep temperance as thou will, if one sin reign in thee
thou art a lost man: for I say, if one sin reign in thee, there is no
mortification in thee, and so there is nothing in thee that pleases God. And
ye know, as ye see a man will die of many maladies; even so ye shall see a man
die of one Simile.
malady: Even so, supposing that you were clean of many sins, yet if there
be one in thee, that one sin will cause thee die. Yet the word is to be
marked. He bids not only generally all, put away all sin, but the
direction is given to every one in particular, of the which it must follow,
that there are none that are borne, but they are clothed with all sins under
the heaven: for howbeit a man burst not out in every sin, an open murderer, an
open adulterer, a thief, an auaricious person; yet he has the seed of every
one of these by nature in his heart: thou art a murderer by nature, and a
drunkard, etc. Therefore I say to every one of you, put away all these things;
put away murder out of thy heart, put harlotric out of thy heart; and in a
word, put all sin away; slay all.

also. That is, as the rest of the world that is faithful has done, if ye
would be accounted Christians, be ye like them; as they have mortified in
themselves these affections, and slain the earthly members, so do ye
likewise: as if he would say, ye strove before with the children of
disobedience, who might be first in evil: even so strive now with the children
of light, the faithful, who may be first in mortification of sin, and in
banishing sin from you; for this compensation must be by thee that art
called to ye light of the Gospel, or else thou show thy self never to have
been called. Have thou striuen with the wicked before in wickedness? strive now
with the godly in godliness. Saw thou ever the broad gate, thou wentest in?
go now and see the straight gate, and thrust in with the faithful that way.
For if thou be a counterfaite, and say thou art a Christian, and walk not as
a Christian, but after thy old manner of life in wickedness like to the
Infidels; I say, thou shall find greater judgment and damnation in that day
against thee, then against an open infidel. He sets then before them the
faithful, and all to work this mortification. For as the Lord mortifieth by
his word (when the Apostle says mortify, that same word is a word of
mortification) even so he mortifieth men by example. He will take a slain
soul, and Examples of the faithful ought to move us.
set it up as a spectacle to thee, and bid thee that art a sinner, look to
that slain soul; he will point it out to thee, and bid thee take an example
of it of mortification; and so, well art thou that preachest by thy life,
howbeit thou never preach Heb. 12. 1. 2. 3.
one word with thy mouth: for thou will be able to edify by thy life, as
another will be by ye word. Now howbeit that the Lord uses both the word and
example, to teach us mortification; yet for all this, it is not effectual in
every one of us: for where one will be moved by example, two will scorn at it.
Know ye not how a naughty pack sold to wickedness will scorn, when he sees
the life of a godly man or woman propounded to him; he will scorn at him: what
matter if he were a Lord, or whatsoever he be, if he scorn at the life of a
godly man, I say he is but an impious man void of grace. 1. Pet. chap. 4 verse.
4. 5. it is said, Because ye will not run on with them, they blaspheme. But
what adds he? Who shall render an account to him that is ready to judge both
quick and dead, thou scorner shall first render an account of thy prophanenes;
and then of thy blasphemy against the Saints.

put away (now) says he, that is, while it is to day: before it was night and
darkness, and therefore ye walked in darkness; but now it is day: and fie on
thee that wilt live in the day light, as it were in the night. Brethren, there
is no small force in the time, to do this or that. Ye know by experience, when
it is night, and when the clouds cover the earth, it provoke men to do
that, which they would not do in the day, and provoke a man to sleep. A man
that is inclined to drunkenness, will go to it in the night; and he that
desires harlotrie, he craves the night: for he that does evil, hates the
light. And by the contrary: there is no small force in the day light, it will
shamethee, and will make thee to wake, and compel thee to put to thy hand to
do some good thing. But to come to the spiritual night and day: if this day
has this force, has not the spiritual night a great force? Thou that lie
under the clowd of ignorance, thou art more heavily oppressed therewith, then the
clowd of the night does the body: this cloud will cause thee to run to all
mischief in the world. And by the contrary, when once that light, the sun
of righteousness shines, when the shining of the Gospel begins to break up,
it provoke men to go to heavenly works, which are the works of the light.
Therefore Paul says, The night is past, and now is the day; walk then as in
the day time, Romans 13. verse. 12. Fie on thee that ever thou should let this
glorious light of Jesus shine upon thee, and then walk in the works of
darkness, and in the night. Better were it for any in Scotland, that they had
never seen the light of the Gospel, then to have seen it. For there are many
in Scotland that the more they hear of the Gospel, they are the wickeder: for
except this Gospel be forcible to the slaying of sin in thee, it shall be
forcible to the works of darkness, which shall work thy damnation. If it make
thee not the better, it will make thee the worse: for it shall be either the
savor of life unto life, or else the savor of death unto death: either Christ
shall quicken thee, and slay thy sin; or else he shall slay thy self. In a
word, never Turk, nor Pagan was so wicked, and so evil a liver as a Christian
man; and yet he will hear the word, and turn up his ear and listen to the
preaching: now if this word alter him not, it shall harden him. And therefore I
give thee my counsel, except thou find a mortification in thee of thy
affections by the hearing of this Gospel, never lend thy ear to hear the
word of Christ, for it shall be a sealed book unto thee. And therefore take
good heed that the Gospel be powerful to life to thee; and cry, O Lord, let
the word of life be powerful to life, that I may find life in me by it.

Now brethren, I have ended these first words. When he has generally exhorted
them, to put away all these things, he comes on in particular, and besides
the members that he has rehearsed before, he reckons more of them, but not
all. And in this text he reckons up seven, wrath, anger (as it is turned)
malice, blasphemy, or cursed speaking, filthy speaking, lying-speaking. Let
us hear of every of them as they are set down. Only I shall touch them so
far as shall serve for the purpose. The first four are contained under the
general Six common injuries. Four degrees.
sin, called injury or wrong done against our neighbor; they are set down in
degrees, and pass up in degrees. The first is wrath, that is the lowest
degree: anger is the second; and a fiery malice is the third; and cursed
speaking is the fourth. To come to the first, he terms it wrath; that is the
first member of the argument, that he will have them to put away from them.
This wrath is the first commotion sinful in thy heart against thy neighbor,
to this end to be revenged on him. An angry man is ever reuengefull, and there
is naught in him but vengeance, and the vengeance of God shall overtake him: I
call it a sinful commotion, because there is a commotion that is holy. God
forbid that men want wrath; the Lord has wrath, the Angels have wrath, and the
godly man has wrath, Holy wrath
and that a holy wrath; I call it so, when it is not so much thou that art
angry, as it is the holy Spirit that dwells in thee, that is, when the
holy Spirit so rules and governs thy wrath, that in wrath thou sinnest not
in any circumstance. Wrath in it self is a thing indifferent, but if thou
fail in circumstance, it is a sin. Some will be angry without a cause for the
turning up of a straw: thou sinnest, if thou pass measure in anger: thou
sinnest if thou be angry, when it is no place, nor time: thou sinnest, if thou
be angry with one, with whom thou should not be angry. So it is a
sinful commotion when there is fault committed in these circumstances, either
in one Ephesians. 4. 30.
or all. And then when thou failest, it is not the spirit of God in thee that
directs thee in thy anger, but it is thou thy self in thy corruption: And
thou make the spirit sad; and if thou continue on, thou will make the spirit
to dislodge himself out 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 23 Psalm. 37. 11
of thee; for the spirit of Jesus dwells in a pacified heart. And to be
short, it is true, a man to be angry and not to sin in it, it is a hard
matter: for wrath of all affections, it is the hottest, sodainest, and
misruliest. It is a short fury depriving thee of thy wit. Therefore the
counsel of the Apostle to the Ephesians chap. 4. verse. 26. is to be followed,
Be angry, but sin not; where he shows that it is a hard thing to be angry
and not to sin. Now then, as all the affections would have the direction of his
spirit: so chiefly anger would have the direction of the spirit of God,
otherwise it is sin. Ask then the direction of that spirit, and say; O Lord,
guide my wrath; yea supposing it were a just cause, seek the spirit; otherwise
thou will pass the bounds, and spill a good cause: therefore in anger, the
special thing to be craved is the spirit of Jesus.

The second degree of wrong, he calls it anger, the word is too mild to
express the first language. The word imports Anger.
a fiery wrath, and commonly to speak it so, when the blood swells and
gorgeth about the heart, and runs, and fireth the tongue, and the eye: so
that when this fiery wrath is enkindled, there is no mercy at thy hand: it
cannot be restained from evil, and thy tongue will fall out in cursed and evil
speeches against thy brother and neighbor; and so this sin is Anger rests
in the bosom of sooles.
worse then the first. I say, thou that have this vice, except thou seek
mortification in time, if thou let it reign within thee, I will assure thee an
evil turn will be in thy hand: a furious man will either stab or be stabbed.
Therefore temper thy anger in time, and be not content that it burst within
thee, but ever strive to quench the fire in the heart. Ye know if a house be
set on fire, if it be not quenched in time, it will burn thorough, and spoil
both the house where it is begun, and others Simile.
besides: even so if thy heart be set on fire with wrath, if it be not quenched
with the watrie spirit of God, it will burn thee up, and hurt thy neighbor
also: quench it then with the spirit of Jesus.

Now come to the third degree, he terms it malice, worse then the two first:
there is no worse body then a malicious Malice.
body. Malice is a continuing wrath; it will lodge with thee night and day, and
thou and it will sleep on together. The other two comes on with a sudden
push, and they will fly away at an instant: but a malicious man takes a
purpose to do ill, when he sees his time. Paul says, Let not the Sun go
down on thy wrath; it will keep thee waking, and the devil will come to
thee, and thou and the devil will take counsel together to slay thy
neighbor. And therefore if common wrath, and that fiery wrath are to be
mortified, how much more should thou mortify thy malice? As for a furious
body, he will soon be pacified: but a malicious man, he will come laughing
and slay the man.

Now come to the fourth that he speaks of here, he calls it blasphemy:
that is, a cursed speaking, that hurts the name 4 Blasphemy.
of thy brother. It is the effect of the former, all run to the tongue, and
from the tongue the action passes to the hand: So that when thou have strooken
him with thy tongue, thou will strike him with thy hand. Therefore slay the
first, slay the cursed speaking, that it may have the hand holden off.

Now (brethren) there is yet a higher degree: where is slaughter, murder?
there is not a word here of it. The highest here is cursed speaking: I mark
this in Paul, while he is condemning vices, ye shall find that he speaks
either little or nothing of murder: which is an argument to me that this
cursed vice of murder had not at this time been so rife amongst them, to whom
he writes, as it is at this day. O villain! how dare thou take away the
life of a creature? Thou will say, I will discharge a pistol on him: O, God
shall power down his judgments upon thee vile murderer, that so lightly
esteemest of the creature of God, created to his own image! The like was not
found among the Ethnickes, that at this day reigns in Scotland. For so I
perceive this heinous vice of murder has Note this of murder not so rife
among the Gentiles as among Christians.
not reigned so amongst them as it does this day. And I am sure, if Paul were
to write an Epistle to Scotland, he will condemn this vice most: for of such
scalding, burning and murdering, as there is in this land, was never heard of
in any part of the whole world; and yet he will be called a Christian, while
he is more cruel and tyrannous then the worst Gentile that ever was. And so
Paul he leaves this vice unspoken of, because it reigned not so among the
Gentiles; yea he abhors it so, that he would not have it once named among
the Christians. Ye see then here this garment of injury against our neighbor:
there is wrath, fiery anger, malice and blasphemy put together, and all to let
you see that that woeful garment it is a thick cloth, and that our neighbors
may many ways be wronged. Again, I note that thou should not be content
to put one pleate, two, or three away, but go to the singlest of all, and put
it off of thy heart: for if thou foster it, it will grow thick upon thee, and
it will not rest till it come to the utmost action: for mortification is not of
one sin only, but it is of all sins; yea of the lightest corruption in the
heart. Therefore begin not to extenuate and say, I will leave this, and keep
this: no, away with the least sin, if it were but the smallest canker that is
in thee, keep not a bit of it: no, slay all, or else thou shall be holden at
heavens gate.

When he had ended these four vices contained under the general injury,
having spoken of the injury of the tongue, he leaves it not so; but insisteth
upon the evils that follows the tongue. To lend the tongue to evil speaking
against thy neighbor, either before his face or behind his back, as it is the
custom of many now adays; it is a dangerous thing.

Look how the third chapter of James describes the tongue. It is a world of
wickedness: and therefore it is chiefly to be taken Sins of the tongue.
heed of. Slay that member and ye affection, or else thou will perish. It is no
small matter to let thy tongue fall a chiding; it shall fire thee. Well, to
come to this vice of filthy speaking; would ye know it? There is no house but
it is full of this villainy. The villain cannot speak two words, but the one
is filthy speaking; and so it is no wonder that this air is defiled. Thou
bring on Gods judgments on thee, and thy corn both; thou art a foul
speaker. Paul in the Ephesians calls it rotten speech, stinking speech; and
that because it is of foul things. For where the thing is filthy, the talk
must be filthy also. And as the filthy thing defiles and corrupts the
flesh, and vitiateth all that it touches: even so out of question, the filthy
speech will rot thee. Put a fresh apple amongst the rotten, the very rotten
apples will rot the fresh: even so thou Simile.
shall rot thy self by thy foul speech. Ye will say to me: Is there such a
force in a word? what do I reckon of it? it is but wind. But Paul 1. Cor.
chap. 15. verse. 23. says, be not beguiled, thou think words be nothing;
what adds he? wicked speeches corrupt good manners; wicked speeches therefore
will rot thee; be not beguiled with them. By this learn thou then how subject
the heart of man is to vanity, and how ready he will be to suck it in. He
will suck it in faster, then ever a dry mouth will drink in drink, and he
will speak of his vanity and filthiness: no, there is not an object cast up,
but it will defile the soul of the filthy speaker. To what end should I speak
of these things? the foul heart will commit filthiness with the shadow of it:
and ere ever thou be a harlot in thy body, thou will be a harlot in thy heart
and tongue first; and then it will not rest until thou pollute that body of
thine. Look to it, and prove thy experience, if thy heart has not committed
adultery, or ever thy body commits it. The body was never so subject to
draw a pestilence, as the heart is to attract the vice of adultery, and all
other filthy vices; and thy senses in thy head are as many doors to the
soul, that lets in either good or evil things, when they are open;
especially take heed The senses windows.
to thy eyes and ears, for they are principal, but the ears chiefest. For as
the greatest grace is let in by the care (for from whence comes faith but by
the hearing? From whence comes edificatio^ but by the care?) and so it is a
special sense in a man: and therefore take heed to it. As it receives the
greatest grace; so it will take in the foulest and greatest vice that is. Take
heed the^ to it, let it not be given to every bodies talk, keep her chaste, lend
her not to filthy speaking: when thou hear any speak filthy talk, turn
thy ear from him. I give this exhortation to young ones, that are brought up in
filthy houses with gentlemen, with swaggerers; I say this therefore for them,
that they may receive knowledge; for it will take a deep impression. And
therefore it should be informed in good things: for there is none of you, but
the filthy things ye gate in your youth, hinders you in good operation.
Therefore thou that art young, keep a chaste ear, abhor filthy company.
And you know if the pestilence were in a house, you would not abide there: O if
thou knew the pestilence of filthy talk! thou would not abide in the
house with him that speaks filthy talk. For as filthy thoughts are put
from the heart; so filthy speaking is from the mouth: and as there is
mortification required in the heart; so there is mortification required in the
mouth and tongue. That spirit cries to all, run up thorough the body, and
all the members of it, and mortify them, beginning at the heart. Therefore
thou that would speak, speak clean things; minister grace in thy talk;
purge the heart: for ye know out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks. Therefore I say to you, if thou hear a Lord speak foul talk, say,
my Lord, your heart is foul, stinking like a privy; I will say this to thee,
Lord cleanse thy heart and tongue, or else both will be burnt in hell. Again
brethren, as the contagion arises out of the heart to the tongue: even so the
filthy word goes not so soon from the mouth or tongue, but it sends a
stink back again to the heart, and it makes it fouler then before; and so
thou defilest not thy tongue only by thy filthy speech, but thou defilest thy
heart, and laiest on it a double filthiness. Is it not as good then to be silent
and ever purging your hearts? Thou that think both filthy things and
speak filthy things, O vile villain! thou sinnest doubly. But alas, who can
hinder this filthiness in man or woman! alas so long as we live, we shall find
it in them: yet I give thee my counsel, lend not thy tongue to it, but ask
grace of God in Jesus Christ to keep thy heart and tongue from this
uncleanness, and be slain in thy heart, and surely thou shall get grace in thy
heart to slay it by the spirit of the Lord Jesus: to whom be all honor and
praise for ever.

THE XXVII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 9. 10. 9 Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put
off the old man with his works;

10 And have put on the new which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of
him that created him.


WE insist yet (brethren) in this exhortation, which the Apostle has to the
Colossians, to this end that they should mortify their earthly members: that
is, their lusts and foul affections. He uses sundry arguments to this
purpose, as we heard, and at last he concludes that purpose in other words.
Before he said, mortify; and now, put away; seeing it is to day, it is a shame
that they should be seen now in Coherence.
the day light of righteousness, to walk in uncleanness and filthy lust. Then
he rehearses up a number of vices besides them that were before, namely wrath,
anger which is fiery, malice, cursed speaking, filthy speaking. And here we
left the last day. Now we shall go forward with the last vice, which is lying,
we be to speak of it first here, and so to pass forward to the argument taken
from that regeneration begun; and therefore it should persevere in us to the
end.

But to come to the vice of lying. There be here three vices Three vices of the
tongue.
reckoned, that follow the tongue: for if it be evil, it is the worst member
in the body. The first is cursed speaking, when we hurt the fame of our
brother. The second is filthy speaking, rotten speaking, as he says in
another place, when we defile the ear, and consequently the heart of our
brother, with the breath of our mouth: for we defile all, and our own heart
also, whereunto our foul speech returns, as ye heard. The third and last is
lying speaking, when we speak not the truth to our brother, but think one
thing and speak another with the mouth. That is as evil a vice, as was yet
any. Now then brethren, because this sin of lying is so common and natural
to man and woman; for all men are liars, says the Apostle Romans 3. 4. by
nature. The devil began it, and in the fall of man he spued that venom into
him: so that al men naturally from the beginning are liars. Therefore we will
speak to you of lying, howbeit not so amply as it would require: yet for your
satisfaction to open to you the greatness of this sin, and to begin at the word.

To lie, it signifies (to take the meaning of the word) to speak The sin of
lying.
one thing and think another in the mind. It is a variance and disagreement
betwixt the mind and the mouth. Alas, all should go together. The mind of
God and his mouth goes together; and if thou be reformed to this image, all
will go together in thee also. Now this variance proceeds of a disagreement:
God himself by thy lie. There is nothing then more unbeseeming a Christian
man, and that is more unworthy of the Lord Jesus, then is lying. For what
says he of himself, I am the truth, Ioh. 14. 6. and will thou then be a liar?
look how thou agreest with Christ. Lie not against him to hurt him: Yet there
is more. Supposing a liar be not set to hurt his brother, but to profit him: As
for example, when a Physician will say to the patient, the medicine is sweet,
when it is bitter; when thou art set thus way to profit him, as thou profitest
his body, thou hurtest the mind; for there is no wrong information but it
hurts the mind; if thou make me to believe that, that is not, hurtest not
thou my mind? Simile.
mingle it so with fallehood, that scarsely can thou be believed, and that is
a foul fault. Ye see this by experience. Well then, evil custom is evil.
And besides this, thou losest thy credit amongmen, howbeit at times thou speak
the truth. For this is true: Quisemel malus, semper praesumitur malus: He that
is once evil, it may be presumed he is ever the same. But what mattereth this?
Know ye not that a liar procures the wrath of God? Among the rest whom God
hates, Solomon says in his Proverbs: The Lord hates a liar. To conclude, a
lie of whatsoever sort, is a sin against God: yet yt ye may understand this
better, ye shall know there are sundry sorts of lying. One is pernicious,
tending to the hurt of thy neighbor. The second is an officious lie for the
good of thy brother: and the third is a merry lie for the delectation of thy
brother. There is none of these but they are evil, howbeit they be not alike.
That lie that serves to the good of thy brother, is a sin to thee; and again
to deliver thy brother with a lie, it is a greater sin: but the pernicious lie
is the greatest of all. Now all comes to this; all is sin. Would ye have me
insist in probation? If there were no more but the commandment, Thou shall
bear no false witness, it may serve: for this commandment teaches thee, that
all sorts of lies are evil in their own nature. And Paul to the Romans chap.
3. verse. 7. 8. Do no evil, (says he) that good may come of it. This tells
thee, that that is That which is evil in his own nature can never be good.
evil of it own nature, and forbidden by Gods commandment, that thing will
never be made good by any circumstance in the world: lay to it the sweetest
salve thou will, it will never be good, yea if it were to save the life of thy
brother, if thou lie, it will not be good to thee; yea though thou were able to
alter the nature of a lie, it is a sin, and it is a folly to think that the
pretense of a good end will make an evil thing of it own nature to be good.
Augustine says: If we look not simply to the nature of the action as to the
end, then the evil may have a defense. Therefore (says he) look ever to the
action, put all other things aside; if it be not good, say not that that action
is good; how beit the best thing in the world should follow it, it will ever
abide a sin. Further, if there were no more but this natural conscience in
man, it tells thee that all sorts of lies are evil: I appose thine own
conscience, if thou have any. Thou will not so soon lie, but thy conscience
will admonish thee, and will say to thee: Thou have sinned. Brethren, there is
no man that will seem to lie and confess it, but he will be ashamed of it.
What means this? but that the conscience tells them, it is a sin. Look to
the children, they will blush when they are challenged with a lie. What is the
cause of this? but that the conscience shows them they have sinned. Ye see
that a man thinks he cannot have a greater injury done to him, then to say
to him; he lies. This tells him, that there is a conscience within him,
that abhors a lie; and that it is unworthy of the nature of man, because
man is created to the image of God, and God is truth: So every lie is a sin
before God. Alas, when Christ in the 12. of Mat. verse. 36. says, that we shall
give an account of all this vain talk, and idle words, that defile the care,
and fill it with clattering and glauering from morning to evening, how much
more shall a liar give an account of his lies? So to conclude, all lying is
sin of what sort soever it be. Therefore use it not neither in jest nor
earnest.

I am not ignorant (brethren) but this matter has bin reasoned of old even by
the learned to excuse some kind of lie, especially this officious lie, that is
for the good of their brother: they want not arguments, and especially the
examples of the Scripture. The Midwiues lied to Pharaoh, Exodus 2. Rahab the
harlot lied to her own townsmen, to save the spies, 1. Iosu. chap. 2. David
to save his own life, being in the Court of the Philistines, he lied, 1. Sam.
21. he fained himself mad. Now, say they, we cannot say that these godly
persons sinned in all this; seeing the Midwiues were highly rewarded: Rahab was
saved, when all the town was spoiled. This is an apparent argument. Now
(brethren) grant this, that they lied (as it is doubted whether they lied or
not) yet it follows not that they sinned not. I say to you, they sinned in
lying. The midwiues sinned in lying; Rahab sinned in lying; and David in that
counterfeiting; and it was not the lie, it was not the infirmity, of the which
the lie proceeded, that the Lord rewarded: no, the Lord forgave the lie: but it
was that pity and fear of God, that was in the women, that the Lord rewarded.
Therefore their lie is not set down to thee for imitation, but that thou
should fly it. Do the good they did, but by another mean; Do not evil
that good may come of it. No, do the good, but use the lawful mean. I doubt
not but these women asked mercy for their lie; if thou be so straited that
thou lie, ask mercy; if it were that thy lie were to save the whole
country, ask mercy for it: for it is an offense to God. Now a question, and
so to go forward. We see here, if we have concluded with the Apostle, that it
is sin to lie in any sort: ye will ask, is it a sin to conceal the truth,
to hide the truth? Sins the man that tells not all the truth? I answer,
there are two sorts of truth, one of religion, and another of policy Of
concealing a truth.
concerning this present life. If thou ask about religion, I give thee a
distinction. If thou be urged to give a confession of thy faith, thou art bound
to conceal nothing; otherwise thou deniest the Lord Jesus; and as thou deniest
him, thou forswearest the truth, and so sinnest grievously. Beware then of
this, though the fire should be set before thee for the telling of the truth,
when thou art urged thereunto, rather be content to go to the fire, then thou
should conceal one jot of the truth of Jesus; but tell all the truth then.
But again, if thou be not straited with a confession, it is lawful to
conceal; yea to cast out the truth in every place, and to every person, it is
to cast pearls before swine. As for the matter of policy, I answer with a
distinction also: If before a Judge thou be charged to Confession of the truth
in religion and policy public and private.
depose the truth, thou art bound not to conceal a whit of it; and thou that
concealest, and wilt not tell the truth, thou resistest the ordinance of God:
for it is God that charge thee in the Magistrate. But if one private man have
to do with an other, and stands not before a Judge, it is lawful to hide a
part of the truth: for I tell you all the truth would not be told at all times
to every man: yea it is a sin to tell the truth at all times. Says not the
Apostle, Charity covers the multitude of sins? Now I end it with this
word: let no manner of lie proceed out of thy heart; let no man be deceived by
thinking that to lie, is a matter indifferent: no, no, alas we are over ready
to think so. But I admonish thee, if thou use to lie in light things, thou will be brought on to lie in the greatest things; yea if it were in matters of
salvation. Beware then of it.

Now to go forward: he returns to his argument tending to mortification, and
it is taken from the regeneration begun. There are two parts of it: the first
part is in putting off: the second is in putting on. The meaning is, ye have
begun to put off the old man, the evil affections of your nature: therefore
continue in putting it off; otherwise it had bin better for you that ye had
never begun the work of your regeneration. Then (brethren) the lesson is,
regeneration once begun would be insisted in, until thou end it; begin once to
be holy, thou must end it; begin once to put off this old man, thou must hold
him off; and put him away, that thou see him no more. And beginning once to put
on the new man, thou must hold him on Perseverance.
still; otherwise to begin and not to go forward, is double iniquity to thee.
It is better never to begin, except thou make a progress, until thou be
glorified. For he or she that begins, and then comes back again, are in
hazard if ever they come forward again. It is easier to bring one forward,
Relapse.
that never came forward, then it is to bring one that has once begun, and
then has revolted and made defection. Read the Epistle to the Hebrews chap.
10. verse. 26. of this apostasy. But to mark the words: Seeing (says he) ye
have put off the old man with his works. The word is borrowed from clothing,
for properly the clothing is put off. Therefore the word imports, that this
old man is a kind of clothing; and being a clothing, Simile.
ye see the thing nearest man, is his clothing. This old man it may sit near
thee, and stick close to thee; yea thy coat and shirt sit not on thee so
near as this old man. The coat covers thy outward skin; but the old man
cloatheth thy heart, and thy marrow; so that there is not one bit unclothed of
thee. Thou wast borne without coat or shirt, Note of our corruption.
but thou art bred with this old man, clothed with this old man from top to
toe. Then seeing this old man is a clothing, he is not of thy substance,
either of body or soul. Thy clothing is not of thy substance, no more is
this corruption; that is, thy old man of thy substance, and so it is a folly
to say that original sin is in a substance. But what is he then? he is a
corrupt quality, and sits so fast to thee, that all the Angels cannot get
him off. No, all the drawings of the world shall not pull him off, except Jesus
come in and put to his hand, and pull him off. He only is sufficient to do
that turn; he has taken it away, if thou believe in him. It is easy to thee
to pull off thy skin; but thou shall not be able to pull off this sin. This
for the word of putting off.

Now what is it they have put off? Seeing ye have put off the old man. What is
meant by this old man? Not to insist in this matter, by this old man is
understood this corruption, this canker, this infection, this pestilence that
cleaves so fast to Original sin.
the soul and body of man; the which we have sucked out of the rotten loins
of old Adam, and even comes down to us through so many fathers, so many
hundredth thousand fathers, until it light upon us: it has that force. Note.
And look how old Adam is, this old man is as old; and therefore not without
good cause is he called the old man, and being so old, this old man that we
bear about by nature, no wonder though he be wrinkly faced, for he was never
well favored. But now being so old, O the wrinkles that are in his face! if
thy conscience were wakened to see that old face of him, it is the terriblest
face that ever thou saw: it would amaze thee, if thou were the ablest yt
ever went on two legs: if thou saw that old face, thou would be cast down;
for the wrath of God is in his face: it would fear thee. Seeing then thou have
put him off, put off this cankred corruption, hold him off, put him not on
again. But what more is meant by this old man? not only this corruption and
infection of nature, but also by him is meant his whole actions; and what are
they? the foul thoughts within, the foul speeches that ye hear, the foul
actions that ye see. For howbeit he is an old man, yea as old as Adam, yet he
runs on me and thee, and every one of us has a skarre of him; for all his
age he sleeps not: yea when thou art most idle, he is busy. Sleep as thou will, if he be in thee, if it were in thy dream he will be busy; and when
thy mouth is closed, he will be in thy affections; so he never sits idle. An
old man as he draws to age, he loses actiuitie: but this old man, the elder
he grows, the more active is he. I tell thee, if he be not slain, if thou
were never so dead in thy old age, he shall be the quicker. An aged man that
has not this old man mortified, is the worst man that ever is. For it is a
sure thing, this old man, the elder he be, he is the more active. I say a great
word to you: Every one of us that is come of Adam, and so far from him by so
long a descent, there is not one of us, but we are wickeder then Adam was.
Think thou that he was the greatest sinner? No, was original sin so great
in him? no, it is greater in thee: for the old man, the longer he live he is
the worse. Ye see now that there is more evil in a young one that is crept out
of the shell, then was wont to be in an old man. The son is worse then the
father: so that this old man grows worse and worse, and this wickedness
tells us that he reigns in this land, and shows that there is no
mortification of him: And therefore he has dominion. Yet I see another thing,
the old man and his actions are ever together. If he abide with thee, the
actions be with thee; if he go from thee, the actions will go from thee.
Therefore call not thy self a Christian man, if thou be not renewed by that
spirit of Jesus. And if an evil wicked deed be in thy hand, and filthy
speaking be in thy mouth, I say to thee, that thou art the old man yet, and he
sticks in thy ribs, and thou and he will die together. Therefore take
heed to thy actions, and strive to live holily; there is no better warrant to
thy conscience, that the old man is dead within thee, then when thou feel
thy self well exercised. As by the contrary, if thou commit sin with
pleasure; alas thou have no part of sanctification: the old man as yet lives
within thee. Now this for the first part of regeneration.

The second part follows: And seeing (says he) ye have put on the new. Then
brethren, after the putting off of the old man, and his soul actions, there
must be a putting on; thou must not stand up naked; thou must be unclothed of
one thing, and thou must be clothed with another. Thou must be clothed with
righteousness, even with Jesus Christ the Lord. The Lord must be the upper
garment, and thou must be sprinkled over with the blood of Jesus; otherwise no
appearing for thee in that day. Secondly, thou must be clothed with inherent
holiness, and righteousness: for whosoever is counted just, must Inherent holiness.
be in some measure sanctified in his own person: For as it is said in the
Hebrews, chap. 12. verse. 14. without holiness no man shall see God: if thou were
the King, if thou have not this holiness, thou dare not look on the face of
God. But to come to the words. Ye have put on. The words are borrowed. And
therefore, as the old man was a kind of clothing; so is the new man a kind
of clothing. And as the old man was near thee, so this new man must be near
thee: he must go thorough thy skin, and come to thy heart and cloathe it;
yet he is a clothing, and as he is a clothing, he is not of thy substance.
Away then with that essential holiness, for holiness is accidental: Essential
holiness.
and howbeit it be not of thy substance, yet it sticks so fast to thy
substance, that all this world will not separate thee and it. The difference
then between the old man and the new is this: the old man may be put off, but
the new man once put on truly cannot be put off again; thou shall never lose
him again. The grace of Christ is unchangeable, and the gifts of God are
without repentance, Romans chap. 11. verse. 10. It never repents God that he
has given thee the grace of repentance and renouation, if thou be once truly
renewed. Seeing (says he) ye have put on the new man. What is meant by this new
man? As the old man is the corruption of nature, sucked out of the rotten
stock of Adam by a natural propagation: even so this new man is the
uncorruption, 1. Cor. 5. or that holiness drawn out, not of Adam, nor of
father, nor mother; but out of Jesus the green tree; not by a natural
propagation, but by a gracious insition, and ingrafting into Jesus. For as thou
suckedst corruption and uncleanness and mortality out of thy former parents,
Adam and Eve: even so believing in Jesus, thou shall draw out of him the sap
of life and sanctification. But the words following make the words plain: What
is meant by this new man? There are three things in the words following. Three
things in the new man.
There is first the making him new again. Secondly, there is the nature, what
it is wherein he stands. And thirdly, there is the pattern, according to the
which he is made: the Lord had made him according to a pattern. First, it is
said, He is renewed: That is, he is created a new again. Then it must follow,
that he was once made before, and that in the creation: and if he be made
again, he was once lost, and so it was. Now after this losing, the Lord
renueth him again: and therefore ye see a wonderful mercy of God, and it is
the will of the spirit, that thou should conceive this in thy heart, and
say, O that exceeding mercy of God! that the Lord of mercy has showed on
thee this mercy. Look to Paul Ephesians. chap. 2. verse. 4. But God who is rich in
mercy according to his great love, wherewith he has loved us, even when we
were dead in sins, has quickened us together in Christ. There he looks in
through the grate of renouation, and therein he sees a wonderful mercy in
God. Ye shall find the life of this in the Epistle to Titus. Alas we want
this eye, there is such a dulnes in us, that we cannot pass up to see this
mercy of God. Thou should not so soon hear of mercy, but thou should
ever look unto God and his mercy, and thank him for it. What Angel could
ever have thought that God would have created that new man again? They all
wondered when they saw it. Alas it is long ere we can wonder!

Now what is his nature? Which is renewed to knowledge. What is he? I answer,
he is knowledge, the light of the mind; thou have a new mind; would ye know
what is knowledge? Paul. Ephesians. chap. 2. tells you that the eyes of your
mind are opened. (O if the eye of thy mind be closed! thou art yet in
nature) Whereto? That ye may know that hope. Yet he goes higher, and that
riches of his grace. And yet he grows higher, and that excellent greatness. In
a word, it is the sight of faith, full of that glory that shall be revealed. I
remember the Apostle to the Ephesians. chap. 4. verse. 24. adds to these two things,
righteousness and holiness: so that in all his members he is light to see God,
Jesus Christ, and all the glory of heaven there. There is the renewing that is
spoken of here; he is then sincere in heart, in his body; and in hand, he is
righteous in dealing with his neighbor. If thou have this new man, he will
cloathe thee within and without; if thou were clothed with gold, and thou have
not this clothing on thee, thou art but a lump of stinking dirt. The last
thing is the pattern, he is created to one pattern. Now what looks God to in
making of him? looks he to an Angel, and says, I will make this new man
like an Angel? or looks he to the Sun and Moon, to the beasts and
elements, or to any creature in heaven or earth? No, no, but he looks to his
own glory, and makes thee according to that form; he looks to that light
that is in himself, and makes thy light like to his own light, and thy
holiness like to himself. Look the first of Genesis, when he had created all
things, the heaven, the earth and the rest, ye shall not find such a word that
he created any to his own image. But when he comes to man with a
consultation, says elohim; Let us make man like to our selves, Genesis chap. 1.
verse. 26. So then, O man there is thy first glory! the Lord honored thee in
thy creation, but thou have lost it. And the renewing of this image, it is
passing excellent: it is double more glorious then it was at the beginning. O
that mercy that renewed it! Thou deseruedst to be turned into a stone, or into
the vilest brute beast or vermin that is. Therefore it must be a passing great
mercy, that in renewing thee, he renueth thee in an higher measure, then he
created thee in. No, in the renewing of thee, in Christ he doubleth his image in
thee. And if he made thee like himself at the first, now he doubleth it a
thousand times more. The glory of Adam was great, but now that is far
greater which we have in Christ. If Adam had kept his glory, yet it would
have bin nothing but an earthly paradize, yt he would have bin in: but all the
earth is not capable of one glorified body in Christ. So then, strive to
believe in him, and certainly the fall of Adam shall be so far from thy
heart, that thou shall bless the time that he fell, if thou gettest this
renewed creature in thee, through the Lord Jesus; otherwise thou shall curse the
time that he fell. So believe in Jesus Christ, and all things shall work to
thy good, felicity and blessedness in Jesus. To whom with the Father and the
holy Spirit, be honor and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
THE XXVIII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 11. 11 Where is neither Grecian, nor Jew, circumcision,
nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond, free: but Christ is all, and in
all things.
THis whole place is an exhortation to the mortifying of these earthly members,
these sinful lusts and affections, and to the putting off of them (for we have
been over long clothed with them) so that they be not put on again. Ye have
heard these days past sundry sorts of them, and likewise sundry arguments to
move us to this mortification. To come briefly to the purpose. The last
argument was from our regeneration begun in this life, standing in two
Coherence.
parts, that is, first in putting off the old man, that is, corruption of
nature, that we have drawn not only out of our mothers womb, but have sucked
out of the loins of old Adam: so that look how he is, it is as old. It
sits on and pearceth through the skin to the heart, and there is none that
is free from it. The second part was, the putting on of the new man. For
certainly as I showed you, no man is able to stand naked before God; clothed
must thou be, or else there is no appearance for thee, being naked before that
tribunal seat: all must be clothed with that righteousness, and sprinkled
with the blood of Christ; and then next with this new man, that is, with that
inherent holiness that flows out of the blood of Christ. For he that is
justified by his blood, must be sanctified by his spirit.

Ye heard a description of this new man; he is new made again. In the first
creation he lost the image of God, and Christ came and renewed that image of God
again: for there was not one spark of the spirit of God left in man.
Therefore he must be renewed again. Then ye have heard his substance: The
chief point is knowledge of things heavenly, of God, and his glory by faith.
To this we added two other things; holiness and righteousness: So there is the
new man. The knowledge in the mind; holiness in the heart, just dealing in all
thy actions with thy neighbor: and so he covers us both inwardly and
outwardly. There is not a part unclothed; and happy is he that is clothed
with this clothing of Christ.

Lastly, ye heard the pattern whereunto he is made: he is not made to the
pattern of Angels, nor of Sun and Moon; but he is made to the pattern of the
Lord. O that glory that thou have in this thy renewing! and blessed is he that
has it. These things shall be perfited at that day, at the appearance of the
son of glory; and then it shall appear that we are made to his pattern, and
that we are the sons of God. For it appears not as yet, as John says, 1.
Epist. chap. 3. verse. 2. yet it shall appear in that day.

Now to come to the text read. In the first verse we have a certain property
of this new man set down, and it is this. Where he is, all these old things,
these outward things which men most respect and make account of, as nation,
kindred, blood, honor, riches, bondage, freedom, beauty, deformity, etc.
where this new man comes out, all these cease: he has no more regard to the
King then to the beggar: he has no more regard to the free, then to the slave;
but he extends himself alike to all. This is his property. But it shall
appear better in weighing the words of the text: therefore mark them with me.
And to begin at the first word. Where he is, where this new man comes, there
is neither Grecian, nor Jew. That is to say, where he is, all these external
things, these carnal and old things, so the Apostle calls them 2. Cor. 5.
17. all turn to ashes: he knows none of them. All these things that were
wont to put a difference betwixt man and man, he is a King, he is a subject,
and the rest; all these cease to this new man. But to go to particulars: There
are sundry of these old and worn things reckoned up. The first is the nation
wherein we are borne; as the nation of the Jew, the nation of the Grecian. The
nation wherein a man was borne, was wont to put a difference betwixt man and
man: but when Christ comes, and this new man with him, there is no regard of
nation; this new man respects not one more then another, all is alike to him.
To be homely with you; Frenchman, Dutchman, Italian, Indian, Scottishman,
Englishman, all is alike to him. The poorest nation that is, the new man will
account of it. This is plain by experience: for if Christ had respected this
nation, he had never come this way. The second particular of these outward
things, that was wont to be accounted of, is of these outward marks that the
Jew and Gentile had. The Jew had circumcision; the Gentile had uncircumcision;
whereby they were discerned. But Christ when he comes out, he looks not to
these things; he puts no difference betwixt the one and the other: he
accounts all alike to him. And to come home to our selves, we were of the
uncircumcised number; and if Christ had had respect to this, Scotland had not
been called to grace. The third particular is, the language. It put a
difference between man and man. The Greek had a trim and eloquent language:
all others besides the Grecians, had but barbarous languages. But when Christ
comes, and this new man with him, he respects not one more then another:
but Grecian and Barbarian all is one to him. This pertains to us all, we were
Barbarians; so that if Christ had respected barbarousnes and exempted it from
grace, Scotland had not gotten grace. So we should draw comfort out of this,
and say, grace pertains to me, as well as to the Jew or Grecian. The last
particular is, the estate of men in policy; some are free; some are bond; some
masters; some servants: This diversity of estate put difference betwixt man
and man: but Christ coming respects not one more then another, but all are
alike to him. And so servants have to rejoice; for they are not secluded from
grace more then their masters: otherwise slaves had been most miserable
creatures, and better had it been for them that they had bin made beasts. Read
the Galat. chap. 3. verse. 28. ye shall find this matter handled. There is
another particular reckoned up there, male and female, that was wont to put a
difference betwixt man and man; but all is alike to Christ, he respects not
one more then another. The female is no more exempted from grace, then the
male; but this new man exte^deth to al. Now I assure you, if God had had
respect to the sex, your estate of women had bin miserable. So that there is
not one word here, but it offers consolation to us. Brethren, there be many
other particulars; for these old things are infinite, and that that I have
spoken is to be understood likewise of riches and poverty: al is alike to
Christ: his grace extends to all. Therefore our lesson is, in the matter of
salvation Observe.
the Lord has no respect to persons, to men, to women, there is the general;
but all that will believe, all is alike to him, Jew and Gentile, male, female,
rich, poor, honorable, dishonorable. If thou believe in Christ, thy estate in
grace is as good, as the Kings: thou art as high in grace as the greatest
Monarch that ever was. And to be more plain; in the matter of our Christian
calling, justifying, glorifying, and sanctifying, there is no difference, al is
alike to him. I might prove this by Scripture, Romans 8. verse. 30. Whom he has
called, them also he has justified, etc. There ye see this Christian calling
to be universal. And in the Romans chap. 3. verse. 21. speaking of
justification: he says, the righteousness of God is made manifest. Again in
this place of regeneration, there is no difference: so this abides sure; in
the matters of salvation, and all points thereof, there is no difference of
persons, all is alike to him. It is to be noted that I say (in the matters of
salvation) least that I should seem to take away policy, and some wicked
spirit has brought in such a conclusion, as the Anabaptists: but all is but
vanity. For brethren, as in the matters of salvation there The Gospel and
Christian policy do well agree.
is no difference: even so the Lord has ordained a difference in policy: he
has ordained, that there should some be kings, some subjects; some masters,
and some servants: for otherwise an horrible confusion should follow. And the
Gospel is so far from that, that by the contrary it sanctifies policy. So
that if any King before the Gospel was settled, after the Gospel he is better
settled. And if a master of a house was settled before the Gospel, he is now
far better settled after the Gospel. And this is the rule of the Apostle 1.
Cor. chap. 7. verse. 17. 20. Let every man abide in that vocation, wherein he is
called. And then he says, Art thou a slave? art thou called to it? abide still
in it, until by lawful means thou get freedom. Will ye have example of
this? There was Onesimus that ran from Philemon his master, Paul after that
he had made him a Christian man, he sends him again to his service. So it
is but vanity to think that religion is enemy to policy, or makes any
alteration in policy; nay it rather establishes all in policy. This one
thing is to be marked. The second is, seeing in matters of grace, the Lord has
no respect to the persons of men, he will not justify a King, because he is a
King; and deny it to a beggar, because he is a beggar: but he will justify
the one and the other, without all respect of persons. Seeing then this is his
doing, what should we do? Look what Paul says 2. Cor. 5. according to the
flesh, I will not account of one man more then of another; I will offer grace
to the beggar as well as to the rich. And again, in policy I give thee leave
to account of the King, as much as thou will; and why should not thou that
art a servant account of thy master? otherwise thou offendest. Think that thou
art an inferior to him, albeit thou be equal in grace with him. And so let
every one in policy, in commonweales and families, have their own place: let
the King have his place, the Lord his place in his own rank and room, and so
forth. And I say to thee if thou do it not, thou have no grace. For if thou
had grace, thou would be so sanctified, that thou would not fail in
any wise to honor thy superiors here on earth: and yet when the comparison
falls out betwixt the gracious man or sanctified man, and old things; count
more of a regenerate man, then of all the profane Kings of the world. What did
Paul? he had many of these outward things; as ye may read in the Epistle to
the Philippians chap. 3. I am an Hebrew (says he) as ye are; O, but when
Christ came in, all these advantages became to me not only domages, but they
became as dung. So all these external things, are but as nothing in comparison
of regeneration. It is better to be a renewed man being a beggar, then to be the
greatest Monarch in the world, wanting regeneration.

Now lastly in this place ye see, when Christ comes, there is a strange
change in the world. Think ye he came in vain, or for nothing? Is there not a
great change, when a great Monarch comes into the country? Think ye not but
when Christ came there was a great change, such as was never at the coming of
all the Monarchs in the world? Paul 2. Cor. 5. verse. 17. says, speaking of
this change; Whosoever is in Christ is a new creature, all things are made new
in him: but there is such a stupiditie in men, that they cannot see this. Thou
art ever harping on these old things: will ye hear him boast? it will be of
these old things. O senseles creature! thou show thou art not renewed. O
these brave Courteours! all their speech is of these old things, by the which
they testify that they wot not what Christ means. Yet in a word, some may
doubt: Are all things so renewed, that these old things have no place? Is
there no difference of nations, of riches, of honors? stand not these things,
these old things, fleshly things, notwithstanding this innovation? I answer,
they stand: but I add this, if ever it be well with them, they must be renewed;
that old shape must be put off them. Thou that art a King, must be made a new
creature; and thou that art a subject, thou must be renewed again, and obey
thy Prince in the Lord. The Gentiles knew not this; thou yt art a servant, thou
must obey thy master in the Lord; and thou that art a master, thou must do thy
duty to thy servant in the Lord: so as these outward things must be renewed in
Christ. I say more, the first coming of Christ made some change; but the next
coming shall make it palpable. Thou shall see it, and feel it: for there
shall be no kings, but the kings of heaven: there shall be no superiors or
masters, but all shall be glorified; there shall be such an alteration then.
And thou that wilt not see it now, thou shall then be compelled to see it, nill
thou will thou. This for the first part of this verse: the next part follows.

In the first ye heard he has taken away all respect of these outward things:
now it might have been thought, if this new man has cast off all these outward
things, what has he in steed of them? for it were a great loss if he gat not
something in steed of them. He answers in a word, Christ is all, and in all
things. There is the answer. So that the thing that graceth a new man is one
only thing, and what is it? Jesus Christ the Lord is in steed of all: he
supplieth the want of all these earthly things. So that if ye will ask of
this new man, what is thy nation (supposing he be of the best nation on earth)
he will answer, Christ is my nation. If thou ask, what is thy kindred, (let
him come of Kings) he will say Jesus Christ is my kindred. It is a woeful blood
thou art come of, if thou be nothing renewed in Christ. Will thou ask what is
thy kingdom? He will answer, Jesus Christ is my kingdom. An earthly body
will say and answer, I am King of France, and I am King of Spain, and I am
Emperor, and will cast his head up. If thou will ask, what is thy riches, thy
honor and estate? he will answer, Christ is all things to me, and so there
is no prerogative in this world. He will put Christ in the room of all,
whether he have or want it. Ye remember Matthew. 12. when the mother of Christ
would have come to him, and the Disciples telling him that, saying: Behold thy
mother, and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee: he
answers, Who is my mother, my brethren and sisters? Even they that do my
fathers will. Then generally he tells: whosoever will do the will of his
father, are his mother, brother, and sisters. Then turn it over: if thou be a
faithful man, thou art brother to him, and all: and again, he is all to thee.
Now certainly this meeting is much more worth to us, then it is to him: for
what have we but all of him? and so Christ is in steed of all; because he is
all: otherwise he could not be in steed of all. What is this that Christ is
all? He has said in the first chapter of this Epistle, verse. 19. that in him
dwells all fulness. And in the second chapter he says, in him dwell all the
treasures: and again, in him dwells the Godhead bodily. And yet to come more
particularly, 1. Cor. chap. 1. verse. 30. he says, he is made to us wisdom,
and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption. So, want thou these things?
he is all to thee if thou believe in him; he is full of all. Yet brethren, some
will think, there wants yet somethings, I find not all: I seek says the
auaricious, riches; I would have house and chests full: The ambitious says, I
want honor, I cannot get this in him: The leacherous says, I cannot get my
lust, he is an enemy to me in that, and so forth, as man is inclined, he would
have Christ made thereafter to him. But understand this brethren, he speaks
not of a foul old man, but of a new man; not of an auaricious man and such
others, but of a new sanctified man; and this man finds all in him: there is
nothing that he wants, but he finds it in his Christ. And I say, suppose
thou get not these earthly things in that measure, that others get; yet thou
gettest better in him. What, and if thou get the better, what have thou lost?
Thou art a servant, yet thou art a freeman of the Lord Jesus. And yet think ye
that the Lord Jesus wants these earthly things? Think ye that riches are not
at his disposition? He that divides acres is above the earth, the Lords all
are at his command, if it were to wring them in pieces. Therefore he says,
Seek first the kingdom of heaven. There is the first that we should be
occupied about, if we would have Christ: to wit, that we busy our selves about
heavenly things: and what shall follow? He makes a fair promise, and all
these earthly things shall be cast to you. What are they worth? they are but
bits that are cast to thee. There is no comparison betwixt them, they are but
things Matthew. 6.
that are adiected. They are as it were additaments: and ye will not think
when this kingdom is gotten, how small a thing of this world will give content
to a creature. No, he will use it with greater contentation of mind, then any
having all this world, wanting Christ, will do. No, if thou have Christ, thou
lackest nothing; all our want is, that we cannot get him: get him, and thou
shall find that thou have no want. Now it might be said, Christ is all; but
what is that to me? he is full of glory, majesty, and power, what is that to
me? He answers, he is all to all, that is, his grace is thy grace, his
abundance is thy abundance. In the second chapter verse. 9. when he had said,
that in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, he adds, ye are
full in him. Note.
It is to be marked that he says not, Christ is all to some, but to all. The
riches that are in Jesus extend not only to some, they are not contained
within the compass of one nation, within Iewrie: it could not hold them. No,
ten nations The riches of Christ common to all nations.
could not hold the riches of Jesus, but it behooued that they should reach to
the utmost corners in the world: yea I say, if it were to ten thousand
millions of nations, the riches of Jesus is so infinite, that they are
sufficient to serve all. His glory also is infinite, so that it would fill
infinite worlds. All these things are but plain speech, but would to God they
were weighed. Again he says, not only to all, but in all, meaning Jesus
himself is in us first ere any thing of his be in us. And as he says to the
Ephesians chap. 3. verse. 17. he must dwell in thy heart first, or ever thou get
any thing that is his: now where he is in proper person, there of necessity
thou have all his graces. Thou need not to go here and there to seek
grace. And this is the difference betwixt the sufficiency of the old and new
man: if thou be an old man, Jesus nor his grace is not within thee. Where is
the honor of the King? in his own bosom? No, it is out of him: if he want
Christ, he will stand up stripped stark naked of all things. Where is his riches
and strength? where is his dinner? all are without him, and he has naught, if
he be an old man; and he will dye for hunger, if it be not given to him. But
to come to the new man, where is his riches? in his bosom, in the heart of
him. It will pass the power of all the Tyrants in the world to take that from
him: so all his sufficiency is within him by faith. It is written that a
certain Philosopher said, Omnia mea mecum porto: Christ is his sufficiency. O
the advantage that a Christian man has, in respect of one that is not in
Christ! for there is such sufficiency in Christ, as no tongue can express.

Now there are one or two things that I will speak of. This is a great word;
Christ is all in all; before that day of the great resurrection. For look 1.
Cor. chap. 15. it is said, that God shall not be all until then, at what time
this shall come to pass. But the answer is easy. There are two estates of
the elect, here they are called the faithful, and in the life to come they are
called the blessed. O that blessing, who shall abide to see it! In deed so
long as we are the faithful, Christ is not perfectly all in all: so long as we
stand in the estate of faith only, he begins in thee by faith to be all in
all: and that is the Apostles meaning here. But in the estate of that
celestial blessedness, it shall be far otherwise: then Christ shall be all in
all in full perfection; there is the difference. Yet to make this more plain.
There are two things required to make Christ all in all. A perfection of grace,
a perfection of glory.
First there is required a perfection of grace. And secondly, there is required
a perfection of glory, that there be nothing but the Lord Jesus Christ, when
he is al in all. There is nothing but he, and the fulness of his glory. These
are the two things required, that Christ may be all in all. Now brethren, to
apply this to the two estates. So long as we abide in earth, howbeit there be
no grace in Jesus, but that we have some share of it; yet the perfection in the
degrees of grace is not yet: thou art holy in him, but it is not perfected.
Then in this life in the faithful, Christ is not all in us: for there is much
ill stuff besides grace in us. Go thy way to thy heart, and thou shall find
it thus, and thou should think it a marvel, that one spark of grace
should abide within thee. But come to that life to come: In the resurrection
when faith shall go away, Jesus Christ shall be in thee in his full glory.
Then in that estate there shall be nothing but Christ. All this uncleanness and
vileness shall be cast away, and that heart of thine shall be enlightened, and
shine in thy body. It shall not hold in thee, but it shall break out in thy
face, and make all glorious both thy hands and feet, and all this mortality
shall be scoured out of thee, and then it shall be truly spoken, Christ is all
in all.

Now one thing and so I end. Comparing this place with that to the Galath.
chap. 3. verse. 28. I find there one end of the coming of Christ, and of the
new man in this word, that is not specified here: and it is, that all might be
made one in Jesus Christ: for as long as he is a Jew, and a Grecian, they are
two; but when once this comes, that they are new men, they are made one in
Christ: so the words spoken import. For Christ being in all, who is one, of
necessity all must be one. And again, if he be all in all, it being but one,
of necessary force it must be one. Ye see the end of Christ's coming into this
world, and of the new man, it is this, to make all one, to put Communion of
Saints.
away all this variance, and to join all in one. There is much ado to join
altogether: would thou have thy blessedness to stand? it stands in joining
thee first with thy head Jesus Christ: and then in making thee a member of his
body. If it were but one joint of his little finger, if thou be but one toe of
that body, thou shall be safe. Well, wanton men and women go out from the
Church. But O that terrible wrath, if thou be not found in that blessed
society! make a jest of it as long as thou will, if thou be not of the
militant Church, thou shall not see the triumphant Church: and thou shall not
be of the number of them that shall be glorified.

I might let you see the example, what danger it is to be cut off from this
body of the Church. I ask, what is a man's arm worth when it is cut off? it
serves for nothing, it dies and perishes. Now it is even as sure if thou be
cut off from this militant Church, thou shall die and perish, and thou shall
never have part with thy head Jesus Christ; if thou abide cut off, thou shall
die everlastingly. Wherefore count it your blessedness, to be first conjoined
with Christ; and then with his members. Now what is the blessedness of the true
God? even an unity in trinity. So thou art blessed, when thou art one with
the members of Christ, and all thy joy is to be in the Lord Jesus. Now the Lord
grant we may abide one, until we obtain this unity in perfection in Jesus
Christ: to whom be all honor and praise now and for ever,

Amen.
THE XXIX. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 12. 13. 12 Now therefore, as the elect of God holy and
beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meeknes, long
suffering:

13 Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel to another: even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.


BEfore in this chapter, the Apostle has exhorted the Colossians to mortify,
slay, and put away the members, affections, and actions of the old man, that
is, of the sinful and corrupt nature. Now because it is not enough to put off
the members of the old man (the actions of the sinful nature) except we
appear before God with other actions, (for we cannot stand naked before him)
therefore in the second room, he exhorts us to put on the members, actions,
and affections of the new man: these are the actions, and this is the clothing
wherewith we must be clad to stand before God. Then to come to the words, and
to weigh every word as the Lord shall give the grace. The first word is,
Therefore put on, etc. He has spoken immediately before of the new man: now upon
the occasion of this word (new man) he gathers his conclusion. Have you put on
the new man? Therefore put on all his actions. If ye be holy, cloathe your
selves with holy actions. The observation is short. The new man, which consists
in holiness and righteousness, requires a new life, and new actions: for if the
life be not yet renewed, but that the old life yet abide with the old actions,
I say, you wot not what the new man means. This is but a vain boasting of
regeneration, that is in the mouths of men, to say, thou art renewed and made
a new man; all is but vain. Let me see thy life and thy actions, and I shall
tell thee by them what thou art: otherwise, thou shall never persuade me that
thou have put on the new man. Now the Apostle says, Therefore put on, as it
were a garment, or raiment never to be put off again. I showed you before,
that when once thou have put on this new man, thou must not cast him off
again, as thou will do with thy coat at night when thou go to bed, which
thou will cast off, and the morrow put it on again; but this clothing thou
must go in it, walk in it, lie down with it, and rise with it.

Now the parts of the clothing follow, Put on therefore the bowels of mercy,
etc. Note then briefly: wherein stands this abiliment of the new man? It is
made of sundry parts, it is like the coat of Joseph made of sundry colors.
This coat is so pleasant, that it is wonderful to look on. Mercy, a
pleasant sight, Bountifulnes pleasant, Modesty pleasant, Meekenes pleasant,
Lenity pleasant; so there was never so pleasant a garment put upon the back
of man. Before he comes to the parts of this garment, he puts in by the way
sundry arguments to move them to put on this new man. The motives are three:
the first is election: the second holiness: the third, the love of God toward
us. Ye are the chosen of God, the holy ones of God, the beloved of God:
therefore put on this garment that is pleasant in the eyes of God. But to
examine these grounds: The first is their election, that is, the calling them
out of this darkness into the light of God: so Peter defines it 1. Pet. 2. 9. a
fair choice. This Gospel that ye hear is the light of the world, and so this
election whereof the Apostle speaks here, is nothing else but that which we
call commonly our vocation. For whom God has elected from all eternity, them
in time he elects and chooses out from the rest of mankind, by effectual
calling. Then I make of this first ground a lesson. This Christian calling, it
requires a fair raiment. You know the clothing of every man and woman, should
be according to their calling; when thou go above thy calling, thou sinnest:
so the earthly raiment and clothing, whatsoever it be, should be according to
thy vocation. This calling of God is an high calling, as Paul to the
Philippians chap. 3. verse. 14. speaks. And as the calling of a King requires a
fair apparel to set it forth with: so this calling to the kingdom of God,
craves a higher apparel. Therefore remember thou art called to put on that
fair apparel.

The next argument is, Ye are holy. This holiness is the effect of the other.
For wast thou black before? yet being called from darkness to light, the beams
of the face of God shining upon thee, now thou art whiter then snow. Ye see a
man that walks long in the Sun, will be altered; so of necessity, this
son of righteousness must make a change, to wit, to make thee holy. And this
is that which the Apostle 2. Cor. 3. 18. says, Looking into the glory of God,
as it were in a mirror, we are transformed from glory to glory; and
therefore take pleasure to look into it night and day, and thou shall be
changed from the dregs of the world, and made to shine. Mark then, as I said
of him that is called; so I say of him that is a Saint. A fair garment fits
thee well: for the Saints stand night and day before God in his household. Who
will come before the eye of an earthly Prince ragged and bare? how much less
before that great majesty of God. If thou be not clad with holiness, the very
eye of God will strike thorough thee to thy consumption.

Now the third argument is, the love of God showed to the^. This is that love
of God that he bare to us, when we were enemies to him: when thou wast wandering
in thy vanity, he gave himself for thee, and he loved thee ere thou wist,
and afterward he powers it into thee that thou feel it. Nay thou never
tastedst of sweetness, if thou never tastedst of the love of God: and this is
the love of God that makes thee to love him again. The beloved one of God
craves a fair apparel. Who is he or she among you, that will not travel to
be pleasant in the eye of your lover? So the Lord loves thee, and never one
loved thee so well. Therefore will thou not study to come pleasantly clad
before him? Then ye see they in whom the Lord delights, come before him
gloriously in fair apparel, that makes them to be pleasant in his eye. Thus
much for the arguments that he sets down, which should have moved the
Colossians to put on the new man.

Now follows the virtues: The first virtue he terms, The bowels of mercies
(that is the word in the first language) that is, pity, mercy, and
compassion: briefly, it is a virtue and grace, not growing of nature, but
wrought in the heart by the spirit of Jesus. Now it has this force and effect,
to pity the misery of men and women: but there is little of it in these
days. When thou see the members of Christ sick or sore, be sorry for them:
thou will be sorry for thy hand when it is sore; even so thou should be
sorry for the members of Christ. Again, he calls it no mercy, but mercies in
the plural number, to signify that he that is merciful, must have many of
them: for many miseries require many mercies. He calls it not mercies, but the
bowels of mercies, to signify this entire love: it must be within thee, and in
thy bowels. Then this mercy it has two properties: first thou must abound of
it. Next, it must be in thy bowels, and thy bowels must be loosed with pity.
Then brethren, ye see this fair garment, he exhorts them to put on. Where
begins it? It begins at thy bowels, the depth of thy heart; there is the first
clothing, and the clothing is pity and mercy: and wherefore mercy, and so
many mercies? because in this world there are many miseries. Where shall the
godly man turn to, but he shall see misery? Will thou look up to the King
and his Court? a spectacle of misery. Will thou look to the beggar? a
spectacle of misery? And if ever there was any pity to be had, this land has
need of it.

The next virtues, Kindness, Bountifulnes. The first was the virtue that pities
thy neighbor: this is the virtue that does him a good deed: Mercy is in the
bowels; Bounty is in the hand. And if thou pitiest any body and have it to
give, put out thy hand, and give him: otherwise it auailes not. Then ye see
this virtue of the elect of God is Bounty. And wherefore is this bounty
requisite? because there is so much need in all estates, and a great scant of
all things both earthly and heavenly: and therefore it is requisite to have
bountifulnes, that thou may bestow upon one body, a benefit spiritual, and
upon another, a temporal.

Now to come to the next virtue, which is the third in number, Low lines of
mind, modesty. It is a virtue when men and women counts nothing of
themselves, and are not puffed up in pride. So it has these two properties: it
counts nothing of themselves, but much of others. Then this virtue is lowlines
in the eye, and in the heart. If thou would appear in the sight of thy God,
put on modesty, come not haughty, come not with raised up necks: the Lord is
above thee, and he will give thee such a stroke, that he will slay thee. For
there was never a proud man, that raised up his head against God, but he made
him stoop. So the third piece of this garment is humility. Will thou look to
thy self, what have thou to glory in? where thou have one thing, thou want
ten. Will thou look to others? the grace thou see in thy brother, thou
should account of it.

Now the fourth piece of this garment is Meekenes, that is, excellently well
matched with humility, ever the humble man is meek; the proud ever churlish,
without meeknes, and mildnes, and so far as in him lies renting the body of
Jesus. For where pride is, there is no society: for a man that has pride he
cannot associate himself with another. Now this virtue is in thy mouth, and
makes thee to give to thy neighbor sweet language. Now this fourth part is so
necessary, that there can be no standing of the Church without it: for such
is the nature of man, if it be handled roughly, it is lost, and if thou handle
a sinner thus, thou do overthrow him. And therefore Paul ever recommends
gentleness: if thy rebukes smell of bitterness, and not of meeknes, thou will
destroy him. Forthere is no sinner, as the Apostle 2. Tim. chap. 2. verse. 25.
etc. speaks, but he must be allured by piece and piece out of the bands of the
devil.

Now follows the fifth part of this garment, which is Long suffering. The word
following in the next verse expounds it, when one bears injuries done of
another, that is long suffering. This long suffering is so requisite, that the
world cannot stand without it. What part is there in this land wherein wrong
exceeds not; and wrong would not be met with wrong, nor injury with injury,
but wrong with long suffering? and I say, if men were not disposed to suffer,
the world long since had eaten up one another. It is the patient body that
bears the injuries, otherwise every one had devoured another. So this is a
fair garment of the beloved and holy ones of God: but the virtue that follows
is greater. Forgiving one another. Long suffering may be without forgiving, as
a poor may yt sustaines wrong, he must lie under the wrong, because he is not
able to revenge it. Others again (albeit they have ability) will not revenge,
but will hold it in their heart till they get opportunity. Then remission is a
greater virtue; it will not only suffer the wrong, but it will put it away; it
will forgive thee that have done the wrong: or else if it will not altogether
forgive the man, it will call him before the Judge. Remission therefore, when
it thinks not expedient to forgive, it will not put to the hand, as our men
will do, but it will call thee before a Judge. The King should revenge all
these wrongs. The Lord should not slay, the Esquire should not slay, the
Gentleman should not slay: but in the mean time while he is pleading his cause
before the Judge, his anger should be abolished, and so God shall be glorified.
But if the injury be done to thee by any man, and in the mean time thou have
anger in thy heart, albeit he be before the Judge; yet thou art the slayer of
him.

So then, there is the sixth part of this garment, free forgiveness. This virtue
is so needful, that if men forgave not wrongs, the world had perished long
ago. And let men think as they please, that runs in revenging; it is not
they that hold up the world, but the blessed ones of God. Now to move them to
this virtue, he uses an argument taken from the example of Christ, As Christ
has forgiven you, so forgive you one another. There was not a reason put to
the rest: what means this? He lets us see it is a hard thing to flesh and
blood to forgive: if thou take counsel at flesh and blood, thou will never
forgive, admit thou were dying. But flesh and blood will ever cry a vengeance;
and so it is a hard thing to forgive: And it is so necessary, that except thou
forgive and strive against thy nature, thou shall never have part with God in
heaven, and it shall debar thee from that society of Jesus Christ. For he
that inclines not in no measure to forgive a wrong, but is always set to
recompense the like for the like, he is not a member of Christ; and if thou be
not a member, thou have no life. And Christ himself in Matthew. 6. 14. 15.
says, If thou forgive not thy brother in earth, thy heavenly father shall not
forgive thee. Then brethren, ye shall not find any one more resembling Christ
in any virtue, then in mercy and compassion: and by the contrary, there is
none that more resembles the devil, then the merciles body: and judge ye how
many in this land be like the devil, and so few like Christ. He cannot be
satisfied, who has put hand in man not once or twice, but he will triple and
quadriple it, and so this vice abounds in this land. Now to add this to that
that is spoken: I dare say a merciles heart never wist what the pity of God
was: if thou find cruelty in thy heart, it is an argument thou art not his.
Thou that have felt the mercy of God, his pity and compassion powered out upon
thee, thou will power it out upon others. I see next in this example of Christ
Jesus, Christ is to be imitated, follow him in thy life. Would you have leaders
in the way? follow Jesus, and put thy footsteps where his was: but it is to be
taken heed to, in what things thou followest him. Jesus wrought wonders in the
world: follow him not in these; for if thou followest him so, thou put thy
self in Gods room. Jesus Christ wrought the work of redemption, follow him
not in that, because it is the work proper to the Creator. Will you read the
Scripture? you shall not find the example of Christ propounded to follow him
in wonders, or to follow him in forgiving of sins. But when ever we follow
him, we should follow him in meeknes, in lenity, in gentleness. To what end
should I speak of the vain dreams of the Papists? they will say, imitate
Christ. Christ fasted forty days: therefore you must fast all the Lent: but I
leave them to their vanity, and they that are unclean, let them be unclean
still, and the Lord keep us with his truth. Now ye see in express terms,
Jesus Christ has forgiven us our sins, Ephesians. 4. 6. it is said, that God in
Christ has forgiven us eur sins. In the one place it is said, God has
forgiven us: in the other place that Jesus Christ has forgiven us. Then Jesus
Christ is God the redeemer of the world. So it follows of this place, Jesus
Christ is God blessed for ever, Amen. For why? it is proper to God to forgive
sins; it is only proper to the Creator: the creature has no power to
forgive. Now in the other place, Jesus Christ is the price of our redemption,
through the which remission of sins is purchased, he is both the forgiuer of
the sin and the price: if Jesus had not been the price, there had been no
redemption in the world.

Now follows the third. This benefit of our redemption was dearly bought by
our Redeemer. It was not a word to say, forgive, but it behooued him to die:
and this benefit which he gives, he bought it by his own blood. Then mark a
great difference between him and man: Jesus he dies; but where thou forgiuest,
thou give but a word. Look what a do the Lord has with the world: and what
travel he takes to get the offense done by thee, taken away: he dies for it.
And therefore the thing we have to press to, is to feel his love: all joy and
welfare is in the sense of this love. And therefore to this Lord be all honor
and glory now and for ever,

Amen.
THE XXX. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 14. 15. 14 And above all these things put on love, which
is the bond of perfection.

15 And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in
one body, and be ye thankful.


THe Apostle (brethren) after he had exhorted the Colossians to put off the
clothing of the old man, which was made up of foul affections, as pieces of
his garment: he begins to exhort to put on the clothing of the new man, which
is made up of sundry graces of Christ, virtues and holy affections. The last
day we reckoned up certain pieces of this clothing, Parts of the garment of
the new man.
namely six: to wit, the and lastly, Now to come to the text we have in hand:
yet he continues in this raiment and clothing, and reckons up other parts of
it. Love, charity that one bears to another, neighbor to neighbor. Among
all the rest of the pieces, he desires them to put on love. And whereon should
they put this piece of the garment? And above all these (says he) put on love,
as the uppermost garment, they being under it, and it being above the^ all, as
a cloak above all the rest of the clothing. Now (brethren) Love must be the
uppermost garment.
you know commonly the uppermost cloth is the fairest, and the honestest, the
preciousest cloth, because it is in the eyes of the world: therefore seeing
he craves that they should put on charity, as uppermost, it must follow, that
it is the fairest, comliest, and preciousest piece of clothing that is. I say
more, when thou have put on all the rest, as mercy, Observe.
kindness, humblenes, meekenes, long suffering, forgiveness, if thou put not on
love above all, all is naught worth. It is but a garment of hypocrisy, and
there is no sincerity in thy mercy; thou show no sincerity in thy
humblenes, nor in none other of thy virtues. Look what the Apostle speaks of
thy virtues that can be given to a man, 1. Cor. 13. without charity the gift
of tongues is nothing; the gift of prophecy, of wisdom, of faith, of doing
miracles, of alms deeds, all is nothing, and lastly, of long suffering, it is
nothing without this charity. It may well be thou profit others, but as for
thy self, without charity thou shall get no profit. Therefore the Apostle
says (speaking of these gifts and many more) they be not profitable, if I want
charity, and what auailes it if it be not profitable to me? So without
charity all is nothing, of no value? and if these virtues want charity, I say
to thee, they are but dead images of virtues. Thy mercy is but a dead image of
virtue, if thou want love, and so forth in the rest: for the life of all
virtues is love; if the heart be not with the hand, that is, the heart with the
action, it shall never do thee good.

Then mark in every good action there are two things to be considered. The
first is the good action it self. The second, is the manner of the doing of
the action. O there is no small respect to be had of the manner of doing, which
is the very habit and clothing of it! Now the action comes from the hand: O
but the form, the manner, the habit, which is the ornament of it, comes from
the heart! now the heart of him does the good deed; if it be evil affected,
the action if it were never so good, it has an evil habit on it; it is evil
favored to the Lord: how pleasant so ever it seem in the eyes of man, yet it
is not acceptable to the Lord: all is lost, yea all good works, if they want
this love, stink in the sight of the Lord, and thou shall never get good of
them. But if the heart be disposed with love, that comes of faith in Jesus
Christ, then thy action appears before the Lord in a fair beauty, and he
makes that deed thou do to return back to thee to thy A good work
returns back with much comfort to him which does it.
good, as it is good to him to whom thou do it. Therefore let every one
seek to be clad with all virtues and good offices; but look to this, that
every one of them appear before the Lord with love and charity, that thy
heart and hand may go together. Put not out thy hand alone, put out heart and
hand together: otherwise thy action shall never be good to thee; for thou art
commanded above all things to put on charity.

Now to go forward to the words following, he desines this love, and by it he
lets us see, that it is no small grace: And first he calls it a Band. Love is
a band that binds things together. All the rest of the graces are likewise
bands; mercy, kindness, humblenes, and the rest bind up the members of Jesus
Christ; but without charity, all be but superficial bands, outward bands,
binding the bodies of men, and not their hearts together. But love is an inward
band, and it comes from the heart, and meets with another heart, and binds up
heart with Love is a band.
heart, and so the knot of love is knit: all the rest give outward things; but
love gives inward things, even the heart of him which loves; I say he that
loves thee, gives thee his heart. The word in the original language imports
not only a band, but a mutual band, as my love to thee, and thine to me: so
that thy love meets my love; for if love be not met with love again, it will
not avail: for friendship cannot stand on one side. Therefore look that
charity be mutual, otherwise be not content with thy self. This for the
first word. The next is the band of perfection. This is the effect of this
band. It perfecteth the man in whom it is; for it binds thee up with the
body, it perfects thee so, that thou shall want nothing, but al shall be
supplied till thou be perfected. Now there is no member of the body that
has all perfection. The Lord has not disposed so, neither was it meet it
should so be; but that every member joined with another should be supplied.
The eye cannot go, therefore the foot comes in and carries the eye: the foot
cannot see, but in comes the eye and lets the foot see and directs it: So in
the body of man, there is not a member even the vilest and the foulest, but
all the rest be ready to cover that member, and to supply the want of it. It
is even so with the spiritual body of Jesus (howbeit man cannot see it, yet
it is as true) for every member has not all grace: no not the King, nor the
Apostles, nor no man in any estate has all graces; yet being united in that
body of Christ, O thou lackest nothing! for all is communicated to thee. So
that Paul had not a grace but it is mine, All is yours (says the Apostle) and
you are Christ's, 1. Cor. 3. 21. 23. You may challenge all the graces that are
in the body, that is a great benefit; yea the graces that are not in thee,
thou may challenge them being in thy brethren, members with thee of one
body. Therefore envy not any man's grace, but challenge it as thy own. Every
one would have al, who is he or she that would not have all graces and
perfection? But I shall teach thee how thou shall be perfect: Will thou stand
up thy self alone like an A, per se, A; and say, I will not be in any man's
Common, and so sever thy self from the body? I say thou shall have no
perfection, thou shall be as a rotten branch cast into ye fire; if thou were a
King, the Lord shall cause thee stink and die in thine own pollution. Away
with a proud headed lowne, who cannot humble himself to creep in to the
body. Then the way to be perfect, is to seek to the body; for there every
member shall supply thy want. Thus for this fair piece of garment Love, or
charity. Go to the rest that follows.

The eight piece of this garment is set down in these words: And let the peace
of God bear rule in your hearts. So the eight 8 The eight part of the garment
of the new man.
piece of this garment, is unity of mind; concord follows upon charity:
for he that loves must be a peaceable man. They will not be restles spirits,
full of enmity and strife. I will not insist much to speak of this peace;
only this, I call this peace nothing else but a sweet quietness in the heart of
man and woman, together with amity and concord with thy neighbor; for when
thy heart has peace within thee, then thy heart is in Peace.
unity with thy neighbor: and therefore it is opposed to that restlesnesse of
the affections of men's hearts. Alas, what pleasure can thou have when thy
heart cannot rest within thee? The peace of heart comes not of nature: no, no,
by nature thy heart is troubled, and out of tune, and all is unruly, reeling
and rumbling within thee. From whence comes it then? Of grace that God gives in
Jesus Christ. If thou have a pacified heart, the Lord has given it thee, and
therefore it is called the peace of God: and it is not of one sort: for there
is a peace Note of the kinds of peace.
that is with God himself, and that is the first peace: there is another
peace, that is with thy neighbor. The peace that thou have with God, is a
pacified heart with God, so that thy Peace with God.
heart is settled with him, that it stirs thee not up to enmity against God.
When thou find that thou art justified by faith in Christ, O the peace of
heart that thou shall have with God! thou will appear before his tribunal
with boldness, Romans 5. 1. For being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The peace with man is a pacified heart with man, when the affection is joined
in love with man. This peace comes of the other; for being at peace with God,
thou art at peace with all the world: get once a settled heart toward God, of
necessity Peace with man.
thou must be at unity and peace with all men. O then begin at God! What is
the cause of all these variances and debates, and al these slaughters? It is
the want of the peace with God. O murderer! thou have no peace with God, thou
have nothing to do with God, and therefore that wrath of God shall consume
thee. O murderer! when thou fightest with man, thou have to do with the great
God. O restles spirit, that can not rest till thou have bathed thy self in
thy neighbors blood! thou art at wars both with thy self, and with the
great God, who shall at one time, or other, meet with thee, and pluck off all
thy harness, and then thou shall never get peace nor rest.

Now to come to this peace that is with man, that is spoken of here. This
peace, it must bear rule in thee: it must be a commander of thee. She must
sit over thee, and hold down thy foul affections, when they are fighting
within thee. Where must she sit? In thy heart, and not in thy hand; for
oftentimes when thy hand will be hindered to murder, thy heart will be
persecuting thy neighbor to death: therefore it must be in thy heart.

Now mark the order. When he has required all good virtues, at last he
requires peace. Whereunto? To be commander of thine affections. This teaches
thee, that except they be commanded and put in order, look not that thou
Affections must be commanded.
can do any good turn in the world. Can thou, who art disordred in thine
affection, do any good to thy neighbor? No, therefore mind not to do any
good without this peace. Then beseech the Lord that he will put this peace in
thy heart, to put these affections into an order. For when enmity possesses
the heart, what good can thou do? Well is that body that can lie down in
peace with God and man. Therefore ask the peace of God, that thou may rest
in peace with thy self, and live in peace with thy neighbor. O villain thou
that lie down with anger and a restles affection, and risest up, and go
out and stabst thy neighbor, what disorder is in thee? and what peace have
thou with God? No, thou art in rage with God himself, when thine affections be
not ruled with love to thy neighbor; and peace thou can not have with thy
neighbor, if thou have not the first peace which is with God. And so thou in
bearing hatred against thy neighbor, tellest plainly, thou have no peace with
God; and wanting this, thou tellest plainly that thou art yet in thy sins,
and therefore under the wrath of God.

Now, when he has exhorted them to this peace, he subioynes the argument, To
the which (says he) ye are called in one body. They, who are in one body,
should live in peace together. An argument to move us to peace.
The first argument then is from our Christian calling. It is a shame to a man
not to be answerable to his calling: if thou be called to such a thing, why
should thou not do it? But above all, a Christian man is called to this
peace, and therefore woe is to him in that great day, if he be one who has
wanted it! Now take the lesson: As ye see a man is called to be a member in any
city, not to live at variance or debate with his neighbors: no, no, he is
called to peace, and to be a quiet man: an unquiet man is an evil neighbor; a
restless spirit, a seditious and an unpeaceable spirit, is an evil neighbor:
even so a man called to be a member in the city of God, in the kingdom of
Christ (for that is our calling) he is called to be a quiet and peaceable body.
For (says the Apostle) what is the kingdom of God? It is peace and joy in the
holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. So if thou be one of that kingdom, thou will be a
peaceable body. Then the man that cannot live in peace, but is full of
variance, ever troubling and renting the members of the Commonweal, who will
not say that that man is not to be suffered in the town, he is not worthy
to dwell in it? much more a restles spirit in the kingdom of Jesus Christ,
Disturbers of the peace of Church and Common wealth
should be driven out of the town. Look if our text speaks not this: These
restles spirits that trouble not only the Commonweal, this whole kingdom, and
have studied to the subversion of the whole land, but have by their means gone
about to trouble the whole kingdom of Christ, they should have no place
neither in Church nor Commonweal; they are unworthy of any calling either in
Church, or policy: they have pulled themselves asunder from both.

The second argument is from the body, wherein we are united. Were it not a
monstrous thing to see the hand strike the face? if thou had spiritual eyes,
it would seem as monstrous a thing to thee to see a member of that body of
Christ, to strike another. Then briefly, as the joining of men in a city
requires a peaceable life, and that they should live in peace: much more this
union of the members, not in a city and Commonweal only, but in a body: so
that some of them are the hand, some the eye, some the foot, and so forth.
This union requires peace and quietness, they should not be restles spirits, nor
full of variance: and therefore thou that art a restles spirit in the Church of
God, and yet say thou art of the Church, and wilt say thou beleeuest: I say
to thee thou show plainly thou have naught to do with the body. And as I
said before, these troublesome men full of debate, I will affirm it again,
they never wist what that union with Christ is; for if they had that union with
Christ, that grace of Christ would come down from the head, and bind them with
the body. So thou show Such as love not peace, have nothing to do with
Christ nor his Church.
plainly, that thou have not to do, neither with the body, nor with the head.
O murderers! your hearts are full of dissension; ye shall perish in that great
day, I give you this doom, ye shall not escape. Thus much for the eight piece
of this garment of regeneration and sanctification.

In the end of this verse, we have the ninth grace and piece of this garment,
and it is this, Be thankful, that is the force of The ninth part of the
garment of the new man.
the word; so it is thankfulness that he requires. All the rest before are
offices, and graces that prevent a good deed done: As when a man begins to be
merciful to any, or mercy be shown to him of that person, that is a good
deed done, and so the former graces stand in doing. But this grace of
thankfulness, What thankefulnes is.
it is such as stands in recompencing a good deed done: In rendering good for
good. If thou will compare this grace with them that went before, it is less
then any of them: for it is a greater matter to be the beginner of any good
deed, then to recompense a good deed done to thee. And thou art a wretched
body that neither can do good, nor when good is done to thee can not
render thanks for it. There be three Three sorts of good me^.
sorts of good men. Three sorts of evil me^.
his heart locked up. Again, he is far worse, that when he has gotten
good cannot recompense it with good again, especially to them to whom he has
been most indebted, as to his parents. This country is full of such: this man
is a wretch, he is worse then an Infidel. An Ethnic can render good for good,
thou shamest thy parents. What if this ingratitude were to common men? but it
is to them to whom they are most bound to, and it is an argument that thou art
ungrateful to the Lord. But the worst of all is he, that for good repaies
evil; and this land is full of such also; yea they who have done them most
good, they will meet them with an evil turn. All these are ungrateful men;
and when thou have called a man an ungrateful man, thou have called him all
the evil in the world: for such a one is unworthy to live. Therefore study
to be thankful, and thou that gettest any good done to thee by any man, at the
least meet him with thankfulness. It is marvel how a man can lie down
without this consideration: for if thou suffer thy self to be oppressed with
ingratitude, thou shall perish.

If the time would serve I would go forward, I will mark only this: All
these graces are grounded upon the word of Jesus Christ, upon this Gospel.
Would thou be merciful? let the word dwell in thee. Would thou be kind?
would thou be humbly minded? and so forth of the rest of the graces; let
the word of Jesus Christ reign in thee. This is the mean that ingenders these
graces, and keeps them in thy heart, to wit, the word of Jesus. So thou, who
would be gracious The Gospel is Gods hand to fill us with graces.
and full of grace, be full of the Gospel. For it is that word that purifieth
the heart: never rest til thou get thy heart full of the Gospel. Thou think
that nothing can fill thee, but a bodily food: no, no, the word of Jesus is as
effectual to fill the heart, as sensible as ever thou foundest thy stomach
fed with food. But consider this: this fulness of the heart is not gotten so
long as we live here. Therefore let our pleasure be ever in filling of our
hearts with the Gospel, as thou have pleasure to fill thy stomach with meat
and drink: so fill thy Simile.
heart, thine empty heart, that is full of nothing but wind, fill it with the
Gospel. Alas, if we could get an hunger of the word; for the soul that
hungers for the food of the word, it shall be filled, and it shall feel the
sweetness of the word. But the heart is so filled with the filthiness of nature,
that it cannot hunger for the word, nor feel the sweetness of it: therefore
empty thy heart of this filth which is in it, that being emptied thou may
have some greedines of spiritual things. Know you not the necessity of this?
If in some measure thou empty it not, and fill it not with this word of grace,
I give thee this doom, look not for a life to come. For there is no fulness of
glory, except the fulness of the word go before in thee. So if thou be not
filled with the word in this life, look not to have a life with Jesus in that
day. Seeing then it stands upon such a pain, take pleasure in this word,
albeit he be but a base silly man that vtters it to thee: for it is the mean
that the Lord has used to fill thy soul with; and it has pleased the Lord to
put this jewel in earthen vessels; therefore take heed to them 2. Cor. 5. 18.
19. 20.
and fill thy self: for else at that day, thou shall repent the time that thou
would not take grace, when grace was offered, being offended at the baseness
of men in the Ministry. O let not the baseness of Christ's servants be a let to
thee, but be thou ever greedy to fill thy self with the word. And woe be to
them that would put this word away from thee, and stuff in vanities in steed
of it! woe to thee with thine Earldome, except the Lord convert thee in time!
The Lord in his mercy give us grace to keep this word of Jesus, and to feed
thereupon. To this Lord, with the Son and holy Spirit, be all praise for
evermore,

Amen.
THE XXXI. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 16. 17. 16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you
plenteously, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves in
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, sing with a grace in your hearts to
the Lord.

17 And whatsoever ye shall do inword or deed (do) all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, even the father by him.


WE have heard (brethren) heretofore of this spiritual araiment of the new
man, or new creature, made by Jesus Christ; and we have heard of so many parts
and pieces of it, as have been thus far reckoned up. Of mercy, kindness,
humility, mildnes, lenity, forgiving, charity, peace, and lastly thankfulness
for benefits received. Now in the beginning of this text, the Apostle
recommends that mean, whereby these graces and all other such like are gotten
and wrought in the heart of man. The mean briefly he Coherence.
calls the word of Christ, the speech of Christ. Let (says he) the speech of
Christ dwell in you plenteously. For without this word, which is the instrument
of the spirit of Jesus, whereby he works in the heart, and without the which, he
works not ordinarily; there can be no grace wrought in the heart. For to
speak The Gentiles had no spiritual grace.
the truth, never Gentile had any of these graces, and for any that they had,
they were but dead images of virtues, without life: for where the word is not,
there can be no grace, life, nor virtue in man.

But to come to the words in particular: Let (says he) the word of God dwell
in you plenteously. Then the mean of all these graces, is the speech or
language (to take it generally) that comes out of the mouth. Well brethren,
there is no little moment in speaking, and it has no small force in the hearer
either to good or evil. The language thou hear, will either do thee good or
evil; for it enters not so soon into the ear, but Speech ever does good or
hurt.
as soon it goes to the heart, and either will corrupt or sanctify the heart.
Corrupt language will rot thy heart, Ephesians. 4. 29. if thou take pleasure to
hear it, it will cause thy heart to stink. Again, so soon as we have spoken
a word of grace, by speaking it, it will cleanse the heart and put out
uncleanness, for there is not a grain of it, but it is full of stink. And
therefore 1. Cor. 15. 33. When he has recited the words of the Epicures, Eat
(say they) drink, let us take our pastime: then the Apostle subioynes, be not
deceived: for (says he) wicked speaking corrupts good manners, foul speeches,
evil talk, will make thee an evil man. For first it defiles thy heart, and
then thy actions. Again, Ephesians. 4. 29. he gives express commandment, Look
(says he) that no rotten speech proceed out of thy mouth, upon pain of thy
life. Albeit thy heart think it (as thy heart is evil inclined to think it)
yet keep thy mouth close; and vetter it Pro. 3. 24. Keep the mouth close,
albeit the heart have unclean thoughts.
not. Then he says, recommending the talk that should be spoken: Speak
that, that is to the edification of the hearer. Speak no speech but that, that
is gracious. I will not insist in this: only keep thy own tongue first, that
thou corrupt not thy self or thy neighbor: then take heed to thy neighbors
tongue, least in case thou lend thine ear to his talk, that thou get not a
filthy heart by it.

But to our purpose. Speech that strikes in the ear it is of great force in
the heart. But whose speech must this be that works these graces which are
reckoned up? Will every speech work it? No: whose must it be then? Let (says
he) the speech of Christ be in your hearts, dwelling in all plenty. Then it is
Christ's speech: O it must be the speech of a great personage that must make
this operation! It is his speech that will pearce down The speech of Christ
only, is the instrument of grace.
to the spirit, because he is a spirit, a divine spirit, and is the maker of
all spirits, and therefore it is he who pearceth down to the heart, and all
his words are spirit and life. This Peter says, Whither shall we go? thou
have the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6. 68. And therefore seeing he has the
spirit, if the Auditor were never so dead, he will make him hear. The time is
come now (says he) in Ioh. 5. 25. when the dead shall hear the voice of the
son of God. O then hear the word of Christ! and it will give thee life. Then
the speech of Christ is naught else but the Gospel, which the Apostle to the
Romans, chap. 1. 16. calls the power of God unto salvation to every one who
believes. Believe it, and thou shall find this power in thee. For as concerning
the Gospel, it was Jesus Christ who was the first speaker of it; first in The
Gospel preached by Christ since the beginning.
Paradise; and then to the Fathers in order; and lastly in his own person, in
a full revelation he spoke this word of life. Look not then for life; let
none from the King to the beggar think to be safe (account of the Ministry
as thou please) if thou lay not thine ear to the Gospel and believe.

Let (says he) the word of God dwell in you. (In you) that is in your hearts,
not in your mouths, and ears only; but let it go down to the heart, and to
the roots and depth of the heart; and let it have it residence there. It is
not enough to have it tinckling in thy ear, albeit some think it enough; but
it must go from the ear to the heart, and there the residence and lodging of
it must be. So he recommends not only the hearing and reading, but he
recommends the meditation in Meditation. in the heart.
the heart, thinking, musing, turning it over and over again and again in the
heart: for except the word be in the heart, it can have no operation. It is not
enough to sit and hear a while, and no more, if there be not a musing in this
word; think not that it can have an operation in your heart: but the more thou
hear, the more graceless art thou, experience proves it. Then the word must
be in the heart, but how long must it abide there? Must it abide the night, and
away the morrow, as a pilgrim lodging here this night, and in another place
the morrow? must it lodge with thee so? must thou muse of it for this time, and
then farewell till thou have to do with it again? and go to thy drinking and
pastime? No, says he, Let the word dwell, that is, have a continual residence
night and day within thee, and be a domesticke or household servant of Psalm. 1.
2.
thine (and not a stranger) to abide with thee for ever; and let there be a
continual meditation on it, so long as thy strength can bear it. Trowest
thou, that the thinking of Jesus will hinder thy occupation? No, it has no
grace but when thou art thinking of Jesus, and it hinders thee naught; except
the meditation of the word be ardent in thee night and day, as it was in David,
who had as weighty occupations as any man (O would to God Kings had a piece of
meditation in this word as David had, in all those other affairs!) think not
that grace will abide with thee. For look how soon this word leaves thee, as
soon grace goes from thee: so that of a merciful man thou be come a
tyrant. What makes so many of our Noblemen so debased, but the contempt of this
word? All our great men are very contemners of Gods word. See ye not the
vengeance of God upon them, their wives, and children they would have this word
driven out not only out of this country, but out of the hearts of men. Well,
well, for all that let the word have residence, and continual residence within
you. O but in what measure and what quantity? Some will say, if you know this,
what behooues me to be over careful to understand this word? let the Ministers
who live by it, have that care: If I have the Lords Prayer, the Belief, and the
ten Commandments, I need no more; I am a Lord, I am a Lady, I am a
Gentleman, what need I to trouble my self with the Bible? I have another
occupation. But what says the Apostle, Let the word dwell in you. How? In
scarsitie? in a bit of it? leaving the rest to others? No, but let the word
dwell in you plenteously: let the word make you rich. The Apostle then requires
a treasure and a store to be laid up in the heart: he would that the riches of
the word be in you, and not a poverty of it. And I say to thee, thou, who wilt
content thee with one part, and wilt not seek the riches of the word; and as
the Apostle to the Hebrews chap. 6. 1. that striuest not to be led forward to a
perfection, but dwell in the Elements and Cathechisme: I say thou have
nothing of it. He that will content himself with the Pater noster and the
Creed: I say he has nothing. And if he have any illumination by it, and cares
not for a perfection, that light he has gotten shall die out; if it grow not,
it will vanish away. You see that if fire be not fed with new matter, it will
go out: It is as sure We must grow in knowledge, or else we have no knowledge.
of that knowledge and light that thou have of God, and that light that is
kindled in thee, if it be not entertained so, that it grow on, it shall go
out. And O then, what danger art thou in? If thou spue out that light, it is
impossible that thou should be renewed by repentance: for it is called the
sin against the 2. Pet. 3. 18 Heb. 6. 4. 6.
holy Ghost. Therefore all ye that would see the light and the riches of
heaven, strive to be rich in this word, and be greedy in reading and
meditating of this word, as the Lord will give you grace.

To go forward, Let the word dwell in you, and in every one of you; for that
that is spoken to one, is spoken to all, and that abundantly. It is the
treasure that thou shall take up with thee, and it shall not leave thee in the
grave, it shall serve thee in heaven. But what more? In all wisdom: now in
this text that Effects of the word.
follows, we have certain fair effects of this word of Jesus dwelling richly
in us. They are partly in the man himself, in whom the word dwells; and partly
in others that hear him speak. He, who is rich in Christ, is not rich
himself only, but he shall enrich others also with him: every word that comes
out of his mouth, is a lump of riches to thee. Then to come to the first
effect, In all wisdom and knowledge. The word of God dwelling richly in any,
must not want the effect; it Wisdom is a fair light.
must have an effect: and the first effect is a fair light. O that light, it
is as it were a goodly torch light in a dark house, that enlightens the whole
house. So thou by nature art a dark dungeon: there is not a spark of heavenly
light in thee by nature. Thou have some light of nature, but what is that? It
is to make thee inexcusable. When this light of heaven comes, it lightens all
thy darkness. What is the first effect of the light of the Sun, or of a candle
but illumination? So this word is the illumination of thy mind. It opens the
heart, and enlightens it, Illumination.
and it illuminates all the affections, and puts them in order. So the first
effect is light. It has this of the own nature, 2. Tim. 3 15. Paul says, The
Scriptures are able to make thee wise; read all the books that are written, if
thou could compass heaven The Scriptures bring true wisdom.
and earth, if thou want the Scripture in thy heart, thou shall never be wise.
And seeing this is the true effect of the word, I beseech you look how you
have it. Some will clatter over Scripture, and yet they will be the vainest
bodies that are. Therefore content not thy self with a rote rhyme of the word,
except thou find an illumination by it in thy mind, and wisdom, and
knowledge in thy heart. What good does the repetition of certain sentences of
the Scripture, if this be not? I say to thee thou abusest them, and thou shall
be challenged for it.

Now to come to the next effect, Teaching and admonishing The second effect of
the word.
your own selves with Psalms, hymns and spiritual songs, with grace in the
heart singing to God the Lord. So the next effect of this riches of the word,
is in respect of others: he that abounds himself in the riches of the word,
having a store of it in his breast, he must redound and run over, as a full
vessel that runs over: he must not only be a vessel that is full, but he
must be a full vessel running over. So he must run over in Simile.
graces to others, and there is none of these graces, that run over that
falls to the ground, but the hearers receive them. We get not this grace to
keep it to our selves, and to hide it as a hoord in our own breast, so that
none other know of it: what auailes that hoord? Wherefore serves silver if it
be not employed to the use of men? even so what auailes wisdom and knowledge,
if it be not employed to the use of men, and communicated to others? it will
rot within thee, and never do thee good. And think thou that the more
narrowly thou keep it, that it will grow up the more? No, no, if thou have
silver and thou give it not out, it will not grow; but if thou laist it out,
thou keep the stock and receiuest the profit: Even so the word of God and
the riches thereof, if thou give it not forth, it cannot grow; but if thou
give it out and communicate the same to others, it shall grow in thee.
Concerning this matter, Paul 2. Tim. chap. 1. verse. 14. says, Keep that fair
thing that is committed in trust to thee, meaning this word. Then in the
chapter following in the beginning he says, These things thou have heard, what
shall thou do with them? Cammunicate them to faithful men. And what shall
they do To speak much of the word to others.
with them? that are able (says he) to teach others. So the only way to keep
this riches with a continual increase, is ever to be speaking of it, and
communicating of it to others. Where thou see an ignorant soul, give to
that soul one piece of that riches. I speak not this to Ministers only, but
to every one of you who hear me: for we and ye are bound to communicate this
word one to another. And thou who art the first giver of it, it shall grow the
more with thee; for it grows through giving of it. It is not like temporal
riches, of which the more is given, the more they decrease: but these
spiritual riches, the more they be given, the more they grow. Therefore be
ever giving of them, that thou may bring many living stones unto the house of
God, and of Jesus Christ; for thou shall not be glorified till the whole body
be glorified. Therefore as thou would be glorified, seek the rest of the
members to be glorified with thee, and be ever bestowing of these riches upon
the members of Christ, as thou have received of him. These are the two effects
that this word has in others. The first is in the mind. The second is in the
heart and affections of the hearers. In the mind the effect of the word is,
when thou teach the ignorant that has no knowledge, by Teaching of mind.
opening up the word thou do minister knowledge to the ignorant, and so it
stands in doctrine. The effect that it works in the heart is by admonishing and
comforting, rebuking as Admonishing and comforting the heart.
occasion serves. So I note the word of Jesus works in all the parts and
powers of the soul of man, in the mind, will, and every affection: it runs
through all the faculties of the soul. As for the word of a Philosopher, that
has the knowledge of things earthly, it will inform thy knowledge, and it
will let thee know the thing thou knew not before; but it will not Psalm.
19. 7. 8
reform nor alter thine heart: it is only Christ's word that does that. Men
are inclined to read good moral books, but I warn thee, except thou read
this word of Christ, nothing can reform thy heart. Therefore seek to this
Gospel. This is one thing I note, and another note is this. It is not enough
for thee that have the word of Christ in thy heart in great plenty and
abundance, to inform the understanding of an ignorant, no not in heavenly
things: yea and it were to understand the whole Scriptures, thou have not done
all thou should do, to make a learned hearer, though it were in the whole
Note of a true teacher.
ministry of God: what should thou do more? Thou must admonish, that is,
thou must go to the heart of the hearer, and his affections, to see how he is
disposed. So that if thou see the affections to be out of rule, as they will
appear in the manners of men, thou must tune thy speech according to the
affections of them, and strive to put them in order. And if they be over
lofty, thou must bring them low down; and if they be dejected, thou must
cheer them up again, comfort and encourage them. In a word, thou must
comfort, admonish, and rebuke, according as thou shall find the disposition of
the hearer: if he were a King, thou must rebuke him as thou find Admonition
hard.
occasion. The world cannot abide this. Speak to my understanding, say they,
teach me Christ, what have you more to do? Make me and the people to
understand, but speak not to my affections. Let me and them be together,
meddle not with my affections, begin not to rebuke me, and to control my
affections, I will not bear with it. But let men speak as they please, this is
the truth. Neither art thou a faithful teacher, if thou were but a private
man, if thou rebuke not a private man: much more a Preacher cannot discharge
his duty in his Ministry, if he admonish and rebuke not the person whom he
sees, and knows to offend. And therefore away with these Injunctions, and
rather close thy mouth then receive such an Iniunction; otherwise thou can
not do thy duty. What profits me all the light in the world, if mine
affections be out of rule? My knowledge shall do me no good, and he
Affections unruly.
who speaks not to thy affections, he shall do thee no good, he must first
instruct thy mind, and then speak to thine affections. I will not insist. But
I affirm, there was never more need to speak to the affections of men, to
admonish, and rebuke, then in these times.

Now he insists in the second thing, in raising up the heart of the hearer,
that is over far cast down and heavy, so that it cannot speak to God. To
cheer it up, I say, the means are Psalms, that is the first. The second, is
Hymns. The third, is Songs, Canticles: All stands in singing, melody of the
voice. The sad heart, that is over far cast down, that it cannot rise to
glorify God, requires to be raised up with the melody of the voice. I will not
insist: Psalms are songs in general of what 1. Psalms.
argument or purpose soever they be. Hymns are songs of 2. Hymns.
praises, a special kind of Psalm. Canticles or Odes are a 3. Canticles
certain kind of Hymns composed and made after a more artificial manner, as
the song of Solomon. The Lord recommends these as means, to raise up the heart
of man to God that is over sad. Then the lesson is this: Among all the rest of
the means, whereby the heart is wakened and raised up to God, singing is one.
This melody, this sweet harmony, whether it be natural, or artificial
Music, serves to raise up the heart to glorify God. And therefore the
melody of the voice it should be applied to the edifying of others. Look how
ye use your voice ye that have it; the Lord gives it to thee for the edifying
of thy brother. If any have a Canticle, use it to the edifying of thy brother:
the greatest part use it to the destroying of the hearer, and feeding of their
foul affections to vanity. Well, take heed you who have voices to sing, for
thou shall give an account, if it be not to the edifying of the hearer.

In the words following, he insists in a large description of these three.
First for the matter, as concerning it; it should be spiritual and heavenly.
All the matter of Psalms, Hymns, and Canticles, should be spiritual. For
why? they come from the riches of the word in the heart. If thou have this
substance within thee, all thy songs will be of Scripture, of heavenly things,
and all to glorify thy God, and to edify thy brother. Well, this that Paul
speaks, condemns all these songs of vain and filthy purposes. Fie upon thee,
who do abuse thy voice in foul bawdrie matters, to corrupt and infect the
affection of the hearer: It had bin better thou had not gotten a voice. Then
he comes to the form of singing, which is, it should be gracious, that is, it
should have such gratiousnes, and gravity, as might convey grace to the heart
of the hearer. This condemns all these light and wanton tunes that mistune the
affection of the hearer. Besides this, it condemns this chirming and chaunting
in the Papistical Church. This word grace condemns all, because by their
broken notes of Music they break the words of the Scripture, and so they
darken the sentence, that the words cannot be understood, and feed not the
heart with the words and sentences of the Scripture, but feed the ear with a
vain tune, and so it condemns all their singing; for all is graceless:
because this singing which the Apostle requires should be such, as should not
break the words of the Scripture, but should make them more plain and
distinct. In the third place he comes on to the chief Organ, that is, the
instrument wherewith they should sing. It is not with the Organs of the
Papists, no not with thy tongue; but it is with the heart, and with the
affection of a well ruled heart. Therefore as a fiddler, or any that plays on
an Instrument tempers his Simile.
Instrument, that a sweet harmony may be heard of it: Even so before thou
sing, temper thou thy heart; and let thy song rise, not from thy throat, but
from the depth of thine heart, that is, from thine affections set upon God.

Lastly, he sets down to whom we be to make this music, and whose ear we be
to please in singing. He says it is to the Lord: then it is the Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom thou should direct thy song, and whose ear thou should
please. So that he or she that sings either Psalms, Hymns, and Canticles,
should set themselves to please the ear of Jesus Christ. You see these vain
singers set themselves to please the ears of men; but thou that would sing
with grace to edification, set thy self to please Christ Jesus, that has
pleased thee. O woe to thee that will not endeavor thy self to pleasure. Whom?
not flesh, but him who has pleasured thee. Fie on thee, that should please
thy self, with the displeasure of thy Lord! For what have thou won, when thou
have pleased all the world, with displeasing of God? When thou singest to the
pleasure of God, thou give grace to the heart of thy neighbor, and edifiest
the hearer. Thus much (brethren) of the mean whereby these graces are gotten.

As for the verse that follows, taking occasion of the former, he sets down a
general rule of all thine actions, to wit, that in all, Jesus Christ should
ever be before thy eye: Al should be done to his honor. First he says,
Whatsoever you do, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. That is, by calling
upon his holy name, begin with him, and look that thine eye be first on him:
and say, Lord, mine eye is upon thee, and all is for thy glory. And in the end
of the verse, he will not give thee leave to thank the Father without the
Son: for he says, Giving thanks to God the Father even by him. The lesson
is then; In all actions and speeches, ever respect Jesus Christ his honor and
glory: he is a majesty of majesty's. When thou art honoring God the Father,
miss not Christ by the way (otherwise thou shall have no access to that
tribunal of grace) and say, O my God, I thank thee through my Mediator Jesus
Christ. Lord have mercy on me, for my Mediator the Lord Jesus sake; for there
is no mercy without Christ. The ground of this doing is, let be that he is God
he has also a Lordship over thee. Read Romans 14. 8. 9. For this end has he
died and risen again, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the
quick. So honor him as thy Lord. As Paul 2. Cor. 5. 15. Christ has died and
risen to that end, that he who lives, live no more to himself, but to him who
died for him, and rose again. Look that that life of thine be to him. Let
all thy life, thy words and thy actions be to his glory. Whereto should I
insist to recommend this matter to you? experience teaches it. What joy has a
man in any action, be it never so fair? what sweetness has any man? except in
the mean time his eye be upon the Mediator the Lord Jesus, except his
conscience tells him he speaks to the honor of the Lord Jesus. I press ye
with experience, foundest thou ever any true joy in thy heart, when thy heart
and eye was not on Christ? No, no: there is no actio^ if it were never so
glorious, that will minister joy to thy heart, except the eye and heart be on
Christ. No, if it were a Preacher, if he have not the eye of him on his Lord,
his speeches auailes not; they will not comfort the soul of him. Therefore
have ever thy eye upon this Lord Jesus, as ever thou would have pleasure and
joy in thy heart, and benefit to thy self in the Lord Jesus. To whom with the
Father and blessed Spirit, be all honor and praise for ever,

Amen
THE XXXII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 18. 19. 18 Wives, submit your selves unto your husbands,
as is comely in the Lord.

19 Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.


IN the text preceding the exhortation has been general, to wit, to
mortification, pertaining to every estate in the world. Now in this text he
descends in particular to certain special estates of men and women, directing
his exhortation particularly to them, and namely to three estates. The first is
to husbands and wives. The second, is to parents and children. The third, is to
masters and servants. To come then to the purpose. It is to be understood, that
from the beginning of this world there has ever been these three principal
estates, and ranks of men and women in the world. The first is the estate of
husbands and wives: for ye know Adam ere ever he had children he had his wife.
The next after Inequality in all estates.
this, was the estate of parents and children; and then by process of time
there became some masters, and some servants: so that this is the last in order
and time. In these three estates all be not equal, but there is an
inequality: some are superiors, and some are inferiors. The superiors he
has made to be Husbands, Parents, and Masters: The inferiors he has made to
be Wives, Children, and Servants. For if all were equal, no policy could
stand, nor order on the earth, but a confusion. The Lord, who is only wise,
knew this, and therefore it pleased him to dispose the world after this manner;
so that a policy might be kept in it. These being the three estates, the
Scripture has chief respect to them, and gives exhortations to these three.
In all he begins first at the inferiors, as in this place he begins at the
wives, and then comes to the husbands. The cause of this is, because the estate
of the inferiors is hardest, and therefore the spirit of God first informs
the inferiors, that they should take that burden the Lord has laid on them,
and that they should do that, which they do, willingly (for I will not give a
penny for thy service and subjection if it be compelled) for the subjection that
is voluntary is blessed, whether it be by wife, child or servant; otherwise
all is nothing worth; thou have lost thy thanks. But to come to the words.

First he says, Wives submit your selves unto your husbands. Few words, but
pithie. Note four things.
In them ye shall mark four things. Peter, chap. 3. where the Apostle making
mention of the ancient women, brings in the example of Sara, and there he
defines that subjection. Yet there is more in this subjection then simple
obedience. The obedience must have joined with it honoring of thy husband in
word: As thou obeyest Subjection of wives to the husbands, and what required in
it
him indeed and effect; so thou must honor him in word: therefore in that
same place it is said, that Sara called her husband Lord. Yet there is more
then all this: there is fear and reverence in the heart required, that is the
ground of all. Paul Ephesians. 5. 33. speaks expressly of this: Look that the wife
fear and reverence her husband in heart. So then there is this subjection in
the whole parts thereof. In deed, it is obedience: in word, it is honoring of
him: in heart, it is fear and reverence. Note.
So that wife which will be subject to her husband, must keep these three
points; or else she fails in subjection.

Come to the second: to whom this subjection ought to be given, not to every
one: To your own husbands. This subjection is commanded, not to strange men,
but to your own husbands. The special kind of subjection, wherein stands the
duty of the wife to the husband, is not to be communicated with any other man.
It is true, the male kind has a preferment above the female: it has honor
above the other. Look Paul 1. Tim. 2. 13. 14. where he gives two reasons of
this preferment. The first is from the creation, Adam was first created, and
then Eve. The second is, from the transgression, the woman fell first; and it
is sure, first in sin, last in honor. Notwithstanding this, wives are not
commanded to do this duty to every man, but to their own husbands. If you
will mark the words narrowly, you shall perceive there lurks an argument in
them. The argument is taken from their property: they are your proper goods;
thou have nothing so proper as thy husband: and therefore seeing thy husband is
thy proper good, should thou not do a duty to thy husband? But I leave
this, and I come to the manner. The manner of this subjection is bounded: In
the Lord: the Lord Jesus must be the rule of it. But to consider the words.
Wives be subject to your husbands in the Lord, The manner of the subjection.
in these two respects. to the will of the Lord, though he should command thee
never Note well two advantages by obeying in the Lord: first, they shall obey,
but in that the Lord commands: secondly, the service Christ accepts as done to
himself.
so much. And if thou obey him in things unlawful, thou shall dearly buy it.
And indeed, a fair advantage to do nothing but that that is lawful, honest,
and agreeable to the Lords will. The second advantage is, Obeying in the Lord;
all the service thou shall do to thy husband, thou shall do it to Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 6. 5. Where there is another doing in the Lord set down, what
ever thou shall do, do it in singlenes of heart, and not in doublenes. As there
be many false wives, who in obeying their husbands, have a double heart,
obeying them outwardly, not for any good will or liking they have to them; but
for some other cause and respect, while as in the mean time she will have in
her mind one evil or other against him. Yea while she is showing her self
obedient to her husband outwardly, her mind will be occupied on her harlotrie
with another: this is no single obedience, and the cause is, for as much as
thine eye is not upon the Lord, and it is impossible that thou can be sincere
in thy doing, except thine eye be upon the Lord. Lastly, doing all for his
sake, and in sincerity: Who shall reward thee? what benefit shall thou get?
shall it be a temporal thing, that he can bestow upon thee? No, no: the Lord
Jesus, whom thou preferrest in the obeying of thy Great reward for serving
Christ.
husband and service doing to him, he shall meet thee and reward thee with a
crown of glory. Woe were it for me and thee if in his service done in his name
and for his sake, we looked for no more but for these earthly rewards, though
it were to be made a King or a Queen: for we and they both shall vanish away;
for nothing is permanent here under the Sun. Well, do nothing, but for the
Lord Jesus sake, and that that is agreeable to his will, and say: All that I do
to my husband, O Lord, all is for thy sake: otherwise all thy service stinkes,
thou shall lose thy labor; for thou shall receive no reward of him. This for
the manner of subjection and obedience unto your husbands.

Now follows the fourth thing to be considered, the argument to move them to
this duty: In a word, It is comely: It is reasonable: it is just. Would you
see this? It leanes upon good grounds (never action had better.) First, it is
grounded upon the ordinance of God; first made before the fall, and after the
The argument of subjection.
fall renewed again. Secondly, it is grounded upon the law of nature: the Lord
has written it in thy heart at the first creation: Thou shall be subject to
thy husband. Besides this, ye that are wives, you have this conscience of your
own infirmity, you are the weaker vessels: and therefore ye crave a head: ye
crave to be under a Superior. Thou who art disobedient, who is it that thou
have to do with? Is it a man? Look what breach of law is here. First, thou
breakest Gods law. Secondly, thou breakest the law of nature. And thirdly, thou
do against thy own conscience. Doubt ye that all these bands lies on you?
I tell you Eve fell not so soon, but all these bands were laid on her. In the
third chapter of Genesis, verse 16. Thy appetite shall be toward him, etc. And
therefore mark it. This rebellion and wantonness in many wives, it is not so
small a sin as you think. It is a sin against God and his law. Secondly,
it is against nature. Thirdly, it is against thy conscience. This is not well
known by many; therefore learn to know it in time. Ye have now heard the
wives part.

Now I come to the men, Husbands love your wives; that is the thing he charges
them to do: then he says, Be not bitter unto them: that he forbids. The thing
then he bids them do, is Love. So subjection in the wife should be met with
love and care in things spiritual and temporal; this is general, subjection
in the inferior should be met with love and care of the superior in things
earthly and temporal, and in things spiritual. Superiors bound to duties as
well as inferiors.
For it is not the Lords will that the inferior should be bound to a duty,
and the superior should go free; but he is as fast fastened to do a duty to
his inferior, and more; the greater preferment the greater burden: all the
honors men get, are the greater burdens to them. Under the term of love, is
understood all kind of duty belonging to the wife; providing it begin at the
heart, and not at the mouth, nor hand. And therefore the word love comprehends
the most entire affection: wey it well, it is not a slender love. Love.
alike to them in filthy lust. Paul says, Husbands love your wives. How shall
ye love them? He says, As Christ loved his Church: Albeit he cannot attain to
the greatness and quantity of this love: yet keep the quality of it. How
loves Christ the Church? Unspeakably. O the chastnes of the love of Christ,
that he keeps to his Church! He loves his own Church, and he loves not an
harlot Idolater. She is set up before him as a chaste virgin. Then take thy
example of thy spouse Christ. Look how he loves thee, after the same manner
love thou thy wife. Whom should they love? Their own proper wives, no strange
woman; cast not your fancy upon them. Ye know we are set to love that, that
properly pertaines to us; but I say to you who are Husbands, ye have not such a
property to any thing as to your wives; yea your heritage, though you had a
kingdom, is not so properly yours, as they are. And therefore seeing it is
natural to every man to love his own, though it were so abject, why should
thou not love that, that is most proper to thee? I see a kind of meeting here:
before he made men proper to their wives; now he makes the wives proper to the
husbands: so that the man may say, thou art my proper portion: there is not
such a property in substance and riches, as this. For the riches cannot say to
the man, thou art my property. Indeed there are many niggard Covetousness.
hearted bodies, and to these men their goods may say; thou art mine as well as
I am thine. O woe is thee, thou forgettest thy duty! For what conjunction can
there be betwixt thee and thy goods? There is not a conjunction like this
betwixt man and woman; so that either is others property: and every one of them
may say to others, thou art my property. There is no such conjunction except
that conjunction which is betwixt the head and the body, and that conjunction
that is between Christ and his Church, which is greater then both the other
conjunctions. This conjunction between Christ and his Church, is the greatest
conjunction that is; for all other conjunctions will sever, but this betwixt
Christ and his Church seuers never. A man may be separated from his wife by
adultery or death, a man may have his head chopped off him, and a man may lose
his goods; but once conjoined with Christ, thou shall never be severed from
him, nor he from thee: What shall separate us, says Paul, from the love of
Christ, Romans 8. 35. The second conjunction is of the head with the body: the
third Our conjunction with Christ inseparable
conjunction is of the man with the wife: every one of these may claim other,
as their proper goods; so straight is the knot and bond that binds them up
together.

Now we have in the end of the verse the thing forbidden, and it is that that
is contrary to love, to wit, bitterness. Love and sweetness is commended:
bitterness, rigorousnes and cruelty is forbidden. There are many husbands, who
are tyrants over their wives; that should not be: they ought not to use
tyranny though it were over a dog or cat. Brethren, we know all this, that
there is nothing more natural to man, then the desire and seeking of
preferment: and the poorest body would be a King. And yet notwithstanding this
sinful body cannot bear it, it cannot use it: the sinful man cannot bear
preferment though it were but over his own wife; the father over the child;
the master over the servant: if ye set him over beasts, dogs and sheep, make
him a sheep keeper, he shall utter the bitterness of his heart, for give him
over to his own nature, he shall degenerate into tyranny. This is the
tyranny of man. Note well.
What is the cause of all this? The higher he be lifted up above others, the
higher is his foul affection lifted up above himself: so the honor of this
world does no good to men, except the wicked affection be sanctified by the
spirit of Christ. Woe be to thee that art a King, if thy affection be not
sanctified! Woe be to thee that art a husband, if thy affection be not
sanctified in thy preferment! And therefore the spirit of God inioynes that they
seek not preferment, who have not gotten their affection sanctified. Thou that
have not gotten a sanctified affection, seek not to be a King, seek not to be
a husband, seek not to be a Parent, seek not to reign over a country, to be
a Peer in a Land, a Magistrate; for thou shall abuse it to thy damnation. Why
should men, whom the Lord has cast down, be raised up and put in preferment?
shame shall betide them, who seek to set them up again, if they repent not.
Will thou set up a man with a heart like a Viper? O sie on thee, thou shall
feel the dint of this iniquity. Yet to come again to the word, Bitterness:
look that your love turn not into gall. Bitterness.
There be many, who have bin loving in the beginning, but incontinent they have
turned their love to gall. This bitterness must either be in the heart, or else in
the behavior: if it be in the heart, then fare ye well, he becomes a monster to
his wife. Is it lawful for a man to strike his own flesh? will not every one
that The husband not to smite his own wife.
hears or sees that, say; the man is mad, and worse then a brute beast? For
this doing comes of the bitterness of the heart against the wife, and thou
show that thy heart is alienated from her, when that thou sets not by what
becomes of her, and so thou art a monster to her without affection either to
love thy wife or care for her. Bitterness in the behavior, is either in word or
deed. Indeed it is true, this bitterness in the behavior it will oftentimes
proceed of the infirmities, that are in you women: therefore you should take
heed to your infirmities, and stir not up that gall. But yet there is an evil
ground in thee, who art the man. This bitterness of thine in behavior proceeds
of wanting of wit. It would beseem many a man better to be a wife, then a man.
Who will count of them that cannot bear the infirmities of women, but they are
degenerate men? Wisdom and discretion requires that they be borne withal.
Bears not Christ with thy infirmities? Has he ever broken the bruised reed?
Will thou not follow him, and bear with the infirmities of them, who are
conjoined with thee? Yet this is not so spoken, that we should let you go away
altogether, but we should so bear with them, that we should go about to
amend them in lenity, as Jesus Christ bears with his spouse the Church. And
this is that honor Peter speaks of in his first Epistle chap. 3. verse. 7.
giving honor unto your wives as the weaker vessels. I will not insist in this.
In all this duty of the wife to the husband, and the husband to the wife, I see
not a better way to discharge it, then to have thine eye upon Christ and his
Church: Follow Jesus, as he behaved himself to his Church; so behave thy self
to thy wife. Therefore as ever thou would be partaker with Jesus and his
Church, conform thy self to Christ and his Church: for if thou will not do
this, thou know not Christ nor his Church. Thou bitter husband, thou know
not Christ nor his Church. Thou, who art an evil wife, knows not Christ: thou
keep not faith to Jesus Christ; and not doing that, how can thou be safe?
So brethren, and sisters be wise: the Lord give the man wisdom, the Lord give
the woman wisdom: for there is an account that abides every one of them.
Therefore live in fear, and mutual duty every one to another, that ye may
be glorified with Christ your head and spouse. To whom with the Father and the
holy Spirit, be all praise and honor,

Amen.
THE XXXIII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 20. 21. 20 Children, obey your parents in all things:
for that is well pleasing unto the Lord.

21 Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, least they be discouraged.


Having ended the general exhortation concerning all estates of men
indifferently; the last day, as the Lord gave grace, we entered into the
special, concerning Three states in a family.
every estate of men. There are three estates in a family. The first is the
husband and the wife. The second estate is the parents and the children. The
third estate is the master and the servants. The last day we spoke of the first
estate concerning husbands and wives; now this day we have to speak of the
second estate, to wit, of parents and children. The words are few, yet as the
Lord gives grace we shall weigh every one, and only shall set down the
doctrine properly, as the words shall afford.

The exhortation begins at the children the inferior rank, as before it began
at the wife. I showed you the last day the cause: The estate of the inferior
is most hard to be borne withal: therefore first he directs his speech to the
inferior estate, to instruct them that willingly they take upon them that
burden, which otherwise they must bear, or else displease God. To come to the
words. Children obey your parents. The word child, in it own language is
common both to the manchild, and to the womanchilde; both are comprehended
indifferently under the name of children; and therefore this precept is
directed indifferently to both. The word, if ye would mark the meaning of it,
signifies him or her, who are begotten What the word children means.
and borne of those which are called parents: yet in the second place it is
directed to every one which bears the name of sons and daughters, whether
they be daughters in law, or sons in law. Ruth as ye read, daughter in law
to Naomi, she took this precept to her: she would not depart from her good
mother; and as you read, she promised obedience to her in all things.
Experience teaches us this day, that there be few like these two. Then
briefly this much for them, to whom this precept is directed. The next thing to
be marked in the words, is the duty commanded, which is this.

Children obey: this is the duty. This duty of obedience, is a duty yt
pertaines to the whole man both soul and body; it must come inwardly from the
heart, and outwardly from the hand. Obedience to parents.
thou art bound to reverence thy parents, as thy superiors: for reverence is
nothing else, but an acknowledging of thy superiors. bound thee to thy parents,
is love. Thou take substance and being of thy parents, all that thou have in
this world under God thou have it of thy parents: therefore the bond of nature
binds thee to thy parents, to love them.

To come to the obedience in the body, which is nothing else, but an outward
testification of all those things that are in External obedience to parents.
thy soul, it stands Timothy chap. 5. verse. 4. he makes mention especially of
the last, Let children (says he) learn to show godliness first toward their
own family, beginning at their father and their mother. If thou be not godly
to them, thou can not be godly to another. And again, verse. 3. Thou that
wilt not provide for thy family, art worse then an Infidel. Thou that wilt
not provide for thy father and mother, thou have no faith. Well, ye who are
children, learn of Joseph, what he did to his father and brethren. It is said
he fed them, he fed his old father, and put meat in his mouth: but thou will
wring it out of their mouth, if they have but one mouthfull. Yea if thou have
wealth and they be in poverty, thou will not know them, nor help them, but
wilt begin to be ashamed af them. Thou will not let them come within thy
doors, and if they come at any time to thine house to be eased, thou accounts
so lightly of them that thou can not abide their presence at thy board, or in
thy hall, but away with them to the chimney corner. O villain! thou art
unworthy to be called a son, and as an unthankful body thou shall find
thy reward to be worse then the reward of the worst Infidel in the world. Know
ye not this to be true? yea some children when they come to years, will wring
all from their parents, and send them to beg their meat. O Scotland, thou have
many such children within thee! but woe, yea double and treble woe be upon them
for ever! Then the duty commanded, is obedience, and this commandment lets
us see how naturally children are inclined to disobedience. God Children
naturally inclined to disobedience
bound thee in the creation to obedience, and now the world is so degenerate,
that there is nothing to be found in children for the most part but contempt,
and disobedience every way. O the malicious lowne will not be so despitefull to
any, as to his parents! So this commandment lets thee see the stubborn
nature of children against their parents. O but if this commandment enforce
thee not to do thy duty to thy parents, thou shall be reserved in bonds to
thine eternal damnation.

But to go forward, to whom should this obedience be showed? Obey (says he)
Whom? not every one, but thy parents, him and her that have begotten thee and
borne thee, of whom thou have thy being, and all that thou have under God: that
is the force of the word. So in the word there lurkes a forcible argument from
nature. Unnatural body, will not nature move thee? art thou unnatural? thou
art ungodly to God. For thou who breakest the bond of nature, thou breakest the
bond of piety. So the argument is from nature. It is wonderful to see how
Ethnicks children moved by the light of nature, have obeyed their parents.
There was a law made among the Athenians, that the child should feed the old
parent, or else be bound in fetters so long as he lived. If this law were in
Scotland, I think there should be many children bound in fetters; yea so many
as there could be fetters made for them. Well, will thou go to the beasts?
they may shame thee: thou may read of their gratitude to their parents, as
for thee they may call thee very well mother-curse and malison. If nature has
been so forcible in Ethnicks, Pagans, and brute beasts; shall grace do nothing
in thee? Will thou say thou stand in grace, and then wilt not do the thing
that nature requires of thee? It is shame to thee to stand up and say with a
brazen brow, that thou stands in grace, when nature has no force in thee? Thou
lie, thou have nothing to do with grace, for that thou have lost even thy
natural affection.

The next thing lets children s^^ in what thing they should be obedient:
apparently the word has no exception: Obey (says he) in all things. The word
is either of one action, and in it is required a perfect and whole obedience.
(If thou will obey, if it were but in action, give him whole obedience in doing
of the same. Some will go to work with grudging and glonshing: the lowne will
go with a backward look, murmuring, and whispering, with a devils pater
noster. This is but half obedience, and thou shall get no thanks for it:
therefore as thou would have thanks of God, let thy obedience be voluntary
and cheerful, or else the Lord loves thee not.) Or this may be understood of
sundry actions, Obey in all things whatsoever. You will ask; Are the children
bound in every thing to obey? Apparently the Apostle means so. Brethren, there
are three sorts of actions, or things in the world: Three sorts of actions.
plain evil forbidden by God: when it comes to that action obey him not: when
the father of heaven countermaunds, obey not thine earthly father.

Now follows the argument to move them to this obedience, for (says he) that
is well pleasing to the Lord; he likes well of it: for in obeying them thou
please not so much them, as the Lord Jesus who looks upon the inward
disposition of the heart. Well are they that can please the Lord: set thy heart
to please him; for there is no joy, but when the heart thinks True joy.
that the thing that it does, pleases God. Wherefore is it pleasing to him?
There is nothing pleasing to him but that that is just: the just Lord likes
nothing but that that is just. Therefore Ephesians. chap. 6. verse. 1. he said,
Children obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right, or just. Wherefore
is it just? because he has said it is according to a law, and this is the
law, Honor thy father and thy mother. But the word has further. It is well
pleasing, that is, exceeding pleasing and acceptable in an high degree. The
Lord has declared this, that this obedience to the parents is not only
pleasing, but in a high sort it likes him well. Look in the order of the
Commandments, begins he not in the second table at this Commandment? Honor
thy father and mother, to serve them, that is the next commandment of service
he commands to be done; after him thou art bounden to thy earthly father; and
more he has declared, that it is pleasing by that promise that is added to
that commandment, That thy days may be long in the land etc. So this promise
lets thee see that there is not a duty under his own worship more acceptable
to him, then this duty to parents is, and if To please parents is a duty very
acceptable unto God.
thou omit that duty and dishonor thy parents, although thou should give
to others all thy goods, thou shall never do any thing pleasing unto the Lord.
Well, you that are disobedient to parents, the Lord shall lay to your charge
the breach of the whole law. This argument has an higher ground: before it
move children to do this duty; first of all they must know the Lord Jesus,
they must study to please him; and then knowing him, and studying to please
him, out of question they will be obedient to their parents. Because my heart
is set to please the Lord, therefore I will obey my father. And therefore you
that are parents, take your lesson; As you would have your children obey you
for the Lords sake, so train them up in the Lord. Tell them what the Lord is,
and what he has done for them, and what they are indebted to the Lord. If you
Education.
omit this, to instruct them, of the just judgment of God it may come to
pass, that thine own child may be thy greatest enemy. So woe to thee that
wilt not let thy son know the Lord Jesus. Now you see this argument. What if
the child obey? he has here a fair offer, if you obey you do that is
acceptable to God; as by the contrary, if thou disobey, thou displeasest not
so much thy earthly father, as thou displeasest God. And think thou that
thou shall do that unpunished? Thy earthly parents cannot get an amends of
thee, but thou can not pass away and eschew Gods judgments. Read you not
of the punishment threatened, Exodus 21? It is commanded that the disobedient to
parents should be stoned to death. Deuteronomy. 27. Among the rest of the curses, he
that curses his parents has a special curse: and what is this curse? is this
curse, in hell everlasting damnation? Is there no more? Prou. 30. verse. 17. The
eye that mockes the father (as there be many lownes that mock their father)
and despises the instruction of his mother, let the Ravens of the valley pick
it out, and the young Eagles eat it. Would you have an example? Read of Cham,
the Scripture tells you what an eternal curse he and his posterity got. Read
you not of the curse of Absolon and of Abimelech, Judge. 9. he slew all the
lawful sons of Gedeon, but the Lord revenged it. We have no need to go to
far examples; see we not daily examples of the judgments of God upon
disobedient children to their parents? Thus far for the duty of Children.

Now follows the duty of the parents. Fathers (says the Apostle) provoke
not your children to anger, the reason; least they be discouraged. This
commandment to parents lets you see, even as the children may fail in doing
of their duty to their Duties of parents to children.
parents; so parents may fail in their duty to their children: albeit the
failing of the one be not so common, as the other: for the love of the father
is more entire to the child, then is the love of the child to the father: and
therefore his failing will not be so often, nor yet so great. And the parent that
is outrageous, he shows himself very unnatural: for his love should be
greater, then the offense of the child. Yet now adays many are unnatural
parents, for nature is greatly broken and almost Natural affection much
decayed.
taken quite away: and therefore the end of the world is at hand; and I am sure
there is not so great hatred among the Ethnicks, as there is among parents and
children this day in Scotland.

But to come to the words: he speaks to the fathers especially, and not to the
mothers, there is some cause of this. Fathers (says he) provoke not etc. This
is because this vice of bitterness, and rigorousnes in dealing with the child
in wrath, is found with the men chiefly; he will handle his child so bitterly,
as if he were a dog: as for the mothers they incline to a more entire love to
their child; and if they fail, they fail in overmuch bearing with them.
Fathers (says he) provoke them not to wrath, as if he would say, they will be
wrath, if you put over sore to them: for why? thou have begotten thy child
like to thy self of a corrupt affection, and therefore blame them not if they
be angry at thee, if thou urge them over much. And it is true, many evil
disposed parents will have evil disposed children; the canker that is in the
child, is drawn out of thee: and therefore thou should seek to amend it.
There be many ways to provoke them to wrath: First, when thou commaundest Many
ways to provoke children.
them to do that that is ungodly (as there are many that do thus.) Secondly,
when thou art outrageous and despitefull, and wilt miscall thy child. Thirdly,
when thou beginnest to strike without rhyme or reason. These are the three ways
whereby chiefly they are provoked to wrath, as 1. Sam. 20. 30. Saul breaks off
with despitefull talk to Jonathan, and calls him a harlots son (will thou
call thy son whores son? then thou have a harlot to thy wife) Then he said,
go get me David, for he shall surely die: he commanded him to do a thing
ungodly: it greatly grieved him, that he was so miscalled of his father, as
also that his father commanded him a thing unlawful. Therefore ye who are
parents be not like Saul; abuse not your children as Saul did Jonathan: for no
question, this abusing of Jonathan was one part of his enditement: God will not
let it slip unpunished: therefore have thine eye to the Lord, that thou may
see what is pleasing and displeasing unto him. O it is a terrible thing to fall
into the hands of the Lord! therefore blessed art thou that studiest to please
the Lord, for thou shall reign with him in glory. Provoke not to anger (says
he) Whom? who but your own children, and bowels: thou art very unnatural, who
wilt rent out thine own bowels. In this word there lurkes an argument from
nature, forcible in the very infidels and beasts. See you not how beasts will
love their own young and handle them lovingly? Well, if nature craves this
that thou should not anger thine own child, what craves grace? Thou do
challenge grace, and yet thou vtterest no sign of grace in thee: if there be
any in thee, thou should utter it toward thine own. The argument is
subioyned in the end of the verse, Provoke not (says he) your children to
anger, least they be discouraged. Thou dullest them and make them like
dogs, by knocking and dinging still on The argument.
them. The argument is not taken from any mutual miurie. I think if the
Apostle had known our country, he would have used this other argument, least
the child meet thee with a double revenge, and pluck the bit out of thy
cheek, and thou who art his mother he strike thee on the face, and shut thee
out of doors, and cause thee beg thy bread, as we see this day some do to
their father and mother. But the Apostle saw not such things in his time;
therefore he takes not his argument from the evil of the son to the father,
but from the evil of the father to the child. This discouraging is not so much
by reason of the rigorous dealing, as by reason of the person that does it. It
is my father who should do me most good, yet it is he who does me most evil:
for this general is true, the nearer they be joined to us who do us any
wrong, our displeasure is the greater. So this discouragement is not so much
for the evil, as for the person that does it.

To conclude, of all others especially the father by his doing is most
effectual either to win or lose his child. There is none will lose or win
thy child, so soon as thy self, and all because of that conjunction that is
betwixt thee and thy child. I read of two ways to lose thy child; but there
is one way only Two ways to lose a child.
to win him: he who spares the rod, hates the child, Prou. 13. 24. Ely
thought he loved his sons when he corrected them not, when they offended: but
I say to you he hated them, and was the wrack of his children under God: for
the Lord had said they should die, yet he used Elyes indulgencie for that
purpose. Absolon was lost, because he was overmuch borne with. As for the
thing that will win them, it is that golden mediocritie; make not Gods of
them, nor yet Devils of them. And would you have a warrant of this? Paul Ephesians.
6. verse. 4. says, Parents bring them up: and how? by filling their bellies?
No, no: but with instruction; instruct them in the true form of religion, in
the rudiments of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, tell them of God from the time
they can begin to Catechizing of children how soon.
babble. See if you can get the holy spirit to possess them, that they may
fear God. This is that golden mediocritie, and if thou miss this way, all
other ways shall be to lose thine own child. Go get great heritages to him,
and if thou bring him not up to know God, thou do nothing else but heap up
coals of fire to destroy him: and as often as thou art in heaping up of thy
pelf for him, thou do but endeavor to bury him in destruction. The Lord
open our eyes that we may see the things that are offered to us in Christ
Jesus: To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all praise now and for
ever,

Amen.
THE XXXIIII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 3. verse. 22. 23. 24. 25. and Chap. 4. verse. 1. 22 Servants, be
obndient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh in all things,
not with eye service as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart, fearing God.

23 And what soever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men,

24 Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance:
for ye serve the Lord Christ.

25 But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong that he has done, and
there is no respect of persons.

1 Ye masters, do unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing
that ye also have a master in heaven.


THese last days (well-beloved brethren) we entered into the particular precepts
and exhortations, concerning particular estates of men and women. And first we
spoke of the duty of wives to their husbands; and again of the duty of
husbands to their wives. Next we spoke of the duty of children to their
parents; and again of the duty of parents to their children. Now the last
estate in a family is, the estate of masters and servants. Therefore we have
to speak of the duty of the servant to the master; and again of the master
to the servant, because there is a mutual duty required: and they are so bound
the one to the other, that they cannot be separate.

To come then to the words: There is one precept given to servants; Servants
(says he) obey your masters. Then after he insists upon this obedience, and
describes it largely. First, he sets down the matter of it, in what things
they should obey. Secondly, he comes to the form of obedience, and describes
it. Thirdly, he goes to the fountain and ground of all duty, which is the
heart. Then lastly, to move servants to this obedience, he brings in two
arguments. The first is, for that rich is the reward in heaven. And the second
is, for that recompense that God shall give to masters, who do not their duty
to their servants. To the words. Servants, says he. In these days when the
Apostle directed this precept, properly here by servants is understood such as
were in a hard estate, slaves, bought and sold like beasts, over whom the
masters had power Servants in the Apostles time
permitted by laws to slay and save them, as over beasts: so their estate was
hard and heavy. Secondly, you must understand, they were servants converted to
Christ, and their estate in that case was blessed. Thirdly, they were for the
most part such as had to their masters Infidels, not yet converted to the faith
of Jesus Christ; and so were the more rigorous. For oh the cruelty of the
Infidel over the Christian! Now in respect of their estate, hearing of the
liberty of the Gospel, they mistook it, and began to think that Christ and
his Gospel came to destroy policy and laws, that binds up Commonweals. And
therefore many of them began to turn grace into wantonness, and began to leave
their masters, thinking that the Gospel made an equality of persons, as the
Anabaptists teach at this day. Therefore the Apostle perceiving this, he
directs this precept to them, recommending obedience notwithstanding of the
Gospel. Thou art a brother, and a sister, and yet a servant; therefore obey.
Now howbeit properly and in the first room, this precept be directed to
servants that were slaves, bought and sold; yet it is extended also to all
kind of servants. It pertaines to you as well as to them.

Come to the next: what is commanded them? The duty is obedience; Obey, says
he. He that is a servant should not rule, but obey. The whole duty of the
inferior to the superior, is called in one word, Honor: so the Lord terms
it. And it has two special parts. First, reverence in words. The inferior is
bound to reverence the superior in his talk. The second Honor has two parts.
part is obedience in deed: he is bound not only to reverence him in words,
but also to obey that he commands. Both these must begin at the heart:
otherwise thy reverence and obedience auailes not. Now the Apostle especially
insists upon obedience. The duty recommended to children is obedience; and the
like is recommended here, because of the two duties, obedience is the hardest.
It is an easy thing to do courtesy to thy master, to put off thy cap, and
beck: but here is all the gravity and weight of the matter, to obey. This the
Apostle considering, he sticks most on it, howbeit under it all points of
duty be comprehended. This for the duty. Now follows the persons to whom it
appertains. Obey. Whom? not every one, but your Lords and masters. Those that
God has set over you. It pleases him to make the^ superiors, and you
inferiors; therefore obey them. Yea, the name it self contains an argument
to move thee to do thy duty: he is thy Lord and master, and thou should
think with thy self, he is my master, therefore I should obey; I am bound to
do it, Let every soul (says Paul) be subject to the superior powers. There
is the commandment. The words that follow, be to the consolation of Romans 13. 1
the servant, your master, says he: but how? according to the flesh. That is,
according to things bodily, not according to the spirit and soul. This is thy
comfort, that art a servant; there is no master that is set over thy soul, no
not a King is set over thy soul, to sit on thy conscience: for that were an
absolute power that commands, as well the soul as the body. Now (brethren)
there is not a Lord that may command so, but only the Lord of heaven and
earth: that is, none that has an absolute power, but only the Lord Jesus
Christ. It is shame to Christ the only Lord of the conscience.
the Monarch to take this name to him. It is a blasphemy and a derogation to
the name of Jesus: no, there is none has power over my conscience or thine,
but only he. So if ye mark narrowly, ye may see that as there is one thing
commanded; so there is another thing forbidden them. Obey them in thy body,
though it were to suffer injury: but as for thy soul and conscience, it is
forbidden thee to subject it to their appetite: if thou do it, thou bereaues
Christ of his right. Therefore Galath. 5. it is said, be not made the servants
of men: if thou do it, thou makes thy self a slave to the foul appetite of
flesh and blood. To be short, there be two vices in service, and obedience that
is done to the superior whatsoever, which should be eschued, Two vices in
service to be eschued.
and they are both in extremities; and betwixt them there is a gracious virtue.
The one is, when the subject refuses obedience in the body, howbeit he should
do wrong to thy body; yea and he should hang thee, behead thee, thou must
not refuse obedience: there is a Lord will requite him. The other is as evil
as the first, when thou give all to him both in soul and body. Fie on thee,
thou give to him that which God has forbidden. The Lord has reserved the
soul to himself, and yet thou will give it to thy superior. Ye know the
speeches of the land, of what religion the Prince is, I will be of the same.
Some of the Lords will say so, my religion depends upon the commandment of
the Prince; but if the King did his duty he would stone thee for thy
blasphemy. These are the two vices in service and obedience. Then comes the
third point, the virtue, that is in mediocritie: the servant must obey his
master according the body, but not according to the soul. Thou art of two
parts, of a body and of a soul: Give thy master the body, but as for thy
soul, keep it to the Lord. Though all the Angels should claim right to my
soul, I will not give it them: it is reserved to my Lord.

Now to come to the second part. The description of this obedience, wherein the
Apostle insists, Obey them that are your masters according to the flesh in all
things, not in some things according to your appetite, but in all things
according to their will and command. Then will ye say, shall we obey them in
all things ungodly, dishonest, unlawful, and forbidden by the absolute power of
God? I answer, the word before immediately, bounds your obedience; as their
dominion is bounded, so is your obedience toward them bounded. So that if
Obedience of servants limited.
with their command they would hurt thy conscience, they pass their bounds,
and thou art not bound to obey, but deny them obedience. For if thou were a
beggar, thou art as free in conscience as the King: but yet servants take heed,
look that you make not the rule of your obedience your own will, as there is
over many this day who follow their froward will; whisperers, that will do
things with a quiet (Pater noster). The rule of thine actions is not thy own
will, but the will of thy master. In such sort that if he command thee things
grievous, laborious, and wearisome, thou art bound to obey. The Lord himself
Luke 17. 7. he sets down the estate of a servant, Which of you having a
servant that has been occupied all the day in labor and travel, will say to
him, come and sit down? No, he will not say that to him, but notwithstanding
all his painful labor and wearisomnes, he will say, Go make my supper
ready, then rest your self, there is the burden. Think not because it is
wearisome, therefore thou may disobey it; but if it stand with the will of
the Lord, thou art bound to obey. This shortly for the matter, wherein servants
be bound to obey: now follows the manner, form and fashion of their
obedience. First he tells thee in what manner thou should not obey (for it
stands thee in no less then the reward of death and life everlasting, if thou
were but a sweeper of a house, or a caster out of ashes, thou have to do with
the Lord in doing of thy service.) The form of not obeying is, to obey to the
eye of thy master. This is a vice in thy service, when thou have not an eye
lifted up to heaven, but art set so on thy master, that without respect to the
Lord, thou go about to please him; yet more thou obeyest him with eye
service, when thou set not thy heart so much, as thy outward eye to please
thy master; so that when he leaves thee, thou will go to thy wantonness again,
or else do some evil; as there be many in Edinburgh this day, who in their
masters absence sit either idle, or else do evil in stealing of their masters
goods. Such service as this, is called eye service. The Lord compares these
servants to reprobates: what do they? As soon as their master is absent, they
will begin to strike their fellow laborers: and what more? they will sit down
and drink and be drunken. What will the Lord do when he comes? he will cut
them off, and give them their portion with hypocrites, Matthew. 24. 48. 49. etc.
Then this is the form forbidden, and he gives a reason, what manner of men are
these eye pleasers? they that do such service are pleasers of men, that is,
they are flatterers, studying to please men, when their heart will be far
from them. Well, he or she, who sets not their heart to please God, but seeks
first of all to please the eye of man, shall never be a faithful servant to
man: False to God, never true to man.
for false to God, never true to man. But that man, who sets his heart to
please God, that is a true servant; he will be as true behind thy back, as
before thy face: therefore thou, who would make a choice of servants, seek
them who are set to please God, and if thou get them with that mark, thou
gettest happy servants. But on the contrary, want he this mark, he shall be
a curse to thee, and the most thou shall get of him, he shall be an eye
servant: for if once thou should turn thy back, he shall be a waster of
thy goods, and an evil speaker of thee behind thy back.

The form of service he craves is this, Obey with simplicity and singlenes of
heart. He opposes this to eye service: for they are as contrary, as light and
darkness: and therefore where there is eye service only, there is no singlenes
of heart: for he that goes about to serve thee with eye service, has a double
and false heart. Again, where the simplicity of the heart is, O there is a
blessed service; where there is such service, there is fidelity and
faithfulness; there is a faithful servant; there is no eye service: for he is
not a servant to thy eye only, but a servant behind thy back also. He shall
be every way faithful. He lays down the ground of this sincerity, fearing
God. So he that fears God more then the eye of him who is his master, the King
or Prince, that man shall be the faithfullest servant. And by the contrary, he
that has not the fear of God in his heart, that wretch will beguile thee; he
shall never be faithful to thee. Therefore thou, who would have a good
servant, I give thee a token whereby thou may know him. Look if he have the
fear of God; and if he fear God more then thee, for all thy scepter and
sword, thou shall get a faithful servant and subject. But on the contrary,
thou shall receive a curse in thy house and family, when thou shall get any
that wants this fear of God: for he shall never fear thee, but shall ever be
false to thee. You that have servants, labor to put the fear of God in their
hearts. Nay, it is no marvel though ye have thieves, and whores in your
houses and families, when as ye put not in this ground of sincere service in
their hearts, the fear of God.

Now follows the fountain of all service: What ever you do, do it heartily.
As if he would say, begin not at the hand, or foot to do thy service, but
begin thou at thy heart: let it be The fountain of good service.
the ground of all thy service. All good actions should begin at the heart.
Therefore if thou were but casting out the ashes, look thou do that turn
with thy heart; so that thy heart be as well occupied as thy hand; otherwise it
is but a counterfeit action: and I will not put a difference betwixt thy action
and the action of an ox drawing in the plough. Indeed thy master may be
profited by thine action; yet if thy heart be not with it, thou have lost thy
travel. The Lord that sits upon thy conscience, shall turn thy action to thy
damnation.

In the next place the Apostle sets down, how they shall come to this way of
service. It is no small matter to get thy heart to serve thy master: for thou
that gettest a freedom to serve, thou have gotten thine hire in thy hand. It
is a rare grace then, to get thy heart to concur with thy action. The way is,
How to serve heartily.
Do it heartily, as to the Lord. As if he would say, when ye are doing and
laboring, think not with your selves, I am serving man or woman, a creature
though he were a King, in my service: but say, I am serving my Lord Jesus
Christ. Then ye servants, whatsoever thing ye do, though it were but sweeping
the house, say, all this that I am doing, how vile soever it be, I am doing it
to my Lord Jesus Christ. Have thy eye lifted up when thy hand is down. I shall
tell thee how thou shall get it: If thou have a respect to his will, howbeit
immediately it be not done to him; yet if thou have the knowledge that it is his
will, that thou should do so, the Lord takes that service, rather done to
himself then to thy master. Therefore the Apostle says, Serving Christ and
not men. Well is that servant that can say, I do this to obey thy blessed
will: and then the Lord will say, I give thee thy reward. Then the lesson is,
who is he that does hearty service? None but the servant of Jesus Christ. If
thou be not his servant, thou shall never be a hearty servant to man; nor a
true subject to the King. Look then, if your servants can serve Christ; and if
they cannot, it is an evil token they cannot serve thee: for there is not a
faithful servant, but he that is the servant of Christ, and in his service
has ever his eye to the will of Christ. And if thou have such a servant, then
thou shall have a blessing of that servant, though it were but a kitchen less.
O blessed is that house, that has a servant that fears the Lord, and loves
the Lord! Yea a greater blessing follows that servant, then follows the
master oftentimes.

Now follow the arguments, to move them to this holy Arguments to move
servants.
service. The first is, from the reward that the faithful servant shall
receive, Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance. The argument is taken not from an hire they get presently, but
from a promise of an hire. Now certainly thou art a wicked servant, that wilt
not do a turn till thou get thy hire in thy hand; thou art a wicked servant
that wilt do nothing till thou get heaven in thy hand: I tell thee, thou shall
never get heaven, if thou cannot depend upon a promise of heaven. There is here
then a promise of an hire, and a reward, From whom? The Apostle says not your
earthly masters will pay you: no, but he says your Lord of heaven shall reward
you. Why speaks he so? because he durst not promise of earthly men: for all
men are liars, and they will often times hold back the hire of the servant; but
he promises in the name of the Lord; for he is faithful. And therefore
servants you should rejoice in this: for howbeit thou want thy earthly hire,
yet be faithful in thy service, and thou shall not want thy hire. What a
reward is this? what should he have? his hire in his hand, and so fare ye
well? Indeed this is the fashion of the world; but this reward the Apostle
speaks of, is a reward of an inheritance. O thou that wilt have an eye to the
Lord of heaven, he will not reward thee like a servant; thou shall be a son;
and therefore an inheritour, Romans 8. 17. And, Go ye (says Christ) inherit that
kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world, Matthew. 25. 34. Yea,
shall the kitchen less be made a Queen, and a silly simple boy a King? Yes,
the Lord will do that, and will give them a kingdom in heaven. So, first
rejoice for the certainty of your reward: next, for the greatness of it. It is
not an hire and a bounty that is small in value. Alas it may be, thou think
little of it, because thou have it not in thy hand: but blessed art thou if
thou caust wait upon the promise, and believe it.

Now to prove that they shall get this reward; first he takes an argument from
their own knowledge, Knowing. Know ye not? I appeal to your own conscience,
if there be not a reward laid up for thee, if thou serve faithfully: tells not
thy conscience thee this? I will serve, for I look for a kingdom. It is not
this small hire. No, that Lord whom I have served from morning to night, he
will give me a kingdom. Brethren, it is a thing impossible, that faith can
beguile a man: hope then, I promise thee thy hope shall not beguile thee; yea
hope for things thou have not seen, and thou shall get them. It is impossible
Note well.
that thy faith and hope can be disappointed. And lay this ground, thou have to
do with a faithful Lord, that can not beguile thee. So close thy eyes upon
all other things, and rest in hope on Christ, and thou shall see a joyful end.
Blessed is that soul that rests in hope, for it shall receive glory.

The second argument is from the service done to Christ: Ye serve the Lord. Fie
on thee that wilt begin to serve another master, and neglect thy duty to him.
So the argument is, because thou seruest the Lord Jesus Christ; therefore thou
must have a reward of him: he will give thee an heritage, because his hand, is
the hand of an infinite God. What are the heritages on the earth? he thinks it
over little to give them to thee: therefore he will give thee the kingdom of
heaven. Then mark: never man served Christ for naught. It is impossible, that
he who serves Christ, can want a reward: thou who caust serve Christ with many
crosses, it is the very way to bring thee to a kingdom. So, blessed is that
feruant, that serves Christ Jesus: if thou get not this benefit to be a servant
in his house, though it were to be but a porter (for the vilest servant that
serves Christ shall get a hire, even a kingdom) woe shall be to thee.
Therefore seeing now is the time to serve him, show your selves faithful
servants to Jesus; for when all vantage fails thee, the Lord Jesus will be
thine advantage: and therefore serve the Lord, and thou shall not want a
reward. And thou must not think that this reward comes unto thee through
merit: it comes of grace; for when thou have done all that is commanded thee,
say I am an unprofitable servant, Luke 17. 10. And so fie on the Papists that
think their service shall merit such an hire, as is the inheritance of heaven.
This reward comes of grace only, and of his faithfulness that has promised:
otherwise hell would be thy reward. Therefore thou who looks for a reward of
thy service, think thou art serving Christ: think again, thou shall get a
reward; but beware of presumption, to think this turn shall merit heaven. No,
but the thing I do shall not be the cause of my salvation; no, I am but an
unprofitable servant, and in the mean time look for a reward of mercy and
grace, because he is a faithful Lord that has promised thee a reward; and in
the end thou shall get a kingdom purchased by the blood of the Lord Jesus.

Now I come to the second argument, to move servants to The second argument.
do their duty, contained in the last verses of this chapter. These servants
in old time were in hard condition: for they were slaves, living to the
appetites of men, bought, sold, beaten, and slame, at their pleasure: for look
what power men had over beasts, the like had they over their servants.
Therefore these servants might have said, there is a fair reward abiding us;
but yet our present estate is intolerable; we are entreated as beasts, and we
sustain great injury: he meets with this, and in a word promises a just
amends, and revenge of the wrong done to them. Let no man abuse his power over
poor ones, what ever wrong is done to them, it shall be repayed. So the lesson
pertaining to the inferior, and oppressed by the mighty ones in this world,
Masters and Lords especially, is this. Art thou a servant? do thou well?
seruest thou the Lord Jesus Christ in thy service? is thine eye set to please
him? thou shall receive the reward of thy weldoing, and that of an inheritance
in heaven. In well doing suffer thou? gettest thou wrong? art thou oppressed
roughly? handled with cruelty and severity? The Apostle answers, thou shall
have an assisement beside the reward. What would thou have? The Lord shall
oppress them that oppress thee. This generally appertains to all estates.
Do thou well? Thy reward shall be an eternal heritage. In well doing
suffer thou wrong? The Lord promises thee an assisement and an acquittance
of them that do thee wrong. Brethren, it is marvelous to see the care and
regard the Lord has to his own, if they were never so poor worms, that the
great folk will not vouchsafe themselves once to look to, it would seem
enough that a poor servant should get such an heritage, howbeit his injuries
he suffered were never revenged. Who would think otherwise? O but the Apostle
answers not after this manner! It may suffice, that you shall get a fair
reward for the service ye do: as for the rest, what matters it? No, but he
says in effect; as for the wrong done to you, it shall be avenged. So the Lord
is not content to give them a reward; but for the wrong they suffer, the Lord
will be avenged on them that wrongs them, if they were the greatest Monarchs in
the world. Howbeit thou would forgive them, as Steven did, Act. 7. and say,
Lord lay not this to their charge; yet the Lords justice will not suffer thee
unrevenged: the Lord shall take them that oppress thee, and throw them into
hell, if they continue impenitent: yea it comes to pass often times, that
oppressors of the poor and Church, before they go out of the world, that the
Lord in the sight of the poor and oppressed, takes them and rents and riues
them in such sort, as they are compelled to pity them. O then, how terrible is
the judgment that abides oppressors and abusers of their servants whatsoever!
Well then, there are two things, well doing, and suffering of wrong: well doing
shall receive an inheritance; suffering shall receive a revenge, and vengeance
shall come upon the oppressor. So let none be weary in well doing in this
world, nor be impatient in suffering; for it is all but for a moment we do and
suffer, in respect of that eternity. The second thing to be marked is this:
Who is this that shall revenge the cause of the poor servants? He says not,
your masters have masters above them (as no doubt they had: for all superiors
have Magistrates above them to take order with them if they do wrong) alas if
he had answered so, it had been little comfort to them, as they found by
experience: for they accepted of the persons of men, they accounted of the
master, and not of the servant, and they permitted the^ by their laws to abuse
their servants. The Apostle knew how slack the Justices are to revenge the
cause of servants: and therefore he promises no amends at their hands, but at
the hands of the Lord. So now speaking of revenge, he promises it not to come
of the Magistrate, but from the Lord: for he knew the Lord would not beguile
him. Ye may then see he has trusted much to God, and depending on him, he
promises much in his name. What would thou have? a reward, a revenge? the
Apostle promises both to thee, but at the Lords hand. The lesson then is: the
man that knows God well, and is well acquainted with his mercy, with his
justice, with his power, and his wisdom; it is wonderful what he will promise
in his name, flesh and blood scarsely will believe it. Note.
Again, a poor body and one oppressed, one that knows not this, when he hears
of this, it is wonderful, how he will swallow up these promises: nay, thou
never did eat meat with such pleasure, as this poor one will swallow them
up. And I say, a Pastor should not promise ought of God, except he knew him:
and thou that art an hearer, if thou know him in his power, justice, and the
rest, in despite of all the world thy heart will rest on him. Therefore know
him in Jesus Christ: and pray night and day, O Lord, I lie in darkness, let me
see thee in Jesus Christ, and the glory that is in thee, that my soul may
rest in thee. Now woe is that soul, that knows not God in Jesus Christ. Ye
shall not abide here ever: therefore seek to know this God with whom ye must
live forever. He gives the reason why God should revenge their cause, and wrong
done against them, by pointing out the nature of God: He is a Judge; not like
the Judges of this world. They respect the persons of men; this is the
corruption With God there is no respect of persons*
of nature: but as for this Judge, he respects no person; he will not look to
thee who art a King, more then to the beggar. When thou appearest before him,
come on with robe royal, he will not regard thee no more, then if thou
appearedst in a beggars cloak. Therefore look to him now, as thou would
see him, when thou shall appear before his judgment. And there is none of us,
but even now we are before his tribunal; howbeit we see it not. There is none
of these outward conditions or degrees (we are all alike by nature) but we
get sundry degrees, he of a King, and he of a Lord (and so forth) yet none
of these outward qualities will be accepted before the Lord: no not the outward
calling of a Christian, if thou have no more. A man may think this is a hard
matter, for all to stand before his tribunal without these outward qualities.
A King may say, shall not my kingdom stand me in steed when I come before that
tribunal? And the Earl may say, shall not my Earldome help me when I come
before God? And the rich man may say; shall not my riches help me? wherewith
shall I cloathe me if I cloathe me not with these? Now I answer, indeed every
man has this in his mouth, I cannot come naked before God: Indeed thou must
not stand naked, thy shame must be hid, thou must have a garment on thee; thou
must be arrayed, or else the wrath of the Judge will devour thee. Now what a
garment shall I get? It must be a bloody garment (no silver, gold or precious
stones) covering thee from the crown of thy head to the sole of thy foot: yea
thou must be died with blood. The high priest durst not enter into the
Sanctuary (for his life) without blood: so on pain of thy life see that thou
enter not into the presence of God without blood. Read the Epistle to the
Hebrews, ye shall find this, that the high Priest of old durst never enter
into the Sanctuary, except first he had bin sprinkled with blood; and this was
the blood of Bullocks, the figure of Jesus Christ. So except thou appear died
over with the blood of Jesus, no standing for thee before God his tribunal. If
ye would then have a garment, seek this garment; never rest till thou get it.
And if thou appear in this garment, thou have this advantage, howbeit thou be
full of spots, the Lord has no eye to thy sin; but accepts of thee in that
bloody raiment, and forgets all thy sin, and thy actions are accepted in that
blood of Jesus. But alas, the want of the knowledge of sin; this dead
conscience that lets us not feel the weight and burden A dead conscience.
of sin, is the cause why we account not of this blood of Jesus.

Now brethren, there is a place in the sixth chapter to the Ephesians I would
compare with this place, recommending the duty of masters in the ninth verse,
he uses the same argument that is here: he uses it there as a terrible
argument to the oppressors; but here he brings it in as a comfort to the
oppressed. Then shall an argument both be comfortable and terrible? Yes. Then
mark the lesson: That, that is in God terrible to the proud and oppressors in
the world, the same thing to the poor oppressed ones that are Gods, it is so
sweet and comfortable, as no tongue can tell. The fiery wrath of God, that
will terrify the Kings of the world, and which they are not able to look on,
will be so comfortable, as no tongue can tell to the poor silly body, that
he will creep in under it, and lurk there: yea he will seek to the wrath
of God to save him, from the wrath of the tyrants of the world. So there is
nothing in God but is comfortable to his children: as by the contrary there is
nothing in him, but the wicked abhor it: yea even his mercy; yea they would
run if it were forth of the world to be out of his sight, but they shall not
escape Job. 21. 22
his curse. So then acquaint you with God, and cloathe you with that garment,
that he may be comfortable every way to you. This much for the duty of
servants.

Now we come to the duty of masters, which is set down in Here begins the
fourth chapter verse. 1.
the beginning of the fourth chapter, Ye masters (says he) do unto your
servants that which is just and equal. There is the precept. The thing he
requires is doing; the word in the original is giving: Give them that which is
just; as if he would say, Masters, when ye have commanded, and they have
obeyed, meet them with a duty: give them something. This duty is grounded
partly on their poor estate; they labor and weary themselves for their hire;
so they crave giving: and partly it is grounded upon the hardness of masters;
for look how feign the one would have, as feign would the other keep. The
poor servant would draw; the master holds. The Apostle comes in and says,
Masters, let your hold go, you are over holding, let your hold go. Brethren,
ye heard before a fair promise of reward made to the servants: now what
needs the Apostle (considering that reward) exhort the masters to give
something of this world, which is nothing but dirt, in respect of that that is
promised; and some might have said so. The Apostle answers: They serve and obey
thee here, pining themselves in working for thee: therefore thou who art a
master, must give them their hire: for that is a just thing so to do; they are
men like unto thy self, and must be sustained of these earthly things for
their labors sake. And so the lesson is, heaven and heavenly inheritance
preiudiceth not a man of his part in this world, and worldly things: and
therefore thou scornest God who say; thou have an inheritance, whereto
should thou have my poor hire; yea thou should be rather moved to part
thy pelf to him; if thou knew him to be an inheritour of heaven, give him the
rather of thy goods of the earth: for an inheritour of heaven, is an inheritour
of the earth: and if thou withhold it from them, woe to thee. Well, I see out
of this place, that the Lord has his servants here, to whom he is offering
that heavenly inheritance; yet so, that they should have their part of this
earth also. The Minister has his part of the earth, and the Lord allows it
him; and thou who pinchest the belly of him, the Lord shall pinch thee in
things heavenly: the Lord will have an eye to him; beware therefore how thou
dealest with them in this life. Then he says, Give them. What? That that is
just, that is, that, that thou have conditioned with them. Have thou
conditioned for such a hire? keep thy condition: yea there is more, give them,
but give them that that is equal: what is that? Have they served thee
according to the rule that I prescribed? have they served thee in all things?
then be not so straight with them, but give above thy condition made to them,
be more liberal and stand not with them in their hire. The Apostle 1. Pet. 2.
18. sets down two properties of a master, Just, and liberal. Compare this
with that that went before, when he spoke of the reward of the Lord. There,
there was not such a modification, but a kingdom was promised: but turning to
the duty of masters, he modifies a stipend: he bids not give all his
inheritance, but give him that that is just and equal, that is, a part of it,
according to their labor and condition, and that liberally, without
niggardlines. This imports something. This lets thee see a great difference
betwixt God and man, in rewarding. The thing that man will give thee is but a
hire, a thing measured: but the thing the Lord gives, is not modefied nor
measured to thee: it is an inheritance: and all that is gotten here, is but an
earnest penny of thy reward. Of this follows another difference.

Now to end briefly: To move the masters to their duty, he adds to an
argument, Knowing that ye also have a Lord in the heavens. What follows on
this? There is something suppressed, to wit, a Lord in the heavens, who if you
give that, that is just and equal, shall give you that, that is just and
equal: he will do justice both to you and them; he will make all odds even:
there is no respect of persons with him. This is the office of the Lord, to
make all odds even; never soul shall receive wrong at his hands, but when
thou gets punishment, thou gets thy due, punishment pertaines to thee, etc. The
thing that I mark is this: It is the Lord that makes masters, and that makes
this inequality; that gives this preferment; that raises up and casts
down. When Adam was created, was there any preferment? No: as the Lord does
this, so the eye of that great Lord is never off him whom he has preferred.
Has he made thee a Lord? or has he raised thee to any preferment? his eye is
upon thee, and as his eye is upon thee, so he stands above thee with mercy in
the one hand, and judgment and vengeance in the other. And the greater thou
be, the greater mercy and judgment is above thee. No, thy hand is not so
ready to take vengeance of thy servant, as his hand is ready to revenge the
wrong. And thy vengeance and his differs in this: thine is wrong; but his is
never wrong, but al is right he does. But yet brethren, to weigh the words,
Knowing (says he) there is the first word. The light of knowledge is the
ground of duty. Light of knowledge ground of duty.
What can a blind body do that sees nothing, if he were a King, a Judge and a
Master? The light then of knowledge is the ground of duty; as ignorance is the
ground of all evil doing. Knowing. What? That ye also have. Then the masters
that did not their duty, they misunderstood the thing they had, and men know
not that they have if it were but this, we have a God, yet they know him not.
The next word is, Ye have a Lord. It is the ignorance of the Lord, that makes
men misknow their duty: their eye is ever beneath, the eye of the King is upon
the subject, but it is a rare grace to get an eye to look to the Lord that is
above him, and therefore he thinks he has no more ado, but with the poor
subjects; and so he cannot do his duty aright. Where is this Lord? In the
heaven. Thou art in the earth though thou were a King; but thy Lord is above
thee, thou art far beneath him: and therefore the judgment and stroke that
must fall from him, must be sad and heavy, because it is far fetched. The
furthest stroke thou can bring will be from thy Crown; but what is that to
the stroke of God, fetched from the high heavens, yea from above Gods stroke
all heavens, that must be a very sore stroke, beware of it; for if it light on
thee thou shall never rise again.

The last word also makes a comparison betwixt the Lord and the servants: you
have a Lord as they have; as they are servants, so are ye likewise servants,
yea to a greater Lord. Yea the more high the Lord is above you in comparison,
ye are the lower servants then the sweeper of your house is: Note.
if ye were a King, the very dust is greater in comparison then thou art. Thou
can not make a pickle of dust. Would to God Kings and Lords knew this.
Abraham knew it, when he said, What am I but dust and ashes? Genesis 18. 27. Now
then, to make the masters to do their duty, he brings them down under the
feet of the Lord of heaven: he brings thee out of thy chair; he hurles the
King out of his throne. It teaches us that there will be no duty gotten of
superiors, except thou be first humbled under thy God. If thou be not humbled
under God, thou will not, nor can not do thy duty. Lastly, I see a
different dealing in the Apostle, when he deals with servants he Note well.
does it comfortably: but coming to Lords and Masters, he draws up their head
to see that there is a Judge sitting above them: this is another manner of
dealing. So mark his discretion: having to do with sundry estates and
persons, he uses sundry arguments. Our folk may not abide this form of
dealing; who bad him (say they) threaten Lords, and Kings? speak to the
Commons and poor people. Well, well, let not the mouth of the Gospel be
closed, which speaks sometimes comfortably, and sometimes boysterously, and
lets men see an angry God, and all to their salvation. Further, I perceive
this: all Superiors would be threatened; Masters would be threatened, Princes
would be threatened; and the higher, the greater matter of threatening. For such
is the nature of men, they cannot bear superiority: make thee a King, thou
shall be a slave to thy affections. So it is profitable to them to be
threatened, that they may keep them within the bounds of their duty. And I
say, they that would ever give them fair words, they are but flatterers; and
if they would have them wracked or undone, let them ever speak fair to them.
Therefore let the Gospel have it own freedom. Bind men as ye will, but
bind not the word: if thou bind the Gospel, O the band thou shall find in
that day! Let every man be contained within a duty to other, that we may be
partakers of the eternal kingdom, where there is only true liberty in Jesus
Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory
now and for ever,

Amen.
THE XXXV. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 4. verse. 2. 3. 4. 2 Continue in prayer, and watch in the same
with thank sgiuing;

3 Praying for us, that God may open unto us the door of utterance, to speak
the mystery of Christ, wherefore I am also in bands,

4 That I may utter it as it becomes me to speak.


WE heard brethren the last day (as God gave the grace) certain special
precepts of manners that were directed to particular estates of men, as to
Husbands, and Wives; Parents, and Children; Masters, and Servants: now in this
text, we return to the general exhortations, that generally concerns every
estate in this world, whereof the first set down here, is concerning prayer,
which is a common duty, that every one that is borne owes to God in Jesus
Christ. To come to the words. Continue in prayer, be instant in Prayer a common
duty.
prayer, pray continually, all is one thing. To speak of prayer, because it is
a common place, I will not insist; but only so far as the text will furnish
me: for the matter is ample, and therefore I will bound me within the text. As
for the causes and necessity of prayer, I need not to speak much, ye know the
Lord gives a commandment that we should pray, and that in the name of Jesus
Christ; and if there were no more but this, it is a Motives to prayer.
cause sufficient to move thee to pray: The Lord commands thee. But there is
more, to wit, a promise, the Lord has promised 1. Charge.
2. Promise.
to every one that prays in faith, Ask, and ye shall receive, Luke 11.
etc. this promise may allure the heart of every one to pray. There is yet
more, who is he that feels not the necessity 3. Necessity.
and wants that be in every one of us, so long as we live? who is he that has
so much that he needs no more? Yea though he were a Monarch, has he such
sufficiency that he needs not to seek more at God? Besides this, there be
such riches, plenty, and abundance in God, through Jesus Christ, that it is
able to fill up all the wants that be in us. Therefore the very 4. Gods riches.
riches that be in him, should drive us to desire a portion of that fulness
which is in him. But (brethren) to leave this, and to come to the words. If
there were no more but this, that we are commanded to pray, it is a
sufficient argument, to every one to assure them, that there is no merit in us.
We deserve nothing of God; but all that we get we get it of free mercy and
grace, and that in Jesus Christ. If thou come on with a deserving, and a merit
of thy righteousness, thou shall never get mercy: I seclude thee from God: for
what is praying, but begging? not of worthiness, but of the mercy of God in
Jesus Christ. And when thou have done all, say, fie on my works, and ask
mercy for that blood of Jesus Christ's sake.

In the text there be two qualities of prayer set down. The first is an
insta^tnes without tyring. The second, is watchfulnes. Two things in prayer:
first, constancy: secondly, watchfulnes.
For he who prays should not be a sleeper, but watchful both night and day.
To come then to the first, he says, Be instant, persevere, continue, all is
one thing. The thing that he requires is perseverance, ardentnes, continuance.
I need not to insist upon the causes of this. Need thou not continually?
Find thou not that there is not an hour, wherein thou want not either
things heavenly or earthly? (if thou want not earthly, indeed it may be
that thou know not the want of heavenly things; but woe is that soul that
finds not the want of heavenly food) and so if thou need continually, why
should not thy prayer be continual? for it is prayer that supplies that want.
Moreover, there is none of you but ye find this by experience: God will not
hear a man at the first; but (cry as thou will) he will not seem to hear,
he will seem to have a Luke 18. 1. 2. 3
deaf ear, and all to this end, that thou should persevere in prayer. For
he has pleasure to try thy patience, faith, and prayer, which is the best
exercise. And so supposing that thou get not that that thou ask; yet if thou
get perseverance, Perseverance. Whatsoever thou gettest without prayer is but
stolen, and an argument of wrath.
thou gettest a greater gift, then if thou had that, that thou askedst at the
first: yea, if thou get all the world without prayer (for all is given in
wrath) if he should advance thee to a kingdom, it is but a bait to thy
damnation, except thou get a heart to pray and to continue in prayer. Of all
graces, a spiritual grace is best: a little bit of regeneration is better then
all the kingdoms in the earth: howbeit thou set light by it now; yet when thou
art driven to the utmost point, or at the last gasp, thou would give all
the world to have a bit of it. There is the first quality in prayer,
perseverance.

The second is watchfulnes, watching in it. Watchfulnes is feruencie in prayer,
when not the body only, but when the soul and all the affections are waking
and bent to heaven: when the Spirit is instant with God in Jesus Christ. It is
opposed to this coldness that ouergoes us all. Our prayer is in sleeping, and
when we are sleeping we are praying; and so comes out a cold prayer out of a
cold heart, and it is opposed to this sluggishnes and deadnes in prayer, with
yawning and gaping, half sleeping, and half waking. Alas, our necessity
requires another earnestnes, it stands us in the losing of heaven, and shutting
of us in hell and damnation. The devil stands to catch us (if we could see
our danger) and when thou think thou art most sure, he is busiest about
thee: if thou knew this, thou would watch better, and would seek more
fervently to God to keep thee. But alas all are so blinded, and all are so
syeled up, that the greatest part are lead to damnation blindfolded. So he
that can get this watchfulnes, has gotten a great grace, and the more thy
spirit is intended, the nearer is A good note of watchfulnes in prayer.
God to thee: for it is his presence that wakens thee. There is nothing that
likes him better, then an earnestnes in seeking these heavenly matters. The
Lord grant we may feel these things; for it is no small matter to have this
sense.

With prayer he ioynes thanksgiving: whereby he teaches us, that the present
necessity should not move us so to seek present help, and supply at God,
that in the mean time we forget the old benefits: in praying with tears for
a new benefit, remember the old, and thank him for it. And if thou get any new
thing, yea, if it be but a mouthfull of meat, never forget to thank him for
it: for it is of mercy thou have it, and not of thy heritage, and Charters.
And if thou have it in thy possession, yea if thou had it in thy hand, and on
thy board, and in thy mouth, ask it of God and desire a blessing to it:
otherwise thou have it with the curse of God. It is the sweetest exercise in
the world to be ever praying and thanking God, if it were but for a A course
eaten cake.
gray bannocke, and drink of cold water: for that body that does this, has
greater joy, then any in the world with their most dainty dishes. Again,
howbeit thou get not, quarrel not with him, but thank him for all that: for
if he give thee feruentnes with this delay, thou gettest a special grace, thou
should thank him for it. Paul writing to the Philippians, chap. 4. verse. 6.
7. teaches thee that when thou castest thy care on God, thou shall get peace
in thy soul: yea supposing thou sought for life and gat it not, yet thank
him: for thou shall get joy and peace in thy soul, and in it thou shall end.
So what want thou? why should thou quarrel with him? Therefore ever
pray, and give thanks to God.

To go to the next verse (for I will not insist in the generals) Praying for
us also: That is, for me Paul. So in particular he sets down that person, for
whom especially he would have them pouring out their prayers, and he recommends
himself to their prayers. He does this not only here, but in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, chap. 6. 18. 19. also, and in other places. Paul the chosen
vessel of God, a man who had such a presence of God, that was so familiar with
God in his prayer, whose calling was to pray for others, as in the first
chapter of the same Epistle is manifest: this man endued with such graces, yet
notwithstanding all these graces, he is earnest to desire the Colossians, who
were but newly entered into Christianity, who in knowledge were nothing like to
him; in Familiarity.
homelines with God, were nothing like in comparison of him, to interpose their
prayers for him to God. Well brethren, mark in Job. 22. 21.
Paul a notable example of modesty (for all the graces he Modesty in Pastors.
had) to Pastors, though they were beautified with never so many and fair
graces; yet they should beg the prayers of the meanest in their flock: and
also mark in the Colossians an example to all people of their mutual duty
they owe to their Pastor, to pray for him: for as he is bound to pray for you;
so ye are bound to pray for him, and in general every one to pray for another,
I for thee, and thou for me. The prayer of the simplest member may help the
head. The toe may help the head: that is, the poorest in the world endued with
grace in Jesus, may help the greatest, and him who has most gifts of God: for
there be none, but they have access to the throne of grace. It is true, one
has gotten a greater grace then another; yet al are made Priests: through the
priesthood of Christ, all have that kingly priesthood. And therefore there is
none, but by virtue of that calling, they have that access to God to come and
make intercession for themselves and others, though it were the poorest for the
greatest; yea though it were for the King, that will not know him in the gate,
yet he has access to God, and his prayer will be available: for it 1.. Pet.
2. 9
is impossible that that calling of the Priesthood can be ineffectual. So
every one of us may benefit another, and we are bound thus to do by virtue of
that common calling to the Priesthood in Christ. Pray for me (says he) also.
This is to be noted, that he says, pray together, by which he means the order
to be observed in prayer. Pray first for your self, and then Order in prayer.
remember me: forget not thy self, for I assure thee, he who forgets
himself, will forget his neighbor, and thou that can not pray for thy self,
can not pray for me, nor no other. A profane man or woman like Esau, that
will sell their birthright, and care not for their salvation, cannot have care
of the salvation of another. He who is unprofitable to himself, to whom can
he be profitable? Therefore seek not the prayers of profane persons. Paul
says in the first Epistle to the Corinths, chap. 9. verse. 27. I bring my body
into subjection, lest by any means after that I have preached to other, I my
self should be reproved. If I shall preach to others, and be a reprobate my
self, what shall it avail me? It may well do them good, to whom I preach:
but if I be a profane man and a reprobate, my preaching shall not help me: if
I have no care for my own salvation, the care for others auailes not: and
therefore crave not the prayer of that body, that cannot be careful of
himself. What is the subject of this prayer for him? He prescribes the subject
of their prayer for him: Pray for me, that the door of utterance may be opened
unto me: there is the subject. In a word generally, the effect of the prayer
they should make for him is, that his mouth might be opened, to utter the
Gospel with liberty. The greatest grace of a Pastor, is liberty to utter
this grace in Jesus Christ: A free heart and mouth, this is the greatest of all
graces. Paul accounted not so much of the gift of wonders, to heal the blind,
and the lame, as he did of this fair Utterance.
grace of a free mouth and heart to utter the Gospel. No such thing writes he
to them, as pray for me that I may work wonders: pray for me, that I may shake
off these bands, wherein I lie: he directs no such thing to them, but pray that
an open door of utterance may be permitted to me for the uttering of the
Gospel. Of the which mark this: It was a hard thing to Paul to get liberty
in bands to preach the Gospel. It is easy in calmenes to preach with
liberty, but when we are bound with bands it is hard to get liberty. And the
word shows that Door of utterance.
it is as hard, as to break through a door closed up. And therefore it is not
for naught that he desires their prayers, that God would open the door to
utter this glorious mystery of the Gospel. As if he would say, your prayers
should be at al times for them that are set over you; but specially when they
are lying in bands. Say therefore to the Lord, howbeit Lord, he be bound in
prison, yet let his heart and mouth be free to utter thy glorious Gospel, that
word of life. Again note, howbeit he was in bands at Rome where he died; yet
the subject of the prayer he craves, is not that I may be relieved, but that
the word of God be not bound; but that my tongue may be loosed to utter the
mystery of the Gospel. This is a lesson to Pastors: if thou were lying bound,
be more careful of the Gospel that is committed to thee, then of thy bands,
or of thy self. First, that it be kept in freedom, give all that thou have
ere that liberty be impaired: be bound and bound again ere through thy
default the word be bound: when thou art in bonds, be not so careful of thy
bands, though it were in fire, as of this liberty. The Martyrs remembered this
well. So the preciousest thing to thee in the world should be the liberty of
the Gospel. This should be most regarded by Kings and Pastors, that the word
of God be not bound. Bind what ye will, but bind not the Gospel in pain of
thy life: thou shall be bound, that binds it. Pray for me also (says he) that
God might open a door of utterance. He says not, that the Emperor should open
my mouth, but that God that has committed this mystery to me, he might give
me this liberty. The lesson is plain: it is only God that opens a man's mouth
to deliver the Gospel with freedom; and if he do it, all the Kings of the
earth will not close it. When thou have cut out the tongue of a man, the
liberty shall abide in the heart of him: so all the world cannot close it.
Again, if God close the mouth and take away this freedom, all the world
cannot open it again. Learn this. For if our liberty depended on men, our
mouths should be soon closed, but it depends on God: so that when the person
is bound, hand and foot, the greater shall be the liberty of the man in the
uttering of the Gospel, and so it is but vanity to strive with God.

To go forward. That God might open. What? the prison door? No, no such
thing, he cares not for it: he took more care of his mouth opening. Open the
door of my mouth, says he: for brethren, it is better to lie in bands with an
open mouth to utter the Gospel, then it is to be a freeman in the forest,
loose and living with a close mouth, and not to speak with freedom of the
Gospel. Woe is that Minister that is set free by man, and then has his mouth
bound. No, make not that choice; choose rather to be bound in the body, then to
have thy mouth bound. And experience teaches, yt there is more joy in a man's
heart, having freedom to speak the Gospel himself being bound, then there is in
his heart that has his mouth bound and his body free. And it is better for the
people to have a Minister bound, that is free in the liberty of the Gospel to
utter it, then to have him loose and dumme: for God never opened a man's mouth
in vain; for of necessity he will open the heart of some of the hearers, as
the heart of Lydia was opened, Act. 16. 14. So it was never in vain that the
Lord opened the mouth of the Apostle.

To go forward, That God should open the door of utterance. Whereto? That I
may speak. It is a great grace to speak: And what? The best thing that ever
was: Speak the mystery of Christ. I will not insist to speak largely what
this word mystery means: In a word, it is a precious thing hid up; so that it
cannot be seen by nature. It is Jesus Christ; and therefore it is called the
mystery of Jesus Christ, folded up from the eyes of men. It is the
unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ hid up. It is that wisdom of God (as it
is said in the first Epistle to the Corinthes chap. 2. verse. 17.) which he
has appointed for the glory of man, and in time he has unfolded it. It is
nothing else, but this Euangel of Christ, and all his graces which were hid up,
till he came. The very name of it self is glorious. It contains an argument
to move them to pray for him, that his mouth might be opened, and to have such
a liberty to utter the Gospel, as he craves. If there were no more but the
name of mystery, it is an argument sufficient enough for thee to pray for that
man to whom it is committed, that he may utter it with liberty: for it is
great pity by any means to restrain the liberty of it; for this is to hide
the light of God. It is a glorious thing, and therefore I say it shall not be
without a judgment, if thou restrain it: for as the liberty conuaieth a joy
to the hearers; so the binding of it is grievous to them. Men in this land have
made a mean to restrain it: but have ye not seen the judgment? Alas, will
not examples terrify thee, to put out thy hand to restrain the Gospel? No, I
assure thee, whosoever will do it, a judgment shall overtake them. For the
which I am bound. As if he would say: If I be bound for it, it is easy for
thee to pray for it: how can thou deny it? For thou that can not pray for
the liberty of the Gospel, thou can not suffer for it. I might speak in
this place of them that cannot give a good word for the Gospel: let be to pray
for the liberty of it. Well, I will leave them to their own Judge. But I say,
if there were no more but this suffering of the affliction of Pastors, and
other zealous Christians, and this suffering of the Gospel under the which it
lies this day; these same things testify plainly the worthiness of the matter,
of the power, virtue and glory of the Gospel: for if there were not a power
in this mystery that vpholds men in affliction for it, they would not abide a
moment in their affliction: and if there were not a power and a glory to
ouershadow the shame of the Gospel, all the world would not make a man suffer
for it. So if there were no other argument but this, it is sufficient to tell
thee, it is the power of God that vpholds this Gospel, and they that suffer
for it.

In the last verse, he makes plain the thing he said; he declares what a
speaking this is. That I may make it manifest, that is, that I may open it, and
unfold it as a piece of cloth. Take this mystery, in the which Christ and
his riches is enclosed, lay it open, and let the world see it clearly. As to
the speaking of it: Moses spoke of it, but he left it foulded up. Then the
Prophets spoke of it, but they unfolded it not; for they could not do it,
because Christ was not yet come in the flesh. Then come the Apostles, when
Christ is crucified, and they open it, and as it is said in the Ephesians chap.
3. They Euangelize. They A mystery.
make manifest the coming of Christ and his mystery. In a word, that, which
was a mystery of old, they make an Euangell of it, and the mystery and the
Euangell is one in effect: for the mystery is nothing else but a closed
Euangell; and the Euangell is the mystery opened up. Then the lesson is:
wherein stands the speaking of the mystery of Christ? To wit, in opening up of
it. And therefore who ever thou be, that takes upon thee to speak of this
mystery, look thou be skillful to handle it, that is, that thou can unfold
it rightly, to let the world see Jesus Christ, that was so long hid up. Let
them see Christ crucified and glorified: look that thou can speak with the
demonstration of a spiritual power, with evidence of the spirit, to make it
plain to the world; and take Jesus Christ and paint The preaching of the
Gospel the unfolding of a mystery.
him out to the eye of the people, and let them see him glorified in the
heaven, and that life flowing out of his blood. If thou inuolue it when thou
should lay it abroad, woe is thee: hold thy tongue and speak not of him.
Alas, then Ministers have need to take heed to themselves. This Gospel would
not be handled with unwashed hands.

The last words are, As it becomes me to speak, or as it is in the own
language, as it behooves me of necessity, whereby he means, that there was a
necessity imposed upon him: as in the first Epistle to the Corinths, chap. 9.
16. and there he says, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel; in this place
he means that same necessity. Then briefly, the Apostle here acknowledges a
necessity imposed upon him to utter the Gospel of Christ. The lesson is
easy, weigh the estate of Pastors and Ministers. In a word, there is not a
Pastor nor Minister, that takes in hand to utter Christ, but there is a
necessity laid on his neck (as an ox yoked in a plough, and all the Kings of
the earth shall not take it off) to utter the Gospel with liberty: To hide
nothing of the mystery, not to impair it a whit, what ever the Lord requires
in the Gospel, in pain of thy life see thou impair it not. If the Emperors
of ye world should lay an other yoke on thee, say with Paul, Woe is me if I
preach not. In deed thou, who would close the mouth of a Pastor, if thou
could free him of the necessity and yoke that God has laid on him, thou
would do something: but woe to thee that would lay on thy yoke with the
yoke of God! Will thou the poor man's perishing? Lay on him what thou will,
thou shall not relieve him of the yoke of god, and woe to that Minister that
conceales ought of the truth of God, for the pleasure of man! Will not men
consider this necessity? No, all the world shall not (with Gods grace) make me
cast off this yoke; yea, if it come to practice, ye shall find men, who will
be content to die for this. Woe to thee, who will impair a jot of the Gospel!
Thou dishonourest God and his Gospel. Therefore the Lord give us grace to
suffer all extremity, and death it self, cre ever we impair a jot of this
Gospel. The Lord work this for Christ's sake: for his yoke is sweet and easy
to be borne. Now to the Father, Son and holy Spirit be all praise, and honor,

Amen.
THE XXXVI. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 4. verse. 5. 5 Walk wisely toward them that are without, and
redeem the season.
Having spoken (brethren) of the particular admonitions that were given by the
Apostle to particular estates of men and women, especially dwelling in one
family and household: we returned again to the general exhortation,
pertaining to men and women of all estates, high and low; poor and rich;
Princes and subjects; masters and servants; and to all alike. The first
general we heard the last day, and entreated of it as God gave the grace: it
was an exhortation to prayer and perseverance in prayer. It is not enough to
pray, but thou must persevere in prayer: be ardent and earnest in it night and
day: for so thou have need to do if thou consider thy wants. Unto
perseverance in prayer, he joins watchfulnes; which is nothing else but
feruentnes and earnestnes to pray with an ardent desire; otherwise thou
scornest him, if thou deal with him for fashion; and thou scorner Prayer.
wilt be met with, and shall find thy prayer to be but foolishnes. Eccles. 2.
17.
Then when he has done this in general, he comes in special to himself, and
desires them to pray together for him among the rest; considering that there
was none that needed more then he, because he was lying in bands for the
Gospel: and therefore had an impediment to utter with liberty that mystery
of Jesus Christ, which is nothing else but the Gospel hid up in a mystery, to
the consolation and salvation of the world.

Now to come to the text, here follows the second general exhortation, and
it is to walk, but with wisdom: so in a word it is an exhortation to use
wisdom in their actions, and proceedings whatsoever. For what auailes it to
do ought, except it be done wisely? But to weigh the words as the Lord will
give grace. Walk (says he) You shall find this often recommended, you are
never bidden sleep, or sit idle, but ever walking: Walk.
occupation, business, doing is recommended. This Christian calling that we
have in Christ Jesus, it is not to sit idle, to be sluggish, to sleep and
slumber, to sit, to lie and to stand still in one place; but it is to walk, to
go, to be on your journey. We are pilgrims, and a pilgrim would ever be on
his feet; and if he rest, it would be shortly and speedily dispatched, and ever
to the journey. Our calling is to occupation, and laboring here, but thou
shall cease from thy labor after this life. To whom is this promise made to
cease from your labor? but to those who are diligently and earnestly occupied
here in the vineyard of the Lord, ever taking heed to their ways, that they
offend not the great God of heaven: and therefore thou should labor if thou
would rest after this life. And I say (brethren) a true Christian is not a
sluggard or The true Christian labors in a lawful calling.
an idle body, but a doing man, and of all sorts of men he is the most active.
Take the example of the Apostle, he said not only that he walked with a slow
pace, reposing himself in this world, but he ran as a man in a race, the
first Epistle Cor. 9. chap. with great speed, and in that race he ran so
fast, that he looked not behind him, to look over his shoulder, he took no
time, but his eye was still on the mark: for standing in the race is the loss
of time. Therefore sit not down to count what thou have done, but over thy
shoulder with it, and still go forward. Well (says he) walk, be occupied, be
doing, it is not enough to be doing every way, for it were better for some to
be idle when they are doing. The greater part runs to mischief, and are doing
wickedly. How should they walk? Wisely. In the Epistle to the Ephesians fifth
chapter, he expresses this in more words, Walk (says he) circumspectly,
consideratly, diligently, not as fools, but as wise men: these are his words,
then walking is commended. But how? with wisdom. The Lord gives wisdom to
men: yea, walk so circumspectly, that thou take heed to each footstep, when
thou lifts thy foot take heed where thou sets it: The life of a Christian is
so precise: therefore look about thee; for the world looks upon thee. Thou
walk in the light, walk then in a comely manner. Finally, in thy walking
walk so wisely, that thou let pass no circumstance neither of time, place,
nor person; but have an eye to all, even to all. Then to give you the lesson:
Our honorable calling is to labor, walking and occupation, but with all
wisdom, consideration and discretion; and a Christian man or woman must be
wise as they are laborious. They must not be fools, rushing and rumbling,
running headlong to every thing without taking any regard, which is a shaming
of themselves oftentimes. Thou must not walk so: this is common to every
Christian, but especially to those whom God has set over others it chiefly
appertains; I mean the ministers: they must be most circumspect. The eyes of
the world are upon them; they are upon the mountain, nothing can escape them;
but all is marked: therefore this wisdom is specially required of them. Paul
in the second Epistle to Timothy chap. 2. he Ministers must pray they may
walk circumspectly.
says, consider these things, then with a prayer he says, The Lord give thee
wisdom in all things. The Lord give a Minister wisdom in all things: for
there was never more need then there is now. And Jesus Christ says, Be
prudent and wise like Serpents, and simple like doves. So this wisdom that he
craves is not the wisdom of this false double world, but wisdom that is in
the simplicity of the heart. The Lord save us from the wisdom of these
politic heads; it is not that wisdom Serpentine wisdom with simplicity.
that the Lord commends to us. The Lord shall justify our wisdom, when their
wisdom shall be counted false policy in that great day. Would ye have
example of both these wisdoms, of the wisdom of the Serpent, and of the
wisdom of simplicity like the Dove? To make that plain, I shall let you see
both in the 23. of the Acts. Paul is accused, he is standing before Ananias the
high Priest, making his defense: The first word he vtters, he says, In all
good conscience I have served my God to this day. This is the preface, here
appears not the wisdom of Serpents, but the simplicity of a dove, laying
out before them that life he had led in a good conscience before God. We must
follow him, and must in all delations and accusations stand up and protest
before that God that sees all, that in a good conscience we have striuen in all
things to seek the glory of God and his service. Then Ananias hearing this
protestation, he commands to strike the man on the mouth. Alas, the world
cannot abide to hear that the servant of God keeps a good conscience! Then he
says, O whited wall, the time 1 The simplicity of a dove in Paul.
will come when the Lord shall strike thee: so the Apostle stands stiff in
defense of his good conscience before God, and will not hold his tongue of
that, but foretells to Ananias the judgment that was to come upon him. Well,
should we hold our tongues here? No brethren, so long as the Lord opens our
mouths to speak, I say, we were traitors above all traitors to King, Church,
and Country, if we foretold not that heavy judgment that shall follow upon
such proceedings; nay, if we should hold our tongue, the earth, and the walls
shall cry out that a judgment shall come upon sinners. Then hitherto he has
uttered his simplicity, and foolish simplicity, as they 2 The wisdom of a
Serpent in Paul.
esteemed it. The forest enemies that then pursued him were the Pharisees and
Sadduces: then the Lord gives him the wisdom of a Serpent, and he shows that
he is a Pharisie, and the son of a Pharisie, and that he was brought there
in judgment for the hopes sake he had of the resurrection of the dead, and in
this he speaks no lie, but speaks the truth, as it was. The Pharisees
hearing that, they fell by the ears with the Sadduces, and so he escapes. The
Lord give us this wisdom and simplicity in the like danger.

Walk wisely. In the Epistle to the Ephesians chap. 5. verse. 15. he desires
this wisdom, and he makes it to be the understanding of the will of God.
Wisdom then what is it? The understanding of Gods will. The wise man what is
he? He that understands Wisdom what it is.
Gods will, the rule of our actions. What is our own will? Nothing but
crooked, and backward, and makes an overthwart and backward action: but Gods
will is straight, and makes all our actions that are done after his will,
straight and even. Who is the wise man? not he that follows his own will, wit
and reason, but he who in all his doings follows the rule of Gods will, and
renounceth his own reason. Take thy reason and thy will and bind them, and
either conform them to the will of God, or else they shall carry thee to
damnation, Natural reason and will.
and thou who would be wise, be a fool. There was never man that followed
his own wit and will from the first to the last, but in the end (howbeit it
was plausible for the time) he has lamented miserably, and has found that he
has run without a rule or mark, and that he was a fool. Nay, if thou follow
thine own will, it shall miscarie thee, and thou shall find that thou have
wrastled with thine own shadow, and it shall disappoynt thee of thy
proceedings. Would to God that men could consider this.

To go forward: Walk wisely. Toward whom? Toward them that are without, that
is, without that body of Jesus Christ, that are strangers from that fold,
such as were the Gentiles in those days: for all the Colossians were not
converted at that Ephesians. 2. 12
time. This is the estate of this world, there are some within and domestickes
in the house of God, through Jesus Christ; and there are some without, as
strangers that want the faith of Jesus as yet. This is the division of the
whole world. For the Church of God is compared to a city that is placed in the
midst of a naughty and crooked generation: within this The Church like a
city.
are the faithful, at the least they that profess the faith; without are the
faithless. They that are within, are as many lights holding out the light of
life; and they that are without, are in darkness, without Christ; aliants from
the Commonwealth of Israel, without the life of God, yea, without God. This is
their misery. Woe is them that are without! Now wisdom should be used in
respect of both, but especially in respect of the strangers, and that for
sundry causes: Our walking with wisdom should be, that we give them not just
offense to keep back. Company.
well, knows thou of what metal thou art? thy body is no more ready to
receive the pestilence, and to be infected with Note.
it, then thy soul is to receive the pestilence of idolatry and sin. Woe
worth evil company, as many have said at the place of their execution. Be not
deceived (says the Apostle) evil speeches corrupt good manners, 1. Epistle to
the Corinthians chap. 15. verse. 33. T

Take time when it is offered.
their turn: for let time go by thee, then adieu, thou shall never lay hold
of it again. Time is painted with a balde hinder part of the head: thou can
not draw it back again: All the Kings of the world have no power to bring
time once past back again. The worldly wise men consider this, when
opportunity is offered, O how they will take hold of occasion! and will
condemn themselves if they let it slip. If this be the wisdom of the world,
what should be our wisdom? for this hour, wherein I am speaking, is the
acceptable time, wherein Jesus Christ is offered. It is the day of grace, and
so long as you hear this salvation, understand it. It is the time of grace,
therefore lay hold of this time, let not an hour escape you; and when thou
hear this Gospel, take hold of grace, and let thy prayer be ardent. Mercy
is offered, Lord give me the hand to receive mercy. Now (brethren) this day is
passing, it is going, so they who would be saved, let them take hold of grace
this day: for it will not always be with you. And be assured, when it shall
go away, many shall perish; and if it go away, many in Scotland shall go to
hell. Therefore foreslow not your time, apprehend grace while it may be had.

Now brethren, it is hard to get this season; for it is said in the Epistle to
the Ephesians. chap. 5. verse. 16. that the days are evil, and evil days will
stand up betwixt thee and this time of grace, therefore (says he) redeem the
time. It will not come to thy hand, but many impediments shall stand up betwixt
thee and it; yea death it self: therefore thou must redeem it. The word is
borrowed from Merchants, who when they see opportunity of merchandise, they
will go speedily to it, and let all other things go, to get their gains of
it: Even so a good Christian man and woman, when they see occasion of well
doing, they must hazard and if it were their life, to get a grip of that
occasion. And I say rather then we should lose this occasion of the Gospel,
if it were to the loss of our life, we should not be slothful in it. What
should we lose thereby? nay nothing, but we shall be restored a thousand fold.
So the good Christian will be busy and vigilant to redeem the time, and will
buy the first occasion to do well, because it is not at his hands. Paul says,
there is a door opened to me, etc. but there be many impediments: so if thou
be a merchant in Christ's cause, thou shall never repent thee, buy the occasion
to glorify God, if it were with thy life. This lies not in the hand of flesh
and blood, but it must come of God. Paul says, be partakers of afflictions,
etc. And seeing it lies not in thy hand to buy this occasion, but that it must
come of God, therefore be earnest to seek power of him. Now the Lord
strengthen us in these dangerous days, and grant us grace to keep this time
and occasion of the Gospel, that we hold up the light of it before the faces
of men. Now the Lord hear us for his sons sake Jesus Christ, to whom with
the Father and holy Ghost, be ascribed, as most due is, all power and praise
for ever and ever,

Amen.
THE XXXVII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 4. verse. 6. 6 Let your speech be gracious always, and poudred
with salt, that ye may know how to answer every man.
THis is another general sentence or exhortation (brethren) pertaining, as the
former, to all sorts and degrees of men and women in the world, none being so
great or so high, that they are to be exempted from it; nor any being so mean
or small, as that they can be freed from it: for as God is the common God of
al, but specially of the^ that believe: so do the doctrines that he delivers
commonly concern all, but chiefly his Saints and servants in this world. So
that men may as well reject and cast off God himself, as refuse the doctrines
that are delivered in this and such like places. His purpose and drift is, to
teach me^ to take heed to their tongues. And this is not unfitly joined to the
former sentence or verse, wherein he admonished them to walk warily, generally
toward all, but specially toward them that are without, as well because they
knew not how to bear with incircumspectio^ in others, as not having learned
that duty of charity, as also because more regard is to be had of gaining
them, then of those that be ranged into the Church. And in as much as by the
speech or tongue, men bewray their retchlesnes and indiscretion, as well as by
acts or deeds, he therefore provoke them even in that respect, to have a
special eye to their words, as well as to their works. So that it may seem,
in some sort to, to be an illustration of the general by some particulars.
Whatsoever it be this is certain, he would have us to be wary, that we give
no offense to others, nor bewray inconsideratio^ in our selves, by our words,
but rather, that we should manifest much goodness in our selves, and set it out
unto others, for their good and Gods glory.

Now two things are to be considered in this verse: the one is a precept or
command, in these words, Let your speech be gracious always, and poudred with
salt: by which he gives us to understand, that it is no arbitrarie matter such
as we may do or leave undone, as we list, but that it is profitable, yea
necessary. The second, is the end that he aims at in their obedience, in
these words, that ye may know how to answer every man: which is the good of
others, as well as their own comfort in the graces they had received, because
whatsoever we have received, we have received it for other men's benefit as
well as for our own, and therefore should refer it to the fame ends.

In the speech that he commends unto us, he requires two properties: first,
that it should be gracious, or with a grace, as we say. Secondly, that it
should be poudred or seasoned with salt. That speech is or may be justly called
gracious, which as in respect of the speaker, proceeds from some grace that
God has vouchsafed unto him: for howsoever to speak be a natural thing, and
as reason has yielded us conceits to speak of, so nature has affoorded us
instruments to speak by, as the tongue, the teeth, the lips and such like, yet
to speak the speech that the Apostle commends and commands unto us in
this place, cannot be but by grace from God. And as in regard of the hearer,
brings with it some grace to them to whom it is directed: which thing the
Apostle plainly expresses, Ephesians. 4. verse. 29. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that
it may minister grace to the bearers. By which we learn, that it is no easy
thing to speak well, nor easy matter to hear good things and to profit by
them. Our nature is backward, both to the one and the other: for as it is a
burden to hear a fool speak, meaning by fool a wicked man, because he
speaks nothing but that which is evil; so a natural man, that is to say, a
wicked man, can deliver nothing but speak like to himself, because out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And therefore me thinks that the
speaker in this case, should pray as the Prophet David does, that God would set
a door before his lips, and guide the tongue of his mouth. And this he ought
to do if he be but a common Christian, and speak to his even Christian,
because there is matter of corruption in him, that may cause him to ouershoote
himself or ere he beware, both as in regard of the naughtines of his mind and
mouth generally, and as in respect of the blindness of his heart particularly;
yea and that many times when we deliver good things, because in the multitude
of words or speech there is transgression, as Solomon says: And the hearer
also should entreat God to boar his ears, and to open his understanding, yea
and to incline his heart, that nothing might steal away his affection from
that, which so directly concerns other men's good, Gods glory, and his own
spiritual comfort: which duty of invocation and prayer, whilst men as in
other respect, so in this behalf regard not, it falls out, that both God is
robbed of his glory, men of their spiritual good, and themselves of Christian
comfort. Nay, I will say more, whilst they do not only neglect this good
duty; but imagine as the wicked did in David's time, that their tongues are
their own, they will speak, who is Lord over them? or who shall control
them? they do not only lose their labor, as water spilt upon the ground,
which is pitiful, but increase their disobedience to God, and manifest their
want of charity toward men, which is ungodly. And if this be the state of
them, that speak not of good things, with an honest heart and to godly
edification: what must their condition be, that deliver lewd and wicked things,
bewraying not only the uncleanness of their own minds, but at the least
intising, if not corrupting others, to runneriot with them to the selfsame
excess of sin. And of this sort are those ribaulds and filthy persons, who
can never be merry, or think themselves well occupied, till they blaspheme
God with their mouths, and strike or curse me^ with their tongues, I mean the
bitter and lewd words they do deliver. But these are to be sharply reproved,
and must needs have the dung of their filthiness and corruption cast into their
faces. And this must we do (brethren) if either we reverence God, or love his
glory, or hate evil, or desire their salvation: and they themselves must be
contented to hear it with patience, and to bear it with profit; or else the
means used unto them do but increase their sin and their condemnation by
means thereof. But the other sort, as not sinning in so high degree, must be
otherwise melt withal, namely admonished in the spirit of love, to leave that
sin, though it might be as dear and precious to them as their right hand, or
their right eye; and to strive by godly communication and words, both to
strengthen them that do stand, and to help the weak hearted, and to gain others
with whom they have to deal. And if this belongs to every Christian, as his
common duty: then how much more does it concern the public Minister, not
only as in regard that he is Gods substitute on earth, who propounds
nothing, save that which is good to edify all, but also in respect that he
speaks, or should speak Gods word only, according as S. Peter says, Let
him that speaks speak as the words of God. And yet the more is the pity,
nothing more trifling, nothing more unsound, then that which some take upon
them, either as Gods ministers, or in steed of them, to deliver in the chair
or pulpit. But we will leave them, and proceed in the text.

The second thing that he requires in our speech is, that it should be
poudred with salt. These are metaphors or borrowed kinds of speeches, and
therefore had need of a good interpretation, both for the clearing and doctrine
of them. That the speech should be gracious, which the Apostle had required
before, it must of necessity be seasoned with salt, because in a hearers heart,
there cannot be effected any grace, but by such speech as is poudred or
seasoned. And wherewith must it be seasoned? The Apostle answers: it must be
with salt. The salt wherewith our words must be seasoned, is true sanctity or
holiness. Of necessity there must be holiness in the heart, before there can be
any salt or savor in the mouth or words. Nay, I will say more, that sanctity
must possess all the affections of the heart, or else there will not, there
cannot flow from it seasoned speech. Yea this holiness must spread and stretch
it self unto all the outward parts and members, and to all the outward actions
and operations of the parts and pieces of men's bodies, or else there can be no
salt or seasoning of any thing that is said or done. For if the heart be holy,
and all the affections thereof sanctified, then the hand shall work, the foot
shall walk, the eye shall see, and the tongue shall speak holily. For if the
heart be it that sets the whole man, and every several part of him, on
work (as that is so sure and certain, as no man that knows no more, then
the light of nature can afford him, will or can deny it) then it must needs
follow, that according to the frame and disposition thereof, all in the whole
and every part of it must be ordered: and if every part follow the disposition
of the mind, then does the mouth also. Which also our Savior himself
signifies when he says, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks: and S. James expresses it likewise by a similitude, when he tells
us, that no fountain can send out at one and the self same place or hole,
sweet and bitter waters. But yet for the clearing of this point, we must a
little look into the nature of salt. It has two special or chief uses. One
to make meat that is sauourie, more sweet to be eaten, and better pleasing the
palate or taste. The other, to preserve every thing almost, from stinking and
corruption. So that first, sanctity is it that makes speech gracious,
delightful, and fit to edification; and therefore meet also and fit to be
directed to the ears, yea to the understanding of the hearer. Secondly, it
purges the very speeches themselves, and preserves them from all impuritie,
stinch, rottennes, corruption, etc. whereas otherwise without this sanctity,
the speech it self will be in it self filthy and corrupt indeed, and as it
were with a certain kind of putrefaction, corrupt the minds of the hearers,
which the Apostle expressly forbids, Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth. By which we may learn one singular
point, and that is this, that as filthy and foolish speech bewraieth want of
true sanctity in him that uses it, or takes delight in the speaking or
hearing of it: so it is one special mean, I mean lack of true holiness, which
neither good speeches of good things, are so powerful in him that speaks
them, nor so profitable in them to whom they are directed, as otherwise they
might be, if there were true sanctity and holiness in the hearers and speakers,
as there ought to be. And that therefore no man should speak to himself or to
others, or hear others speak of good things, but that they should strive,
first to purge themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit, and
then to fit and fill themselves with all purity and piety, that so there
being an analogy and proportion between inward holiness, and outward holy
things propounded, the holy and good things of God might be more profitable
then they have been. And so we may see one special cause, why good things
spoken either in public or in private, profit so smally; no man, neither
speaker nor hearer, has conscience or care to cleanse their hands, or to purge
their hearts, but as though that they were clean enough already, if not too
clean; or as though their impuritie could stand with the holiness of good
things, so do we go on. But beware (brethren) of this conceit, for a net is
spread, by Satan's malice and our own corruption, to catch our feet fast, and
to hold us in sin at their pleasure.

But we will pass from this, and proceed in the text, wherein yet one word,
contained in this sentence of framing and fashioning our speech, is worthy of
animaduersion, and that is the aduerbe always. By which he gives us plainly
to understand, that it is not sufficient for us now and then, or sometimes as
we say, to have our talk, communication and speech holy and gracious, for that
will but make us more and more without excuse, as having a light raised up in
us, to testify against us, that we have seen, and affected for a while the
best things, but have in a daily course followed the worst. But we must
continually look to our selves: in so much that when we are to speak, we
must either speak holily, and unto the benefit and edification of others, or
else speak not at all. For even in this sin there are these degrees. To
speak wickedly or filthily, is to corrupt other men, because as the Apostle
says out of the Poet, Euillwords mar good manners: and this is properly
indeed to destroy men. But if we be silent we sin not against them that way,
though we must answer this to God and men, that we advance not in them the
work of grace and goodness. But men are of another mind: they think that if
now and then they speak well and holily, they then have for a great while
after the greater license and liberty in profane iestings, filthy and
foolish talkings, idle and unprofitable words. For which our Savior himself,
and the blessed spirit in the Apostle Paul, will have them to be so far, that
Christ tells us, we shall answer for every idle word; yea the Apostle will
have no filthy speech to come out of our mouth, Ephesians. 4. 29. And in another
place of that Epistle, will not have such things to be so much as once named
amongst us, but rather giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5. 3. Hitherto for the
exhortation or doctrine.

Now to come to the end of it, That ye may know how to answer every one. By the
word answering, which is but a part of our speech or words, he understands
all our speech of what sort or nature so ever. Properly in our language, it
implies a question or demand going before, and shaping an answer thereto. But
here it is put a part for the whole, and used according to the Hebrew phrase,
which many times signifies to begin and to continue speech, without any
occasion ministered thereof by a precedent demand. And so is it that in the
latter end of the 11. of Matthew it is said, that Jesus answered and said, when
yet there went not before any demand or question. But to the point. The
meaning of the Apostle is to show, that by continual custom and course of
speaking holily and graciously, men attain to spiritual wisdom and
discretion, and thereby are enabled fitly and to good purpose, to answer to
every one, that should demand his judgment in any thing, specially
appertaining to Gods religion and his Christian profession. And whereas he
says, every one, we are to see what he means thereby. Men to whom we
direct our speech, or with whom we have that way to deal, may be reduced into
two sorts. For either they are such as are without, or else they are our
brethren, and of the household of faith. And either of these again are of two
sorts. The first are either persecutors, or such as are not of so cruel a
disposition: with these we must deal in such sort, as if it be possible we
may win them to Christ; or at the least, not give them occasion to blaspheme,
by our speech: we know, that as their hearts are ready to conceive evil
against us and our cause; so upon any surmise or suspicion from us, their
mouths will be open to speak evil also. And therefore we should carefully
endeavor to avoid all occasions, and to stop their mouths, if we could tell
how. On the other side, our brethren are either strong or weak. For the weak,
we must take heed that we offend them not in our speech, because Christ
says, Woe be to the man, by whom offense comes: but rather we must do our
best to confirm and strengthen them in the faith, as who, by reason of weakness
in themselves, and bad examples in the world, had need to be animated in all
well doing. And as for the strong, we must more and more protect them, to
mutual comfort, and godly edification, and the rather because he that knows
any thing, knows yet nothing as he ought to know: and none is so forward, but
still he had need to be provoked and pricked on. From which rightly known and
understood we may learn two things: first, that in all our cariages
generally, and particularly in our speeches, we should have good respect,
what, when, and where it is that we speak. For if the light of nature have
taught men to look to themselves, what they say, and of whom, the grace and
work of the spirit should much more not only inlighten us herein, but enable
us thereto. Secondly, that if we speak well, there is much power and
efficacy in our speech, and that not only as in regard of the hearers heart,
to have it affected, either to sanctity and instruction, if our words be pure
and holy; or to corruption and naughtines if they be unsound and unsavory:
but even as in respect of the party speaking, whose mind shall be the better
framed to, and the more plenteously endued with spiritual wisdom, if he can
walk well and wisely as in this behalf, both respecting the persons with whom
he talks, or to whom he speaks: and also in expressing his mind, by a
good choice of words, both which are powerful means to manifest grace in
himself, and to communicate it to others. But our age is every way full of
corruption. Some care to speak nothing, but that which is as themselves
corrupt. Othersome care not how they utter any thing so they speak a good
matter. Othersome have good words, but deliver unwholesome things. And some
speak the truth, with such smoothnes, that many times it is suspected of
falsehood. He that can avoid these extremes, and speak when, where, and
what he should, does not only show that he has received grace from God, but
that he shall have growth in this goodness; because the lips of the righteous
will ever be speaking of good things, and in all other mercies from God through
Jesus Christ: to whom with the holy Spirit, three persons, and but one
eternal God, be all glory and praise, with thanks and power both now and
for evermore. So be it.

THE XXXVIII. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 4. verse. 7. 8. 9. 7 Tychicus our beloved brother, and faithful
minister, and fellow servant in the Lord, shall make known unto you all my
matters:

8 Whom I have sent unto you for this very purpose, that he might know your
matters, and might comfort your hearts,

9 With Onesimus a faithful and a beloved brother, who is one of you.
Therefore they shall declare unto you all things that are done here.


THe Apostle passes from general matters unto particular things, that is,
from those duties which indifferently concerned the whole Church and every
particular sound member of it, to such as did belong to himself and others in
special. And in these three verses is contained (if you remember it) the third
part of the chapter, and the sixth part of the whole Epistle. In which he
handles, both his own private affairs, assuring himself that the Colossians
were desirous to know and understand the same, and also testifies his desire
to know and understand how matters went with them. For the better declaration
whereof, he had sent some to see in what condition they were, and to certify
them also in what condition his business stood. He herein expresses both his
great love and care to them, and also shows that as he would not have them to
believe uncertain rumors and reports touching his own estate: so he would
not credit every flying tale, concerning their condition: for fame, as he well
knew, and we find by daily experience, increases by going; and as men are
minded, either in good will or evil will, so they add too and diminish, as
they either love or hate. And therefore for the avoiding of these
inconveniences, and the more full understanding of the truth in these causes,
he sends Tychicus, and some other with him, in presence faithfully to relate
all things on both sides, that is, both to cause the Colossians to conceive in
what case Paul and his affairs were, and to certify the Apostle how things
went with the Church there: and more particularly, that by these faithful and
honest messengers, he might comfort and confirm the Colossians hearts.

The first of these is called Tychicus, who being borne in Asia, willingly
accompanied Paul going thither, to preach the Gospel there, as you may read
Acts 20. 4. Neither followed he him in that labor of the Ministry alone, as
a thing very profitable for himself: but even then when Paul was prisoner at
Rome for the Gospel, he was with him there, and ministered unto him, and was
sent from thence by Paul, as with this Epistle to the Colossians, so with that
which he wrote to the Ephesians, as appears chap. 6. 21. 22. and also 2.
Tim. 4. 10. where he says that he sent Tychicus to Ephesus.

Another of the^ is named Onesimus, who is the very same that Paul commends
to Philemon in the epistle he wrote unto him: where we shall find that he was
Philemons unthrifty servant, and did run away from his master for some great
offense: but yet being touched with conscience for that sin, and unfeignedly
turned unto God, even by Paul himself, whilst he was prisoner at Rome, Paul
thought it meet upon his unfeigned amendment to commend him to his master
again. And he joins them both together as it were in commission in this
cause, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, al truth concerning causes
on both sides, might be established. For further credit whereof also, he does
adorn them with good and gracious titles.

And first for Tychicus, to the end that the dignity of the person might
procure more authority and credit to his testimony among the Colossians, and
from them to the Apostle himself, he describes him by three titles or
adjuncts: but they may be reduced under two sorts or kinds. The one such as is
common to all Christians, when he terms him, beloved brother: the other
peculiar to them that travail in the Church causes, as Ministers and such
like. And these are two in number: the first is, faithful minister: the second
is, fellow servant in the Lord. From all which there are many good instructions
affoorded unto us: as in the first: that if any man be a true Christian, and
therefore our brother, we are bound even in that respect so much the more
tenderly to embrace and love him. For, though every one, yea that is not a
Christian, must be loved in his measure and manner, because he is the creature
of God, and the excellent workmanship of his own hands, and the rather because
he is endued in some sort and sense with the image of God, yet there is a
special love due to such a sound hearted Christian, as is a member with us of
the selfsame holy body. Neither indeed, specially in spiritual
consideration, is he so much another man differing from us, as one and the
selfsame with us. For all true Christians are members of one and the selfsame
body, growing up together with us to the constituting of that blessed body of
our Savior Christ, and to the framing and fashioning, yea making up of that
very man, the head whereof is Christ, and the body are all faithful
Christians. Concerning which, see what the Spirit says, Ephesians. 2. 15. Hitherto
for his general or common title.

Now he describes him by his specially calling: in which if we respect Christ,
he was his minister and servant, in the work, ministry and preaching of the
Gospel, and serving him therein, not in outward show only, or for filthy
luere sake, but in all fidelity and sincere vprightnes: and therefore he is
called in this place not only a minister, but a faithful minister. And if we
consider or respect the Apostle, he was his fellow-seruant in the Lord, because
both the one and the other of them, Paul I mean and Tychicus, did serve the
selfsame God even the father, and the selfsame Lord Jesus Christ in the holy
ministry, walking in it with all fidelity, as became them that had received
grace from God, not only to believe his truth, but to walk in the obedience
of it that way especially. And this does teach us that by example, which the
Apostle prescribes in an other place by precept and rule: Let him that has an
office, attend upon his office, Romans 12. And again, What is required of
stewards (which al Gods ministers are) but that they should be found faithful?
And Christ says, Who is a faithful and wise servant? even such a one as his
master sets over his household, to give them their just proportion of meat
in due season, Matthew. 24. What carelesnes, yea what unfaithfulness is there in
all callings? yea Ecclesiastical as well as civil? Who thinks that the
place he has is from God? or that he must render an account unto him? If
Magistrates considered this, they would not be so furious and cruel, as many
of them are. If Preachers did weigh it, they would not be so cold and
careless, so negligent and idle, in the execution of their duties, and in
gaining men to God, as commonly they are. I will tell you my mind, there are
few found in this function, to whom we may rightly attribute the adjuncts and
titles that the Apostle gives here to Tychicus, that they are faithful
ministers, and fellow servants in the Lords work: for fear many times and
flattery, bleareth out, if it do not utterly kill, their fidelity and
integrity: and corrupt respects, of private profit, honor and such like,
makes them go a way by themselves, and to withdraw from the rest of their
brethren. We have too much experience of this in the Courtlike preachers of
our kingdom here, and other reformed Churches abroad, taste and smacke too
much of it, this being one bitter fruit that the Hierarchy has left behind
it amongst us. And thus far for Tychicus and his titles.

Now concerning Onesimus, Paul sets him out and commends him to the
Colossians, first by his common calling, by which being through faith grafted
into Christ, he became a faithful and beloved brother unto him in Christ. The
selfsame man that is here termed a faithful and beloved brother, is named in
the Epistle to Philemon verse. 10. his son whom he begot in his bonds. How can
this be? can one man have two titles? Yea well enough, if we consider diverse
respects and states wherein they are, through Gods grace and goodness. Such as
the Ministers beget by the Gospel, and bring unto Christ and his Church, they
are, as in regard of that work of begetting them in the faith, and may be
justly called sons: and this is that which the Apostle says in the
Corinthians, that though they had many teachers, yet they had but one father
which was himself, who also had begotten them unto God through the Gospel, 1.
Cor. 4. 14. But when that work has increased in them, and that they are
become strong men in Christ, then he does every where, and so may we
acknowledge all sound believers to be our brethren, as who are indeed the
sons of one and the selfsame father, to wit God, in and by Christ, the first
begotten brother of us all, and in whom the whole family is named both in
heaven and earth. Secondly, he commends Onesimus unto them by these terms,
that he was one of them, that is as we would say, their countriman, and had
the fellowship of the same country or nation with them, and that not only
generally as Grecians, neither yet more particularly as people of Phrygia,
wherein Colosse stood, but it may be of the selfsame town and city.
Whatsoever it be, we may learn here many good lessons and doctrines. And
first, that no man's sin, which he has truly repented of before God and the
Church, should be any disparagement to him in subsequent times, no more then
Onesimus fraud and flying from his master was to him: nor we think never a
whit the worse of him, nor have him in less esteem, then Paul had Onesimus:
for seeing God has forgiven it, as repentance is a true pledge thereof, and
the Church has received him, as it ought upon unfeigned amendment, what reason
that private and particular persons, should refuse them, or think evil of
them? unless they will be more wise and just then God, or more severe then the
Church, and I think neither the one nor the other is fit for private men. And
yet we see amongst us, men so peeuishly pettish and wayward toward (I will not
say offending parties, howsoever they offended, but) repenting persons, that
after a sin is once discovered, they will never be satisfied, but always
suspicious, having for a ground of their surmises a maxim of the Civil law, He
that is once found to be evil, is always supposed to be evil: but forgetting
the rule of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. that charity is not suspicious, and that
they proceed by another rule toward offending, yea repenting persons, then
Iwis, they would have practiced toward them, if they were in the like case.
But let us cast away from us this and all other corruptions, that so we may
walk more religiously toward God, and more charitably toward his servants.

Secondly observe, that Paul, not thinking it enough to have commended
Onesimus, for his brotherly love and conjunction that he had with him in
Christ, but adding also that he was of the same nation, country, yea it may
be city with them: in which respect also he speaks afterward of Epaphras,
verse. 12. of this chapter: and of this very Onesimus, in his Epistle to
Philemon verse. 16. he declares, that he should be so much the more dear to
Philemon, because he had been his servant: Observe (I say) and gather from
hence, that these natural and civil familiarities and friendships, in which
men partake one of them with another, as for example, consanguinitie,
affinity, nation, country, city, etc. should be unto them, which through
faith are ingrafted into Christ, more strict causes and occasions of mutual
love one of them toward another in the Lord. We deny not, but that that
spiritual fellowship and communion which we have in Christ, is indeed very
necessary, because by it we are all in him made brethren one with another,
yea that without it there can be no true or sound love, although men otherwise
may be very strictly joined together. The reason is, that whatsoever is in men
without him, is but natural and humane. And indeed to say truth, there cannot
be any synceritie of the heart without Christ: and yet notwithstanding, if unto
that spiritual conjunction, there be added some natural or political
conjunction, there will also be a greater degree and further step of love: in
so much that the faithful people may more tenderly love and regard them, which
both in faith and flesh are linked to them, then those that are knit to them
only in the fellowship of the same religion. Which as the Apostle himself
means, 1. Timoth. 5. 8. saying: If any man provide not for his own, and
specially for them that are of his household, he has denied the faith, and is
worse then an Infidel: so it is not obscurely signified in that rule, Galat.
6. Do good unto all, specially to those that are of the household of faith. And
if nature must give place to religion: then religion and it being joined
together, men are and must be more strictly tied. And yet we see that under the
color of kindred, religion is destitute: and some under pretext of relieuing
the religious, destitute their own flesh. The truth is, that both must be
performed, if God himself give ability: and when we lack power to do to all
alike, then to prefer them that concern us in flesh and faith. And let this
suffice for the persons, as they are distinctly commended to the Colossians.

Now a little of them coniunctly. He says, that he sent Tychicus to them: and
with him Onesimus. There are two causes (as it should seem) for which he sent
them. For though verse. 8. he seems to speak of Tychicus only, yet he
expressly mentions Onesimus, verse. 9: and lays almost the same burden
upon him, specially as in regard of private affairs, that he does upon
Tychicus. I say therefore, as I said, there are two causes of this mission or
legation. One, that he might by them understand in what terms the affairs of
the Colossians stood, specially for their Church causes: for otherwise though
he wished them well in the world, yet he meddled not much with their worldly
business. The other, that knowing how weak and faint good men's hearts be, he
might, by the coming and presence of these two, comfort and encourage the
Colossians. Which though most properly it were the work of Tychicus, as of the
minister of the word, yet no doubt Onesimus, as a particular member of the
Church, might in his measure perform it, yea and did in his measure. To these
two causes he adds a third, and the same of no less moment then the former,
namely to cause the Colossians to understand in what state he and his matters
were. Because as the good condition of the Colossians would make the Apostles
heart glad: so the Apostle being well, who had been their gracious and good
teacher, they could not but rejoice. From all which we may observe, that
though Paul were in his enemies hands, and were fast bound in chains, as we
say, yet he thought it not enough, by writing this present Epistle to the
Colossians, to confirm and strengthen them in the faith, but also sends
Tychicus unto them, and together with him Onesimus, whom notwithstanding he
might have detained with him, the better to minister unto him in the bands,
that he endured for the Gospel. And all this he does, that by them he might
the better declare unto the Church his own particular estate, and be the better
informed in the knowledge of their affairs. All which he does not in a loose
mind, as in regard of himself, babbling out his own matters, he cares not
how, nor where, nor to whom: nor with a curious mind as in respect of their
businesses, being as too many are now adays, too much occupied in other men's
affairs, and carelessly neglect their own, but of a very careful heart for
them and their good. Which care of his, amplified as you see, and being so
great as it was indeed for the Churches of Christ, whose benefit and good
edification in Christ, neglecting as it were his own life and health, he had
always before his eyes, should teach us what we should do. Which yet that he
might the better persuade us unto, he mentions it, yea he discourses upon
it in many places, and namely 2. Cor. 11. verse. 28. 29. where he says:
Besides those things that come from without, that fear and trouble that daily
rises up in me, forces me still, I mean, care for all Churches. Who is
afflicted, and I am not afflicted? who is offended, and I burn not? But what
shall we say, sin and Satan, and the intisements of this present wicked
world, have daseled men's eyes, and besotted their understandings, and plainly
do express the palpable, yea the deplorable calamity of these naughty days
and bad times, in which a man shall hardly find any man, amongst the members of
the Church, that has conscience or care of the performance of this duty. And
can we marvel at it, that the poor people know it not, or feel it not, since
you shall hardly find one, amongst many thousand of the ministers and preachers
of Gods holy word, who does not more care for his own health and welfare, then
for the incolumitie of any other, yea of the whole Church besides? And is it
not manifest by this, that if a man be brought into some peril and hazard, he
will with the neglect of the Church, provide for one, and imagines, that if it
goes well with him, it goes well withal. So strongly does the world, and
worldly things, and self love, and all other corruption bear sway: and so
truly may we say, as the Apostle Paul does, 2. Tim. 4. 10. Demas has forsaken
me, and has embraced this present world. But indeed, if there were at this day
such fidelity and zeal in the hearts of them that exercise and execute the
ministry of God, as there was in Paul, and in other of Gods faithful
servants in his time, they would esteem as nothing all the dangers of this
life, and they would account as dirt and dung all worldly pleasures and
profits, in comparison of Christ's glory, and the Churches good. And of this
let us assure our selves, that till men, yea ministers be come so far, they
are but the shadows of Christians, and vizards or counterfeits, in comparison
of Gods faithful servants and ministers. To amend this geere is not in us,
howsoever we may speak of it, and wish it: God only must work it. To him
therefore let us go with cheerefulnes and earnestnes, and beseech him to work
this care in the hearts of all faithful ministers that belong to him, and are
employed in his Church. Which he grant for Christ Jesus sake: to whom with the
Father and the holy Spirit, be given all praise and power, both now and at all
times, of us and all people,

Amen.
THE XXXIX. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 4. verse. 10. 11. 10 Aristarchus my prison fellow saluteth you,
and Marcus Barnab as cousin (concerning whom, ye have received commandments:
If he come unto you, receive him)

11 And Jesus which is called Iustus, who are of the Circumcision. These only
being helpers with me in the kingdom of God, have been comfort unto me.


IF you remember (brethren) the things that have been spoken before, you may
perceive, that in these verses and the rest following, there is contained, as
we may say, the seventh part of the whole Epistle, and the fourth part of this
particular chapter. And consists principally of salutations or greetings,
which some that were with Paul, when he wrote this Epistle, sent to the Church
of Colosse, and with commendatio^s also, which the said Church was in Paul's
name (and it may be in the name of diverse that were present with him) to do to
another Church, and some particular members of it. The first sort of these two
salutations, are comprehended in these verses that we have read, and so on in
the 12. 13. and 14. The other is contained in the fifteenth verse. And we are
to mark, for the more clear understanding of the text, that these greetings
are sent from two kinds of people, according as the world it self was divided,
and as God was pleased out of them to gather a Church unto himself: that is to
say, they were sent, partly from the circumcised, meaning thereby the Jews,
because that sign was in some use among them at that time: and partly from the
uncircumcised, that is from the Gentiles, who were not clogged, or to be
clogged with that ceremony. Of these latter he speaks verse. 12. 13. 14. and
of the former in these two verses, yet so as we must understand that one of
the^ also was a Gentile, namely Aristarchus, as we shall better perceive anon.
And this I would have further to be marked, that having begun in some of the
foregoing verses to treat of private and particular affairs, he holds on
here in these and the rest following, that so all and every one of the Church
might understand, that he was both careful for, and mindful of the whole, and
every one of them, and of al their good, specially spiritual, which should
cause the^ likewise to affect him.

Those three persons that are mentioned in these two verses, are after a double
manner described here. For either he does by some particular description
commend them to the Colossians, and of this sort are, my fellow in bands,
attributed to Aristarchus; Barnabas kinsman, attributed to Mark; Iustus
attributed to Jesus: with some common title, common I mean either to two of
them; and that is that they were of the Circumcision: or else to all three
together, that they only help him in Gods kingdom, and were singular
comforts unto him. The first of these is named here Aristarchus. He was of
Thessalonica in Macedonia, and was converted by Paul's ministry and preaching,
and accompanying him in most of his iourneys, he was taken with him, as also
was Gaius, in the tumult that was made at Ephesus against him, which being
pacified, he accompanied Paul going into Asia, and was carried prisoner
together with Paul unto Rome. If you would see these things more at large, look
Act. 19. 28. and 20. 4. and 27. 2. Mention also is made of him in Paul's Epistle
to Philemon, where among others named in that place, he is said to be Paul's
helper: as in this text he is counted and called his prison fellow. All
tending to this end, not only to show the manifold graces that God had
vouchsafed to show to Aristarchus, which were manifested by sound fruits even
from the time of his conversion to that present hour, and particularly his
zeal and constancy in the truth, that by no tumults or trials did shrink
from it, and his care and love toward the Apostle, with whom he stood forth
and abode even in bonds: but the better to move the Colossians, with godly joy
and love to receive a man of such worthy parts, and to credit him in what he
should say, or in any thing they should send by him. And this teaches us, whom
we should best esteem, like of or credit, even those that have bin most
faithful and fast to God, his truth and ministers. For as we most mislike, or
should mislike them that are most wicked, as the Prophet says Psalm. 139. Do
not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? yea I hate them right sore, as though
they were mine enemies: so should we most dearly esteem, and carefully
commend the most godly and faithful, that so we might say of our selves, as
the Prophet David does, Psalm. 16. My goodness reaches not unto thee, O God, but
to the Saints that are on the earth: all my delight is in them.

The second mentioned here is named Mark, whom some interpreters make the
second amongst them that were circumcised, and are mentioned in this place. I
will not greatly contend about this, though I have before expressed my mind
touching the same. To me it seems, that because Aristarchus was a Gentile,
and we read nothing of his circumcision, that it is manifest to think Mark
to be the first of them, who as it should seem was a Jew, or at leastwise
descended of some Jewish parents and kindred, and therefore likely yea certain,
that he was circumcised. Who this man was, and what he was, the holy history
will sufficiently declare: and particularly we may read of him, Act. 12. 12.
and 13. 5. 13. and 15. 27. and in other places. It should seem he had two
names, John and Mark, but this latter being his surname, as appears Acts 12.
12. where also it appears that he was the son of one Mary a godly woman,
which likewise is manifested by this, that the Church met in her house, and
that Peter after he was delivered out of prison, came to the same place. This
man, when Paul and Barnabas returned from Jerusalem, was taken into their
company, and ministered unto them all their journey, even until they came to
Perga a city of Pamphilia, where departing from them he returned to Jerusalem,
by means whereof there arose that great controversy between Paul and
Barnabas, mentioned in the Acts, and that after they came from the Synod or
Council held at Ieruselem, Act. 15. through which contention, Paul and
Barnabas were severed, and Barnabas took Mark who went with him into Cyprus.
But these iars and divisions notwithstanding, Mark was reconciled to Paul, and
was with him when he was prisoner at Rome, and ministered unto him in his bands,
as appears both in this place, and also in the epistle to Philemon verse. 24.
and 2. Timot. 4. 11. where he says: Take Mark and bring him with thee, for
he is profitable unto me to minister. And he is described here by two
adjuncts, as I may say: the first is his affinity with Barnabas, whose cousin
he is said to be. From whence we learn, that affinity amongst great men in
the Church, specially if they be godly and faithful indeed, should make them
more esteemed among the Saints, and should work a greater estimation of them
in our hearts, even for their kinreds sake, by whom the Lord has enlarged the
glory of his name amongst us. Otherwise we should show our selves to be such
as would not be moved, neither by the graces of God in their callings, nor by
the gift of nature in their kindred and flesh, God having joined both together
as it were in one person, that by all means we might learn to draw nigh unto
him, and to say indeed, amongst our selves, O how beautiful are the feet of
them that bring glad tidings, even the glad tidings of the Gospel! Secondly,
he is set forth as a man furnished with commandments from Paul and others, in
these words: concerning whom ye have received commandments. These
commandments touching him, were directed unto diverse Churches, and amongst the
rest to that of Colosse. The tenor or effect of the command was, that if he
came unto them, they should receive him reverently, intertaine him kindly, and
pursue him with due honor, as we would say, as the true and faithful servant
of Christ Jesus. There might be many causes of this command: but two
especially worthy to be considered. Men are backward to good works generally,
and particularly to religious intertainment of the Saints. This iniquity Paul
labors to prevent in the Colossians, by this good caveat. Again, because
Paul had before refused to take him with him, and that for this reason, because
he departed from Paul and Barnabas in Pamphilia, and refused to be their
companion in that work and labor of the Lord: and thereupon men might
suppose, that Paul carried that hard conceit of him still, and particularly the
Colossians might happily deem, that if he should come unto them, he was not
meet to be admitted. But the Apostle having proved his repentance, and seen
his sincere care to promote the Gospel, did again commend him to the Church.
And from hence we should learn, that no former offenses should be remembered or
thought upon, after the heart is truly touched for them, and men are mutually
reconciled: but that as God forgets and forgiueth whatsoever is past, when
men have No vpbraiding with past transgressions after repentance
unfeignedly repented; so should his Saints and servants do upon earth, never
remembering other men's past iniquities, much less vpbrayding them with them,
specially when they have showed sure signs of amendment. And therefore we may
see how much they are out of the way and mislead by Satan's malice, and their
own corrupt heart, that will upon every light occasion hit men in the teeth
with their former falls, plainly manifesting by this, that they never felt sin
in themselves, nor unfeignedly remitted the same in others: for had they done
so, these and such like corruptions could not have carried sway in them, as we
see it does.

It follows in the text. And Jesus, which is called Iustus. Of this man being
the second, I take it of the circumcised mentioned here, as we have said
before, I find no mention in any other place of the New Testament but in this:
and therefore cannot say much. Even here he has two names: the one Hebrew,
that is Jesus: the other Latin, that is Iustus. Both his names imply and
signify good things, by which also it should seem he was a good man. But
because we have no more certainty of his life and qualities, this shall be
sufficient that has been generally spoken.

Now it follows, to see what the Apostle says of all these together. These
only are my workefellowes unto the kingdom of God, which have been unto my
consolation. This is a general commendation of them, and in it concerning them
he affirms two things. The first, that they were fellow laborers or workmen
with him, in aduauncing the kingdom of God, they all joining hearts and hands
together in setting forward that excellent A good thing when faithful men
join together in well doing.
work. The second, and it does in part proceed from the former, namely that
they were no small comfort unto him, meaning thereby, not only as in regard of
aduauncing the work of the ministry, but also yielding him sound consolation
in his imprisonment and bands, and that made me to say before, in part
proceeding from the former. By the kingdom of God in this place, omitting the
diverse acceptions of the word in the Scriptures, specially of the New
Testament, is meant the glorious Gospel of Christ, by which, as it were by
What is meant by the kingdom of God.
a standerd lifted up, God gathers a Church unto himself, and thereby
manifests to men a means, whereby they may have entrance into the said
Church: yea by which he guides and governs, both the Church it self, and
all those that are gathered thereinto: the Gospel serving not only to begin
and beget faith and a good conscience, but to hold men on in the same, and to
cause them to grow therein. And yet this double commendation of them, is
amplified by these words in the text, that these were they alone of the
Circumcision, who help him in promoting Christ's kingdom at Rome, and did much
comfort him, as before has bin showed. And that word only would be marked,
because that from it we may probably conclude, either that Peter was never at
Rome at all: or else that if he were there, he was not so good and faithful a
head to Peter not at Rome.
the Church, nor so comfortable a companion to his fellow Apostle, as the
Roman Catholics do make him. For if he were at any time at Rome, I would
feign know what time we should rather think him to have been at Rome, then a
little before that time, which they themselves assign to his passion or
suffering there, which in their own opinion is the very selfsame time in
which this Epistle was written, they affirming that both Peter and Paul
suffered and were crucified at Rome in one and the selfsame year. But it
appears by this which is said here, that Peter was not then at Rome, when
from thence he wrote this Epistle. And besides, how can it be credible, that if
he had been then at Rome, he should not have furthered Paul in aduauncing
Christ's kingdom? or should not have yielded him comfort in his bands? To say
or think the first, is at the least to make him a dissembler of his religion,
or a denier of Christ, as once he had done before: but they hold, that after he
had received the holy Ghost, he was freed from all error, specially in faith,
though they forget his fall mentioned in the Galathians, and remember not, that
if that entitled him into not erring, the rest of the Apostles had as great a
privilege that way as he, because they al equally received the spirit. And to
affirm the other, is to make him uncharitable, and to note him to be a
forsaker of the brethren, and not a fellow sufferer with them in their bands
and afflictions. So that whilst they go about to bring him to Rome, they have
spunne a fair thread, in that they pull upon him, and by consequent upon
themselves, these inconveniences at the least. But the truth is, he was not
there. And for the further strongthening of us therein, we are to be persuaded,
that if he had been there, the Apostle, who is so careful, yea so curious as
it were, both in this and other Epistles of his written from Rome, mentioning
so many men of mean note in the Church, and the names of so many faithful
teachers also, as then were present with him there, and yet makes no mention
at all of Peter, whom yet notwithstanding in another place, he calls the
Pillar of the Church, Galath. 2. verse. 9. But to leave this and to proceed to
another point.

In that the Apostle is so careful to give charge and order touching Mark and
the receiving of him, we may see first that Mark was a good man, and so learn
by that, who should be dear and precious unto us, even the Saints that are
upon the Whom Gods people should most affect.
earth, as the Prophet says Psalm. 16. and find in our selves thereby, the true
note, that we are sound members of the Church militant, and therefore shall be
gathered to the Church triumphant, in that a vile person is despised in our
eyes, but we make much of them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. But the world is
quite and clean contrary, for it loves her own, and hates the godly. So
that we may say as the Prophet says: He that frames himself unto
righteousness, makes himself a pray. And surely, if it be a great sin to
condemn the generation of the just, then it cannot but be a transgression
also, not to commend and esteem the godly: for besides that, God accounts
the favors done to them, as done to himself: and on the other side reckons
the indignities offered them, as accomplished against his own Majesty, the very
graces yt he has shed abroad into their hearts, should make us to esteem
the^. So that if we would not behold their persons, yet we should acknowledge
his mercies and graces in the^, and accordingly reverence and regard the^.
Secondly, in this act of Paul, what great care and diligence the Primitive
Church had, in giving testimonies unto men. No doubt the cause moving them
thereto was, many seducers and false brethren went abroad, and they To whom the
Church should veeld testimony.
would not willingly have had the godly and faithful deceived by them, which
sin no doubt they might the more easily have fallen into, if the Church had
not kept this good course, in yielding faithful testimony to the holy
professors, yea preachers it may be of Christ's Gospel. It there were at this
day the like diligence and care, amongst such Christians as dwell in diverse
regions and parts of the world, or amongst them that live in one and the
selfsame kingdom, country and Church: these vagrant men, that so much run
up and down from place to place, and from country to country, and travail
so sore to seduce and carry men away from Christ, could not so much prevail
as they do. Which I do not mean only of Jesuits and Seminary Priests,
though I take them to be the most dangerous enemies of the Church, but others
both of corrupt life and corrupt doctrine also, who having spued themselves by
their evil dealing, labor by running up and down, in propounding poysonfull
doctrine, and bad example of life, to leave a miserable yea infectiue stinch
behind them wheresoever they come. These should the Church and Magistrates have
great regard to repress, as on the other side to exalt the godly and
faithful. But since they are cold and careless both in the one and the other,
and we know that God regards his own vineyard, let us entreat him that is
the Lord of the vineyard, not only to thrust forth workmen into his harvest,
Matthew. 9. but also to repress rouers and wanderers, which seek nothing but
their own bellies, and the supplanting of the truth of doctrine, and honesty
of life: which he vouchsafe to bring to pass even for Christ Jesus his sake,
to whom be praise in the Church for ever,

Amen.
THE XL. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 4. verse. 12, 13, 14. 12 Epaphras the servant of Christ, who also
is one of you, saluteth you, striving always for you in prayers, that ye may
stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.

13 For this I testify of him, that he burns in a great desire of you: and
of them of Laodicea, and of them of Hierapolis.

14 Luke the beloved Physician greeteth you: and so does Demas.


THe Apostle having begun to name some, who saluted the Church of Colosse, as
you have heard, in some of the former verses; holds on in these verses to do
the like: and names particularly two or three, as Epaphras, Luke, and Demas:
all which it is very probable, if not certain, that they were Gentiles. And
two of them, that is Epaphras and Luke he diversely describes, contenting
himself with the bare naming of Demas. Touching every one of them, as they lie
in the text. Epaphras is the first, and he describes him by diverse adjuncts:
he was one of the^, by which what he means, has bin expounded already, when
we treated of Epaphras commended.
the 9. verse of this chapter, where Onesimus has the same title given unto
him. But the Apostle alleges it here, to tell them that even in that respect
he should be the more dear unto them, and the better accepted of them,
notwithstanding that our Savior says; and we find it every where true in the
world, that a Prophet is not without honor, but in his own country and his
fathers house. the servant of Christ, whom also he had mentioned before, chap.
1. verse. 7. where he is called a faithful minister of Christ for the
Colossians. By which we may see, that he has this title of the servant of
Christ, by reason of the special calling that God had committed unto him, in
which he served Christ, by the preaching of his glorious Gospel.

The second that the Apostle mentions here, that greeteth Luke commended.
the Church, is Luke: whom the Apostle describes here was a Physician.
beloved: under which term he is commended, from that love the Apostle carried
toward him, as a very Christian man, and very familiar and inward with the
Apostle. So that he signifies that if they loved him himself, they could not
choose but affect Luke: because that the love of Christ's Apostle, and the
familiarity that he had with Luke, could not but much commend him to the
Church.

Demas, who has no title of commendation given unto him here or elsewhere, for
ought I Demas.
know, which to me may serve to argue, that he carried not himself so well as
others did, and that the Apostle had some suspicion of him, or else he would
not have been so sparing: And of all these the Apostle speaks verse. 14. But
we will treat of them severally as they lie in the text.

Concerning many of the terms or titles attributed to Epaphras, we shall not
need to say much, because they have been sundry times expounded already.
Such as have not been declared let us somewhat deal with. And first for his
prayers, three things are expressly marked therein by the Apostle: Things
observed in the Apostles prayers
words, striving always, meaning thereby earnestnes and feruencie in pouring
them forth. for you. that ye may stand perfect and complete, etc.

When he expresses the manner of his prayers, by the word striving, we must
not think that he means any carnal combat or bodily conflict, but such a
one as was spiritual, and had indeed hand to hand with the ghostly enemies of
our salvation, the world, the flesh and the devil. Which as they are always
ready to hinder all the good motions of the spirit in our Hinderers of the
prayers of the Saints.
minds; so specially do they exercise their force and their fraud, in opposing
against our prayers, sometimes casting stumbling blocks in our ways, to
hinder us from the doing of that duty, as disturbing our passions and
affections, of love, hatred, fear, anger, and such like: and sometimes when
they see that these will not prevail to let or hinder our prayers, they assay
by all means to make them cold, faint, few: and least by continuing our
prayers we should conceive hope to be heard, they set before us one while our
own, another while other men's sins, for whom sometimes we pray as for our
selves. All which things are not obscurely signified and set out in the third
chapter of the prophecy of Zechariah, under the person and practice of
Iehashua the high Priest, mentioned there, and matters contained therein. But
what shall we do? content our selves with the knowledge of these things? No,
that is discomfortable. But we must resist and strive against, Weapons to
withstand our spiritual enemies by
being fenced and armed with the weapons of the holy Ghost, that is, with faith
and hope, and other good graces expressed and plainly put down Ephesians. 6.
Neither may we at any hand suffer our enemies to be more powerful in hindering
our prayers, then the might of the spirit to further them in us. For the first
of these is, to give place unto Satan: and the latter were to quench and cool
the spirit, and both be evil, and therefore we should auoidthem.

But he adds in the doing of this duty: always, in sinuating thereby that
as he did it often and earnestly, so we should not do it for a time only as
many do, but that this combat and conflict of ours, in and about prayer, must
be perpetual and continual, even as our prayers themselves ought so to be.
Whereunto the better to be provoked, we must remember these two things:
first, that whether we pray for our selves or Two things furthering
perseuevance in prayer.
for others, we have daily need of some new benefit and increase of Gods grace
in us. Secondly, that we should every moment and minute forgo the grace that
we have received from God, except God, who has given it us, did preserve the
same both in our selves and in others. To which we may add the third, that we
can never come to prayer, but that Satan our common adversary, will set
himself against us, and do what he can to hinder our prayers: and that
therefore he being always opposite, we should always pray.

The next thing he tells us of in this service of prayer, is, the parties for
whom we must pray: for you. True it is, that we must power forth prayers, and
strive in our supplication for all men: according to which the Apostle says,
1. Timoth. 2. 1. I exhort therefore, that above all things, supplications,
prayers, intercessions and thankesgiuings be made for all men: yet we are more
specially bound to pray for them that are linked unto us in Whom we should
chiefly pray for.
the same fellowship of the body of the Church, then for others not so
straightly joined with us. Again, amongst the faithful, we are more obliged to
pray for them that are of kin unto us in the flesh and touch us in our blood,
then those that are further removed. For even this natural conjunction works
in them, that otherwise are joined together in Christ, some more great and
excellent degree of love. The reason is, because the more bands we have to tie
us together, so much the more great ought to be our love and care for our and
others salvation. And this does Paul profess Romans 9. 2. 3. saying, that he was
especially careful for the Israelites, his kinsmen according to the flesh. And
Philip. 2. 26. he commends Epaphroditus, that he was much troubled and
grieved, by reason of the sorrow of the Philippians, from whom he was sent, as
it should seem, to the Apostle.

Now we come to the matter, for which he prays, as on the behalf of the
Colossians, in these words: that ye may stand perfect and complet, etc. He does
not pray for this only that they might be perfect, but that they might stand
perfect, that What it is to stand perfect.
is, that they might constantly persevere and go forward in that perfection,
which God had vouchsafed unto them. For the word of standing, signifies
constancy and perseverance, yea such a constancy and perseverance, as has
courage of heart joined therewithal. Our perfection stands in the knowledge
of God, in righteousness, holiness, etc. And this is twofold. One imputed unto
us, that is, that perfect righteousness Two sorts of perfection.
and satisfaction of Christ, which God imputes unto us, that through faith
believe in Christ, and in which he does even think us as perfect, as if we
were altogether just and holy in our selves. The other is inherent in us, when
the holy Ghost works in our minds the knowledge of God and of his will, and
in our hearts holiness and righteousness, and wholly purges us in the inward man
from sin and natural corruption. The first of these is wholly and altogether
perfect, and that even in this life, and indeed is the true cause of that
perfection that is inherent in us: which wholly flows from, or consists in
our conjunction and fellowship with Christ: without which indeed there could
be no perfection at all in us. But as for that other, namely that inherent
perfection, which is wrought in us by the holy Ghost regenerating us, it
cannot be absolute and in every respect perfect in us in this life, by reason
of some darknesses that we carry about with us in our minds, for we know in
part, and prophecy in part, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13. 9. and by reason
of the remainders of sin and filthiness of corruption, which shall never be
utterly and altogether abolished in us, until that by the spirit of Christ
dwelling fully in us, we be perfectly freed from impuritie, and all manner of
pollution, which shall be brought to pass in that other life that is to come,
when we shall be altogether present with the Lord. Notwithstanding we must
endeavor and strive continually, that we may be comefully perfect, and daily
attain to greater perfection, Christ so commanding us, Matthew. 5. 48. Be ye
perfect: for unless we daily proceed in perfection in this life, we shall
never have it altogether perfect and absolute in that which is to come. And
this indeed is it which the Apostle says, Epaphras prayed for, as on the
behalf of the Colossians, that they might in an unwearied course persevere and
hold on till they came to be perfect.

He adds, In all the will of God. In which words he does after a sort as it
were limit, this perfection. And it is the same with that which he wishes to
the Ephesians, that they might be filled with all that fulness of God, Ephesians. 3.
19. for all that fulness of God, which he mentions there, is nothing else but
all that fulfilling, in all the will of God, which he speaks of here. And in
both places the Apostle adding an universal term, he thereby declares, that
it is not enough for perfection and filling, that in some one or sundry things
we study to please God, but that it is necessary that in all things we
should be conformed In all things we must siudie to please God.
to his will: which then is brought to pass, when the eyes of our minds are
enlightened, that we may both know and acknowledge him and his will; and that
our hearts and all the affections thereof are sanctified unto his obedience,
and all our actions both outward and inward are framed according to his law,
which is the most exact rule of righteousness, religion, and whatsoever else.

In the next verse, to wit the 13. the Apostle declares, that these earnest
prayers, which the Apostle shows Epaphras made for the Colossians, did
proceed not only from a great care and godly zeal that he bare toward
them, but also toward their neighbors, the Laodiceans, and them of
Hierapolis: for whom certes even as for the Colossians, he did in prayer even
as it were strive with the Lord. For we cannot earnestly power forth prayers
unto God for any, unless that our hearts be seized before hand with an earnest
affection toward them. And it would be marked, that to the end this great
care and love of Epaphras toward them might be the more assuredly manifest,
and they the better persuaded of it, he confirms it by his own testimony,
which considering what great authority and credit, specially as an Apostle,
he ought to have amongst them, should at no hand be counted either light or
deceitful: and that causes him to say and deliver it in this form, This I
testify of him.

It follows in our text, namely verse. 14. of this chapter, Luke the beloved
Physician saluteth you, etc. These are still salutations and greetings sent
them, and indeed comefrom sundry of the Gentiles, as diverse of those before
did. This Luke that is mentioned here, was Paul's continual companion in all
his troubles and travails, as appears in the Acts of the Apostles, which he
himself wrote: and he remained with Paul, even then when other being sent
away from him, Demas forsook him also: which also the Apostle shows, saying,
Only Luke is with me, 2. Timoth. 4. 11. And in Paul's Epistle to Philemon,
verse. 24. he is called Paul's helper, that is, a labourer or worker with him in
the Ministry. Now Paul deseribeth him here, first by the calling which he had
before God put him a part to preach the Gospel, he was a Physician: from
whence we may learn, that no politic or civil calling or occupation, can
hinder Gods calling unto the ministry of Nothing can hinder Gods calling of
men to the holy ministry.
Christ, but he will call whom he will, and of what sort of people please
him. He calls Matthew from the receipt of custom to be an Apostle. He
calls Peter, Andrew, John and James, who were busied about catching of
fishes, and he makes them fishers of men. He chose Amos from being a heardman,
to be a Prophet: and the like may we read in many other. And so he makes Luke
the Physician to become an Evangelist. For as God is most free in himself, so
is he not tied to any condition or calling of men whatsoever, but chooses whom
he will, and as he will, to do his work, always notwithstanding induing them
with gifts fit for the execution of their duties, according to his good
pleasure. Secondly, he sets him out by this adiunct, beloved: in which
term the Apostle commends him, for that great love which he bore toward him
as a Christian man, and one that was very inward with him, and familiar unto
him. For the love that Christ's Apostle, and the friendship that was between
them, did not a little commend the man. By which we may see, that it is no
small To be beloved of them that love God.
matter, but indeed of good worth, both to our selves and to others, to be
beloved of them, that either love God, or are loved of him. To our selves, as a
testimony of good comfort; and to others, as an argument of good credit.

To him he adioyneth Demas. This was he of whom the Apostle complains, that
he was forsaken, saying, 1. Tim. 4. 10. Demas has for saken me, and embraced
this present world. In the Epistle to Philemon he is called Paul's helper: from
whence we may with good probability gather, that at that time he was a
minister of the Gospel, but afterward forsaking his calling he fell away, and
gaped after gain. From whence we may see, that the love of this present world
cannot stand with the The love of the world and the ministry of the Gospel
cannot stand together.
ministry of the Gospel. For no man (says Christ) can serve two masters:
for either he shall hate the one and love the other, or cleave to the one and
forsake the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Matthew. 6. 24. If the mind
once be carried away with the carefulnes of worldly things, it cannot be wholly
occupied in seeking Christ and his glory, but will easily prefer the world
before Christ himself. And thus far concerning these verses, and the true
and natural meaning of them, with other necessary matter, in sort and manner
as you have heard.

Now to some observations out of them. And first in that Epaphras did always
strive for them in his prayers, we may gather that it is not so easy a matter
to make prayers unto God, No easy matter to pray well.
as commonly men account it, but rather indeed very hard and of great labor.
Which may appear by this, that if a man does but once settle himself to it,
specially if he do it earnestly, he shall find a thousand lets and
hindrances set before him, if not utterly to pull him away from prayer, yet to
stay him much therein, or to make his prayers more cold and faint. Sometimes
Satan's malice, sometimes his own corruption will stand up against him:
sometimes other men's examples of neglect, or of cold performance of prayer. And
though Hindrances to pray.
these were not, but that men thought still they prayed, yet shall men, if they
would sift and sound their hearts well, perceive yt this is one cause why in
prayer, or to prayer, men find no hindrance, because they are content with a
certain form of words which flow from the mouth, but have no seat in the
heart, and so praying without true faith indeed, or any serious affection of
the mind, or any unfeigned reverence of God, or any sound feeling of their own
miseries, or any hearty desire to be reconciled to the Lord, etc. their
prayers are Things necessary to him that would pray well.
lip-labor, yea lost labor. Neither will Satan much set himself against such
prayers (if we may call them prayers) because he knows they will not much
hurt him and his kingdom. But he will mightily oppose against the hearty
prayers of Gods people, and resist them, by obiecting and casting in their way
all the temptations that possibly he can, because he well knows, that by
means thereof his kingdom shall, if not be overthrown, yet greatly
diminished.

Secondly, in the person and practice of Epaphras, learn, that it is the
Pastors duty, not only to teach and to instruct his The Pastors duty in
presence and absence.
flock in the doctrine of the Gospel, whilst he is present with them, but
even as it were to carry them about with him in his heart, and to take
himself continually bound and tied to zeal and care for them, and with
earnest requests and supplications to wish for and procure their salvation, and
continually to pray for them to almighty God. And great reason, they are their
fathers, they are their teachers. Fathers are unnatural, if they remember
their children whilst they are present with them only. Teachers are
negligent, or at leastwise short of their duty, if they remember their
scholars only whilst they are in the school with them. The doctrine of the
word is not easily received: neither does it quickly bring forth fruit. Prayer
is a worthy mean to help forward the one and the other, specially the
prayers of the pastor and teacher. And if in other cases, the prayers of a
righteous man are much available, specially if they be fervent, so says S.
James; then the supplications of a godly and faithful minister are likewise
piercing.

Lastly observe, that the Apostle highly, yea and as it were before others,
commends Epaphras to the Colossians, and particularly for this that he was
their minister, and preached the Gospel unto them: yea and he gives him this
testimony, that he had a certain fervent affection and earnest desire toward
them. He does the like unto Timothy, whom he purposed to send to the
Philippians. He does in like manner commend Epaphroditus unto them, Phil. 1.
19. Observe therefore I say and gather from hence, that it is very necessary,
that in any, yea in every particular congregation, there should amongst all be a
reverend regard of the pastor that lives and teaches The Pastor of the Church
should be reverently esteemed.
in the same: yea all should be well persuaded, not only generally of his
honesty, piety, faith, charity, learning, conscience, and other graces,
necessary and fit for the Ministry, but also of his singular affection and
love toward them, yea specially of his desire and care to do them good, so
that he may as it were possess the hearts of his people, and have them most
strictly conjoined to him. For so he shall more easily bring them unto Christ,
whilst they are willing, and commit themselves to the faith and trust of their
Pastor. But where this persuasion is not of their Pastor, his labor, to and
amongst the flock, though it be never so great and good, should do small good.
And therefore we may see, that we are not only to pray, as our Savior Christ
teaches us, Matthew. 9. to pray the Lord of the harvest to thrust forth workmen
into the harvest, but also to entreat him so to link the hearts of the Pastor
and the people together, that the work of his glory in them and their
salvation, may be every day more then other advanced. But where shall a man
find such people? where shall he find such Pastors? A man may go from the
East to the West, from the North to the South, and find very few: which should
be so far off from discouraging us from this duty, that it should provoke
us more carefully to perform it. And that I say to you, I speak to mine own
heart. Let us therefore travail again and again with God, to work such a
mutual conjunction betwixt the Pastor and the flock, as his glory may be
daily advanced thereby, and the work of eternal life furthered through
Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all power and praise,
with thanks and glory now and for evermore,

Amen.
THE XLI. LECTVRE UPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 4. verse. 15, 16, 17, 18. 15 Salute the brethren which are at
Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his house.

16 And when this Epistle shall be read among you, cause that it be read also
in the Church of the Laodiceans: as that ye likewise read the Epistle which
was written from Laodicea.

17 And say to Archippus, Look to this, that thou fulfill the ministry which
thou have received from the Lord.

18 The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bands. Grace be with
you. Amen.


THe first of these four verses belongs to the last treaty, touching
salutations. And therefore we will deal with it by it self, before we come to
the other. Having showed before what worthy persons saluted them: Now he
entreats the Church to salute and greet from him and them, some others.
Those that are to be greeted are of two sorts. First, the brethren which are at
Laodicea, and the rather he entreats this, because he would have this
Epistle read amongst them. Secondly, a certain man named Nymphas, together The
members of the church specially to be regarded in our salutations.
with the Church that was in his house. From whence we may perceive, that
amongst them of Laodicea, he would only have the^ to be greeted that were
brethren. By which name he means them that were sons of one father, to wit
God, and adopted into that grace, being ingraffed into Christ through faith.
The reason whereof is plain, because with them alone and with no other we are
conjoined, and as it were made one in Christ. And as for salutations and
greetings, they are certain means that God has appointed, to preserve and
maintain that unity and conjunction, that the members of Christ have among
themselves. Which howsoever as in respect of the body they are distinguished
and separated one from another in this present life, yet feel they here the
communion of Saints, and have hope in their hearts of inseparable conjunction
with their head Christ, and with that whole holy body of the Saints in the
life to come.

Another thing that we may learn hence is in the person of Nymphas: who being
the father of a family, or master of a household, teaches us what is the
duty of such as be in that calling, namely so to govern their families and
households, Parents and householders duty.
and so to instruct them in the knowledge of Christ and salvation, that they
may be well inured with integrity of life and sanctimonie, and so have them,
particular congregations as it were, famous and worthy commendation amongst
all the godly, for faith and holiness. But what man is he, I will not say, that
strives to this, but that thinks of it, at the least carefully? From whence
it flows, that not only people proceed to prophanenes, but the Churches are
not increased: which cannot be, till special families, which make particular
congregations, be well and thoroughly reformed. But we will leave this and
proceed to that which follows.

The two next verses contain in them the fifth part of this fourth chapter. And
they do contain in them certain special points which he gives in charge to
the Colossians, concerning partly their own benefit, and partly the good of
the Laodiceans. The first thing he charge them withal, is, that after this
Epistle had been read among the Colossians themselves, they would cause it to
be read also in the Church of Laodicea, From whence it should seem we may well
infer, that this Epistle was chiefly sent to the Governors and Elders of the
Church, and therefore the Apostle would first have it read publicly in the
Church of Colosse, that it might be known and understood of all the Saints
there. Next, that he would have the whole Church of Laodicea acquainted
therewithal. The reason why he would have this Epistle communicated with the
whole Church, both of Colosse and Laodicea, was the great profit which it
contains in it, by means whereof it might profit all the faithful even unto
eternal life. From whence we may gather, that it is not enough that Pastors,
Teachers, Elders and others, know the holy Scriptures, whereof this worthy
Epistle of Paul's is an excellent part, but that they must of necessity
acquaint common Christians and all faithful people therewith. And therefore
are the Church-Rulers bound to read them both publicly and privately, and
must propound and interpret them in the assemblies of the congregation, yea
must turn them into vulgar tongues, that so the common people may read them
and understand them: and in a word, they must carefully provide, that that
book may not be to the common people as if it were a book closed and shut up,
into which no man must look but they alone. But how far are the Doctors of
the Popish Church from this holy mind? They forbid lay men, as they call
the^, from reading the holy Scriptures, yea they strictly enjoin that
translations of the vulgar tongues, should not be used. Wherein, what greater
furtherance can they give to the kingdom of Satan? who knowing how needful
the Scriptures are to salvation, does wholly by himself and his supporters
strive unto this, and labors nothing more, then to hinder the scriptures
from coming into men's hands, or once appearing in their sight.

Another thing worthy observation is this, that though Paul's Epistles, as
almost all the rest of the books of the holy Scripture were written to some
certain Church, or to some certain person, that yet notwithstanding they do
indifferently appertain to all Christians, because they contain in them a
perpetual doctrine, and such as is common for all Christians, and were no
less committed to writing for our instruction and comfort, then for theirs to
whom they were namely written. For look what the Apostle said, touching the
books and writings of the Prophets, Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written
before hand, were written for our learning, that through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures we might have hope, that same may we affirm of all the
holy Canonical books of the Bible: and the rather because the holy Ghost
says: Every Scripture given by divine inspiration, is profitable to teach, to
rebuke, to correct, and to instruct, in righteousness etc. 2. Timoth. 3. 16. And
why should we doubt of it? since they come all from one God, were penned and
indicted by one spirit, and tend all to one end, the glory of God, either in
pledging up salvation to them that are appointed to everlasting life, or
damnation to them that are put apart against the day of wrath?

But it follows in the text. And that ye likewise read, etc. This is the
second special point, wherein he commands the Colossians to read that
epistle, which was written from Laodicea. What this epistle was, it is very
hard to determine, we may with some probability, and without any impiety say,
that though it were not such a one as Paul himself wrote, yet that it is
likely, yea more then that, certain, that he approved of it, or else he would
never have had it read: from whomsoever it came, or was written to himself,
whether it were from the whole Church of Laodicea, or from the pastor of the
said Church, yet he took the reading of it to be necessary for the
Colossians, because the state of the neighbor Churches was not unlike theirs.
From whence also we may observe, that though the holy Scripture be abundantly
sufficient, for the establishing of the points of Christian religion, and for
framing and fashioning us to holy life, and that nothing be wanting therein,
that is necessary to sound doctrine, and to true sanctity, that yet it is
profitable, and that even to edification, to read good men's holy writings,
though they be of far different authority from the word of God. For if we
may be edified and builded up, by gracious and good speeches, which do proceed
from the faithful members of Christ, and also may be advanced in goodness by
their holy life; both which cases are plain in the holy Scriptures, and even
in the Apostles own epistles: why should not also their holy writings,
agreeing with the word of God, tend also in some sort to our godly edification?
And therefore as men are and ought to be sharply reproved, for that they neglect
to read the holy Scriptures or word of God: so are they also much too blame,
for neglecting to read good and holy books. Wherein I marvel what men can
allege for themselves, that can allow themselves so much time and leisure, to
pursue profits and pleasures, yea to follow sin, and have no spare hour to
be occupied in reading of Gods holy word, and other good works? Surely all
that they can say for themselves is but fig leaves, and neither will give
peace to our own hearts, nor stand us in stead before God and good men.

He adds in the 17. verse: And say unto Archippus, etc. This is the third
special point that he charge the Church withal, and it concerns the
admonishing of Archippus, or putting of him in mind touching his duty. It
should seem that he Archippus what he was.
was a minister or a preacher of the Gospel in the Church of Colosse, and was
a colleague, as we may say, with Epaphras, who was then at Rome with Paul.
Whereupon also in Paul's epistle to Philemon verse. 2. he is called Paul's fellow
soldier, that is to say, his fellow labourer and helper in preaching of the
Gospel of Christ. But whatsoever he was, it is very probable that he was
somewhat slack and negligent in doing his duty: and therefore he wills, yea
he commands the Church, to admonish and put him in mind thereof. From
whence we may observe, that it is a part of the Churches duty, when it sees
any of the ministers or officers thereof, either not sufficiently The Churches
duty toward the negligent.
diligent, or any whit slack in accomplishing of their calling and charge, to
admonish them and call upon them, for greater care and more conscience in the
faithful performance thereof. And good reason: for if private men as members,
may, yea ought to admonish one another, and provoke to good works whilst it
is called to day; then the body of the Saints may as well do it to the
private members, yea and public ministers and officers thereof, if you will,
unless you will say, either that they cannot fail in doing their duty, or
auerre, that men's places exempt and free them from other men's charitable over
sight, and careful admonitions. Yet in this there must be great respect had:
namely, that it be done with such reverence and modesty, as becomes the
flock toward their pastor, whom Cautions to be observed in the Churches
admonishing of ministers.
they ought to honor and esteem, as sent from God unto them for their good.
For if that rule of the Apostle 1. Tim. 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort
him as a father, hold and be true still, toward them that be of great years,
then must it in proportion be true in the Ministers and Elders of the Church,
in whom their place and calling, this way forth, is as much to be respected,
as years in others. And the Pastor himself, should not in regard of his great
place, and excellent graces above others, contemn or lightly esteem these
admonitions, as the manner of some is, but should set them to heart, and be
provoked by them, the more faithfully to execute the charge and function that
God and the Church have imposed upon him: which what it is, the Apostle shows
by the words following, when he says, Look to this that thou fulfill the
ministry which thou have received from the Lord. This is a very grave, and
yet withal a very modest form, that the Apostle would have the Church to use
in admonishing their pastor. And it seems to stand upon two special points,
or to contain two things, which he would have the Church to admonish their
pastor of. Two things principally required in a faithful pastor or minister.
what manner office it is, and of what great weight, and also how grave,
laborious and excellent the vocation is, looking into it generally, and
carefully considering all the parts of it, and omitting nothing, that is of
necessity required, to the faithful and full performance of his pastoral
duty. A very strong reason.
because as the Apostle says, to him that knows how to do well and does it
not, to him it is sin. And again we know, that no man can execute his
office, and discharge it in faith and a good conscience, unless he first
understand what he is bound by the virtue and power of his calling to
accomplish: because that experience teaches us, that as of an unknown thing
there is no desire; so there cannot be any accomplishment, no man being able to
do that which he knows not or understands not.

Now though out of these words we may learn many good lessons, yet for the
time, and because we are to hasten to an end, we will observe only two. The
first, that for the better stirring up of Archippus, to fulfill his ministry,
he takes an argument drawn from God the author of the ministry, saying,
which thou have received from the Lord. Conscience, that the ministry is from
God, shall make men to walk faithfully in it.
to provoke us to faithful execution of them, in the place wherein God has
put us, whether it be Magistracy, Ministry, or any other, specially the
ministry of the Church: So Paul when he exhorted the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, to look to themselves, and to the whole flock, and so to feed the
Church of God, draws and takes his argument from the holy Ghost, who had
called them to the oversight of the Church of Ephesus: In which (says he) the
holy Ghost has made you overseers: thereby declaring, that nothing can more
effectually move and stir up men to the doing of their duties, then to
consider that we have received our ministry from God, before whom we as
other men, must render an account of all things that we have done in the flesh:
before whom also the minister must stand, as an approved workman that need not
be ashamed, 2. Tim. 2. 15. Which whilst good men have seriously thought of,
and carefully practiced as became them, they have had the peace of a good
conscience in themselves, and great approbation before God and men. Whereas
others, either not knowing this, or not walking in the obedience of it, have
run riot to much excess, and drawn many after them and with them into
perdition. And I would to God, that we here in our land had not tasted of the
smacke of this: yea I wish with all my heart, that we could learn by that
which is past, to be wiser for that which is to come, or at the latter end, as
we say: then should we see God more honored, the ministry more faithfully
discharged, the people better instructed, and all good fruits abound. Whereas
now through ignorance and carelesnes of this, sin and superstition
ouerfloweth all, and nothing but a flood of judgment ready to ouerwhelme. But
we will leave this point, and proceed on to the other.

The ministry is not performed, when some one point or duty of it is
accomplished.
only, exhort only, or so forth, but he must of necessity diligently
execute all and every part thereof, that so he may be found faithful in all
the house of God as Moses was, Hebr. 3. 2. and in all the parts of his calling
too, keeping back from them none of Gods counsels, that so he may be free from
the blood of all, as the Apostle was, Acts 20: for that indeed is to fulfill
the ministry. And great reason indeed of this, and that as well, because the
whole and every part of the ministerial function is from God, and we know
that no imperfect or defective thing will either please him or be good to our
selves, since he commands us to do all that he enioyneth us, and not to go
aside from it, neither to the right hand, nor to the left, Deuter. 12. as also
because it is so prescribed in the word of truth. For the Apostle writing unto
Timothy, in his second Epistle and in the end of the third chapter, and
reckoning up the principal uses of the Scripture, and namely, that it is
profitable to instruct, to reprove, to correct, and to teach even unto
righteousness (which are as it were so many parts and pieces of the
Ecclesiastical ministry, and in which indeed consists that same right
dividing of the word, whereof he speaks in the same Epistle, chap. 2. 15.)
presently in the beginning of the fourth chapter, with a grave obtestation
urges Timothy, that in all these things he would be earnest and vigilant,
saying, I beseech thee therefore, before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead, in that his glorious appearance and in his kingdom:
preach the word, be earnest in season and out of season, improve, rebuke,
exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. And afterward verse. 15. But watch
thou in all things. But what shall we think of these careless men, that will
not labor in any part, much less in every part, carefully to discharge their
duty? or those that think laboring now and then, in some piece of their
calling, the same to be more then a sufficient discharge of it before God? or
of othersome, who as though their general and particular vocation in the
Ministry and parts thereof were not troublesome and burdensome enough, do
take and lay burdens upon them in Magistracy, in policy, and I cannot tell
what. But we leave them to God, to whom they must one day answer for all these
corruptions, and will go forward in that which follows: which is the last
verse, both of this chapter, and of the whole Epistle.

The salutation by the hand of me Paul. After he had put down other men's
salutations to the Church, he does in the last place mention his own: adding
thereto, that as he desires them to be mindful of his bands, so he cannot but
wish them all grace and goodness from God. Concerning this and such like
salutations, the Apostle uses them for two special respects: first to
testify unto them, his great care, love and good will that he carried to them,
being always mindful of them for good: then to express the prayers and the
wishes he made for them, by which he desired grace and all good things to be
vouchsafed unto them, for whom he prayed. And concerning the salutation, he
protests that he wrote it with his own Paul's care to prevent counterfeit
writings.
hand, and that to this end and purpose, that it might be as a sign and seal,
with which he shut up after his usual manner all his Epistles, as he
professes 2. Thessal. 3. 17. for it seems, that Paul in writing of all his
Epistles, at the least in most of them, did use the help of a Scribe or
Secretary, till such time as he came toward the end, or shutting of them up,
or as we may say, the greetings in the end, but that he wrote with his own
hand, and that to this end, that all might know by that his handwriting, that
it was Paul's own Epistle, and not one that was adulterous, or foysted in in
steed thereof. For there were even in the Apostles time some, as appears 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2 who dissembling Paul's name spread many errors abroad, and all for
the corrupting of that sound and wholesome doctrine which he had delivered. And
should we marvel at this, seeing we know that this is an old sleight of
Satan, to obtrude unto the Church forged and bastardly writings in steed of
true, and all that he might corrupt the Church? But as Satan's malice was great
herein, so did Gods care and love to his Church appear, in providing so for
his Church, that he has by certain infallible notes distinguished the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, from all other writings of men
whatsoever. And though it be certain, that Paul's natural and true Epistles,
be to be discerned from all bastardly and counterfeite ones, by setting thereto
his own hand, yet the authentical Scriptures of God, have certain other
notes and marks more sure in my mind, and the same also perpetual. As for
example, the divine majesty that shines therein, though otherwise the speech
used in it be very simple and plain. Again, the heavenly purity and
sanctimonie, that every where is manifested in it: the spiritual grace that
appears therein, as well in the words as in the matters thereof: the
certainty of the things being before foretold, and accomplished in their
times: the inward reverence that is in man's heart toward them, above all
writings whatsoever, with sundry such like, of Should be strong in us, to
detest popish perswasio^s and Atheistical opinions.
which we may not speak at this present. Only this we are to know, that if
we feel this in truth and peace, it will effectually arm us, against Papists,
Atheists, and other corrupters: some not only deprauing the credit of the
word, and bringing in many bastardly writings besides, to the end they might
equal with, or advance their traditions before Gods word, which is the sin
of the Romish Catholics: and othersome disgracing and discrediting the same,
that they might persuade men there is no heaven or hell, God, devil, word,
etc. and provoke them to live as bruit beasts: and these are Atheists: but both
lie under judgment: the first, for their gross superstition and idolatry;
and the latter for their horrible blasphemy. But to go from this point, to
some other following.

The Apostle adds: Remember my bands. Before he come to put down his wish or
prayer for them, he commends unto them the memory of his bands or
imprisonment, which he suffered for the defense of the Gospel. Three respected
in one precept.
there are many uses; and that both as in regard of Paul himself, the
Colossians and others. For it behooves them in respect of Paul to think upon
them, and him in them, that so they might in earnest prayer commend him and the
cause, for which he suffered, into Gods hand, and that not only for his own
sake, that he might stand fast, notwithstanding all his troubles, but that the
Gospel also might flourish more and more thereby.

There remains the last words: Grace be with you. Wherein the good thing that
he wishes to the Colossians is grace. Which word first signifies the free
favor of God toward them in Christ: next, all spiritual blessings
especially, which What things are specially signified by the word grace.
from that free favor proceed and flow to them that he loves: of which sort
are, forgiveness of sins, justification, sanctification, and many others in
this life, and eternal glorification in that which is to come. When he
saluted them in the beginning of this Epistle, he wished this grace unto them,
from God the father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. And now in the latter end,
yea in the last words thereof, he wishes them not any other good thing, then
the very same grace: neither indeed needs he to pray for any other thing for
them, because he that has this grace, has all goodness. Whence we may see
also, that it is an usual and ordinary thing with the Apostle, almost in all
his Epistles, to begin with grace, and to end with it as we say. From whence
also we may safely gather, that nothing in this life, more excellent and more
to be Nothing more excellent or more to be wished for the^ grace.
desired, can be given to any man, then this great goodness of Grace: which as
the Apostle signifies, in so praying for it, as on the behalf of the Church.
So David does not obscurely declare it, when he prays, Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us, Psalm. 4. showing that that should be far
better then the increase of Corn, Wine, Oil, or all other worldly things
whatsoever: whereof also me thinks we may render this reason. For what can a
man imagine, that may be either profitable or necessary to this life present,
or to that which is to come, which we have not, and enjoy, when once this
grace is committed unto us in Christ? The Apostle tells us, 1. Timoth. 4. 8.
that godliness is profitable to all things, as which has the promises of this
life present, and of that which is to come. But from whence proceeds
godliness, but from this grace? Nay I will say more: what good thing is there
any Grace and opinion of man's merit cannot stand together.
where, that in any case may steed us, that can come from any other cause or
ground, then from this great grace? Whereupon we may conclude, that the
conceit of man's merit has no place, in procuring any good for us, from or
before God. The Apostle himself in this very Epistle, and namely chap. 1.
commends the Colostians for their faith and charity toward all Saints. But
does he for all that, wish or pray that God would vouchsafe them a recompense
or reward, as due from God, in the name of debt, as we would say, for those
fruits and works of their charity? None at all: neither is there any thing,
though never so small, that he insinuates that way, either there or elsewhere
in his writings. Nay rather, the thing that he wishes unto them and prays
for as on their behalf, is wholly and altogether grace, that so we might
learn steadfastly, and in every respect wholly to depend of Gods grace, and to
ascribe all thereto, that so in all the good things which are communicated to
the Church, and bestowed thereupon, God might have the praise and glory of his
own grace through Christ Jesus. Which to perform, the Lord of his own
goodness vouchsafe us the grace, for his dear Sons sake Jesus Christ: to whom
with the Father, and the blessed Spirit, be ascribed and given, all glory and
praise, with strength and majesty, of all people and in all places, but
specially of and in the Church, both now and for ever. So be it.

FINIS.

