A Godly and short discourse, showing not only what time the inhabitants of
this land first received the Christian faith: but also what manner of doctrine
was planted in the same.

Whereby may appear, how the reformation at this day in England is not a
bringing in of a new Religion, but a reducing again of the old and ancient
faith.

Ierem. Chap. 6. verse. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand in the ways and behold,
and ask for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest for your souls. --

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1589.

To the right honorable and his very good Lady and Mistres, the Lady
Fraunces countess of Hertford, Christopher Rosdell wishes increase of honor
and endless felicity.
IT is an opinion (right honorable and most virtuous Lady) not so true, as
commonly believed and holden of a great many, that the doctrine, faith and
religion which the Popish Romanists profess and maintain, is the old and
ancient religion, ordained of God, witnessed by the Prophets and Apostles, and
practiced of all the godly from time to time: and that the doctrine or religion
now professed in England, is a new doctrine, which had his beginning but
hereby. Which imagination or conceit of theirs does by so much the rather
please them, for that by some hundred of years last past, the true and sincere
doctrine of the Gospel being suppressed, banished, and in a manner extinguished,
the errors, or rather the heresies of the later Church of Rome, have every
where both flowed and flourished. Whereby it is come to pass, that like as a
true and natural mother, that has been long absent from her house and
family, at the length turning home again, is not known, no not of her own
children: even so, the ancient and Apostolical religion has been so long
absent, and lacking to her Christian children, that now at her return she is
almost a stranger to all, and in deed known but to a few. Hence comes it,
that although unfitly applied, yet usually it is said of Romish superstition
and idolatry, The old Religion, the old Religion: and of the Euangelical
doctrine of Christ Jesus, The new Religion, the new Religion. Not for that it
is so in deed, but because it seems so unto them, who have so long gaped
upon their golden God of Rome, that they have clean forgotten poor and simple
Christ Jesus of Nazareth: Whereas if men would read the Scriptures diligently,
judge indifferently, and speak uprightly, they should soon perceive, that
neither our religion is new, as they falsely charge us, nor theirs old and
ancient, as they vainly boast of. For in them we are taught the true,
immutable, and most ancient faith and religion of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and holy Apostles. As that therefore which concordeth with them can not be
new: so that which dissenteth from them can neither be true nor old. The
Lord by the Prophet Jeremy says, Iere. 6.16.
Stand in the ways and behold, ask for the old way, which is the good way,
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Hiero. lib. 2. com.
in Ier.
Which place Saint Herome expounds thus, We must cleave unto the Prophets,
and diligently behold and ask for the old and everlasting ways, which more
significantly in Greek are called (...), which is the good way contained in
the Gospel: we must walk in that, which when it is found refreshes and
purges the souls of the faithful: Ad Pomp. cont. Epist. Stephan.
To the same effect S. Cyprian says. Si ad diuina traditionis caput
reuertamur, cessat omnis error humanus, etc. If we would return unto the
head of divine tradition, all human error should cease, etc. If a water
pipe (quoth he) which before ran copiously and plenteously, do upon the
sudden give over, do not men go unto the fountain, that there the reason of
the defection or giving over might be known, etc. Even so it behooves the
ministers of God at this day to do, keeping the divine precepts: that if in
any point the truth be changed or shaken, we might return unto the original
of the Lord, the Evangelical and Apostolical tradition, that then the reason
of our action might arise, from whence the order and original has proceeded.
Thus far Cyprian. Excellently therefore says S. Ignatius, Antiquitas mea
Jesus Christus. Ad Philad. lib. 4. de virginitat.
Christ Jesus is my antiquity. And Ambrose also, We do rightfully condemn all
those new things which Christ has not taught: for Christ is the way unto the
faithful: If Christ then has not taught that we teach, we judge even that
also for detestable. Hereunto Cyprian in another place. If Christ only be to be
heard, we ought not to regard what any before us has thought meet to be
done, but what Christ who is before all, has first done: neither ought we to
follow the custom of men but the truth of God. O that according to this rule
we might be heard, our cause decided, and the quarrel ended: then would it
soon appear, how under the visard of antiquity, they have hidden a new
startvp superstition: yea that their whole pretenced religion is nothing else,
but a huge heap of hypocrisy, and a store basket of all Apostacy. Then
should it be seen, that this reformation is not a declining from the ancient
faith, nor a bringing in of a new: but a reducing again of the old, and
Apostolical faith or religion. For the better proof whereof (most christian
Lady) I have in certain of their chiefest holds compared their assertions
with the censure of the Prophets, Apostles, and ancient Fathers: to the end
that the indifferent Reader might partly judge by these, what is to be thought
of the rest? In publishing whereof I have had special respect unto the profit
and commodity of the common and vulgar sort of people: that they might have,
not only at a small charge, in respect of the price, but also with little loss
of time in respect of reading, whereby they might be either instructed, if
they were ignorant, or the better confirmed if they had some knowledge. And
these my labors whatsoever they are, I am right well assured, shall be by many
degrees more gracious and acceptable unto diverse, for that they proceed and
come forth under your honorable name and protection. Most humbly therefore I
beseech your honor to accept the same in so good part, as with a good will it
is presented unto you. Whereof as I nothing doubt, so will I never cease to
pray unto the almighty, that you may long live in this world to his glory,
and the benefit of his Church: and finally after this life, may for ever
reign with Christ Jesus in his immortal and everlasting glory, Amen.
December the 15. 1588.

Your Honors faithful servant, and Chapleine, Christopher Rosdell.

The first planters of Christian faith in England.
The first Chapter.
THis Realm or kingdom of England, if it were not (as Cardinal Poole in an
Oration made in the Parliament house, Anno 1554. November. 28. imports) of
all other Islands ye first that embraced the faith of Christ: yet that it was
worthy (for the antiquity thereof) to be numbered among the first, may by
diverse and good testimonies be sufficiently proved. Nicepho. li. 2. cap. 40.
Gildas de victo. Aurel. Ambros.
Nicephorus says, that Simon Zelotes came into this Island of Britain, for so
was it then called. Gildas says, that Joseph of Aramathie, which begged the
body of Jesus, after the dispersion of the Jews, was sent of Philip the
Apostle, from France to Britain, about the year of our Lord 63, Anno. 63.
and here remained in this land all his time, and so with his fellows, laid
the first foundation of Christian faith among the Britain people. Whereupon
other teachers and preachers coming afterward, Beda.
confirmed the same. And for better proof hereof, that is to be observed which
Beda testifies of this la^d, namely, that in his time and almost a thousand
years after Christ, here in Britain, Easter day was kept after the manner of
the East Church, to wit in the full of the Moon, what day in the week soever
it fell on, and not on the Sunday as the Church of Rome did then, and we do
now. Whereby it falls out most likely, that the first planters of religion in
this land, came out from the East parts of the world where it was so used,
rather then from Rome where it was not so used.

The second Chapter. What success the Gospel had in this land at the first.
YEt notwithstanding, because we find no certain relation of a general
reformation, and profession of Christian faith in this land, both by prince
and subjects, until the time of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, and Lucius king of
this land: thereby it is very probable and likely, that albeit the labors and
travails of those ancient fathers, which first turned up the furrows of
Idolatry, and sowed the seeds of pure religion in this land, albeit (I say)
their labors were not unfruitful, yet they prevailed not so far forth, as
unto an universal and public reformation throughout the whole land. So hard
and difficult a matter it is to withdraw the minds of men, from that wherein
through long continuance they have taken deep root. Thus also it pleases God
to work that by degrees, which he could bring to pass all at once, and to
finish that by one, which was begun by another. And so he brought that (as it
were to a perfect building in this land) by the ministry of Eleutherius,
whereof he had laid the foundation by Simon Zelotes, Josephus, or some other
Apostolical men.

The third Chapter. How Religion increased and was confirmed.
THe seeds of true Religion being thus in sort and measure scattered here and
there by the ministers of Christ in this poor distressed land, were shortly
after by the malice of Satan, either utterly choked, or else so repressed, that
until the time of king Lucius son of Coilus which builded Colchester, which
was about the year 180. Anno. 180.
they began but little to appear forth unto the world. At which time the
said Lucius (then king of this land) hearing of the great miracles and wonders
done by Christians of that time in diverse places, directed his letters to
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, to receive the Christian faith. Who hearing the
request of this king, and glad to see the godly towardness of his well
disposed mind, sends him certain teachers and preachers called Fugatius, or
by some Fuganus, and Damianus, or Dimianus, which converted the king and people
of Brytaine, and baptized them with the baptism and Sacrament of Christ's faith.

The fourth Chapter. What public alteration followed this general conversion.
THe inhabitants of this land being thus turned from their diverse and many
gods to serve one living God, true religion with sincere faith increased,
superstition decayed, profane temples, with all rites and monuments of
Idolatry were subverted, and the whole state of the common wealth was now
clean changed and altered. For whereas before this time there were in this
kingdom 28. head Priests which they called Flamines, and three Archpriests,
which were called Archflamins: having the oversight of their manners. and as it
were judges over the rest, These 28. Flamines they turned to 28. Bishops, and
the three Archflamines, to three Archbishops, having then their seats in three
principal Cities of the Realm: that is, in London, in York, and in
Clamorgantia, videlicet Vrbe Legionum, by Wales. And thus the Countries of the
whole Realm, being divided every one under his own Bishop, and all things
settled in good order, the faith of Christ continued here the space of 216.
years, till the coming of the Saxons into this land, who then were Pagans
and heathen people, by whom the faith and faithful people of this land were
suppressed.

The fifth Chapter. What manner of doctrine was at the first planted here.
BEcause many think that the doctrine and faith which is now taught in this
realm is not the same which at the first was planted here, by Simon Zelotes,
Joseph of Aramathea, or some other of their fellows, whosoever they were that
first invaded this land, by the sword of Gods word to subdue it under the
obedience of Christ, and afterward was confirmed by Eleutherius his sending:
but that it was many hundred of years since devised by man's invention, and
through the might of humane authority thrust upon the people: and that the
doctrine now taught and holden at Rome, is the old and ancient doctrine, which
first was planted here by those Apostolical fathers, and after was confirmed,
augmented or settled by Eleutherius Bishop of Rome: I suppose it will not be
altogether unprofitable in some and the chiefest points of doctrine to show
what was the faith, judgment, and opinion of the godly learned in the ancient
and primitive time of the church. For such faith, judgment, and knowledge as
was in them, no doubt they did not only by vocal preaching, labor to
persuade in others, but also in their writings have left behind them for all
posterities to see and know. And because there are none either for antiquity
more to be reverenced, or for fidelity more to be trusted, the^ the Apostles
of Christ our savior, we will especially enquire after their faith and
judgment: and comparing their judgments with the faith and doctrine of the
Church of Rome at this day, we shall soon perceive, not only how much they
are fallen from the ancient faith of Rome, but also how near at this day we
come unto the same. And that this reformation or alteration of religion in
England, is not the beginning of any new Church of our own, but a renewing of
the old ancient Church of Christ, not a swaruing from the Church of Rome, but
a reducing to the true Church of Rome.

The sixth Chapter. Of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome.
ANd first to begin with the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Bishop of that
Sea, which they affirm at this day to extend it self, not only over all
nations, kingdoms and provinces of the world, but also over al estates,
degrees, synods, and assemblies of men. When the disciples contended amongst
themselves, Mat. 18. Mar. 9. Luke 9.
who should be the greatest: good occasion was offered unto our Savior (if he
had intended any such Hierarchy or supremacy) then by showing whom he would
advance to that dignity, for ever to have decided this question. But as one
intending no such matter, he persuades them rather in perfect humility, and
lowliness of mind one to go before another. In deed after his resurrection,
he gave them commission, saying, Go into all the world, teaching all nations,
etc. but no where, nor at any time did he say to them, or any of them, Go to
Rome, Antioch, or Jerusalem, and be thou entitled or installed there for
Bishop, that thou may be prince of Priests, supreme head of the Church, my
vicar upon earth, not to be judged of any, having all knowledge of Scriptures
and laws within thy breast, and that I give to thee, I will also tie and bind
my self by promise to give to all those shall in that place succeed thee. And
as Christ no where gave any such prerogative to any of his disciples above the
rest: so did none of them ever usurp or take upon them any such matter. Yea
the Apostle Peter was so far from chalenging unto himself any such
prerogative above his fellow Apostles, that he did not only give the right hand
of fellowship to Paul, Gal. 2.
but also was content to be reproved by him. And as for the Church of Rome,
there was no more respect had unto it in old time, as appears evidently by
the testimony of Pope Pius the second, Ex Epist. Pij secundi. 301
the^ to other churches. But every Church was then ruled by his own
governance, till the year of our Lord 3^0. Anno. 340.
Then followed the Counsel of Nice, wherein was decreed, not that the Bishop of
Rome should be universal Bishop, chief priest of the world, prince of the
Church, or any such matter: but that the whole university of Christ's Church,
which was now far spread over all the world, Ex council. Nicen.
should be distinguished in four provinces or precincts: whereof every one
should have his head church and chief bishop, called then Metropolitan, to
have the oversight of such Churches as did lie about him. In the number of
which patriarchs or Metropolitanes, the bishop of Rome had the first place:
not for any dignity of the person of him that then was bishop, or of him that
succeeded, or of him who^ he is said to succeed, but only in ye place wherein
he did sit, Ex Council. Calc. ca. 2^.
as most plainly may be proved by the Council of Calcedon, which says, Our
fathers did worthily attribute ye chief degree of honor to the sea of old
Rome, because the principal reign or emperie was in that city. The same also
is confirmed by Eusebius. Caesariensis, Ex Gabriel Bicl. lect. 25.
declaring that the excellency of the Roman Emperie did advance the Popedom
of the Roman Bishop above other Churches. Moreover the said Caesar, says, the
council of Nice gave this privilege to the Bishop of Rome, that like as the
king of the Romans is named Emperor above other kings, so the bishop of ye
same city of Rome should be called pope above other bishops. Thus although the
B. of Rome, for the dignity and excellency of that city, had the first place
given to him, this was don by ma^s authority, and not by ye authority of God.
And all this notwithstanding he had no more, nor greater authority the^ ye
other Metropolitans: but every of the 4. had his peculiar circuit and precinct
to him peculiarly appointed, Ex Council. Constant. cap. 36.
in such sort as one of them should not deal within another precinct, and
also that there should be among the^ equality of honor. Whereupon we read so
often in the decrees of the old councils, equal degree of thrones, and of honors
amongst Priests and ministers. And again speaking of the said Patriarchs,
Conc. Con. cap. 2.3.
or Primates, we read in the Council of Constantinople, that Bishops should
not invade the dioces of others without their borders, nor confound together
Churches. The old doctors also for the most and best sort of them accord in one
sentence, that all Bishops placed wheresoever in the Church of God, be of one
merit, of like honor, and all to be successors together of the Apostles. For
S, Hierome says plainly Omnes Episcopi pares, and haeredes sunt sedis
Apostolicae. That is, Al Bishops are equal, and are the heirs of the
Apostolical sea. And by examples he shows, that the Bishop of a small town
has like authority as a Bishop of a great city. And that if one Bishop be
higher or lower then another, it is because one Bishoprike is richer or poorer
then another, otherwise they are all the successors of the Apostles. For this
cause when Victor, which was Bishop of Rome Anno 200. Anno. 200
went about to excommunicate the East Churches for the observation of Easter
day, he was not permitted by Ireneus so to do. Also when Boniface the first
required of the Bishops of Carthage, to send up their appellations to the
Church of Rome, he was not only denied thereof, Con. Cart. 6
but also the learned and godly men of Carthage, assembling themselves in a
Council to the number of 217 Bishops, made a public decree, that none out of
that country should make any appeal over the sea. Yea the fathers in that
Council by their letters exhorted the Bishops of Rome, that he would not
induce the swelling pride of the world into the Church of Christ, which
shows and gives the light of simplicity and humility to such as love to
see God etc. And after this, about the year of our Lord 583. Anno. 583.
When Ioannes Bishop of Constantinople went about to establish that proud
title of universal Bishop to the sea of Constantinople, the Bishop of Rome
that then was, Ex Palagi. 20. dsti. 99. cap. nullus. Ex Anton. tit, 12. cap. 3.
called Pelagius the second, and his next successor Gregory the first, were
so far off either from giving unto the Bishop of Constantinople that proud
title, or from chalenging it to themselves, that when it was offered by
certain Bishops unto Gregory, he refused it saying, none of my predecessors
were so arrogant, as to usurp this proud title, calling it new, foolish,
proud, perverse, wicked, profane, and such as to consent unto it, is as much
as to deny the faith. Yet for all this, there is no one thing for the which
the Bishops of this later Church of Rome do more egerly fight and contend, as
may appear not only by the decree of Boniface the eight, wherein he
commands every man, upon pain of damnation, not only to believe, but also
to be subject to the primacie or supreme authority of the Bishope. But also by
that they do every where burn those for heretics which acknowledge not the
same.

The seventh Chapter. How the Bishops of Rome in old time were subject to
civil Magistrates.
AND as in old time the Bishops of Rome kept themselves within the bounds and
limits of their own province and precinct: so were they also as well as all
other ecclesiastical persons, subject to their Emperors, and lawful
magistrates: yea, and that not only in causes civil, but also in
ecclesiastical government. Gregorius surnamed Magnus was subject to
Mauritius, and called him Lord, saying, you were then my Lord, when you were
not Lord of the whole Empire: Gregor. ad Mauritium, August. lib. Epist. 3.
Epist. 61.
behold Christ himself shall make you answer by me, which am his most simplest
servant and yours. And before him Eleutherius his predecessor bishop of Rome,
writing to Lucius king of this realm, calls him by the name of Christ's
vicar. Boniface also the first by humble supplication obtained of Honorius his
Emperor, that a law was established, none should be made Bishop of Rome by
ambition. Did. 97. ca. Ecclesiae. ca. Victor.
Justinian also Emperor of Rome, ordained and constituted many wholesome laws
for the ordering and government of the Clergy, as that no Bishop or Priest
should excommunicate any man before his cause were known, and proved to be
such, as for the which the ancient Canons of the Church would him to be
excommunicate. And if any should otherwise proceed contrary to the same, then
the excommunicate person to be absolved by an higher degree, and the
excommunicator to be sequestered from the Communion, 24. q, 3. cap. dc illicita.
so long as it should be thought meet by him that had the execution thereof,
etc. Besides these, many other such like examples (if it were not to avoid
tediousness) might be inferred. But seeing the question grows to this issue,
whether ye Bishops of Rome, ought by the divine law of Gods word, to be subject
to their lawful magistrates or not, we will omit and cease to heap up a
multitude of examples out of ma^s law, and produce a few witnesses out of the
word of God. And first of all, Christ our Savior did not only command his
disciples to give their allegiance to Caesar, but also himself paid tribute.
And the Apostle Paul writing to the ancient Romans says. Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to ye higher powers, under whose obedience, neither
Pope, Cardinal, Patriarch, Bishop, Priest, Friar nor Monk, is excepted nor
exempted, Theophil.
as Theophilactus expounding the same place declares, saying. He teaches all
sorts whether he be Priest or Monk, or else Apostle, that they should submit
themselves under their Princes. And S. Augustine writing ad Bonifacium, says
in such like sort. Whosoever refuses to obey the laws of the Emperor which
make for the verity of God, incurreth the danger of great punishment. Aug.
contra Cresco. lib. 3 cap. 5.
Also writing unto Cresconium, he has these words. Kings, according as it is
enjoined them of God, do serve God in that they are kings, if they in their
kingdom command those things that be good, and forbid things that be evil,
such as appertain not only to humane society, but also to Gods religion.
Under the old Testament, were not the Priests and Levites subject to the
civil Magistrates, yea even in matters of Ecclesiastical government, when
king David disposed them into four and twenty orders or courses, appointing
them continually to serve in the ministry, 1. Para. 23. and 24. and 25
every one in his proper order and turn as came about? And when good king
Ezechias renewed the same institution of the Clergy being decayed. 2. Para. 31.
2. Parapo. Chap. 31. But the Bishop of Rome at this day with his shaued
Clergy can not in any kind abide to be ordered or disposed by any, and
therefore judge good Christian Reader, whether we or they in this respect come
nearer unto the ancient constitution of the Primitive Church.

The eight Chapter. Of justification.
NOw as we have heard how the ancient Bishops in former time neither exempted
themselves from subjection to their lawful magistrates, nor challenged unto
themselves any universal jurisdiction over others: so let us also in other
points of their religion and doctrine compare them with the first and primitive
time, and we shall most plainly see they are altogether unlike unto themselves.
And here to begin with the article of justification: first the blessed Apostles
themselves in all their writings, and namely Paul the doctor and teacher of the
gentiles, sets forth no other means for justification or remission of
sins, but only faith aprehending ye body or person of Christ Jesus crucified.
For as there is no way into the house, but by the door: so is there no coming
to God, but by Christ alone, which is by faith. And as the mortal body
without bodily sustenance of bread and drink can not but perish: so the
spiritual soul of man has no other refreshing, but only by faith in the
body and blood of Christ Jesus. And for this cause it is said, To him do all
the Prophets witness, that through his name, Acts. 10.
all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. He that believes
in the son has everlasting life, John 3.
and be that obeys not the son, Ephesians. 2.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. For by grace are ye
saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. When
the keeper of the prison at Philippos asked Paul and Silas, what he should do
to be saved, they answered him, Acts 16.
saying, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. With this
Charge, and to this end our Savior sent forth his disciples into all the
world saying, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that will
not believe shall be damned. So Paul witnesses, that he was called and sent
of God to call the people to repentance, that they might receive forgiveness
of sins, Acts 16.
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ. Thus the
Apostles preached, and thus were the old Romans (to whom Paul sent a worthy
Epistle notably deciding this question) taught. Acts. 10.
The same did Cornelius a Roman, and first that was baptized of all the
Gentiles, learn of Peter, when he received the holy Ghost, not by his own
works which he did according to the law, but only by hearing the faith of
Jesus preached. And in this faith and doctrine, not only the Church of Rome,
but the whole congregation of Gods people continued many years, as more
plainly may appear by the testimonies of these ancient fathers. Ambros. li.
5. de orat.
Ambrose says, it is not the law but the faith of Christ that congregateth
the Church: for the law is not of faith, but the just by faith shall live. It
is faith therefore and not the law that justifies: for righteousness comes
not by the law, but by the faith of Christ, and he that refuses faith, and
prescribes the works of the law, Ambros. de vita beata. lib. 1. cap. 6.
declares himself to be unrighteous, for the just by faith does live. And the
same father in another place says, This is that which profits me: namely,
that we are not justified by the works of the law: therefore I have not wherein
I may glory or boast in my works, and for this cause I will glory in Christ.
I will glory not for that I am just, but for that I am redeemed: not for that I
am without sin, but for that my sins are forgiven me; not for that I have
profited any, or any has profited me, but for that I have an Advocate with the
father, even Christ that shed his blood for me. Cyprian de passione domini.
Saint Cyprian writing upon the passion of Christ, says, The gift could do
more than the transgresson, and grace more then sin, for grace through the
benefit of love, has freely without any merit absolved us that were bound
with the debt of condemnation. Origin lib. 3 in epist. ad Romanos.
Origin also upon these words of the Apostle (We conclude yt a man is justified
by faith without the deeds of the law) says: The justification of faith
only is sufficient, so that if a man believe only, he is justified, albeit no
work as yet has been fulfilled by him: and so he alleges the example of
the thief. August. super Psalm. 70.
Augustine upon the 70. Psalm, says. The grace of God whereby we are freely
saved with out any our merits, is commended in this Psalm. And a little after,
Seeing then we are delivered not by our merits, but by his grace, let us praise
him unto whom we owe our selves wholly whatsoever we be. Hiero. ad Galat. 4.
Hier. writing upon the Epistle to the Galatians, says, that neither Moses,
nor any other famous man among the ancient fathers, could be justified before
God by the law. Gregor, super Ezech. Hom: 7.
Gregory upon Ezechiel says, Let us not trust in our weepings, nor in our
works, but in the allegation of our Advocate, who lives and reigns with the
father, in the unity of the holy spirit. Fulgentius
Fulgentius says ye God crowns in his saints, that righteousness which he
gave the^ freely, and will preserve freely, and will freely make perfect.
Maxentius says, Maxentius.
we verily believe that from Adam to this day none has been saved by the
strength of nature, but through the gift of the grace of the holy spirit, in
the faith of the name of Jesus, for there is no other name given unto men under
heaven etc. Item, all the faithful from Abel unto Christ, as many as have
been saved, have been saved by the same grace whereby we are saved. Chrysostom.
in sermon. de fide and lege naturae.
Chrysostom faith, I can show thee a faithful man, who without his good
deeds, both lived and obtained the kingdom of heaven: but none without faith
has had life, etc. And least here thou should say, he wanted time, etc. I
will not contend with thee herein: but this one thing I dare boldly say, that
faith only by it self did save him. Basil. in co^tione de humilitate.
Basile likewise says, this is perfect and true glorying in God, when any is
extolled not for his own righteousness, but acknowledging him self to be
void of true righteousness, is justified by faith only in Christ. Bernard
orat. prim. omnium sanctorum.
And finally Bernard says, What can all our righteousness be before God? Shall
it not be as the Prophet says, like a menstruous cloth? And if it should be
strictly judged, all our righteousness should be found unrighteous. What then
shall become of our sins, seeing our righteousness is not able to answer for
it self. Therefore let us earnestly cry with the prophet, O Lord enter not
into judgment with thy servant: and with all humility let us flee unto that
mercy, which only is able to save our souls. By these testimonies (gentle
reader) thou may soon perceive what was the judgment of the godly learned
in old time touching justification. And in this faith the Bishops of Rome with
their Romanists should still remain, if they were such ancient Catholics as
they pretend, and if they would follow the old mother Church of Rome, and hold
the first liquour, wherewith they were first seasoned. But the sweet verdor,
and sent of that liquor, is now clean put out, through other unsavory
infusions of the Popes thrusting in, so that almost no taste, nor piece
remains of all that primitive doctrine which Saint Paul and other Apostles
planted among the Gentiles.

The ninth Chapter. Of good works.
ALbeit the godly fathers in ancient days (as has been in the former
Chapter sufficiently declared) nowhere could find any sure comfort for the
soul, or rest and peace of conscience with God the Lord, but through grace and
sweet promises of God, given to mankind in Christ Jesus his son. Yet
notwithstanding, they were not only abunda^tly fruitful in good works
themselves, but also most vehement and earnest in calling upon all true
faithful people to serve the Lord in true holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of their life, as by their lives and sermons may sufficiently
appear. For to this end are we elected, created, called, and freely justified
to do all such good works as God has prepared for us to walk in. Hereunto
tend many exhortations, both of Christ and his Apostles, and also of the
Apostolical fathers which succeeded them, not only by order of place, but
also verity of doctrine. The like example of whose teaching if we do not now
follow, let our sermons, preachings, writings, exhortations, and lives also
bear record. For although we exclude good works from the office of justifying,
yet we exclude them not from the practice and conversation of Christian life,
but most earnestly call upon all the faithful in Christ to walk worthy their
vocation, to lay down their old conversation, to give their members servants
of righteousness, to offer their bodies to God a lively sacrifice, etc. In
deed we do not (after the manner of our new found Romans) set forth for good
works the devices of men, as prayer for the dead, going of pilgrimage to dumb
idols, reckoning up of a certain number of prayers to some certain Saints,
giving of rewards, or building of Monasteries for to pull souls out of
Purgatory, and such like, which because they neitheir have commandment nor
promise in the word of God, Matt. 15.
our savior testifies of them saying, in vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines men's precepts. And the Lord by his Prophet says, who
has required these things at your hands. But such we commend unto the people
as are prescribed unto us of God in his holy work. As it is said, What works
are good. Deuteronomy. 6 and 5
Thou shall keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 12.
and thou shall put nothing thereto, neither shall thou take any thing there
from, neither shall ye go there from, either to the right hand or to the
left. Ye shall not do every man what seems good in his own eyes. And
therefore as S. Paul says, Romans 12. Ephe. 5.
we exhort men to prove what is the will of God acceptable and perfect, which
is in deed the reasonable service of God, and besides the which, all other
seruings are unreasonable. For look whose works we do, his servants we are:
if we do the works of man's invention, then are we the servants of men: but and
if we do the works which God has required, then are we the servants of God.
Now touching the works which God would have us to walk in, some of the^ are
specified by our Savior, saying, When I was hungry ye gave me meat, Mat. 25.
when I was a thirst, ye gave me drink, when I was naked ye clothed me, in
prison and sick, ye visited me, etc. And by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 1.
saying, Cease to do evil, learn to do good, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherles, and defend the widow. Likewise the Apostle
Peter says, 1. Pet. 3.
Be ye all of one mind, one suffer with another, love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil, neither rebuke for rebuke,
but contrariwise bless, knowing that ye are thereunto called, 1. Pet. 2.
that ye should be heirs of blessing. And in another place. Lay aside all
malice, guile, dissimulation, envy, and evil speaking. To be brief
therefore, these and such like are the works which the holy Apostle have
taught christian people to be conversant in, love, joy, Gal. 5.
peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and
temperancie. Concerning which virtues, whiles our Popish doctors in these later
days, have incombered themselves much about the works of their own
inventions, they have scarsely so much as once thought upon them. And not this
only, but also that which is more absurd, they ascribe the goodness of their
works to the power of man's freewill, or to the habit of virtue, or strength of
nature, etc. Whereas in old time men were taught to ascribe all the dignity and
worthiness of their works, to the faith of Christ. For this is the nature
office and property of faith, The nature of faith.
not only to reconcile us to God, by procuring unto us through the mediation of
Christ, the forgiveness of sins, and so to justify us before God in heaven:
but also here in earth by renewing our hearts to bring forth good works, and
to make the same works acceptable in the sight of God, which otherwise
(through the infirmity and corruption of our nature) were impure and execrable
in his sight. For whatsoever is not of faith, Romans 14. Heb. 10.
is sin, and without faith it is impossible to please God. To this effect our
Savior says, Make the tree good and his fruit good. For like as an evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit (it may bring forth fair fruits, and such as
to the eye may seem good, but when they come to the trial of the taste, then
it appears they are nothing less) even so an evil man (such as all men are
by nature and without faith) cannot bring forth good works: he may well bring
forth such works as may seem fair and good, but when they shall come to the
trial of the Lords taste, they shall be found unsavory. Paul before his
conversion lived after the strict manner of the Pharisees, and did many fair
and goodly works, yet had he no good works in deed, before the grace of Christ
had rooted faith in him. The efficient cause of good works.
As touching ye efficient or formal cause therefore of good works, next under
God, there is no other but faith. For as a man sees and feels by faith the
love and grace of God toward him in Christ his son: so begins he to love
again both God and man, and to do for his neighbor, as God has done for
him. Whereunto Saint Augustine bears witness in these words saying, August.
super Ioani. e^.
Like as in the root of the tree there appears no show of beauty, and yet
whatsoever beauty or comeliness is in the tree, it proceeds from the root:
so from the root of faith, as from a foundation, proceeds whatsoever merit
or beauty the soul shall receive. Thirdly, whereas the word of God does not
only teach men that their good works are ever imperfect, and therefore are so
far from justifying them that they have need daily to pray unto God, that he
may remit their imperfections, The end and use of good works. Mat. 5. 2. Pet.
1. 2. Tim. 1. 2. Cor. 9. Heb. 10.
but also that we are to do good works, to set forth Gods glory, to assure
our consciences of our election, to exercise our faith, to relieve our
neighbors, and to provoke others by our example to do the like. They
contrarily and most falsely teach men, not only to do good works, to the end
they may be justified by them in the sight of God, saying, Tho. Aqui. Hosius in
a. tom. confess. cap. 1.
that Christ suffered for original sin, or sins going before baptism, but
the actual sins, which follow after baptism, must be done away by men's
merits, and so assign unto Christ the beginning of salvation, or obteining of
the first grace (as they call it) but the perfection or consummation thereof
they ascribe to works, and our strength, against the truth of holy Scripture,
saying, There is no remission of sins without blood: Heb. 9. 1. John. 1.
and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Also that man being
help by grace, is able not only to do all yt the law requires, but more
also. And hereof come the works of supererogation, contrary not only to that
principle of holy Scripture, which says, 1. John. 1.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us:
but also to the institution of Christ, who has not only commanded, but also
taught his whole church, and every member of the same continually to pray,
saying: Forgive us our trespasses. Thus they derogate from the benefit of
Christ, and attribute unto works a great or the greatest part of our
justification, directly against the vein of S. Paul's doctrine, and first
institution of the ancient Church of Rome, and against all the principles of
holy Scripture.

The tenth Chapter, Of sin.
Whereas the holy scriptures do teach, Sin, what it is.
that sin if it be rightly defined, is that whatsoever in us by any means is
contrary to the will and law of God. As the crookedness and corruption of our
nature, and whatsoever proceeds thence, as ignorance of mind, lack of
knowledge and true fear of God, the untowardness of man's mind to Godward, the
privy rebellion of the heart against the law of God, the vndeliting will of man
to God and his word, and whatsoever wicked actions, motions, appetits, lusts
and desires flow thence. For in our flesh, that is our nature unregenerate,
dwells nothing but sin: yea the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against
God. Romans 7. Romans 8.
The imaginatio^s of man's heart (says the Lord) are only evil continually.
Genesis 6. and 8
Our newstart popish doctors, not considering the deepnes and largenes of
sin, suppose it to be nothing else but inward and outward actions with consent
of will. And so those motions which are contrary to the rule of
righteousness, if consent of will be not added, by their censure are no
sins: and as for original sin, by this their doctrine they do utterly take
it away. For if sin can not be, unless consent of will be added, then must it
needs fall out that original sin is none at all: because that none does
willingly and by his proper election contract it, Original sin made no sin by
the popish doctrine. Psalm. 51.
contrary to ye judgment of the Prophet David, who speaking of his original,
says: I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. Let
us therefore acknowledge and confess our selves (as indeed we are) to be
bondmen of sin by nature, that being manumised by the grace of Christ, we
may be free, as it is said, If the son make you free, then are ye free in
deed.

The xi. Chapter. Of repentance.
OF repentance, Repentance what it is.
which is nothing else then the conversion or turning of the whole man from sin,
that is, not only from wicked words and deeds, but also from filthy lusts and
concupiscences, from false and erroneous opinions of God and his worship, and
from all wicked superstition, unto the earnest study of perfect innocence, and
sincere service of the true and living God: and therefore says the Lord,
return as far as unto me. Joel. 2.
This ye Lateran church of Rome does not teach aright, nor according to the
tenor of Gods word, and ancient Church of Rome. For first they have made
thereof a Sacrament, Repentance no sacrament.
contrary not only to the right course of S. Paul his writing, who in his
Epistles makes relation but of two Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper: but also to the definition of a Sacrament, wherein according to the
definition as well of their own schoolmen as others, there must be an
external and visible sign, or element, as Augustine says, Let the word be put
unto the element, and then it is a Sacrament: But in penance or repentance
there is no element, external sign, or visible symbol instituted of God, and
therefore it is no Sacrament. Secondly, they teach that repentance consists of
these three parts, that is, co^trition, confession, and satisfaction Canonical,
for so says the master of the Sentences, in perfectione poenitentiae tria
obseruanda sunt, co^punctio cordis, confessio oris, satisfactio operis, that
is, contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of work.
Contrition (as they teach) may be had by the strength of free will, without the
law, and the holy Ghost, through man's own action and endeavor: which contrition
must be sufficient, and so it meriteth remission of sin, contrary to the
word of God and common experience. For if there were in man either such
freedom and liberty of will, or power and strength of nature to perform, that
when he would he could detest or not detest sin, be contrite or not contrite
at his pleasure, what needed then a law to be given, which (as Jeremy says)
is the hammer of God, breaking and tearing in pieces the stony hearts of men,
if without the same by our own freewill and strength of nature, we could be
co^trite. And if there were in man's nature any such freedom and strength, how
chances it then that neither the reprobate can put from them that co^trition,
which their consciences (will they nill they) suffer, whiles the law of God
touches and urges them, as Caine, Judas, and such like. Neither the elect in
their conuersions could begin to be truly contrite, before that by the
preaching of Gods law they were humbled. As David before he was smitten with
the hammer of Gods law by Nathan the Prophet, began not to think of his
transgression: And Peter till he heard the cock crow, ceased not to deny
Christ: neither did Paul leave off from persecuting, till from heaven he heard
a voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? etc. Besides this, the
Lord himself by the Prophet Ezechiel speaks, Ezech. 36. Iere. 24.
saying, I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give
you an heart of flesh. And a little after: then shall ye remember your own
wickedness, and your deeds that were not good, etc. Where note (gentle reader)
how the Lord by his prophet in this place says, that he would give them a
soft or contrite heart, and then they should begin to turn: as who should
say, you have it not of your selves: neither by your own strength, without my
grace, are ye able to prepare your selves. And therefore have the holy men of
God bin wont to pray saying, Convert us, O Lord, and we shall be converted. Now
whereas they ceach that this contrition must be sufficient, and then it
meriteth. Considering how odious and loathsome a thing sin is in the sight of
God, and that nothing in the universal world can be found (besides the
blood of Christ, as of a lamb immaculate and undefiled) of sufficient value to
redeem it with God: what man's life can be long enough, or tears in his body
plenty enough, to mourn so sufficiently for his sins, that he might merit
remission or forgiveness with God, especially seeing our Savior says, when
ye have done all, yet say ye are unprofitable. In confession they require a
full rehearsal of al sins, whereby the Priest knowing the crimes, may minister
satisfaction accordingly. And this rehearsing or reckoning of sins in the
ear of a Priest (as they say) meriteth remission of sins ex opere operato,
that is, the very act doing, where first they require more then any man is able
to perform, for as it is written, who knows how often he offends? and
therefore says the Prophet, Psalm. 19
Cleanse me, O Lord, from my secret faults. Secondly the Priests vsurp and take
more upon them then any where by the law of God is given the^. For albeit in
Scripture we find two sorts of confessions of sins, Twofold confession.
whereof one is to God, as David witnesses, saying, I will confess unto the
Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin: Psalm. 32. Luke 18.
and the Publicane, who confessed himself unto God, saying, God be merciful
to me a sinner: and this kind of confession to God is also of two sorts, Two
fold confession to God.
that is, either private, when one private person privately, as this Publicane,
confesses his sins to God, or else public and common, when a multitude and
whole congregation make their humble confession together, 1. Sam. 7 1. Reg. 8
as 1. Sam. 7.1. Reg. 8. or when some open offender, or offenders, do openly
confess their faults in the face of the congregation, which was much used in
the primitive time. Another sort of confession is unto man, as when he that
has offended his neighbor, being touched with remorse of conscience,
confesses his offense unto him, and craves forgiveness. Of this kind of
confession our Savior speaks, saying, If thy brother have offended thee,
reprove him, Luke 17.
and if he repent forgive him. James 5.
And S. James, saying, Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for
another, that ye may be saved. As for the popish auricular confession, or
secret reckoning up of sins in the ears of a priest, neither has Christ
comanded it, nor yet his Apostles, and the godly fathers which next succeeded
them used it. And this some of their own doctors do affirm, as may appear by
the gloser upon the decrees, who says, It is better to say, De poenitent.
did. 5. cap. in poenitent.
that confession was instituted by a certain tradition of the universal
church, rather then by the authority of the old or new testament. We read in
deed that our Savior sent forth his his disciples to preach the Gospel, but
no where do we read that he sent either them or any other to hear secret
confessions. August. co^fes. lib. 10.
Yea, Saint Augustine says, what have I to do with men, that they should
hear my confessions, as though they could heal mine infirmities? ah curious
sort to know the life of another, but slouthful to amend their own! And
Chrysostom. says, Chrysostom. super Psalm. Miserere. hom. 2.
I bid thee not confess thy sins unto thy fellow servant, that he might
vpbraid thee, but to God that he might heal thee. And in another place, I do
not bid thee openly to bewray thy self, nor yt thou should accuse thy self
to others: but I would have thee obey the prophet, saying, open thy life unto
ye Lord. Io. Scotus. li. 4. sent. did. 7. art. 3.
Confess thy sins therefore before God. And by the testimony of Scotus and
Antoninus, it had his original by pope Innocent 3. in the council of Lateran.
Concerning that which Socrates in his ecclesiastical history witeth of a
penitentiarie minister, Socrat. lib. 5 cap. 19.
and of confesson of sins instituted because of the Nouatians, and after under
Nectorius Constantinopolitanus, for ye wicked fact of a deacon, abrogated, eue^
by the testimony of Ecchius, it aperteineth not unto auricular confession, but
to that which is required in solemn repentance, whereof ye may read in the
Tripartite history li. 11. ca. 35 Lastly, where they say that this auricular
co^fesson meriteth remission of sins, that is against ye manifest word of God,
which says, a man is justified by faith without works, freely by grace not of
our selves. Gal. 2. Ephe, 2.
Satisfaction which they call works not indebted, or of duty, inioined by ye
holy father, and by the which works, not only eternal punishments are changed
into temporal, but also ye te^porall punishments mitigated: and which
satisfactions ye pope may take away at his pleasure, because it proclaims open
war against christ and his merits, I think it needles to deal any further
therein. This unsavory and heathenish doctrine of repentance differs far from
ye true teching of holy scripture. By yt which, repentance co^teineth these 3
parts, co^trition, faith and new life. Co^tritio^ is called in scripture ye
sorrow of heart, rising upon the consideration of sin committed, and of the anger
of God provoked: which sorrow drives a man to christ for succor, whereupon
rises faith, faith brings afterward amendme^t or newnes of life, which we
call new obedience, working fruits worthy of repentance.

The xij. Chapter, Of the difference between the Law and the Gospel.
THe Law (I mean the law of God) which is ye most perfect rule of
righteousness, teaching us what is good, that we might do it, and what is evil,
that we might avoid it, promising life to those that absolutely, and in all and
every point of the same fulfill it, but threatening eternal death and
condemnation to all those, that in any part thereof transgress it: differs
exceeding much from the Gospel, which is the public proclaiming, denouncing,
and preaching of grace, free remission of sins, and eternal redemption,
purchased by the mediation of Christ Jesus. John. 1. Heb. 3.
For first the Law was given by Moses, though faithful, yet a servant: but the
Gospel by Christ Jesus the only son of God, and true heir of all things.
The Law was given with thu^ders, and lightnings, Exodus 20.
and the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking, so that the people in
great fear and trembling, fled and stood a far of: but the Gospel was
published by the voice of Angels, singing, Glory be to God on hie, in earth
peace, and good will unto men. The law given to teach us to know our
imperfections, but the Gospel to heal our infirmities: in the law God shows
him self a severe Judge, but in the Gospel a most merciful father: the law
tells us that we are debtors, the Gospel says Christ has paid our debts:
the law says do this and thou shall be saved, the Gospel says, believe in
the name of Christ, and thou shall be saved: the law says, thou art a sinner,
and therefore thou must be condemned: the Gospel says, thy sins are forgiven
thee, be of good comfort, thou shall be saved: the law tells us we must make
satisfaction, but the Gospel says Christ has satisfied for us: the law says
God is angry with us, the Gospel, Christ has pacified him with his blood for
us: the law says, we are bound to the curse and malediction thereof, but the
Gospel says, we are delivered and freed by Christ Jesus. As it is written: he
ascended up on hie, Ephe. 4.
he led captivity captive, and has set man at liberty, not to live as flesh
lusts, neither has he freed him from the use and exercise of the law, but
from the malediction and curse of the law. So that now Paul says, there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And in another place,
speaking of the power and dominion of the law, he says, that Christ has taken
the obligation written against us in decrees, and has nailed it upon the
cross, triumphing over all, etc. So that as the kingdom of Christ first began
upon the cross: even so upon the same cross, and at the same time the
kingdoome of the law expired, and the malediction of the law was so crucified
upon the cross, that it shall never rise again, to have any power against
them that be in Christ Jesus. For like as a woman, when her first husband is
dead, being now married unto another, is quite discharged from her first
husband: even so we being espoused to our second husband Christ, are utterly
discharged from our first husband the law, Romans 7. Romans 6.
and are no more under the law, that is, under the dominion and malediction of
the law, but under grace, that is, under perpetual remission of all sins,
committed not only before baptism, but also after baptism, and during all our
life long. For therein properly consists the grace of God, in not imputing
sin unto us, so often as the repenting sinner rising up by faith, flies unto
christ, Psalm. 31. Acts 10.
and apprehends Gods mercy and remission promised in him. This difference of
the law and the Gospel, as it is necessary and comfortable for troubled
consciences, to be well instructed in the same: so is this later Church of Rome
much to blame in this behalf, because it confounds together these two, being
in nature so diverse and contrary one from the other, imagining ye Gospel to be
nothing else but a new law given by Christ, binding to ye promises thereof, ye
condition of our doings and deseruings, no otherwise then to the old law, and
so divided they the whole after this distinction into three parts, to wit, the
law of nature, the law of Moses, and the law of Christ. And as for the Gospel,
(they say) it was revealed for no other cause, but to show to the world more
perfect precepts and counsels, then were in the old law: to the fulfilling
whereof they attribute justification, and so leave the poor consciences of men
in perpetual doubt, and induce other manifold errors, bringing the people
into a false belief of Christ, as though he were not a remedy against the law,
but came as another Moses, to give a new law unto the world.

The xiij. Chapter. Of freewill.
FOr the better understanding of this question, we are to consider three
estates, or conditions of man in this world. The first of his creation, in
respect whereof, man was a most free creature: for he was created according to
the image of God, to whom nothing is more agreeable than true or perfect
freedom and liberty: and albeit he were in his first estate, subject not
only as Angels and all other creatures, were subject to the will and service
of God, whose service is freedom it self, but also to some kind of
necessity, as namely to eat, drink, and such like: yet was he free from all
calamities which might bring death. Having his will free, not only in respect
of all coaction or forcing to that which was evil: but also in respect of all
retraction, impediment, or withholding from that which was good: So that by his
creation, as there was nothing in him that might draw or force him to will
that was evil: so was there nothing that might retract, withdraw or hinder him
from willing, and also performing that was good. And therefore in respect of
this estate it is written of him, that God had crowned him with glory and
honor. And in Ecclesiasticus we read, Eccles. 15.
that God at the beginning made man, and left him in the hand of his counsel,
and gave him his commandments and precepts, etc. he set fire and water before
him, that he might stretch out his hand to which he would. August. de nouo
cant. cap. 8.
Which place August. expounding of Adam, says, God left him in the hand of his
counsel: that is, he made him free both in counsel and ability, or ableness
and power of counsel, that he might after his own will, either choose the
good and refuse the evil, or else refuse the good, and choose the evil, etc.
And hereof he gives this reason, August. de liber. arbit. cap. 2.
saying, God gave unto man in his creation freedom of will, that he might
declare his goodness and justice toward him: goodness if he had done right,
but the severity of justice if he did evil. The second estate or condition of
man is in respect of his fall. By the which fall, as August. witnesses,
August. in Ench ad Laurent u^. cap. 30.
man lost both himself, and his free will. For when sin in the conflict had
gotten the maistrie, it brought man into servitude and bondage. For although in
respect of civil and mortal actions, there remains in man a natural
knowledge and power of will: yet even therein men find and prove great
difficulty in themselves, whiles furious just resist moral rectitude,
entisements and pleasures provoke their senses: Satan with wicked councillors
daily urge and enforce them, and God by his wonderful providence disposes
their councels to a far other end then they had purposed. For as Jeremy
says, Man's way is not in his own power: neither can he direct his own
goings. Yet concerning those works which are good works in deed, and may be
pleasing and acceptable to God, man by nature has no freedom and liberty of
will. For such works as appertain unto the service of God, and so may be
acceptable and approved in his sight, depend upon these two points, namely
knowledge, and appetite, affection, or desire, both which are wanting in man by
nature. And first touching knowledge. Notwithstanding all men by nature have in
them a certain form of knowledge, reason, and understanding: yet concerning
those things which belong either to his own salvation, or to the setting
forth of Gods glory, the Apostle says, the natural man perceives not the
things of the spirit of God: 1. Cor. 2. John 3.
whereof we have a singular example in Nicodemus, a man not only endued with
good gifts of nature, but also furnished with the help of art: yet when he
heard our savior entreating of the mysteries of God, stood as a man amassed,
understanding nothing. And if by nature (as you see) we are rude and ignorant
of the things that appertein unto God: how shall we then, or how can we either
freely will or rightly perform that we know not. Now secondly, for our
natural appetite, affection, will, and desire. True it is that all men by
nature have in them an appetite, affection, will and desire. For as Augustine
witnesses, Agust. lib. 3 Hypognost.
Omni creaturae inest illa volu^tas, qua appetitur quod placet, declinatur quod
displicet. That is: every humane creature has in himself a will, whereby he
desires that he likes, and flees that he disliketh. But how this will, or
appetite of the natural man, that is, the man unregenerate, is affected toward
the will of God, which is the only rule of righteousness, that none can
decide better then God himself, who knows man thoroughly what he is, and what
is in him: who testifies, saying, The imaginations of the thoughts of his
heart are only evil continually. Genesis 6. Romans 8.
And Paul accords hereunto saying, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither in deed can be.
And therefore Ambrose says right well. Ambros. li. de vocation Gentium. cap.
2. and 3
Homo a Diabolo, non voluntate priuatus est, sed voluntatis sanitate: that is,
Man was robbed of Satan, not of his will, but of the integrity or soundness
of his will. So that there remains in man by nature a will: but in respect of
God and goodness, crooked, perverse, and peevish, unless by the spirit through
the grace of Christ it be made straight, reformed, and reduced again to his
original. And this is the third state of man, called the state of
regeneration, In the which state man has obtained that in Christ, which he
lost in Adam, namely a power not only to will, but also to perform that is
good. And therefore as it is said, without me ye can do nothing: so likewise
is it said, I am able to do all things through the help of Christ that
strengthens me. For it is God that works in us to will, and also to perform
according to good will. If the son make you free, then are ye free: as who
should say, it is but folly to glory in any other freedom. For so August.
teaches, saying, What can be the freedom (I pray ye) of a bondseruant, except
it be when he takes delight to sin? for he serves freely that willingly does
the pleasure of his master. And hereupon he is free to sin, that is the
servant of sin: and he cannot be free to live righteously, unless being freed
from sin, he begin to be the servant of righteousness, etc. And a little
after. But whence shall a man that is bound and sold have this freedom of
working well, unless qe redeem him, who has said, if the son make you
free, John. 8.
then shall ye be free in deed? Which thing before it begin to take place in
man, how shall any man, which yet is not made free to work well, glory of free
will in respect of good, unless being puffed up with vain pride he exalt
himself: which pride the Apostle restrains, saying: by grace ye are saved
through faith. Thus was the original Church of the ancient Romans at the
first instructed by the Apostles, and afterward by Augustine, and others. From
the which Sea now how far this later Church of Rome has degenerated, which
holds and affirms, that men without grace, that is the gift of Gods grace,
may perform the obedience of the law, and prepare themselves to receive grace
by working, so that those works may be meritorious, Congrue, Condign.
and of congrue (as they say) obtain grace: that is, of good right and equal
congruence and agreeance. As if one should say, they have been good,
serviceable and profitable unto God, and therefore it is meet, reasonable and
convenient, that he should requite them again with grace and favor, otherwise
he should fail in the rule of good congruitie, wherein one part ought to be
answerable to another. Which grace being thus obtained, men may (as they say)
perfectly perform the full obedience of the law, and accomplish those
spiritual actions and works which God requires, and so those works of
condign, that is, by just law, and equal merit, deserve eternal life. As for
that infirmity which still remains in our nature, against the which we are
not only continually to strive, but also to pray for mercy, they do not
regard it so much as once to speak of it.

The xiiii. Chapter. Of invocation and adoration.
BEsides the former vncatholike, and almost unchristian absurdities, and
defections from the Apostolical faith, touching invocation also they dissent
much, not only from others, but also from themselves in respect of their
original. For whereas in old time the godly in all perils were wont by seruent
prayer to fly unto God only, who acaccording to his promise is able and
willing to help all such as call upon him faithfully: as it is written, Psalm.
145. Psalm. 50.
call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. Contrary to
the comdement of God, and example of all the godly from time to time, they have
erected and set up Saints departed to be prayed unto, and called upon, as
mediators of intercession, affirming that Christ is a mediator of salvation,
and that only in the time of his passion. Which assertion of theirs, how well
it agrees either with the ancient doctrine that S. Paul and the residue of the
Apostles taught as well the old Romans as other Gentiles, or else stands with
reason and common sense, may appear by that which follows. And first,
whereas they deny Christ to be a mediator of intercession, how accords
that with the saying of Paul to the old Romans, where he speaking of the
intercession of Christ, says, Romans 8.
He sits on the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us. Likewise
in his first Epistle to Timothy. After his exhortation to prayer for all
estates, 1. Tim. 2.
and degrees of men, he shows not only to who^ we should pray, but also in
whose name, saying, There is one God, and one mediator between God and man,
which is the man Christ Jesus. 1, John 2.
Saint John also says, If any man sin, we have an aduocat with the father,
Jesus Christ who is the propiciation for our sins. And our savior himself
says, whatsoever you shall ask the father in my name, John 14.
not in the name of Saints he will give it you. Touching prayer therefore to be
made unto Saints, that they might be intercessors to God for us, we neither
have commandment that we should do so, nor promise to speed in so doing, nor
example of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, or Apostolical men that ever
they did so. Which of the old fathers under or before the law, did pray to
Noe, Exodus 32.
Abraham, or Moses, after they were departed. For whereas they object the words
of Moses in his prayer saying, remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy
servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, etc. The Prophet in that
place does not call upon those saints, that they might make intercession for
him: for then he would have said, O holy Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, pray to
God for us: but by their names he remembers the promises of God made to them.
Which of the godly under the new testament did pray unto ye holy martyrs, John
Baptist, Stephen, James, or any other after their departure. Yea, they were
obedient to the commandment, which says, Call upon me: and regarded the
promise which says, whosoever calls upon the name of ye Lord shall be saved. John
4.
Thus Christ has taught us saying, when you pray, say, Our father which art in
heaven: and not our Lady which art in heaven. Ephe. 3.
Thus Paul bowed his knees to God ye father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and not
to any of the Saints. Thus the congregation in the primitive church prayed for
the deliverance of Peter out of prison, Acts. 12.
not to any of the Saints, but to God himself, and not through the mediation
or intercession of any other then Christ. For in those days, and long after, ye
godly neither knew nor taught any other mediator then the man Christ Jesus.
August. de vera religi. cap. vlt.
As for the Saints departed, Augustine shows what is to be done to them,
saying, they are to be honored for imitation, and not to be worshipped for
religion. And Epiphanius, Epiph. con. Collyridia. lib. 3. tom. 2. hae. 79.
speaking of the virgin Marie, says, In deed the body of the virgin was holy,
yet not God: she was in deed a virgin and honorable, yet not to be
worshipped, but she did worship him, that was borne of her according to the
flesh. They were wont to use a poor reason, taken from the similitude of an
earthly king: unto whom men cannot have access but by officers in their
degrees. As though God were like to a mortal man, and had need of a guard to
save him, or of officers to inform him. When the scripture says he knows
all things, yea even the very thoughts of men: and is more ready to hear our
prayers then we are to make them. Now whereas they make Christ the mediator
of salvation, how agrees it with common sense and reason that they appoint
other intercessors, seeing salvation is in Christ. For salvation being once
had, what can we require more? or what lacks he more to be obtained of ye
saints, which is sure to be saved only by Christ? And yet in their Catholic
denotations they teach men thus to pray to the blessed virgin, Save all them
that glorify thee. What marvel though they agree not with us, when they are
contrary to themselves? Here unto also apperteineth the worshipping of
relics, and the false adoration of Sacraments, that is the outward signs
for the things signified, contrary to the word of God, Deuteronomy. 4. Luke 6.
which says, God only is to be worshipped.

The xv. Chapter, Of the Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.
THe corruptions and errors of this later Church of Rome as touching the
Sacraments, are neither small nor yet a few. For first, by the institution of
Christ, and ancient observation of the godly, there are but two Sacraments of
the new testament, to wit, Baptism, and the Lords supper, they have added unto
the^ five other sacraments. And for better proof hereof, the Apostle Paul in
all his Epistles makes mention of no sacraments besides ye sacramental Supper,
and Baptism, or washing of regeneration. August. ad Ianuarium Epist. 118.
And August. speaking of Christ, says, He has bound the society of the new
people together with sacraments, in number the fewest, in observation the
easiest, in signification the most excellent, as baptism which is consecrated
in the name of the Trinity, and the communication of his body and blood. And
in another place he says, August. de doct. christiana. lib. 3 cap. 9.
At this time, since by the resurrection of our Lord, there has appeared a
manifest token of our delivery, we are not ouerladen with the burden, no not
of those signs which we now understand, but the Lord and Apostolical
discipline, has delivered a certain few, in steed of many, and the same most
easy to be done, noble to be understood, and pure to be observed, as the
sacrament of Baptism, and the celebration of the body and blood of the Lord.
Ambrose.
Ambrose also in his book of Sacraments (if it be his) makes mention only
of Baptism, and the Eucharist. Secondly, where as the word of God has
ordained these Sacraments, not that we should seek our salvation in them: but
that by them we might be admonished of our salvation purchased by Christ, that
the promises of God might be firm in us through faith, and we again not
only consecrated to God, but also discerned from all other people. Romans 8.
As God gave unto Abraham the sacrament of circumcision, as the seal of the
righteousness of the faith, which he had when he was yet uncircumcised. And
also whereas by holy scripture we are taught, that neither the Sacraments, do
nor yet the word it self does profit us without faith, as appears not
only by the testimony of the author to the Hebrews, Heb. 4.
where it is said, the word which they heard profited them not, because it
was not mixed with faith in the^ which heard it. 1. cor. 10. and 11.
But also by the example of the unbelieving Jews under ye old Testament, and
of Judas, Simon Magus, Ananias and Saphira his wife with others, John 13. Acts
5.
who notwithstanding they both had used the Sacraments, yet were they never the
nearer to be saved, because they wanted faith. They contrariwise teach that the
Sacraments do not only stir up and confirm our faith in us: but also that
they avail and are effectual without faith, by the very doing of the action,
without any good motion of the doer. As is to be found in Thomas Aquine,
Scotus, Catharinus, and others. Thirdly, beside manifold abuses which they
commit in the sacrament of Baptism, by adding to the simple words of Christ's
institution diverse other new found rites, and fantasies of men, where the old
Church of Rome was wont to baptize men only, this later Church of Rome has
baptized Bells, and have applied the words of baptism to water, fire, candels,
stocks and stones. Finally, as concerning the Lords Supper in the primitive
Church, as appears by the example of Christ, and testimony of S. Paul, 1.
Cor. 11.
the use then amongst them was, to have the participation of the bread called
the Lords body, and of the cup called the Lords blood, administered not at an
altar (as now it must needs if it please the Pope) but at a plain board or
table, where, not the minister alone did receive, and the other looked on, but
the whole congregation together did communicate with reverence and
thanksgiving. Yea, Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. ser. 3. cap. 1.
if any did abstain from the holy Communion, and would be but a beholder
only, the old fathers and bishops of Rome in the primitive church, (when as
yet the private Mass was not hatched) did excommunicate him as a wicked
person, and an Ethnicke. De co^secra. did. 2. cap. secularis. De co^secra.
did. 2. cap. peracta.
And therefore in old time Calixtus decreed, that after consecration all should
communicate, unless they had rather depart out of the Church: for so have the
Apostles (says he) ordained, and so does the holy Church of Rome hold. And as
the whole congregation did communicate together, so also did they participate
in both kinds, for so Christ commanded, ye Apostles every where taught, De
co^secra. did. 2. cap. co^perimus.
and the old Catholic fathers and bishops followed. And if any did otherwise
as Gelasius says) he was counted to commit sacrilege. And it was not
admitted in a strange language which the congregation understood not, but in a
vulgar and common speech, that it might be understood of all, as is witnessed
by S. Paul, who commanded that al things should be done in the Church to
edifying: but what edifying can be there, where the people know not what is
said. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constant.
And for this cause godly Constantine caused the Scriptures to be placed in a
legible hand in Churches. And Justinian in his 127 constitution, ordained, that
all Bishops and Ministers should sound out their service, and celebrate the
mysteries, not after a secret manner, but with a loud voice, so as they might
not only be heard, but also understood of the faithful people, which could
not be if they had spoken in an unknown tongue. Hereunto might be added the
testimony of Hierome, Augustine, and others, but for brevity sake we will
rest upon the testimony of Innocentius the third, Innocent. 3. offi. iud. ord.
c. quo^ niam.
who says, Because in many parts within one city and dioces, much people of
diverse tongues are mixed together, having under one faith diverse rites and
manners: we straightly command, that the Bishops of those cities or dioces,
provide sufficient men, which according to the diversity of rites and tongues
may celebrate among them the holy functions, and minister the ecclesiastical
sacraments, instructing them by word, and also by example. Yea and this they
did also without lifting over the priests head, or worshipping, or kneeling, or
knocking their breasts or any such like thing. Only giving thanks for the
benefit of their redemption, and praying unto God for his continual favor
and grace toward them. Platina in vita Sexti.
As Platina in the life of Sextus witnesses of the Apostle Peter, that he
ministered the celebration of the Communion, only with ye Lords prayer. As for
the new found devise and term of transsubstantiation, it was not in the
primitive time, nor many years after, til the council of Lateran 1059. as
Erasmus testifies, saying, The Church has latelye defined transubstantiation.
A long time it was sufficient to believe the true body of Christ to be
present, Li. annota. 1. Cor. cap. 7
either under the bread, or any other way. Lib. senten. 4.
Likewise John Duns speaking of the words of institution, says. These words
of Scripture might be expounded more easily, and more plainly without
transubstantiation. But the church did choose this sense which is harder, being
thereto moved (as seems) chiefly because men should hold of the Sacraments,
the same which the Church of Rome does hold. And after, in the same place, he
expounding himself more plainly, makes mention of Pope Innocent the third,
and of the council of Lateran. For our Savior when he instituted that
mystery, meant not by changing the elements of bread into his body, or of
wine into his blood, to work a miracle, but by ordaining a Sacrament, to leave
a perpetual memory of his death, till his coming again. Ambros. in Io. cap.
6.
And therefore says S. Ambrose, the bread and wine are both the same things
they were before, and also changed into another. Meaning they are the same they
were before, in nature and substance, and changed, in respect of use and
property. And Gelasius says, De sacra. li. 4. cap. 4.
the substance of bread, or the nature of wine cease not to be. And Theodoret.
After sanctification, In Dialog. 1. and 2.
the mystical simboles or pledges loose not their own proper nature: for they
remain in their former substance, figure, and form. In sermo. ad infantis.
And Augustine. That which you see is bread, and the cup, which also your eyes
show you: but as touching that which your faith requires to be instructed in,
the bread is the body of Christ, De consecr. did. 2. cap. qui manducat.
and the cup his blood. And Origin, That bread which is sanctified by the word
of God, in respect of the matter or substance, enters into the belly, and is
cast into the draught. And Christ himself not only after the consecration,
but also after the communication says, Luke 22.
I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine. Now the fruit of the vine, is
wine and not blood. And in speaking thus we derogate nothing from the Lords
supper, neither do we make it a bare sign, as some falsely slander us. For
we affirm and teach that Christ is truly present in his Sacraments, in
Baptism that we might put him on, in his Supper, that by faith spiritually we
might eat him, and through his death and passion might obtain everlasting
life. For although we rent not Christ in pieces with our teeth, yet we
possess him in faith, mind and soul: and therefore when we come unto the Lords
table, we have not our minds fixed upon the creatures, but lift up our minds
thither, where Christ our true and only food is. And so the council of Nice
commands, saying, Have not your minds basely fastened on the bread and wine.
And Chrysostom. writes, saying, we call the body of Christ a carkas, and we must
be Egles, that we may know how we must mount a loft if we will come unto the
body of Christ, for this table is for Eagles, and not for Iayes. And Cyprian,
this bread is ye food of the mind and not of ye belly. And Augu. in another
place says, how shall I hold him as absent? how shall I thrust up my hand into
heaven, that I might hold him sitting there? He answers, send up thy faith,
and thou have holden him. But for these our new found Romanists affirm and
teach Christ's body, flesh, blood, and bones, as he was borne, crucified, and
buried, to be in their little round cake. Therefore they worship it, they offer
it, they eat it, or else they close it fast in a Pixe. Where if it corrupt and
putrify before it be eaten, then they burn it to powder and ashes. And
notwithstanding they know right well by the scriptures, that ye body of Christ
can never corrupt or putrify: yet will they needs make it the body of Christ,
and burn all them for heretics, which with them will not believe that, which is
against the Christian belief.

The xvj. Chapter. Of Matrimony.
Matrimony, which is the conjunction or coupling together of man and woman, in
an holy league, inseparably to cleave one to ye other, and to live together in
perfect love and unity according to Gods ordinance: in old time w not only
counted an honorable and high estate, as may appear by that which is written
to the Hebrews. Where it is said, Marriage is honorable among all, Heb. 13.
and the bed undefiled: But also was freely permitted to all sorts of men, that
were apt thereunto, and had need of the same; as it is written, 1. Cor. 7.
to avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her husband. But now the new Catholics of the Popes Church, repute and call
marriage astate of imperfection, and prefer single life be it never so impure,
before the same: pretending that whereas the one replenisheth ye earth, the
other fills heaven. Whereupon pope Ciricius in his decrees, cites that saying
of the Apostle, to wit, they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.
against those yt are lawfully married. And for this cause they have of late
days (not regarding whether they had the gift of co^tinencie or no) through
coacted vows restrained many, both men and women, from holy wedlock, not to
the filling of heaven, but rather to the stuffing up of hell. For from hence
have proceeded, adulteries, fornicatio^s, Sodomitrie, with great occasion of
murdering infants, as we read of infants heads that were taken up in pope
Gregory's mote, by hu^dreds, what time the lawful wedlock of ministers began
first to be restrained. Anno. 600.
By which occasion the said pope Gregory revoked the canon he had made a
little before, inhibiting the lawful marriage of ministers. And Pope Pius the
second said, he saw many causes why ministers were to be restrained of marriage:
Platina in vita Pij. 2.
but he saw mo and greater, why they were to be permitted to marry. Yea this is
most certain, that the nearer we come to the ancient time of the Church, the
less ancient shall we find the Romish doctrine in this point. And to begin
with the Apostles, and their own examples and canons: who although they were
not all married, yet diverse of them were: and the rest had power and liberty, to
have and keep their wives, as witnesses Paul, saying, 1. Cor. 9.
have we not power to lead about a wife being a sister, as well as the rest of
the Apostles. Albeit Clemens Alexandrinus which was 200. years after Christ,
denies not, but that Paul was married being an Apostle as well as Peter and
Philip. The Canons also which are said to be the Apostles, say, If any teach yt
a priest for religion sake ought to contemn his own wife, Can. Apost. 6.
Canon.
let him be accursed. Anno. 180.
In the year of our Lord 180. we read of Policrates Bishop of Ephesus, who
dissenting from pope Victor about a certain controversy of Easter day,
alleges for himself, how his progenitors before him seven together one after
another, succeeded in that state, and he now the eight, was placed in ye same
place. Using this descent of his parents, not only as a defense of his cause,
but also a glory to himself. In the Nicene council, Anno. 400.
when some went about to restrain ministers from marriage, Paphnutius a godly
father, himself being unmarried resisted the same. And likewise before this,
Anno. 300. Gangren. Council. did. 28.
the council of Gangren, which was Anno. 300. did establish the liberty of
priests marriage, as a thing both good and godly. Moreover, proceeding yet in
times and Chronicles of the Church, we shall come to the sixth council, Council.
Constant. did. 35. cap. quoniam.
called the council of Constantinople, almost 700. years after Christ. The
words of which council be alleged in the decrees, and be these in English.
Because in the order of the Roman Canon, we know it so to be received, that
such as be Deacons and Priests, shall profess themselves to have no more
copulation with their wives, we following the ancient Canon of the diligent
Apostles, and constitutions of holy men, enact that such lawful marriage, from
henceforth shall stand in force, in no case dissoluing their conjunction with
their wives, neither depriving them of their mutual society, and familiarity
together, in such time as they shall think convenient. Hitherto you have heard
the Decree: hear now the penalty, in the same Decree and destinction
contained. If any therefore shall presume against the Canons of the Apostles,
to deprive either Priest or Deacon from the touching and company of his
lawful wife, let him be deprived. Finally, here in England till the coming
of Anselme in the days of William Rufus, Guiliel. Malmsb. li. 1. de gestis
pont.
and king Henry the first, and of pope Hildebrand 1067. the restraint of
ministers lawful marriage was not publicly established for a law. And as it
was not yet entered in here, no more was it in many other places of ye world.
For Auentinus a faithful writer of his time, Exact. syno. Mediola. Anno. 1070
who writing of the council of Hildebrand, says, Priests at that time had
publicly wives, and did procreate children as other Christians. Gebuilerus.
One of the Popes crew testifies, that in the time of the emperor Henry 4.
Anno. 1057. Anno. 1057
to the number of 24 Bishops, both in Germany, Spain, and France, were
married, with the Clergy also of their Dioces. Pope Symmachus disti. 80.
says, let Priests be restrained from the conversation of all women, except it
be their mother, sister, or their own wife. Where ye gloss in the margent
gives this note, Here he speaks according to the ancient times. Truly
therefore is that verified in this later church of Rome, which so many years
ago Paul prophesied and foretold of, namely that in the later times there
should some depart from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.
hearkening unto spirits of error, and to the doctrines of devils, forbidding
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which the Lord has created,
to be taken with thanksgiving. To conclude therefore, marriage in it self is
either good or evil: if it be good, why do they forbid it: if it be evil, why
do they make a sacrament of it.

The xvij. Chapter. Of Magistrates and civil government.
AS concerning Magistrates and civil government, what has been in old time
the judgment of the godly, may manifestly appear by that which Paul writes
to the Romans, saying, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: Romans
13.
for there is no power but of God: whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves judgment. Where first it is to be noted that the Apostles would
that every soul should be subject to his lawful magistrate. Which words
Chrysostom (as has been already showed) expounds of Priests, Monks,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and what soever. For if any pretend to be
exempted because he is spiritual, let him consider, that none ever had such
abundance of the spirit as Christ: and yet was he subject to the civil
government. And if holiness of life could discharge men from obedience to
civil rulers: who more holy then the Apostles, and yet in such things as
appertained unto the function of the civil Magistrate, they did not only
themselves, but also taught others to obey, 1. Pet. 3.
as Peter testifies, saying: Submit your selves to all manner of ordinance of
man, for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the king as unto the superior.
Tit. 3.
etc. And Paul writing to Titus, says, Put them in remembrance that they be
subject to principalities and powers, and that they be obedient. All this
notwithstanding the Bishops of this latter Church of Rome with their clergy,
howsoever they glory and boast themselves to be the successors of Christ and
his Apostles, yet in this matter of subjection and obedience to civil
Magistrates, they will accept no instance in any. Secondly, whereas it is
said, that there is no power but of God: learn thereby with Chrysostom, to
distinguish between the person and the function. For the power or authority
is of God, and therefore must needs be good: but the abuse or misusing of the
power or authority, is from the corruption of man's nature, and the malice of
Satan: as the Lord complayneth, saying, Hosc. ^.
They have reigned, but not by me, that is, not according to my will and
ordinance, but according to their own lusts and appetites. And yet we are
not to think but even such persons are not only for good causes stirred up of
God, but also their inordinate proceedings directed by the wonderful
providence of God to such end as he knows best. And yet neither God to be
made the author of evil, nor they the authors of any good. For although God
gave the person, and stirred up the party that woorketh evil, yet God neither
woorketh the evil himself, nor yet in giving the person, or stirring up the
party, had any respect unto evil, but unto that which is good, both in
respect of the profit of his Church, and the aduauncing of his own glory: as
God gave Pharaoh, not that he should do evil, but that his name might be
glorified in him. And although Pharaoh (as all other tyrants) did all things
not to the end he might please God, but to the end he might please himself,
yet God by his unspeakable providence, whereby he draws light out of
darkness, and turns all that for good, which he did only for evil. The
good therefore that comes of their evil government, is altogether to be
imputed to the providence of God, who directs and turns their studies,
councels and labors to a far other end then they intended. So that though in
respect of the effect and end, they do nothing but that God would have done,
yet do they offend grievously in doing of the same, because they regard not the
will of God in doing of it, but to satisfy their own wicked and ungodly
desires. And as their studies, councels and labors have another end then they
either knew or intended: so shall they also have another reward (not then
they have deserved) but then they looked for. Finally, where it is said,
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves judgment. Thereby we are taught, not only
how magistrates should be obeyed, that is, more of conscience, because the
word of God binds us thereunto, then for the fear of punishment, because we
cannot resist. For though the magistrate were unarmed, and a man might provoke
and contemn him freely, to wit, without punishment for it, yet is it no more
to be attempted, then if we saw present vengeance to beat hand for it: but
also we are generally taught, what end remains for all those that fight
against God in respect of his providence to govern the world by magistrates and
rulers, namely, a judgment, that is, not only in just, but also a most sure
vengeance what way soever it come.

The xviij. Chapter. Of Purgatory.
THe Paradoxes, or rather the fantasies of the later Church of Rome concerning
purgatory, be monstrous, neither old nor apostolical. For first whereas the
Scriptures and word of God, make mention only of two places after this life.
John. 3.
As it is written, he that believes in the son, has everlasting life, and
he that obeys not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him. Mat. 3.
And John Baptist speaking of Christ, says, He will gather his wheat into
his garner: but will burn up the chafe with vnquenehable fire. In which words
you see mention to be made of two places only and two sorts of people:
believing, or not believing, chafe or wheat, saved or else damned, in the
Lords garner, or else in fire unquenchable. And the ancient fathers for the most
and best part of them, either utterly deny that there is any third place, or
else speak of it very doubtingly, August. in Enchir. ad Laurentiu^. cap. 69.
as August. in his Enchiridion to Laurentius, says, It is not incredible but
some such thing may be after this life: but whether it be so in deed, or not,
may be a question. And in the same work, Chap. 67. he says plainly, that
he thinks them to be deceived which do believe, that they who depart out of
this life in their sins, can by fire be cleansed in the life to come. Epiphanius
likewise takes away purgatory. Epiph. lib. 2 haeres. 59.
And Ambrose also in his book de bono mortis, ca. 2. Gregorius Magnus in his
dialogues lib. 4. cap. 1. and 39. writes doubtingly of it. And in his book de
ecclesiast. dogmat. cap. 77. and 78, makes no mention of it. But in his book
de fide ad Petr. cap. 2. constantly denies that there is any place for
repentance after this life. And in his fifth book Hypognost. says after this
sort. The Catholic faith through divine authority, belongs the kingdom of
heaven to be the first place, and hell to be the second place: a third place we
know none at all, neither do we find any in holy Scriptures. Cyprian in his
first tract against Demetrianus, says, after a man is departed hence, there is
no place for repentance, no effect of satisfaction, life is either lost or
woonne here. Yea, there is nothing more usual, and common among the old
fathers then this saying. And therefore conclude I with that exhortation of
Augustine, in a sermon that he makes against drunkenness, saying, Let no man
deceive himself, brethren: for there are two places, and the third is not
seen. He that reigns not with Christ, shall without doubt perish with the
devil. Yet our new Catholics have not only found out a third place, which
they call Purgatory: but also teach, that lack of belief thereof brings to
hell. And this Purgatory in torture and pain differs nothing from hell, but
only that it has an end, the pains of hell have none. The fiery pain whereof
(say they) fretteth and scowreth away sins before committed in the body.
Contrary to the which, holy scripture teaches, saying, John 1. and 2
The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. And in the
second Chapter of the same Epistle, speaking of Christ, he says, He is the
atonement for our sins, and not for ours only, but also of the whole world.
And Romans 8. Romans 8.
Now there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. And Revel.
cap. 14. Apoc. 14.
Blessed are ye dead that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors. But if
they go from this world to purgatory, they have but small rest. The pains of
this painted fire indureth in some longer, in some shorter time, according as
their sins have deserved, which time being expired, then God of his mercy
translateth them to heaven for Christ's sake. But first they must abide in that
imaginary fire, so long till it have clean fretted and scowred away the
rustie spots of every sinful soul, unless they be cleansed by the Popes
pardons and indulgences, sacrifice of the altar, diriges, and trentals, prayer,
fasting, meritorious deeds out of the treasure house of the Church, alms, and
charitable deeds of the living in satisfying Gods justice, etc. And for all the
pope can (as they teach) deliver the souls out of that woeful pain of
purgatory, which is so great, that if all the beggars of ye world were seen
on the one side, and but one soul of purgatory on the other side, the whole
world would pity more that one then all the other, yet is this prelate so
merciless, and hard hearted, that he will not rid the^ out. But he knows
right well, that if the people should believe, that either there were no
purgatory at al, or else understand that the popes good grace had put out the
fire of purgatory, then would the chimneis of his kitchen sone cease to smoke.
For the smoke that comes from the fire of purgatory, is artificially conveyed
through the Popes chimney. Besides these, there are many other false erors, and
great deformities, which abound in this later Church of Rome. Howbeit (gentle
reader) these may suffice to let thee see, not only how far they are fallen
from their first foundation, but also how near at this day, through the grace
of Christ, we come to that ancient faith, religion and profession of doctrine,
which at ye first was not only planted in Rome, but also in England and other
kingdoms of the world: and that this reformation here in England (as in other
parts of the world) is not a falling away from the faith of Rome: but rather a
reducing to the true and ancient faith of Rome. The eternal father and God of
al mercy grant us for his christ's sake grace continually to grow up more and
more in thankfulness toward his majesty for the same, that whiles England
does live, the truth of his Gospel may never die. Amen.

A prayer.
O Eternal God and most merciful father holy in all thy ways, and true in all
thy promises, which never failest them that faithfully call upon thy name. We
heartily thank thy divine majesty, for that it has pleased thee of thy great
goodness, to hear the prayers, and grant the petitio^s of us thy unworthy
servants, which, then with sorrowful and heavy hearts we powered out before
thee, when our enemies approached to destroy us and our country. And forasmuch
(O Lord God) as thou have vouchsafed until this present day, not only to
preserve us, our Queen, and realm, from the laying in wait of many and
mighty adversaries, both at home by secret conspiracies, and abroad by foreign
invasions: but also under a most gracious and christian Queen, have given us
health, wealth and peace, with liberty of bodies and minds, now by the space of
xxx. years. Most humbly we beseech thy fatherly goodness to grant us grace,
that in word, deed and heart, we may show our selves truly thankful and
obedient to thee for the same: and that we may continually grow up more and
more in thankfulness toward thee. That like as by thy delivering of us, thou
have declared thy self to be our merciful God and savior: so we also by our
serving of thee according to thy most holy word, may show our selves to be
thy faithful and obedient servants. Maintain (O Lord) and increase the
honorable estate of our gracious sovereign, and al her noble counselors and
magistrates, with the whole body of this common weal, let thy favor so
preserve them, thy holy spirit so govern them, that thy true religion may be
purely maintained, manners reformed, sin and superstition restrained, according
to the precise rule of thy sacred and heavenly word. Convert or else subvert
all those wicked studies, counsels, and practices whatsoever the devil or man
does work against us. Comfort those that are afflicted with any kind of cross
or tribulation, and specially those which suffer for the testimony of thy
truth. Grant thy Gospel a free passage, and send us everlasting peace in
Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

