When I remember and take heed of the conversation of us that live in this
wretched life. in which is no surete ne stable abydyng. And also the contynuel
besynes of every man. how he is occupied and daily labors to bylde and
edefye as though their habytacion and dwelling here / were permanent and should
ever endure. and also practyse how they may get temporalle possessions. goods
and rychesses. of which they are never content ne satysfyed as for the most
party. but contynuelly entende and labor by many subtyl means how they may
encreace their said possessions and richesses for to come and attain to
worldly honor and estate. In which they wene be very felycyte and blessydnes
/ and when I have well ouerseen and examyned these foresaid things and life. I
find nothing in them but vanyte of vanytees and all vanyte and yet I merueylle
much of them that been learned wise and noble men in the law. that not
withstondyng their rychesses. and sure living as well in the spirituelte as in
the temporalte contynuelly labor to be enhaunced and promoted to hye
dygnytees and offices. as though therein were perpetuel felycyte. In which ye
may see at eye that al is but vanyte. and they that me^ repute for wysest and
gretest about princes in a moment ben overthrown and brought to naught. Not
withstondyng for the most part. they of the spyrytuelte and also of the
temporalte entende more to get. worldly honors. rychesses and possessions for
to satisfye the appetyte of their inordynate desire here in this transytorye
life / which anon and hastily shall depart fro the corruptyble body. tha^ they
do for theternal life which shall ever endure in Joy or in pain. Then to
the end that every man reasonable remember him self that he is mortal. and shall
without fail depart out of this life hastily and sone. and ought while he is
here living to purueye and ordeyne for the perpetuel life to come / and so to
live according to the law and comandements of our lord and ocupye him self in
virtuous ^^^racyons and works. in eschewyng al vices and sins and all the
branches of the^. that they may after this short and tra^sytorye life attain
and com to the ever lastyng life in heaven / I purpose and attend by the
suffraunce of almighty god to translate a book late delyuerd to me and reduce
it out of frensshe in to our common english tongue. in which every man may be
informed how he ouzt to keep the law and comau^deme^ts of god. to follow virtue
and flee and eschew vices and to pourueye and ordeyne for him spyrituel
rychesses in heaven ppetuel and permament / which book was made in frensshe at
request of Phelip le bele king of france in the year of thyncarnacion of our
lord MCClxxix. and reduced in to englisshe at the request and specyal desire of
a synguler friend of mine a mercer of london the year of our said lord / M.iiij
C.lxxxiiij. which book is entytled and named in frensshe. le lyure royal.
which is to say in englisshe^ the ryal book. or a book for a king. in which
book ben comprysed the x comandeme^ts of our lord. the xij artycles of the
faith / the vij dedely sins with their branches the vij petycions of the
pater noster^ the seven yeftes of the holy ghoost. the vij virtues and many
other holy things and matters good and prouffytable for the well of man's
soul. Then I exhort and desire every man that entendeth to the prouffyt and
seluacyon of his soul / to over see this said book / in which he shall find
good and prouffytable doctrine by which he may the rather attain to come to
everlasting blysse^ and always what that is wryton is under correctyon of
learned men / humbly besechyng them to correct and amend where as is any
d^faute. and so doing they shall do a merytory deed. For as nyghe as god has
given me connyng I have followed the copye as nyghe as I can. and I beseech
almighty god that this said werk may prouffyte the redars. and that is the
special cause that it is made fore / that knows god to whom no thing is hyd
/ which give us grace so to live virtuously in this short life. that after this
life we may come to his everlasting bliss in heaven ame^

HEre follows the table of the rubriches of this present book entytled and
named Ryal which speaks first of the ten commandementes.
First of the two tables of the law which god delyuerd unto Moses for to
preche to the people capitulo primo Of the first commandment capitulo ij Of the
first commandment of the law cao. iij Of the second commandment of the law
capo. iiij How one ought to love his neighbor capo. v Here follow the ten
comandements of the law particular vj Of the iij first comandements partyculer
and the first thing that a subget owes to his Lord capo. vij Of the second
thing that a subget owes to his lord viij The third thing that a subget
owes to his lord ca ix Of the seven other comandements apperteynyng to the
love of his neighbor capo. x Of the xij artycles of the faith capo. xj Of the beast that saint Johan theuangelyst saw in thapocalips capitulo xij The
deuysyon of the seven dedely sins capo. xiij Of the brannches of the sin of
pride capo. xiiij Of the first branch and of the first bowh capo. xv Of the
second bowh of the first branch capo. xvj Of the third bowh capo. xvij Of the
second branch of pride capo. xviij The third branch of pride capo. xix The
fourth branch which is ambico^n capo. xx The v branch which is vaynglorye
capo. xxj The vj branch is ypocrysye capo. xxij The vij branch of pride
capo. xxiij The second heed of the beast capo. xxiiij The third heed of the beast of hell is Ire capo. xxv The first war of the sin of ire capo. xxvi
Of the sin of slouthe which clerks call accydye ca xxvij Of pusyllanymyte
of delayeng and werynes capo. xxviij Of delayeng to do well capo. xxix Of the
sin and vice of neclygence capo. xxx Of forgetyng and the vice that comes
thereof capo. xxxj Of the vice of latchednes capo. xxxij Of evil points of
slouthe capo. xxxiij Of the sin of auaryce capo. xxxiiij Of diverse manners and
spyces of usure capo. xxxv The second manner of vsurye ca xxxvj Of theft ca
xxxvij The third branch of the sin of auaryce capo. xxxviij The sin of
challenge capo. xxxix Of vij manners of the sin of challenge capo. xl The fyfthe
branch of auaryce capo. xlj Of the sin of symonye capo. xlij Of the first
bough of Symonye capo. xliij Of the sin of malygnyte that comes of auaryce
xliiij Of marchaundyse capitulo xlv The ix branch of auaryce xlvj Of the
sin of lecherye capo. xlvij Of diverse estates of lecherye capo. xlviij Of the
sin of glotonnye capo. xlix Of the sin of the tongue capo. L Of the sin
that is in idle words lj Of the sin of auauntyng capo. lij Of evil sayers of
other ca liij Of the sin to say lesynges capitulo liiij Of the sin of
pariurye capitulo lv Of the sin and peril that is in chydyng ca lvj Of the
sin of murmr ca lvij Of the sin and peril that is in rebellyon ca lviij
Of the sin of blasphemye ca lix That this life nys but death as hit appyereth
ca lx How man lives deyeng in this world capitulo lxj How a man ought to live
holyly and to learn to do well lxij Of iij manners of goods spyrytuel capitulo
lxiij Of the goods of fortune capitulo lxiiij Of the goods of nature ca lxv
Of the goods of grace capitulo lxvj what virtue is honorable good capitulo
lxvij Of very sapyence or wysedom capitulo lxviij Of the prowess of the
knights of Ihesu Christ ca lxix Of the very seygnorye that gives grace and
virtues ca lxx Of very fraunchyse capitulo lxxj Of very noblesse capitulo lxxij
That charity is most grettest of virtues capitulo lxxiij Of two manners of
goods delectable ca lxxiiij Of virtues in specyal capitulo lxxv The seven
petycyons and requestys that been contained in the holy pater noster capitulo
lxxvj wherefore thou say fader our. and not fader mine ca lxxvij why it is said
qui est in celis lxxviij How sanctificetur nomen tuum is expowned ca lxxix The
second petycyon and request of the pater noster lxxx The iij petycyon and
request of the holy pater noster ca lxxxj The fourth petycyon and request ca
lxxxij The v petycyon and request of the pater noster lxxxiij The vj petycyon
and request of the pater noster ca lxxxiiij The seventh petycyon of the pater
noster ca lxxxv Of the seven yeftes of the holy ghoost ca lxxxvj They be called
yeftes for three reasons ca lxxxvij why the yeftes of the holy ghoost be called
yeftes ca lxxxviij why there be seven yeftes. and no moo ne less lxxxix Of vij
virtues. whereof three ben deuyne. and iiij cardynal lxxxx Of the four cardynal
virtues ca lxxxxj Yet of the four cardynal virtues capitulo lxxxxij Of the
virtue of attemperaunce capo. lxxxxiij Of the virtue of strength capo. lxxxxiiij
Of the virtue of Iustyse capo. lxxxxv How a man ought to take fro him the vij
dedely sins capitulo lxxxxvj Of the yefte of holy dread lxxxxvij Of four
rotes of the sin of pride capitulo lxxxxviij Of the virtue of humylyte capo.
lxxxxix Of the rote of the virtue of humylyte capo. C Of him that is very
humble capitulo Cj Of him that is humble of heart capo. Cij How a man ought to
hate pride capo. Ciij Of diverse estates of pride capo. Ciiij Of thenseynement
and doctrine of our lord capo. Cv Of the pryuyte that god has to the soul
capo. Cvj Of the comparyson of the mustard seed to the love of god capo. Cvij
Of the yefte of holy dread and pity capo. Cviij Of seven manners of love
spirituel capo. Cix Of the seven yeftes of the holy ghoost and first of the
yefte of science capo. Cx Of the second degree of equity and ryghtwysnes capo.
Cxj Of the third degree of the virtue of equity capo. Cxij Of the fourth and
fyfthe degree of the virtue of equity Cxiij Of the syxte degree of the virtue of
equity capo. Cxiiij Of the seventh degree of the virtue of equity capo. Cxv The
virtues against the seven dedely sins capo. Cxvj How one ought to live in
mean estate capo. Cxvij Of the dyuysyon of virtues after the philosophers
Cxviij Of the first virtue of magnanymyte capitulo Cxix Of the virtue of fyaunce
or trust capo. Cxx Of the virtue of surete capo. Cxxj Of the fourth degree of
the virtue of prowess capo. Cxxij Of the fyfthe degree of the virtue of
prowess capo. Cxxiij Of the syxte degree of the virtue of prowess capo.
Cxxiiij Of the spyrytuel bataylle against sin capo. Cxxv Of the first
bataylle against al vices capo. Cxxvj Of very repentance of heart capitulo
Cxxvij How a man ought to confess him capitulo Cxxviij Of the virtue of the
yefte of counceyl. and of the good and merit that is therm capitulo Cxxix Of
the degrees of the virtue of mercy capo. Cxxx The branches of the virtue of
mercy and of alms capo. Cxxxj The seven branches of mercy on the lift side
and the first branch capitulo Cxxxij The second branch capitulo Cxxxiij The
third branch capitulo Cxxxiiij The fourth branch capitulo Cxxxv The fyfthe
branch of miercy capitulo Cxxxvj The vj branch of mercy capitulo Cxxxvij
The vij branch of mercy capitulo Cxxxviij How a person ought to do alms
capitulo Cxxxix Of the life actyf and of the life contemplatyf capo. Cxl Of the
virtue of chastyte the first degree capo. Cxlj The second degree of the virtue of
chastyte cao. Cxlij The third degree of the virtue of chastyte capo. Cxliij The
fourth degree of the virtue of chastyte capo. Cxliiij The v degree of the virtue
of chastyte capo. Cxlv The vj degree of the virtue of chastyte capo. Cxlvj The
vij degree of the virtue of chastyte capo. Cxlvij Of the first estate of them
that been hole and chaste of body capitulo Cxlviij The second estate of them
that been corrupt cao. Cxlix The third estate and the fourth estate capo. CL
The fyfthe estate of chastyte capitulo Clj The vj estate of the virtue of
virginite and chastyte ca Clij The seventh estate of the virtue of chastyte
capitulo Cliij Of the yefte of sapyence capitulo Cliiij Of the first degree of
sobrenes and of mesure capitulo Clv Of the second degree of sobrenes and of
mesure ca Clvj Of the iij degree of sobrenes and of attemperaunce ca Clvij Of
the iiij degreee of sobrenes and of mesure ca Clviij The v degree of sobrenes
and of mesure capitulo Clix The vj degree of sobrenes and of attemperaunce ca
Clx The vij degree of sobrenes and of attemperaunce ca Clxj
Explicit
Here after ben contained and declared the x comandementes of the law which
god wrote with his propre fyngre / and delyuerd them to Moses the prophet for
to preche to the people for to hold and keep capitulo primo
FOr to have and to come unto the knowleche of the x comandementes of the law.
the which every creature reasonable is holden to keep for to have life
pardurable^ is to wete that sith the creaco^n of thumayn creature four laws
have been The first law is called the law of nature. which is none other
thing but knowledge of good and evil by the which we know that / which we ouzt
tensiewe after reason. and also that which we ouzt to flee. that is to do to
other that which we would after rayson should be done to us. and not to do to
other that / which we would after reason should not be done to us. and this law
gaf god to man and to woman in his creaco^n. and that same law every creature
reasonable ought to keep. and by ygnorau^ce he shall not be excused / sith they
have understanding of reason The ij law comes of the devil to destroy the
law of nature aforsayd. and that is said law of concupyscence which was put
in the creature reasonable by the sin of Inobedyence. which was in our first
fader / for tofore he dysobeyed to god by sin. the body humayn was obeyssau^t
to the soul and to reason entyerly. but as soon as he had dysobeyed god. the
body by concupysce^ce dysobeyed to reason. Of which it happeth often. how be it
that the creature by the first law of nature know the good to be done. and
the evil to be eschewed. Always by co^cupysce^ce and folisshe plesau^ce is
left the rizt Judgment of reason. and is enclyned to do the contrary. and
this says saint powle / that he fond a law in his membris^ that is to wete
the said law of concupyscence which gaynsayed to the law of reason which was
in the soul. and of this law of concupyscence set by sin in the creature /
None escaped but only Ihesu and the glorious virgyn marie. The iij law is
said the law wryton. which was delyuerd for the creature / that by the law of
concupyscence would enclyne him against the Judgment of reason to do evil. to
withdraw him to do sin for doubt of punycyon. and this law was delyuerd to
moses and to the children of Israhel / The iiij law is said of love and of
grace which is none other thing but to love god and his neighbor / And was
delyuerd by cause that the law of scripture which for dread to be punysshed
withdrewe the creature to do evil was not suffycyent / for how well that hit
empesshyd the deed / as towchyng the work. Nevertheless it empesshed not to the
creature the will to do evil / the which thing is dedely sin. as often
times as it is concluded in the thing that should be as to the deed. and this
iiij law of love is in ij comandementes pryncypally comprysed. The first is
this / Thou shall love thy god with all thy heart. with all thy soul. with all
thy entendeme^t / and with all thy might. The ij is that thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. And these two comandements ben so conjoined. that the
one may not be accomplisshed without that other^

Of the first commandment capitulo ij
FOr to have the knowleche of the said first comandeme^t ought to be known
that ij things enclyne us to love god. The first is to here gladly for to
speak of him and often. for naturelly when we here of any person said great
good. we ben enclyned to praise and love him. and therefore to goo often to holy
church to predycacio^s and sermons / is to a creature great vtylyte and
prouffyt. The second thing is to think often and to have in mind the great
benefaytes that a creature has received. and receives every day of god / for
naturelly we ben enclyned to love them that done us good. This love of god is
acquyred and gotten by these ij things in a creature and is kept and
multeplyed by ij other things. First for to wythdrawe and take away his heart
fro the love of temporal goods / for the heart may not be parfyte in diverse
things. and therefore none may love god and the worldly things together
perfytely / Secondly for to have steadfast pacye^ce in tribulaco^n and to suffer
it for the love of god. for the thing for which love has most trauayl. and by
most pain is gotten / ouzt to be most loved / and most derworthly kept. and
this sapyence is much necessary and prouffytable to al them that will goo with
god. For thus as says holy scripture. by many tribulacions / byhoueth us to
enter in to the royame of heaven. And this manyfesteth and shows to us the
lives of saints. which for to come to god have so much suffered and endured.
After it is to wete / that to thacoomplysshement of the said commandment iiij
things admonessheth the creature The first is to have in mind contynuelly the
goods that the creature has received of god. as said is tofore. For when the
creature consydereth that he has received of god body and soul / and al other
goods that he has. temporell and spirituel / the parylles also which he has
escaped^ The glory of heaven which he has apparaylled to us. the creature
humayn shall Judge that he owes to love god with all his heart The ij reason is
to have in consyderacion the great puyssaunce excellence and noblesse of god.
And with that the great inyserye and pouerte of our self. by the which
consyderacion. the creature shall Iuge^ that when he shall love god with all his
heart he shall serve him with al his might / which yet he does full little unto
the regard of his great excellence^ noblesse and puissa^ce And therefore the
creature humayne ought always the more to enforce him to love. to serve. and to
honor god / The third reason is to take away the love and affection of
worldly things as said is tofore. For where all the heart suffyseth not for to
love god suffysauntly. considered his great excellence noblesse and puyssau^ce
as tofore is said. then he that puts in his heart the love of things
temporelle. which ben not but fylthe and ordure to the regard of god. seems
well that he does to god great vylonye / and in this caas he loves not god with
al his heart after the said commandment. for of so much as the heart of the
creature is set to love other thing than god. of so much is it less in god
The fourth reason is to keep him self and to put from him al sins. and in
especial dedely sin. for no creature being in dedely sin may love god. For
by dedely sin the creature offends god and is pryued and out of grace.
which is thing contrary to his love.

Of the first commandment of the law capitulo iij
WE ought then according to the said first commandment to love god with all
our heart. The which thing the creature does / when in all his werkys his
entencyon is ryghtful and after gods will. For thentencyon of the creature
is of such virtue that he render his works and his operacyon after god good or
evil / and therefore what so ever work that the creature do if his entencyon
be evil. thoperacyon and all the work is without merit. and conuertyd fro
hit. in to evil. hereof it is said in the gospel by our savior Ihesu christ. if
thyn eye be evil al thy body is derke / That is to say if thyn entencyon be
evil / al thy werkys ben derke and in sin and without merit. And therefore
it behooves to render the work of the creature good and merytorye. and that
his entencyon be ryghtful according to goddys will / But by cause that she to
^^ndre the work of the creature good and merytorye according to god /
suffyseth not only good entencyon / But it (...) to have the ryghtful
entencion and good will like as it may appyere in him. that will feel and take
other men^^s good^s for to nourysshe and feed the pour people / For the^te^cyon
of the will to give for gods sake to the pour people is good. But the will
to stele or take aweye other me^nes goods is evil for to so do. And therefore
that deed shall be evil / and may not be excused. For by cause that an evil
werk for any good entencyon may not be excused^ It is said after in the said
commandment. that the creature ought to love god with all his soul. That is to
say that his will accord in all his werkys to the will of god. and this
demand we of god when we say our pater no^^er. when we pray god that his
will be done in us Item by cause that yet for tacco^plisshe the said
commandment. suffyse not only good entencyon and good will / it is after
said in the same comandement^ that the creature ought to love his god with all
his entendement and understanding. That is to say that in thentendement of the
creature be no dedely sins delybered by consentyng ne concluded. For all
consentynges concluded in thing that should be as touching the deed of dedely
sin. though so be that the deed be not done outward as touching the work
that any thing ensie we thereof / yet it is dedely sin. And the creature
being in dedely sin may not love god as above is said / Item by cause that
yet for taccomplysshe the said commandment suffyse not only good entencyon
and good will as touching the works wythoutforth^ and that in thentendement
of the creature grows dedely sin by consentyng / but it behooves that the
creature put and employe all the strength and puyssaunce that he has in good
werkys. Just and virtuous / that they be to thonour of god and to the
salvation of him self and of his neighbor. It is said after in the said
commandment that the creature ought to love his god with all his might and
strength / And therefore al they that put and employe all their might and
strength in the werkys of sin / done against the said comandeme^t and sin
dedely / Thus it appyereth clearly that for taccomplysshe the said first
commandment pryncypal. The creature ought to give to god. entencyon. will /
entendement. and al his strength by the manner aforesaid /

The second commandment of the law is how each man ought to love his neghbour
Capo. iiij
FOr to have the knowleche of the second commandment pryncypal aforesaid
touching the love of his neighbor whom the creature ought to love as him
self. It is to wete that to the love of our neighbor four things ouzt to move
us. First for by cause that we al ben children of god by creacyon. And
naturelly brethern and systers love that one that other. And thus we ben al
members of Ihesu Christ. which is our heed. and one membre loves another
naturelly / Secondly to this ought to bring us the love and obeyssaunce that
we owe to god as said is. which comau^deth us to love our neighbor Thyrdly to
this love ought to bring us the commynycacyon which is emonge creatures
humayn. For one lord has made us al and created / for us al he has suffryd
death. And to us all he has apparaylled the glory and the beatytude of heaven.
if we lose it not by sin. And naturelly every creature of one lykenes / of
one form / and of one semblau^ce loves and ought to love the other. like as
we see in beestys and in birds that each love other. and him that is to him
like and his pareyll. And therefore every creature that loves not his neighbor
mespryseth not only against the law dyuyne but also against the law of nature
/ The fourth thing that to this love ought to bring us. is the prouffyte that
comes thereof / For when a creature loves well another he desires his
prouffyte / his honor. his sauement. and pourchasseth it gladly. By these
four things aforesaid appears clearly that we ought to love our neighbor as
our self. and this love is in five things. First when one loves his neighbor
truly / that is to say for the well of him / and that is in him and no thing
for his owen propre. To the knowleche of which thing is to wete emonge
reasonable creatures. three manners of love been founden /

Here is contained how one ought to love his neighbor capitulo v
THe first is when a creature loves another creature for the prouffyt that he
does to him / and this love is not very. For when the prouffyt faylleth the
love faylleth. The second is when a creature loves another creature for her
beauty. and the play^yr and delight that he takes therein. This love is not
very. For she faylleth when the playsyr or delight faylleth / The third is when
for the love of god and for the well of him the creature loves another
creature / And this love is good and very. and according to god. Secondly when
one loneth his neighbor ordynatly / that is to wete less tha^ god^ Thus as
the creature owes to love him self less than god. And this techeth us our
savior Ihesu Christ when he says. He that loves fader or mother. or suster. or
brother / or children. or any other thing more than me. he is not worthy to
have me / how shall this be known. Saint gregory enseygneth it to us / that the
works of withoutforth done for a creature show the love that one has to him
wythinforth. For naturelly one does gladly which he weneth that hit ought to
plese him or her that he loves And by this it apperyth clearly that when any
creature leueth to do the works. the which according to god he is holden and
bounden. For to do other werkys contrary to the playsyr of the creature /
then he loves that creature more than he does god / And in this doing he
mespryseth against the two commandments aforesaid and synneth dedely /
Thyrdly the love aforesaid is when the creature loves his neighbor by deeds /
That is do say not by words only. But in fayte and deed to procure in him
his prouffyte. and to empesshe and let his dommage with his power. as he
does to him self / Fourthly when a creature loves his neygbour in all times.
That is to understand also well in the time of his aduersyte and of his pouerte
/ as in the time of his richesse and of his prosperyte / For in especyal in the
time of aduersyte and of pouerte / the very friend is proved / Fyfthly when
the creature loves his neighbor holyly / That is to say that the creature
ought not to love another for to draw him unto sin. or for to be his fellow
in evil werkys. As been they that acoompanye them to rob and stele other
mennys goods. or do other evil and wicked deeds. For after reason thou
sholdest not Judge that thou ought do such things. After the five things
that every creature ought to render unto his neighbor after the said second
commandemente. is to wete that two things shown pryncypally the loue^ when it
is in the creatures / The first is for to have pacyence and compassyon in
myschyef and in the aduersyte or pouerte of other. For one excuses and
pardonneth gladly and lightly the defaulte or offense of the person that he
loves. and these be signs of great love. The ij is humylyte which causes
pacyence For comynly when a person is proud he knows not his defaultes /
But despyseth the other by presumpcyon. and may not supporte the defaultes that
he judges in them. But he is Inpacyent. And wythouteforth he shows and
manyfesteth often anger and dysplaysaunce. But by cause that the said
commandment for to love his neighbor as him self was by the Jews and
pharysees evil vnderstonden. and may be and is yet by many either. For they
hold that they ought love them that louen hem. and to hate them that hate hem.
and for their neighbor they understood only their frendys It is to
understand that when love or hate is in a creature / ij things ben to be
considered. that is to wete the nature that he has and the sin or defaulte
of him. every creature of god after his nature. ought to be byloued. but his
sin and defaulte ouzt to be hated / And after this exposycyon ought to be
vnderstonden the commandment that Ihesu Christ maad to his appostles for to love
their enemies / For the nature humayn we ought to love. and to do well to them
that hate us / and pray for them that do to us evil. and that persecute us /
But we owe alweye to hate their sins and their defaultes. Nevertheless we
may well. and is leefful to us to desire the destructyon of a creature obstynat
in evil and in sins. and that destroys holy church. and domageth and
hurts other / For the desire of this. is to desire the good of other. and
nothing the evil. to the end that he seace to do evil / and persevere in evil /
And not only for his destructyon. Such people wha^ they have desired after
thentendement aforesaid ben called after thappostle the mynystres of god /

Here after follows the ten commandments of the law partyculer capitulo vj
NOw it is to wete that these two pryncypal commandments aforsayd were given
to moses / when god delyuerd to him the law in ten comandements particular.
The which comandementes every creature reasonable is bounden to keep for to
have the life and glory perdurable. The three first have regard to the
dylection and love of god according unto the pryncipal commandment tofore
said. And the seven other partyculer apperteynen to the love and to the
dylectyon obhys neighbor. according to that other commandment pryncypal after
ensyewyng / And of the same x comandements there ben tweyne affyrmatyues only
which enduce the creature to do well / and viij other negatyues which defend
to do evil / The cause is for so much as for to keep him from doing evil / is
in the puyssance of the creature for the free will that he has to the which
he may not be constrained. but to do well is not in the puyssance of the
creature. but it is the special grace of god.

Of the three first comandements partyculer capo. vij
FOr to have the knowleche of the iij first comandeme^tes apperteynyng to the
love and dylectyon of god. It is to wete that a very subgette owes to his
lord three things / the which the creature owes to god soueraynly / The first
is feyth or fydelyte. that is to say that thonour / seruyse and obeyssaunce
that the subgette owes to his lord. and the seygnorye that he ought to have
over him be not by him delyuerd to another / For in such a caas he should be
holden for a traytre and for falls and evil / And upon this was given of god to
moses the first commandment which is such. Thou shall not adoure no strange
god. That is to say / thobeyssau^ce. honor and service that the creature
ought to do to god / like as hit is devised upon the first commandment
pryncypalle. he shall in no wise do unto any other than to god.

Against this commandment done and sin mortally all tho people that entremece
them of dyuynacyons. of fortyleges and sorceryes. For after Saint Austyn such
things may not be maad ne done without to have any or sum couenau^tes with
the devil. by the which all such things been said and made / And therefore
al such people be cursyd and excomenyed of holy church. And yet also al they
that hold and believe that the p^anettys and the sterrys govern the souls of
the creatures / For god only governs man and woman / and for to serve man
and woman they ben maad and created / Thyrdly all they that in any other manner
thing what someuer it be that set more their hope in than in god / be it in
goods temporelle or in creatures or that more love them than god^ The which
happeth wha^ for such love / or for to get such a thing / the creature
dysobeyeth to the comandements of god and of holy church Fourthly al they that
for to obey to them and to do their plesyrs. make their subgetcis or
servants to dysobeye the comandementes of god and holy church. Fyfthly and
al they that in such a caas obey to the creature. And yet also all them that
more believe to their own wit than they do to the comaundementes of god^ and
to the ordyna^ces of holy church / as do they that retche not to know the
comandementes of god. the artycles of the feythe. and all other things that
of necessyte ben to be byleuyd / kept and holden for to have glory and life
perdurable / But many believe to get heaven by their folysshe presumpcion / And
therefore they will govern them at their playsyr and will. and yet all they
that for to have the delectacyons and the eases of the flesh and of their
bodies dysobeye to god and to his comandementes.

The second thing that the very subgette owes to his lord capitulo viij
THe second thing that the very subget owes to his lord. and in especyal to
god. is that he ne say ne do thing that may be to his vylonnye / or to his
Iniurye or dyshonoure And upon this was delyuerd the second commandemente
apperteynyng to the love of god which is such. Thou shall not take the name
of thy god in vain / That is to say for to afferme and do believe thing that
thou say or do / thou shalt not swear the name of god. but for things
verytable and for good and Just cause / and yet in caas of need and of
necessyte / For oath is ordained for to set an end in things lytigyous and
debateful. of which feyth or demonstrau^ce may in none otherwise be known but
by oath. And in this was restrained to the christian that^ which was granted to
the Jews / For it was leefful to them to swear and not to be perjured. But to
the christian people is not only defended to pariure and forswere him self. but
also to swere^ Except in caas of necessyte as said is And therefore it is said
by our savior Ihesu Christ if thou wylt any thing afferme or deny late thy
word be. it is thus. or it is not thus. and if thou make oath of habundance.
but in caas of necessyte it is evil and it is sin And the cause of this
restraynte or defense is / by cause that the creature has no membre so feeble
ne to the keeping may by a creature be less set. than in the tongne. And to
this purpoos says Saint James thappostle. that all nature of beestys. of
birds and of serpentys may be dompted and taken by the creature humayne but
none may not ne will not refrain his tongue. ne keep him from evil saying or of
ouermoche spekyng /

And therefore says the holy appostle sweet Saint James that the man is parfyte
and wise that sets to his tongue such guard. that he mespryse not ne sin
not in his spekyng And for that fraylnes the creature that uses or
accustommeth him for to swear periureth or forsweryth him lyghtlye. The which
thing of him self is dedely sin when the pariuryng is made in ernest and by
delyberacyon / and the most grettest sin that is after / is to adoure
strange gods. which is said sin of ydolatrye. And therefore not to take the
name of god in vain by the manner that said is / was the second commandment
given of our lord to moses as tofore is said.

The third thing that the very subgette owes unto his lord capitulo ix
THe third thing that the very subgette owes to his lord and soueraynly to
god / is service / and upon this was deyluerd to Moses the third commandment
apperteynyng to the dylectyon and love of god. and is such as follows / Thou
shalt halowe or sayntefye the sunday / that is to say Thou shall seace the
said day fro al worldly works / and in especyal of the werkys of sin / And
that day thou shalt employe and occupye thy self in the praysyng and in the
service of god In knowlechyng the benefaytes and the grace that thou have of
him / And god would that by the Jews the sabate day should be employed in his
praysyng and his seruyse / In mind of that which he had made and fourmed all
things And the seventh day he had seaced and did rest to make new creatures
/ And by the christian people instead of the said sabat day that the Jews
hallowed The day of sunday has been ordained in mind of the recreacyon of the
creature reasonable maad by the resurrexyon of Ihesu Christ / which aroos on
such a day. And semblably the frestys of Saints. and the solempnytees
commanded by the church to be kept also like as the sunday ought every
creature temploye in the praysyng and loange of god and of his saints and to
seace and rest fro all erthely and worldly works. and in especyal from sin.
And in especyal the creature ought to cease of two things First fro al werkys
temporelle. erthely. and corporelle. except in four caases. The first is for
to have the necessyte of his life The second for the necessyte of the life of his
neighbor / The third for the necessyte of holy church / The fourth for
thauctoryte of his souerayn and for his commandment. when in such days he
comandeth to work for any causes Just and reasonable. In which four caases
it is leefful to a creature on the said days to do work corporelle The second
thing whereof thumayn creature ought to cesse in especyal on the said days. is
to do sin. and in especyal dedely sin. For how well that a creature ought to
keep him self from sin and in especyal dedely / Nevertheless sin done in the
said days is much more grievous than in other days. The third thing whereof a
creature ought to keep him in. the said dayes^ is of ydlenes / For for to be
idle is cause of over much evil and of sins / and in especyal on the said
days ought a creature to occupye and enbesye him in three things. First in
making sacrefyse to god of him self. and of all that he has. and in especyal a
creature ought on the said days to give him self to god by devout orysons
and prayer. And to have great sorrow and bitter repe^tau^ce of his sins.
Secondly a creature ouzt to occupye him in the loange and praysyng of his maker
and creator. And by cause that in the mouth of a sinner / preysyng is not
playsaunt to god. every creature ought to make clean his heart fro al sins by
bitter repentance / by devout confession and by penance Thyrdly a creature
ought to occupye him in the said days in doing almesses for the love of god of
such goods as god has given to him / to them that have need and necessyte.
and more largely ought to be given in the said days than in other / Also yet
in the days of the festys of saints the creature ought to torn his
entendement in the consyderacyon of three things First the creature ought to
consider the great lyberalyte and largess of god that the saint of whom the
feste is / for a lytyl service that he has done to god / God has so gretely
rewarded and guerdoned that he has given to him glory and Joy pardurable^
with him. And with this god will that of his creatures he be honored and
preysyd in this world. And by this consyderacion the creature ought to be al
toward god. and ouzt desire with al his heart. to doubt / to love and serve
deuoutelye and perseuerantly such a lord that pays so well his servants /
Secondly a creature ought in his heart to ymagyne and think of the glory and
of the joy / that the saint has with god. which is so great that heart
humayn may not think ne mowthe express ne speak. and by such consyderacyon
he desire to have such well. and by this the creature desire with al his heart
to serve / love and dread god which for this gives such well to a creature
Thyrdly a creature ought to consider in the said days the great myserye of him
self / the diverse trybulacyons / afflyctyons. maladyes / and evil accydentes.
fortunes and seruytudes / and many moo parylles that been every day in this
pour world. And by this consyderaco^n a creature ought to have the world in
despyte. and not to preyse worldly things. and to serve god with all his power.
And to desire to be out of this myserye / for to have the great Joy and
glory of heaven which the saint has with god /

Here after folowen the seven other comandementes / apparteynyng to the love
and dylection of his neighbor capo. x
AFter the three comandementes aforesaid apparteynyng to the love and dylectyon
of god / Follow the seven other apparteynyng to the love of his neighbor
according to the second commandment pryncypal aforesaid / For to have the
knowleche of them. is to wete. that the creature that loves his neighbor
after the said commandment / ought to have ij things. that is to wete not to
do evil / and for to do well. And therefore of the said seven comandementes
partyculer. the first enduceth and excyteth the creature to do well. But how be
hit that every creature is bounden to do well to his neighbor / Nevertheless
he is most bounden by especyal to do good to tho persons that to him be
most nygh and most conjoined And therefore the said first commandment of these
vij enduceth and admonesteth the creature to do well. and commanded to honor
serve and aid fader and mother. which ben the persons most conioynt to us /
and to whom we be most holden after god. And it is such. honor thy fader
and mother. to the end that thou have good and long life upon the earth / The
cause wherefore we ought to honor our faders and moders / is for the great
benefaytes that we receive of them in iij things pryncypally. First the child
receives of fader and mother his being. For therefore the child ought to bear
to them more gretter honor and obeyssaunce than to any other after god.
Secondly the child receives of fader and mother nourisshyng in his chyldehode.
And therefore the child is bounden to govern them in their old age / and of
his goods to admynystre unto them their necessytees after his power if they
have need / Thyrdly the child receives of fader and mother techyng and
doctrine. And therefore in all things. that be not against god the child owes
to obey to them. and in this doing v things ben promised of god by the
prophet to the child. First grace in this world and glory perdurable in that
other. Secondly long life which ought not to be nombred in the nombre of years
/ but in the nombre of good virtues. And in life which is without sin.
Thyrdly joy and lygnage of children / Fourthly fame or renommee lowable.
Fyfthly rychesses / After it is to wete that sum be not said fader for cause
of carnal generacyon. but for many other causes. Sum ben said fader. and to
each of them we ought to bear honor and reverence / First so^me be said fader
for good and holy doctrine / and good ensaumple that they have given and showed
of good and holy life. As the apostles and other saints. for by their holy
doctrine they have maad us children of Ihesu Christ by feythe. and to them we
ouzt to bear honor. reverence / and obeyssaunce. not only with the mouth.
but by ensyewyng their werkys. and their good and holy lives and doctrine.
Secondly so^me ben said fader for the admynystracyon that they have of god.
like as ben the prelates of holy church. to whom we ought give honor in
obeyeng to them and to their comandements. as to the mynystres of god Thyrdly
sum be said fader for the guard and defense that they ought to do to their
people. as ben the king / the prince / and other lords which have the people
to govern and to keep. and them we ought to love and honor and to them obey
by subiectyon. for their power comes of god. Fourthly sum ben said fader.
and ben to be honored for the weel and good that is received of them / as ben
they that socour the pour in their necessyte / as a fader by pity and by
compassyon. Fyfthly sum be said fader and ought to be honored for their old
age. as been the people which been of great age.

AFter the said first commandment partyculer touching the love and dylectyon of
his neighbor. which enduceth and somoneth a creature to do well. Folowen the
other vj which defend to a creature to do evil / And therefore that emonge
all the euylles that a creature may do to another. the grettest evil is to sle
him / and this was given to moses in the second commandment of the vij. and is
this. Thou shalt not slay. that is to wete creature reasonable of thy propre
will and auctoryte. To the knowleche of which commandment is to wete that
after holy scripture been slain creatures reasonable in many manners / First by
smytyng in the body and hurtyng in such manner that death ensyeweth thereof / and
this is not only against the second commandment pryncypal aforesaid / which
comandeth to love his neighbor as him self. But it is against nature. for
naturelly al things like and semblable love each other. Secondly by gyuyng
counceyl favor or aid and tenduce a creature to slay another bodyly. or to
make him to fall in to dedely sin. Thyrdly in making comfort and aid to a
creature for to slay another corpor^lly. or to cause him to fall in to dedely
sin. Fourthly in consentyng him self to the bodily death of another or
spyrituel. as touching to dedely sin / as to make another to fall. The
which consentyng is understand. as often times as I may let another fro
death corporel or spyrytuel as touching dedely sin and I let him not. By
this it appyereth clearly enough / that a creature sometime sleeth the body / by
iniurye done to his body in such wise that death ensyeweth. and sometime the
soul. for to make it fall in to dedely sin. and sometime body and soul
together. by sleyng him self or a woman great with child living. The second
commandment defends to do evil to a person conjoined in marriage. and that is
this. Thou shall do none aduoultrye / That is to say with a woman conjoined to
another by marriage / Thou shall have no comyxtyon. or flesshly company. Ne a
woman also married with any other man than her husbond / and it is to wete that
man and woman in doing against the said commandment sin first against the law
of god. which has defendyd aduoultrye by the said commandment. and yet they
sin against the law of god / by the which it is said / that this which god
has conjoined by marriage. that by man it may not be deceueryd ne departed. In
gyuyng over his body by carnal copulacyon to another. For after the holy
scripture man and woman by marriage ben constytuted ^weyne in one flesh. Yet
efte they sin against the sacrament of marriage made in the face of holy
church / By the which man and woman promytte their truth to other / By
virtue of which oath the body of the man longs to the woman and the body of
the woman is to the man / and ought not to be abandou^ned ne delyuerd to other
by comyxtion carnal. alweye how well that in the things aforsayd they sin
dedely as said is yet the sin of the woman. that abandou^neth her body to
another man than her husbond by company carnal and co^myxtion. is more gretter
when children or lygnage ensyeweth. than is of the man. For with the sins
aforsayd she commytteth theft / in gyuyng to her husbond heirs for to succeed
to him of another man than of him self / and by this the woman commytteth
sacrelege trayson and theft. And in other caases the sin of the man that
has commysed aduoultrye. is to be reprehended more than of the woman. by cause
that he ought to have more gretter knowleche / and to be more strong for to
keep him from sin / than the woman which is frail and deceived lightly by
concupyscence. And also a man is ordained and constytuted heed and maystre of
the woman / and in doing that sin he gives to his wife evil ensaumple. And
also it is to wete that by the comandeme^t aforsayd is not only deffended
aduoultrye of man and woman assemblyd by marriage / but al fornycacion
comyxtion. and flesshly company between man and woman other than in lawful
marriage is dedely sin. and deffended by the said commandment. and to hold
the contrary is heresye. For to take aweye fro god that which is given and
consecrate in the holy sacrament of baptesme / for to give to a creature / is
more great Iniurye and mysprysion and more gretter sin than to take it fro a
creature / Then sithe that it is defended that such vylo^ye and such
Iniurye made to a creature by more strenger reason. it ought in no wise to be
done unto god. Also yet against the said commandment ne mespryseth not only
man and woman by aduoultrye and fornycacyon as touching the deed or fayte. but
all the times that for to do hit they have the will delyberyd and concluded.
without the deed be done or follow it is dedely sin. and also al byholdynges
touchynges and kyssynges made by deliberacion for to come to the deed of carnal
comyetion and fornycacion as well by man as by woman out of marriage. wihoute
that the deed ensyewe. is dedely sin. and is defended by the said
commandment. The third commandment defends to do evil and hurt to another
in his temporel goods and that is this. Thou shall do no theft Against this
commandment myspryse and synnen dedely al they that pryuely and secretly take
others goods in entencion to reteyne them against the will of him that owe
them / and this manner of taking is theft. Also al they that manyfestly or
openly by force and by vyolence taken the goods of other. and this manner of
taking is called rauyne. and it is gretter dedely sin than theft / In this
sin fallen the princes and lords that without cause reasonable leueye and
reyse upon their people tayllage. aids. and Indue subuencyons / and that for
auaryce maken evil and wicked ordynaunces upon their people / for after saint
austyn / al wicked seygnourye is thefte^ and after the said saint austyn such
people and such lords ben called the great theuys. Also al they that reteyne
the hyre and salarye of other / and that they owe to other. For this is against
Justice. that will that to every man be rendryd that which is his. Also all they
that in fayt of marchandyse by delyberacyon. and in deed aduysed commyse and do
falsehed or damage to other. Also tauerners and sellars of wyn. that put water
with the wyn that they selle / or put in the same of less value and of less
prys than that which is in the vessel. and selle al at one prys Also against
this commandment mespryse and sin all they that do vserye. which is
commysed and made in many manners. Sometime openly. that is to wete when a
creature leneth money to another. and by certain couenaunte shall have prouffyte
thereby sometime pryuely and secretelye / and that is in diverse manners / First
when a creature leneth to another gold or silver or other thing and for the
more gretter surete to be paid ageyn / is delyuerd in his hand sum thing
that of the same comes prouffyt. As ben medowys^ vygnes. or other herytages.
and if he receive the said prouffyt without that he will any thing rebate of
that which is lent. Secondly when for the more surete to have again that
which has be lent / a person has received pledge as horse or other beestes
of whom thusage has done to him prouffyte. and will no thing rebate therefore
as before is said. Thyrdly when ostage is delyuerd to so^me for the payement of
sum fynaunces / And therefore he takes his despences upon the said ostages
during the time Fourthly when any fynaunce is due to any person. and of the
payement of the said fynaunce / he gives delay for certain prouffyt that is
made for that cause / Fyfthly when a creature is accustomed to bye re^tis or
other things. by such condycyon. that if with incerteyn time. his money be
not rendered ne paid ageyn / he shall have that thing / and for the time of the
said being he byeth it for less than it is worth^ And he sees clearly that he
that has sold that has not. ne shall not have at the term power to pay ne
to render that which is lent. And if he have not the power in this hope and
will / he gives him time of rechate or byeng ageyn / that then he shall have
the prouffyte of the thing. and with that he shall have ageyn all that he has
lent wtthoute any thing to abate thereof. Also when any person gives term
of payement for the thing that he has sold. And for the abydyng of his
payemynt he has sold it derrer than it is worth or of value. Also when a
creature byeth any thing that shall be delyuerd to him at certain time to come.
and for thabydyng the delyueraunce of that thing. he byeth it for less than
it is worth. Also when a creature accompanyeth him with another in the fayte
of marchau^dyse. and delyuerth his money by such couenaunte that he shall be
fellow and partyner in the gain. and bear no thing in the loss. And upon
this caas of usure is comprysed the manner for to deliver beestys to deelyng
that shall not deye. which been called beestys of iron. That is to say.
supposed that they deye or perysshe. he that takes them to moison or delyng
shall deliver hem ageyn. and he that has delyuerd them shall not bear no part
of the loss / but in the gain he shall have his part / Also when a creature
byeth any rent. revenue / or other thing that shall be paid to him at certain
term by such condycyon. that if he be not paid at the said term / he shall
give for every day or for every weke sum thing for the forberyng / and for
the defaulte of payement the byerleueyeth and receives the said pain or
thing / Also when for to abide the payement of that which is lent of him that
so owes the pressed or ^ette is received seruyse or werkys and labors bodily /
Also against the said commandment mespryse and sin dedely that bye dygnytees
espyrytuel and benefyces. and al other that commyse symony^ / Also all they
that by force of tyranny holden temporal seygnoryes and lordshyppes / and in all the caases aforesaid. the creature is holden to restore all that which he
has had and received of any other against the said commandment. After the three
comandementes toforesayd which defend to do evil by work follows the iiij
which deffendeth to do evil in hurtyng or doing wrong to other by word. and
that is this. Thou shall not speak against thy neighbor false wytnes. against
this commandment trespacen and synnen mortalle al they that accusen other in
falls Judgment / also al they that Iudgen falsely. also all they that by
detracco^n of saying evil of other take aweye their good name and fame / Also
all they that recyten and taken playsyr and delight in saying and recountyng
that which they have herd say and recyte in deffame of other. also al they
that allow and approuue the words of a creature said in the deffame and
anoyeng of another / Also by the said commandment is deffendyd all lesynges
and lies. the which is commysed in many manners. Sometime in things which
byholden the feythe of holy church to the spyrytuel hurt of another / and to
his dampnacyon in delyueryng to him false doctryn. and against the truth of
the faith of holy church. Sometime in things that been to the damage and
gryef of another as touching his goods temporell. and in these two caases al
lesynges is found dedely sin / Sometime a lesyng is said and commysed in his
propre deed by humylyte. as done sum people which accusen them self in
confession by humylyte of that which they have not done. And fro such a
leesyng ought a creature much for to keep him and for to be ware right gretely
thereof for such humylyte is wicked / For after the saying of saint Austyn /
Like as a creature ought not for to hele ne hyde in his confession that which
he has done / In like wise ouzt he not for to say that which he has not done.

Sometime a creature lies in his own deed for shame. That is to wete when he
says sum thing which he weneth be true / And in saying it he aduyseth him
and knows in him self that it is not so. And nevertheless for shame he dare
not wythdrawe that he has said. according unto the truth And sometime a
creature lies for to have sum prouffyte thereby. or for to escape sum
peril. Sometime for to do prouffyte unto another. Or to deliver or keep him
from sum peril. or for to empesshe his prouffyte. Or to let his dommage /
Also sometime the creatures maken lesynges or lies in Iapes or plays / and for
to glad and enjoy the people which they are in company with al. And fro
all these lesynges after the saying of sweet saint Austyn / a creature ought
always to keep him. For every leesyng is sin. and the two first ben dedely
sins. and the other by evil custo^ may bring a creature to dedely synne^ after
these iiij comandementes aforesaid which defend to do evil by werk and by
word follow the other two which defend the will of lyberte to grieve and do
evil to another^ The first deffendeth the will to hurt another in his goods
temporel / And that is this. Thou shalt not coueyte the thing of thy
neighbor Against this commandment mespryseth and synneth a creature sometime
mortally or dedely. that is to wete as often as by delyberacyon he coueyteth and
would have the goods of another and against reason. Sometime venyally that is to
wete when he coueyteth the goods of another. But he would not have them but by
reason as for the prys that they be worth. and by the good will of him or
them that owe them / The second commandment defends the will delybered or
concluded to coueyte the wife of another man. for to have carnal company with
her. For to have the knowleche of the said comandeme^t it is to understand
that in iij manners concupyscence carnal is in a creature / First in the heart
when it is by consentyng delybered and concluded. To this purpoos says our
savior Ihesu Christ / that he that byholdeth a woman by carnal concupyscence /
that is to say by a will concluded to have her company flesshly in his heart.
he has commysed fornycacyon. and synneth dedely. Secondly in the mouth in
expressyng and declaryng theuyl desire that is in the heart by consentyng. the
which conse^tyng is called dedely sin / thyrdly in work when the evil
purpoos or conse^tyng is done in deed. After it is to wete that iiij things
pryncipally kepe^ a creature fro falling in to the sin of concupyscence. The
first is to flee evil company and all occasyons that given and moeuen cause
of concupyscence. As for to frequente and to see wymmen often and to here speak
of them. The ij is to put out and not remember in his heart the evil thouztes
and the temptacions that come by the things that he has seen. and to chastyse
his body and hold in penance and affliction. The iij is to have recours to
god by devout oryson and prayer when flesshly temptacyon comes in requyryng
deuoutlye his help. The fourth is also in occupyeng him self in good werkys
according to god / And always to flee ydlenes which is cause of all evil /
Thus it appyereth clearly by the comandements aforesaid and declared / that the
creature that loves god has of necessyte for to do three thyngys. First that
he adoure ne worship but one god after the first commandment partyculer.
Secondly that the name of god he receive not in vain after the second
commandment. Thyrdly that he honor god after the third commandment In like
wise a creature that loves his neighbor has of necessyte to do vij things /
The first is that he do honor and reverence due after the fourth commandment
/ The second that he do none evil ne Iniurye by work. First as touching to his
person after the fyfthe. commandment / Secondly as touching the person to him
conjoined after the vj commandment Thyrdly as touching to his goods after the
vij commandment / Also that do not ne bear damage by his word after the viij
commandment / Ne also by thought and will concluded first when he coueyteth
his wife after the ix commandment Secondly as touching to coueyte his things
after the x commandment / The which god give us grace to accomplysshe Amen.

Thus enden the commandments of the christian law which each man ought to
hold and keep entyerly for to have the life and glory pardurable / Deo gracias.
These been the xij articles of the christian faith which every man ouzt to
believe fermely. For otherwise he may not be saved. if he have understanding and
reason in him self. and they ben xij articles after the nombre of the xij
apostles. which establysshed them to hold and keep. of whom the first
apperteyneth to the fader The second to the sone. and the iij to the holy
ghoost. For this is the foundement of the faith to believe in the holy trynyte /
That is in the fader. and in the sone^ and in the holy ghoost one god in iij
persons. Al these artycles ben contained in the great Credo and in the little
credo. the which the xij apostles made. of which each of them made and set
a clause of whom the first is this /

The first article of the faith capitulo xj

I believe in god fader almyzty creator or maker of heaven and earth / this
article made saint peter / saying Credo in de u^ patre^ omi^pote^te^ creatore^
celi and terre. The ij apperteyneth to the sone as touching his deyte / that he
is god / and that is this I believe in our lord. sone of the fader. and in this
we ouzt to believe that he is se^blable and egal to the fader and to al things
which apperteyne to the deyte. and is one thing with the fader. saut the
person which is other tha^ the fader as touching thumanyte / this article made
saint andrew saying. Et in Ihesu^ ^p^m filiu^ eius vnicu^ dn^m nr^m The iij
article is of the co^cepcion of cryst^ and was conceived of the holy ghoost and
borne of Marye That is to say that he was conceived in the vyrgyn marie. And by
the virtue of the holy ghoost and no thing of man. and that the vyrgyn marye
abode always virgyn and tofore and after. This article set in saint James the
more saying / Qui conceptus est de spiritu sancto natus ex maria virgin / The
fourth article apperteyneth to the passion of Ihesu christ. that is to say that
he suffered under pylate his passion. The which pylate was preuoste and Judge for
the time in Iherusalem for the romans / And of him was Ihesus christ Judged
wrongfully at the request of the right felon Jews. and crucyfyed and deed.
and laid in the sepulcre and descended in to hell. This article maad saint
Johan theuangelyst saying Passus sub poncio pilato crucifixus mortuus / and
sepultus descendit ad inferna The fyfthe article is of the resurrection of
Ihesu Christ. That is to say. the third day he aroos fro death / This article
maad Saint Thomas saying. Tercia die resurrexit a mortuis The syxthe article is
of thascencyon of Ihesu Christ / That is to say he ascended to heaven and
sytteth upon the right side of god the fader almighty. This article maad Saint
James the less saying / Ascendit ad celos. sedet ad dexteram dei patris
omnipotentis The seventh article is of the coming of Ihesu Christ to the dome.
That is to say / From thens he is to come to Judge the living and the ded /
This article made saint Phelyp saying / Inde venturus est iudicare viuos and
mortuos The viij article is to believe in the person of the holy ghost. This
article made saint bartylmew saying. Credo in spiritum sanctu^ The ix article
is to believe in the holy church of rome. and in thordynau^ces of holy church.
This article made saint mathewe saying. Sanctam ecclesiam catholica^ The x is
to believe in the holy sacrament and by the same holy sacrament is made
remyssyon of sins to al them that receive him worthily. This article made
Saint Simon saying. Sanctorum co^munionem remissione^ peccatorum The xj article
is of the general ressurection in propre bodies This article made saint Jude
brother of saint simon / saying Carnis resurrectionem. The xij and the last
article is to believe heaven to be life perdurable / This article composed and
made saint Mathye saying vitam eternam Amen /

Thus enden the twelve artycles of the feythe
Of the beast that saint Johan theuangelyst saw in thappocalyps capitulo xij
THe holy appostle Saint Johan the euangeliste in the book of his reuelacio^s
which is called apocalips says that he saw a be which issued out of the sea merueyllously desgysed and much dredeful. For the body of the beast was of
a lyepard. the feet of a beer the throat of a lyo^. and he had vij heedes / and
x horns above. and above the x horns x crowns / and saint Johan saw that
this cruel be has power and might to fight against saints and to overcome
them / and to conquer them. This be so cruel / so conntrefayted. so diverse
and so dredeful / signefyeth the devil of hell. which is full of sorrow and of
al bytternesse^ The body of this be was as says saint Johan semblaunte unto
a lyepard. For in like wise as the lyepard has diverse colors / In like wise
has the devil diverse manners of engynes for to deceive and to draw the people
to sin. The feet of the beast were of a bear. For in like wise as the beer
has the might and strength in his feet and in his arms. and holds
strongly. and byclyppeth fast that which he has under his feet and enbraceth.
In like wise does the devil them that he embraces and has beten down by
sin. The throat of the lion was in him for his great cruelte. The vij hedes
of the said be ben the vij chyef dedely sins. by the which the devil
draws to him as it were all the world. For oftyme it happeth that many
persons fall in so^me throat of these vij hedes / That is to understand of
the seven dedely sins. and therefore says Saint Johan that the said be had
power against the saynces. for in the earth is none so holy a man that
parfytelye may eschew all the manners of synnes^ that of these vij heedes. and
of the vij dedely sins descend. without specyal pryuylege and grace of god
/ like as it was in the virgyn marie / which never did sin / or in another
saint after the specyal grace that he had of god / like as the glorious vyrgyn
marye had specyal and synguler grace of god above al other creatures. The x
horns of the beast sygnefye the brekyng of the x commandementes of the law of
our lord. which the devil pourchaceth as much as he may that the creature
break them. in like wise as he purchaceth that the creature fall in the vij
dedely sins toforesayd. or in so^me of the branches of them. The x crowns
of the said be sygnefyen the vyctoryes that the devil has upon the sinners.
by cause that he has made them for to break the ten comandements of the law
of our lord.

Herafter follows the deuysyon of the vij dedely sins ca xiij
THe first heed of the beast is pride / The second Envy. The iij ire or wrath.
The iiij slouthe. The v auaryce / The vj glotonnye / The vij lecherye / Out of
these vij sins dedely descenden all manner of sins and therefore be they
called chyef of vices. for they ben chyef of al vices and of all sins be
they dedely or venyal. Eueryche of these seven dedely sins is departed in
many parties. and first we shall speak of the sin of pride. This was the first
sin and the beginning of al evil when the angel lucyfer for his great beauty
and his great understanding he would have been above all other angels and would
compare to god that so good and fair had made him. and by cause he took such
pride in him he fyl fro heaven in to hell and became a devil. And all his
company with him / All proud men resemble this lucyfer / which will be above
the other / and be more preysed. more allowed and more enhaunced than the
other^ which been better and of more valewe than they be / This sin of pride
is over perylous. for it blyndeth man and woman / so that they know not ne see
not the peril wherein they be by sin / This is the right strong wyn of the
devil. and the most especyal of which he enyureth or makes drunk the great
lords and ladyes^ the bourgeyses. the rich / the noble and valyaunte
persons. and generally al manner of people. But in especyal the great lords
and ladies in such manner that they know not them self / ne see not their
defaultes / ne their folyes. ne their sins. This is the most perylous
maladye and sickness of all the other / Certeynly he is in great peril to whom
all tryacle torneth to venym. like as doctrine and chastysyng does to the
proud. For the more men chastyse and blame them of their defaultes. so much
more ben they angry and defend them. Pride is the first daughter of the devil.
and she that has most grettest part in his heritage / Pride warreth against
god and his goodness and al graces / and ageyn all the good werkys. that been in
the man. for pride makes of alms sin / and of virtue vice. and thus is
pride a thief to god / and with the goods that one ought get heaven. he makes
him win hell. This sin is the first. For it assaulteth the knights of our
lord. and that last leueth them. For when the knights of god have ouercomen
and vaynquysshed all other vices and sins / Then assault them most
strongly the sin of pride and of vain glory.

The branches of the sin of pride. ben these capo. xiiij
THe sin of pride deuydeth him and departs in so many parties that uneath
they may be nombred. But there ben in this sin vij pryncypal parties / which
been as seven branches that issue and grow of an evil rote. of which the
first branch of pride is dysloyalte or untruth. The second despyte / The
third is surquydrye which so^me call presumpcion. The fourth folehaste.
which is called ambycion / The fyfthe vain glory / The vj ypocrysye. The vij
evil and foul shame of well doing. To these vij parties and branches
apperteyne all the sins that grow of pride. But eueryche of these vij
branches have many small bows.

The first branch is dysloyalte or untruth capo. xv
THe first brau^che of pride is dysloyalte. which deuydeth him in to three
branches / The first is evil. The second is werse. The third is werste. That
one is vylaynnous / That other is wode / The third is renyeng. Vylaynnous
generally is in all sins. for no sin is without vylonye / But the
vylonye of which we speak here specially that grows of pride is a party of
dysloyalte. which is called of clerks Ingratytude that is unkindness. That is
to say forgetyng of god and of his yeftes / that men thank not our lord ne
give him laud and praysyng thereof. But he forgeteth and renders evil for good
and vylonye for curtesye / This vylonye does every creature to god / when he
forgeteth his goodness. grace and yeftes / and yeldeth not to him therefore
praysynges and thanks like as he ought to do. But oftymes fyghteth in evil
custom and usage against the will of god. This is much great vylonye when a
person receives great bounte and goodness / and daygneth not ones to say
gramercy. yet is the vylanye gretter when one sees. and when he forgeteth. But
that slouthe is over great when a person receives all way the bountees and
renders always evil for good / who then bethought him well and took head often
of the bountees and goods that god has given and done to him and does
contynuelly fro day to day. for he has no goods. but god has given them to
him / Ne goods of nature. as beauty / health. strength of body / clear
understanding and natural wit as of the party of the soul. Ne goods of
fortune. like as rychesses. honors. and hawtesses. Ne goods of grace. like
as ben virtues / grace. and good works / well ought such a person to preyse
and thank god / and honor doubt and love him with al his goods / for one
bounte requires and asks another.

Of the second bough of the first branch capo. xvj
THe second bough of dysloyaulte that grows of pride is woodnes. That man is
holden for wood that is out of his wit. in whom reason is goon and
departed. Then is he a right great fool and well may be said out of his wit
and wood that in good ernest wastes destroys. and sets in evil usage the
goods that been not his. but ben the goods of his lord of which he must
straytely count and give a rekenyng^ th^^ is to wete the time that he has
lost. and how he has em^loyed his time. and of the temporelle goods how he
has used them. the which he has had in his keeping / and has despended them
in folyes. in oultrages. and in evil vsages tofore the eyes of his lord that is
god / Ne has not pourueyed him to render his acompte. and knows well that he
must rekene and wot not whenne. ne the day. ne the hour. Such folly is
called forsenerye or woodnesse. Of this vice and of this sin been the great
proud men that use right evil the goods that god has lent them.

Of the third bowh of dysloyaulte capitulo xvij
THe third bowhe of dysloyaulte that comes of pride is renyeng he is well
renyed that the lord which he holds of his lord puts in the hand of his
enemy. and does to him homage. This sin do al they that sin mortally or
dedely For in as much as in them is they do homage to the devil / And become
servants and caytyues of the enemy. and render to him all that they holden of
god. both body and soul And al other things that they have they put in the
service of the devil. And how be it that such folk say and call them
christian. they renye god by work / and show that they been not. But in three
manners a man is called renegate or renyed / and falls christian / Or for by cause
that he byleueth not that he ouzt like as does the bougre or the heretyke. and
the apostata that renyeth his feythe. Or by cause that they break the feythe
that they believe / like as done they that been pariured. and be lie their faith
/ Or by cause they believe more than they ought to do / like as done deuynours
/ Sorciers and the charmerers which use and work by tharte of the devil. and
al they that in such evil werkys believe and set their hope sin dedely. For
all these things ben against the feythe / and therefore holy church for bedeth
and deffendeth them. These been the manners of desloyaulte which is the first
branch of pride /

The second branch of pride capitulo xviij
THe second branch of Pride is despyte. which is a much great sin / and
how well that dedely sin be not without despyte of god. Yet alwey after that
we here speak / in this despyte specially may one sin in three manners Or by
cause that a person preyseth not ryghtfully another in his heart like as he
ought to do / Or by cause he bears not reverence ne honor there as he ouzt
to do. Or by cause he obeys not a right them to whom he ought to obey. Now
think right well dylygently in thyn heart how oftymes thou have mesprysed herin
that which thou have in thyn heart. thyn own self and other falsely preysed.
And the bettyr despreysed and despyted and the werse preysed. and think hou
often thou have despised in thyn heart them / that been of more valewe tha^ thou
art / And how thou have despised them for so^me forayne grace that god has
given to the / Or for noblesse. or for beauty / or for prowess. or for
strength of body. or for lyghtnes / Or for what someuer other good that it be
/ by which thou have* preysed more thy self than thou ought to do / and the
other thou have less preysed than thou ought. After think hou many times
thou have borne little honor and reverence to them that thou ought to do.
First to god and to his sweet mother and to all the angels and saints of
heaven. For there is none but thou have trespaced to by despyte or by
irreuerence In that thou have often times evil kept the festys and holy days.
After think hou many times thou have served evil our lord Ihesu christ. Or in
that / that thou have not gladly herd his service. ne said his hours ne herd
his sermons. And when thou wenest to here the mess in the church or the
sermons. thou Ianglest and bourdest tofore god / and let other to do well.
after think how thou have many times done little honor to the body of Ihesu
christ when thou see him. or when thou receyuest him. In this that thou art
not worthily apparaylled ne made ready by confession and by repentance. Or by
adventure that werse is thou have received him in dedely sin thy self wytyng.
The which thing is as great despyte unto god as to crucyfye him. After think
how unto thy sweet fellow / and to thy good kep^r thyn angel which is always
with the / and always keeps the / how many vylanyes thou have done to him / in
so much as thou have commysed sin tofore him. after think how oftymes thou
have be inobedyent to thy fader and to thy mother and to them to whom thou
ought obey and bear honor. If thou wylt in this manner record thy life
thou shalt see that thou have ofter sinned in this manner of pride which is
called despyte / than thou can recounte or tell /

Of the iij branch of pride. which is arrogance capo. xix
THe third branch of pride is arrogance which is called surquydrye or
presumpcyon. that is to wete when a man weneth more of him self than he ought
/ That is to say that he weneth to be of more valor than he is worth. or to
know more. or to mow more than other. This sin is the fortress of the
devil. For he keeps and nouryssheth all the great sins. This sin shows
him in many manners by work and by word. But namely he shows him in vj
manners. That is to wit in syngularyte / For the proud surquidrous that weneth
to be more of valewe and of power. and to know more than the other. daygneth
not to do as the other do which ben of more valewe than he is. Also he will be
synguler in his werkys. This is the first sin for which surquydrye shows
him in work or by deed. The second folly is enterprise of great dyspences of
his owen or of other for to be preysed and renomed. And that he be holden the
more large and the more curtoys / The third evil that grows of surquydrye is
folysshe empryse of leude stryffe. For thus says Salamon. emonge the proud
men been always stryues and plees. The iiij bough of this branch by which
the proud man shows the pride of his heart is auauntyng / which is a much
foul sin to god and to the world. he that auanteth him is like unto the
cuckoo that can sing no thing but of him self / this sin is foul in him.
that by his own mouth auaunteth him / of his wit or of his parage. or of
his werkys or of his prowessys. But this sin doubleth in them that follow and
flatre these vauntours and losengers / and suffer them for to preyse them and
for to say of them that they durst not say and for to lie / and for to cry
their oublyes The fyfthe tacke of this branch is derisyon. For that is the
custom of the proud surquydrous / for it suffyseth not enough to despise the
other in his heart / that has not the grace that he weneth to have / but he
makes his mockeryes. and derysyons And yet that werse is he scorneth and
mocketh the good wise men / and them that he sees be good and honest. which
is a much great sin and perylous. For by their evil tongues they let much
people to do well. The vj boughe of this branch is rebellyon / That is when a
man is rebelle to all them that would him good. For if one repreue the proud
surquydrous he deffendeth him. if one chastyse him anon he is angry. if one
counceyl him he byleueth it not but his own wit. This is a peryllous maladye
that may not suffer that he be touched. and to whom every medycyne torneth to
venym / Hit is an evil thing to murmr. but much werse is rebellyon.
Rebellyon is a vice of the heart which is hard and froward and diverse. that
will always that his will be done and his sentence holden / and will that all
other bow and enclyne to him / and he shall not bow ne humble him self to no
person This is the hard heart of the word of salamon which may not faylle
to come to an evil end. and like as murmr is against god and ayenste man.
right so is such an heart that is rebelle against god and^ against the men /
This sin and this vice which is called rebellyon departs and deuydeth him
in to four branches. Such an heart is repugnante and rebelle to believe
counceyl and to suffer chastysyng / and to receive doctrine if any of their
friends would counceyl and show their prouffyte or their defaultes. he deygneth
not to take heed thereto ne to here it / But by cause that they have spoken he
will the more gladly do all the contrary. And on the other party they be much
rebelle to the counceylles of our lord / as to the counceyl of the holy
gospellys of the other holy scryptures. and of sermons / To which they be
bounden to do and to accomplysshe the will of god for to have glory
perdurable / And the devil leyeth tofore them either Impotence. or yongthe or
age. or other evil reasons / so that at the last they may no thing do. After
wha^ men repreue and chastyse them / they defend them as a boor / so that they
will not know their folyes. and so much more as they excuse them. so much
more is their sin. Also it is wha^ god smyteth chastyseth or corrects hem
to the end they should know their sins and their defaultes. and that to the
end they repent and amend them. They con him no thank but despise him
saying. O what have I trespaced. what will god do with me. and thus they
murmr against god. Thus done and say the fools / For that which should be
tryacle and purgacyon of the soul / it torneth to hem venym. and the medecyne
torneth to the death / After they be of so diverse wits that they know no
good doctrine / But always defend their sentence what someuer it be / and in
that wise they fall often in error and in false oppynyons / in heresies and in
myscreaunce / Blasphemye is also as says saint Austyn when one byleueth that
which he ought not to believe. But especyally we call blasphemye when one
myssayeth of god or of his saints / or of his creatures or of his sacraments
that be made in holy church. this sin blasphemye is done in many manners as
in the saying in his mind or thought. as done the heretykes / or when it is
said by couetyse of wynnyng. As done the enchauntours or the sorceriers. Or
when it is said by dyspyte as done these great swerers. that sweren so
vylaynously by god. by his blessed mother and by all his saints. which is a
much horrible thing to here and to herkene. Such folk ben like an hounde
enraged and wood that byte and know nothing their master ne lord. This sin
is so great that god punyssheth it sometime openly like as we have said
tofore. when we speak of the evil and wicked people / Of this sin says god
in the gospel. that it shall never be perdoned ne foryeuen in this world ne in
that other. That is to say uneath he shall be forgyuen. by cause that uneath
he repe^teth him. or it may be perauenture that he shall never repent him

Of the iiij branch which is ambicion capitulo xx
THe fourth branch of pride is ambycyon / That is an evil desire to amounte
and rise high. This sin is the pan of hell in which the devil fryeth his
frytours. this branch stratcheth him in many manners on the right side and on
the lift side. For they that desire to wax hye and rich will playse sum.
and thereof grown many sins. like as it were on the right side / That is to
wete losangerye. flaterye seduction. adulacion. folyly geuyng. and folyly
despendyng. by cause they should been holden large and curtoys / unto other they
will noye and grieve / and thereof comen and sourde the sins on the lift side /
As for to myssaye of him whom he will gryeue for tenhaunce him self. and give
to that other blame. And that wers is. that he desires the death of him. that
holds that thing for which he entendeth and desires. and of this branch
grown stryues / Trayson / evil counceyl. and conspyracions.

The fyfthe branch is vayn glory capitulo xxj
THe fyfthe branch of pride is vaynglorye. This is folysshe playsyr of vayn
praysyng. That is when any feleth in his heart a reioysyng of that / that is or
weneth to be preysed of so^me thing that is in him or weneth to have / And
would be preysed of that. of which he ought to preyse god / And by that vayn
glory takes aweye fro god that which is his. For of al manner goods what
someuer they be. he ought to have the honor and the glory And to us the
prouffyte. Vaynglorye is the great wind that beteth down the great toures and
the great steples. The great castellys and the great forteresses / and dryueth
down to therthe the great forestys / and makes the great montaygnes to quake
and shake. These been the hye men and the most valyauntes / the great princes
and the great lords. This is the penny of the devil by which he byeth all the
fair wares in the fair of this world. These been the good werkes^ and by
cause that there ben iij manner of goods that the man has of god. and that the
devil will bye them with his penny. Therefore this branch departs him in three
bows out of which sourde so many sins that no clerk may nombre them.
These iij manner of goods that the man has of god been the goods of nature.
the goods of fortune and the goods of grace. The goods of nature ben the
goods that a person has by nature. as toward the body / or toward the soul
/ The goods of the party of the body ben. health beaulte strength prowess
good facond / good wys and lyghtnes of body. The goods of the party of the
soul ben clear understanding. clear wit to understand and reteyne. Subtyl
engyne for to find good memory and mind. and the virtues naturel by which a
man is more naturally curtoys than another or more large or more ^ebonayr. or
more attempred. or more gracyous. or to be well ordeyned^ Of all these yeftes
ought every man to praise and thank god / serve and honor him / For fro god
comen al these goods that we may have but the proud man sells them to the
devil for the false money of vayn glory / And fyghteth often ageyn god with
all the goods that he has lent to him. which ben here above declared / How
many persons have accustomed to sin often by vayn glory in diverse manners.
every man may Judge in him self. In the goods of fortune ben highness /
honors rychesses / delyces and prosperytees. which ben called in many manners.
For when dame fortune has turned her whele And has raised a man / and has
set him in the most highest degree of her whele as a wynd mylle does. and
unto the most highest mount and come all the xij wyndes and blow meruayllously
with the wind of vaynglorye. For when he is so hye raised in prosperyte / he
thinks in his heart on his great dygnyte / After in his prosperyte. after in
his richesse / After on the great company that follows him. after on the
fair meyne that serves him. After in his fair manoyrs. After on his fair
horse. after on the plente of his fair robes after on thapparayl of his
lodgyng in vessel and in beddys / and in other manner of harneys that is fair
and noble. after on the great presents and on the great festys that been made
to him oueralle where he goth. after on his great renomee and his great loos
and praysyng which flees al about / wrerin he ioyeth and glorefyeth the
very caytyf in his heart that he wot not where he is. These ben the xij
wyndes of vaynglorye. That is to say manners of temptacions of vaynglorye /
which they have that been in this hye estate / or in the world or in relygyon /
or clerk or lay man / The goods of grace ben virtues and good works /
Against these goods blows sometime the wind of vaynglorye and often time
throws down the most gretest trees and most hye / These ben the most wise
men. and it is to wete that in good virtues and good werkys the devil tempts
by the sin of vaynglorye in iij manners. That one is in the heart within forth
when a person enjoys him of the good that he has done pryuyly. as of
prayers and orysons or of pryue good works / and weneth that he be bettyr with
god than he is. That other is when he suffers a folisshe gladness come in to
his heart of that he hereth or sees his good fame or renomee. and that he is
reputed and holden for a good and noble wise man / The third is when he
desires and secheth and purchaceth preysyng loos and good fame. and in that
entencion he does his good deeds and werkys no thing for god proprely but for
the world

The vj branch of pride is ypocrysye capitulo xxij
THe vj brau^che of the sin of pride is ypocrysye. this is a sin that
shows good deeds wythoutforth which ben not withinforth. then they ben
ypocrites which countrefayte the wise man withoutfort.) / and they be nothing
so wythinforth. For they do more in the entencyon to have the name of a good
man than the truth and the holiness. And this is departed in to three parties
/ For there is one ypocrysye folysshe. one foul. and one subtyl. They be foul
ypocrytes that done the ordures and fylthes of sin secretelye in hyd places.
and countrefete the good men tofore the people. Our lord calls them in the
gospel sepulcres painted and gylte They ben folysshe ypocrytes that keep them
clean enough as toward their body. and do much great penance and good works
pryncypally for the praysyng of the world. by cause they would be reputed and
holden for good and holy / Such people ben well folysshe. For of good metal they
make false money. They ben subtyl ypocrytes that will mou^te in hye estate. and
taken aweye and stele the dygnytees and offices. They do all that a good man
ought to do so subtylly. that no man may know it unto the time that it be
achyeued and gotten. and al ready mounted and raised in to hye estate and
dygnytees. and then they show their vyees their fayntyses and the ypocresyes
that were in them within their heart. That is to wete pride auaryce and malice
and other evil werkys by which may be clearly known their wickedness and
their ypocresye. And that the tree was never good. and that all the work and
deed of such a person was fayntyse and ypocresye of that he had showed tofore.

The seventh branch of pride is fool dread capo. xxiij
THe seventh branch of pride is fool dread and fool shame that is when one
leueth to do well for the world. to the^de that he be not reputed and holden for
an ypocryte and a papelart. and fereth and doubts more the world than god.
This shame comes of evil playsaunce / when one will playse the wicked and evil.
And therefore is she daughter of pride. And the seventh branch pryncypal
makes a person oftymes to leave to do well. for to playse wyckedly the world.

The ij heed of the beast of hell is envy capitulo xxiiij
THe second heed of the beast of hell is envy. This is the serpente that
enuenymeth all / Envy is mother of the death And by the envy of the devil
came the death to the world. This is the sin that most right makes a man to
resemble unto the devil his fader / For the devil hates nothing more than the
well of another. And loves no thing but the harm of another / And by this
sin the enuyous man may not see the well of another. no more than the oule may
see the clerenesse of the son. This sin is departed in to three branches
pryncypal / For this sin poysenneth first the heart of thenuyous person. and
after the mouth / And after that the werkys. The heart of the enuyous is so
poysonned and ouertorned that it may not see the good of another / but that it
gryeue his heart wythinforth. and Judges evil that which he sees. or that he
hereth. he takes and demeth always the werste. And in all this he does his
owen harm. The heart of an enuyous person has so many venymous thoughts and
falls demynges and Iugementes that they may not be nombred. After this when the
enuyous person does or hereth any evil of any other what someuer he be. is
hit of harm of his body / as evil of his death or of his sickness or of evil
fortune. as of pouerte or evil spyrytuel like as when he hereth that sum
which have been holden for good men been blamed and deffamed of sum vices
and deffaultes. Of these things enjoys the enuyuos person in his heart.
After when thenuyous person hereth and sees the well of another. Then
comes to him a sorrow and an heaviness to his heart that he may not be eased
ne make good chere ne fair semblaunte. Now may thou see that the venomous
heart of thenuyous person synneth generally. In malice in gladness and joy of
the harm of other / and in sorrow of the well of another. Thus synneth the
enuyous by his mouth / For needs must such wine come out of the tappe as is
within the vessel. And by cause that the heart is al full of venym. it byhoueth
that such issue out of the mouth. Then by the mouth of thenuyous person
issue three manners of venymous words / of whom dauyd spekyth in his psaulter /
that the mouth of thenuyous person is full of maledyctyon / For of the good
and well of another he myssayeth. appayreth and lasseth as much as he may. Of
hurtyng / For all the harm and deffaultes of another he secheth and sercheth.
and shows forth to his power / Of Trayson / For all that he sees or hereth
he peruerteth to his power. and tourneth it to evil and Judges it falselye.
After the enuyous person has three manners of venym in work. like as he has
in his mouth and in his heart. For the nature of the enuyous is to quench and
to destroy to his power. all goodnesses. be they lytyl / be they great / or
myddle or perfyght. Then he is of the nature of a basylyke that may suffer no
verdure nygh unto him. neither herb ne busshe ne tree / Then after the
gospel the good or well has in him self three estates / For it is first as in
the herb after in the ere / and after it is full of grayn. Then al thus there
be so^me that have good beginning to come well forth / and to prouffyte well. and
ben like as the herb. Them the enuyous thinks to destroy if he may. the other
ben also like theerys of corn that flower well and prouffyte well to god and to
the world / And them the fend cries to destroy and to shame to his power.
The other been perfyte in great estate. and do much good to god and to the
world. For to beat down their good loos and renomee and for to mynysshe their
good deeds. thenuyous dresseth all his engynes. For as much gretter as the
goodness is / So much more sorrow he has. This sin is so perylous that
uneath may one that uses hit come a right to very repentance. For this
sin is contrary to the holy ghost. which is fontayne of all goodnesses. And
god says in the gospel who that synneth against the holy ghoost he shall never
have for yeuenes ne mercy in this world ne in that other. For he synneth of his
propre malice. And it ought holy to be understand that there is no sin how
great it be. but that god foryeueth and pardons in this world if a person
repents with good heart. But uneath it happeth that any repent of this
sin. For such one warreth with his power the grace of the holy ghoost / in
that. that he warreth the spyrytuel good of another. In like wise as the Jews
warryd against our lord Ihesu Christ for the good that he did. And ye ought to
know that there be vj sins specially against the holy ghoost. That is to wete
presumpcyon which enlarges ouermoche to sin. and preyseth little the Justice
of our lord. and ouermoche to trust in his mercy. And therefore much people
sin in hope. The second sin ageynste the holy ghoost is in despayr / which
bynymmeth and takes aweye from god his mercy. Like as presumpcyon takes from
him his Justice. The third is obstynacyon. This is hardenesse of heart / when
one is so enharded in his sin and in his malice. that he may not be humbled
ne meked ne bow and will not repent him ne amend / The fourth sin against
the holy ghoost is despyte of penance. That is when a man purposes in his
heart. that he shall never repent him of his sin. The fyfthe is to war
against the grace of the holy ghoost in another. The vj is to war against
truth in ernest wetyngly. and in especyal the truth of the christian faith.
Al these sins ben against the bounte and goodness of the holy ghoost / and
they been so great that uneath they come to very repentance. And therefore
been they uneath forgyuen and pardoned.

The iij heed of the beast of hell is Ire or wrath capo. xxv
THe third heed of the beast is Ire. But thou owe to know that there is an
ire which is virtuous / that the good men have ayenste this sin. which
geten the virtues against the vices / There is another Ire which is a much
great vice / that is felonnye of heart. out of whom yssuen many branches.
And in especyal four wars that the felons have /

Of the first war of the sin of ire / which is such xxvj
THe first war of the sin of ire / is to him self. for when Ire surmounteth
the man / she tormenteth the soul and the body so much that the man may not
sleep ne rest / Sometime ire takes away the etyng and drynkyng. and makes
one to fall in a fever or in so great heaviness or malancolye. or despayr that
he takes the death. This is a fire that wastes all the goods of the hows The
second war that the felon has that is to god. For ire and felonnye surmounte
and fire sometime all the people. by aduersyte temporalle. or by maladye and
sickness. or by death of frendys. Or by any manner of meschaunce that his
will is not done. that he grutcheth and murmureth against god our lord and
says maugre / and in despyte of god and of all his Saints. And swereth and
blasphemeth against god and his blessed saints / The third war of Ire that
the felon has / that is unto them that been under him. that is to his wife and
to his meyne and breketh pottes and cups like as he were out of his wit /
and so is he. The fourth war is wythoutforth to his neighbors and bydwellers
about him / and of this branch grow vj bows / For when Ire ryseth between
two men. there is then stryf. dyscorde. words. vylonyes. wrongs / And after
rancour which dwellyth in the heart / after comes hate / medlyng and
bataylle. after desire for tauenge him / after otherwhyle homycyde and
manslaughter. After comes often mortalle war emonge the friends. out of
which yssuen often euyls in diverse manners / and many that may not be amended
For when there is war between two hye great men hit happeth often that many
men be slain / which never had blamed ne ^^espaced. monasteryes and chyrches
broken up. and sometime burnt. towns destroyed and burnt. Abbayes and great
pryoryes destroyed / men wymmen and children dysheryted and put to pouerte^
robberyes. wymmen married. and maidens defouled and corupte / and over many
other euylles that been do for that cause. And all this be they bounden to
render and to make amendys. al they by whom so many myschyefs and harms have
be done. And al they that have been in their help in such wicked and evil
works / and therefore be they in great peril of dampnacyon. and far fro
their sauacyon / For they may not amend ne render the da^mages that they have
done. and they behoue to restore or to be forlore /

Of the sin of slouthe which is said accydye capo. xxvij
THe fourth heed of the beast of hell is slouthe. which is called of clerkys
accidye / This sin is grievous to do well / This sin is an over evil rote /
and casts out many evil branches / For this sin causes a man to come
unto evil amendment / and more evil beginning. and over evil endyng / The
slow person has evil beginning by vj manners of sins. The first vice is
fayntnes. that is when a man loves lytyl and fayntly our lord. whom he owes
to love ardantly / and this happeth when he is flawe. latchous and slowful to
do well. The second vice of slouthe is tendrenesse. that is the bed wherein the
devil rests him and says to the man or woman. Thou have be ever tenderly
nourysshed thou art of over feeble complexyon / Thou may not do great
penaunces / thou art over tender. thou sholdest anon be d^ed. and for this
the caytyf suffers to be cherysshed / and to do all the eases and the delight
of his body. The third vice is idleness. This is a sin of whom comes many
euyls as the holy scripture says. For when the devil fyndeth a man idle he
puts him anon in his werkys. that is. he makes him first to think evil.
to desire vylonyes rybaudryes. lecheryes to lose his time. and to leave to do
much good that he might do by which he might get heaven. The fourth vice of
sloth is heaviness. when a man is so heavy. that he secheth nothing ne loves
so much as to lie down rest and sleep. Sometime how well he be slowe^ they been
wakre and quycke enough to the needs of the world / But they be al slepy to the
needs and werkys of god. and for to do the werkys that should be to their
sauacyon. and these manner men had lever lose three masses than a sweet or a good
sleep. The fyfthe vice of slouthe is shrewdnes or cursydnes that is when a man
lies in sin and feleth the temptacyons of the devil and of his flesh that
assaylle him. And for very shrewdness he will not lift up his head ne his
heart to god by contrycyon / Ne cry to god deuoutelye by confession / Ne
stratche up his hands to god by satysfaccio^ To such slouthe resembles the
wicked man that had lyeuer rote in foul stynkyng prison / than to take un him
the labor to goo up the steyer. or the degrees for tescape and goo his way

Of pusyllanymyte. of delay. and werynes capitulo xxviij
THe vj vice of slouthe is pucyllanymyte / In this vice be they that have fere
and dread of naught / and dare not begin to do well / for they have dread that
god shall fail them This is the fere and dread that so^me people have of their
dreme They resemble him that dare not enter in to the path or way for fere of
the snaylle that shows his horns / And resemble also the child that dare
not goo in the way for gaglyng and syt^yng of the ghees / These ben the vj
vices that take aweye fro a man good begynyng. And for vj other vices the slow
person may not have good amendment. These been the vj tatches or condycyons
of evil servants that so do that no good wise man ought to receive in to his
service. that is to wete when he is delayeng. neclygent / forgeteful. slow
latchous and fayllyng to do well /

Of delayeng to do well capitulo xxix
THe first vice is delayeng. For when god puts in the heart of a man good
will to do well. Then comes the devil that says to hym^ Thou shall recoure
well enough. thou art young and strong thou shall live long enough By this
manner the devil destroubleth a man to do well.

Of the vice and sin of neclygence capo. xxx
AFter delayeng comes neclygence / For who so makes delayeng it is no wondre
though he do a thing neclygently / This is a vice of which all the world is
entatched if it be well taken head of. For there be not many that be dylygent to
do that they ought to do anenste god and their neighbor /

Of the vice of forgetyng capo. xxxj
AFter neclyge^ce comes oublye^ce or forgetyng. for who is not retchyng and
neclygente he forgeteth often. by these two sins of neclygence and forgetyng
happeth often that so^me person can not well confess ne shryue him self. For
when a man is not remembryng ne not retchyng and neclygente to confess him. He
forgeteth his sins whereof is great peril For no person may have pardon
without very confession And he may not have very confession that has not
repentance in his hole heart of all his sins. knowleche of his mowthe. and
obedyence in works / This amends and this satysfaction ought every man to
do. Ne there is none how good and wise he be. if he sees and consydereth well
his defaultes but that he fyndeth enough to say al way in his confession. But
neclygence and forgetyng blyndeth the people / that they see no thing in the
book of their confession and of their conscience. / After comes fere or dread
which comes of deffaulte of heart. and of evil custom that byndeth so a man
that uneath he puts him self to do well. and sometime this comes by defaulte
of dyscressyon / and of folysshe fervor by which a man takes on him and
tormenteth so his body by fasting. by wakyng. by penaunces^ and by other
works that he falls in to langour and in such maladye and sickness. that
he may not labor in the seruyse of god / and of this he falls in such
fere. that he has no savor of devotion to do well.

Of the vice of latchydnes capitulo xxxij
AFter comes latchednes that makes a man latchous. and appayreth fro day to
day so much that he is al recreant and defayllyng. and this is the vj vice of
which the evil servant is entatched when he faylleth tofore that he come to
the end of his term / and it is said comynlye. who that serves / and serves
not to the end loses his reward.

Of the evil points of accidye and of slouthe capo. xxxiij
YEt there ben vj evil points in the sin of accydye and of slouthe^ that
brings a man to his end. The first is inobedyence. when a man will not do
that which is charged him in penance / Or if he be commanded sometime to do a
thing that him seems hard. he escuseth him that he may not do it. Or if he
receives or accepts it. be does lytyl or naught. The second point is
Impacyence / For in like wise as he may no thing do by inobedyence. Right so
may he no thing suffer by Impacyence. Right so that no man dare speak to him
of his prouffyte / The third point is murmr for when he is spoken to of his
prouffyte he anon wexyth angry and murmureth and him seems that he is
despised / And then he falls in to heaviness / that all that ever is said
to him. and all that is done to him. and all that he sees al greueth him. and
thus he falls in langour and it annoyeth him to live. so that him self
desires the death After al these sorouful points of slouthe gives the devil
the mortal stroke and puts him in despayr / by which he him self purchaceth
his death and sleeth him self / Or else he plays with him self like as al
despayred. that he abandonneth or gives him self to all wyckednes. And
fereth not ne dredeth not to do any manner sin /

Of the sin of auaryce or couetyse capitulo xxxiiij
THe fyfthe heed of the beast toforesayd is auaryce which otherwise is called
couetyse. which is rote of al euylles like as saint poule says. This is the
maystresse which has so great a soole that al goon thither for to study. like
as says the holy scripture / For all manner of people study in auaryce /
Prelate. Clerk. Lay man and relygyous / Auaryce is a love of dysordynate
hauoyr and richesse / This dysordynau^ce shows him self in iij manners
generally. In getyng arda^tly In retaynyng straynably. and in despendyng
scarcely. These been the three branches pryncypalle that grow out of this
rote. But especyally and proprelye yssuen out of this rote of auaryce many
bows which been much great dedely sin. The first is usure / The second
theft / The third raueyne. The iiij challenge. The fyfthe sacrylege / The vj
Symonye^ The vij malygnytees. The viij marchandyse. The ix in wicked crafts.
The x in evil and wicked plays / and eueryche of these bows departs him in
to many manners.

Of diverse manners and spyces of usure capo. xxxv
THe first bough of usure departs him in to vij twigs / For there is one
manner of usurers lenyng openly which lene their money for other money / And
above the catel they take and leueye their gain. or in money. or in horse. or
in whete or in wyn or in fruit of therthe. which they take in gain without
to rekene the fruytes in payement. And yet that werse is. they will rekene two
times in the year or thryes for to areyse their vsures. and will yet have
bountres or rewards above for every term / and thus be they helped above that
they lene pryncypally / Such people ben usurers couched and vylaynous. But
there ben other manner usurers. lenyng and curtoys which lene their money
without making of any couenaunte / Nevertheless they entende to have
prouffyte and rewards therefore / in money or in catayl. or in gold or in
silver. or in yeftes or in presents. or in robes or in tonnes of wyn or in
fat swyn or in seruyces / Or in labor of horses or of oxen or asses or of
carts or waynes / Or of prebendes for their children. or in other things. and
in all these and such things is usure / when it is lent for occasyon to have
sum prouffyte. This is the first manner of usure. that leneth his good
wyckedly and shrewdly /

The second capo. xxxvj
THe second manner of usure is in them that lent not the money in their own
person / But that which their faders or their moders. their wives or their
husbondes / or their predecessors have gotten by usure they reteyne it. And will
not render ne yield it ageyn. The third manner of usure is in them that deygne
not ne will not lene by their own hand. but they make their servants and
other people to lene for them their money. tho ben the maystre vserers / Of
these sins be not quyte the great and hye lords that keep and sustain the
Jews and lombardes of pyemou^t and other places / which destroy the
contraye. and they take the rewards and great yeftes and sometime the raunsons
or redempcions. which been of the catayl and cheuessaunce of the pour people.
The fourth manner is in them that lene other men's money. or that borow it
with little cost. Such people been dyscyples of usurers which learn this
foul and wicked stynkyng craft. The fyfthe manner is in marchaundyse. when
one sellyth any manner thing what somener it be for more than it is worth for
the abydyng of the term than he would do for ready money. and that more is the
untrue sellar and wicked when he sees the people more at great myschyef.
then he shall selle his ware the more derrer. ye twyes or thryes more than it
is worth. Such manner people do over much harm. For / for their long term
they destroy and appourysshe the knights and hye men that follow
thassemblees. the wars and the tournoyes that they deliver to them their
lands and their herytages in gayge and wedde. and so lyeng in gayge they deye
and never quytte ne paid. The other sin in byeng the things as corn wyn or
other things less the half than it is worth for the money that they pay
tofore hand. and after they selle the same three or four times more dear than
the thing was sold and delyuerd to them fore / Other merchants bye the
things wha^ they be at no prys and good chepe. as whete in harvest. wyn in
the vynyerde or other marchandyse / for to selle ageyn in the time when they
shall be more dear / The other by^ their whete in the stalkys and eerys and the
wyn in the flouryng when they show fair forth / by such couenaunte that they
have their achate sauf and their mesure. The vj manner is of them that deliver
their money to merchants in such wise that they shall be fellows and part in
the gayne^ and no thing in the loss. Or that deliver their beestes to halnes.
so that they be as iron. That is to say that if they deye or perysshe he that
takes them to halnes shall set and put other beestys in their place. of so
much and as great of valor and prys as were they that been deed or perysshed
at his propre charge and dyspence. The vij manner is of them that put and set
their next neighbors in their work and labor. by cause that they have lent
them gold or silver or corne^ or has done to them any curtosye or frendshyp.
and when they see them pour and nedy. then make they with them bargayns for
their avail. and for the money that they deliver to the pour man / or for a
lytyl corn that they selle to him well dear and for more than it is worth in
the market. He will have of him syx penyworth work or labor for two pens /
These been the bows that grow out of the evil branch of vsure^

Of theft capitulo xxxvij
THe second branch of auaryce is theft / this is to take or reteyne other
mennys thing wrongfully without knowleche or ayenste the will of him that
owes it. And this sin may be done in four manners after four manners of
theuys. For there ben sum theuys openly So^me covertly Sum pryuelye and
so^me telawly / The common and open tbeuys ben they that stele in such wise
that there is Justice done on them when they been taken. and of them ben diverse
manners. as well on the sea as on land. The convert theuys ben they that take
aweye secretelye and conuertly great things or small things / by their
barate. trayson or by subtyl wit and engyne. The preuy thieves ben they that
take aweye no thing from strangers. but of their neighbors and known / and
of them been both great and small as the untrue receyuour / Shereuys.
prouostes / Eschetours. Bayllyes / sergeantes. and other such as taken the
amends. and restrain the rentes to their lords. and acounte much in costs
and despences and less in receytes and rentes / Thus done the great officers
which been in the howses of the great lords and rich men that maken great
costs and dyspences. and give largely the goods of their lords and masters
without their knowing and against their will / In this sin synneth the wife
which causes by her sin that the child which she knows well that she
has had of another man than of her husbond enheryteth and has therytage where
he has no right thereto. In this sin also synneth the wife that takes aweye
the goods of her husbond. for to dyspende and put it to evil usage / That
other thief is the little thief that takes aweye out of the hows the breed or
wine and other things. or fro their neighbors their capons or hennys / or the
fruit out of their gardyns or other things. Such been they that reteyne the
things that they have founden and known well to whom they belong. and
therefore they should not reteyne them / But they ought to do by the counceyl of
holy church. or by the counceyl of their confessor. The theuys that been
fellows ben they that parten their theft. or by composycyon or by yefte / or
by achate or by other manner. Also they that consent to the theft. or
counceylleth or that commands it to be doou / Also they that cou^ceylle the
theuys or deffende them or sustain them in their malice / or receive them in
to their house or in to their land. or that gadre together the theft. Also the
wicked Iustyses that suffer them for yeftes / or by prayers or by ouy other
evil reasons and will not ne dare not do Justice /

The third branch of the sin of Auaryce is Rauyne as follows capo. xxxviij
THe third branch of auaryce is Rauyne. which has many bows / The first is
an evil executour of testamentes. Such people rob them that been deed. which
is over great an untruth The second is in wicked and evil lords. be they
knights or other lords or bourgeyses which ete and flee the pour people by
tayllees / by aids Imposycyons amends or by other manner / which seche and
purchase that which may grieve their subgettis. and accomplysshe their evil
will / and they ought to keep and deffende them In this sin ben the great
princes the great barons / which by their might taken away fro the pour and
other that they may subdue their castellys their rentes and their baronnyes /
And also other rich men that take away by strength fro their propre
neighbors lands vygnes and other things / And taken on all sides so that
no thing may escape them The third been robbeurs of evil hostryes or Innes
which rob the pylgrymmes and the merchants. and other that pass and walk
by the cuntreye.

The fourth is in them that will not pay that they owe And that reteyne
wronfully and without cause the hyre or wages of their servants or of them
that do their work / The fyfthe is in these great prelates that pylle their
subgettys. and that raunson them by over great procuracions^ or by other
exactions and extorcions that they do in many manners. These ben the wulues that
destroy the sheep that they should keep The syxte theft is in bayllyes
Shereues bedellys sergeantes and other offycyers. which do the great rauyne
and extorcions upon the pour people and bye the great heritages. and so much
there is of other manner of rauyne which should be ouerlonge to reherce here.
But the most great part is contained in the things above said.

Of the sin of challenge capitulo xxxix
THe fourth of Auaryce is challenge. that is to run on another wrongfully / To
this sin apperteyneth al barate trycherye and falsnesse that happeth in
plees. In the clergy has dame Auaryce many scoliers. and in especyal seven
manner of people that estudye therein.

Of seven manners of the sin of challenge capo. xl
THe first ben the false psedours that make the false partycyons and demaundes.
and seche the false Iuges. and the false wytnessys. and the false aduocats. and
false letters for to trouble other / and trauaylle the people wrongfully in the
spyrytuel court / or in the temporal court / The second been they that put
aweye and set at naught that is right. And sechen barats and delays for to
take aweye from other their chyuaunce. The third been the false and untrue
witnesses / For they maken the false and unright maryages / They taken away the
herytages. They do so much harm and domages that none may amend it / and al
this they do for their great couetyse. The fourth been the false advocates
that sustain the evil causes al wytyng. and empesshe and let the good
people. for the hyre and the yeftes that they take on both sides / And they
make often the good causes to be lost. and the quarelles of good men. and maken
of right wrong / and of wrong right by their wickedness and couetyse like as
they that been masters of the barate and of the trycherye / The fyfthe ben the
false notaryes that make false letters and Instruments. and falsen the seals
/ and make false lybellys and many other vntrouthes. The vj theft done the
false Iuges that entende and ben more favorable against reason more to one
party than to another. for yeftes for promesses for propryertees or for love
or for hate or for dread or for favor / if they delay the causes and the
quarylles wrongfully and make men to do great costs and dyspences. and taken
great yeftes and sometime of both parties. and sellen their Justice / or they
leave to do Justice / and done to pour people so great domages and hurtes that
they may not ne can not amend ne repair The vij ben the evil accessours
which given evil counceylle to Iuges. and causen that the causes and quarellys
be lost by the offices and seruyces that they have. Al these persons tofore
said ben bounden and holden to render and yield again all that which they have
thus had and taken evil of other / and also all the costs and domages that the
other have had and suffered for them.

The v branch of avarice is sacrilege capo. xlj
THe fyfthe branch of Avarice is sacrilege / when one breketh or hurts or
trayteth vylaynousy the holy and blessed things or the persons of holy
church. or else the holy places. which been appropred or longyng to the
service of god / and this does the sin of couetyse in many manners First when
one treats vylaynsly the body of our lord / like as done the heretykes. the
Sorciers or wytches. and the wicked priests for wynnyng / in like wise say I
of the other sacraments. Also when one breketh takes aweye or treats
vylaynsly the sayntuaries. the crosses / the chalyces. the cresme / the
corporalls. the hallowed vestymentes and other things mysteryes of the church
/ Also when one brenneth and destroys chyrches / or monasteryes / or holy
places. or chyrchyerdes* or howses of relygyon / or when any draw out them
that been fled for refuge or socour in to monasteryes or chyrchyerdes for
their surete or warrante Also when one makes medlees or bataylle in the
church so that blood be shed. or when the sin of lecherye is done therein /
Also when hand is laid in wrath and evil on priest or clerk or on any man or
woman of relygyon. Also when one steleth or bears aweye by any reason out of
holy place any holy thing blessed and hallowed / or unhallowed what someuer it
be. Of this sin be not quyte they that the goods of holy church the
patrymonye of Ihesu Christ despenden in evil usage. Ne they that reteyne it by
auaryce. when they ought to give it to the pour people in holy church or put
it in good usage / Ne they also that take aweye or reteyne with wrong or with
force. the things which are longyng to the pour in holy church. Or who that
pays them evil. like as the rentes. the offerynges the dysmes / and the other
ryghtes and dutees of holy church. Of this same sin be not quyte they that
break the sunday and other festes commanded. For the holy days have their
fraunchyse like as have the holy places. These been the bows that grow out
of the branch of sacrylege.

Of the sin of Symonye capitulo xlij
THe vj branch of auaryce is Symonye. Symonye has taken the name of an
enchauntour which was named Simon. which would have bought of saint Peter
thappostle the grace for to do miracles. And therefore he offryd to him great
hauoyr and good / And therefore been they called Symonyaks all they that will
selle or bye any things spyrytuel which is emonge all dedely sins one of
the grettest and this branch has many bows.

Of the first boughe of Symonye capo. xliij
THe first is in them that selle or bye the things hallowed or blessed or the
body of our lord or other sacraments of holy church. The second is in them
that selle the word of god. and preche pryncypally for money. The third is the
sin of them. which by yeftes or by promesses. or by prayers of friends do so
much that so^me be promoted to dygnyte of holy church. like as ben bishops
Abbottes Deene archedeken or other which ben made by electyon. The fourth is
the sin of them that for yeftes or for promesses for prayers or by force of
arms / or for seruyses dyshonest give the prebendes the cures or other
benefyces of holy church. The v is the sin of them which by couenaunte made
enter in to relygyon / and in them that in such manner receive them. There ben
many other diverse sins in symonye. but it apparteyneth more to clerkys than
to lay men. and this book was more made for the lay men than for the clerkys
which know and have the books. yet nevertheless it is necessary and need to
lay men that they keep them fro this sin in iij causes. One is when they will
aid and help their kynnesmen and their friends to rise unto dygnytees of holy
church / The other is when they give the prebendes that been of their yefte.
and the benefyces / The third is when they set and put their children in to
relygyon / in these three points if they give or receive yeftes or prayers not
leefful or evil seruyse. they may sone fall in this sin of Symonye. For like
as says the law wryton / There be three manners of yeftes of Symonye / yeftes
of the hand. like as gold or silver or other Jewel / Yeftes of the mouth as
ben prayers. yeftes of service dyshoneste. I call yeftes dyshonest where the
sin is done pryncypally for things spyrytuel.

Of the sin of malygnyte which comes of auaryce capitulo xliiij
THe seventh branch of auaryce is malygnyte. when a man is so wicked that he
fereth not to do a great sin dedely and horrible. or to do great harm to
other for little conquest of prouffyte for him self. This branch has many
bows. The first is when any person for dread of pouerte or for couetyse of
wynnyng he renyeth and forsakes god or for to deny the christian feythe. and
bycometh heretyke or Jew or sarasyn. To this sin apperteyneth the sin of
them that for money done call the deuyls and make the enchauntementes and
maken to look in the sword or crystal / or in the vngle or nail of the fyngre
/ for to atteyne and find the theft or other things lost. And of them also
that pourchace the charms by sorcerye or by any other wicked craft what
someuer it be when persons been in marriage hate each other and may not dele ne
have company one with that other by marriage / Or persons that be not in
marriage hate each other by sin folyly The second is the sin of cursyng. or
by evil saying by trayson or by detractyon. when a man for wynnyng or for hyre
does thing. for which any person is put unto death. or by sword / or by
venym. or by ouy other manner. The iij sin is of them that for to win.
brenne howses or towns castellys or chyrches. or destroy the vygnes or
corns. and do other diverse great dommages / The iiij is the sin of them
that often pourchace the plees debates and the wars in cytees or in castellys
in chapytres. or emonge other hye and great men by cause that they wene to get
and win more in war than in the pees / The fyfthe is the sin of bayllyes
and such officers that accuse and challenge the pour people and make them to
be raunsoned and tormented for a little gain that they have thereof. To this
sin apperteyneth the sin of the false Iuges. of falls men of law and
advocates. and of falls questys and witnesses of which we have spoken tofore /
and in many other manners is the sin of malygnyte. But it were over long for
to write it here. And better may each man read and consider his sins and many
other* in his conscience than in the skin of a sheep or in paper /

Of marchaundyse capo. xlv
THe viij branche of anaryce is marchandyse wherein men sin in many manners for
temporal goods / and specially in seven manners. The first manner is to selle
as dear as he may The second is to lie swear and forswere the more for to selle
his marchandyse. The third is the deceyte and fraud that is done in the
weyghte and in the mesure / and this may be done in three manners / The first is
when a person has diverse weyghtes and diverse mesures. and byeth by a more
gretter weight and longer mesure and sells by a less / The second is when
one has a true weight and a true mesure and wayeth or meteth untruly and
falsely / like as the tauerner which fylleth his mesure with scum and foam. the
iij manner is when they that selle by weyghte. pourchace and do so much by
deceyte and fraud. that thylke thing that is weyed seems to be more of
weyghte than it is. The fourth manner for to sin in marchaundyse is to selle
the derrer for the term. hereof we have spoken tofore / The fyfthe is to selle
otherwise than the mustre is and worse / like as these scryueners and wrytars
done. that at the beginning show and write good letter. and after make werse
and shende al. The vj is in hydyng and concelyng the truth of the thing that
is sold. and so do these brokers and coorsers of horse. The seventh is to make
and pourchace that the ware or thing that is sold seem much better than it
is. like as done the merciers and drapers that chosen and make the places derke
where as they selle their clothe and ware. And in many other manners may men
sin in marchandyse. but it should be ouerlonge to say here /

The nynthe branch of auaryce capo. lxvj
THe ix brau^che of auaryce is in many mesteres or crafts. In this synneth
much people and in many manners like as done these commyn wymmen. which for
little wynnyng abandonne and give them self al to sin. Also these hazardours.
bawdes. kepars of forboden games and many other w^yche for temporel prouffyte
abandonne them to dyshoneste and unthrifty crafts. which may not be done
without sin as well of them that do it as they that sustain hit. The x
branch of auaryce is in evil plays and games. as the dyse quardes tables or
what someuer games that men play at for money or for gain temporelle. Such
manner plays in especyal of dyse and tables been deffended and forboden by the
decrees and law for many perils that comen thereof. The first is couetyse /
the second over great usure as xij for vj. and not at a month or three days /
but many times in one day. The third sin to multeplye lesynges and vain
words. and that werse is great blasphemies of god and of his saints / The
anger and wrath the oftymes has be taken to correct and chastyse the other.
For sometime their vysage has be turned bacward and behind. Sometime so^me have
lost their eyes. Sum their speech. There was a knight that swear by the eyes
of god / and anon the eyes of his head sprange out and fyl upon the
eschequez. There was also an archer by cause he had al lost at play. in
despyte he drew his bow and shot up toward god an hye. and on the morn
when he was set ageyn at his play. the arowe fyl donn upon the eschequyer al
blody of blood and threste out his eyes. The fourth is evil example that they
which play given to other that behold the play. The fyfthe is to lose the
time which ought to be employed in good werkys and many other wyses. One
thing ought not to be forgeten. that is that he that wynneth at such games
may not ne ought not in any manner to reteyne his gain. but he ought to give
it al for gods sake / but if it were in such manner that he played for
another or by deceyte or by force like as does he that makes another to play
with him by force / In this manner he ought to render it to him that has lost
it / In like wise I say of that which is won at tournoys / These been the
branches of auaryce. there ben enough of other but they appertain more to
clerkys than to lay men. and this book is made more for the lay men than for
clerkys that know the scryptures One thing ought ye to know that the
auarycious man has a devil to whom he serves. which is called in the gospel
ma^mona. and that devil makes to his servant syx commandments. The first
is to keep well that he has. the second that in no wise he mynysshe it / The
third is that he encreace it always be it day or night. the fourth that he give
no thing ne do alms for gods sake / ne curtosye to any other. The fyfthe
that he ne lene ne give to the pour and nedy any thing / ne put not in peril
and Ieoparde that which he has in his possessyon. The vj that he refrain him
self and restrain his meyne fro mete and drink for to spare his good /

Of the sin of lecherye which is love dysordynatly xlvij
THe vj heed of the beast of hell is lecherye / which is oulttrageous love and
dysordynate in flesshly delytes. Of this sin the devil deceyueth a man in vj
manners. like as says Saint gregory. First in folysshe and false beholdynges.
After in folysshe and lewd talkyng and words. After in false touchynges.
After in falls kyssynges / after comes the deed. For fro folysshe beholding
comes the commynycacyon and speech and fro speech to touching / and fro
touching to kyssyng / and fro kyssyng to the deed. Thus subtylly brings the
devil that one to that other. First this sin is divided in two manners For
there is lecherye of heart and lecherye of body. Lecherye of heart has four
degrees. For the spyryte of fornycacion which is the fire of lecherye enbraceth
the heart / and makes first to come the thoughts the fygures and the
ymagynaciyon of sin in the heart and in consentynges. after the heart delyteth
him in folysshe thoughts. and yet he delyteth how well that yet he will not do
the dede^ and in this thought he abides and this delight is the second degree.
which may be a dedely sin so great may be the delight. The third degree is
the consentyng of the heart of reason and of will. and these consentynges
concluded been dedely sin in caas that the deed be dedely sin / after the
consentyng comes the desire / and the great brennyng of the flessh that they
have to this sin. and done many sins in the day in seeing the ladies and the
damoysellys rychely and fresshly apparaylled / which often desgyse and array
them proudly for to make the fools and musardes to muse and behold them. And
certes they sin much grievously / for by their couetyse by their pride and by
their cause perysshen many souls / and much people put to death and to sin.
For thus as says the proverb / dame dator is the arblast to the tour^ For she
has not a membre in her body but it is a grynne of the devil. As salamon says
/ whereof must be given acomptes at the day of Judgment of the souls which by
thoccasyn and cause of them be dampened. That is to understand when they be
occasyon and cause other to sin by their entysyng and labor. Lecherye of the
body is departed in to the lecherye of the eyes of the eerys. of the mouth. of
the hands / and of all the five wits of the body. and in especyal of the
vylaynnous deed and werke^ To this sin apperteyneth all the things of the
flesh. that moeuen and desire to do this sin. As done these oultrages and
the excess of mete and drink. of sweet beds and soft / of delycyous robes
and in all manner of excess of body without necessyte

Of diverse estates of the sin of lecherye capo. xlviij
THe sin of lecherye has many estates. and is departed in many branches
after the estate of the persons that done it / And it goes mountyng fro
degree to degree. and fro evil in to werse. The first is of syngle man and
syngle woman that holden no bond of vow. ne of marriage / ne of order ne of
relygyon. ne of other thing. This is the first sin of lecherye / The second
sin is of common wymmen / and this is more foul and more abhomynable. For by
cause such wymmen ben sometime married and have left their husbondes. or
sometime ben of relygyon / and refuse no man ne brother ne cosyn ne kynne ne
other. The third sin is of the man syngle with a wydowe. or the reuerse /
That is a wydower with a syngle woman / The fourth to defoule a vyrgyn. The
fyfthe is with a wedded woman. This is the sin of aduoultrye which is much
grievous / For there is brekyng of feyth that the one ouzt to keep to another.
After there is sacrylege when the sacrament of marriage is broken. and hereof
happeth sometime dysherytaunce and falls marriage / This sin doubleth him
somtyme^ when it is of a wedded man to a woman married to another man. The vj
sin is when a man uses his wife in thing deffended and dysordeyned ageyn
nature and order of marriage / A man may sle him self with his owen sword So a
man may sin dedely with his own wife / For this cause god smote Onam the
neuew of Jacob with an evil deth^ and the devil which was named asmodeus
strangled the seven husbondes of the holy damoysel Sara which after was wife to
young thobye. For all the sacraments of holy church ought to be treated
clenly and holyly / and to hold and keep them in great reverence. The vij
sin of lecherye is to have flesshly company with his godsyb. or goddoughter.
ne with the children of them. for such persons may not assemble without
sin. ne also by marriage. The viij is of a man with his kynneswoma^. and this
sin encreaceth / and dyscreaseth after that the kynne is nyghe or far. The
ix is of a man with the kynne of his wife. or the reuerse. the wife with the
kynne of her husbond. this sin is much peryllous. For when the man has had
company with such a woman / he may not after have his marriage of the cosyns
of his wife. And if he take her the marriage is none after the law / and if he
take a wife after her cosyn. he loses the right that he has to his owen wife.
in so much that he may not ne ouzt not to dwell with her. if she require it
not tofore / The x of a woman to a clerk. This sin aryseth and aualeth much
after thordre and after the dygnytees ordered. The xj is of a man of the world
with a woman of relygyon. or the reuerse. a woman of the world with a man of
relygyon. and this sin encreaceth and dyscreaseth after the state of the
persons that done it / The xij is of the prelates. which ought to be form
and ensaumple of clennesse of chastyte and of holy life to all the world / The
last is most foul and so abhomynable that it ought not be named / This sin
is against nature / which the devil enseygneth and entyseth a man in many
manners which ben not to be named for the matere. which is ouermoche
abhomynable. But in confession it ought to be said / if it be he or she to
whom it has happed. For of so much as the sin is more great and more
horrible. of so much auaylleth the more the confession. For the great shame
that a man has to say his sin. is a great part of the penance. after the
holy scripture This sin dyspleseth so much to god. that he did do rain fire
brennyng and stynkyng sulphre upon the cytees of sodom and gomor / and did do
synke for this sin five cytees down to hell / The devil him self that
purchaced this sin. has shame and abhorred it when it is done.

Of the sin of glotonye capitulo xlix
THe seventh heed of the beast of hell is the sin of the mouth. otherwise
called glotonnye which has two offices. of which that one apperteyneth to the
taste. as to ete and drink. and that other is in spekyng / Therefore this vice
and this sin is divided in two parties pryncypally / that is to wit in the
sin of glotonye / which is in etyng and drynkyng. and in the sin of the
shrewde tongue. that is in foul and folysshe spekyng. And first we shall say
of the sin of glotonye / which is a vice that much pleases the devil. and
dyspleaseth to god. By this sin has the devil great power in man whereof we
read in the gospel that god gaf license to deuylles for to enter in to swyn.
and when they were entered they drowned them in the sea. This sygnefyeth that
the glotons that led the life of hogs and of swyn the deuyls have leave to
enter in to them and to drown them in the sea of hell. And makes them to
ete so much that they breast / and drink so much that they be drowned. when
the champyon has overthrown his fellow. he holds him by the gorge. by cause
he should not relyeue. Right so is hit of him that the devil holds by his
sin in his mete the devil renneth to his gorge like as the wolf does to the
sheep for to strangle him. like as he did to Adam and Eve in paradys terrestre.
This is the fysshar of hell which takes the fysshes with the grynnes by the
throat / This vice dyspleseth much / For the gloton does to him great shame
when he makes his god of a sack full of dunge. That is his belly which he
loves more than god and doubts and serves it. God commands that he should
fast. The belly says nay. thou shat not / but thou shalt eete long and by
leyzer / God commands to rise erly. his god his belly says thou shalt not. I
am over full me list to sleep The church is none hare he will not flee away.
and it is not yet open. It shall well abide and tarry for me^. And when the gloton
aryseth he begins his matyns and his prayers and says. O god what shall we
ete this day. shall we not find that is any thing worth / After these matyns
comen the lawdes and says / A lord god how well drank we yester even the good
wyn. and how good mete ete we. Then after this by wepeth the gloton his
sins and says. Alas says he I wend well this night to have deyed. The wine
yestereuyn was over strong / mine heed aketh. I shall not be eased till I have
dronken. This god of the womb of glotonye is over evil For first he bycometh a
tauern gooar / and frequenteth tauernes. after he plays at the dyse. and
after he sells his good away / after he bycometh a rybaulde / an holyer and
letchour and at the last he hangs on the galowes. This is the salarye and
the scotte that is often paid for the sin of glotonye This sin is departed
after saint gregorye in to v branches For there is sin in five manners in
etyng and drynkyng. and therefore sum drink tofore time. or without reason or
mesure. or over ardantly or over plentyuously or over curiously Then the
brau^che of this sin is to ete tofore time. Ouermoche to ete is a foul
thing to a man that has age and dyscreco^n when he may not abide a due hour
for to ete and drink By great excess of glotonye it happeth often / that a man
that is hole and strong of body drynketh and eteth without cause reasonable
tofore time ordained. and that he comes to the mete as does a dombe be /
And much sin and maladyes bodily happen often by the customs. and thereof it
comes that this gloton says that he may not fast ne do penance. For he
says he has an evil heed and an evil heart also. and certainly he says
truth. and for to break the fasting days and vygils commanded is right a
great sin. For he dampneth him self. and also will have company with him. and
withdraws and lets them to do well. and ledeth them with him unto hell.
For he makes them to break their fastes. and do glotonnye. which they would
keep if it were not the evil company and felawshyp / For these glotons and
these letchours emonge al other euylles that they do / done a sin that is
proprely the craft of the devil. that is when they let and wythdrawe al them
that they may fro well doing. and mock and skorne all them that love to do
well. These glotons say that they mow not fast. but they lain falselye. For
little love of god causes them to say so / * For if they loved as much the
very glory of heaven as they do the vayn glory of the world / For like as
they fast for their worldly occupacyon and temporal goods often unto the night.
as well might they fast unto none for gods love if they loved him. And that if
they desired their salvation. But they be like unto the child that all day
will have breed in his hand. / And truth it is that like as one synneth by
etyng and drynkyng over erly. Right so one synneth by over late souper. These
people that so much love to wake by night and waste the time in ydlenes. and
goo late to bed. and arise late synnen in many manners / First in this that
they waste and lose the time and torn it. when they make of the night the day.
and of the day the night. God curses such people by the prophete^ For men
ought on the day time to do good and occupye him in good and holy werkys. And
in the night to preyse god. and to pray to him deuoutelye. and to yield him
thankynges of his yeftes / But they that then lie in their beds when they
should be up and risen must needs sleep when they should pray to god and worship
him. and here the service of our lord / and thus lose all the time. and the day
and the night / Also in these great wakynges ben commysed many sins. as to
play at chesse tables and at dyse. and then is there spoken many folysshe
words and corrupt. of which many sins follow and ensyewe / And also the
caytyues waste their bodies their time their soul their wit and their good
The second branch of glotonye is to ete and to drink oultragyously and
without mesure. These that so do been like unto a goulf that swaloweth all in.
like as an abysme. It is over great wysdom to keep mesure in etyng and
drynkyng^ And also it is great health for much people dye often tofore their time
by oultrageous etyng and drinking. and by such excessys and such oultrages
comen and sourden many maladyes and sekenessys. But he that will know and take
this mesure / he ought to know that there been many manners for to live in the
world / So^me lyuen after the flesh and after the eases of the body. Sum
after their Iolyte / Other after their ypocresye. Other after physyke. Other
after their honest. Other after that their sin requires / Other after there
spyryte. and after the love of god They that live after the flesh as Saint
Poul says sleen their soules^ for they make of their belly their god / They
reteyne neither reason ne mesure. and therefore they shall have in that other
world pain and torment without mesure / They that live after their Iolyte will
hold company with toles. such folk can not may not ne will not hold ne keep
mesure ne reason. They that live after ypocresye ben they that been marters to
the devil. such ypocrites have ij mesures. For the ij deuyls that tormenten
thypocrite ben much contrary that one to that other. that one says ete enough
so that thou be fair and fat. The Other says thou shall not but thou shall
fast so that thou be pale and lene. to the end that the world hold the for a
good man / And that it may appyere that thou do much penance. Now it
byhoueth that the ypocryte have ij mesures. one little and one great of which
they use the little mesure tofore the people. and the great mesure they use so
that no man see them. they reteyne not the true mesure that been auaricious In
such manner as the mouth will. which is lady of the house and comandour. Then
between the belly and the mouth of the gloton ben three dysputacyons / The belly
says I would be full the mouth says I will not be full / the belly says to him I
will that thou ete and take enough and despende largely. The mouth says I shall
not. I will that thou restrain the. and what shall the sorry caytyf do which is
servant to his two evil lords. Two mesures maken the pees. The mesure of the
belly in an other man's house good and large. and the mesure of his mouth in his
owen house sorouful and over s^ars. They that lyuen after physyque kepen the
mesure of ypocras. which is little and streyte / and it happeth often that he
that lives by physyke deyeth. They that lyuen after honest they keep and
hold the mesure of rayson / and lyuen honorably in the world. For they eten
in time and hour. And taken in gree and at worth that which they have.
curtoyslye. clenly and gladlye / They that live after that their sin
requires keep such mesure as is charged to them in penance. They that live
after the spyrite ben they that for the love of god rule and govern hem self
like as the holy ghoost enseygneth and techeth them to hold and keep mesure
reason and order / They have the lordshyp and seygnorye over their body which
is so dysciplyned and endoctryned by penance and so well chastysed that he
demands none oultrage. and does that which the spyrite commands and
without contradyction. Now may thou see by that which we have here said
that the devil has many engynes for to take the people by their throtes and by
their glotonye / For first he shows to them the wynes and the metes which ben
fair and delycyouses / like as he did to eve the apple^ and if it be not worth
he says to him Ete and drink like as did such one. Thou must needs hold
company wylt thou that men mock and scorn the and will thou ben holden a
popelard. Or he says to the. thou must nedys keep the health of thy body / who
has not his health has no thing. Be not an homycyde of thy self / Thou owe
to thy body his sustenaunce / Or he says to him otherwise Behold and
consydere the good that thou do and what thou may do. Thou etest not for
the delytes of thy body. but for to serve god / Thou ought to keep thy
strength to god like as dauyd the prophet says. Of these reasons abouesayd
be sometime atteyned and deceived the most wise men / The third branch of
this vice is to run and to take over gredyly the mete. like as the hounde
does the caroyn. and how much gretter is the gredynesse so much gretter is
the sin / For like as it is not sin to have the richesse Justly gotten and
truly but not over much to love them. ne to use them evil / right so it is not
sin to ete. But that it be not over gredely ne over dysordynatly. Al manner
metes ben good unto good people. to them that by reason and by mesure vsen them
without any excess and without oultrage / and alwey we ouzt to preyse god and
render tha^kynges to god of his goodness and of his yeftes / and by the swetenes
of the mete we ouzt to think on the sweetness of god. and on that celestyal
and sweet mete of glory perdurable which fylleth and accomplyssheth the desire
of the heart. Therefore men read in howses of religyon at mete / by cause that
when the body takes his refection on that one part. that the soul should take
his spyrituel mete and refection on that other part. The iiij branch of this
sin of glotonye is of them that over nobly will ete and drink. and which
despende and waste that whereof an hundred pour men might be suffycie^tly fed
Such people sin in many manners. First in great despences that they make.
After in that / that they use over great gredynes and over great delight. After
in the vayn glory that they have. But this is not only thexcesse of the
throat / but it is often for bobance and for great pride / and for the praysyng
of the world that they seche so dear metes and multeplye so many messes whereof
often times grow many sins. The v brau^che of glotonye is the curiosite of
glotons / which think on none other thing but for to delight them in metes.
they ben proprelye lychorous which seche not sauf only the delytes of their
throat and mouth. In iij things namely lies the sin of such people / First
in the great charge that they have in pourchasyng and in arayeng their metes /
After in the glory and in the great playsyr that they have in seeing and
beholding them / and that they may recounte what dylygence they put to that.
that the metes been well arrayed. and that eueryche have his right and propre
saw^e. and how they may of one thing make diverse messes dysguysed for the
delycyousnesse of the mouth / and when the messys or the metes come^ in one
after another. then be said the bourdes for entremesses and thus goes the
time. and the caytyfs forgete them self and. reason slepeth and thinks no
thing of the death. ne on the sins that they do. their stomach cries and
says. Dame throat ye slay me / I am so full that I am like to break. Then the
lychorous tongue answers though thou sholdest to breast I shall not suffer this
licorous mete escape me. after the lycorousnes of mete comes vaynglory that is
to remember it. Then desire and wesshe they that they had as long a neck as
a crane / and as great a belly as a cow that they might yet devour and swalowe
more mete / Now have thou herd the sins that comen of glotonye and of
lycourousnesse. and by cause that these sins sourden and comen often in the
tavern. which is fontayne of sin. Therefore I will a little touch the sins
that been made and done in the tavern. The tavern is the scole of the devil
where as his dyscyples study. and his propre chapel where as his service is
done. and that is the place where he shows and does his miracles both day
and night. such as apperteynen the devil for to do. At church our lord god
has a custom to show his virtues and to make his miracles like as ye may see
in many places. the blind for to see. the lame and crooked to be redressyd. to
mad men their wit. to dombe men speech / and to deef men their heryng / But
the devil in the tauern does all the contrary. for the tavern is his chapel as
is aforesaid where men does to him service. for when the man goes to tavern
he goes all right. and when he retorneth he has neither foot ne hand. by
which he may him self bear ne sustain. and when he goes thither he speaks
well. hereth and understands. and when he retorneth he has lost all this /
like as he that has neither wit ne reason ne memory in him self. Such been
the miracles that the devil makes in the tavern. and what lesson is read in
the tavern I shall say to you. There is read learned herd and seen all fylthe
and ordure of sin. that is to wete glotonye lecherye sweryng forsweryng lyeng
myssayeng renyeng god and his saints. mysherkenyng brawlyng and many other
sins. Then sourden and comen stryues homycides or manslaughter. there is
lernyd to stele and to hang / the tauern is a fosse and a pytte of theuys. and
also it is the fortress of the devil for to war against god and his saints
and the tauerner that susteyneth such people dysordynate ben partonners of all
their sins that they do in their tauernes. And certain if a person said as
much shame to his own fader or to his mother or to his knave / as such manner
people do to their fader of heaven and to our lady and to the Saints they should
be much angry. and find and set other remedy than god does.

Of the sins of the tongue capitulo L
WHo that will know and think of the sins of the tongue. him byhoueth to
think and acounte to thynk what the tongue is and fro whens she comes and
what harm and evil she does / For it happeth that sometime the word is sin
in him self. by cause it is evil / and happeth by cause that it is sin / men
sin for as much that she yssueth and comes of an evil heart. And also it
happeth that the word is great sin by cause it does evil. how well that it
be fair and well polysshed / Now thou ought to know that the evil tongue is
the tree that god curses in the gospel. by cause he fond thereon no thing but
leeuys. By the leeuys ben under stonden in holy scripture words. And like as
it should be a thing dyffycile and hard to nombre the leeuys of trees / Right
so it is Impossyble to compte and nombre the sins that grown of the tongue.
But we shall set and put ten chyef branches which grow out of this tree.
And these x branches may thus be named / ydlenes / auauntyng / losangerye.
detraction. lies or lesynges / Forswerynges. contencyons murmr. rebellyon.
and blasphemye.

Of the sin that been in idle words capo. lj
THey that abando^ne them to idle words geten great dommage and great peril
/ which they apperceyue not. And also they lose the time which they may never
recouere. And lose also the good deeds that they should and might do unto their
own salute and health.

And lesen the joy of heaven / and the tresour of their heart / and replenysshe
it of vanyte and of sins / They dyscouer the pot and the flies enter
therein. They call them idle words / but they ben not. For they ben much
costyous damageous and perilous as they that avoid fro the heart al goodness.
and replenysshe it with vanyte. For they shall render reason and yield acompt of
them to god straytely at day of Judgment. like as god says in the gospel /
This is not then a little thing ne little ydlenes / when hit byhoueth to yield
reason and accomptes at the day of dome unto a little thought. and in so hye a
court as is tofore god and al his saints. In this idle words men sin in vj
manners. There been sum vayn words. of which sum tongues be so full that so
much speak before and after that they be like the clyket and the clappe of a
mylle which may never rest. and also so^me words ben so curyous of them
that gladly heren tidings told. that they often set their heart to the
desease of them that here them. so that the recounters been often holden for
fools and liars. After comen the rehersayl and the fair words / wherein is
much vaynglorye. in them that can subtylly show and say them. for to make the
herars to laughe / after ben the truffes bourdes and lies full of fylthe of
ordure and of sin which ben called idle words. but they be not / for they
be peryllous and greuable / After ben Iapes. the esbatemens and plays not
leeful. that say sometime upon good men and upon them that would fayn do well / by
cause that they might wythdrawe fro their heart the goodness that they have
conceived and purpose to do / These be not idle words / for thou art like an
homycyde if thou wythdrawe by thy tongue a man or a woman or a child fro doing
well or fro doing a good deed. And god shall conne the as good thank as the king
should do to the if thou had slain his own sone or stolen aweye his tresour.

Of the sin of auauntance capitulo lij
AFter comes the sin of auauntyng which is much great much foul false and
much vylaynous / it is much great. For he that auau^teth him self is much
hateful to god for he takes away his glory. Also as we have said tofore this
is a much false sin. for his goods of which he myzt get heaven he gives
for a little wynde^ and so it is a much foul sin. For all the world holds
him for a fool for a vylayn and for nyce. and this branch has.v. leuys.
There ben v manners of vauntours That one is of time past / This is the sin of
them that so gladly remember their werkys and their prowesses. and that which
they wene to have done well or said well. That other is of time present. this is
the sin of them that no thing do gladly. ne pain them to do well / ne to
say well when they be not seen ne herd. They in doing or in saying or in
syngyng auaunte them self and selle for nouzt all that they have and done. To
this man apperteyneth the sin of them that so auaunte and boost them of the
good that they have. or of that which they wene to have of their noblesse or
of their richesse. They ben like to the Cuckoo / that can not sing but of him
self. The third is of them that been surquydrous and that think and say in them
self. I shall avenge me hereof. I shall make hills and valeyes. The fourth is
more subtyl. that is of them that dare not preyse them self for shame But all that ever that other done and say they blame and despise like as no thing were
worth / but that which they can do or say The fyfthe is yet more subtyl. that
is of them that will when that men preyse them. and they dare not say it
openly / they make it all contrary and make them self humble and say that
they be no thing worth and sinners three times wers than they be. by cause they
would be preysed and for that men should hold them for well humble and meke. Alas
says Saint Bernard that this is a sorouful auauntynge. They make them self
deuylles by cause they should be reputed for aungellys / and feign them self to
be evil. to the end that men should repute them for good. But certeynly a man
should not more anger them. than to say ye say truth To this apperteyneth the
sin that sechen the advocates for to preyse them. and to cry their oublyes.
by whose mouth they speak more hardely.

Of evil saying of other capitulo liij
LOsangers ben the nouryces of the devil that give souk to the children and
make them sleep in their sins by their fair syngyng / They enoynte the way
of hell with the honey of flaterye by cause that the sinners should goo it the
more hardely. This sin is departed in to five parties that been like as five
leuys on this branch. The first is of these flaterers. that when they see
that he or they. that they see dyspose them to say well or to do well. anon they
show and tell it to him. by cause that he should have thereof vayn glory. But
his defaultes they shall never say ne tell him / The second sin is that the
little good that the children do they double it. That is to say / that them that
they preyse and feed by flaterye / they encreace it and double it / and
adiouste thereto so much that it is more lesyng than truth. and therefore
been they called false witness in holy scripture The third sin is when they
make a man or a woman to understand that he has in him many good virtues and
much grace / where as he has none And therefore holy scripture calls such
flateres enchau^tours for they enchaunte so much the man or the woman / that
they believe them better than hem self and that they believe bettyr that they
here than that which they see / and that they say to hem better that they
know and feel / The fourth sin is when they sing always the placebo of
flaterye / That is to say / my lord or my lady ye say truth. my lord does
well. and torneth al thing by flaterye what someuer he does or says be it
good or evil. and therefore ben they called Ecko / That is the so^n that
redoundeth in hye mountayns and woods and accords always to that which is
cried and said. be it true be it falls / The fyfthe ben the flaterers that
defenden excusen and couere the vices and the sins of them that will flatere
and preyse. and therefore ben they called in writing taylles. for they cover the
ordures and sins of the rich men for sum temporal good. and therefore ben
they lykenyd in scripture to the tayll of a fox. for their flaterye barate and
tryeherye.

Of losengerye and of flaterye
LOsengiers and myssayers ben of one soole. These ben the ij seraynes otherwise
called mermayde^s. of which we find in the book of the nature of beestys
which is a monstre of the sea that is called serayns. which has the body of
a woman the taylle of a fysshe. and vngles or claws of an egle / and they
sing so swetely that they make the maronners to sleep. and after they devour
them. These ben the losengyers and flaterers which by their fair speech make
men to sleep in their sins / There been sum serpents which have the name
of serayns. that run more swyftely than an horse. and sometime they flee / and
their venym is so strong that tryacle may not avail against it. For sonner
comes the death than the bytyng of the serpent is felt. These ben the
myssayers of whom Salamon says. that they byte in trayson like a serpent.
with this ben slain three at ones. That is he that says it / he that hereth it
/ and he of whom is myssayed / This is the right cruel be that is called
hate. which fynyssheth destroys. and brings out of the earth the bodies of
the deed men and eteth them. These ben they that byte and ete the good men of
relygyon that been in the world / Such manner people ben more cruel than is
hell which deuoureth the wicked / but these people run upon the good and
deuoureth them. Such manner people resemblen the sow. which when she has
pigs gladly will byte a man clad with whyt clothes. They ben like the huppe
which makes his nest in the ordure of a man and there rests him / and like
the dorre or waspe that flee the flowers. and louen dunge and ordure. and this
branche has five leuys. The first is when they contryue the lesynges and evil
for to hurt blame and defame other. The second is when they have herd the
blame and harm / they say it forth and report it to the people / and adiouste
more of them self thereto. The third is when they quench and set at naught
all the good that a man has done. and make it to be holden for evil. they ete
the man al hole. the other ete him not all. But they byte him and bear aweye a
pyece This is the fourth leef of this branch. which is proprely called
detraction / For he always wythdraweth and cutteth of a pyece of good that he
hereth spoken of other. For when any good is spoken of any other tofore him /
always he contryueth somthynge to say to his reproach. and gives thereto a but
as thus. he is right a good man and I love him well / but there ben such
defaultes in him certainly I am sorry therefore. This is the scorpyo^ which
blandyssheth with his face and prycketh with his taylle. The fyfthe is when he
peruerteth and torneth al to the wers party / and the good in to evil. And
therefore he is a false Judge and untrue.

Of the sin to say lesynges capitulo liiij
LEsyng falseth a man. like as one falsed the seal of the king. or the bulls
of the pope. and by cause that such men falsen the money and beren forth false
letters he shall be Iuged at the day of dome as a false man. The liar is emonge
the good true men as the false penny emonge the good. and as the chafe emonge
the corn. The liar is like to the devil which is his fader. like as god says
in the gospel for he is a liar. and the fader of lesynges as he that forged the
first lesynge. And yet he forgeth and techeth them forth all day / The devil
shows him in many manners and in many fourmes. and transfygureth him self in
many guyses for to deceive the people / Right so does the liar / Then is he
like the plouyer which lives of the wind and of the air. and has no thing
in his entraylles but wind. And also to every color that he sees he
changes his sowne^ In this branch been three bows. for there is one manner
leesyng brennyng. another playsaunt. and another noyeng. and in all three is
sin. For like as says saint austyn / how well he that lies. and with his
lesyng does good and prouffyte to another. nevertheless he does his own hurt
and damage. then the lies ardaunt ben sins / But the lies playsaunte ben
more gretter sin. like as ben the lies of losengiers of flaterers of
mynystrellis. of trufars which that sayen these bourdes lesynges and derysyons
for to solace the folk and to make them laughe. and it is no doubt for to
take heed and to here them it is a sin. But the lesynges greuyng and noyeng
ben dedely sin / when they be said ernestlye with a for thought for to harm
and hurt any other / To this branch apperteynen all the falsetees the
fallaces the deceytes and guylles that been done and said thorugh out all the
world for to deceive and hurt any other in soul or in body in hauour in
renome or in fame /

Of the sin of forsweryng capo. lv
IT is an evil to lie / But it is much werse and gretter sin a man to
forswere him self. It is a peryllous thing to forswere him self. and therefore
our lord deffendeth it much. not for that by cause that one may in no wise
swear without sin. For often to swear makes a man often to forswere him and
often to sin. For in vij manners may a man sin in making oaths. First when
one swereth ardauntly / this is by despyte and gladly / like as it seems that
he delyteth or that he were fro him self. Therefore defends Saint James not
only to swear when it is of need. but the will to swear. Also when one
swereth for naught It is for naught. when one swereth lightly without cause
and without reason. This is deffended in the second commandment of the law.
which god wrote in the tables of stoon with his blessed fyngre and delyuerd
them to Moses the prophet for to preche them to the people. After when one
swereth accustomably / like as many done that been evil taught and that can no
thing say without sweryng. For for to swear nys none other thing but to
call god to witness / the cause ought to be much great. reasonable and true.
where as should be called or dare call so great a lord as god is to witness.
his glorious mother and his saints / Also when one swereth folyly / and this
comes and happeth in many manners as where swereth by ire or suddenly / of
which when he is repreued he repents anon. or wha^ one swereth for a thing
which he may not keep without sin / Such swerynges ought to be left. and
of them do penance of the folysshe oath. Or when one swereth certeynly of the
thing of which he was not certain how well it be true. Or when one swereth
certainly of that which he knows not. or that he may not accomplysshe. Or
when one swereth by the creatures. as so^me say by the son that shyneth / or
by the fire that there bre^neth Or by my heed Or by the soul of my fader. Or
such semblable things. God deffendeth al these oaths in the gospel. For to
that which I ought to conferme. I ought not to take to witness but the
souerayn truth / that is god which knows al. and no thing the pure
creatures which be no thing but vanytees / For when men swear ernestly by
them. they do dishonor to god / For thonour of god ought alweye to be kept in all things. But when men swear by the holy gospellys. men swear by him of whom
the words ben that be there wryton. And when one swereth by the holy relykes
or by the saints of heaven. they swear by them and by god that enhabyteth in
them / After when one swereth vylaynsly of god and of his saints. In this ben
the christian men werse than the sarasyns. that ne sweren in no manner. ne
suffren that any swear vylaynsly tofore them of Ihesu like as christian men do
And who that swereth in their law Mahomet their god he shall be stoned. The
christian men been in this more cruel than the Jews that crucefyed Ihesu Christ /
For they brake none of his bones. But they that swear by him rende and make moo
pyeces of him than is made of a be in the boucherye. And there be many false
christian men that in like wise break in pyeces our blessed lady and other
saints in sweryng vylaynslye And certeynly it is merueyle how christ may suffer
it After when one swereth falsely or bears false witness to his wytyng in any
manner that he swereth covertly or openly. or by art color or sophym. For the
law wryton says / God that loves symplesse and truth in such a thing. he
receives the oath and understands the word. as they that say entende it. and
which symply and without barate understand it Much is the great debonayrte
of god. when such men swear that / which they know well is not truth. Or
that promytteth a thing which they will not hold. that the devil strangle
them not anon. For when they say as god keep me. or as god will me help / he
puts him self out of the grace of god and of his aid and help. Now ought
they of very right to lose wit and mind / and all that they hold of god.
The last branch of this sin is when one breketh the feyth that he has
promised and creanted. by his faith or by his oath. For faith lied and oath
broken is all one /

Of the sin and peril that is of chydyng capitulo lvj
Saint Austyn says that there is none so like to the devil as is the chydar.
This craft without doubt pleseth much the devil / and dysplayseth much
unto god which loves above al other things pees and concord. This branch
departs him in to vij bows / of which the first is to strive The second to
chyde The third ledenger. The fourth to curse / The fyfthe to reproach or to
repreue / The sixte to menace or to threte. The seventh dyscorde and to r^yse
hate. This is when the devil sees pees and love between two persons it much
desplayseth him. and for to make them dyscorde he does his power to make them
to strive. and when they begin to strive the devil begins to blow the
sire of anger. Then after the stryffe and anger comes the noise and chydyng
/ Then as the fire is light and the smoke is up anon comes the flamme and
lepeth out / Stryuyng is when that one says to that other. It is so. it is not
so / it was so / it was not so. Chydyng is when they demene and say one to that
other great words After comes the ledanges that is when they pynche and shoue
that one to that other and say great vylanyes and great felonyes For there be
sum so felou^s that have their tongues more cuttyng than a rasour. and more
percyng than arowes or alles Such folk resemble the porpyn which is al full
of pryckes and sharp poyntures. and is over fell and angry / and when he is
wroth he launceth and casts his pricks like arowes out of his body and
throws on the right side and on the lift side. Also he resembles the felon
mastyf that byteth and barketh on al them that he sees goo by the way / After
this comen the curses and maledyctio^s. this is when that one curses that
other. And this is so great a sin as the scripture says that who curses his
neygbour. he is cursed of god. And Saint poul says that such folk may not
have the royame of god. And Salamon says that their mouths ben like as the
pot that boylleth and casts out on al sydes^ and scaldeth them that be
about him. After comen the reproaches which ben yet more sin that is when a
man reprocheth another of his sins and his defaultes or of his folyes. his
pouerte. his pour kynne. or other defaultes that he has in him / he wexyth
angry and synneth. After comen the menaces and thretenynges and then begin
the medlynges and wars. But above all the sins that we have here named /
passes the sin of them that by their wicked tongues areyse and moeue
dyscordes deuysyons and evil will emonge them that been friends to gyder. and
that destourbe and let the pees and accordes / God hates much such people
as says the scripture.

Of the sin of murmr capitulo lvij
WE see that it happeth often time / that they that dare not answer ne chyde.
begin to murmr and to grunte with his teeth. Therefore after the sin of
chydyng we set the sin of murmr. how much this sin is great and how
god takes vengeance and correction of it we shall show / For god oftymes
has taken vengeance on such / like as the holy scripture records. For. for
this the earth opened and swolowed in dathan and abyron. and they descended all
quycke in to hell / And for this sin god sent a fire from heaven that burnt
chore and al his fellows / that is to wete ij hundred and xl thousand of the
grettest that were in the host of our lord in deserte. For this sin lost
the Jews the land of promyssyon which god had promised. So that of vj.C /
thousand that god had delyuerd and put out of seruage of the king of Egypt
pharao. and that had nourisshed them xl year in deserte with the manna of heaven
/ Of al them there entryd in to the holy land of promyssyon but two persons
only. which were named Caleph and Iosue. but al deyed with sorrow in deserte.
This sin has two branches. For so^me murmr against god. and sum against
man / The sin of murmr against man is in many manners like as servants
ayenste their lords and masters. and chamberers and wymmen against their
ladies and maystresses. children against fader and mother / The pour against the
rich. The vylaynes against the nobles. The lay people against the clerks and
against the prelates. And the cloysterers against thabbottes. pryours and the
o^fy^ers. And this murmr grows against these persons of inobedyence. by
cause that there is made to them over hard commandementes. or of dread / or of
inpacience by cause all things be not done ryghtfully. or of envy. or of
felonnye. by cause that one is auau^ced more than another. and many other evil
rancours. Murmr against god has many occasions that is he that lost grace
and patience and would be more than god / For such ^hynge as god has made in
earth. if he has not made it after his will. anon he grutcheth against god.
and syngeth the deuyls pater noster / For like as the holy ghoost enseygneth
and techeth his chosen to sing in their heart the sweet song of heaven / that
is deo gracias. of all that he has made and given us. and of all that he sends
us / In like wise the wicked spyrite makes his dyscyples to sing the song of
hell. That is of murmr that always shall dure in hell. Certain such a man
is a much fool and wood that will that god should give to him acomptes of all
that he has made. if he send to him pouerte or maladye or dear time. or if he
take fro one and give to another. and all this be not done at his deuyse. anon
he takes against god and murmureth against him. and can him maulgree / and what
marvel is hit though god avenge him on such folk when they would take fro
him his seygnorye. his sapyence and his puyssaunce.

Of the sin and peril that is in rebellyon capo. lviij
EVyl thing is it of murmr. but much more evil is it of rebellyon.
Rebellyon is a vice that comes fro the heart. which is hard. froward. and
diverse / and always will that his will be done and his sentence holden / and he
that will that other humble and bow to him. and he will not bow ne enclyne to
no man. This is an heart diverse of which salamon says that he may not faylle
of an evil end. and like as murmr is against god and against man / Right so
is such an heart rebelle against god and man / This vice has iiij branches.
for such an heart is froward and rebelle to believe counseyl. and taccomplysshe
and do the comandements of god / and to suffer chastysyng / and to receive
doctrine. Of this vice thou have herd in the chappytre of pride.

Of the sin of blasphemye capo. lix
BLasphemye is as says Saint austyn as much as it grows etc^. Seche all the
condycions in the chappytre of pride tofore wryton in the rubyche of arrogaunce
in the end / Now we have showed x manners of sin of the tongue / of which
the first is idle words / and the last is blasphemye. And this is that Salamon
says / that the beginning of the evil tongue is folly. and the end shall be
over evil / here fynysshe then the dedely sins and all the branches that
descend of them / and know ye for truth that who should well study in this
book he might well prouffyte and learn to know al manner of sins and to
confess him self well. for none may confess his sins well / if he ne know
hem not / Now thou ought to know that he that redeth in this book ought to
think and take heed dylygently if he be culpable of any of these sins
aforesaid. And if he find him culpable of any he ought to repent him and
anon to confess him dylygently. and to keep him to his power fro other sins
in which he is not culpable. and also he ought to preyse and thank god
humbly. and to pray him deuoutelye that he will keep him by his sweet grace.

How this life nys but death as hit appears capo. lx
Grievously dies he that has not learned to deye / learn then to dye if thou
shall conne live / for no man shall can live. that has not learned to dye / and
he is by ryzt called a caytyf that can not live ne that knows not to dye. if
thou wylt live freely and surely learn to deye wyselye / if thou say how shall
it be learned. I shall now tell to the / Thou ought to know that this lyfnys
but death. For death is a departing / this knows every man And therefore it is
said of a man when he dies that he departs / and when he is deed he is
departed^ This lyfnys no thing but a departing. ye truly a much short
departing. For all the life of a man if he lived a thousand year. is not only a
moment to the regard of that other life. which always dureth. In torment or in
joy perdurable. This witnesses to us The kings The dukes The earls The
princes and the Emperors which had sometime the glory of this world / Now
weep they in hell. Cry and howl. cratchen and sayen alas / what auaylled us
our power / honor noblesse Joy beaultees and al rychessys. Sone is al this
departed and faylled as a shadow or smoke. and much faster fled fro us than
birds fleyng. or quarelles out of a cross bow. Thus departs aweye our
life. Now we were / and anon we ben deed. and all our life was not a little
moment. Now be we in perdurable torments Our Joy in weeping Our carolles and
feestes in sorrow. Roobes hoodes feestes dygnytees games Rychessys and al
welthes ben faylled us. Such been the songs of hell like as holy writ
recounteth / For to show to us that this life is no thing but a departing. and
this death is no thing but a departing. and to live is no thing but to
depart. Then the living in this world is no thing but for to deye. and
this is true as the pater noster. For when thou beganst to live / anon thou
beganst to deye. and to approach the death. and al thyn age and all thy time
which is passed / the death has conquered and retained. Thou saeyst that thou
have xl year. that is not truth / the death has them. Ne never shall he yield
them to the ageyn / Therefore the wit of the world is folly. And certain the
clerkys seeing. seen no thing at al. day and uyght they done one thing / and
the more they do the less they know. always they deyen and can not deye^ for
night and day thou deyest as I have said to the. Yet in another manner I shall
teache the this clergy. to the end that thou know well to live and well to deye.
Now take heed and understand the death is no thing but the deceueryng of body
and soul. this knows well every man and understands / Now techeth us Cathon
the wise man. learn says he to deye. To depart and deceuere often thy soul and
thy spyryte fro thy body. like as did many of the great phylosophres that so
much hated this life and despised the world and so much desired to deye that
they slew them self by their own agreement. but it auaylled them no thing.
For they had not the grace ne the faith of our lord Ihesu Christ. But the holy
men which love god and dread him / of three dethes have they passed the tweyne.
For they ben deed as touching sins. and deed as touching the world. Now abide
they the last death that is the third / and that is the deceueraunce of soul
and body / Between them and heaven is but a little wall. for they pass it by
thought and by desire. And though the body is in this world on this side. the
heart and the spyryte is on that other side in that other world. there where
their conversation is in heaven. like as says saint poule. Their solace their
I^ye / their consolacion is by thought on the ferther side in heaven where their
conversation is like as says saint Poule. And therefore they hate their life
which is but death / and desire the bodily death / For this damoysel bears Joy
that is the death which crowns all the saints and set them in joy
perdurable. Death is to a good man end of al his euyllys / and yate and enter
of al goods. Death is the river that departs death and life / Death is on this
side life / and on that other side also / But the wise men of this world which
ben on this side of the river of this world seen so clear. and on that other
side they see no thing. and therefore been they called in scripture fools and
blind / For this death they call departing / And the death that is comune to
good they callen the end. And therefore they hate so much the death. For they
know not what it is. ne on that other side of the river they have not
conuersed / ne know no thing what gooeth there out. Then if thou wylt
know what is good and what is evil. issue out of thy self. issue out of the
world / learn to deye / Dysseuere thy soul fro thy body by thought. Send thyn
heart in to that other world That is in heaven. in hell / and in purgatory /
There shalt thou see what is good and what is evil / In hell thou shalt see
mo sorrows and diverse tormentys than any man may or can deuyse. or any heart
think.

In purgatory also thou shalt see moo torments than any may endure / In
heaven thou shall see more Joy and glory than any may desire. In hell shall be
showed and enseygned to the how god vengeth dedely sin. Purgatory shall show
and enseygne the how god purges dedely sin. In heaven thou shalt see clearly
virtues good werkys. how hyely they ben guerdoned and rewarded / And in these
three things understand how and all that. that the byhoueth to know to live
well and deye well /

How men live dyeng in this world capo. lxj
NOw behold and take heed yet a little. and ennoye ne grieve the not at these
three things. Therefore to know and will to hate sin. Forgete thy body one
time in the day and goo in to hell living. to the end that thou goo not thither
at thy death. Thus done often the good men and the wise There thou shalt see
all that the heart hates / cold hete hungre thyrst and diverse torments. as
wepynges syghes and wayllynges. that the heart may not think ne tongue deuyse /
and all way shall endure without end. and therefore is this pain by right
called death perdurable / which is always death in living. and life in deyeng. when
thou shall see then that this one dedely sin must nedys be so dear bouzt /
thou had lever be flayne al quyck. tofore thou sholdest consent to do one
only sin / After goo to purgatory. there shall thou see the pains of
souls. which have had very repentance of their sins in this world. but they
were not parfytely purged / Now make they the remenau^te of their penannce unto
they be clear and net / like as they were at time and hour wha^ they were
baptized / but this penance is much horrible and hard / for all the pain
that wymmen ever suffered in trauayllyng and delyueryng of their children. and
also saint bartylmewe suffryd to be flayn al quyck. saint stephen to be stoned
with stones. saint laurence and saint vyncent to be burnt and roasted upon
brennyng cooles Al these martyrdoms and torments ne ben not but as a bayne in
cold water after the witness of scripture to the regard of torments of
purgatory. where as the sowles brenne until they be purged of al their sins.
like as gold and silver be purged and fined in the fire. till no more be found
to be purged. For this fire of purgatory is of such nature / that all that
they find in the soul is it of deed of word and of thought that has corned
to any sin little or great. all is there burnt and purged / And also there
ben punysshed and purged all the sins venyal. which we call little sins.
which we often do / Like as foul thoughts. idle words Iapes trufes lies and
all other vanytees so long till the soul have no more to be purged of / and
that she be so clean so pure so net and so worthy that she be sayntefyed for
to enter in to heaven. where as none may enter but if he be right fine right
clean and right clear. This fire dreden all they that to their power keep them
fro dedely sin. and that keep holyly their body / their mouth their eerys
their eyes. and al their five naturel wits fro al sins. And also lyuen as
they should every day dye and come tofore the Judgment. And by cause that none
may live al without sin. like as says Salamon / For seven times in the day
falls the ryghtwysman. And therefore by holy confession. by teerys by orysons
by almesses and other good deeds ought every man to be relyeued and put away
fro sin and amend his life. and to Judge him self of his sins / to the end
that he abide more surely the last Judgment Also to learn to know evil. and to
flee it and all sin great and little. And that he be then in the great
dread of god. which is the beginning of all good and of good life.

How we ought to live holyly and learn to do well capo. lxij
Now it is not enough to leave al sins and all euyls. but that it be lernyd to
do good. and if we learn to get the virtues by which we may cast and put
aweye the vices and all sins without which virtues no man may live well ne
rightfully. Then if thou will learn to live well after virtue / learn also to
deye as I have before said to the / deceuere thy spyryte fro thy body by thought
and by desire / And goo out of this world deyeng And goo in to the land of
living / where as none shall deye ne never wexe old. that is in heaven / There
is learned to live well. and al wysedom and all curtesye. For there may enter no
vylayne. There is the glorious company of god and of the glorious virgyne his
mother saint marye. of Angellys and of saints. There surhabounde all goods.
beaultees Rychesses honors strength lyghtnes science fraunchyse virtues
wit glory and joy perdurable. There is no point of ypocresye ne of
trycherye / ne of losengerye / ne of dyscorde. ne of envy ne hungre ne thryst
ne hete ne cold ne evil ne sorrow ne dread of enemies / But always feste and
ryall espousaylles song and joy without end. This joy is so great. that
who that shall have tasted one only drope of the most lest joy that is there
/ he should be fyred and so entalented in the love of god that all the joy of
this world should be unto him stenche and torments. and rychesses dunge / and
honors but fylthe and vyletees / And the desire for to come thither shall make
him an hundred thousand times more arda^tly to hate sin. and to love virtues
and to do well / For love is more strong than dread / and then is the life
fair and honest / when a person flees al euyls and sins. And enforces him
to do all the good that he may. not only for fere to be dampened but for the
desire of the glory perdurable and for the love of god And for the great
clennesse that virtues have and good life / and them whom the love of god
ledeth. much hastelyer sonner and more ardantly comen thereto. and less
costeth / than they that serve god for dread / The hare renneth and so does the
grehou^d That one for dread that other by desire. That one flees that other
chaceth / The holy man renneth to god like a grehounde. For he has always his
eyes and his desire to heaven / where he sees the pray that he chaceth. And
for that he forgeteth the goods of this world. like as the gentyl hounde when
he sees his pray / This is the way and the life to the five good and true
lovers of god / to gentyl hertes that so much louen virtues and haten sins.
that if they were certain. that they ne should ne might know the sins / ne
that god should not avenge them. yet they would not deygne to do ne to consent
to sin / but al their thought and pain of their heart is to keep them clean
f^o al sins. And to apparaylle them that they be worthy to see and to have
perdurably the glory of heaven. where as heart vylaynous entached with sin
shall never enter. ne fool ne felonous ne proud man.

Of iij manner of spyrituel goods capitulo lxiij
NOw have I well showed to the how one should learn to deye and led and use good
and holy life. and for to get virtues so that a man know well and euydently
clennesse. and what is sin. what is alms and what is virtue. Also that one
know well and certeynlye. and to Judge what is evil. and what is sin and what
is good. and to co^ne deuyse the very good and the great good fro the little.
For a thing not known is neytherhat^d ne desired. and therefore ought thou
to know that the scryptures sayen that there been sum small things that be
called the lityl good and sum the myddel good And sum the great good. and
sum very good that is ryghtful to al. the world is sometime deceived. For
they give the great goods for the lytyl. or the great for the myddle / For
this world is as a fair. where as ben many folysshe merchants / and fools
that bye glass for sapphires / and leed for gold. and bladders for lanternes.
But he is a good marchaunte that of every thing knows well clearly the
truth and the propre virtue / like as the holy ghoost enseygneth us. and
another maystre techeth us to know the great things fro the small. the
precyouse fro the vile. the sweet from the bitter /

Of the goods of fortune capo. lxiiij
THey call the small goods the goods of fortune. which dame fortune has
about her whele. and always takes a weye and gives / and torneth that which
is above to fall under / These ben the procyouse stones that the fools have
bought for rubyes for saphyrs and for emerawdes / These ben also as Jewels /
and young children which god gives to us for to solace us with. and for to
draw our love to him By cause that he knows well that we ben tender and t^ble
and that we may not hold the sharp ways of penance. of anguysshe and of
martyrdom / like as done the good knights of god which conquer the royame of
heaven by strength. and take it by ttheyr prowess and their good virtues.
Then that is not the great good ne well ryghtful. For if that were the great
good and very / Then were fools the blessed children of god Ihesu Christ
which chosen pouerte shame and sharpness for to give and to show to us
ensaumple. And refused the joys the honors and the rychessys of this world.
if these goods transytorye worldly and temporalle ben very good. then be
not all the very goods in heaven / Then is not god parfytelye good and happy
by cause he will not use such goods. Then god is not good ne naturalle by
cause he gives not these worldly goods to his friends / but he gives them
more largely to his enemies. if these were very good. then were foles all the
saints. all the good clerkys and the wise phylosophres that fled fro such
worldly goods and despised them as dunge. if these be very good / then
fails the holy scripture that calls them lies and vanytees. nets and
grynnes of the devil / and this is as true as the pater noster / For these ben
the engynes of the devil. by which he deceyueth the souls in a thousand
manners. and byndeth them and takes and holds them But the wise marchaunte
that is the wise man / whom the holy ghoost enlumyneth by very knowleche.
that oueralle knows and can decerne what every thing is worth. ^he sees
right well and understands that all the world is not a good morsel for to
fylle the heart of one man. and that there is therein much evil and little good.
And therefore he beholds the euylles and perils that been therein. and knows
well that it is truth that is comunelye said / who that gives not that which
he loves / he takes not which he desires. Such folk given the world for
to have heaven. and forsakes oueral richesses for joy. fylthe and ordure for
gold. and leave all for gods sake / rychesses delyces and honors. and
bycome pour in this world for to win good and for to get the richesse of
heaven. This is the most fairest life and most sure that may be in this world
There ben other that see that in many manners may one do his prouffyt and his
sauacyon with goods temporelle. and that he may have without ouermoche to love
them For god commands not a man to leave al / They reteyne them / but lytyl
they preyse them / They use them / but lytyl they love them / like as did
Abraham Job and Dauyd / and many other which eschewed and fled the perilles.
And they do spyrituel prouffyte with temporalle goods. and will bye heaven with
their almesses and other good deeds. They can bye out their sins and help
their neighbors. They can the more love god dread and doubt him for the
perils that they be in. and the more humble them self when they see and
consider their sins and their deffaultes. when in sharp and streyte weyes of
penance they dar not goo^ when so little for gods sake they will suffer and
give / which so much suffered to save them. and would xxxij year in this world
be pour for to enryche them in heaven. They save them well but it is hard to
do / For it is a more light thing to leave all the goods attones. than to
reteyne them and not to love them.

Of the goods of nature which follow here. capo. lxv
THe moyen or myddle goods ben the goods of nature and of doctrine. Of nature
like as beaulte of body / prowess. force or strength. vygour / lyghtnes.
debonayrte / clear wit and clear engyne for to find. good memory for to
reteyne well. and good wys for to sing well. All these goods aforsayd nature
brings them in the natyuyte or birth of a person. Doctrine clergy and al
other goods be gotten by study or by accustomaunce. like as been good virtues.
good manners and other virtues. But these ben not yet very good ryghtful. For
they do not that which is perfytelye good. For many a phylosophre. and great
clerkys. Kings. Emperors and other many princes and other lords that had
many of these goods been dampened in hell. Also these goods has our lord
given to his enemies as well as to his friends. To Sarasyns To Jews To false
christian men like as he has to good men. Also this is not very good that
faylleth at need. and that may be lost maulgre him self And though theuys may
not take them and rob them. yet the death takes them away at the last. Also
I say that the very goods ayden always and greuen never / but certeynlye
such goods and such graces foreign been often damage and grieve them that have
them / if they use them not well according to god. For sum auaunte them and
been proud and despysen the other. when they to whom god has given such
graces and such goods as I have tofore said and named. if they use them not
well and Justly according to god. they shall be in gretter tormente in hell And
straytly they must acompte and yield a reckoning at the day of dome / of that
they have done. and how they have used and despended it / Notwythstondyng they
have gotten goods that god has lent to them for multeplyeng and encrees /

Here after is showed of the goods of grace capo. lxvj
NOw have I shortly showed the little good and the moyen good. Now will I show
to the which is the very good ryghtful and parfyte. This does he which has
the good with right and vnderstondyng^ For without the which was never no
good with right. This good is called the grace of god and virtue and charytee^
Grace by cause that she gives life and health to the soul / For without that.
the soul is deed. For like as the body is deed without the soul So is the
soul deed without the grace of god. It is called virtue by cause it adourneth
the soul with good werkys and with good manners / it is called charity by cause
it joins the soul to god. and also does al thing as it were with god. For
charity is no thing else but a dear unity / That is the perfection and the
beneurte to which we ought to entende. Much were deceived the ancient
phylosophres that so curyously dysputeden and enquyreden who was the souerayn
good in this life. and never could they find ne know hit / For sum set
their study and their wit in the delytes of the body / The other in
rychessys. the other in honest / but the great philosopher Saint Poul which
was rauysshed unto the third heaven and passes all other phylosophres techeth
us by many reasons that the souerayn good in this life. and that the queen of
virtues is to love god and to have very charity in him self / For without
this good ne auaylen all the other goods right naught / And who that has
this good of charity he has all other goods / and when al other goods
shall faylle / this good shall not faylle. and above all the great goods that
been this charity is lady / Then the grettest good that is under heaven is
charity. After by cause that thou will and desyrest this good which by right
is called virtue / and that thou desyrest to love it most. and to seche it
above all other goods. I will yet show to the his valor. It is acustomed to
deuyse three manners of goods in the world. that is to wit goods honorable /
goods delectable. and goods prouffytable There be no moo goods ne very ne
good ne fair but these three manners / And this see thou openly of the world.
that none desires ne loves any thing but that he wene that it be honorable
or delectable or prouffytable / The proud secheth thing honorable. The
covetous man secheth things prouffytable / The delycious secheth things
delectable. And when they sechen this thing vaynlye. Every man ought to know
that vert^es have these three propretees. For virtue is much honorable and
delectable and pro^ffytable /

what virtues ben goods honorable capo. lxvij
Which virtues ben goods honorable. this may thou see in this manner. Six
things been in this world much desired by cause that they seem much
honorable. that is to wete beaulte wit prowess power fraunchyse and
noblesse. These ben vj fontanyes of vanyte. Of vayn glory comes and sourdeth
a plant. Beaulte is a thing much loved. For it is a thing much honorable.
and nevertheless beaulte that the eyes and the body see and love / is a thing
falls covert and vain. It is false for he or she is nothing fair But our eyes
ben vayn and feeble that see no thing but the skin wythoutforth. Then who
might see as clear as a be that is called a lynx which sees thorugh out a
wall he should cl^rely see that a fair body nys but a white sack full of
stynkyng dunge^ and like a dunghylle couerd with snow or with grene grass.
Also I say to the that this beaulte is much short and not abydyng. For it is
sone faylled and anon passed as a fume or a smoke. and as the flour of the
field or of the medowe. Anon as the soul departs fro the body. fare well all the beaulte is faylled and gone / Then the beauty that the body has. the
soul has given it to him / And therefore much fools been al they that for
the beaulte of the body gloryfye them self. But the beaulte of the soul is the
right beauty. which always encreaceth and never shall faylle. This is the v^ray
beaulte by which the soul pleases god and to the aungellys that seen the
heart / This beaulte renders and gives to the soul graces virtues and love
of god. For she reformeth reparaylleth and renders her right enprynte. That is
the image of her maker / which is beaulte without comparyson. and who best
resembles in getyng the virtues. in pluckyng up and cast from him all
sins. and keep his commandments entyerly he is most fair. Then the
most fair thing that is under god. is the soul which has parfytely his
right form and his right clerete. color of flour. clerenesse of the son /
figure of man. and playsaunce of precious stones. And all that the eye of the
body sees of beaulte is fylthe and foul to the regard of the soul / and all that may be thought of beaulte may not be compared to the soul.

Of very sapyence capitulo lxviij
Wit and clergy is a thing much honorable. and much do be preysed. But
and if thou will be wise a right and learn very clergy. do so that thou
have very good. that is grace and virtues. That is the very sapyence that
enlumyneth the heart of a man. like as the son enlumyneth all the world.
This wit passes and surmou^teth all the wit of the world. like as the son
passes the clerenesse of the moon / For the wit of the world nys but folly.
like as the scripture says / and chyldehode and wodenesse. Folly is in them
that so much louen the world and his beaulte / and that can not know the day
fro the night / Ne Judge between great and little. and between precious and vile.
They wene the moon to be the son / For they wene that the honor of the world
be very glory. and a little apple to be a great montayne. for they wene that
the world be a great thing / But to the regard of heaven it nys but pouerte.
They wene that a glass be a saphyr And they wene that their strength and
their power be much great. which is more feeble and more fraylle than is
glass / Also I say that this chyldehode the wit of the world is in them that
so much make them wise for to keep and ease the body and to be in delyces.
which lyuen as a child / that seche nothing else but to do their propre
will. In such people reason is deed / and therefore they lyuen as beestys. for
their wit is al turned and corrupt / like as is the taste and savor of a
seek man or of a woman great with child. which fyndeth more savor and
appetyte in a sour apple than in bread made of whete. and more savor in a
cool than in good metes / Also these people may not believe that there is more
Joy and delight in loving god and to serve and to honor him / than in doing
the will of the caroyne of their body / For they can not ryghtfully Judge
between sweet and bitter. Also I say that the wit of the world is wodenesse
in them that so much be subtyl in fyndyng malice for tengyne and deceive
other. be it by strength or by plee or by barate. And that ne think ne study
sauf to auaunce and enhaunce them self / and to grieve other / This wit as
says saint James is the wit of the devil. which always payneth him self to
do harm to other / But the very wit that the holy ghoost enseygneth and
techeth to the friends of our lord is in knowing without mysprysyng what every
thing is worth. he shows that the world is vayn in being foul in valor /
in loving it and sauouryng it / The rychessys ben vile and transytorye. And the
delytes been bitter. After he gives feelyng that the love of god and virtues
is a thing very precious and sweet. very for she fylleth the heart
nouryssheth and susteyneth it. She is precious for one may bye god and all that
he has. She is sweet. for it is the manna that al things makes sweet. labor
sorrow wepynges shames trybulacyons aduersytees martyrdoms and al pains / And
all that one may think to love. it makes it savor like su^re / This is the
wit and the sapyence whereof the scripture says. This is the sapyence out of
which grows purete and very conscience /

Of the prowess of the knights of Ihesu Christ capo. lxix
AFter I say that virtues and charity given very prowess / Then there is no
prowess by right. but in the knights of god which the holy ghoost adoubeth
and armeth with virtues and charity / In prowess been three parties. Hardynesse
Strength and Stedfastnes / There is none noble by right but if he have these
three things / but if he be hardy prudent and entreprenau^t of great things.
and strong and puyssant for to pursiewe them. and ferme and stable to fynysshe
them. But without wit and without purueaunce nothing auayllen none of these
iij things. For like as says the book of the art of chyualrye. Error
without bataylle may not be amended. For it is anon compared. Folyssh
enterprise is where as lies little prouffyte. much despence and great pain and
peril. These been thenterpryses of them that been called wise and hardy in
this world. that their bodies and their souls putten in sin in peril and
in pain for to get a little loos and preysyng which is much vain. and little
endures But virtue makes a man of great heart and of wise enterprise. when
she makes a man which is nothing but earth so hardy. that he dare enterprise
to conquer the royalme of heaven. and to vaynquysshe all the deuylles of hell
that been so strong This enterprise is good wise and much prouffytable / For
there is therein little peril. and little pain but there is glory honor and
prouffyte inestymable. and perdurable without mesure. who has no virtue has
no great heart. but he is like him that is aferde of naught. Such ben they
that doubten the euylles / the aduersytees / perils / and trybulacyons of the
world. And that have dread to lose that / which they may not long keep They
have no great heart that give hit over for naught. like as done they that give
their hertes for to love the goods of fortune / which in truth been right
naught / but fylthe charge and ordure to the regard of the goods and glory
perdurable Then such people been like a child. that loves better an apple
or a myrrour than a royame / But virtue gives great heart by right / For virtue
makes them to conquer heaven. despise the world / and to bear great deeds of
penance. And to supporte and gladly suffer all the euylles of the world and to
endure them for gods sake / And also for to wythstonde and resyste all the
assaults of the devil / Like as the wise and prudente Seneke says. wepynges.
myschau^ces / sorows. trybulaco^ns / harms shames. perils. and all that
which evil fortune may menace and do. have no more power against virtue / than
one drope of water should do in the sea. virtue makes a man hardy as a lion /
strong as an holyfaunte. ferme and durable as the son which always renneth
and is never weary. Then there is no prowess ne strength but in virtues.

Of very seygnorye which gives grace and virtues lxx
THus is there none very seygnorye. but in virtues. A great lord is he that
knows all the world. Such a lord gives to a man such virtues and grace.
For he sets a man in his right estate. in which he was first set in and
made. The man was made in such honor and in such seygnorye. that he was lord
over al creatures that were under heaven. to whom al things obeyed. and to
whom no thing might noye ne grieve. and this is the right estate to the man
and to his seygnorye. but he lost this seygnorye by sin. And might not
recover it ageyn but by virtue. But virtue sets a man on high. and sets
the world under his feet. and makes him to converse in heaven. virtue makes a
man by good right gretter lord of the world / than the king is of his royame /
For of the goods of the world he has as much as his heart desires. he has
his usage and his sustenaunce. and as much as he may have for suffysaunce. and
more suffysantlye than the king has in his royame / For all that the good has
and the evil / al is his. Therefore of all he does his prouffyte and preyseth
god and thanketh and loves him the more. and doubts and serves. And in this
he sees and knows that every creature is made for to serve him. Also there
is another seygnorye much great / without whom there is none by ryzt lord.
for he is emperor and lord of him self. that is of his body and of his heart.
which he Iustyceth and holds them in good pees and does his will / For his
heart is so joined to the will of god / so that of all that. that god does he
thanketh him. and it playseth him well / And this is the seygnorye that virtue
gives to him that has it. Of this speaks seneke and says as great honor
gives god to the / when thou art lord and emperor of thy self and more tha^ a
king / ha lord god how many kings emperors and other great lords have been in
the world and also barons / that have citees / castellis. and royames that have
not this seygnorye. For they be not lords of their hertes. By cause that it
tormenteth often. by wrath or by maletalente. or by couetyse. or by desire that
they may not accomplysshe.

Here is spoken of very fraunchyse capo. lxxj
AFter this I say that there is none that has very frau^chyse / if he have
not grace and virtue. Then if thou will know what is very frau^chyse of a
man and of a woman by right. Thou ought to understand that a man has iij
manner of fraunchyses / One of nature. another of grace / and the third of
glory. The first is free will by which a man may chese and do freely good or
evil. This fraunchyse holds every man of god so freely that no man may do it
wrong ne all the deuylles of hell may not enforce a man ayenste his will to
do a sin without his accord and consentemente. For if a man did evil against
his wylle^ he should have thereof no sin. for as much as he in no wise might
eschew it. like as says saint austyn / This fredom and fraunchyse has every
man / But this fredom is not in children. ne in wood men. ne in fools. by
cause they have not the usage of reason by which they can chese the good from
the evil / A man puts away from him this fraunchyse in great party when he
synneth dedelye. For he sells him self unto the devil for the delight of his
sin / And yeldeth him self unto him. and bycometh his servant by sin. so
that he may not cast him self out. ne put him fro his will. for he has
deserved the death of hell. if the grace of god help him not. The second
fraunchyse is such that the wise man has in this world / whom god has
frau^chysed by grace and by virtues from the service of the devil. and fro
sin. that they be not bond to gold ne to silver / ne to temporalle goods
of this world. ne to their bodies which is caroyn. ne to the goods of fortune
/ which the death may sone take away. but they have their hertes lift up and
given to god. so that they preyse no thing the goods of the world. ne the
honors. ne the vanytees / ne king / ne duc / ne meschaunce ne pouerte. ne
shame. ne death / For they been now deed to the world. and have the heart so
deceueryd and taken away fro the love of the world. that they desire the death.
like as the werkman his payment of his Journey or days labor. and the
labourer his hyre. and also like as they that been in the torment and in the
fortune of the sea. desire to come to port salve / And like as the prysonner
desires good delyueraunce / and as the pilgrim desires to come ageyn in to
his contreye. And if they be parfytelye free in this world like as a creature
may be. then fere they ne doubt they no thing but god. and been in greet
pees of heart. For they have then their heart in god and been in heaven by
desire / And this fraunchyse comes of grace and of virtue. But yet all this
fraunchyse nys but seruytude to the regard of the third. fraunchyse that they
have that been in glory / They be verayly free. For they be verayly delyuerd
fro all perils and fro all torments. fro fere of death and of death. fro the
grynnes and empessheme^s of the world fro myserye / fro pouerte. and fro al
pain of heart and of body without retornyng. Of the which thing there is
none free in this world / how parfyte that he be /

Of very noblesse capo. lxxij
WHo that shall have the second fraunchyse of which I have spoken shall come to
great noblesse / The very noblesse comes of gentyl heart. Certain none heart is
gentyl but if he love god. There is no noblesse but to serve and love god and
to keep him fro al sins and from the seruage of the de.+uyl. Ne there is no
vylanye but to anger god by sin. There is no man by right gentyl. ne noble of
the gentylnesse of his body. For as touching the body we ben al sons of one
mother. That is of the earth and of fylthe of which we al have taken flesh
and blood. Of this part there is none gentyl ne free. But our sweet fader
Ihesu Christ which is king of heaven that fourmed the body of the earth and
created the soul to his image and semblau^ce. and al in like wise as it is of
the carnal fader. that is much glad and joyous when his sone resembles him /
Right so is it of our fader Ihesu Christ. For by the holy scripture. and by his
messagers he techeth us. that we should pain our self to resemble him. And
therefore he sent to us his blessed sone Ihesu Christ in to therthe for to bring
and give to us the very exemplayre. by which we may be reformed to his image
and semblaunce like as they that dwell in the hye cytee of heaven / That been
the angellys and the saints of heaven / where eueryche is of so much more hye
and more noble. As more proprely he bears this fair image / And therefore the
holy men in this world pain them self to know god. and to love him with all
their heart. and purge them cleanse and keep them from all sins. For of so
much as the heart of a creature is more pure and more clean without sin / of
so much he sees more clearly and more euydently the precious face of Ihesu
christ. and of so much he loves more ardauntly. of so much he resembles
more proprelye. And by that he has the more gretter glory. And this is the
very noblesse that god has given us / And therefore says right well Saint
Johan the appostle and euangelyst / that then we shall be the sons of god /
and we shall resemble him proprely. wha^ we shall see him euydently like as he is
/ This shall be in his glory. when we shall be in heaven. For no man sees so
dyscouerd ne so clearly the beauty of god. like as says saint poule / But
then we shall see him face to face proprely and clearly when we shall be in
glory in his Joyous company The very noblesse of a man then begins by
grace and by virtues / and that is parfyght glory / This noblesse makes the
holy ghoost in the hertes that he purges and culumyneth in truth and in
parfyte charity / These been the grettest goods that god has done to
aungellis like as saint Denis says. by which they resemble their maker / Thus
werketh the holy ghoost by grace and by virtue in the hertes of good men / by
which they be reformed to thymage and to the semblaunce of their maker Ihesu
Christ as much as it may be in this mortal life / For they reyse them self so
in god / and enbrace them self so with the love of god. And al their
entendement. al their entencyon / their will / their memory is all converted
to god / And this love and this enbracement and desire which encreaceth
Joins and vnyeth so the heart to god. that they may no thing will. but
that. that god will For there is not between them and god but one self will.
And then he has thymage and the semblaunce of god as much as may be had in
this world. And this is the most great noblesse and the most hye gentylnesse
to which one may atteyne or mount. Ha good god how far from this noblesse
and fro this hyenesse ben they that make them so noble and so queynt. Of this
pour noblesse that they have of their mother the earth which bears and
nouryssheth the hogs as well as she does the Emperors and the Kings. And
they auau^te them of their gentylnesse. by cause they wene they be of more
gentyl fylthe than the other. and of this kynrede and parage conne they right
well recounte and tell / But that other side and that other noblesse they
behold no thing at all. of which comes the very noblesse and the gentyl
parage They should behold and take heed to their very exemplayr Ihesu Christ /
which more loved and honored his mother. than did any other man. And
nevertheless when one said to Ihesu Christ. Sir your mother and your cosyns
stonden without to seche you. he answered to them and said. And who is my mother
and who is my fader and cosyns / who someuer do the will of my fader that is
in heaven. he is my brother / he is my fader. my suster / and my mother. for this
is the noble side and the gentyl kynrede / by which comes and grows to the
heart very glory. and of that other grows vain noblesse and pride.

How charity is grettest of virtues capo. lxxiij
NOw I have suffysauntly showed to the that there ben no goods honorable by
right but virtues and charity. This is the fair love of god / For there is none
other good prouffytable without this virtue of charity. This witnesses to us
saint poul that says thus. If I have as much science so that I knew al
clergy and al langages. and spoke as well as men or angellys. and knew all the
scryptures and the counseylles of god. and if I delyuerd my body to martyrdom.
and gaf all that I had to pour people / and if I did by miracles that the
montaygnes lepen from one place to another. if I had not the virtue of charity /
all this should not auaylle me. Now behold then and take heed that saint
Poul whom we ought to believe. has here named the grettest things and good
that one may do. and that most auaylle and prouffyten. That been penaunces of
the body. to suffer martyrdom to aid the pour people. to convert sinners. and
to have science of langages / and thappostle says al these things auayllen
not without charity. and if such and so great goods auayllen not. how should
less god auaylle. That same may thou know by reason. Think on this
proverb which is comunely said. As much is a man worth as his land is of
value. This is as true as the pater noster / who well under stands. how the
man is of no value. or sum thing or more or less. And this is no doubt
but it be that he have love and the charity of god. and who that has most is
most worth. and who that has less is less worth. and who that has naught
is naught worth. For how well that a man has temporalle goods. like as is
gold or silver or other rychessys / or of spyrytuel goods or naturalle. like
as art. engyne science clergy strength prowess or other goods / How shall I
say that they prouffyten. for they been the most part more cruelly dampened.
by cause they use not aryzt the goods that god has lent to them for to
multeplye and for to win than ben they that no thing know. Also if he do
bodyly werkys / as don the laborers the mynystrelles and other werkmen. or if
he do spyrytuel werkys as to fast wake clothe the pour were hayer. if this be
without charity all this auaylleth nothing. For he shall never have thereof
merit. But he that has virtue and parfyght charity / of all that that god
sends him in this world he does his prouffyte. and with al conquereth grace
and glory. Charity is good and sure marchaundyse. For oueral it wynneth and
never leseth / She byeth all the good wares. and makes al hyrs. and always she
has her penny ageyn. This is the love of the heart which is the penny / with
which she byeth all the goods of the world. and it remains always in the
almerye. love of charity has in all places his sales. Charity wynneth in all
quarellys. and has vyctorye in all bataylles / She does so much that it is
as much worth to her to give a penny. as to another an hundred pound / And
also charity does so much that it auaylleth one as much to fast one day. as
another all the lent. and to say one pater noster. as another to say a
psaulter^ And this is for none other reason. but by cause that as much is a
man worth as his land is of valewe. and so much ben worth his werkys / for so
much as a man has very love in god. so much he wynneth more every day. The
love that a man has to god is the poys and weight of saint Mychel. For none
other thing may not waye^ when one takes every day his wages. but the love
and charity. And therefore I say that there is none good prouffytable. proprely
to speak by right but fair love and charity.

Of two manner of delectable goods capitulo lxxiiij
IN like wise as god made man of body and soul. Right so has he given two
manner of delectable goods for to draw his heart to him. and in whom is all the very delight The sum goods comen wythoutforh and by the v wits of the
body / by seeing by heryng by smellyng by tastyng and by touching. These v
wits ben also as five conduytes / by which the goods delectable of the
world entren in to the heart for to delight him and for to lycke and draw to the
very delyces which ben in god to serve to love and to honor him. for all the
delight of this world that the five wits have / been not but a drope of dew
to the regard of the fontayn. that is Ihesu christ / But of the great see of
these goods. descends the drope of dew / when one sees hit a far
resemble to a precious stone. But when one weneth to take it. it falls to
ground and bycometh naught. Thus is it of the delytes of the five wits
bodily. when one thinks or fygureth or wyssheth or when one desires them /
it appyereth much precious. But when a man has and holds them. anon they be
lost. and bycome truffes and dremes. Think on the delight of the last year. and
of thy dreme to night. thou shall see that al is one. anon they passen. and
anon they comen ageyn. and in no manner may they fulfylle the heart of a man.
And if in a drope be as much sweetness / that it is the sweetness of all the
fontayne / Then is that a delectable good / And therefore the wise and holy
men in all that they saw in this world / and sauoureden of the delectable
goods of the world preyseden god. and most desyreden the love of him. and the
more that they saw the dropes sweet / the more they desyreden to come to the
fontayne celestyal. And therefore it is well known / that the more that one
forgeteth the drope. the more he loves the fontayn. and the reuerse / The more
that one loves the drope the more he hates the fontayn and forgeteth it. And
the more that the sweetness of the world playseth to a creature which he so
much desires / the less has he of the sweetness of god. Therefore the good
men take the less of the sweetness of the world as much as they may and will
not use the flesshly delytes / ne the deduytes that comen by the five wits
bodyly / A good lord god how much been they fools. and more than beestys.
that know well that the body of a man is the most foul thing that may be.
and that the soul of a man is the most noble thing. the most precious / and
the most noble creature that may be. Therefore they should not wene that the
goods that come of the body be more delectable and sweet. than they of the
spyrite / which ben very good. pure / and perdurable / and may fulfylle the
heart and replenysshe it. Such goods gives god to a man in this world. when
he gives to him pees of heart and vyctorye against his sins and against
thenemyes of hell. And gives to him glory of conscience and apeasyble heart
/ when he replenyssheth the heart with love and spyrytuel Joy / Of such Joy
ne of such delight. no semblau^ce ne no comparyson may be fou^den in the joys
of the world / ne been not but dropes to the regard of the fontayne of
sweetness which is Ihesu Christ. This is the fontayne of sweetness of which
our lord speaks in the gospel. who that shall drink of the water that I shall
give him. he shall become a living fontayne. which shall make him lepe in to
the life perdurable. This is the fontayn of joy of sweetness and of charity.
which may fylle and replenysshe the heart. And none other thing what someuer
it be may not fylle it Of this fontayne has tasted Dauyd the prophet which
says in his psaulter. O lord god how much is the multitude of thy great
sweetness / which thou kepest to thy servants. and departest to thy
friends. And certain who had well tasted and sauoured this sweetness that god
has given to his friends / he should despise all the delyces and all the Joys
of this world / and should chese and reteyne the spyrytuel Joy. And should do
like as they that bulte the mele and deceuereth the flour fro the bre^ne and
grous. and as they that make the oil / that take the clear pure fat. and
leave the gross matere. For Joy of the heart that comes of god to love / to
serve and honor him which is very Joy parfyte / like as says the proverb.
That none has parfyght Joy if it come not of love / And therefore this joy is
called oylle in holy scripture. like as our lord says by the prophet. I
shall give says he Oylle of Joy for weeping. This is joy of heart pure and
very for weeping of penance. Of this oylle ben enoynted they that god has
made kings and lords of the world and of them self / And then is a man
parfyte christian when he is enoynted with holy cresme. For of crisme is said
cries. and of christ is said christian / that is of Ihesu Christ And who that is
enoynted of such oynement. that is of Joy and love of god. he lives in god
and god in him. like as the appostle says / And this is then the life of a
Christian / that is to speak right. the life of a man / This is a good life and and
blessydnes that al christian men ought to seche and desire for to get the life
perdurable. ye know much well that he is not in life. but in langour / that
always lives in pain. in thought and in anguysshe. This is no thing. but now
weep. and anon laughe. Now is ease. now is he at mysease / now is he in anger.
now is he in pees. now in Joy. now in sorrow. Then who that will led a good
life / and live Justly without sin. seche he that he have the very good.
then he shall have life honorable / delectable and prouffytable. And then he
shall live as a man reasonable. That is to say holyly / ordynatly. wisely
Ioyously and meryly / Meryly without anger. wisely without errour^ and Ioyously
without sorrow. and this life has one by grace and by virtue / and none
otherwise /

Here after is spoken of virtues in especyal capo. lxxv
NOw I have showed to the generally here tofore the dygnyte and the valor of
the virtue of charity. and wherefore one ought to get it. For great prouffyt
comes for to have it. as Joy. honor. and glory perdurable. But by cause men
know not the thing so well in general as they do in specyal Therefore is mine
entencyon to speak of virtues in especyal. in such manner that eueryche that
will study in this book may ordeyne his life by virtue and by good werkys. For
otherwise little should auaylle to know the good if he do it not. For like as
says Saint James the appostle. who that knows the good and does it not / he
synneth and mysdoeth / he is a fool that knows the right way. and ernestly
gooth out of hit The holy scripture says thus. The wise man or wise woman
has a fair gardyn full of verdure and fair trees and of good fruytes^ whereof
god says in the book of love to the holy soul. My suster. my friend thou art
a gardyn enclosed of two closures. That is of the grace of god and of angellys.
This gardyn planted the great gardyner / That is god the fader when that he
admolysshed and made soft the heart of the creature humayn. and made it sweet
and traytable like wax chauffed / and as good earth well arrayed and cultyued.
and worthy that good ympes should be therein planted. These ympes been the
virtues which the holy ghoost bydeweth with his grace The blessed sone of god.
which is the very son / by the virtue of his clerenesse makes them to grow
on hye and prouffyte These three things be necessary to all the things that
grow in earth. that is to wete. earth couenable / humor nourysshable / and
hete reasonable / without these three things spyrytually may not the ympes of
virtues grow ne bring forth fruit. These things makes the grace of the
holy ghoost in the heart of the person. and makes to wexe grene / to
flourysshe and to fructefye. and it makes him as a gardyn much delectable full
of good and precious trees. But in like wise as god planted in paradys
terrestre plente of good trees and of fruit. And in the myddle he planted a
tree. which was called the tree of life. By cause that his fruit had strength
and virtue to keep the life to them that should ete of hit without deyeng. and
without ever to have any maladye or sekenesses / Right so does he spyrytuelly
in the heart of a person. The great gardyner / that is god the fader. For he
planted the trees of virtues / And in the myddle he set the tree of life /
That is Ihesu christ. which says in the gospel. who that eteth my flesh and
drynketh my blood has life perdurable. This tree enuerdureth and embelyssheth
by his virtue all that which is in paradys / By the virtue of this tree grown
and flourysshen and fructefyen all the other trees. In this tree is al good /
as much as there is / This tree is to be preysed and to be loved for many
things. For the rote. for the fruit / for the stock / for the flower. for the
odor. for the leef / and for his fair shadow. The rote of this tree is the
right great love and the oultrageous charity of god the fader / of which he
loved us so much. that for to bye ageyn his evil servant / he gaf his right
blessed sone and delyuerd him to death and to tormente / Of this rote speaks
the prophet and says thus. That a rod shall issue of the rote of Iesse /
This word is as much to say as embracer of love. The stock of this precious
tree. is the precious flesh of Ihesu Christ. The heart of this tree. that was
the holy soul in which was the precious marghe of the sapyence of god. The
bark of the tree was the fair conversation wythoutforth. The droppynges of
this tree and the body. weren three precious things and of right great virtue /
which yssueden and dropped out of the precious members of Ihesu crist that
were the water. the teres. the sweet and the blood / The leuys of this tree
weren the precious and holy words of Ihesu Christ which heleden al maladyes /
The flowers were the holy thoughts of Ihesu Crist which were fair / honest
and beryng fruit / The fruit weren the twelve apostles / which fed all the
world and nourysshed it with their holy doctrine. by their examples. by their
good werkys. and with their benefaytes. The branch of this tree in one sens.
been all the chosen that ever were / and that been. and that ever shall been / For
like as our savior Ihesu Christ said to his appostles. I am said he the vygne.
and ye ben the branches In another sens. his branches were his fair virtues.
and his gloryouse exemples / which he showed by work / and taught them with
his mouth. These were the parfyte virtues and full of very beneurte and
blessydnesse / which Ihesu Christ showed to his pryue friends to the xij
apostles. whom he led in to the montayne / and there he satte as says the
gospel. and his dyscyples were about him. And then the debonayr Ihesus
opened his mouth and said Blessed be the pour of spyryte. for the royalme of
heaven is theyres. Blessed be the debonayr for they shall be lords of the
earth. Blessed be they that wepen / For they shall be comforted. Blessed be they
that have hungre and thurst for Justice / for they shall be full fed. Blessed
be the mercyful. for they shall find mercy. Blessed be they that be clean of
heart. for they shall see god. Blessed be the peasyble. for they shall be called
the sons of god. These ben the seven branches of life of the blessed sone of
god Ihesu Christ. In the shadow of this tree ought the fine. and good heart to
shadow him. and ought to see and behold these fair branches. which bear
the fruit of life perdurable / In these branches and in these seven words is
enclosed all hyenesse. al perfection of grace. of virtue and of blessydnesse. as
much as may be had in this world. and to have and atteyne in that other. For
these ben seven rules of holy life which Ihesu Crist taught to his children.
This is the very phylosophye that the maystre of angellys enseygned to his
dyscyples In these words is enclosed all the sum of very perfection of the
new law of love and of swetnesse. And it is well said new. For it may well
wexe old. like as did tholde law to the Jews. And by cause that the soul
was woxen old by sin. it is made young ageyn and bycomen new by these
words aforesaid. It is very new and desguysed fro the other laws. law is
said by cause it is bounden / But the other bynden. and this unbinds / The
other chargen / this dyschargeth. The other laws men^cen and threten / this
law promyseth / In other laws is plee / In this new law is pees / In other
laws is dread / In this new law is love / The other laws have maledyctyon
and cursyng. this new law has benedyction and blessyng / Then is this new
law al full of beneurte and blessydnesse / And therefore ben blessed all they
that keep it and accomplysshe it. this says Salamon. For all they that keep it
well wynnen the tree of life perdurable. Then these vij words abouesayd which
god said ben called blessings / For they make a man to be blessed as much as
he may be in this present life. and yet more blessed in that other. Now have
thou herd what the tree of life is. which is in the myddel of paradys which
god planted in the holy soul / In the shadow of this tree grows and
prouffyteth the fruit; The tree of virtues which god the fader. that is the
great gardyner / planted in this gardyn. and bydewed it with the fontayne of
grace. which makes it wexe grene. grow and to prouffyte / and holds it in
virtue. and in life / This fontayne is departed in to seven ryuers. These ben
the vij yeftes of the holy ghoost. which arowsen and watren all the gardyn. Now
behold the right great curtosy of god. which came in to this world. for to
seche and save that which was lost. by cause that he knew well our pouerte
and our feblenesse. by which we may fall in to sin But by our self we may
not relyeue us ne issue out of sin ne get virtue ne do none other good / but
if it be by the grace of god / or that it come of his yefte. and therefore he
cesseth not to excyte us that we pray and require him of these yeftes. And
promyseth much to us / that if we require and demand him any thing that is
good for us / and that it be ryghtfull we shall have it. And yet the debonayr
Ihesus does unto us more of his curtosye. For he is our advocate that forms
for us our request and our petycyon. For we have not the wit if he formed it
not to us. The petycion. the request or oryson that the sweet Ihesus informed
and taught us with his blessed mouth / is much fair. much good / and but
short by cause we should reteyne it well / That is the pater noster. wherein been
vij petycyons and requestys. by the which we require our good fader Ihesu
Christ. that he give us the vij yeftes of the holy ghoost / that he deliver us
fro the vij dedely sins. and that he take them away fro our hertes. And instead of the said sins. that he by his grace will plant there and nourysshe
the vij virtues / which bring us to the vij blessings of perfectyon and of
holy life. by which we may have the promysses that the debonayr Ihesus maad and
promised to his chosen people in the seven words aforesaid. Then our
entencyon is with the aid and grace of the holy ghoost. to speak first of the
seven petycions of the holy ghoost which been contained in the holy pater
noster. After I purpose to say of the yeftes of the holy ghoost / After of the
seven virtues. against the seven dedely sins / The seven petycyons and
requests ben like as seven fair maidens that never cesse to draw the living
waters out of seven ryuers for to watre and arouse these seven trees that bear
the fruit of life perdurable /

The seven petycyons an drequestes that been contained in the holy Pater noster
capitulo lxxvj
When a lytyl child is set to scole. at begynni^g he lerneth his pater
noster / who that will learn of this clergy and know it. he must be little and
humble as is a child. For our good master Ihesu Christ techeth his scolers
this clergy which is the most prouffytable and the most fair that is / who
that this doctrine well knows. understands / and well reteyneth hit For such
there be that wene well for to understand it. that no thing know thereof / by
the bark or rynde wythoutforth That is the lettre which is good. But little is
hit worth to the regard of the margh^ / of the goodness and of the great
substance which wythinforth is so sweet / It is much short in words and
much long in substance / light to say and subtyl for to understand. This
prayer and oryson passes and surmounteth all other in three things. That is
to wit / In shortness / In dygnyte / and in prouffytablenesse The dygnyte is
in that. that the right blessed sone of god made it. to god the fader in short
words. God the holy ghoost touching his demand. he will that it be short in
words. by cause that none ne excuse him to learn it and to conne it / And also
by cause that none should be grieved to say it wyllyngly and often. And for to
show that god the fader hereth us right soon / and grau^teth it gladly when
we pray him with good heart. so that it be not of long ryotte ne of words
polysshed ne rymed / For sweet Saint Gregory says Verayly for to work is not
to say fair and glosyng words with the mouth. but to cast out wepynges
and deep syghes from the heart. The valor and the prouffyte of this oryson or
prayer is so great / that it compryseth and encloseth in words much short /
all that which may be desired of heart. and prayed and demanded of mouth.
That is to be delyuerd of all euylles. and replenysshed with al goods Thus
begins the holy pater noster. Fader our that art in heaven. Behold now how
our good advocate. and our right good and blessed master our Lord Ihesus
Christ which is the sapyence of god the fader. and that knows all the vsages
and all the laws of his court / techeth us for to plete well. and to speak
wisely / subtylly. and shortly. But certeynly if the first word that thou
say. fader our that art in heuen^ yt that it be well vnderstonden and well
poursyewed he shall give to the all thy request and all thy demand / For
Saint bernard says that the oryson that begins by the right name of god the
fader / gives to us hope to Impetre and get all our prays and requestys
This sweet word fader. which makes sweet all the remenaunte. shows to the
that. which thou ought to believe / and somoneth the to that. which thou
ought to do. And these two things saves the man when he byleueth well and
a right And when he does after that he ought to do. when thou call him
fader / thou know that he is lord of the house. that is of heaven and of
earth. and capytayn and beginning. And fontayne of whom all creatures and
all goods comen. Thus knowlechest thou in that. his puyssaunce and might /
After I say by cause that he is a fader / he is ordeynour. governor. and
pourueour of his meyne. and specially of his children / that is of the men
whom him self has created. made and fourmed to his semblau^ce. and in this
thou knowlechest his sapyence / yet also sithe that he is a fader by nature and
by right. he loves that which he has maad. Like as says the book of
Sapyence. And he is debonayr and loves and nouryssheth his children / and
does their prouffyte better than they can deuyse / And he beteth and
chastyseth them when they mysdoon for their prouffyte as a good fader. And
gladly he receives them unto mercy and to pardon. when they have trespaced /
and return to him by great repentance And by this we know his bountee and
his great debonayrtee Now I have showed unto the then this word. when thou
say fader. his Puyssaunce. his Sapyence^ his bountee and his debonayrte / On
that other part he remembers thy self. thy noblesse. thy beaultee. and thy
richesse. Of more great noblesse ne may thou not be sone Ne unto so great a
king. Ne unto so mighty or puyssaunt an Emperor as is god. For more gretter
richesse may thou not have. than to be heir of all that he has. More great
beaulte may thou not have than to resemble him by right. The which beaulte
is so great that it passes the beaulte of man and of angellys. Then this
word fader remembers the that thou art his sone. by cause that thou paynest
thy self to resemble him. as a good sone ought to resemble his fader and to
ensyewe thy good fader. in all good virtues and in all good werkys. That is
to say that thou be wise and noble. vygorous strong and puyssaunte to do well
/ to keep the from all sins. and strongely resyste against the temptacyons of
the fend / And that thou be wise and aduysed. large. curtoys. sweet and
debonayr. clean without vylonye and with out sin / like as is thy fader our
lord Ihesu Christ. And that thou hate sin and fylthe and al evil. as does
thy good fader Ihesu christ. so that thou forsake him not. This word then
fader. remembers the all the times that thou say it. that if thou be his
good and true sone. thou ought to resemble him by nature. by commandment
and by right. For thou owe to him love. honor. reverence and dread. seruyse
and obedyence. Now think then when thou say thy pater noster / that thou
be to him a good sone and true if thou will that he be to the a good fader
and debonayr. hit is said to a knight. think whose sone thou art / for to give
to him the gretter courage. when he enters in to the tournoyeng. here see
thou how this first word when thou say fader. how sweet it is. and how it
admonesteth the. that thou be valyaunte and noble. and techeth the what thou
sholdest be.

wherefore thou say fader our. and not fader mine lxxvij
NOw demand I of the wherefore that thou say fader oure^ and thou say
not fader mine. And unto whom thou accompanyest the / when thou say give to
us and not give to me / None ought to say fader our. but he that is his sone by
nature without beginning and without endyng. That is the blessed sone of god
Ihesu Christ. But we ben not his sons by nature. but in as much as we be maad
to his image and to his semblaunce / So ben the sarasyns and the Jews. we
been his sons by grace and by adopcyon. Adopcyon is a word of law / For the
law of the Emperors. when an hye man has no children / he may chese the sone
of a pour man if he will. and make of him his sone and his air if he will by
adopcyon / This is by aduoerye. And by that he shall be his herytyer and his
heyr and have his heritage This grace has given to us the sone of god the
fader without our deserte. like as Saint Poul says / when he maad us come to
baptesme / where as we were pour and naked / and all sons of wrath and of
hell Then when we say fader our / and we say give to us / we accompanye with
us all our brethern by adopcion. which been sons of holy church / by the
faith that they received in baptesme / Now we show then by this word
ours. the largess and the curtosye of god our fader. which gives more
gladly enough than little. to many than to one / whereof Saint gregory says.
that the prayer that is common is much worth and prouffytable. In like wise as
the candel is better employed and is more prouffytable that serves and
lyghteth many men / than that which serves and lyghteth but one man allone
This word fader our admonesteth us to yield thankynges with all our hertes
of this grace which god has done to us. by which we ben his sons and his
heirs. and that much ardauntly we ought to love our brother and fader Ihesu
christ which has accompanied us with him to this grace. This word our
admonesteth that we keep in our hertes the holy ghoost which is our witness
of this adopcyon / And like as he were a gayge or wedde. This says the
appostle Saint Poule. By whom we be sure. that we shall have the heritage of
our fader our lord Ihesu Christ. That is the glory of our fader of heaven. This
word fader our techeth us and says that we been all brethern. both great
and small. Pour and rich. high and low. of one fader and of one mother /
That is of god and of holy church. And that no man ought for to despise. ne
mespreyse another. but to love him as his own brother. And that one ought to
aid and help another. like as the members do of one self body / And also we
ought to pray the one for that other like as says the blessed appostle Saint
James. and in this our prouffyte is much great / For when thou say thy
prayer in common. thou have part in all the comynalte of holy church And for
one Pater noster that thou say. thou wynnest more than an hundred thousand.

This word ours techeth us to hate three things in especyal. Pride. Hate. and
auaryce / Pride puts a man out of company / when he will be above all
other people. Hate puts him out of company. For when he hates and warreth
one. he warreth all the other / Auaryce puts him out of companye^ For he
will not him self. ne that his things comyne with other / And therefore such
people have no part ne company in the holy pater noster^ This word our.
shows that god is ours. if it be not in our deffaulte. if we will. The fader
the sone and the holy ghoost. That is if we keep his commandementes like as the
gospel says.

why we say. qui es in celis capitulo lxxviij
When that I say. qui es in celis. that is to say. which art in heaven. I say
two things. like as I shall say / The king is at paris. I say two things.
that he is a king and that he is at paris. Right so when I say that he is in
heaven. I say that he is. and that he is in heaven It is founden in holy
scripture in two books of the law that god appyered to moses the prophet in
a montayne and said to him. Goo thou in to Egipte and say to king pharao on my
behalue that he deliver my people the children of Israel from the seruage.
wherein he holds them. Sir said moses if it be demanded of me how ye be
named what shall I say / I am that I am. said god. Thus shall thou say to the
children of Israel. He that is sends me to you. Now sayen the holy and good
clerkys. that emonge all the hye names of our lord this name is the first and
most propre / And that most aryght techeth us what god is. For all his other
names. either they speak of his bounte. or of his excellence. or of his
sapyence / or of his puyssaunce. or that he is such or such That is the right
good. the right wise / the right fair / the right puyssant / and many other
words as been said of him to his loange and preysyng. which say no thing of
the being of god / But we that been gross and rude to speak of so hye a thing
/ speak of god. like as one speaks and deuyseth of a man of whom he knows
not the name / Thus as it is said / he is a king he is a duc. he is an earl /
he is so great / he is so fair / he is so rich. he is so large. And many
of such propretees and Accydents. How and by what manner one may know what he
is / and what manner man / But he says not his propre name a right / But thus
as we speak of god we find many fair and sweet words. The which show unto
us sum thing of him / But there nys no word so propre / as this same word
here following / qui est. which so proprelye is showed to us and so subtylly.
In as much as our entendemente may stratche and compryse / For our blessed
Lord Ihesu christ is he. that is only. like as Job says. he is only. for
to say right. For he is only perdurable without beginning and without endyng
/ But this may not be said of none other thing. After he is very truth. For
he is way and truth. All things created. that been creatures. ben vayn and
vanytees as Salamon says / and be naught to the regard of him / and to naught
shall they come. fro whens they came if he sustain them not. and keep them by
his virtue. yet also he is only establement and steadfastness. For he is
always him self / and in one self point without trouble without to change
him / without to moeue him in any manner. this says Saint James. Al other
things been moeuable in sum manner of their nature. Then is he proprely
called / that is. For he is verayly without vanyte / establysshement. without
beginning / without end. without he was. and without he shall be. for in him
is no departing. Now ought thou here understand that he is And that there
is no thing that may better be known than this. that god is / And therefore I
counceyl the that thou muse not tenquyre ferther / For thou may sone err and
goo out of the way. late it suffyse to the that thou say. Fader our that art
in heaven / Troth it is that he is oueral present. in earth in heaven. in see.
and in hell. like as he is in heaven / But it is said that he is in heaven. by
cause that he is more seen there. more known. more byloued / and more honored
After I say that the debonayr Ihesus is in persons spyrytuel and devout That
is in the holy hertes. that been hye / clensyd / clean and purged from all
sin as is the heaven / For in such hertes is he seen. known. honored and
loved. Now have thou herd these iiij words Pater noster qui es in celis / The
first word somoneth the to honor god. The second to love god. The third to
redoubte god. For how well he be fader and our. always he is Just and not
meuable. The fourth word somoneth the to engyne thy self to him and to encorage
and enforce the. for ^yth he is so hye and thou art so low / if thou be not
hardy and vygorous to vaynquysshe al sins / to resyste all the temptacions of
the enemy / and to keep holy his commandementes. thou shalt not come in to
the glory of heaven / The first word abouesayd shows to us the length of his
eternytee. The second the largess of his charity. The third the depnesse of
his veryte and truth / And the fourth the hyenesse of his mageste. who
someuer shall have these four things attained without doubt he shall be well
blessed.

How Sanctificetur nomen tuu^ is expowned capo. lxxix
Now have thou herd the prologue of the holy pater noster which is like unto
an enter in to a town. A lord god who that well could al this song / he should
find therein many sweet notes / For it is no doubt that in the prayer and
song spyrytuel which the sapyence of god made. he that taught the birds to
sing / has many notes and words subtyl and sweet in his holy song and
prayer of the holy pater noster. how well that it conteyneth little letter. In
this song and excellent oryson ben vij notes. which ben the seven petycyons
and requests of the holy pater noster. which get and Impetre the seven
yeftes of the holy ghoost / which put away and destroy the seven vices
capytal of the heart. those ben the seven dedely sins. And they plant and
nourisshe the vij virtues. by the which one may come to the seven blessings /
Of these vij peticions and requests The three first make a man holy as much as
he may be in this world / The iiij after makes him parfytly Just / All the
holiness of a man that is made to thymage of the holy Trynyte after three
things that been in the soul. that is to wete / memory. entendement and will
is in iij things / In this that the soul be parfytely purged. and the will
parfytly enlumyned. and the understanding parfytly confermed in god. and with
god in the memory. And the more the soul receives of god these iij things.
the more habondantly and more proprely she approaches more to his right beauty
naturelle^ That is to the semblaunce of the fader and of the sone^ and of the
holy ghoost. That is when god the fader confermeth unto him his memoire. God
the sone enlumyneth to him his understanding. God the holy ghoost purges in
him his will These three yeftes we require in the iij first peticions of the
holy pater noster. when we say / Sa^ctificetur nomen. we show to our good
fader curtoysly our pryncypal desire. which we ought always to have. That is
that his glorious name be sanctyfyed. and that it be confermed in us. Then
when we say Sanctificetur nomen tuum. we show to our good fader Ihesu Christ
curtoysly our desire / That is to say Sir this is our souerayn desire. This
require we above all things that thy blessed name be sanctyfyed in us. That
is thy good reno^mee / thy knowleche. thy faith be confermed in us. In this
first petycyon we require the first and the pryncypal yefte of the holy ghoost
/ That is the yefte of sapyence which makes steadfast. and confermeth the
heart in god. and Joins him so to him that he may not be desioyned ne
deceuerd. Sapyence is said of savor and for to sauoure / for when a man
receives this yefte. he tastes and assauoureth. and feleth the sweetness of
god. like as is felt the sweetness of good wine by the taste better than by
the sight. But to this that thou understand better what it is to say. Thy name
be santyfyed. Thou ought to know that this word / Saint is as much to say
as pure. as gold. as earth / as dyed in blood. as confermed. In these five
manners is sayntyfyed the holy ghoost of sapyence in the heart of a man. First he
cleanses and purges like as the fyrefyneth and purges the gold and the
silver / after he takes it away fro the earth. that is fro al carnal
affections. and makes al to bycome lothely that which he was wont to love /
like as the water is hated to him that is lykorous to the good wine / After he
haloweth him self all to the service of god. For he leueth al charges. and
puts him self al to think on god and to love serve and honor him. like as
the church and the monasterye is hallowed to the service of god. So that he
ought none other thing do but to serve and honor god. After he dies him
self in blood / For he puts him self in one so strong and ardant love and
in so sweet love of Ihesu Christ / and of devotion. that when he thinks on him
and on his passion / he is as he were all drunk of the precious blood that
Ihesu Christ shed for him in his holy passion like as is a soppe of hot
bread / when it is put in wine. This is a new bapteme / For to dye and to
baptyse is all one. After he confermeth him in god so strongelye / that
nothing may dysseuere ne desioyne him. Now then / will thou to say this word
/ thy name be sayntyfyed in vs^ That is to say give to us the yefte of sapyence
by which we may be so fined as is the gold. and the silver in the fornays /
and cleansed fro all ordures of sin. by which we be dronken of his love and
that al other loves be to us bitter / by which we be so given to the and to
thy service. that we never retche of none other charge. to the end that we be
not only wesshen fro all sins / but dyed in grain. renewed and rebaptysed
in the precious blood of Ihesu Christ by devotion of fervent love / to this that
the blessed name of our good fader Ihesu Christ be so confermed in us / that he
be our good fader. and we his good sons and his servants. as very obedyent
to all his commandments. and in such manner. that no thing what someuer it
be / may come ne happene to desioyne this fastnes ne this grace. Much is great
the grace of god wha^ the will of the creature humayn is so rooted in god and
confermed that it may not wagge ne moeue for no temptacyon / Much gretter a
thing it is / when one is so affermed in the love of god and so dronken in his
sweetness. that no soulas. ne no comfort / ne no playsaunce may not be had
but in him. and then is the heart parfytelye confermed in god. when the
memory is so fastened and joined to him. that it may not think on no thing
but on him / And this require we when we say / Sanctificetur nomen tuum. that
is to say / Sir thy name be sayntyfyed in us.

Here is the second petycyon and request of the holy pater noster capitulo lxxx
ADuemat regnum tuu^. This is the second petycyon and request of the holy
pater noster. where we pray and require. that the royame of god come in us.
and be within us Our lord says in the gospel to his dyscyples. The royalme of
god is now within you. Now understand well how this may be / when god gives to
a person in his heart the spyrite of understanding. Thus as the son takes
away the derknesses of the night. and wastes the clouds and the mystes in
the morning. Right so wastes this spyrite and takes away all the
derknesses of the heart. and shows him al his sins and defaultes great and
small / like as the rays of the son shows the motes and the duste that is
in the house / Also this spyrite of understanding shows on that other part.
not only that which is within him. but that which is under him. hell. and
that which is above him / heuen^ and that which is about him. all the fair
creatures / which al preysen god and wytnessen how god is fair. good. wise.
puyssant. sweet. and great. And who that sees most clear the creatures. is
most desyryng to see god. but let him consydere that he is not pure ne worthy
to see him. Then the good heart / true and devout chauffeth him / and is
angry with him self / Then he begins to enter in to his heart. and to
examyne him. And there he fyndeth so many sins. vices. pouertees /
deffaultes. troublynges of heart and of thoughts and evil will / that he is
angry with him self by great contrycyon and desplayser that he has of his
synnes^ And then he begins to cleanse his heart and purge him of al ordures
of sin by bitter repentance / and by devout confession / and after by
sharp and condygne penance / But when he has long led this life. and has
cast out al his sins by very confession / Then he fyndeth pees and rest
and consolacion. And tereth so much god to fall ageyn to sin / that him
seems that all the world be to him hell to the regard of this clerenesse
and this pees that he fyndeth in his heart. And this demand we of god when we
say. Aduemat regnum tuum / that is to say. Fair fader plese it to the that
the holy ghoost will enlumyne in us the heart. and cleanse and purge it fro al
sins / And that he vouchesauf to come and dwell as a king and a lord /
governor and commaundour in our hertes. so that all the heart be his / and
that he be king and lord and always that we may see him. For it is a life
perdurable to have the royame of god within us. Therefore says our lord in the
gospel / that the royame of god is as a tresour hyd in a field. that is in the
heart of a good man. which is more great than all the world.

The iij peticion and request of the holy pater noster lxxxj
FIat voluntas tua sicut in celo and in terra. This is the iij peticion and
request / where we pray our lord that his will be done in us / like as it is
done in heaven / that is as in holy angellys which ben in heaven / which ben so
enlumyned and confermed in god / that they may will none other thing but that
which that god will. we may not have this peticion ne this perfection but we
have the yefte of counceyl / which is the third yefte of the holy ghoost.
which techeth us to do his good will / and that he convert our caytyf and
fraylle will so that in us grow no propre will. but that his will be only
lady of all the heart holy / and do in us what someuer he will / like as his
will is done in holy aungellys of heaven which may not sin. And that always
done the will of god without mespryse and gaynsayeng. Now have thou herd the
three petycyons and first requests of the holy Pater noster. which ben the
highest and most worthy. In the first we demand the yefte of sapyence. In the
second the yefte of understanding. and in the third the yefte of counceyl. like
as I have tofore showed / These iij things we require not. by cause we should
have them in this mortal life parfytelye. But we show unto our good fader Ihesu
Christ our desires. that they be always in heaven where they ought to be. To the
end that these three requests and petycyons be done and accomplisshed in us in
the life perdurable / we demand them in this present life In the other four
petycyons that comen after we speak another langage^ For we say to our good
fader Ihesu Christ Give to us / Pardone us. keep us. and deliver us. For if we
have not of Ihesu Crist these four petycyons and requests in this present
world. we ben but deed^ For they be necessary to every person in this mortal
life.

The iiij petycyon and request capitulo lxxxij
PAnem nostrum cotidianum da nobis hodie / well techeth us our good master
Ihesu Crist to speak humbly and wisely. For he techeth us to say. Fair fader
give to us this day our bread cotydyan or daily. what may the sone less
demand of his fader. than only bread for to pass forth the day / he
demands none oultrage. ne wine. ne flesh. ne fysshe. but he demands
bread and no more not for a year. ne yet for a weke. but for to pass with the
day only / This seems that it is a little thing that we demand. but
certainly we require a much great thing. when we require of an abbot the
bread of an abbay / or require the fraternity. the company the part and the
right in all the goods of the abbey. Right so is it of him that demands of
god this daily breed / he has fraternity. part. company. and right in all
the goods that been in heaven. This is the blessed bread of heaven. of that
blessed couente / The bread of heaven / The bread of angellys. the bread
delectable / the bread of life perdurable. For it gives life understanding.
never to deye. and preserves a man / whereof god says in the gospel / I am the
bread of life which descended fro heaven. who that shall ete of this bread shall
always live without deyeng / This breed is right good mete. For hit stauncheth
all the hongres of the world / and fylleth a man and replenyssheth. this does
not other mete. this is the breed and the mete that thou take at the
sacrament of the altar. And this mete thou ought to take in great ardour
and in great devotion of heart. and in great desire / That is to understand
that thou ouztest to believe feythfully that this mete so much precious is the
very body of Ihesu Christ. and the soul. and the godhede al together without
error and without to demand or ask any ferther. For god may more than man
may understand. After a man ouzt to understand and chewe this precious mete.
like as the ox fedeth of the grass and cheweth his cudde / and then he
takes it in / That is to say that one ought to remember deuoutlye and often by
parties / the bountees and graces of our lord. and all the sorrows that Ihesus
Christ suffered in earth for us / Then the heart fyndeth the savor of this
precious mete / and causes a right great ardour of the love of god in right
great desire and will to do and to suffer all that he may for him / and more
than he may. And al this does the virtue of this blessed bread (...) the
sacrament of the mass which is the very precious b^^y of Ihesu Christ / This
is the bread that comfort and ^^^orceth the heart to that^ that he be well
strong to suffer and (...) do gr^te things for the love of god. But this may
not be (...) if he have the fourth yefte of the holy ghoost. which is (...)
the yefte of strength / which armeth and encorageth the ^nyght of god. and
makes him to re^ne gladly to martyrd^^ and to suffer Ioyously the torments.
Now may thou see. when we demand this bread of angellys. we demand the
yefte of strength. For like as the bodyly bread or materyal sustain the body
and enforce it. Right so the yefte of strength makes the heart strong to
suffer and to do great things for god. This bread celestial of angellis. we
call our / for he was made of our paste. he was sone of god the fader. and was
sone and borne of the glorious vyrgyn marye. Blessed be this glorious vyrgyn
fro whom came this blessed flower. For that was the debonayr Ihesus. which
was fried and crucyfyed on the cross for to redeem the world fro the pains of
hell / And this did he for the great brennyng love that he had unto us. This
is the bysquyt of which he garnysshed his ship of holy church to pass the
great see of this perilous world. he is ours. for he left to us at his
departing and leave taking at his last testamente the sweet Ihesu Christ. the
right large as the most great and most rich tresour that he might leave to
vs^ For he gaf him self to us as the most fairest Jewel that he might give to
us / And we ought deuoutelye. clenly and reverently keep him without sin. and
of this bread of angellys we ought every day to use for the love of him / and
in mind of his holy passion / he is verayly ours. For no thing may he take
away fro us against the will of ours. that is him self. we call our bread
cotydyan. that is to say of every day. that is to understand the cotydyan
distribucyon that he gives to his preestys and relygyous people every day
which done his seruyses and sing his masses and his hours. that is to all
good christian men and wymmen that every day by very love deuoutely make
remembrance of the dolorous passion of Ihesu Christ that he suffered for us. The
groos of the prouende of this bread of aungellys we take in harvest. that is in
heaven when we shall see the sweet Ihesu Christ dyscouerd / in his right great
beaulte like as he is / Therefore is it said cotydyan / that every day is to us
necessary. And every one ought to take the holy sacrament of the altar like
as done the preestys / which ben thereto ordained. Or otherwise every good
christian man or woman ought to take him by right faith / This bread is right
precious. right noble and right well arrayed / This is mete ryal in which been
all manner of delyces and al good savors like as says the book of sapyence.
This is none erthely mete that ought to be given to raskayll. but to hertes
gentyl and and noble which ben purged and cleansed fro al ordure of sin by
very repentance. by devout confession. and by entyer satysfactyon and
penance Of the virtue of this bread of angellys says Saint matthew
theuangelyst. and calls it bread sursubstancyal / That is to say. that it
passes and surmounteth all substance and all creatures of praysyng and of
virtue / of all dygnytees / and in all manners of valor / Nor none may better
name it ne descryue it ne more suffysauntlye than to call hit. breed
sursubstancyal /

It is said that a mete is substancyous. when there is therein enough of
substance and of nourysshyng / And for so much more as it is nourysshyng.
so much more it is said that it is substancyall. And by cause that in this
precious breed of Aungellys is more of nourysshyng of virtue. and of good than
ever may be thought and said is not said only that hit is substancyous
between any understanding and supposyng. but it is said sursubstancious This
bread require we at our good fader Ihesu Christ and we pray him that he will
give it to us in this day. that is in this present mortal life. to the^de that
we may make a good Iourneye. and abide more gladly our reward. that is in the
end of our life the glory perdurable.

Here follows the v petycion and request of the holy pater noster capitulo
lxxxiij
DImitte nobis debita nostra. sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris. In
this request and petycyon we require and demand our good fader of heaven that
he will pardonne and foryeue us our sins and our trespaces. like as we foryeue
them that have trespaced to us. or that trespass to us. Then we say thus
fair fader quyte to us our debtes like as we quyte our dettours^ Our dettes ben
our sins which we have increased upon our souls. This is the best and most
dear wedde that we may fine. whereof the synnar for one dedely sin which is
so sone passed as to the delight or as touching the deed. is bounden to so
great usure that he has no power to pay ne to fynyssbe^ that is the pain of
hell which is without end. After he owes unto god whom he has dysplesed
so great amends that he has no power to pay it. For in all his life if he
lived an hundred year or more he might ne could not make suffysau^t penance
For one dedely sin onely^ if god would use his ryghtful Justice. it should
never be fogyuen to the And therefore it byhoueth that in bitter and great
repentance the wicked synnar return unto the mercy of the debonayr and
blessed lord Ihesu Christ. And that he cry him mercy and demand pardon and
foryeuenes. For by the right of the court of Justice. the sinner shall be Iuged
and condeuipned unto death perdurable / And therefore our good fader Ihesu christ
which is soft and debonayr for to foryeue and pardone / large and curtoys for
to give / we pray him that he will pardone and foryeue to us our sins and
trespaces. But think and consider well how thou prayest / For thou say
pardone to us our sins and our trespaces. like as we pardone to them that to
us have trespaced. God shall not foryeue ne pardone to us / as he him self says
in the gospel. if we foryeue not and pardone to other that have trespaced to
us. Then he that says his pater noster if he keep in his heart rancour and
felonnye he prays more against him self than for him self / For he prays to
god that he forgive him not his sins. when he says foryeue me like as I
forgive. and therefore all the times that thou shall say thy pater noster tofore
god that sees thyn heart. Thou ought to forgive al evil talentes and cast
out of thyn heart al Ire and all rancour. Otherwise thy prayer is more against
the than with the. if it seem to the an hard thing and grievous to foryeue and
pardone to them that hate the / and that will the evil. or that have much
trespaced to the. or myssayed. Think that god pardoned his death to them that
crucefyed him / for to give to the an exaumple for to forgive. and more yet for
to pray for them that have trespaced to the / that god forgive them. and more
yet for to do well and good to them. and to help them if they have need / For
as he says in the gospel. that it is not a great thing ne great merit against
god to do good to them. that do us good / ne to love them that love us / For so
done the paynyms and the Sarasyns / Jews and other sinners. But we that been
the children of god by faith and by grace and been named christian of our blessed
Lord Ihesu Christ. and been heirs with him of the heritage of heaven. ought for
to foryeue each other. And also ought for to love our enemies. That is to say
their persons and pray for them and to do good to them if they have need.
For so comandeth god in the gospel. Then we ought only hate the sins and
to love her souls. Like as the members of one body love and supporte each
other. if one membre hurt that other by adventure / that other aduengeth him
not / And therefore we that been al one body in Ihesu Christ like as thappostle
says we ought to love and supporte each other. and not to hate ne to grieve.
and who that does otherwise he is an homycyde of him self. this says the
scripture / Such there be that can say their pater noster. that it were better
for them and more auaylable that they could say it aryght. For who that
pardons not. ne foryeueth with heart and with mouth. he moeueth his Judge
against him. In this prayer that we make to god. we require of him the yefte of
science. which makes a man wise and cunnyng. This spyrite shows to him.
what he is. fro whe^s he comes. whyther he gooth. and what he has don. and
what he has trespaced. how much he has lent. and how much he owes. And
when he sees that he has not whereof to pay. then this spyryte makes him
to repent. to weep and to syghe. and to cry god mercy and say. O good lord
foryeue and pardonne to me my debtes. that be my synnes^ for I am much
endetted unto the. for the euylles and sins that I have commysed and done.
and for the good deeds that I have forgoten and left to do. which that I
ought and might have done and for the goods and benefaytes that thou have done
to me^ and the great bountees which I have al day received and evil used them.
and have evil served the. And by cause lord that I much dread and doubt to
make my payement. I require the to pardone me that. which I owe unto the. when
this spyryte of science has thus enlumyned him that he knows his defaultes
and sins. Then he casts out of his heart all hate and rancour. and
pardons all his evil will and anger if he have any. And if he have any. and
is in will and in purpose to pardone and foryeue with good heart if any have
trespaced to him. Then may he well say / Fair fader forgive us our trespaces /
like as we do to them that have trespaced to us.

The vj peticion and request of the pater noster capo. lxxxiiij
ET ne nos inducas in temptacionem / Brent child fire dredeth / and he that
sometime is fallen in to sin. when his sin is pardoned him. he is more
doubtous and more aferde / and has more dread of the temptacyon of sin than
he had tofore / and therefore he prays to god to whom he has so much
trespaced. and also that has forgyuen and pardoned him. that he will keep him
fro falling in to hit ageyn. and says thus / Et ne nos inducas in
temptacionem. That is to say Fair sweet fader. suffer not thou that we enter
in to temptacyon. and that we consent not to any sin. The devil is the
temptour of sin. for it is his craft. of which he serves in the house of god
to preue the new knights of god / And if the temptacyon were not good and
prouffytable to good people. God which does al thing for our prouffyte. would
never suffer that temptacyon should come. But as saint Bernard says when our
temptour smyteth us on the back / He forgeth to us our crowns of glory /
like as he that smyteth on the back of a good knight / forgeth to him his
praysyng and his glory. The devil tempts a man proprely to the end that he
take him aweye and depart him holly from the love of our lord Ihesu Christ
Therefore prayed and prays to us Saint Poule the appostle. and unto his
dyssyples. that they be founded and term as a toure. and roted as a tree. in
charity. and in the love of god so that no temptacyon may moeue them ne make
them for to stakre ne quaure. And therefore in this petycyon and request we
require and demand the aid and help of god in our bataylle against the
fend. that he will give to us the yefte of pity / That is a grace that arouseth
and bedeweth the heart. and makes him sweet and pyetous. and makes him al to
render and wexe grene / and to bear fruit enough of good works wythoutforth.
and wythinforth / And within to make steadfast and ferme his roots in the land
of living people. That is like as the good cyment of which been maad these
walls sarazynoys / which may not be broken ne defeated with pykoys ne with
hamer when we say then. Et ne nos inducas in temptacionem. That is to say
sweet fader make our hertes ferme and stable. that they moeue not ne quauer for
no temptacion that come to them by the grace of the yefte of pity. we pray
not / that we be in no wise tempted / For that were a folysshe prayer and
shameful. like as the sone of a lord / or of another noble man. that should be
adoubed a new knight. and he should say to his fader. Fair fader I pray you
that ye me deporte or forbere and keep that I never see batayl ne tournoye / we
ought well will to be tempted. for it is our great prouffyte in many manners.
For we been the more humble and the more doubcous and the more wise in many
caases. and the bettyr proved and the more hardy. For as Salamon says the. who
that has not be tempted / he may know no thing a right but like as one
knows of the batayl of troy by here saying for he may not know him self ne
his Infirmyte / ne the strength of his enemies. ne their subtylte. ne how god
is true and (...) at need to aid his friend. ne how and many times he has
kept us from many perils and sins / and by all these reasons be shall not
co^ne love god aryght. ne thank him of his yeftes if he be not tempted. but
pray we him that he keep to us our hertes that they enter not in to
temptacyon. that is to say that the heart consent not thereto. and as touching
our self we be so pour. that we may not an hour of the day susteyn thassautes
and the diverse temptacions of the fend without the help of our lord. And
when he faylleth for to aid and help us we enter in to temptacion / And when
he helps us we resyste and we fight and vaynquysshe the fend our enemy when
that we consent not to sin.

The seventh petycyon of the pater noster capo. lxxxv
Ed libera nos a malo amen. saint austyn says that all the other temptacyons
ben to us either for to do well or for to leave to do well. But all the yeftes and
all the good that a man does. or that he can get / is for to put away and
destroy pride and al sins and euylles. And therefore when god has given to a
man this that he has required of god in the vj requests aforesaid. Then
certaynlye it is of very need that god deliver him from the puyssaunce of the
fend. fro all his engynes. and from al his temptacyons. And therefore comes
at the last this petycyon and request as the ryergarde which says thus. Sed
libera nos a malo amen / that is to say / Fair fader Ihesu Christ deliver us
fro al evil / fro all sins and fro all perils passed. present. and to
come. And fro al thengynes of the fend our enemy. that we lose not by pride
the goods that thou have given to us.

In this request we pray to god that he give to us the yefte of holy dread.
By the which we may be delyueryd fro the fend and from his temptacyons. and
fro all manner of evil. that is fro all perils and fro al sins in this
world and in that other amen. So be it as we have said / so much is it to say
this word amen. Now have thou he^^ the seven petycyons and requestys. which
god made wy^^ his blessed mouth. for to enseygne and teache us to learn all that
which we may and ought to pray and demand for the body and for the soul
and for this world and for that other / And al is contained and comprysed in
the holy Pater noster Now keep the well that thou say it aryght with heart and
with mouth. For great good shall come to the thereof. if thou so do.

Thus ends the seven petycyons of the holy Pater noster
Of the seven yeftes of the holy ghoost capitulo lxxxvj
AFter the peticions and requests that been contained in the holy Pater
noster. us byhoueth to speak in great reverence of so hye a matere as of the
holy yeftes of the holy ghoost. like as he him self of his grace shall
enseygne and teache us. And we shall say first which ben the yeftes of the
holy ghoost. After wherefore they be called yeftes. and wherefore they be called
of the holy ghoost. After wherefore they be seven yeftes of the holy ghoost ne
moo ne less / After we shall say of the goods that the yeftes of the holy
ghoost do. Custom it is. reason and curtosye. that a man hye. rich. valiant.
and noble when he will goo to his spouse that he loves with al his heart. that
he bear to her of his Iewellys. Ysaye the prophet saw in spyrite the
gloryouse espowsaylles that were made in the belly of the blessed vyrgyn marye.
when the blessed sone of god espoused her / and took in her our blood and our
flesh / our humanyte and our nature. So recounteth to us the said prophet of
the Iewellys and the fair yeftes that he brought with him for to give to his
espouse and to her parents / And says thus the said prophet much
curtoyslye. Fro the rote of Iesse shall issue a rod that shall bear the flower
of nazareth. That is to say. out of the great charity. and fro the great
enbracyng or brennyng of the love of god shall come to us a rod which shall
bear the flower of flowers. For Nazareth is as much to say as a flower / and
Iesse is as much to say as enbracyng or brennyng. And upon this flour shall
rest the holy ghoost. the spyryte of sapyence and of understanding / the
spyrite of strength and of counceyl / the spyryte of science and of pity. and
the spyryte of the dread of god. These ben the graces of which he was al full
fro the hour that he was conceived in the precious belly of his mother / like as
the great see is full of water. and is well and fontayne of all the fresshe
waters and salt. of which he arowseth and watreth all the world / Right so was
he as says Saint Johan theuangelyst so full of grace. of veryte or truth that
of his plant we take al These vij spyrites and these seven yeftes we take them
and receive in the holy baptesme But thus as the graces corporelle which god
gives to children. in wit / in bounte / in strength. and in other graces.
which he gives at his playsyr^ to eueryche he shows him lytyl and lytyl.
like as a child grows and comes forth. Right so is it in spyrytuel graces.
after that / that eueryche prouffyteth and grows in good werkys. and gives
all his heart / and all his thought to god / after that. god gives to him
more of his graces. and that shows the same yeftes by werkys. sum in one /
and other in other. at the playsyr of the holy ghoost as says saint Poul the
appostle. Then in our beginning these graces and these virtues been low /
and rise on heyght / That is fro the spyryte and yefte of dread unto the yefte
of sapyende. For holy dread is the beginning of sapyence. Like as dauyd says
and Salamon. But in Ihesu Christ weren always all the graces and all the
virtues plenerly without any mesure. And therefore the prophet sets them in
descendyng each yefte after the order of his dygnyte. like as the petycyons and
requests of the holy pater noster ben set forth after the order of their
dygnyte. the hye tofore. and the lower after.

why they be called yeftes. for three reasons capo. lxxxvij
SVche manner graces have to name yeftes. for iij things and for three reasons.
First for their dygnyte and for their valor. if a man at the court of the king
give a robe to a child. or to a pour man a dysshe of weight. This is no thing
that ought to be called the yefte of a king. Therefore calls Saint James
thappostle all the other temporel goods that god gives / not a yefte / but
little yeftes which ben moeuable and passing / But these graces abouesayd he
called them yeftes parfyte / For god gives them to no creature / but that he
gives to him / him self. The second reason is by cause that the other graces
and the other yeftes he leneth them to us for to use them in this present life.
But these seven yeftes toforesayd ben very yeftes by right without reprysyng
and reprehendyng / for when all the other yeftes shall faylle. these vij yeftes
shall abide always in their ferme estate. Then they be so proprely ours that
we may not lose them ageyn our will. like as we may lose the other / The third
reason and the pryncypal is. that the selue yeftes be given purely for love.
And thou know well that a yefte leseth the name of yefte when it is not given
purely for love. For when the yeuer yeueth any yefte for his own prouffyte /
that is not a yefte. but it is marchandyse. when he beholds bounte received
or seruyse / that is not a yefte. but it is bounte and curtosye. received to be
rendered and yolden ageyn. But when the yeftes is gyneu freely and lyberally
without entencyon to have prouffyte and without dread and without any doubt.
Then is it by right called yefte / hereof says the phylosophre that a yefte
is a yefte without gyuyng ageyn / or without to awayte any reward but only
for to get love. In this manner. god gives to us these yeftes purely for the
love that he has to us. and for to get our hertes and al our love to him.

why they be called the yeftes of the holy ghoost capo. lxxxviij
NOw for what cause been they called yeftes of the holy ghoost. and not the
yeftes of the fader and of the son. for all their werkys and their yeftes ben
common. To this purpoos ben two reasons. That one like as the works of
puyssaunce and might ben appropred to god the fader. and the works of sapyence
to god the sone. right so ben the werkys of grace and of bounte appropred to
the holy ghoost. For bountees ben like as says saint denis. to spend and to
give him self / For if a man give that. which cost him naught / that is not
great bounte. But by cause that the holy ghoost by these seven yeftes expendeth
and gives him self in our hertes. Like as says saint poule. like as it were
by seven stremes / therefore ben they called proprely yeftes of the holy ghoost.
For he is the fontayn and they ben the stremes That other is by cause that the
holy ghoost is proprely the love that is between the fader and the son / and
by cause that love is the propre. the first. and the pryncypal yefte. that a
man may give. then with right in this yefte ben given all the other. and
without this yefte none other is not called yefte truly ne ryghtfully.
Therefore is the holy ghoost a yefte. and yeuar. For he gives him self and is
yeuen in eueryche of these seven yeftes. which that he gives for to conferme
our love unto his. so that it be fervent. fine very and clean.

why there be vij yeftes and no moo ne less capo. lxxxix
FOr two things a man is saved fro to flee the evil. and to do good. For to
hate and to flee the evil causes us the yefte of dread. The other vj yeftes
cause us to do good. The yefte of dread is the vssher at the great mass / that
is to say at the great menasse of the sentence of god / and of the pains of
hell / which is always ready and apparaylled against the synuars this is the
watch of the castle which never slepeth / This is the wedar of the gardyn that
wedeth and plucketh up al evil herbys / This is the tresourer that keeps the
heart and all the goods that been therein / These be the other vj yeftes that
make us to do all the good deeds. Now ought thou to know that like the
clerenes of the sonne^ which thou see with thyn eyes yeueth clerenes to the
world and virtue and enuygoure and strength all the things that grow and come
in to the world / Right so does the holy ghoost which enlumyneth in heaven and
in earth al them that been in grace / men. wymmen. and angellys. and al in like
wise as there beu in heaven three estates of aungellys as saint denis says of
whom one is most hye. that other moyen or myddle / and the third more low.
The most hye ben like them that been of the kings cou^ceyl. They be always
with god more nerre to him than the other and see him and here him and his
secrets. The moyen or myddle ben as barons and bayllyes that govern love and
kepen all the royam and gone and comen. and learn of them of the cou^ceyl that
which they comande^ and make it to be done to other. the lowest ben like as
servants and officers which have their crafts / and done their offices and
messages as is said to them. By this manner and ensaumple there ben iij estates
of the children of god in earth the which the holy ghoost ledeth and conduyteth
as says saint Poul. The one estate is of them hat ben in the world^ and lyuen
after the commandementes of god. and of holy church. and after that they here
and believe of their prelates. The other estate is of them that been parfyte.
that al have their heart out of the world and of this mortal life. and have their
conuersacyon in heaven and their body in earth. and their heart with god. The
third ben in the myddle estate which govern them self well and other. and
lyuen after the counceyl of the gospel. and not only after the commandments.
These three manner of people techeth the holy ghoost. and ledeth and governs by
these vj yeftes. and departs to them his graces. to eueryche after his
benygne volente and will as says thappostle. The two first of these vj yeftes
apperteyne to them that been of the first estate The yefte of science techeth
them. and the yefte of pity makes them to work. The ij myddle apperteyne to
them of the moyen estate. The yefte of counceyl governs them and the yefte
of strength accomplyssheth the works. The ij last apperteyne to them of the
most hye estate. The yefte of understanding enlumyneth them. and the yefte of
sapyence confermeth them and Joins them with god. Another reason there is
wherefore there ben vij yeftes. for the holy ghoost by his seven yeftes wedeth.
plucketh and takes away the vij sins and vices fro the hertes of the
persons. and planteth there and nouryssheth vij virtues contrary which make
perfytely a man to be honored. These ben the goods that the holy ghoost
makes in the hertes where as he descends by these seven yeftes. But tofore
that I descend unto the virtues. which ben contrary to the seven dedely
sins. I will shortly speak of seven other virtues. of which three ben called
dyuyne. and the other four been called the four cardynal virtues.

Of seven virtues of whom there been three dyuyne. and four cardynal capitulo
lxxxx
THe three first virtues dyuyne. Saint Poul thappostle calls them / Faith.
hope. and charity. And they be called dyuyne by cause they be godly and ordeyne
the heart to god. faith like as saint Austyn says sets us under god. and
makes us to know him. and knowleche him a lord of whom we hold all that
which we have of good. Hope says he enhaunceth us to god / and makes us
strong and hardy. and to entrepryse for the love of god that. which passes
the virtue and strength of man / Charity. says saint Austyn Joins us to god
/ For charity is none other thing but chyere unity. that is. dear onehede. for
she makes the heart and god all one as says saint Poul. Faith byholdeth in
god souerayn unity hope beholds in god souerayn hyenesse. and charity
souerayn bounte / These iij virtues ben divided by iij degrees of love / for
for iij things a man is loved. One is by cause that one has herd or hereth
great good of him. Or by cause that he has received great good of him. Or by
cause he entendeth to have great good of him. These iij manners of love ben in
these iij virtues. Love of faith hereth and werketh. love of hope feleth the
savor and requires it. love of charity takes and sees it. and tastes and
holds it.

Of the four cardynal virtues. by which a man ought to govern him capitulo
lxxxxj
OF the four cardynal virtues speken much the ancient phylosophres. but the
holy ghoost gives them and enseygneth them better an hundred times as says
Salamon in the book of sapyence. The first of these iiij virtues is prudence.
the second attemperaunce. the iij strength. and the fourth Justice / These
iiij virtues ben called cardynallys / by cause they ben the most pryncypal
emonge the virtues of which the ancient phylosophres speken. For by these
iiij virtues a man governs him self in this world. Like as the pope governs
al holy church by his cardynalles. Prudence keeps a man that he be not
deceived by none engyne of the enemy. Attemperaunce keeps a man that he be
not corrupt by none evil loue^ Strength keeps him that he be not vaynquysshed
ne overcome by wrath. or by dread. or by sorrow. This is that holds a man in.
good estate toward him self. Justice sets a man in right order and in right
estate anenst him self and and other. for Justice renders to each man that.
which is his These ben the iiij toures at iiij corners of the house of the good
man that makes it strong. sure / and good. Prudence garnyssheth it toward the
eest by pourueaunce for perils. Attemperaunce garnyssheth it toward the south
against the evil heetys. Strength garnyssheth it toward the north for the evil
coldes. Justice garnyssheth it toward the west against the evil raynes.

Yet ageyn of the four cardynal virtues as follows lxxxxij
THese iiij virtues have diverse offices. and been much diverse in their werkys.
like as says an au^cyent phylosophre named plato in his book that he made of
these four virtues. and deuydeth the^ much subtylly. and says that prudence
has iij offices. For by this virtue. all that which a man does says. and
thinks is ordained al and led by line / rule / and reason and in all his
werkys he pourueyeth. that he use them after thordynaunce of god that al sees
and Iugeth. A great lord should he be as me seems that should have this only
virtue. and by these three things should govern him.

Of the virtue of attemperaunce capitulo lxxxxiij
THe virtue of attemperaunce has iij offices / for the heart that has this
virtue will not ne coueyteth not to do a thing of which he ought to repent.
In no things he breketh not the law dysmesurably. but puts him self always
under the yoke of reason / And no thing doubts of all the couetyses of the
world / That is to say. who has this virtue he keeps him that he he not
corrupt by the three things that foulen and shamen the world.

Of the virtue of strength capitulo lxxxxiiij
THe virtue of strength has also iij offices. for a man that has this virtue
in his heart. he lift him self upon hye above the perils of this world^ and no
thing doubts he sauf vylonye and sin. he bears aduersyte and prosperyte /
and suffers without to bow on the right side ne on the lift side. Much
good should be the knight of god that in these three things should be well proved.
These iij virtues armen. ordeyne. and adourne a man as touching the three parts
of the heart which ben called. reason. love. and vygour / Prudence keeps the
reason that it be not deceived / Attemperaunce keeps the love. that it be not
corrupt / Strength keeps the vygour or might that it be not overcome /

Of the virtue of Justice capitulo lxxxxv
IVstyce makes a man to live ordynatly emonge the other. For like as plato
says the phylosophre / This is the virtue that makes that a man does unto
every man that which he owes to do. For he renders reverence and honor to
them that be above him. Frendshyp pees and concord to them that been like to
him. grace and pity to them that been under him By these iiij virtues says the
said phylosophre / that a man is then worthy that he be governor of him
self. and after of other. In these iiij virtues studied the auncyen
phylosophres which despyseden all the world for tacquyre and to get virtue and
wysedom / and therefore were they called phylosophres^ which is as much to say
as love of sapyence / O good god how should this confound us and make us aferd
that they that were paynyms and without law wryton and nothing knew of the
very grace of god ne of the yeftes of the holy ghoost. and nevertheless they
styed up in to the montayn of perfection of living by force and by their propre
virtue. and daygned not to take heed of the world ne to do evil. ne to consent
to sin / and we that been christian men that have the very faith. and know the
commandments of god / and have the grace of the holy ghoost if we will and our
sins cause it not. that we may more prouffite for our health anenst god in a
day. than they might in a year. we defoule our self. and lie here bynethe as a
swyne in mire / and in the ordure of this world. and sin in the fylthe and
donge of delyces of this world. Therefore says saint Poule that the paynym that
is without law shall Judge us at day of Judgment. that have had here the law
/ and we neither hold ne keep it. and by cause they had not ryzt faith ne the
grace of the holy ghoost ne no virtue ne quycke ne very faith. they may not well
know how these virtues be good and fair. for as much dyfference as is between
a brennyng cole. and a deed cole. and a living man and a deed man. So much
dyfference is there between virtue that is without charity. and virtue that is
with charity. which is the bou^te. the valor and the life of other virtues.
whereof saint austyn says when he speaks of these iiij virtues. he deuydeth
them by iiij manner of loves and by iiij things that very love does. and says
that the virtue of prudence is the love of hert^ which verily and wisely
refuses all that which may grieve and ennoye him. and cheseth all that which
may aydeto have that which he loves. that is god / The virtue of attemperau^ce
is the love of the heart. by which he gives him self entyerly and without
corruptyon to that which he loves / that is god. The virtue of strength is
the love of the herte^ by which a man serves only that which he loves /
that is god. and for him sets a man al other things under his foot. and
despyseth them. Then the virtue of Justice sets a man in his right estate /
that is above al things. and under god / without these iiij virtues / there is
none that may mount in to the montayn of perfectyon. for who that will mount
so hye. him byhoneth / that alther first he have prudence which makes a man
to despise the world / and that he have with hit the virtue of strength. which
gives to him great heart strong and stable courage to enpryse and to pursiewe
great things. and on that other party that he have the virtue of attemperaunce
/ by cause that he be not over charged ne evil carried. and that he have with
him the virtue of Justice that may led him by the right path. and by a good and
Just way / that he be without sin. and that he show to him how by holy
werkys he owes to conquer the royame of heaven. like as god did to Jacob / as
says the book of sapyence. who that thus may have these iiij virtues he shall
be well parfyte and blessed in this world. and more in that other. for he shall
be in pees of heart and in joy spyrytuel / and no thing shall faylle him. but
he shall habou^de in the grace of god that he shall have with him. in whom he
shall delight.

Here after follows how a man may take aweye and put from him the vij dedely
sins. and get the virtues lxxxxvj
NOw late us come ageyn to our matter. and pray we with all our heart to the holy
ghoost that he will inspyre and enseygne our hertes / that he be our advocate.
and teache us to show. how he by the vij yeftes of the holy ghoost he pluck
out and take aweye the seven dedely sins fro our hertes / and that he therein
will vouchesauf to plant the seven virtues.

Of the yefte of holy dread which makes a man Just lxxxxvij
THe yefte of dread is the first of the yeftes. for he casts out of the heart
all the sins like as we have said tofore. But proprely this yefte of dread
plucketh out. takes away and destroys the rote of pryde^ and planteth
there in his place the plant of humylyte. Now behold and understand well how
the synnar that holds him and slepeth in his sin. is like to a rybaulde
that slepeth and is dronke^ and has al lost at tavern. and is al naked and
so pour that he has no thing but he feleth no thing ne complayneth not. but
weneth that he be a much great lord. But when he has slepte and comes ageyn
to him self. and that he is out of his drunkenness / Then feleth he his
harm and knows his folly. Now complayneth he his loss and his damage. This
is the first good that the holy ghoost does to a synnar when he vysyteth him.
For he gives to him ageyn his wit and his mind. and brings him ageyn to
know him self. So that he aduertyseth and sees what goods he has lost. and
in what pouerte and in what peril he has be for his sin. like as did the
sone of the good man. which wasted and dyspended his heritage in dyssolucyon
and rybauldrye. In such confusyon and myserye he became that him byhoued to
keep the swyne and feed them. and to live of their releef and mete. like as our
Lord Ihesu christ shows us by exaumple in the gospel. Yet also the synnar as
says Salamon is like to him that slepeth in the myddle of the sea. and is in
great peril and tormente. and he feleth no thing ne has no fere thereof.
But when the holy ghoost awaketh him. he felyth and sees his peril. and
begins to have dread of him self. Yet also the synnar is like to him that is
in prison feteryd in yrons. and is in boltes and has many kepars. like as
Saint Peter was in the prysone of King Herod. And the caytyf synnar thinks
no thing on the prouoste. ne on the Justice. ne on the galowes that tarry for
him / but he slepeth and dremeth that he goes to a weddyng and to a feste /
But the grace of the holy ghoost is like to the aungel that awoke saint Peter.
and delyuerd him fro the hand of king Herode^ For the grace of the holy ghoost
awaketh the synnar and delyuerth him from the hand and fro the puyssaunce of
the devil of hell / yet also the synnar is like to him that weneth to be
strong and hole. and he has the death under his teeth. For he has the
humors evil and corrupt within the body / then dies he within a month.
that wend to have lived xl year. Like as says Elyuans in the verses which
speken of the death and sayen thus. Go ye away ye whystelars and gapars. for
such be couerd under their clothes. that wene to be hole and fat that shall
not live unto march. But the holy ghoost is like unto a good physycyen that
shows to him his maladye and sickness. and moeueth fro him his humors. and
gives unto him a bitter drink which heleth him and renders to him his life.
Right so troubles our lord the synnar by bitter contrycyo^ wha^ he helyth him
fro his sins by the bitter drink like as says the prophet in his psaulter
/ and fereth him. and brings him ageyn to know him self / like as did Adam
our first fader. when he hid him emonge the trees of paradys terrestre. And
then said god to him. Adam where art thou / Three other demau^des made god by
his angel to the cha^bryer of holy Abraham which was named agar when she
fled fro her lady. The aungel said Agar fro whens come thou. whyther go
thou / what do thou / These iij demaundes makes the holy ghoost to the
synnar. when he awaketh him of his sins / where as he was aslepe / and he
reyseth him / and opens to him the eyes of his heart / and gives to him ageyn
his wit and his mind. where art thou says he. that is to say. behold
caytyf in what sorrow and in what peril thou art in this world. For thou art
like to him that peryssheth in the sea slepyng in a ship. ne feleth ne
understands ne apperceyueth his perylle^ That is to say caytyf behold ageyn
thy life fro now bacward. For thou come fro the tavern of the devil. where as
thou have wasted thy life. and lost thy time. and all the goods that god has
given to the. what doste thou. That is to say. consider how thou art faint and
frayl weary and slow toward thy body and toward thy soul. Thou wenest to be
hole and strong. but peradventure thou have the humors corrupt in thy body
which shall led the to thy death And in the soul thou have evil manners. that
shall led the to the death of hell if the grace of god keep the not. After
whyther ghost thou. that is to say caytyf think behold and understand that
thou go to thy death / wherein thou shall fall in the hondes of herod / that
is the devil of hell and of his meyne / Thou ghost to the Judgment where thou
shall see the Iustyse of god so cruel. so strayte and so puyssaunte. Thou go
in to hell where thou shall find fire and stynkyng sulphre and moo than a
thousand torments that never shall fynysshe to tormente the. Thus does the
holy ghoost to the synnar to opene his eyes. and to behold above him and under
him. and tofore him and behind him. These been four strokes of death which
fereth the synnar and makes him to tremble and to have dread. And these four
beholdynges and consyderacyons proprely been the four stremes of the rote of
the virtue of humylyte that the yefte of dread planteth in the heart of the
synnar when god vysyteth him.

Here follows of the four roots of the sin of Pride capitulo lxxxxviij
THe iiij thoughts and consyderacyons toforesayd pulle out. take away from
the rote out of the gardyn of the heart the iiij roots of pride. that is the
proud man weneth to know much thing. or to be of the valoyr of much
thing. or that he may do much thing. or to have much thyng^ These ben the
iiij horns. that is to say the iiij cowardyses that shamed the contre which
god showed to zacharye the prophet / but the iiij things that he showed him
proprely after that they came for to beat down these iiij horns. been the iiij
thoughts and consyderacyons tofore said. For when a man thinks fro whens he
comes / and understands and knows the pouerte / the vylete / and the
fraylte of his birth / how he was conceived in sin / of so foul matter made
and formed. In so pour a house her berowd. in so great pouerte borne. In what
pains nourisshed in what labor he has lived / and how he has lost his time.
he sees and considers the great nombre of his sins. and knows clearly
the good deeds which he has left / and not done by his slouthe and
neclige^ce. Then the grace of the holy ghoost makes him to feel. to Judge and
to know in his heart. that he is of no value ne no thing worth. after when he
thinks where he is. and sees this world which is nothing but an exyle. and a
desert full of beerys and lyepardes. a forest full of theuys and engynes a see
full of tempest and perils. a fourneys brennyng and enbraced with fire and of
all sins. a field of bataylle and of anguysshe. where always byhoueth to
live in war and fight ayenste the deuylles which been so subtyl and so
sage. Then the grace of God makes him for to feel aryght and perceive that
he felt no thing for to govern him well touching his salvation. Yet ageyn
when the synnar thinks consydereth and knows his sins and his deffaultes
that he is full of sins. and wide of all good deeds and works. Then the
holy ghooost makes him to feel and to know his pouerte. and that he has no
spyrytuell good in him / After when the synnar sees tofore him which way he
goes / and he sees the death. to whom no man may gaynsaye On that other
part the synnar sees the Justice and the vengeance of god so Just and so
ryghtful. which is so much to be doubted. by whose hands he must pass. he
sees and knows the pains horrible of hell. from whom the synnar may not
escape. Then god gives him to know that the power of a man and of a woman
is naught / and that they may do no thing without the specyal grace of god.
Then the synnar begins to have the spyryte and yefte of dread. In these
thoughts and consyderacyons ben the branches of the rote of the tree of
humylyte. This tree is planted beside the fontayne of the dread of god. of
which it is always arowsed and watered as well in winter as in somer. Now
ought thou to know that these vij virtues / of which I purpose to speak of
have each of them seven degrees. by which it prouffyteth. aryseth. and grows
in the heart of a creature. and his good werkys by which it shows outward /
For virtue grows on hye. like as does the palmer / the cypres or the cedre.
and after spredeth and casts his branches on al sides.

Of the virtue of humylyte capitulo lxxxxix
OF the virtue of humylyte speaks saint Ancelme. and says that it has vij
degrees / by which it mounteth on hye before that it come to perfectyon. Now
understand well how the first degree of humylyte knows his pouerte. his
sins. and his defaultes. For like as says saint bernard humylyte is the
virtue that makes a man to mespryse and despise him self / and hold him for
vile when he knows him self verayly This knowleche grows of the iiij roots
tofore said. But there ben sum that know well their deffaultes and their
sins / and their pouertees. but they feel them not. Therefore the second
degree of humylyte / is to feel and to compain his sins. his defaultes /
his sorrow. and his maladye he renneth gladly to the leche. that feleth him
self hurt of a wound. and in peril of death. and he renneth much sone to the
physycyen that is seek. and that has evil humors in his body for to have
health and guaryson. and is much glad and Joyous when he may purge them and
cleanse them. and therefore the third degree of humylyte is for to confess
deuoutelye and often his trespaces. and to bewail his sins gladly in great
contrycyon and repentance and to purge his heart fro al sins. But there ben
sum that know well their defaultes and feel them and ben well sorouful for
them but they will not for any thing. that no man should know them. Therefore
is the fourth degree of humylyte holden for vile and despytous. but there ben
yet sum that well know feel and tell their deffaultes. and say well and Judge.
I am wicked and a synnar and such and such. But if another said so to them.
Certeynly that is truth that thou say / they should be dysplesyd and wexe
strongly angry. Therefore is the fyfthe degree of humylyte. to here gladly
truth spoken of him self / and that one say to him his deffaultes / And this
is that saint bernard says that the very humble would be holden for vile. and
would not be praised that he is humble. Therefore is the vj degree of humylyte
when a man suffers in pacyence that he be foul treated and as a person
despised / like as did the good King Dauyd. which suffered swetelye a servant
named Semey which threw at him stones. and said to him great vylonyes. and all that he knew of evil and harm. Yet there is a degree in which is there sum
of this perfectyon and of this virtue of humylyte / That is will certeynly and
desire of heart with out fayntyse to be reputed for vile and byholden simple and
fowly to be treated. That is a right pouerte of spyryte and humylyte of heart /
Much loved this pouerte in this world the rich king of heaven Ihesu Christ.
Much loved he it when he bought it so dere^ which would and vouched sauf to be
borne in a stable horrible and abhomynable with the oxen and asses / and would
have xxxij year in pouerte. The sweet Ihesu Christ loved much humylyte. when he
him self that never did sin he that never had deffaulte faught and came
emonge the theuys. That was between the sons of adam our formest fader. And
the sweet Ihesu Christ clad him with the clothes of a sinner and malefactour^
by cause he was fowly treatyd Then he said the night of his cene or souper to
his apostles with great desire I have desired this pasque. That is to say this
death. this shame and this departing. More hye may not this trees mount in
humylyte. And who shall be raised unto this degree of humylyte. without doubt
he shall be well blessed in this world and in that other^ For he that says this
is god. may not lie. For he is the perfayte and souerayn veryte which says
with his blessed mouth in the gospel. blessed ben they that be pour of
spyrite. and how that is he techeth and shows to us when he says. learn of
me and not of other to be meke and humble of heart / as I am. and ye shall find
rest to your souls. This rest and this blessydnes none know it but they
that learn it. Then if thou wylt know what it is. do pain with all thy
heart so much to vaynquysshe thy self. that thou be mounted in to the seventh
degree of humylyte Then may thou gadre of the fruit and ete of the tree of
life. like as it is said in thapocalyps /

Of the rote of the virtue of humylyte capitulo C
OF the rote of humylyte grow vij branches. For this virtue shows him in
seven manners. First in honoring god / in praysyng other. In adouryng and
prayeng god. In loving pouerte. In gladly seruyng. In fleyng praysyng. and him
self trustyng al in god. The very meke and humble honors God in three manners
/ For he byleueth him symply. he prayseth him truly and he prays him
deuoutelye. he honors him first in that. that he byleueth him symply and
steadfastly of all that / which is said in holy scripture. like as a little
child byleueth his master / And for this reason has our faith merit. Then
who byleueth well. it does him great honor. like as he does great honor to a
man when he byleueth him upon his simple word / And this is the beginning of
well doing. which is necessary to al them that will save them self. as says
saint Poul. That is to believe god on his simple word. that al is toewe what
someuer is said of him only. without to seek other reason or to require other
proof. Therefore ben the heretykes and proud men dampened / For they would not
believe god without good wedde. That is to understand. if that they see not
quycke reason in all that which god says / but to the quycke reason they
holden them. like as the usurer holds him on his pledge or wedde that will
trust no person by his simple word. And hereof ben comen all the evil heresies
and vnbyleue / For the proud Aungellys that would compare their wit to the
sapyence of Ihesu christ. daygned not to believe that god said. but if he showed
to them quycke reasons or good open miracles. But we that keep the very faith
believe an hundred fold better. this that he says that may not lye^ that is
god / than we do the miracles ne rayson. ne that which we see. God says that
every person shall be Iuged after his werkys. god says that of every idle
word. us byhoueth to give acomptes at the day of Judgment. But the meke and the
humble that this hereth and byleueth and dredeth and doubts and does pain
to keep his heart. and so his mouth. and al his werkys / shall not be Iuged.
After the very humble prayseth god truly for all the goods that he has done
to him and that he does to him daily* and that he yet shall do. after like as
we have showed before in the trayte of pride. The humble person is like a pour
man. which of a little alms has great Joy. and thanketh with al his heart
his benefactour. Then when the humble sees nothing in him. by which he is
worthy to have good or bread or other thing of which he uses / he knows
sees. understands / byleueth. and doubts not of all that god sends /
yeueth and leneth him. and by cause that the very humble draws nothing to him
self of the goods of his lord. which passen by his hand. therefore is he a
true servant as saint bernard says. After the very humble adoureth god and
prays him deuoutely / that is to say with very teerys which comen of the
grace of god and of right felyng of the heart. For him seems that he is like a
child that is al naked tofore his maistre and that can not his lesson / or
that he is like to the pour man endetted. which is fallen in the hands of his
credytour / and has not whereof he may fine ne pay his debte. Or that he be
like a thief proved that is taken with an hundred trespaces. and that has the
cord about his neck. or that he be like the lame man that lies at church
door / which has no shame to show his maladye and his soores to them that
pass by. for cause that each body should have pity on him / If thou will
then learn to pray god. pray and adoure him aryght / these iiij things
aforsayd shall enseygne and teache the that is to wete / the chylde^ the man
endetted / the thief. and the lame man.

Of him that is very humble and meke capitulo Cj
THe custom is of a very meke and humble man to praise another and to give him
loos. to put him before. allow him with his mouth / and by werkys to bear him
honor. he is like the little be that makes the honey / which escheweth
stynkes. and secheth flowers of the field and souketh the dew and the
substance of them. and makes honey for to garnysshe with his house / Thus does
the very humble. which takes none head of the stenches the sins and the
deffaultes of other. But all the goods that other do. he heholdeth them
loves and prayseth. and souketh the swetenes of devotion of his heart with
which his conscience is replenysshed. The very humble sees none so evil a
thing. ne so hard. ne so synful. but that he can draw matere to allow and
praise god / In his heart he preyseth other in iij manners. For he byleueth more
the wit of another man^ than the wit of him self. he will that the will
of other men be do sonner than his own. All the contrary does the proud man
like as we have showed tofore. After also the very meke and humble man
allows and prayseth other men by word. The good deeds that other have done
he enhaunceth and prayseth them. and the evil deeds he excuses and makes them
less. The very meke man torneth the mean thing in to good. and understands
them always to the best / and this is against the evil tatches of the myssayers
/ which enhaunce the evil deeds and mynysshe the good. and the moyen preuerten
and torn to the werste. The very meke and humble prayseth by work. and
honors in deed eueryche as he ought to do and as he may do without mysdoyng
/ Thus does not the proud man. but all the contrary. like as we have said
tofore in the trayty of the sin of pride.

Of him that is humble of heart capitulo Cij
THe custom is of him that has an humble heart. that al his good deeds he
has behind him at his back. and al his evil. his sins and al his
deffaultes he has always in mind tofore his eyes. and the good deeds of other
he has all way tofore his eyes. and the evil deffaultes and sins of all
other he sets them behind him at his back as in oublyance or forgetyng.
And hereof happeth oftymes that the very meke and humble man the more he
prayseth other and honors. so much more he dyspreyseth him self. The very
humble and meke person of heart is like the auarycyous and covetous man that
has always his eyes on the goods that other have. and that they do And always
him seems that he has no spyrytuel good in him. For like as there is an evil
proud man / So is thece very meke and humble / He that is very humble of
heart is like as a lytyl child which is sone of a king and heir of the
royalme. which wepeth and cries. and knows no thing of his hyenesse ne of
his richesse. He is also like unto the simple sheep. in whom al is good and
prouffytable. the wulle the fell / the flessh. the milk. and his dunge. and
the sheep no thing knows of hit. ne thinks on it. and in this manner says
the great patryarke holy Abraham of him self. that he was no thing but ashes
and pouldre. And holy Job which was so great and rich in the world said in
like wise. And Saint andrew that said also of him self / what am I but ashes.
duste. fylthe. rotynnesse / a worm / wind. shadow leaves that the wind
bears away. and dry stupple which is nouzt but for the fire / And like as
the very humble person of heart prayseth and honors other with his heart and
mouth and also in deed as we have said. Right so despyseth he him self in
these iij manners. It seems to him like as saint Iherome says of him self.
when that Iete or drink. or that I wake or sleep. always me thinks that the
fereful trompe of the day of Judgment blows in mine eerys saying. come to thy
Judgment. come to thy Judgment. and by cause that he will not be Iuged of his
sins. he seeseth not but every day purges him self keeps and cleanses him
from all sins and Iugeth. condempneth / and repreueth al his werkys and his
wordes^ he cries and nombreth. poyseth counterpoyseth and repreneth^ for he
fyndeth more chafe than grayn. that is to understand more of sins than of
good deeds. And by cause that he will not be Iuged at the death of Justice. will
he not leave but that little and great be examyned and said / and also Iuged in
the court of mercy / that is in holy confessyon^ In that court who counts
well aryght / is al quyte of his sins. But in the court of Justice which
shall be at the day of Judgment / whom someuer he owes he must pay. Ne never
shall he mow be aquyted. and therefore he shall be perdurably dampened / For he
must render or pendre. that is hang / Alas caytyf what shall he pay that has
no thing. but the body which is charged and al full of dedely sins. who that
well understood and felt these things / he should hold and keep him fro al
sins. and should wythdrawe him fro mockeryes and lesynges. which they
contryue against the very meke and humble persons which dread god and love
him. by cause they fere and dread him. they will keep them clean without ordure
of sin and confess them gladly and often. but little auaylleth confession
without repentance. and without penance. and without good Judgment / and
that Justice be not done truly. and therefore al in like wise as the very meke
and humble person makes of him self very Judgment in bitter coutrycyon of
heart and in very confession of mouth. and in satysfaccyon and penance of
very Iustyce^ he Iuged him self as a thief and puts him verayly on the
gybet of penance without fayntyse. and without ypocrysye.

How a man ought to hate pride capitulo Ciij
WHo that hates pride. he loves pouerte / and sets his heart allow and in
humylyte. and therefore al they that been very humble louen pouerte. and ben
pour of spyryte. The very humble person loves pouerte for three reasons.
that is to wete. for the perils that been in gouernyng of rychesses. for the
goods that been in good and very pouerte. and for by cause that god loves so
much pouerte. as wha^ he was here in this world he loved it and yet loves.
and al them that love it. like as holy scripture witnesses it. whereof Ihesu
christ says by dauyd in his psaulter / that god hereth the prayers and desires
of pour me^. and pourueyeth to them mete swetely in good savor For he is their
refuge and their savior. Job says that god is the fader of the pour / and
has given to them power to Judge the other. And our lord at the beginning of
his fair sermon says that blessed be the pour. and then be accursyd the
rich that have here their heaven / But the very heaven celestyal he has given
to the pour. so that they may give it and selle it and the world will not
believe that god say trouthe^ ne that pouerte be blessed. But god says thus in
the gospel. fair fader I pray the and thank the / that thou have hyd these
things fro the wise. and have manyfested and showed it to the humble and meke.
The humble and pour of spyryte seen god / here him well and believe him well. and
louen better an hundred fold their pouerte / than the covetous man loves his
rychessys. In iij things shows a man that he loves pouerte. when he loves
and holds gladly the company of the pour. and loves them and holds them
company / like as Ihesu Christ did as long as he was in this world. for
naturelly the lambs flee fro the wulues and wythdrawe fro them. and the
children wythdrawe them and flee the company of great people. and the humble
and meke people withdraw them gladly fro the proud people / The life of a pour
person is little and pour. for he requires not ne demands precious metes
ne oultrageous vesture ne clothyng / ne he secheth no bobaunce, ne no pride.
in roobes ne in rydyng. ne in householde. ne in meyne ne in feast ne in
companye^ And it suffyseth to the very pour that he have only his
sustenaunce. The very pour person suffers in pacyence hungre and thryste /
cold and hete. lothynges and vylonnyes. and many bitter trybulacyons for the
love of Ihesu christ and of his passion. And al these the evil pour man does
and suffers against his will. The very humble and the very pour suffers
gladly al euyls and al aduersytees for the love of god Yet ageyn it is the
custom of a pour man. that if he have no thing. and may get ne win no
thing. he is not ashamed to ask and demand. and the very humble beggeth al
day and requires the prayers and the orysons of good people and of the friends
of god. and the very humble trusts more in their aid. than he does in his
own good deeds.

Of diverse estates of pride capitulo Ciiij
Pride loves the hye place above. Humylyte loves the low place bynethe. This
is the dyamont of the noble nature that dayneth not to sit in gold. but in
pour metal as in iron. in like wise is the sheet of whete beten. The grain is
under. and the chaf is above / But our lord shall selle his whete at the day of
dome al wynewed like as says the gospel / and he shall cast the chafe in to
the fire of hell. and the grayn in to the garner of heaven. how much more the
gold is fine and pure^ so much more is it heavy. and the more it wayeth the
sooner it goes down to the bottom. and the more that a man is meke and humble.
the more loves he the low place / like as did Ihesu christ and his sweet
mother. which gave to us ensaumple to serve and to obey / Not only to the
grettest but to the least. And how much more the seruyse is vile and
despysable so much gladly does it the humble and meke. Therefore our lord Ihesu
Christ taught his appostles to wesshe the feet by humylyte. Then humylyte is
proprely mother of obedyence and nouryssheth it. enseygneth and keeps it that
it be not corrupt by vayn glory by heaviness nor by murmr. ne by propre wit.
ne by propre will. ne by aduersyte. ne by any other manner / and it is to wete
that there be vij adournements of obedyence. The first that one obey anon
prestly. gladly. symply purely. generally. vyly. and vygorously / The humble is
pour tofore his eyes and naked. and has not to do for him self. and therefore
he is always ready. as the maro^ners in the sea in their ships that anon as
they here the voys of the governor / they obey to him and run as they were
enraged / The humble obeys gladly. that the pains. the perils. and the
death he receives to his power with great joy for the love that he has to
obedyence. Therefore said dauyd the prophet in the psaulter. that he loved
better the commandments that god made / than he did gold ne silver. ne
precious stones. The humble obey al symply. as does the hors^ or the sheep.
whom the shepeherde ledeth where as he will. and that never says. wherefore goo
I more here than there. For one of the most honest daughters that humylyte
has is holy symplesse. The humble is right true to god. like as is a right
good wife to her husbond. which will to no man obey folyly. but to her husbond
only And therefore none obeys so Justly ne in so good ente^cyon as does the
very humble. which hates not. but for to playse the world. and desires no
thing but to plese god. After the very humble is right vygorous. right swyfte
and open / when he bears the virtue of obedyence and the love of god and does
it to his prelate. But when his own will bears him and ledeth. Then he is
heavy and slow to do wel^ like unto the sterre named saturnus. which renneth
as much in one day with the fyrmament. when the fyrmament ledeth her. as she
does in xxx year in her propre ^ours. Also the very meke and humble obeys
generally oueral and in all places. where he byleueth that it playseth god. and
in all things like as does the ass of the mylle / that as gladly bears
barley as whete^ and led as gold. and whete to a pour man as to a rich man.
Also the very meke and humble is made strong / For he changes his strength
with the strength of god. like as says the prophet ysaye. And therefore there
is no thing but the very humble may well bear. For god bears him and his
deeds. Then he obeys vygorously and perseuerantly. For he is never weary
no more than the son is. which god ledeth and conduyteth. and the longer it
lives the more grows her force and her vygour / Now may thou see clearly
how humylyte techeth the well and parfytely to serve and obey god /

Of the techyng and doctrine of our lord capitulo Cv
IHesu christ the great maystre of humylyte. when he had preched and fed his
people. and heled the seck men and lame / Then he fled away fro the people
in to the montaygne / for to be in orison for to enseygne and give us an
ensaumple to flee the praysyng of the world and therefore the true humble heart
like as he payneth to do well when he obeys. Right so he payneth him to fle
the praysyng of the world. and to hyde him for to keep him from the wind of
vaynglorye. And to fyxe him in the shadow of the roche. like as ysaye the
prophet says fro the tempest of evil tongues / This roche is Ihesu Christ him
self. which is the refuge and the charity to the humble and meke. To this
roche. that is Ihesu crist flees the humble heart charged with thorns like as
is the yrchon. that is of sharpnes of penance This is the dounehous in to
which fleen for refuge. the dounes of our lord. That been the meke. humble. and
simple hertes that flee thither to refuge for the fowls of proye or rauayn That been the deuyls which always seche to da^pne the souls when an humble heart
has done so much that he is entryd in to this roche as the down in to a
dounehous. that is when he remembers well the life of Ihesu Christ / and his
blessed passyon^ then he forgeteth al his sorrows / and prayseth little all that the world has and is worth / and may be of valu. A good heart that has
assayed this. desires no thing so much as to be forgoten to the world. The
world is to him a charge. and besynes^ for as says the wise man. The good man
is never more sure. than when he is al allone. ne more in werkys than when he
is idle. For he is then with ij of his best frendys. that is with god and
with him self. There a devout heart treats of his great quarellys and
complayntes by which al other works semen to him truffes and naught. and al
vanytees. There he acompteth with god / and god with him by holy thoughts and
by fervent desires. Then he seleth the great swetnes of consolacio^s and
comfort that god gives to them that dread him. and love him. like as Dauyd
the prophet says in the psaulter / Then al langages and al words ennoye
and grieve him. if they be not of god. to god. or for god. Thus begins the
soul to love solytude and scylence And then comes to him in his heart an
holy shamefastnes which is one of the fair daughters of humylite. for all in
like wise as a damoysel that loves paramours with great shamefastnes when she
is apperceyued and she hereth that it is spoken of. In like wise the humble
person and devout when he hereth that one speaks of him. and of his
spyrytuel goods that god has done to him. and no thing less does he. than
the maid does which is ardantly surprysed of love. for what someuer the world
say to him / it is known. Nevertheless he secheth his corners and hydles like
as he that requires none other thing. but to be rauysshed in god like as was
Saint Poule.

Of the pryuyte that god has to an holy soul ca Cvj
OF this acquaintance and of this preuyte^ this holy soul begins to have
of god / between her and an holy pride. For when the holy soul is rauysshed
unto heaven / she beholds the earth fro far / like as says ysaye the
prophet. and there sees it so little to the regard of the gretenes of heaven
/ so foul to the regard of that great beauty. so troublus to the regard of
that great clerenesse. so wide to the regard of that great plente / Then he
despreyseth and despyseth certeynly all the rychessys of the world. beautees.
honors. and noblesses. Then it seems to him that it is but a play of
children that play in the way* and much trauayllen them self and win
nothing. It seems that al is but wind and dremes as says salamon. Then he
begins to deye to the world. and live to god as says saint Poul. Then is
the soul so pour of spyryte that it has naught. For god has his spyryte
taken fro him and rauysshed it / and replenysshed with his yeftes. as he did to
thappostles on whytsonday / Then the holy ghoost gives to him so great an
heart / that the prosperyte ne aduersyte of the world he prayseth no thing at
al. and with this he gives to him so holy and so ferme a conscye^ce. that he
awayteth hardyly the death. and he has in god so great faith. and hope and
love. that there is no thing but he dar enterprise it for the love of god.
For he has that faith of which god speaks in the gospel / which is lykened
to mustard seed. by which he may comande to roches and montaygnes / and they
shall obey to him.

Of the comparyso^s of mustard seed to the love of god Cvij
THe seed of mustard is much little. but it is much strong and sharp / And
it is hot in the fourth degree as the physycyens sayen. By the hete is
vnderstonden love The first degree of love as says saint Bernard / is when a
man feleth no thing of love but of him self. and of his owen prouffyte. The
second is when he begins to love god. The iij is when he knows best god /
and loves him proprely for his bounte. The fourth is when he is so esprysed
with this holy love. that he ne loves him self ne none other thing but god /
or for god. or with god. And unto this love brings him very humylyte. Now
may thou see clearly that the pour of spyryte ben blessed. For they be so
humbled and void of their spyryte. that their spyryte is all mynuysshed / for
god has it al. and the holy ghoost has replenysshed the house of his heart. and
is there lord. and enhaunceth them that been pour of spyryte. These been the
very meke and humble. whom he makes to regne in heaven by holy hope and by
holy conscience. and therefore says our lord in the gospel / that the royame of
heaven is theyres. Not only by promise / but by fyn certeynte. like as they
that began sometime to receive the fruytes and the rentes how they should be
blessed in that other world. That may no man know unto the time that he be
there. For the heart of a mortal man may not think it. ne express with mouth
/ ne here it with his cerys.

Of the yefte of holy dread and of pity capitulo Cviij
THe first yefte of the holy ghoost makes the heart humble dredeful and to
doubt god and hate al sins. and therefore it is named the yefte of dread. The
second yefte of pity makes the heart sweet debonayr and pyteous. And therefore
is it named the yefte of pity. And that is proprely a dew and a tryacle against
the venym of felonnye. and in especyal ayenste the venym of the sin of envy.
of which we have spoken tofore. For this yefte of pity takes away and
plucketh out of the heart the rote of envy. and there heleth it parfyghtely.
Then the heart that receives this yefte / and feleth in him a dew. which
makes him to germyne a sweet rote and ryzt well atempred. that is good love.
out of which grows a fair tree beryng great fruit. that is a fair virtue and
good that is called in latin mansuetudo. That is to say sweetness and
debonayrte of heart. which makes a man sweet. debonayr. charytable and
amyable. For this virtue makes a man to love his neighbor parfytely. and him
self after god / This tree has vij degrees by which he mounteth on heyght /
These vij degrees shows to us saint Poul^ there where as he admonesteth and
prays that we do pain to that / that we be al one in god / The first reason
is that we have al one heart the hye and the low. the pour and the rich.
That is that we have al one fader in heaven. That is god which made us al
comunely to his image and to his semblaunce / and by cause that we al have one
creator and maker. which maad us al of one matere and of one form. and to
one end. that is that we be al in him and with him. like as he says in the
gospel. It is much great reason that we love each other / for the bestys and
the birds each loves his semblable^ The second reason is that we be al
christian and baptized in the sacrament of bap^esme pour and rich. That is that
we be al wasshen with the precious blood of Ihesu Christ. And we were redeemed
with one manner money. and as much cost that one as the other. Much then
owe we to love each other and to honor. For god has much loved us and
praised us. and has made us of great dygnyte / The third reason is by cause we
have al one faith and been bounden all to one law which all is
accomplysshed. like as Saint Poul says in this word / love thy neighbor as
thy self. Of this debte is no man quyte for any thing that he can do. this
debte owes each man to other / and who that most renders most owes. The
fourth reason is that we have al one maystre and one lord that is god of whom
we hold al. body and soul. and all that we have. he has made us al and
formed. and has us al redeemed of a like prys. he shall Judge us al^ and reward
largely to al them that shall have kept and holden his commandementes. and that
have loved each other truly. The fyfthe reason is by cause that we be al
fellows in the host of our lord / And we ben al his knights and souldyers.
which we al abide one reward. that is the glory perdurable. and love and
company of all saints. The vj reason is that we live all of one espyryte
spyrytuelly. like as we live all of one air corporally. By this spyryte we
ben all sons of god by adopcyon. That is by aduoerye. and sons of holy
church. brethern germayn of fader and mother. a spyrytuel fraternity. which is
better worth than a carnal fraternity. like as the spyryte is of more value
than the body. The seventh reason is by cause that we been al members of one
body / of which Ihesu christ is the heed. and we been the members which lyuen
al of one mete. That is of the precious flesh and blood of Ihesu Christ.
which so much loves us / and us holds so dear / that he gives to us his
precious blood to drink. and his precious flesh to ete. Therefore remembers
us so often saint Poule this love which he shows to us. For a more quycke
reason ne more fayrer example may he not show to us of very amytye and
frendshyp. if thou will think well on these reasons. thou shalt find vij
degrees of amytye and frendshyp which comen of the yefte of pity.

Of vij manners of spyrytuel love capitulo Cix
OF this stock and out of this rote grown vij branches / For this virtue
shows him in seven manners. like as love is known. which is emonge the
members of a body in vij manners / First the one of the members keeps and
countregardeth the other. that it do to him none evil. ne that at faylle him
not / ne that it do him none harm ne do^mage to his power. and herin we
understand our Innocencye / which we ought to keep each anenst other / For
this commandment is wryton in the heart of every person. That is that thou do
to another after god that. which thou would that he did to the. and that
thou sholdest not do to another. otherwise than thou would should not be done
to the. Ne that thy right hand should smite thy lift hand / Also that one
membre suffer swetelye that other that it do to hit no harm. ne no vengeance
ne wrath. But if that one membre have harm or hurt. that other members feel
it / And in this understand we parsyght debonayrte which has iij degrees /
The first is that he revenge him not / The second that he reteyne not wrath ne
ire. The third that he ne feel no moeuyng of hate ne ire toward his neighbor
for any thing that he does / Also the members obeyen al to their souerayn. For
they do al to their power that. which the heart comandeth them. and the cyen
enseynen them / In this understand we the virtue of obedyence of which we have
spoken tofore. which ought to be apparaylled in love and in charity like as
says Saint Peter. Also the one membre helps that other. and serves that
other without danger. without contradyctyon and without auaryce. And herin we
understand the virtue that is called charity. of which a man then helps
and socoureth another gladly with the power that god has given him. or he
enseygneth or counceylleth with the wit that he hath^ Or he gives and
departs largely for gods sake the goods that he has. Than is said of him
that he is much charytable. and thus commands to us saint peter. that the
graces that god has given to vs^ that we admynystre them to our neighbors /
whereof Tullyus the phylosophre says. we ought to feel all that which is in
the world and grows / al is made for to serve man. And the men be made that
one to aid and help that other. For the one is engendered of the other. Let
us then do that for which we be borne. and that which nature enseygneth us
/ and seche we all the common prouffyte. for thus as says Saint Poule. we been
all members of one sole body. All the members felen and draw to them that
which is done to eueryche / be it good. be it evil. be it Joy. be it
anguysshe / when one smyteth the foot. the mouth says ye gryeue and hurt me /
By this we understand the virtue of very pity. which we ought to have
commynly. which has two offices as says Saint Poule. That is to wete to Joy
for the good that other do and have / And to sorrow for the euylles that other
feel and make / Also if a membre be seek or hurt / all the other helpen it to
the end that it may be guarysshed and hool / In this understand we the virtue of
Justice and of correctyon / without the which the body of holy church may
not endure / For the roten members defoulen the other that been hole. who that
will then chastyse his brother and his neighbor. and repreue and punysshe his
subgette. late him take heed at him self / when that a membre is seek or hurt.
the heart has great compassyon^ and feleth great sorrow / And that is for the
great love that he has to it. he set hand to. much swetely and often. And
like as says Seneke. like as all the members of the body ayden and bear up
each other / Right so ought every man for to supporte his neyghboue. and to
correct and pluck away the wounds of sins that been in his heart. First
there ought for to be laid thereto the oynementes and thenplaystres of sweet
admonycyons.

Also if this be nouzt worth there must be laid thereto the sharp pouldres
and poynaunt of hard reprehencyon / And if that help not / then let come
the sword to dysseuere. or for to excommynye him / or to bannysshe him out of
the contreye or to wythdrawe fro him.

Also the members honor and keep that one that other. and do worship like as
says saint poule. we owe to bear and do reverence one to another. and
specially they that have great need to be supported^ These been the most
folysshe and most feeble. Them ought men most to supporte. Then the wise men
and sage beren and supporten always the fools and the feeble. like as the bones
beren the feeble flesh. and as the pyler bears the house / This is against the
myssayers. that so gladly cryen and sayen the deffaultes and the sins that
they see in other. Also that one membre deffendeth that other at need and put
him tofore to save that other. for at need is seen who is a frende^ when that
one foot slydeth. that other helps it anon. wha^ that one would smite the
heed. the hand put him tofore. In that understand we parfyght and pure amytye
whereof god says in the gospel / who may do gretter amytye or frendshyp. than
to set his life for his friend / This frendshyp shows us Ihesu Christ the
very friend. which for us set his soul and his body to death shameful^ And
that did be to give to us example. like as says Saint Peter. and also Saint
James. that god has set his soul for us / And right so we ought to set
our souls for our brethern and for our neighbors. if we be aryght the members
of the body of Ihesu Christ. which is our heed / who that has this virtue a
right / I shall say appertly that he is well blessyd^ This is the virtue that our
good maystre Ihesu Christ enseygneth us. when he says in the gospel^ blessed
be the debonayr. For they shall possess the land of them that lyuen in glory
without end / Now understand well this blessyng that the debonayr has in
this world. For the parfyght debonayr been now in possessyon of therthe. That
is to understand in iij manners. First of the earth of living people. That is
god him self. which is the heritage of them that live perdurably that is of
the saints and of good people. in like wise as the earth is habytacyon of
beestys and of men. And by cause that god him self is the earth of living men.
he has the debonayrs in his possessyon. For they do no thing but that which
pleseth god. Therefore it is right that they have god in their possessyon / Like
as Dauyd the prophet says in his psaulter. The debonayrres says he shall have
the earth in possessyon and in heritage. and also they shall have delectacions
in multitude of pees. And Saint Anstyn says that no man shall have god in his
possessyon. but that first he shall be in his. Also the debonayr have in this
world the land of their heart in possessyon / For they be by right lords of
their heart. The felon is not lord of his heart. and the debonayr has the
maystrye of his heart and of his evil manners. And Salamon says that he is more
valyaunte. that maystryeth well his heart than he that takes a strong castle
and cytees.

Also the debonayres ben lords of therthe / that is of worldly goodes^ For if
they lose them they shall never be troubled ne angry therefore. But they that
been angry when they lose worldly goods / be not lords of them ne of their
heart. But been servants thereto. and therefore it is right and reason that they
that have here the goods temporell and spyrytuel / have in them self their
possessyon of the herte^ But now understand and behold that this that God
gives unto the pour of spyryte is the heaven. and to the debonayr the earth /
where shall be the auarycyous men then and the felons. but in the torments of
hell.

Of the seven yeftes of the holy ghoost. and first of the yefte of science
capitulo Cx
THe first yefte of the holy ghoost is the yefte of science. which makes a
man humble and dredeful. The second makes him sweet and pyteous. The third
makes him clear seeing. and connyng. and therefore it is called the yefte of
science. For it makes a man wise and connyng in mesure in all things. when
this yefte descends in to the heart of a person. he extyrpeth and casts out
the rote and the sin of ire and of felonnye which troubles the heart. and
makes a man like as he were fro him self so that he sees no thing ne for him
self. ne for to conduyte other. But this yefte enlumyneth the heart on all
parts so that he may not be deceived of any person / like as the yefte of
pity makes the man Innocent. so that he will none deceive. whereof saint Johan
says in thappocalipse in spyryte. that the holy man that was al full of this
espyryte. was al full of eyes tofore and after. And an angel showed to zacharye
the prophet a stone wherein were seven eyes These ben the eyes that the good
men have. for they see clear within their heart and al about them / That is to
say under and above. on the right side and on the lift side. This yeft of
science is maystre of the werkys. and that is to say of virtues of the soul.
For he makes al Just to a point by line rule and plombe / he takes first
his bound and his point. and that is that the wise man sayth^ In all that thou
begynnest. behold the end. and to what end thou shall come. after he holds
the line. For he goes by right way before and by right entencyon. After he
makes all by rule. For he makes it all plain and by mesure. For he loves
the common way of good people without to find noueltees. After he preueth his
sight and his work by plombe / For he takes head that his body enclyne not
toward the right side by prosperyte. ne to the lift side by aduersyte / This
yefte of sapyence is like to the priour of a cloystre of the soul. which
keeps thordre. and makes it to be kept oueral. First in the heart. and after
in other offices In this heart ben two sides and two things. the understanding
and the will / the reason and the affectyon / when these two sides and these
two things accorden to gydre. they make much sweet melodye and much fair
seruyse. That is when the will. will all that. which the understanding
enseygneth to good / and that affectyon feleth all that. which reason
understands. if they understand well in these ij sides which ben in the
soul / when. and how. they ouzt to accord In one side ben iiij locks. and in
that other side iiij. for reason has four offices. That is to inquire. to
Judge. to remember. and to show that which they understand by word. This
yefte enseygneth the reason that. which he ought to learn and to inquire. and
in what order. and in what manner and what end. and this is a much great
craft / For the mesprysyng in these things is much peryllous. hit byhoueth
to understand the reason / and to learn that which is necessary prouffytable
and honest. and to wythdrawe fro the contrary O god how a creature leseth his
time / and dyspences for to learn things that been of no value / but vaynglorye
and sin. But the holy ghoost by this yefte enseygneth lightly. and makes a
man to learn ordynatly that / which is most necessary to the prouffyte of
the soul. And that ledeth him most right unto the love of God for the health
and the prouffyte of his soul. and to help his neighbor.

Also it byhoueth the reason well to inquire the truth of the things / And
also how he ought for to believe / well to believe is. when a man byleueth symply
and steadfastly all that which god says and commands without ouermoche to
inquire. and without to enserche the counceylles of god / and the profoundnes
of his Iugements. the heyght of his mageste. and the reasons of his sacraments
/ well to believe is when one byleueth not over hastily. ne over late. ne to
eueryche / ne to none. for that one and other is vice as says seneke / After
good enquyryng comes well to Judge. For to Judge well it apperteyneth that one
afferme no thing. unto the time that he has inquired the truth of the thing
/ and that he be well encerteyned / and that he entremete not to Judge that.
which apperteyneth no thing to hym^ like as ben the secret things and hid
/ thentencyo^s of hertes^ the things that may not be turned on the right side
ne on the lift side. that yet they be vnderstonden to the better part. Of
which the spyryte by this yefte makes the reason to Judge well. and to know
the right / and to determyne between good things and evil things between the
little things and the great things. for he must praise every thing after his
valor. Also this spyryte makes the reason to remember. For he remembers a
man all that is nedeful to him. like as god says in the gospel. The things
that been passyd he must remember and bring ageyn to memory. The things that
been present he must understand and remember and ordeyne^ The things that
been to come he must purneye fore / ordeyne and advise. These ben the seven
parties of the virtue of prudence. after that which the phylosophre says. Also
he makes the reason to speak by mesure / and be stylle gladly. and not to
speak till it be need. So that the word be tofore well aduysed and well thought
or it come to the tongue^ And that the word be wayed and poysed as good money
and preued like as Salamon sayth^ So that the word be according unto god and
without sin of good matere and of good form. That is that it have not
ouermoche. ne over little. And that it be well employed. For good money ne a good
word ought not to be given for naught. Hereof says God in the gospel that we
should not cast the precious stones tofore hogs. That is to understand the
precious words of our lord god before them / and to such persons that set
them self not to work for their health. But lyuen in the ordure of their
sins. therefore holy scripture calls them hogs. This yefte before said
ordeyneth and accords that other party of the heart. That is the will where
it has iiij parties. love. dread / joy and sorrow. That is that one love
that^ which he owes. so as he owes. as much as he owes. and that he dread
not also that which he owes / and that he have no joy ne delight sauf in that
he owes after god and also how he owes / and as much as he owes. And that
he have no sorrow ne heaviness / but in that which he owes / and also how he
owes. and as much as he owes. when these four parties been accorded. then
it is said that a man is well attempred when he is not over cold ne over hot.
ne over dry. ne over moist. And in like wise as to the body of a man comen
over many maladyes. for the dysate^peraunce of these iiij qualytees / or of
these iiij humors / Right so to the heart of a man comen to him the vices and
sins by the dysatemperaunce of these four manners when these ij sides of the
heart ben accorded and ordained / that is the reason and the will. Then is a
man ordained within him self / These ben the ij sprynges of the rote of a much
fair virtue which is called equity. Equity proprely is that which is done by
Judgment good and true. not over soft / ne over rude^ without bowyng and
enclynyng unto that one party. ne to that other. when one goes forth aryght
as a line / for equity is none other thing but unity. that is egalte / al egal
/ who has this virtue is a true Judge and wise / For he does nothing but it be
inquired and examyned like as a good Judge ought to do Then the first degree
of this virtue / is that a man be a good Judge of him self. for he ought to enter
in to him self. and behold his conscience. and well to examyne his thoughts
and his wylles. whether they been good or evil / and to ordeyne all to the
regard of reason. so that will and reason be at one accord / For like as
saint Bernard says. virtue is none other thing but thassente of reason and of
will. That is that will without gaynsayeng. say and doo^ and also put in
oeuure. that is to say in deed and work. that which reason says / shows.
and enseygneth.

Of the second degree of equity and of ryghtwysnes Cxj
THe second degree of this virtue is. that a man be a rightful Judge. and hold
the right line of equity between himself and that which is under him. That is
his body which he has in keeping which he ought here to nourysshe. that it
may serve. and be so dyscyplyned and chastysed that it will of all and in all
things obey unto the soul. like as a good chambryere obeys to her
maystresse. and a good dyscyple to his master without gaynsayeng. For the
reason ought to be like as a true arbytrour between the soul and the body.
which ought to keep the right of either part. In such manner that the spyryte
be a good lord. and the body be a good servant and very subgette and
obeyssaunt to the soul / Now is it great necessyte to hold in this party
oueral equity and ryzt mesure in drynkyng and etyng. in clothyng and in
arayeng. and in all the things that the body commands. For it enclyneth more
to ouermoche than to ouerlytel. After. him byhoueth the v wits of his body
well to conduyte and to govern by reason and by equity. so that eueryche serve
in his office without sin and without mesprysyon. like as with the eyes to
behold. the eerys to here. the noses to smelle. the mouth to taste and to
speak. the hands and all the body to touch. when these v wits be well kept
from sin / Then is the castle sure and ferme. For these ben the yates of
the soul. These ben the wyndowes by which death enters often in to the soul
This witnesses the prophet.

Of the iij degree of the virtue of equity capo. Cxij
THe third degree of the virtue of equity is that a man be a good Judge and that
he hold equity. between him self / and that that is tofore him. That been the
temporal things. which often destroyen body and soule^ as when a man sets
his love ouermoche on them like as done the auarycyous and covetous men. and
al they that above mesure louen worldly things / For they have their hertes
knytte in the nettys of the devil. as Job says. That is to plees and
quarellys^ and forayne works. wherein they ocupye them so and in such manner.
that in the life spyrytuel ne to their sauacyon they conne naught do / ne may
not ne will not entende. so much ben they blind / and bounden in their
sins. whereof it happeth that which Seneke the wise man says. That by this
we sin and goo out of the way. that as touching the parties of the bodyly
life. every man thinks and is besy. but for to ordeyne his life spyrytuel for
to have glory perdurable no man thinks ne studyeth / Now is then much
great necessyte. that a man set not ouermoche his heart in forayne things /
for who that so ouermoche does. he falls in the charges and in the couetyses
of the world. which is the rote of all vices.

Of the fourth and fyfthe degree of the virtue of Equity capitulo Cxiij
THe fourth degree of the virtue of equity is that a man see clearly on his rzht
side. that is that he take heed and take example of the good for to govern
him. which ben like as at his right syde^ And of the good and wise men he take
wit and example / But in this side behooves to hold dyscrescyon and equity /
For all the people may not goo by one way / ne all the good. ne all the wise. have
not one self grace. like as the members of a body have not one self office. and
hereof been many persons nouyces deceived in their heart. like as says the book
of collacyons of holy faders. which treaten of the perfectyon of virtues / for
wha^ they see a man well parfyght much prouffyte in one estate and in one
grace. Anon they entende. desire. and will resemble him. and when they see
another. which in another estate does also much good. also they cry and
run after. and also to the third and the fourth and with none they abide ne
rest / They be also like as the young grehounde / which is yet all young.
that renneth after every be that he sees tofore him / and does no thing
but makes him weary and leseth his time. hereof tells ysopus a tale or a
fable. of a little hounde and of an ass. which ass saw the hounde that as
oftymes as his lord came home. he ran ayenste him and lepe upon his neck.
and the lord played with him and made him great feste. and the ass thought
saying. More ought my lord to make to me feste which serve him al day. than to
this dog which serves of no thing It was not long after that this ass
saw his lord come to his house. And he ran against him / and cast his ij
forefeet about his neck. and began strongly to lycke and fawn him. The
servants of the lord which saw this / ran with great staves and beten
right well the ass. And of that. of which the ass had supposed to have had
grace. honor. and prouffyte. he had shame and dommage. By such fables the
wise men were wont tenseygne and teache them self by such ensaumple. And by
this ensaumple he shows / that no man should desire such graces as he may not
attain ne come to. and the same techeth Salamon saying. Sone cast not thyn
eyes to rychesses / That is to the graces that thou may not atteyne. Therefore
he has great need of dyscrescyon that he see of whom he takes ensaumple.
Also it is necessyte that a man see clearly on his lift side. and that is the
fyfthe degree. For one ought to behold the fools and the shrewes which ben
as on the lift side. for they be on the werse side. To them ought one to take heed. First by cause that a man should have pity and compassyon / Also that one
should not ensyewe their folly ne their predycyon. so as the wise Salamon says.
I passed said he by the vyneyerde of the slouthful fool. and saw that it was
full of thorns and nettles. and by this ensaumple I have learned wit and
prouydence. Also that one love most god by whom he is quyte of such sins
and of such perils. But him byhoueth on this side to keep dyscrescyon and
equity. For when I see a fool and a synnar. I ought to have pity and
compassyon. and not to make of him mocquerye ne derysyon / I ought always to
hate the sin. and love the persone^ and much I ought to keep me that I will
no grief ne harm in my heart to no person ne to condemn him. Ne compare my
self to another that is so evil. For he is this day evil that shall be to morn
good and such is this day good that to morn shall be evil. Also I ought as
much as I may without mysdoyng unto other enploye my self. humble and
condescende in werkys and in words for to win him to god. and to wythdrawe
him fro sin. For like as says Seneke and Saint Gregory we may not better
relyeue them that been fallen. than by that which is aforesaid. and late us not
will our self how that it be^ enclyne toward them.

The vi degree of the virtue of equity capitulo Cxiiij
THe vj degree of the virtue of equity is the vj eye that the wise man has.
That is that he see clearly behind the net and the engynes of the devil /
which been to us as behind us. For the fend sees us and we may not see him.
The fend our enemy that is the deuyl^ which is much strong / wise. subtyl.
and besy for to deceive us / For he cesseth never day ne night. but always is
in a wait for to deceive us by his craft and by his engynes that he uses in
moo than a thousand manners. And like as says saint austyn. The deuylles see
much subtylly thestate of a man and his manner. and his complexyon and to what
sin. and to what vice he is most enclyned. by nature or by custom / and to
that part whereto a man enclyneth him self. Thereto the devil assaylleth most
strongely / The coleryke man to wrath and Ire. The sangueyn man to Iolyte and
to lecherye / The fleumatyke coglotonnye and to stouthe. and the malencolyke to
envy and heaviness / And therefore every man ought to deffende and keep him fro
that part where he sees that his house is most feble^ And against this vice
and this sin ought one to fight and resyste most / of which he is most
assaylled. And how much more he shall resyste strongely ayenste all sins.
So much more merit shall he have in paradyse or in heaven / and understand
well that the enemy of hell spares no person / For he is hardy and aygre^
as he that assaylleth our lord Ihesu Christ in temptyng him. Know thou says
our lord to Job. in how many guyses the fend desguyseth him. and in how many
manners / Like as he should say. No man knows but I only. For like as says
saint Denis. All the angellys the good and the evil. and all the spyrytes of men
ben like as a myrrour spyrituel. Then like as a myrrour receives all the
fourmes and thenpryntes that comen tofore him / Right so does a spyryte of a
man. be it in slepyng be it in wakyng. Now then took a myrrour and set it
against another. Anon all the forms that been in that one / thou shall see in
that other In such it is said that the devil shows to a man such fygures
and such fourmes as he will that god suffers him And the soul receives
maulgre him self sometime in thouzt and in ymagynacyon / like ayenste my will.
me byhoueth to see and receive in the sight of mine eye the form that comes
before me. Now is it a right great grace of god and a right great yefte of the
holy ghoost to understand well all the langages of the devil and to know all
his temptacyons. and all his engynes. For like as says saint Bernard / It is
over subtyl a thing to know and to dyscusse between the thoughts that the
heart conceyueth and brings forth. and them that the devil planteth^ And the
fend shows to a man how the sins been playsaunte and delectable. lightly
may a dyscrete man and reasonable know this / But when the fend comes to
tempte a man in guyse of an Angel. And shows to him good for to draw him to
evil. Then is the temptacyon most strong. And therefore says saint Johan
that one ought not to believe all spyrytes. but they ouzt to preue and well
examyne them tofore that one believe them and to consider if they be of the
part of god. Right so done they that have their confessors good and holy
men. wise and well approved in their fayt / To which confessors they that
confess them. shown often their thoughts which come unto their heart. both
the good and evil. For like as Salamon says Blessed be they that all so
doubten that they sin not. ne mysdoon. And he says also in another place /
Do by good counceyll all that thou shalt do. And then thou shalt not
repent the.

The seventh degree of the virtue of equity capitulo Cxv
THe vij degree of Equity is the seventh eye. which he must have that will have
this virtue. That is that he behold upward on hye. And that he have god all
way tofore him. Of such our Lord says in the gospel^ if thyn eye be pure and
simple / All thy body shall be clear and shynyng. And if thyn eye be derke and
tenebrouse. All thy body shall be derke obscure and tenebrouse. That is to say
if the entencyon of thyn heart is pure and simple. and gooth forth the right
lygne after god by all the degrees that we have tofore named. All the mass
and substance of thy works and of thy virtues shall be fair clear and
playsaunt to god. And if the entencyon be not good but froward and evil. and
reployeth bacwarde. all the work shall be derke and tenebrouse. For without
good and ryghtful entencyon. Alms bycometh sin / and virtues vices /
Thentencyon is simple when a man makes his works good right for gods love.
and it is obscure and derke. when a man does his works for to playse the
world or for vain glory. It is crooked and not right in two things. that is
when one holds one part to god. and that other of the world. For thentencyon
retorneth bacward / when a man secheth his own prouffyte in all thing that
he does. Now have thou herd the seven degrees ol ^hys virtue of Equity by
which this tree reyseth on heyght

Here folowen the virtues ayenste the seven dedely sins capitulo Cxvj
THe branches of this tree ben the seven virtues pryncypal / which answer
unto the seven dedely sins. like as meekness or humylyte does ageynste
pride. Amytye or frendshyp ayenste enuye^ Debonayrte and pacyence against ire
and telonnye. Prowess and dylygence ayenste slouthe / Largess ayenste
auaryce. Chastyte against lecherye^ and Sobrenesse against glotonnye. These seven
virtues keep and conduyde much right the spyryte of science which ledeth and
conduyteth them by the way of Equity as Salamon says. By the which way
dyscrescyon and reason which is the charytour and the conduytour of virtues as
says saint bernard and the governor of the ship of the soul ledeth and
governs them that they goo not out of the way ne on the right side ne on
the lift. And thus prouffyten they / grow and brings forth fruit
plentyously / Then the virtue of Equity. shows him by dyscrescyon in all the
works of other virtues. that without this virtue. the name of the virtue
bycometh vice. I say well that in another sense. these seven virtues beforesayd
been the branches of Equity. and all the fruytes and the good works that
grown thereof apperteynen to this tree. Now understand well how the great
maystre of virtues speaks to us of this virtue. For he says not in his rule.
blessed be they that holden equity oueral. and in all things have dyscrescyon
and mesure without mystakyng For there is none but he mysdoeth in many manners
/ And therefore our Lord Ihesu Christ recomforteth us. when he says not.
Blessed be they that sin not / and that mysdoo not. but done all by equity
and by right lygne. but he says much curioysly for to recomforte the synnars.
Blessed be they that weep / for they shall be comforted / That is to say. They
been and shall be blessed that seen. known and vnderstonden well their sins
and their deffaultes in all the points of equity which we have here tofore
named / And thereof wepen and be sorouful that they find Inyquyte and
wickedness. there where as they should hold and find equity. And therefore
this world is called the valey of teerys. that none in the world may live
without teerys. which has received the yefte of science. whereof we have
spoken tofore. But it byhoueth as says Salamon. that who that most knows
and most sees the euylles and sorrows of the world / he has most sorrow at
his heart. teres and wepynges.

Thus began the world to grieve and annoye. and to whom this transytorye life
most annoyeth ans greueth / he most desires that other life which is
wythouten end. Now ought thou to take here six manner of teerys which an
holy man had here in this world by the yefte of science / The first teerys
comen of that. which a man has oftymes angered god. by thought. by word. and
by work. The second teerys comen of that. which one byholdeth the great
torments / horrible and perdurable of hell which thou have deserved by thy
sins. of which each person ought for to have great dread. The third teres
grow of the euylles. that a man see the good suffer. of whom we ought to have
pity and compassyon^ The fourth teres comen for the sins that the evil people
do. The v teerys comen for this life which is peryllous. and for that other life
which is without end in glory perdurable. that we tarry so long therfro /
The syxthe teres comen of devotion and of great plente of spyrytuel Joy of the
presence of Ihesu Christ. and of the feelyng of the holy ghoost. These been a
right well blessed that thus wepen. For they shall be comforted as says the
gospel. like as the nouryce comfort the child that wepeth and cries. For
she dries the eyes and kysseth him / and makes him to laughe by force. Right
so shall our lord do to them that wepen by bitter contrycyon for their sins
like as I have said / The debonair Ihesus shall dry their eyes. that they shall
never weep more / Ne they shall never feel harm ne sorrow. But all way they
shall be with our Lord god in pees / in laughyng and in Joy pardurable.

Here after follows how that a man ought for to live in moyen astate capitulo
Cxvij
NOw have we spoken of the yeftes and of the virtues that govern them that
live in this world in the lowest of these three estates of which we have spoken
tofore / Now owe we by the aid of the holy ghoost to speak of the yeftes and
of the virtues. which most proprely apperteyne to them that despise the
world. and tenden to the montayne of perfectyon. Of them says proprelye the
holy man Job. That the life of a man upon the erthe^ is as a knyghthode. for the
life of a man in therthe is laboryous. Now behold and take heed of a young
bourges. and of a young knight / These two manner men have much diverse
thoughts. and diverse ententes. The bourges entendeth to marchaundyse. for to
bye and selle. to win and to get good / and the end of his entente is all
for to be rich and noble and honored in his cite or town.

The new knight gooth all another way. For he desires and entendeth to do
curt^syes and to give largelye. To learn chyualrye and for to use arms. To
suffer pain and disease / and to show prowess. to conquer loos and honor
and to mount in to hye estate. These two estates we see openly in these two
manner of people / Of which sum been / that will keep them from great sins
/ for they will do penance and give alms / and hold and keep the
commandments of our Lord Ihesu Christ and of holy church. And well should
suffyse them. if they might for so much save them at the last. There been
other to whom the world ennoyeth and greueth for the perils sins and the
pains of which it is al full. So that none may have pees of heart ne sure
conscience. They see ageyn on that other side / that there is no tresoure
which may be compared unto the love of god. Ne no swetnesse so great / as is
pees of heart. Ne no glory mondayne ne worldly. that may compare to the glory
of a pure conscience. It seems to them and truth it is that who that might
get these three things he should be more than an Emperor.

This is a great thing. but there been but few that dare take this empryse /
But when god gives to a man this grace and this yefte. which is called the
spyryte of strength he gives to him a new heart. a noble heart. and an hardy
heart. Noble for to despise all that. which the world may take and give. And of
this hardynesse speaks our Lord in the gospel / when he says. blessed be they
that have hungre and thyrste for Justice / Salamon says that he is Just that
despyseth his do^mage for his soul or for his friend. and saint bernard says
that he is not Just that sees not that his heart feleth and understands.
that he is bounden in his heart anenste god to love him above al things. They
that verayly desire with all their heart to render this debte to god. been
they of whom our Lord speaks in the gospel. when he says that blessed be
they that have hungre and thyrst for Justice. He says not blessed ben they
that done Justice. but that have hungre and thyrst to do Justice / For this
Justice may not be holden. ne plainly rendered in this world / But in this world
it shall be desired. and in that other paid. Therefore our Lord says not they
be blessed that shall render and yield this Justice / but he says more
curtoysly. As he that well knows our pouerte. Blessed be they that of this
Justice have hungre and thyrste. For Ihesu Christ requires not that we pay to
him here his debte. but it suffyseth to him if we have good will and desire to
render and yield. And how shall I say that they be Iuste^ that render not that
/ which they owe. ne have no will ne hungre to pay. This desire when it is
very in the heart / him byhoueth that he show it by work For like as Salamon
says. No man may bear fire in his lap but if that his gown brenne. This
demonstraunce may not be without virtue and without prowess. For by
witness. ne by pletyng ne by preef may not be that one be a good knight. but
by many good feetes of arms / and by much suffryng and enduryng of
trybulacyons and myschyef. And this is the fourth virtue that the holy ghoost
gives to a man to extyrpe and pluck all out the fourth dedely sin. That
is the sin that is called in clergy accydye. that is slouthe / This virtue
aforesaid is of so great dygnyte. that emonge all other virtues. this only
bears by him self proprely the name of virtue. For virtue and prowess is al
one. God gives this virtue of prowess to his servants when he suffers and
will make them knights / like as he did his apostles at pentecoste or
whytsontyde. Of whom we read that they were so cowarde tofore that they had
received this virtue of prowess. that they durst not goo out of their lodgyng.
unto the time that they were armed with this virtue. but after they had this
virtue of prowess they suffered gladly al martyrdoms and al manner torments.

Of the deuysyons of virtues after the phylosophres Cxviij
THe phylosophres that treat of these virtues. depart^ this virtue of prowess
in vj parties. which ben like vj degrees whereby this virtue mounteth and
prouffyteth. but our master which maad the phylosophres and the phylosophye.
that is Ihesu Christ. he put to the seventh point of prowess. The first
point of prowess is called magnytude The second is affyance. The third
surete. The fourth pacyence. The fyfthe constaunce. The syxte magnyfycence. And
the seventh which our master Ihesu Criste adiousted. that is hungre and
thyrst of Justice / This virtue may not so proprely be named in english. as
thentendement or understanding of the world is said in latin.

The first of the virtue of magnanymyte capitulo Cxix
MAgnanymyte. is hyenesse. gretenesse. and noblesse of courage by which a man
is hardy as a man of great empryse. This virtue has two parties / That is to
wete to despise great things. or naught to preyse. and more gretter things to
enterprise and to chese / Of the first party says Saint Austyn. Prowess is
when courage despyseth all that which he has not in his power / That is all
that he may lose ayenste his will / And Seneke says. in worldly things there
is no thing great / but the heart which despyseth great things / Of the
second party says the phylosophre. that magnanymyte is reasonable empryse of
hye things and ferdful. who that has this virtue. he byholdeth the world fro
far. as says Ysaye the prophet. And thus him seems that all the world be a
little thing. like as a sterre seems to us a little thynge^ Then all the
world. and all the charges. and the great works and needs of the world semen
to him as naught. whereof salamon says when he had well enserched the world /
and had desputed of al thestates. of the fools and wise men. He said his
sentence in this manner. vanyte of vanytees. and all that I see is vanyte. That
is to say that all the world is vanyte / and all full of vanytes And a man him
self for whom the world is made. be peryssheth with al vanyte. for in him is
al manner of vanyte and of ordure^ Like as dauyd says in his Psaulter. vanyte
by mortalyte. For his life flees away as shadow. vanyte by curyosyte / For
his heart is as a dreme. vanyte by wyckydnesse / For sin makes him more to be
holden and reputed naught. than any thing that is in the world. Now is then
the first party of this virtue that has made him to despise the world. Like
as have sometime done in time passed. the phylosophres. the paynems. the
sarasyns. And holy christian men / That other party is so that he do get the
way of perfectyon: and to chese the life that is so openly sharp and
dredeful. This is the way that ledeth a man unto the montaygne of god. that is
in thestate of perfectyon. This is the way of the pryue counceyl of our lord
Ihesu Christ. which he showed in the montaygne to his appostles / whereof this
traytye speaks. This way chese they / to whom it suffyseth not only to
keep the commandementes of god / to which they be bounden by true debte like
as they doo^ that leave all that they have for gods sake. and abandonne them
self to dye for the love of him that deyed for them in the cross. that was
sweet Ihesu Christ. Or for to goo unto the holy land or ellis where. as they do
that leave and despise all for the love of god both hauoyr. friends. and them
self. and make them servants of other and pour that were rich and might be
in the world and put them self to suffer great sharpenes! which hadden in the
world great eases and great delytes / and al these things done many and have
done with good heart that been in relygyon for little auaylleth it to be in
relygyon or in sharpenes of penance if the heart be not there. For the habyte
makes not the monk. ne the arms the knight / but the good hertes and the
purneaunce and garneson of good works.

Of the virtue of affyaunce spyrytuel capitulo Cxx
THe second degree of this virtue is affyaunce / For who that has emprysed a
good way or any good works / him byhoueth that he hold him fermelye in his
purpoos / And that he achyeue that he has begone. This virtue is called
fyaunce. Fyaunce is necessary ayenste thassautes of the world. of the flesh
/ and of the devil of hell. which much strongely assaylen a man at the
begynnyng^ The flesh says to him I may not endure this life. my life has
custom to live such a life / The world renneth after for to withdraw him fro
doing well / like as one renneth after a thief. when he escapes fro prison. The
devil says to him. Caytyf what will thou do. wherefore wylt thou thus sle thy
self / thou may well save thy self otherwise. These ben the first assaults
that the new knights of god suffer. which entende and draw to conquer the
royame of heaven. and when they entende and abide with god by good and term
affyaunce. they retche not For he is the right true friend that can. may. and
will keep his friends / and whom god will aid and help / none may noye ue
grieve.

Of the virtue of surete capitulo Cxxj
THe third degree of prowess is surete. Surete as says the phylosophre is a
virtue by which a man redoubteth not ne dredeth the euylles ne the perils
which been tofore his eyes. and this is the third good and well that the yefte
of strength makes. For when the holy ghoost armeth his knight with his virtue
he gives to him first a noble heart for to enterprise great things. after he
gives to him a great ardour and a desire to poursyewe it / and great affyau^ce
to bring it to an ende^ after he makes him sure and hardy as a lion so that he
has no dread of peril ne of pain. ne of dethe^ ne of torments. but
desires them like as does the new knight the tournoye. Thus dyden the holy
marters like as it appears in their lyues^ Emonge other we read of Saint
agathe that had as great Joy when she went to the torments. like as she
should have gone to a weddyng or to a feste. and in like wise of thy holy
apostles and other holy marters without nombre.

Of the fourth degree of the virtue of prowess Cxxij
Right as the holy ghoost makes his knight sure for to abide the torments and
the sorrows that been to come Right so makes he him strong and pacyent to
suffer them when they come. and this is the fourth degree which is called
pacyence. By this virtue a man ouercometh his enemies. The devil. the flesh.
and the world^ and all that they may do and say. For these be the sheldes of
gold to him / which for the love of god suffers that they couere on al sides
/ Like as dauyd the prophet says in his psaulter / so that no stroke may
hurt him / This virtue has no man but if he has be tempted^ For trybulacyon
forgeth sapyence as says saint Poule. like as the fire makes the tyles hard.
without this virtue is none proved. Thus without pacyence none may come to
perfectyon. without pacyence no man has vyctorye. For who that leseth
pacyence is vaynquysshed. Of this we see example in all the crafts that been
made with hand. Many a stroke of the hamer suffers the cup of gold tofore
or it be set on the table of a king. And also a chalyce or it be blessed and
set on the altar. Much suffers the tonnes and pypes many great strokes
tofore the wyn be put therein / Much is defouled with the feet of the fullers
the fine scarlet cloth. tofore or the queen is clad wythal. and as many
examples may thou fynde^ as there ben in london crafts. By this virtue is a
man strong as iron. which all other metalles softeth and maystryeth / and he
is maad precious as gold. which the more it is in the fire. the more is it
pure and clean. clear and traytable. as the salamandre in the fire. and as the
fysshe that lives in the water of trybulacion in which he swymmeth and is
nourysshed.

Of the v degree of the virtue of prowess capitulo Cxxiij
THe v degree of the virtue of prowess is called the virtue of constance / this
is a very virtue that makes the heart strong and stable as a toure founded
upon a ferme roche. and as a tree rooted in good ground. that meueth not. ne
waggeth for no wind that may blow. That is to say. for none adventure ne
temptacyo^ that may hap or come. good ne evil without this virtue none comes
to virtue ne to vyctorye. For when the knight of god has made or done so^me
prowesses Then assaylleth him the devil by vaynglorye. And then is the
bataylle in the heart only to vaynquysshe. that he fall not by vaynglorye /
that all the first temptacyon was not so strong / as is this vaynglorye. Of
which Dauyd says in his psaulter. that the devil beteth down the strong on
the lift side by aduersyte. And the right strong on the right side by
vaynglorye. This virtue prayseth much Seneke the wise man which says. That
there is no virtue but that which gooth tofore proudly between that one
fortune and that other. and to the great despyte of that one and of that other.

The vj degree of the virtue of prowess capitulo Cxxiiij
THe vj degree of prowess is magnyfycence^ this virtue expresses and declares
also the phylosophre saying Magnyfycence is an hye work and happy achyeuyng.
Our Lord Ihesu Christ the souerayn phylosophre calls this virtue perseueraunce^
by which the good knight of god endures the euylles unto the ende^ in that
hye way of perfectyon which he has emprysed. Of this virtue says saint poule
that all the virtues run / but this virtue wynneth the sword All they fight
but this has the vyctorye and the crown. All werken. But this virtue of
perseueraunce bears away the reward and the merit. For our lord Ihesu
Christ says. who that shall persevere unto the end he shall be saved and none
other. The phylosophres could no ferther declare this virtue of prowess. But
the dyscyples of our great maystre Ihesu Christ seen much more ferther. For
like as Salamon says when they have all remembered and performed / Then
them seem that al is to begin ageyn. The virtues and the prowess of
phylosophres were al for to vaynquysshe the sins and vices / and for to get
the virtues / But the prowess of saints was not only to vaynquysshe sins
and vices and to get virtues. but with all this pryncypally for to keep Iustyse
and truth toward Ihesu Christ. He is not true ne Just. that renders not
that he owes to his power. And certeynly it is a thing much ryghtful and
reasonable that I give my life and my death for him that gaf his life and death for
me. And as much as he is of more value and is more worth than I / so much I
am more redeuable to him by right Iustyse. Like as says Saint ancelme. This
Justice I owe to desire but I may not here render it ne pay it fully^ as we
have said tofore. And therefore is the seventh degree of this virtue this which
our lord Ihesu christ has put to. To the which the phylosophre might never
atteyne. when he said blessed be they that have hungre and thyrst of Justice /
They then be blessed that be mounted in to these seven degrees of prowess /
and have hungre and thyrste and great desire to their power to mount unto the
seventh degree.

Of the spyrytuel bataylle against sin capitulo Cxxv
IN this tree like as in the other we find vij branches for in vij manners the
virtue and the prowess of the good knight of god shows him / For by vij
manners of bataylle there comen vij manners of vyctorye. and by seven manner of
vyctoryes. he conquereth seven manners of crowns of glory These been the
rewards and the seven merytes of which speaks saint Johan thappostle and
euangelyst in thapocalypse For as Saint Bernard says. Much is he a fool. and
over wenyng that without vyctorye attayneth to have the crown and that without
batayl weneth to have vyctorye / whereof Saint Poul says. That he shall never be
crowned in glory that fyghteth not truly ayenste sin and vices / which is
the champe of battle in this world. The maystre of this ^elde of bataylle is
Ihesu Christ. which preueth his new knights like as it is wryton in the book
of kings. This maystre is the debonayr Ihesu Christ. which is ryzt true as
says saint Poule. and knows well the power of every man wherefore he suffers
not that any enemy or tend tempte us above our power / ne that no aduersarye
assail us so. but that we may overcome him if we will by thayde of god why^he
increases our strength in the bataylle as says saint Paul. and saint Johan
also as we have said and devised vij vyctoryes and vij crowns / That is to say
vij manner of rewards and of merytes which god promyseth to them that overcome
the sins and the vices.

Of the first bataylle against al vices capitulo Cxxvj
THe first bataylle that a christian man has / is ayenste dedely sin. There is
none ouercomen ne vaynquyshed in this bataylle / but if he will / For who that
will not consent to sin he vaynquyssheth the battle. which is light to do
to a good heart vygorous / and much hard to him that is slow and latchous and
evil encoraged to do well and to the seruyse of god. which is not strong by
dread. ne hoot in prayer to god and in well dooyng as Saint Johan says. For who
that falls and is vaynquysshed in this battle. has much to do and is more
hard for him to releue him and to defend him. than he that is in hye
spyrytuel estate. For he has no power to releue hym^ but if it be by the grace
of god For like as the fysshe enters by him self in to the net. yet may he
not issue ne goo out / but if he be cast or put out / Right so a man
falls by him self and by his will in to sin. but he may not issue ne goo
out without the grace of our lord and his aid and help / as when he gives
to him repentance to do penance for his sins. and that is the armor that
saint Poul comaundeth to take in this bataylle. Now ought thou to know.
that when a man is armed for to vaynquysshe and overcome hardely sin and
parfyghtly him byhoueth that he have three things which ben in very penance.
The first is repentance of heart / The second confession of mouth / The third
is satysfactyon and penance. that is the amends of sin. if one of these
three faylle the confession is nothing worth.

Of very repentance of heart capitulo Cxxvij
Repentance requires great sorrow and great bywayllynges of heart of that
which he has angered and dyspleased god. and of so much as he has more sinned
and dysplesed god. so much more ought be the sorrow. and the repentance
gretter. Thus repented him the good King dauyd when he said in his psaulter. I
have labored and trauaylled in my bewayllyng / and have wasshen in the nyghtes
my bed and my couche with my weeping teerys / He that has dysplesed god by
dedely synne^ ought to weep and waylle in the depnesse of his heart. and with
great syghynges cry god mercy like as the thief. the murdrer. and the traitor
that has deserved to be hanged on the gybet of helle^ The synnar is the thief
to god. For he has stolen and mysused the goods of his lord which been but
lent to him for to win with. Tho been the goods of nature / of grace / and
of fortune. of which he must render and give acompte and rekenyng much
straytly / how he has folyly dyspended them. and has put them to evil use.
Also he is a murdrer of the daughter of the king. that is of his own soul.
which was daughter of the king of glory by grace / whom he has slain and
put to death by dedely sin / Also he is a traytre. For the castle of his heart
and of his body which god has given him to keep / he has yolden to the devil
which is his mortal enemy. well ought he to demene great sorrow that is in
such peril. and ought often to wasshe his bed / that is his conscience.
These teres chase and drive away the devil out of his heart. like as the
scaldyng hot water dryueth a dog out of the kechyn. After the repentance
ought to come the confession. that is the good chambryere which makes clean
the house. and casts out all the ordures with the besomme of the tongue.
whereof dauyd says in the psaulter / Now understand well how a man ought to
confess him /

Here after is contained how that a man ought to confess him capitulo Cxxviij
Unto that / that confession auaylleth unto the sauacyon of the soul byhouen
six condycyons. The first is that it be made wisely / and this is in two
things / the first that he take good head. to whom he ought to confess him:
and after whereof he ought to be confessyd. Saint Austyn says. that it which
one should do for to eschew and flee the death of the body / ought one do for
to eschew the death and the dampnacyon of the soul / The seek man for
teschewe and to fle the death. and for to have health. secheth gladly the best
physician and the most wise that he may find. Thus says Saint Austyn. who so
wisely will confess him and find grace anenst god. he ought to seche such a
confessor. which can and may bind and unbind. and also counceylle. That is
that the confessor can well know sin. and counceylle the synnar. and that he
have power to assoylle him / and to give him penance after the sin. For
according to his sin he ought to have penance. Also who so will confess him
wisely he ought dylygently remember his sins tofore or he confess him and
enserche al his heart and his conscience. how he has dysplesed god and his
blessed mother and al his saints. and ought to remember all his life in great
dread. Like as did the good king Ezechyas which said thus. I shall remember al
my years in the great bytternes of my soul and my heart. The synnar ought to
enter in to the house of his heart / and not to pass thorough like a mynystrel
which abides not gladly in his house. For he has no werse home than his
own. But in his own heart a man ought to dwell and consider all his sins
and his deffaultes. whereof he ought to yield acompts and reason truly to god
and to his confessor. and ought to remember to ordeyne well his acompte / like
as he that is adiourned tofore his lord for to render acompte of al his
receytes and payementes. And also well to take heed tofore the writing of his
conscience / that he faylle not to account all his life. For if he faylle of
his acompte god shall not faylle of his when a man has dylygently remembered his
sins. and beholden how and in how many manners he has dysplesed god / and how
oftymes. and how gretelye he has sinned / And how long he has abyden in
sin / Then he ought to confess him anon and hastelye And this is the
second condycyon that ought to be in confession. The king Dauyd rose at
mydnyght for to confess him. like as he says in the psaulter. and abode never
unto a month. ne to the end of a year. And the wise man says thus in another
place / Ne tarry thou not to convert to god. ne withdraw the not ne seek no
delays fro day to ady. For in taryeng is much peril for many reasons. First
for the condycyon of sin. For sin is a fire brennyng. which may not be
quenched but by lacrymable confession / And much were he a fool that saw his
hows brenne. and would not hastily run to fetch water for to quench the fire.

Also it is a great maladye and sickness to dwell in sin and the very
medecyne is confession. And certain little prayseth he his health. that sees
him self seek to the death / and desires not to be guarysshed and helyd. Also
the death which is nyghe and all about to espy the synnar^ ought to moeue
and excyte him hastelye to confess him. For he knows not the day. the hour.
ne the point or mynute when the death shall come. which surpryseth often the
synnar. there. where he takes none head. And certeynlye who that knew what
day he should deye. he should make him ready in the best and hastyest wise that
he might / Also if a synnar saw well the peril wherein he is. For he is in
the hold and prison of sin and in the throat of the lion of hell. and of
the dragon that will devour him / he should hastily goo to confession / and that
as soon as he might. Also a synnar ought to see what he has lost by his sin.
the goods perdurable and the goods spyrytuel. His time and him self which he
might al recoure by devout confession. Much then were he a fool if he
hasted not to recouure that which he had lost.

Also the mercy of god that abides for the synnar. and knocks at his door as
says the apocalypse. For that he ought to haste him to be confessyd / For of
as much as god abides so long the synnar. of so much is his Justice more
hard and more cruel when he sees him slow and neclygente. For like as the
archyer gives to his bow more bente / and tharbalester to the cross bow so
much more smyteth it the harder and stronger. And certeynlye god has his bow
bente and ready to loze as says the Psaulter for to slay the synnars if they
will not convert them. and if they take not good head Also the synnar that
ouerlonge taryeth to confess him / forgeteth often his sins. So that it
happeth that uneath that he is well and truly confessyd. For he forgeteth many
sins which he shall never remember. and so of them shall he never repent. ne
never be confessed / of which it is to him great peril. Also when a synnar
is tofore his confessor he ought to express and say his sins clearly. so
that his confessor see euydently his heart / and al thentencyon of him that
confesses him. For the seek man ought to dyscoure his maladye unto the
physycyen. else the physycyen might not work. Ne the Surgyen ne might not
hele the sore but if he saw the wound. And therefore says the wise man / if
thou wylt that the Surgyan hele the. thou must dyscouere to him thy wound or
sore. Then the truaunte and the lame ^echen the to confess the which shown
their maladyes. and lay forth the foulest tofore for to have alms. Thus
then ought the synnar to dyscouer his sins to his confessor for to have
mercy^ and this is the third condycyon. that ought to be in confession. Also
the synnar ought to confess him entyerly and holy / this is the fourth
condycyon. For he ought to say all his sins great and little and all the
cyrcumstaunces of the synnes^ Then he ought first to byholde the dedely
synnes^ of which I have spoken tofore. and to confess him holy of eueryche
of them / after that he feleth him culpable. without to hyde any thing. and
without saying more / and without excusing hym^ and without to accuse any
other. Right so confessyd him Dauyd that says in the Psaulter / I shall
confess me and shall say all my sin against me. and not against other. like as
ypocrytes which put always the fairest outward / and tell their good deeds
and hyde their evil deeds. And accusen other of that. which they them self be
more culpable of. For they see well a little festue or a little mote in the eyes
of other. and behold not a great beme or block which is in their owen eyes /
that is to say the great sins that been in them. Such was the pharyse of
whom the gospel says that he remembered his good deeds. and despised the
publycan that humbly smote his breast in the temple. and cried God mercy and
said. Lord god have pity and mercy on me pour synnar. Thus ought the synnar
Judge him self tofore god. and not aledge his sin but to agryeue. poyse^ and
recounte clearly without lyeng. Also confession ought to be hole. and not
departed to diverse confessours^ For it ought to be said all to one confessor
/ and not one part to one / and another part to another god loves not such
departing. Also a man ought not to say only the sins. but all the
cyrcumstaunces which agreuen much the sins. For the sins ben perauenture
more great in one person than in another. as in a relygyous man more than in a
seculer. In a prelate than in a simple man. Also this is more great sin in
one place than in another / as in a monasterye^ or in any other holy place^
more than in an unhallowed place / also in one time more than in another. as in
lent or on festeful days / Also when one synneth wytyngly and in ernest. he
synneth more than when one synneth ygnorantlye. Also one ought for to say the
condycyon of the sin. For it is gretter sin with a wedded woman than with a
syngle. Or in a man or woman of relygyon^ or in a person ordained a priest or
a deken. after that the order and the estate is more great. so much is the
sin more great. Also if the sin be ayenste nature and how long time he
has duellyd in the said sins. also he ought to say if he have little or
naught resysted and with stand te^ptacyon / or if he have souzt te^ptacyon. or
if he have be beten in te^ptaco^n^ Also he ought to say the cause and the
ente^cyo^ that moved him to do the sin. and all the other occasyons of the
sin. Also a man ought for to think and consydere by all his members how he
has sinned. First he ought to goo to his heart. and say all his sins what
someuer they be carnal or spyrytuel. Spyrytuel as against the faith or of
vain glory. or of Envy. of auaryce. of rancour. or of other manners. of whom
there be many. The sins carnal or bodily / apperteynen to the delytes of the
flessh of the body or if he have not kept him well in all thoughts. that
therein has been consentyng^ or long abydyng. Or delight. which sometime is as
much as the consentyng. and of all these thoughts he ought to confess. Also
one ought to take heed if he have sinned by the me^bres of his body. for a man
synneth in them in many manners. First in the head / when one sets over great
cure and great costs to dress it. as done these ladies and wymmen. which so
curyously array their head with precious adournementes for pure vanyte and for
to playse and draw men to sin. In which they sin often grievously. and
specially they that make them hye horns of their here. or of other thing /
which resemblen common wymmen. There be vanytees enough about the heed. in
wasshyng. in kembyng in dyeng and in pouryng in a myrrour / of which things
god is often dyspleased / Of this vanyte and folly the men be not all quyte.
For they arraye their here like wymmen. and force it to be yelowe. and if they
be blacke^ they by craft make them blounde and abourne. and late them grow
long more like to a woman than to a man. which is a sign of great evil and
much pride. And of all this and such things a man ought for to confess
him. and of all other vanytees and keep him that he do them no more.

Also a man ought to remember and well consydere to the five wits of his body
/ wherein he has often sinned in many manners / By the eyes in folyly seeing and
beholding. Or by the eerys in heryng gladly the myssayers / losengers. liars.
and other folyes. Or by the mouth in folly spekyng. in oner much drynkyng and
etynge. Or by the nose in ouermoche delytyng him self in sweet odours or
wicked odours. Or by folyly touching in him self. or in his wife. or in other
that is werse. be it man or be it woman / Also a person ought to confess him
of the oultrageous array of his robes and of his garments in hosyng and
shoyng. and of all other defautes. of which he has mind. And thus the
confession is good and hool. when one says all his sins great and little.
and this is the fourth condycyon that ought to be in confession. The fyfthe
condycyon is that one ought for to confess him humbly / For the synnar speaks
to god which sees al his heart. Then the confessor is but the ere of god
and that which he hereth. ne knows not as a man^ but as god. And the synnar
ought to tell his sins with great dread. and ought to opene his heart and
pour it abroad that it flow over. like as one shedeth out a full pot of
water wha^ the water is poured out there abides no colour^ as does of milk
ne odor. as of wyn ne savor ne taste as of hony^ thus should no thing be
retained of the sin. sithe it has be said in confessyon^ Ne the color. That
is an evil manner that is had in spekyng. or in byholdyng / or in following evil
company. or in other thing that has color of sin. Also one ouzt to leave
the savor and taste of sin. he reteyneth the savor of synne^ that thinks
on the sins that he has done / And delyteth him in the remembrance of them
and pleseth him / But he ought for to think upon them in great dread. that he
fall never no more in them. And also he ought to remember them in great sorrow.
And he ought for to confound him in him self / and to have great shame tofore
god of his sins. And ought to have ferme purpoos that he should never return
to his sins though he should be desmembred. Also he ought to leave and fle the
odor. There been so^me that leave well their sins. but yet they here gladly
spoken of them. but who that well repents him / will not gladly here speak of
them but he ought to have great abhomynacyyon of them. The vj co^dycyon is
that one ought ost to confess him for many reasons. First for to get more
gretter grace and more merit against god. like as the lynnen cloth which is
often wasshen / is the more white. Also for the venyall sins that one falls
in often / he ought to wasshe him. Also for to chase and drive away the devil
fro him. and for to be out of his thraldom and of his net. The bird
wythdraweth him and departs gladly fro the place where as his neste is broken
and deffeated / and fro thens that his eggs been taken away. Also for to
learn forto confess him well. For the usage makes a master. like as it
appyereth in these crafts. Also by cause that one knows not if he have be
well sorry and well repentaunte / therefore he ought to have recours unto his
confessour^ and to confess him of all things suffysaun^lye Also for to humble
him self. for to get the more grace and more merit ayenste god. wherefore one
demanded of a monk wherefore he confessyd him so often. and he answerd^ by
cause said he that I have always fere that I be not well confessed. and also I
remember me often of so^me things that I have not said in confession by
forgetyng. and also by cause that after my confession I find my self always
the more humble and meke / Now have thou herd how one ought to confess him.
Now ought thou to know that five things specially e^pesshe and letten
very confessyo^. The first is shame that one dare not say ne tell his sin
for shame^ and this makes the devil. that puts shame tofore for to close
his mouth like as a thief does / which that casts unto the hounde a little
glewe. by cause he should not bark ne baye / For the litel glewe is of such
nature that it makes an hounde dombe and to be stylle when it is put in his
throat. but the synnar ought to think that the shame that he has to tell his
sin / is a great part of his penance and of thamende. Also the synnar ought
gladly to suffer and drink a little shame for to escape the great shame. that
al synnars shall have at the day of Judgment when all the world shall see al their
sins / The ij thing is evil dread to do great penance. the which the devil
puts in the ere of the synnar saying. thou may not do this sharp
penance. and thou may not leave thy customs. Such people resemble the shough
horse which is aferde of the shadow that he sees. And certeynlye this penance
that we do here in this world is but a shadow to the regard of the pains of
hell or of purgatory. The third thing is the wicked love that the synnar
has enlaced that he loves so much his delight that he will not les^e it. and
thinks that for no thing he will confess him. but slepeth in his sin like
a swyn in the dunge. The iiij thing is hope of long life. whereof the devil
says to him. thou art a young man. thou shall live long. thou shall well
recoure a confessor. but he takes none head ne sees not the death that
awayteth him and shall take him sonner than he weneth / for god which promyseth
pardon to him that repents. promytteth not to morn as saint Gregory says /
Then the devil plays often with the synnar^ like as the catte does with the
mous when he has taken him. For when he has long played he strangleth and
sleeth him. The v thing is despayr. in which the devil puts the synnar. but
he ouzt to remember that god fory^ueth to them that repent lightly and more
gladly he gives pardon than we demand him. After the confession comes the
satysfaction. That is thamendes and the penance that one ought to make and
pray for his sin. after tharbytrement and will of the confessour^ which
ought to Judge the amends of the trespaces / In fastings. In almesses. or in
prayers. or in other good things after that the sin requires it. and the
seek man ought gladly to obey to the physycyan to have health / And the good
sone ought gladly to do the will of his ghoostly fader for the sauacyon of his
soul. Now have thou herd three things that holden together the hauberes of
penance. with which been armed the new knights of god for to vaynquysshe
the battle against sin / And who that shall vaynquysshe this bataylle shall not
retche of the second death. Like as Saint Johan says in thapocalypse. but he
shall have very rest. that is the glory perdurable. The first death of the
soul is to love sin. which is vaynquysshed by penance / by which one
escapes the second death / that is the death of hell. where one may not deye.
This is the first branch of the tree of prowess in them that vaynquysshe
sin. After this bataylle comes another. For when a man repents him of his
sin. then comes a new wrastlyng to his heart. what penance he may do.
and what life he may led / And there be many of them that in this bataylle be
recreaunte. For like as god says in the gospel. Now they believe. Now they
believe not. Now they will / now they will not. Now they purpose / Now is all
naught. For they be not ferme ne estable. ne perseueraunte. But when a man
Joins him to god / and affermeth his heart and his good purpoos to him /
then is this bataylle good and gotten / and then god makes him ferme and
stable as is a pyler in the church. as says saint Johan. This is the second
vyctorye and the reward that answers to him. after this wrastlyng comes the
iij wrastlyng that a man has to his flesh. which much complayneth wha^ it
begins to feel the hardness and sharpness of penance. and it reenforceth
to come ageyn to her old customs. the flesh is an evil wife. whereof salamo^
says. who most does the will of the flesh. the wers it is. and more is to
him contrary. And who that suffers his flesh to overcome him. he enters
and puts him self in great seruytude. For there is none so foul a thing as
to be ouercom of his flesh / who that vaynquyssheth this bataylle. god
promytteth to him a new crown whyt of chastyte and of Innocencye. and
brings him to rest / that is the glory perdurable like as he says in
thapocalypse. after this batayl comes this world and dame fortune with her
whele^ which assaylleth a man on the right side and on the lift side / which
been two strong bataylles. where as much people ben vaynquysshed / and moo be
vaynquysshed on the right side than on the lift side / like as dauyd says in
his psaulter. For more strong is the temptacion that comes of the right side.
than it that comes on the lift. as dauyd says in his psaulter. For more
strong is the temptacyon that comes of honor of rychesses and of delytes
which the devil offreth and sets before. tha^ that which comes of
aduersyte. like as pouertres and the maladyes and the sekenesses that god
sends / and he that vaynquyssheth and that despyseth with his heart the
prosperytees of this world. God promytteth to him honor and hyenesse in
glory. for he shall make him sytte with him in his trone as says thapocalipse
To him that shall vaynquysshe that other bataylle which is on the lift side in
thaduersytees of this world god promytteth glory which no man may take fro
him. The vj battle which is much strong / is against the wicked that been in
the world which ben the members of antecryste which warren against the good men
by their might. like as did of old time the tyrau^ts. against the marters and
good christian men. for uneath shall none dar reclame him christian for the
strength of Antecryst and of his members. This is the beast that Johan saw
that warryd the saints of which we have tofore spoken^ The members of this
be shown them in wicked princes and evil prelates. which by their great
couetyse defoule flee and eten their subgettes. so that the good men that been
under them have enough to suffer and many dyseases and great myschyeues^ But
they that take al in good pacyence without murmr as did Job. and trust al in
god they vaynquysshe this batayl. and to him that shall overcome it. god
promytteth to him that he shall give to him power over his enemyes^ like as
saint Johan says in thapocalyps. After all these bataylles comes the last
which is most strong. for the devil which is malycious and much subtyl.
when he sees that a man is mounted upon the moutayn of perfection. and has
ouercomen al these bataylles aforesaid. Then assaylleth him the fend by
vaynglorye / and by presumpcion. for then it seems to him that he is a much
good man. and great friend of god by this that he has al suffered for him by
which he falls sometime from hye to low as did lucyfer / and therefore it is
great necessyte that a man be wise. and that he keep him from the sin of
vaynglorye. which makes the ryergarde. For in the taylle lies often the
venym. and thenconforaunce. and sometime the ship that is nyghe to the port
peryssheth^ which went surely in the hye see. Then him byhoueth that he
tarry and address his saylle. That is al his entencyon and all his heart at
the port of health. That is to Ihesu Christ by the wind of fervent love and
of great desire of god. This is the hungre of Justice of which we have spoken
tofore. which comes of the yefte of strength and of the virtue of prowess.
As the good Knight which is noble and hardy / that has a good heart. and that
has been in many presses. which has great talente and great hungre to show
his strength in tournoyes or in bataylles for to get to him pryse and renomee
/ And certeynly who that has great love to god and great hungre and desire of
his health he ouercometh lyghtlye this last bataylle. he will not ne desires
not in this life. but that which is unto the honor and to the glory of God.
And to the health of his soul. and who that vaynquyssheth this bataylle shall
win the reward. of which saint Johan speaks in thappocalypse there where
our lord says. that to him that shall vaynquysshe he shall give to him to ete of
the tree of life. which is in the myddle of paradyse. That is Ihesu Christ him
self that gives life perdurable of which all the saints lyuen in the glory
of heaven. and al been fulfilled and been in rest / And this is the blessyng of
which the debonayr Ihesu Christ promytteth in the gospel to his good knights
when he said. blessed be they that have hungre and thyrste of Justice / that is
to serve god and to love him / For they shall be fulfilled of the fruit of the
tree of life. That is the end and the perfectyon of this virtue which is called
prowess. to which ledeth the yefte of strength.

Of the virtue of the yefte of counceyl. and of the good and merit that is
therein capitulo Cxxix
Like as the holy ghoost gives strength and vygour to empryse great things.
Right so yeueth he counceyl by which a person comes to a good end / of that
which he empryseth^ This is a great grace that the holy ghoost gives which
is called the yefte of counceyl. by which a man has great aduysemente and
great delyberacyon and aduys in all that. that he empryseth / and in that.
that he be not over hasty in his empryses. For like as says the phylosophre.
Great things be made and done not only by strength ne by arms but by good
counceyl / And another phylosophre which was named Socrates says that of
hasty counceyl men repent hem after. And therefore says Salamon do no thing
with out good counceyl / and after the deed thou shall not repent the. This
grace shows him in a man in three manners. First in sechyng gladly good
counceyl. thus thoby cou^ceylled his sone / Fair sone said he ask counceyl
always of a wise man. And Salamon says that there where as is no good
governor. the people faylleth anon and is anon destroyed / but it is sauf
when there been many good counceylles. and the wise Tullyus says that little is
worth the arms withouteforth / if there be not good counceyl wythinforth. But
keep the well says the scripture fro evil counceyllours / and cou^seylle the
not with fools. For they love no thing but that which pleseth them. and not
that which pleases god. Also the scripture counceylleth that one should ask
and seche counceyl of the old and auncyen men. and not of the young men which
ben not proved in the works. For in the auncyen men that have seen and proved
many things / is good wysdom and good counceyl. By cause that Roboas the sone
of Salamon left the counceyl of the old and auncyen men that were wise. and
took the counceyl of young men / he lost the most party of his royame. Also
who that has this yefte late him examyne and consydere the counceylles that be
given to him. and think with great aduysement if he be well counceylled and
truly / and not lightly to believe to the cou^ceyl of one man ne of tweyne / how
well that they be of his pryue friends / Therefore Seneke says that a wise man
examyneth his counceylles. and byleueth them not lightly. For he that byleueth
lightly. he fyndeth that he is often deceived. Also who that has this yefte. he
obeys to good counceyl when he fyndeth it. For for naught asks he counceyl.
that has no will to do thereafter. whereof says salamon. It seems to a fool
that he be in the right way. but the wise man hereth gladly good counceyl.
that is to say / that the wise man obeys to the good counceylles / which the
foles despise / The most prouffytable cou^ceyl that a man may have. is the
counceyl that our good master Ihesu Christ which is the fontayne of all
sapyence of whom comes all good cou^ceyl. that is in the holy gospel when he
says. if thou wylt be partyte. goo and selle all that thou have and give it
to the pour people. and come follow me / and thou shall have great tresour in
heaven / and behold and think who gives such counceyl. For he is as I say
the fontayne of sapyence. The very god that came in to therthe for to
counseylle the. and for tenseygne the the right way for to goo to paradys.
That is the path of pouerte of the spyryte. by which the holy ghoost ledeth
them whom he enlumyneth with the yefte of counceyl / Truth it is that in
another manner a man may be sauyd / As by the way of the commandments of
our lord to hold and keep them. One may be saved in marriage. or in wedowhode /
or in rychesses of the world when they be well used. But the holy ghoost by the
yefte of counceyl ledeth and conduyteth more right and more surely by the way
of very pouerte of the spyryte. by which one despyseth and put under foot all
the couetyse of the world for the love of god. this yefte takes away fro the
heart the sin of auaryce and of couetyse / and so planteth the fair tree of
mercy. which is to have sorrow and compassyon of other men's harm / and of
other men's suffraunce.

Of the degrees of the virtue of mercy capitulo Cxxx
THis tree of mercy has seven degrees like unto the other^ by which it
grows and prouffyteth. These ben seven things which moeue much and draw a
man unto mercy. and to have compassyon of others harme^ The first thing that
moeueth a man to mercy is nature^ For as the book says which speaks of the
nature of beestes. No bird eteth another bird of his own nature / Ne a be
also eteth not another be of his own nature / Also the same book says that
a mare nouryssheth the fool of another mare. when she is deed. Also it has
often be seen and preuyd that a wulfe has nourysshed the whelps of another
wulfe / and has defended them fro other beestes. well then ought a man to
have pity and compassyon on another. of his evil and harm / which is
semblable to his nature. For we al be made of one matere and one form and one
image. The second thing that ought to draw a man to mercy and to compassyon
of another man's harm is grace. For we al be members of one body / that is of
holy church by grace / and one membre helps another naturelly. and has pity
and compassyon. Also we be bouzt and redeemed with one prys. that is with the
precious blood of Ihesu christ. that henge on the cross for to redeem us fro
death perdurable / when our saueour Ihesu Christ was then so pyetous and
mercyful toward us. well ought we then to have pity and compassyon one of
another. and to aid and socour that one that other. Also we ben al brethern of
fader and mother by faith and by grace / For we ben al sons of god and of holy
church. and the one brother ought to help that other when he sees it is need.
for at need is seen who is a friend. The third thing that ought to moeue a man
to mercy is the comandeme^t of the holy scripture which cou^ceylleth and
commands the works of mercy above all other things / whereof the wise
Salamon says. See well to says he that thy head be not without oylle. for by
thoylle that nouryssheth the fire and the lamp. is vndersto^den mercy. which
ought always to be in our tonnes. For in like wise as the oylle surmou^teth in
the lamp. above al other lyquours. Right so mercy surmou^teth the other
virtues. And also as the oylle nouryssheth and keeps the fire in the lamp.
and when the oylle faylleth the fire quenches. Right so mercy keeps the fire
of the love of god in the heart. and when mercy faylleth. the love of god
faylleth. Like as says saint Johan / who that shall see says he his brother and
his neighbor having disease and necessyte in need. and closes the door of his
heart. that is to say that he has no pity ne compassyo^. and helps him not if
he may. how says he^ shall the love and charity of god be in him. like as he
would say / That may not be. For the oylle of mercy is faylled in the lamp of
his heart / Also the good thobye taught his sone and said thus. Fair sone be
thou mercyful / as much as thou may / if thou have plente of goods give
gladly and largely. if thou have little yet of the same give gladly to the
pour. And our lord says in the gospel. Goo said he and selle all that thou
have and give it to the pour. This is the virtue that the holy scripture
prayseth most generally. And it is the virtue that most playseth god as the
scripture says. Hereof says god by the prophet. I will says he mercy and not
sacryfyse. And Saint austyn says that there is no thing that so much makes
a man amyable unto god as does pity. and to have mercy on other. Much people do
seruyse and sacrefyse to god in fastings or in pylgremages. or in sharp
penance of the body. but to do alms. they ben scarce caytyf and strayte.
Also much people of great estate to whom god has given largely of his
temporell goods do sacryfyse and seruyse not to god. but to the world. or to
the devil in that. that they dyspende folyly their goods in vanytees and in
oultrages / and in honors of the world. But for to give fo gods sake to the
pour they ben hard as ademont. Also like as mercy pleseth to god. right so
despleaseth it to the devil. For it is the armure and the virtue by which he is
most sonnest vaynquysshed. as is said in a gloss upon the psaulter / he may
not suffer the good odor of such an oyneme^te. No More than the crapaulde may
feel the smellyng or odor of the vygne. This odor might not Judas smelle ne
feel when the holy Maudeleyne enoynted the heed of Ihesu Christ with the
precious oynement. For it seemed to Judas that it was a thing lost. and had
lever the money that it cost in his purs by couetyse. Of such people that be
thus covetous and auarycyous is lord and master a devil that is called
closepurs / whom an holy hermyte saw. that he had the office to close and
shette the purses of covetous men. that they should not be opened to do
alms. The fourth thing that ought to moeue a man to mercy / is the great
largess of our lord / which gives largely to every man after that they be /
as says Saint James. and makes his son to shine upon the good and upon the
evil / like as it is said in the gospel. Sithe that the debonayr Ihesus is so
large to vs^ that he gives to us. and has given. all that we have that is
good. we ought to be large and curtoys that one anenste that other. For so
commands to us god in the gospel when he says / Be ye mercyful / like as
your fader of heaven is mercyful. He ought to resemble his fader. and ought to
ensyewe him when he is good and wise. Or otherwise he forsakes him. and
therefore says the wise man in scripture. Be ye mercyful and pyetous to the
pour and to the orphans like as thou were their fader or their mother / be thou
as their husbond. and thus shall thou be called the sone of god. The fyfthe
thing that ought to moeue a man to mercy is the honor of god. For as Salamon
says. he honors our lord that does well to the pour. For that which is
done to the pour. is don unto god like as him self witnesses in the gospel.
That which ye have done to one of the leest of my servants. ye have done to
me / this says god. The pour ben the little meyne of our lord. who so
honors them by the werkys of mercy he honors god. For who honors the
meyne he honors the lord. and who that does vylonye to the famylye and
servants. does vylanye to the lord. Hereof have we a fair and a good
ensaumple of the holy saint martyn. To whom god appyeryd in the night. after
that he had departed and given his mantel to the pour man. and he was couerd
with the said mantel. and god said to his angellys Martyn has clad me with
this vestement. The syxthe thing that ought much to moeue a man to mercy / is
the dread of the Judgment. For as says saint James Judgment without mercy
shall be do to him that does not the works of mercy. For like as god says in
the gospel. when the day of Judgment shall come / the sentence shall be given
against them that have not to their power done and accomplysshed the works of
mercy. For god shall leye a deef eere to them that now leye a deef eere to the
pour. like as it appyereth in the exaumple that he recounteth of the rich man
that would give none alms to Lazare / and by cause he refused to give to him
alms. god refused to him a drope of water when he was in the fire of hell /
In like wise did he to the folysshe vyrgyns that had none oylle in their
lamps. God closed to them the yate at the weddyng and said to them I know you
not. and so they abode without and came not in. Right so shall it be do at
the day of Judgment to the auarycyous and to the covetous men which have not
the conduytes of mercy which ledeth the souls to heaven. and makes to them a
ryzt way to come tofore god as holy scripture says. Like as way is made and
the yate opened to him that brings a present. Certeynlye acursed shall he be
by right to whom pity and mercy shall torn their back at the day of
Judgment. when god shall give sentence so ferme. stable. and dredefull For it
shall be so establysshed by Justice and confermed. that it shall never be
repeled. And then shall god do as souerayn pope bishop and king / cast out
his great excomynycacyon. For he is king and bishop as says the scripture.
for he took nature humayn in the lynage of kings and of bysshoppes This
excomynycacyon shall be cast upon them that shall be on the lift side. None of
them shall be except. They shall be wicked people whom god shall curse for their
sins and for their falsehede. Thus shall he say to them. Goo ye wicked and
cursed in to the fire of hell perdurably / which is ordained to thorryble
deuyls / and to them that have done their will. Alas this sentence how well
that it is short. certeynlye it shall be over anguysshous and over hard when
Ihesus Christ shall chase them out of his company. Such hard a departing
ought much to be doubted. The seventh thing that ought much to moeue a
person to mercy. is the fruit and the good that grows of this tree. which
appyereth in many manners First in that which mercy geteth pardon to synnars.
Of which mercy has the lettres of pardon and of Indulgence. For god says in
the gospel. Blessed be the mercyful. for they shall have mercy. After in the
same letter says he. if we pardone not that one the other / god shall not
pardone us. Also mercy is the good marchaunts purs. which wynneth oueral. and
never leseth. For as says saint Poul. mercy auaylleth to all things. A
precyouse stone should be much worth. that should be good for all things.
That is mercy which wynneth the goods temporell. the goods spyrytuell / and
the goods perdurable of glory. Of the goods temporell says salamon. honor
god of thy rychessys and of thy goods temporell give to the pour. and god
shall replenysshe thy garners of whete / and thy celyers of wine / But
understand well this word. that he says of thy rychessys and of thy goods /
and not the goods of other / as done sum that will do almesses of that
which they have taken fro other by force. by rauyne / by usure. or by other
evil cause. and maken often of other men's lether large thonges^ But of thyn
own propre good which thou hold truly honor god. For that other thou art
bounden to yield and render ageyn. Also he says that thou give to the pour
and not to the rich. and god shall yield to the an hundred double therefore.
like as he says in the gospel. Mercy is a seed that fructefyeth better in the
lene land than it does in fat. How that mercy multeplyeth the goods
temporell we have many fair ensaumples. of which I will remember so^me here.
It is said of saint Germayn of Ancerre^ that when he came fro Rome. as he went
out of melane. he demanded his deken if he had any money / he ansuerd that he
had but three pens. for saint Germayn had given all to pour people. Thennne
commanded saint Germayn to his deken that he should give tho iij pens to the
pour people. for god had well whereof to feed them that day. The deken with great
pain and grutchyng gaf ij peus / and retained the third penny / and as they
went on the waye^ the servant of a rich man brought to saint Germayn fro
his lord. CC shelynges / Then called saint Germayn his deken / and said to
him that he had stolen fro the pour a penny. For if he had given the third penny
to the pour. the knight had sent him CCC. shelynges. After it was said in the
way to Saint Germayn / that to saint Johan thamener came a gentylman which was
robbed of theuys so that he had no thing and told to saint Johan thamener his
caas. he had great pity and compassyon on him / and commanded his dyspencer
that he should give him / xv. pound. of gold. his dyspencer for couetyse gaf
him but / v / Anon a noble lady sent unto the said Saint Johan five. C. pound.
of gold. Then he called his dyspencer and demanded him how much he had
given to that man. He ansuerd and said that he had given him xv. pound. The
holy man said nay. and that he had given him but. v / pound. and when he knew
the troth by him that had received it^ he said to his dyspenser. that if he
had given that.xv. pound. Our lord had sent to him by the good woman.M. and.
v C. pou^de^ and when he demanded of the good lady whom he called to him. how
much she had given and left to him in her testament. She answered that she had
ordained a thousand and five hundred pound for to send him / And when she
saw the.M / pound raced and put out of the writing. she thought that god
would that she should send to him no more but v hundred pound. Also Saint
Gregoire reherceth of saint Bonyface. that fro that time that he was a child
he was so pyetous. that he gaf his sherte and his gown unto the pour. how be
it that his mother beat him often therefore. Now it happed that the child saw
many pour people that suffered much disease / he espied that his mother was not
at home. he ran to the garners. and all that his mother had assembled for the
year he gaf to the pour people. And when his mother came and knew what he had
don. she was as out of her wit. Then the child prayed our lord and the
garners were full of whete / Also there was a pour man as it is said that had
but one cow. which herd say of his curate in his sermon that god said in the
gospel / that a man should have an hundred fold double for all that he should
give for gods sake. The good man by the counceyl of his wife gaf his cow unto
his curate in hope to have an hundred kyen for his cow. And when he had long
tarried. and that promise abode long after / he wend that his curate had
deceived him. and thouzt that he should slay him. and aroose on a night for to
slay him and when he was in the way he fond a great mass of gold. and
then he thought that god had rendered and yelden his promise and returned in
pees.

Also of another pour man by cause that he had herd that god would so give an
hundred for one. he gaf his cow unto his curate which was rich. The priest
took gladly this cow and sent it to his pasture where as his other kyen were.
And at even the pour man's cow came ageyn home and brought an.C. kyen longyng
to the priest with her. when the pour man saw that he. thought that god had
kept his promise according to the gospel. and the said kyen were Iuged tofore
the bishop to the pour man against the priest. These ensau^ples toforesaid
shown well. that mercy is good marchau^dise for it e^creaceth well the goods
temporel. Also mercy e^petreth and geteth of god the goods spirituel and
perdurable / whereof saint Poule says that it auaylleth to all thing. For she
gives life and grace in this present life. and the life of glory without end
in that other. And therefore says Dauyd in his psaulter. that god loves mercy
and truth / For she gives grace in this world. and glory in that other.
Also mercy and alms keeps a man fro all perils and delyuerth him from
spyrytuel death / that is fro sin and fro the death of hell / For many deed
men have been raised to life by the works of mercy that have be done / whereof
there be many ensaumples in writing of the lives of saints. that is of the
death perdurable of hell. Therefore said Thobye to his sone / Be thou said he
pyteous and mercyful as much as thou may. For alms delyuerth and keeps
fro all sin and fro the death of hell. and defends the soul that it goo
not in to the derknesse of hell. Now have thou herd the branches and the
degrees of mercy. by which she grows and prouffyteth. Now the byhoueth to
see the branches of this tree. by which she mounteth. and by which it
descends.

Here after folowen the brannches of the virtue of mercy and of alms capitulo
Cxxxj
THis tree has moo branches tha^ the other toforesayd. for it extends more
than the other / whereof there been branches on the ryzt side and on the lift
side. On the right side ben the works of mercy which touch the soul. They
ben the spyrituel works of mercy. on the lift side ben the bodyly works of
mercy which apperteyne to the body. on the right side be vij branches The
first is to give good counceyl to them that have need. and only for the love
of god purely. not for to coueyte other thing temporel therefore. as done these
advocates and men of law that taken with both hands / and of that one party
and of that other. And given often times many evil counseylles for to have
money. or for yeftes. or for dread. or for favor of rich men. but they that
have god tofore their eyes. and counceyl the synnars to leave their sin and
save them. Or they that be out of sin. to keep them. to the^de that they
fall not thereto ageyn like as confessors ought to do and the prelates. and
the good men in what someuer estate they be / they done the first work of
mercy spyrytuel. and this is the first branch of the right side / The second
branch is to teache and enseygne them that a man has to govern. As a prelate
his subgettes whom he ought to feed with good doctrine. and with good
ensaumple / In like wise ought the master do to his dyscyples in doctrine in
science and in good manners. Also the faders and the moders their children in
such wise that they keep them fro sin and vices. and that they accustom
them to do well. and that they keep them fro lye^g. fro sweryng. fro evil plays
and games and fro evil company / and specially the children of great lords
and of rich men ouzten to be best informed in good manners For the children will
all way hold their first form / And therefore they ought to be informed to
do well. The third branch is to reprehende and chastyse the fools and the
wicked people of their folyes. and this apperteyneth specially to the prelates
and to the princes which oughten to chastyse their subgettes / when they know
that they be wicked. For when they suffer the sins where they might amend
them and will not. they ben partyners^

Ne no prince ne prelate ought not to suffer any wickedness in a man about
him if he may know it / For if he have about him evil and wicked meyne and if
he knows it or supposes. if he remedy it not / It is a sign that he is no
good man. for it is comynly said. such lord such meyne. and after the lord
the meyne follow. and oftymes it happeth that the lord is deffamed by his evil
meyne. and therefore / ne for hauoyr. ne for favor ne for famyliarite of
persons a lord ouzt not to doubt to take away the sins that been about
him. For he ought to doubt more god and to love him. than any man mortal / Me
ought to love the persons and hate the sins. and every prince. prelate. and
lord ought to know that ygnoraunce in this part shall not excuse them. For
they be bounden to know how their people govern them in their houses and in
their offices. and ought tenquyre by good men and true. and that dread god and
love him. For they shall not be quyte at day of Judgment for to say that they
know not thereof. The fourth branch of mercy is for to comfort the seek men.
and them that been in trybulacyon or in aduersyte or in maladye. and to help
them to their power. and to comfort them by good words that they fall not in
despayr or dyscomfort. and that their heart faylle them not. Thus commands
Saint Poul that says. Comfort them that be feeble of heart. And Salamon says
that he that is in disease of heart shall be glad and Joyous for to here a good
word. Also as he him self says. like as a person delyteth him and takes
playsyr in good odoures. in like wise delyteth the soul in great sweetness of
good counceyl and in the good words of a very friend / That is he that loves
also well in aduersyte as in prosperyte. For at need is seen who is a friend /
and in aduersyte is the good and true friend proved. and thou ought to
know that iiij things comfort much a man / which is in aduersyte. in
trybulacyo^ or in maladye. The first thing is to think on the pains of hell.
which ben so much hard sharp and horrible. that it nys but a shadow and an
enoyntyng all that that may be suffered in this world to the regard of the
pains of hell / whereof saint austyn says to our lord. O good lord brenne me
here and hew me al in pyeces. rather than thou dampne me perdurably. Also
Saint austyn says that the torments of saint Bertylmewe which was flayn al
quycke. of saint lawrence and of Saint vyncent which were burnt roasted and
laid on gredyrons / and of Saint steven which was stoned to death. Al these
torments ne ben but a bayne to the regard of the pains of purgatory. And
therefore the rod of chastysement of our lord must be suffered for teschewe the
perdurable pain of hell. God shows great semblaunt of love to them. to
whom he sends the aduersytees temporelle. for he says. I chastyse them that
I love / note this ensau^ple. The ox that shall be slain shall be well kept and
made fat. but he that shall be kept and live. is put to the yocke for to
labor the earth / A great sign of love shows the king and great honor
does he to him / to whom he sends his cup to drink of. The cup of our
lord of which he drank ben the trybulacyons. thaduersytees and the myschyefs
of this world^ This is the first sauce. with which one ought to ete such
mete. that is to think on the pains of hell. This is a sauce of vynaygre.
which takes away the savor of wine of the delyces of this world / Like as
the vynaygre takes away the savor of good wyn / The second thing that much
comfort in suffryng pacyently trybulacion. is to think on the reward of
heaven that one geteth. for like as says saint Gregory. that allegeth and
asswageth much the pain and the trauaylle. when a person has an hope to
have great reward and great prouffyte^ The third thing is to think on the
passion of Ihesu christ. which suffered death for to redeem us fro the pains of
hell. there is no thing that so much allegeth and swageth the pains and the
trybulacions of this world. This is much well sygnefyed to us in holy
scripture. there where as the children of Israhel came to a water. which was
so bitter that they myzt not drink. Then showed god to moses the prophet a
staf of tree / and said to him that he should put it in to the water that was so
bytter^ And when he had put it therein. it was all sweet. The bitter waters been
the trybulacyons of the world. The staf of tree that made it sweet. that is the
cross on which the debonayr Ihesus was hanged on for us. For who that
remembers well this sorrow that he suffered on the cross / There is no pain ne
aduersyte ne trybulacyon temporal. but it is sweet and light to suffer. The
fourth thing is to think on the spyrytuel goods that the trybulacio^s done to
them that suffren them pacyently for the trybulacyons prouen the knight of god.
A knight knows not well his stre^gthe. unto the time that he has been in
bataylle and in the prees. whereof saint Poule says / that pacyence proves a
man / and an au^gel of heaven said to Thoby. because that thou were playsau^t to
god / It byhoueth that temptacion should prove the Also trybulacions purge the
soul as the fire purges gold in the fornays. and as the flaylle the corn
when it beteth it. and as the hamer the iron as says saint Gregorye. Also
trybulacyons ben the medecynes that hele the maladyes of sin. For like as
says the holy scripture. The grievous maladye makes a man sobre. whom sin
has made dronken oftymes whereof saint Gregorye says. late it not be hard to
the that thou suffer disease on thy body. when thou art guarysshed of the
maladye of sin wythinforth^ Also by tribulacions is won the crown of
glory. when one has good pacyence. whereof saint James says / blessed is that
man that suffers temptacions. that is aduersyte and tribulacion. like as a
good knight that suffers the strokes^ for when he shall be well assayed and
preued. he shall have the crown of glory. These iiij remembrau^ces aforsayd
comfort much them that been in trybulacion. The vspyrituel brau^che of mercy
is to pardone his maltalente and evil will to every body. For like as saint
Gregory says / who gives his pens or his al^^sse to the pour and pardons
not his evil wylle^ his alme^^e is nothing worth. For god receives not the
yefte as long as the felo^nye is in the heart. for god weyeth. preyseth. and
takes the yefte after his will / And therefore our lord says in the gospel /
If that we forgive not each other / our fader of heaven shall not forgive us our
synnes^ Then he that will not pardonne and foryeue says against him self. as
often as he says the pater noster. for he prays that god pardonne hym^ like
as he pardonneth his evil will to other. It is said of the emperor theodose /
that he held it for a great shame. if one did to him vylouye or Iniurye that
prayed him to forgive him. and when he was most angry. then he foryafe most
sonnest. For he had lever draw^ to him people by debonayrte and by love. than by
dread / The vj branch of this virtue is to have in the heart pity and
comyassyon of the synnars. and of them that be in trybulacyon or in pouerte. or
in aduersyte / For that one membre ought to bear the maladye of that other
whereof Saint Poule says. who that is seek. and I am seek with him / And Saint
Gregory says. that so much is a man more parfayt. as he feleth more in him
self the sorrow of another. The vij branch of myserycorde is to pray for the
synnar and for his enemies / and for all trespasses / For so comandeth our
lord in the gospel / Pray ye said be for them that done to you evil. and so
shall ye ben the sons of your fader which is in heaven / as who should say /
Otherwise ye ben not the sons of god. and then ye have no thing in his
heritage. Now is it then great alms and great prouffyte for the soul to
pray for the synnars. for his enemies. and for all them that been departed out
of this world. These ben the vij branches of mercy of this tree on the right
side.

Here after folowen the seven branches of mercy upon the lift side capitulo
Cxxxij
Like as this tree of mercy has seven branches on the right side. so ben
there seven branches on the lyte side / These ben the vij works of mercy
corporel. which holden the body. like as the other byholden the soul before
said.

The fyyrst brau^che is to feed the hungry the nedy and the mys^ased / and this
admonesteth us the holy scripture in many places. First Thobye which said to
his sone / Ete thy bread with the nedy and the pour that deye for hungre. and
Salamon says. if thyn enemy have hungre give him to ete. and if he have
thyrst give him to drink. Also our lord says in the gospel. when thou shalt
make a great dinner. call the pour people. the blind. the lame and the
Impotent and thou shalt be blessed. For they may not yield it to the ageyn.
But god shall yield to the in the ressurection generalle. and an hundred fold
double. This is ayenste rich men that done grere oultrages of mete. for
bobaunce / pride / and vaynglorye of the world and have no pity on the pour
people. But they ought to have great dread that they fall not in meschyef. like
as it byfel to the rich gloton / of whom god says in the gospel. which ete
every day delycyously and plentyuously. and suffered the pour Lazare deye for
hungre at his yate / But as to the death of that one and of that other was a
great change. For lazare was borne with aungellys in to Abraham's bosom / and
the rich man auarycyous and gloton had his sepulture in hell. where he
desired to have one drope of water for to refresshe his tongue. Alas if all the
water of the sea had run over his tongue. it should not have been coled in that
fire perdurable of hell which may not be quenched. Therefore it is good to
feed the pour people. For there by may one escape fro the pains of hell. and
win the glory of heaven. like as says holy scripture. whereof our lord shall
say at day Judgment. Come ye blessed of my fader in to the royame of heaven
which is ready to you. For when I had hungre and thyrst ye yafe to me to ete
and to drink / For that which ye did to the least of my pour people. ye did it
to me.

The second branch of mercy capitulo Cxxxiij
THe second branch of mercy is to clothe the pour naked people. That is to
say that he that may should give to them clothyng hosen and shoon. Thus taught
Thobye his sone when he said. Cover the naked with thy gown / and Ysaye the
prophet says. when thou shall see the pour naked couere and hele him. For
such work saint Peter raised that good woman named Dorcas. For she clothed
the pour people as the scripture says / Hereof have thou a fair example of
saint Martyn as I have said tofore. The gown or vesture or what someuer
alms one gives to the pour. is a memoryal to them that pray for him that
has given it / And is represented to god of his angellys.

The third brau^ch (...) mercy capitulo Cxxxiiij
THe third (...) mercy is to lene to the pour people at their need. and to
(...) to them the debt that they owe when they may not (...) / For it is not
only alms to give. but it (...) alms to lene without vsure^ and any
prouffyte (...) evil entencyon. but purely for gods love. In (...) to
pardonne and quyte his debt / when (...) and may not pay it. and this is that
whych^ (...) commands in the old law. where he says. if one of thy
b^ethern fall in pouerte thou shall not enhard thy heart. ne wythdrawe not thy
hand fro him / But thou shall opene it to the pour. and shall lene to him
that whereof he has need / And our lord says in the gospel. lene says he to
him that has need and that requires the. without hope of wynnyng any
temporell thing. and god shall render to the an hundred fold double in glory.
This matter is ayenste the usurers. that will always have more than they lene. in
money or in seruyces. or in other things. But god commands to lene to the
pour nedy purely for his love. and he shall render to the an hundred double.
and to the pour man to whom thou have lent. or that owes to the. or that
may not pay to the. thou ought to foryeue and pardone him. For so
commands to the god in the gospel / and says thus / if ye foryeue not each
other / god shall not foryeue you. And hereof God shows an ensaumple of an evil
servant to whom his lord had pardonned his debt. and by cause he would not
pardone him that ought to him / The lord repelyd the curtosye and bounte that
he had done to him. and did do dystrayne and held him till that he had rendered
all that he ought. Right so shall our lord do. if we foryeue not each to other.

The fourth branch of mercy capitulo Cxxxv
THe iiij branch of mercy is to vysyte / comfort. and to aid the seek people
/ That is a work that much pleseth to god^ and more than trauaylle. or
fasting. or other bodily penance. whereof we find in vitis patrum. that an
hermyte demanded of one of the au^cyent faders. the which was of most
grettest merit / of him that fasted vj days in the weke and trauaylled and
labored with his hands. or of him that served the seek malades. The good
fader answered that he that fasted and trauaylled though he henge by the
nosethrylles might not compare to him that served the seek people / This work
auaylleth much to eschew synne^ and is a great remedy against sin. And
therefore says Job. vysyte thy semblable. that been the seek men that been
semblable to the in nature For they be men as thou art. and if thou so do. god
shall keep the fro sin for to do such a good work. And saint James says
that it is a relygyon holy and clean tofore god to vysyte the orphans. the
seek and pour men / the wydowes and them that been in trybulacyon / whereof is
recounted of a much great synnar which went over the sea unto the isle of
roodes. and put him self in an hospytal for to awayte and serve the seek people
/ and it happed on a time that he had great abhomynacyon of a seek man of whom
he wesshe the feet. Anon al ageyn his heart he drank of that water his full
draught / And when he had dronken. he felt a right sweet and good smellyng
odour^ and this was a great token and sign that his sins were pardonned by
this good work / Also by this work is gotten great perfectyon of holy life.
whereof the wise man says in holy scripture / be thou not ennoyed to vysyte the
seek people / For by that thou shall be confermed in the love of god Also thereby
is gotten great reward as is said in the gospel^ whereof is told that a lady
named Marye which was a much holy woman converted her husbond so much. that
they left all that they hadden. and went to the mesell hows for to serve the
seek malades. by which they came to great perfectyon / After it was showed to
the same Marye. that her husbond that had been her fellow in humylite for to
serve the seek men and wymmen / should be her fellow in the glory of heaven. Of
the same our lord gives us ensaumple in the gospel that he touched the seek
people and heled them. The servant ought not to have desdaygne ne shame to
vysyte the seek people ne to serve them. when the lord of heaven came in to this
world for to serve and vysyte them. Of whom he took the form. and semblaunce
of his servant. This says saint Poul for to serve us that were seek by sin.

The fyfthe branch of mercy capitulo Cxxxvj
THe fyfthe branch of mercy is to herberowe the way faryng men. the pour
people. and the pilgrims that have no lodgyng / This is one of the works of
mercy that pleseth much to god / as it appyereth by ensaumples of holy
scripture. First Abraham received oftymes the aungellys of heaven in semblau^ce
of pour pylgryms / and they promised to him that his wife Sarra which was old
and barayn should conceive a sone. Loath by cause he received the pour and kept
hospytalyte he received the angellys which kept and delyuerd him fro the
peril of sodom. and therefore says Saint Poule let us not leave hospytalyte.
for thereby many good men have been much playsaunt to god and in his love and in
his grace / for they received aungellys instead of the pour. It is not
meruaylle if such people receive angellys / For they receive our lord like as
he says in the gospel. For who receives them receyuen him as he says / and
that which is done to the pour is done to him. whereof saint Gregory
recounteth of a good man which was much pyteous and gladly received the pour
people in to his house. he received on a day the pour like as he had be
acustomed / and when he had supposed to have given water to a seek man that was
there. as soon as he turned him. he that was in lykenes of the pour man
vanysshed. and none knew where he bycam. whereof he much meruaylled. And the
night after our lord apperyd to him and said. that he had on other days
received him in his members. but on that day he had received him in his propre
person. Also hospytalite is better and more worth than abstynence or any other
labor / whereof is found in vitis patrum that in egypt was an holy fader
which received all them that passed forth by that had need. and gaf to them
such as he had. It happed that a man of much great abstynence was herberowed
in his lodgyng. which would fast / and would not ete at the prayer of the good
man that had received him Then the good man that had lodged him said to him.
late us goo fair brother under that tree there without. and pray we to our
lord that this tree enclyne and bow donn at the prayer of him that best
pleases god. and when they had made their prayers / the tree enclyned down to
him that received the pour people. and not to him that made the great
abstynences. there been many moo fair examples of hospytalyte but it should be
over long a thing to reherce.

The syxthe branch of mercy capitulo Cxxxvij
THe vj branch of mercy is to vysyte comfort and aid them that been in
prison and in hold. and them to deliver if they may. For to do this
admonesteth us thappostle poule that says. Remember ye them that been in
prison. like as ye were bounden with them. that is to say that ye vysyte them.
comfort and aid them. like as ye would that ye were comforted vysyted and
helped if ye were bounden in prison as they ben / Thus did Thoby which went
to them that were in prison. and comforted them with good words / And salamon
says in his proverbs. Deliver thou them says he^ that men led to dye. In
such wise delyuerd danyel s^sanne fro death. And our lord delyuerd the woman
that had be taken in aduoultrye^ which should have be stoned to death after the
law / not for by cause that Justice should not be done upon malefactors. But
in such deed and fayt he taught the Iuges what they should be. and how they
ought to Judge other. whereof in this ensaumple he enseygneth four things that
every Judge ought to have and keep in Judgment. The first thing is great
delyberacyon / and great aduysement of counceyl good and hool / whereof Job
says. The cause that I knew not. I enserched it and required right dylygently
/ and this is to understand in that. which our lord when the Jews had
accused the woman. he wrote in the earth with his fyngre. he that is without
sin of you. throw the first stone / For to stone the woman^ And by the
scripture made with the fyugre we understand dyscrecyon and great delyberacyon.

The second thing is good entencyon that he bow not ne enclyne more on that
one party than on that other. ne for prayer ne for yefte. ne for favor. ne
for love. ne for hate. and this is to understand in that when Ihesu Christ
wrote he held him stylle in the place. The third thing is good life and to
keep him well fro sin. For he that Iugeth other ought to be of good life / and
of good conscience. and live Justly. For if he be other he ought to have great
dread of the Judgment of god. which says in the gospel. that such Judgment
as ye do to other. shall be done to you / And Saint poul says thus of evil
Iuges In that thou Iugest other. thou condempnest thy self. For thou do
that. for which thou Iugest other. whereof our lord said when he aroose fro
writing / he of you that is without sin cast on her the first stone. and
when they herd this sentence. they departed and went away al ashamed. the one
after another without taking leave. for they were gretter synnars than the
woman. whom they would have stoned / The fourth thing is to have pity and
compassyon. that the Judge ought to have on him that he shall Judge. for he ouzt
more to enclyne by humanyte and mercy than tenharde him by rygour to do Justice
/ For Justice without mercy is cruelte. and mercy without Justice is lewdnes.
And therefore that one of these ij virtues holds often company with that other
in holy scripture. But always says the scripture / that mercy surmounteth
Justice. And saint Johan with the golden mouth says. that at the day of
Judgment. that it shall be more worth to render reason of doing mercy. than of
the rygour of Justice. and Saint James says that Judgment without mercy shall
be done to him that has do no mercy And therefore our lord after that he was
relyeued he enclyned him toward therth. and after delyuerd the woman. for the
Judge ought to enclyne by pity and compassyon to hym^ whom he ought to Judge /
and have great dread / and also against his will ought he to Judge the other.
For if he Judge wyckedly he shall be Iuged at the day of Judgment. Now is it
great alms to vysyte the prisoners / and them to redeem and deliver that
may. And therefore our lord Ihesu Christ would descend in to hell for to deliver
the souls of saints that were there.

The vij branch of mercy capitulo Cxxxviij
THe seventh branch of mercy is to burye the deed bodies. Of this work is
much preysed in holy scripture Thobye. which buried the deed bodies and left
his mete. And our lord praised Marye Magdalene for the oynemente that she
shed on his heed. whereof he said that she had done it in sygnefyaunce of his
sepulture. Also Joseph demanded the body of our lord / and buried it much
dylygently. The other were right besy of their sepulture^ and had great
bewayllyng and great devotion to the holiness. good. and holy life. of their
faders. and therefore they would be buried with them / Of whom Jacob said to his
sone Joseph. Burye me not in egypt. but with my faders. and therefore it is good
to be buried emonge good relygyous men for to have their prayers Nature ought
to moeue a man to this good work. whereof it is read in the nature of beestes
that the dolphyns wha^ they see a dolphyn deed. they assemble them to gydre /
an bear him to the bottom of the sea. and there they burye him / If nature and
pity moeue and stir the Jews and Sarasyns. and other myscreauntes to do
this. much more ought pity and compassyon to moeue the christian men to do
thus. why he by our faith see that the bodies be raised and rewarded with the
souls. And therefore who that loves the soul of his neighbor he ought to
love the body / and do burye it when it is d^ed with all humanyte and mercy
that he may / Now have thou herd the branches of the tree of mercy. These
been the works of mercy corporell and spyrituel /

Here after is said how alms ought to be done Cxxxix
IT is so that there is much people that lose their alms and their other
good deeds which they do / by cause they do them not as they ought to do.
Therefore I will show here shortly how alms ought to be done and how it is
prouffytable and playsaunte to god / First I wyl^ show shortly how a person
ought to do alms. and whereof he should do alms. For a man must do it of
his own good. and not of another man's. and of such good that is well and truly
gotten. God sets no thing of none evil yefte. Alms which is made of
theft. or of taking away of others good. of ra^yne. or of usure. or of other
evil gooten good pleases no thing to god. whereof the scripture says. Thou
shalt not make sacrefyse ne offryng to god^ of oxen ne of sheep. ne of thing
wherein is any spotte of sin. For god has great abhomynacyon of such
sacrefyse / The wise man says. that who that does sacrefyse to god of the
catayl or goods of the pour man. He does like to hy^ that s^e^th the sone
tofore the eyes of his fader. And Saint Austyn says what yefte is that /
which the one takes gladly^ and that other wepeth And therefore ought every
man take heed whereof he does his alms. Also he ought to take heed to whom
he does it whereof the scripture says / Beware to whom thou shalt do good.
do well to the good. That is to him that thou wenest that he be good. And give
no thing to the wicked for cause of their wickedness. Like as they do
which give to rybauldes and to menestrellys for their wyckednesse^ which is a
great sin as say the saints. but who that gives to them not for evil. but
for pity and compassyon. for their pouerte. or of their wives. or of their
children if they have any. or of their faders or moders. or for any other good
cause or reason / as for to wythdrawe them fro sin he does well Then the
alms ought to be given unto the pour / and more to them that be very pour
of heart and of will which have left for gods sake that which they had.
much more than to other that be not pour with their will. but sometime of
pure necessyte. And sum there be trewauntes and slouful for to do any good /
and might get their living if they would. And sum there be that by fayntyse
show sum hurtes and be faytours of them self that deceive the world. To
such ought a man not to give his alms. but it ought to be given to the
pour orphans. to shamefast people to pour wydowes. to the dyseased and lame /
and unto seek pour people where as it is need / and when one may do it And if
a man is bounden to give to strangers / he is much more bounden without
comparyson to his fader and mother more than to any other / For nature enseyneth
it. And God commands it. It is read of the storkes. that they nourysshe
fader and mother when they be old and may not purchase their mete. Then
nature techeth that one ought to do good to his fader and mother. and therefore
it is well ryzt and reason that myschyef fall to al them that do evil to their
faders and moders as it oftyme happeth. Also a person ouzt to take heed how he
ought to do alms and the manner of gyuyng. For iij condycyons ought to be had
in gyuyng alms The first is that a man ought to give gladly and with good
heart. For god has more regard to the heart than to the hands. whereof god in
his sacrefyse as saint gregory says / beholds not only the thing that is
given. but with what heart / Like as hit appyereth well in the gospel of the
pour woman that had no more but two mytes which she offeryd in the temple. And
our lord said / that she had offered more than all the other which had offered
great things. for more playseth sometime to god a penny that a pour man gives
gladly for gods sake. than if a rich man had given an hundred mark of
silver in grudchyng. And therefore says the wise man in the scripture. Make
always says he good chyere in all thy yeftes. And Saint Poul says that god
loves much the yeuar that is glad and curtoys. There been so^me people right
rich and be so rude and vylaynous to the pour. that when they demand hem
alms. they answer to them so vylaynously / that they call them truau^tes.
and say to them many reproaches and vylonnyes. Such alms pleseth not god
and therefore says the wise man in holy scripture. Enclyne and bow thyn eere
to the pour man without heaviness / and answer him swetelye. The second
thing that apperteyneth to do alms. is that it be done anon and hastelye.
whereof Salamon says say thou not to thy friend. goo and come ageyn to morne^
and then I shall give to the / when thou may give anone^ And also god says.
withdraw not long thy yefte fro the pour and fro them that be nedy. That is
to say^ make thou not him abide. when thou may give forthwyth / This is
ayenste many rich men which make pour men to cry after them. that have to
do with them. And so much delay them that they must often pray and require
them tofore that they will any thing do / They selle over dear their bounte
and curtosye. that they do to them / for like as seneque says. nothing is so
dear bought as that which is required and the proverb says that it is over
dear bouzt that is demanded Thus should every man hastily do for his soul. as
long as he is alive and hool. whereof the wise man says. Fair sone says he do
well to thy self if thou have whereof. and offer to god worthy offrynges as long
as thou lyuest / For the death shall not tarry but that she comes / And in
another place he says do well to thy friend tofore thy death. that is to thy
soule^ to whom thou ought to do well tofore thy death. as to thy true friend
/ that is to Ihesu Christ to whom thou ought to do well. tofore thy death in
almesses for the love of him to the pour people / For that which is done to
the pour people is done to Ihesu christ. like as he says in the gospel. Then
the alms that is done in a man's life and in his hele. is much more
auaylable. than that which is ^oon after his death / like as the lantern that
is borne before a man conduyteth and ledeth him better and more surely. than
that which is borne behind his backe^ and therefore admonesteth us saint
Poule. that we do well as long as we have the time that god has lent us when
a rich man or lord is coming unto a cite or town. he sends his messagers
tofore and his herbegeours for totake his lodgyng. and for to make ready
prouysyon against his coming. or else the lord and his people should be evil
pourueyed. The good herbegeour and messager that takes the lodgyng and makes
al thing ready to rich men in the glory perdurable been the almesses and
other good deeds that they do in their lives which ben represented by the
aungelles tofore god / The almesses that been don after the deth^ ben like as
the slow servants that comen late to the lodgyng / so that the lord is
sometime evil pourueyed and evil herberowed. The third condycion that ought to
be in alms. is that one ought give gladly and largely. after that he may
forbere at his ease / whereof the wise man says. give to god after that he has
given to the. And Thobye says also. after thy power be pyteous and merciful.
if thou have much give largely and gladly. and if thou have little depart of
that little with a good will. and every man ought to give after his estate /
and after that god has given him / It is read of a king. of whom a pour
man axed a penny / and he answered / that so little a yefte apperteyned not to him
which was a king. and of alysaunder it is read. that he gaf a cite to one his
servant / And the servant thought the yefte over great a thing for him and
would have refused it. Then alysaunder said to him I have no regard what is
conuenyent to the for to take. but to me what I ought to give. The fourth
condycyon is that the alms be don in humylite and in devotion. / to the end
that there be no vaynglorye therein. ne that the pour people to whom the
alms is given be not despised. ne for alms done with other men's goods /
ne to give for to sin / ne for to have presumpcyon thereby to be saved / Sum
people there ben that when they do alms they will that every body know it /
But the scripture says that alms should be put in the bosom of the pour.
For as says saint Gregory. It ne suffyseth only to a good man that he see of
whom he attends his reward. and therefore says our lord in the gospel. when
thou shall give thyn alms says he. late not thy lift hand know what thy
right hand does so that thyn alms be hyd. for to eschew the loos and
praysyng of the world. and thy fader of heaven which sees in hyd place shall
reward and yield it to the. That is to say when thou shall do thyn alms.
keep the well that vaynglorye which is vnderstonden by the lift hand be not
meddled therwyth. but do thy alms in true entencyon. that is vndersto^den by
the ryzt hand I say not but that one ought to do good works sometime openly
tofore the people for to give good ensau^ple / whereof god may be praised / For
right so says god in the gospel. that we should do good works tofore the
people. by cause that god should be preysed and gloryfyed. and not for the
preysyng of the people as done the ypocrites. A good servant ouzt to be
ashamed to serve his lord tofore the people / for to honor him. whereof our
lord says. who that shall have shame of me tofore the people. he shall have
shame of me tofore thau^gels^ and I shall have shame to see him. This is good
against hem that leave to do well openly. by cause they would not be reputed
ypocrytes. And therefore says Saint Gregory. that who that does his werkys
openly / that the entencyon be right to god wythinforth^ And that do it to
please god only. Also who that will do alms he ought not to despise the
pour to whom he does alms. Therefore says the prophete^ ne despise not
thy flesshe^ That is the pour man which is semblable to the. and of such
nature of flesh and blood as thou art / and of such fylthe. There be so^me
people that despise the pour and deyne not to speak to them. and if they speke^
they speak rudely and proudely. Thus did not Job that said / that he never
despised them that passed by / for any thing that they did. but gaf t^ them
clothing and mete / Also there were holy men as well kings and other many
great lords that were not ashamed to serve the pour men. how well that sum
there be that do alms to the pour. but they have them in desdayn and in
despyte. and if they were very humble. they should love better the company of
pour men that been good. which ben pour for the love of god. and may edefye
them well by ensaumple. and by word. than many of the rich men that been
about them. where as is in them but flaterye. couetyse / and vanyte. and done
them much harm by evil counceyll. and let them for to do many good deeds.
Also there been sum people that do alms enough. but nevertheless they leave
not to do great sins. such almesses shall not save them. For if they deye
in that estate. their almesses shall never keep them fro dampnacyon. Then
such manner people been like to them that make their hows on that one side / and
depesshe and throw it down on that other side. and therefore scripture says.
if thou wylt plese to god / have first pity and mercy on thyn own soul. for
who that is evil and untrue to him self. shall never be good to another / and
therefore says Saint austyn who that will ordynatlye do alms. he ouzt tofore
to love more his soul than another or any other thing except god. none should
say that he were pyetous ne mercyful that had not pity of his own soul pour
and seek. how well that he had pity on others / Also I say not that he is
pyteous ne mercyful that has no pity on his own soul. when he knows that
it is seek to the death by dedely sin. Now have I showed to the enough of
mercy. the degrees. the branches. the fruit and the spyrituel good that comes
thereof in this world and in that other. Of the fruit of this tree says Dauyd
to us in the psaulter in this wise. Blessed is he that entendeth to the nedy
and to the poure^ That is to say that he abide not so long till the pour
demand him / but that he (...) without asking. Ne he has no heart to give
that gives not without askyng. he does well that gives to the pour. but he
does much better that gives with out demaundyng. And therefore says Dauyd
the prophet blessed is he that entendeth unto the poure^ and wherefore is he
blessed / he says after in the said place / that god shall deliver him in the
evil day fro his enemies. That shall be at the day of dome which shall be hard
and evil to them that shall be dampened by cause they have not fulfilled the
works of mercy. Then shall the Judge say to them at that day^ Goo ye cursyd
in to the fire of hell with the deuyls. when I had hungre and thyrst ye gave
to me neither mete ne drink. I was seek and ye vysyted not me. I was naked and
ye clothed me not. and therefore they shall be delyuerd to their enemies. that
been the deuylles of hell. And they that have been pyetous / and have intended
to the pour shall be delyuerd that day and shullen be put in the possessyon
of heaven. Like as our lord says in the gospel. For he shall say unto them
that have done and accomplysshed the works of mercy Come ye blessed of my
fader. Receive ye and take ye the kingdom of heaven which that I have maad ready
for you sith the beginning of the world / For that which ye have done to the
pour. ye have done to me. Great honor shall god do to them / when he
shall thank them of the works of mercy. and shall give to them the glory
perdurable. And therefore says he in the gospel / Blessed ben the merciful For
they shall have mercy / by cause they have enlonged the life of the pour people
by their alms. and therefore they that have had pity of the members of Ihesu
Cryste^ and have sustained them in this world. and have comforted and aided
them in their aduersytees. It is well reason that he do to them mercy. which
delyuerth fro al aduersytees and fro al myserye. and so shall he do when he
shall give to them the life ^erdurable. whereto mercy shall led them and herberowe
them.

Of the life actyf and of the life contemplatyf capitulo Cxl
THe holy scripture witnesses and enseigneth to us ij manners of well and
goo^es. by which a person comes to the life perdurable. The first is called
the life actyf / by cause it is in labor of good works. and makes a man to
ente^de to the prouffyte of him self and of his neighbor. The second is called
conte^platyf. by cause it is in rest of good works / and ne entendeth to no
(...) but to love and to know god / Then is he idle of were (...). and like
as he were a sleep. but he is awaked (...) for to think upon god. and for to
love him / And for the love that he has to god. he put al other thynge^ in
forgetyng. like as he were al rauysshed and fyxed in god / and desires to be
dysseueryd fro the mortal body / for to be always with Ihesu Christ. The first
life. is the field of good works. where the knights of god assaye and preue
them. The second rest them with god in the chamber of clean conscyence^ The
first entendeth to feed god with the mete of good works. The second entendeth
to be ^edde and fulfilled of god by very comfort spyrytuel / Of the first is
sygnefyed by martha which was besy to feed our lord. as it is said in the
gospel. The second is sygnefyed by marye magdalene which satte at the feet of
Ihesu Cryst^ and herd his words. The first is a way and enter to the second
/ For no person may come to the life contemplatyf^ if he be not first well
proved in the life actyf like as says saint Gregory^ The yeftes and the
virtues. whereof we have spoken tofore. apperteynen to the first life / which is
called actyf. The two last yeftes of which we shall speak. by the help and
aid of the holy ghoost. that is to wete of the yefte of understanding and of
the yefte of wysedom and sapyence / apperteynen to the second life. which is
called contemplatyf / This life has two things like as we have tofore touched
that is to wete in right knowleche of god / and in parfyght love / The yefte of
understanding ledeth to perfectyon of ryzt knowleche. The yefte of sapyence
ledeth to perfectyon of love we shall say first of the yefte of understanding
after that the holy ghoost shall teache and enseygne us. This yefte that is
called the yefte of understanding nys none other thing / after the saints and
the doctours^ but a light and a clerenes of grace which the holy ghoost
sends in to the heart. by understanding a man is lift up to know his maker
and the things spyrytuel. which may not be seen bodyly. And all the things
that apperteynen to the health of the soul. and to natural reason to which
the understanding of a man by him self may not ome. This yefte is called light.
for it purges the understanding of a man fro the derkenesse of ygnoraunce /
and fro the spots and fylthe of sin. For like as the bodyly light takes
away the derknesse / and makes the bodyly things to be seen clearly Right so
this spyrytuel light purges the understanding of a man / to that which he may
see clearly and know certeynlye. as a man may know in this mortal life god his
maker / and the spyrytuel creatures. like as ^en the aungellys and the souls
and the things that apperteyne to the health of souls. That been the artycles
of the feyth / of which we have spoken tofore This knowleche is not but in
conscience well purged. pure and clean. For like as sore eyes charged with
fylthe may not behold the clear light. Right so the understanding of a man.
when it is of him self may not behold ne know spyrytuel things / if it be
not well purged fro al tatches of error and of fylthe of sin. by very faith
which purges the hertes as the scripture sayth^ But the yefte of the holy
ghoost of which we speak here perfourmeth this purgacyon at heart so that
the holy soul which is purged and enlumyned with this light of understanding
may see and know god / and all that which is to him necessary. and
prouffytable to his sauacyon. And that is the blessyng whereof god speaks in
the gospel when he says. blessed be they that be clean of heart. for they shall
see god. in presence by faith / in light and informed by the yefte of
understanding. and after the death they shall see him in heaven face to face
clearly without end as says saint Poule. This yefte takes away all ordure
and fylthe fro the heart. and makes him clean parfytelye fro al ordures of
sin and specially for the spotte of the sin of lecherye. For who that of
this sin is entatched is very blind. For he has lost the eyes of the heart
of reason and of understanding. So that he may not understand ne know his
maker. ne thing that is holsom ne health of his soul / But is like a be
that has neither wit ne reason in him self. whereof dauyd says in the
psaulter. that a man to whom god has done so great honor that he has made
him to his image and his semblaunce. by which he may know god and have him.
which he has not done to any other be / if he forgete his maker / and the
bounte that he has done to him. he is bycomen semblable to folysshe bees^ys
which have none understanding. The sin that makes most a man to be like a
foul be. is the sin of lecherye. of which we have spoken tofore in the
traytye of vices. The yefte then of understanding which is contrary to this
ordure. and destroys fro the heart the sin of lecherye^ and sets therein
purete and clennesse. out of which grows a right fair tree. That is the virtue
of chastyte by which they come to this blessyng. which god promytteth to them
that kepen clennesse of heart when he says. blessed be they that be clean of
heart. For they shall see god. By cause that they shall have the eyes of the
heart well purged and well enlumyned of the yefte of understanding. This tree
grows and prouffyteth much like to the other byforsayd by seven degrees /
These been vij things which much auaylle to live chastelye.

The first degree of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cxlj
THe first degree is clean conscience. that is the rote of this tree. For
without clean conscience chastyte may not plese god / This clennesse.
chastyte. and purete requyren that the heart may be kept fro evil thoughts /
so that the heart consent to no sin. For who so consents to evil thought
and to evil desire of his heart. he is not chaste. how well that he keep him fro
the deed. For. for the consentyng only delybered and purposed. he should be
dampened if he deyed in the same state / Three things auaylle much to keep
clennesse of heart The first is to here gladly the word of god and the sermons
whereof our lord says in the gospel to his dyscyples. ye be all clean said he
by the words that I have said to you. For the word of god is like a fair
myrrour in which one may see the spots of the hett. The second thing is
very confession. which is the fontayne where one ought often to wasshe him of
al ordure of sin. The scripture says in the book of kings that Elysee the
prophet commanded to Naman which was a lepre. that he should wasshe him vij
times in the flom Jordan for to be clean and heled of his maladye / and when he
had wasshen him there. he was all hool and clean / The flom Jordan is as much
to say as the ^treme of Judgment / which sygnefyeth confession. where one
ought to Judge him self with great sorrow of heart and with great repentance of
his sins so that a streme of teeres run by the conduyt of his eyes. and
thus the synnar shall be hool of the mezelrye of sin. And therefore says saint
Bernard^ love confession if thou wylt have beaute^ For very confession and
hool is the beauty of the soul. The iij thing is to have remembrance of the
passion of Ihesu Christ. For no temptacyon ne none evil will may not duelle in
the heart that thinks and remembers often the death and the passion of Ihesu
Christ. For this is the armure that the devil doubts most. as that by which
he is ouercomen and leseth his power. This is right well sygnefyed to us in
scripture / where as Moses raised up a serpent of brass by the commandment
of god upon a perch on hye that all the people saw it. And al they that behold
it were helyd of the bytyng and hurtyng of the serpents. The serpent of brass
that henge on the perch. sygnefyeth the body of Ihesu Christ hangyng on the
cross. That was the serpent without venym / of which was made the tryacle of
our sauacyon / for who someuer feleth him smyton and enuenymed of pryckyng and
styngyng with the venomous serpents of hell / that been the deuylles. late him
behold by very faith on the serpent of brass / That is to say that he have
in his heart parfyte mind of the passion of Ihesu Christ. and anon he shall be
heled and delyuerd of the temptacyons of the enemy. that is the devil.

The second degree of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cxlij
THe second degree of the virtue of chastyte. by which this tree grows and
prouffyteth / is for to keep his mouth fro vylaynous word^s. which ben of
rybauldrye and dyshonestees. or such as tornen to dishonor. For by such
words and by such wind is often quyckened and enfla^med the fire of lecherye.
whereof the scripture says. who speaks of a common woman is brennyng as fire.
And saint Poul says that the shreude words corrumpen good manners. And
therefore who that will keep him chastely. him byhoueth that he keep him fro such
words. and who that gladly speaks them. or gladly hereth them. he leseth god.
and shows well that he is not chaste / For there may none other thing issue
out of a vessel but such as is within it. if the words be foul and vylaynous
It is an open sign that the ordure and the vylo^nye is in the heart / For of
the habundaunce of the heart the mouth speaks. this says our lord in the
gospel.

The third degree of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cxliij
THe third degree of the virtue of chastyte. is to keep well the five wits of
the body. the eyes fro folly beholding the eres fro herkenyng of folly and
vain words / The nose thrylles fro ouermoche delytyng in sweet savors and
wicked odours. The tongue fro evil speech and rybauldous langage. And the mouth
fro over sweet and delycyous metes and drynkes. These ben the ^^yates of the
cite of the heart. by which the devil enters often these ben the five wyndowes
of the house by which death enters often in to the hert^ like as says the
prophet / Many great wise men have be taken and ouercomen by this. that they
kept not well the yates / And if thou wylt have example of this matere. think
that no man was more strong than Sampson / Ne more holy than dauyd the
prophet. Ne more wise than Salamon. And nevertheless they fylle and were al
deceived by wymmen / Certainly if they had well kept their yates of their five
wits corporell. the fend had not taken so great fortresses^ For as saint
gregory says / The toure of the heart may not be taken if it be not opened to
the host of the devil. wherefore the ancient phylosophres fled in to far
places. in deserts. by cause they myzt not see. ne here. ne feel things
delectable / by which their strength and virtue should wexe feeble. ne by which
they might lose their chastyte. Other phylosophres there were that by cause
they should not be let to think on their phylosophye put out their eyes by
cause they should see no thing that myzt draw them fro contemplacyon. Then
the bodyly wits ben like an horse that renneth without bytte or bridle / which
makes his lord to overthrow or fall. But the chaste heart holds him by the
rain and by the bridle of reason.

Of the fourth degree of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cxliiij
THe fourth degree of the virtue of chastyte. is sharpness of penaunce^ to
subdue his flesh which is rebelle. and make it subgette to the spyryte. like
as says saint poule For he that will quench the fire of lecherye. he ought to
take away the rise fagotte. and all tho things that make it to brenne and
that nourysshe the fire. These been the delyces and the eases of the body
which quyckene and lyghten the fire of lecherye and corrumpen chastyte. whereof
saint bernard says that chastyte peryssheth in delyces. And therefore who that
will keep him fro brennyng / he ought to take away by abstynence. and by
sharpness of penance of his body all the occasyons that may quyckene the
fire of lecherye. whereof the scripture says that the children that were
nourysshed with gross metes would not use delycyouse metes. and were saved in
the fournays of babylone. by which is vnderstonden the sin of lecherye.
why^he is quenched by abstynence and by sharpnes of pr^aunce. But the fat
metes delycyouses. and the strong wynes inflame and nourysshe this sin of
lechery in like wise as oylle and greece alyght and enflammeth the fire and
enforce it.

Of the v degree of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cxlv
THe fifthe degree of the virtue of chastyte. is to flee evil company and the
occasyons of sin. Much people have fallen to sin by evil company. which
otherwise had not fallen / like as the leuayn corupteth the paste and draw it
to sauour^ Right so the evil company corupteth the good fame and renommee of
the person. An appel roten if it be emonge the sound and hole / corrupts
the good apples if it lie long emonge them A brennyng cole anon sets a
fire an hepe of cooles when it is laid emonge them. whereof dauyd says in the
psaulter. with the holy thou shalt be holy. and with the shrewes thou shalt
be perverted.

Thus then if thou wylt keep chastyte and clennesse / follow the company of
the good. For if thou love the company of evil and shrewes / thou shalt be
evil as they be. For who that loves the company of a fool^ it byhoueth that
he be like to him. according to that scripture says / Thus byhoueth it to flee
all the occasyons of sin. As to speak secretly with a woman. and in
suspecyous place. one allone to one For such things given occasyon to sin.
when there is place and time. whereof we read in the book of kings. that Amon
which was the sone of dauyd. when he had his sister Thamar in his chamber he
corrupted and defoulyd her. The lady of Joseph when she fond him allone. she
would have maad him to sin with her. but he fled as a wise man and left
her. Therefore says Saint Poule. Flee ye fornycacyon / that is to say all the
occasyons that may bring or led a person to the sin of lecherye. For one
may not better overcome the sin of lecherye ne keep chastyte than by fleyng
the companyes and the occasyons of this sin / whereof the aungel said to loath
that he should issue and depart fro the cytee of Sodom. and from all the
marches. For it suffysed not to leave the evil company ne the sin / but that
he should leave the marches of sin / It is said that s^. long gooth the pot
to water. that at the last it breketh^ And the gnat flees so long at the
flamme of the candell. that at last it brenneth. In like wise may one seek
thoccasyons of sin. that he falls therein. who so will then keep him well
fro such fire that he brenne not. he ought to withdraw him fro it.

The sixthe degree of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cxlvj
THe syxthe degree of the virtue of chastyte / is that one be well occupied and
well set a work of good werkys and honest. For the devil which slepeth not.
when he fyndeth a man idle and slow to do well. put him self to labor and
makes him fall lightly in to sin. whereof the scripture says. that
idleness / that is to say neclygence and slouthe for to do good. is maystresse
of many euylles / and that is enemy of the soul. And therefore says Saint
Poule. Ne give thou no place to the devil / That is to say ne be thou not idle.
that the fend find not place to tempte the. For who that is idle to do good
works / he gives rome and place to the devil for to tempte him. Therefore says
Saint Gregory do allwaye sum good works that the devil find the not idle.
For he is lightly taken of the fend. that occupyeth not him self always in
so^me good works. For he that is idle may not long keep ^ym fro falling in to
sin. Of this says the prophet. that the cause of the sin of sodom the
cite. was plente of breed and wyn. and idleness. That is to understand that
they ete and drank. and dyden no thing. And therefore they fill in to sin so
horrible that it ought not to be named. Right so do much people that lose her
time / and employe it in vanytees and in oultrages of mete and drink and lewd
games. in Iolyte^s of lewd songs. of daunces / of plays not leeful^ and
other deduytes. And in such vanytees they wasten their tyme^ and therefore the
fall often in many horrible sins. and often in to the pytte of hell. For like
as Job says. They led their lines in plays. in deduytes and in delyces. and
in an only point they descend in to the pytte of hell. that is at the point
of death where as they take none head.

The vij degree of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cxlvij
THe seventh degree of the virtue of chastyte / is devout prayer and oryson.
which much auaylleth to overcome all sins. and specially the sin of
lecherye / whereof Saint Ambrose sayth^ That prayer is a good shield ayenste
all the brennyng darts of the devil. And saint ysodore says that it is the
remedy against all temptacyons of sin. a man to run to prayer as soon as
the fend tempts him unto sin. For the accustomaunce of devout prayer
quenches all the assaults of sin. Devout prayer is much mighty unto god
when it is under set and accompanied with four things as of four pylers.
The first is true faith / whereof our lord says in the gospel. All that ye
ask and demand in your prayers* have ye good faith and steadfast believe in
god^ and ye shall have that ye demand / And Saint James says. that one ought
demand or ask in steadfast faith without doubtyng. For who that doubts is
like the foam of the sea which the wind ledeth hither and thither. And
therefore he that prays doubtyng. Geteth no thing of god. The second thing
that ought to be in prayer is hope to have that. which is demanded and
required Hereof says dauyd in the psaulter^ have good hope in god. and he
shall do that which. thou requyrest of him / And also he says in another
place. Lord have mercy on me. for my heart trusts in the. God gives to us
great hope for to require him. and to have that / which we demand of him
when he says in the gospel. That who demands. he takes it. and who so
secheth. he fyndeth. that is to understand who demands wisely. and secheth
dylygently. and knock and shoue at the door perseuerantly. And when these three
things been in the prayer / wit. Dylygence. and perseueraunce god enhaunceth
it. if thou demand wisely. Many men pray and demand which be not herd ne
granted of god. by cause they ask evil and not leefully. whereof saint James
says to them that can not demand. ye ask often says he of god / but ye get
no thing by cause that ye can not ask it / Sum ask more hye thing than
apperteyneth to them. as did saint Johan and saint James. which demanded of
god that that oue should sytte on the right side of our lord in his royame. and
that other on the lift side / They asked not wisely but it was with great
presumpcyon. And therefore our Lord answered to them hard and said to them. ye
wot not what ye aske^ then who that will pray to god. late him keep him fro
presumpcion / that he suppose not great things in him / as did the pharysee.
which auaunted him in his prayer / and despised other / But humbly ought a
person to pray to god in Iugyng and accusyng him self tofore god. which sees
every heart. and knows the maladyes of sin and the deffaultes and also
knows that whereof we have need. and that which is prouffytable for us.
be^ter than we our self / and take ensau^ple at the pour truau^tes which
shown their soores and maladyes for to moeue the people to pity toward them.
Right so ought one to do tofore god humbly to show his sins and his
deffautes to remember there. for to get grace and pardon. There ben other that
can not demand but vile and little things / as ben the goods temporal. And
god will give to the a gretter thing. he will not appease the with an appel or
with a pere as a child. but he will that thou demand great things. which
been for the health of thy soul. as his grace and his glory. For who that
demands of god rychesses. or honors. or death. or vengeance of his
enemies. he demands of god foul prayers and against him self. and therefore
god grau^teth them not. Therefore says saint Austyn / understand not of god to
be a great thynge^ the goods that he gives as well to the wicked as to the
good / and to his enemies as well as to his friends / And yet more gives god of
temporalle goods to the wicked than he does to the good. God gives them to
the wicked. to the^de that the good persons should learn to despise them as
saint austyn says. when thou prayest says saint ambrose. demand great
things. that been they that enduren without end. and not the things
transytorye^ But them that enduren without end. For such a prayer as to
demand temporalle goods. he grants them not. And therefore our good
master Ihesu Christ techeth us for to demand wisely. And forms unto us our
demand. when he says in the gospel if ye demand any thing of my fader in
my name. he shall give it you / he demands in the name of Ihesu Christ. that
demands that which apperteyneth to the health of his soul. And what thing
we ouzt to ask and demand / he enseygneth and techeth us when he says in
the gospel. Seche ye first the royame of god and his Justice. and all things
temporalle shall come to your auau^tage. For as it is woned to be said. unto the
most need. ouzt one allewaye to run. we have need of two things of the
goods spyrytuel and temporelle. But we have grettest need of the goods
spyrytuel. And therefore we ought first and pryncypally require them / and god
shall give them and do to us advantage of the second good^ that been the goods
temporell / we ought not to make of the second goods the pryncypall. as done
the covetous men. which seche not to have none other life. but this present
life. which faylleth and escapith* from them. will they or nyll they / but the
royame of god is life perdurable. That ought we require of god and desire by
merit of good prayer. And that is that god says. Seche ye first the royalme
of heaven and his Justice. That is to do good works / by whyehe we may come to
that royame / that never shall faylle. who that secheth in this wise / god
does to him advantage of temporalle goods. For he gives to his use
suffysanntlye. For no thing lacks to them that dread god and love him. like
as says the holy scripture. But the auarycyous people of the world / the more
that they have the more they lack and faylle. And Saint Iherome says / that
to the covetous man. fayllech that which he has and that which he has not.
Now think then when thou would pray god / for to demand wisely
dylygently. and perseuerauntly. And he shall give unto the all that shall be
nedeful to the prou^fyte and health of thy soul The third thing that ought to
be in prayer / is devotion of heart. that is to lift up the heart to god.
without thynkyng ouwher else. whereof our lord says. when thou wylt pray to
god / enter within thyn heart. and close the door upon the. that is to say. put
out all thoughts. seculer. flesshely. foul. wicked. worldly. and vylaynous.
And thus pray thy fader of heaven in hyddles in thy heart / and that the heart
think on none other thing. but on that which it ought to think. and saint
ysodore says. that then we pray god truly. wha^ we think nowher else. And
Saint Austyn says. what auaylleth to moeue the mouth and the lyppes / when the
heart says not a word. As great dyfference as is between the chafe and the
corn. and the brenne and the flower of whete^ so great dyfference is between
the prayer and devotion of the heart. God is not a ghoote to be fed with
leaves. God cursyd the tree whereon he fond no thing but leaves. Right so the
prayer which is all in leaves of words without devotion of heart / pleases
no thing to god. but it dyspleaseth him. and he torneth his eere. For he will
not understand such langage. who that prays god without devotion. it
seems that he mocketh god. like as he that will mock a deef and a dombe man.
that meueth his lyppes only as he spacke. and no thing says / To such people
god makes a deef ere. but the prayer that comes fro the depnes of the heart.
that hereth our lord as he says in the gospel / God is a spyryte / and
therefore who will pray god and have his request granted. him byhoueth that he
pray in spyryte and in truth. Dauyd the prophet enseygneth and techeth us
in the psaultrr to pray to god deuoutely when he says. lord mine oryson be
adressyd tofore the like to thensence Thensence when hit is upon the fire it
smells swetely / Right so does the prayer that comes fro the heart brennyng
in the love of god smells much swetely tofore god. otherwise the prayer may
not be enhaunced tofore god if it come not fro the heart. like as a messager
which brings no letters. ne has no knowleche. enters not gladly tofore
the king. Oryson or prayer without devotion is as a messager with out
letters. who such message sends to the court. he does evil his erandes^
who then will pray god verily. he ought to cry to god fro the depthe of his
heart. as did dauyd / which said in the psaulter. lord god here my wys / For I
cry to the fro the depnesse of my heart. The fervor of love is the cry fro
the depnesse of the heart. this says saint Austyn. Such a wys and such a cry
pleseth much to god. and not the noise of words polysshed. whereof Saint
Gregory says that verily to pray to god. is in the teres and bewayllynges of
conpunctyon of heart. This cry chaseth away the thieves / that been the deuylles
which lie in awayte for to trouble and rob us. And therefore ought we often to
cry and pray unto god that he will keep and deffende us fro the theuys of
hell. Thus ought we strongely to cry to god against the fire of couetyse. or
of lecherye. that he give to us the water of teres for to quench such fire
that hit enflamme not our hertes. Also we ought to cry to god ayenste the evil
thoughts that come often to the heart. that the heart and the soul perysshe not
by consentyng. Therefore cried Dauyd to god and said. Lord save me. and keep me
fro the peril of waters. which ben now entered in to my heart. and the
dyscyples of our lord when they saw the tempest of the sea upon them they
cried saying lord save us for we been in great peril. And for these three
things that I have here said one ought often to cry to god that he save us fro
these three perils / that is to wete fro the thieves of hell. and fro the fire
of couetyse. and fro the flodes of evil thoughts and of temptacyon. Now
ought thou to know. that in all times / and in all places may a person
pray to god. But he ought specially and most deuoutelye ought he to pray in
the church on the sondayes and in festes which ben stablysshed for to pray
to god to preyse and honor him / and therefore then they seace and ought to
^eace all persons fro bodyly works and temporal. for the better tentende to
pray to god and honor him. and to spyrituel werkys. God commanded so
straytly to keep the sabotte day in the old law that he made a man to be
stoned tofore the people. by cause he had gadrid a few styckes on the sabotte
day / what shall god do then of them that do the great sins on the sondayes
and the festes. and waste the time in vanyte and in folyes / and yet werse done
they on the sonday^s. on the festes and on solemn days than they do on other
days. Certeynly they shall be more punysshed and dampened in that other world /
than the Jews that brake their sabotte day^ For the sunday is more holy than
the sabotte. So ben the pryncypal feestes which ben establisshed in holy
church for to pray to god / and to honor and thank him of the goodness and
bountees that he has done to us / and does every day. like as holy church
remembers / In such a feste as is cristemas / that is of his natyuyte how he
was borne of the vyrgyn marie. At Ester how he roos fro death to life. At the
ascencyon how he styed up in to heaven. At whytson tide how he sent the holy
ghoost upon thappostles. Also there been establysshed to keep the feestys of
saints for to preyse and worship god and his saints. and to remember the holy
miracles that he did for them for to conferme our faith. And therefore we ought
to keep the feestys of saints. and to pray them deuoutelye to aid and
socoure us unto our lord / which has so much honored them in heaven in
glory and in earth and therefore they sin grievously that keep not their
feestys For they do against the commandment of god and of holy church. But
here sum may say to me. Fair sir a man may not al day pray to god ne be at
the monasterye ne in the church. what harm is it if I goo play and dysporte
me as long as I play I think none evil. To that I shall answer. All the time
that thou employest in folysshe plays and in vanytees. and in work that is
not ordained in any manner to god / thou lesest it / For thou ought to know
that all the time that thou thynkest not on god. thou ought to acounte for
lost. this says the scripture. That is to understand wha^ thou thynkest on
vanyte / and in thing that is not in any manner ordained to god. And certeynlye
he leseth a great thing that leseth his time / this says Seneke^ For he
leseth the goods that he might do in as much as he so leseth in plays and
in vanytees. and that is not without sin for to despende the time in evil
usage. For god requires rekenyng at the day of Judgment. this says Saint
Ancelme. and therefore ought one always well to employe his time as long as he
lives in this world. And the time is short as says the scripture / Ne no man
knows how long time he has to live. ne no man knows when he shall deye. ne
how he shall pass out of this world^ who then will keep the holy days as he
owes. he ought to keep him fro doing that desplayseth god and his saints. and
well to employe his time in god. in prayeng him. praysyng. and gyuyng him
thanks of his goods. and to here the sermons and put them in eure and to
entende to other good werkys and needs that been according to god. Also when a
man is in the church he ought to conteyne him much honestlye^ and do
reverence to god and to his saints deuoutelye. For the church is ordained for
to pray god and his saints / and not for to Iangle ne for to lawghe. ne for
to Iape^ ne for to speak idle words ne for to talk to other of seculer
things. For our Lord says. My hows is the house of prayer. And therefore a man
ought not to do none other thing therein. than it for which it was
establisshed. this says saint austyn. he that shall come tofore the king in
his chamber for to empetre and get any grace he ought well to keep him fro
saying of any thing that should dysplese the king. Much more ought he to be
ware that comes in to the church which is the chamber and the house of god.
what he says and does tofore god and his aungellys and that specially that
should dysplease him. Then god will not that a man should make of his house a
market ne an ha^^e For he him self chaced and droof out of his temple with
good scourges them that bought and sold therein. Also he will not that any plee
should be made therin^ ne noise ne no seculer need / but he will that we should
entende to pray god deuoutely and praise and than^^ him of al his benefaytes /
There ouzt a man to call ageyn his heart to him self and put away all worldly
werkys and al evil thoughts. and think on his creator. and on the bountees
that god has done to him. and does every day. and to remember his sins and
his deffaultes. and to humble him self tofore god. and to require him of pardon
and grace to keep him from sin / and to have perseueraunce in good works
unto the end. Also in the church ought the great lords and the great ladies
to forgete all their glory. their richesse. their power. their dygnyte. their
hyenesse / and their puyssaunce / and ought to think that they be tofore their
Judge. which shall straytely examyne them and rekene straytly of the goods that
he has done to them of the dygnytees and estates that he has set them in.
and how they have used them and he shall reward them after their deserte.
Therefore ought they much to humble them to god. and not to gloryfye them of
their hyenesse. ne of their fair array. ne of their rich robes They may take
example of king Dauyd. which forgate his dygnyte when he prayed tofore god.
and despised him self so much that he said to our lord. I am said he a lytyl
worm and not a man. In this Dauyd knowleched his lytelnes. his pouerte. and
his deffaultes. and made him nouzt For like as a worm is little and naught. and
grows naked of the earth. al in like wise is a man of him self a vile thing
and pour. For when he enters in to the exyle of this world he brings no
thing. ne no thing shall bear away. al naked he entered / and al naked he shall
goo hens. whereof saynt^ bernard says. what is a man but foul sperme. a sack
full of dunge. and mete to worms. He is much foul and made of foul seed in
his concepcyon. a foul sack full of dunge in his life. and mete to worms after
his death. Also the great ladies that been so arrayed with gold and silver. with
precious stones and robes ought in the church tofore god well to take example
of the good queen hester / which took of her precious roobes and her
parementes when she came for to pray god / and humbled her self. and knowleged
her pouerte and her deffaultes tofore god. and said to him / lord thou know
that I hate the sin of pride. and the glory of parementes and of Jewels
which me byhoueth to set down fro my heed / in great abhomynacyon of them /
that in such things trusten. delyten. gloryfyen / and were them for to show
them and to please the fools. God has not to do with such parementes in his
church. but of a clean conscience and of an humble heart. Saint Poule enseyneth
and techeth right well how the wymmen ouzt to array them when they come for to
pray god^ he says that they ought to have honest habyte without any
oultrage. that is to understand after that it apperteyneth to the estate of
the person / For that which is oultrage in one person / is not oultrage in
another / sum is conuenyent to a queen which is not according to a bourgeys
wife. or another simple woman. Also thapostle techeth that the wymmen of what
estate they be. that they should be of simple beholding and regard and humble /
that is to understand that they should be simple. humble and shamefast. and not
afronted ne openly show her vysage. as done these common wymmen. which goon
with their neck stratched out as an heart in the launde. and look a side or a
trauers as an horse of prys. Also he will that they be not curyous for to array
their heed with gold ne silver ne with precious stones. And yet he will also
that they have in the church their hedes couerd. so that no man be styred by
them to euyl^ ne sin not in beholding of them / but they ought to be arrayed
as devout and good wymmen / which show the bounte of their heart by good
werkys / and therefore says saint Ambrose^ who will be herd in prayer. he ought
to take away fro him al sign of pride. and ought to enclyne him to god with
his heart by very confession / and by penance in profou^de humylyte. for to
moe^^ god to do him mercy. For as he says proud habyte geteth no thing of
god / but it gives cause to Inge evil of him that wereth it. Now I have showed
to the three things that ought to be in prayer. fayth^ hope and devotion. But
to that. that prayer may be perfyghtly agreeable and playsaunte to god and
worthy to be enhaunced and herd. it behooves four things / That is that it
have ij wings which bear it tofore god. These two wings ben almesses and
fastings. or other penaunces. whereof the au^gel said to Thobye / Prayer is
good when it has in him self fasting and almesse^ without these two wings
the prayer may not flee to god. For as says Saint Ambrose / good life makes
the prayer to flee to god. But sin lets it and wythdraweth it ageyn.
whereof thou ought to wete that in two manners is prayer let. like as says
saint Ysodore. One is by cause a man keeps him not fro sin and fro doing
evil and for that a person will not forgive the evil will that he has to
another. For in like wise as the oynementes will not hele the wound. as long
as the iron is within / Right so auaylleth not ne prouffyteth no thing the
prayer to him that says it. as he has evil will to another. And therefore
says the prophet. let us lift up our hertes and our hands to god. He
lyfteth up his heart and his hands to god / that lyfteth up his prayers by good
works. And thappostle says that he that lyfteth up his pure hands to god in
prayer. lyfteth up in pure and clean conscience without sin / For god
enhau^ceth not the prayer that comes of a conscience full of ordure and of
sin. whereof he says by the prophet. when ye shall multeplye your prayers. I
shall not here them. for your hands be all blody and full of sin. who ben they
that have their hands blody^ but they that dystresse the pour people which ben
under them and take away fro them their good by force / they have the hands
full of blood of the blood of pour people. for they take away fro them their life
/ and their sustenau^ce / by couetyse and by their rauyne. and do great
oultrages. and eten the morsellys full of sin. wherefore they shall pay the
scotte in that other world. For the scripture says that god requires the
blood of the pour people For they must give a rekenyng. or sytte therefore. and
therefore who will be enhau^ced and herd of god in his prayers. late him not
come tofore God the sword drawn. Ne the hands blody ne with wide hands.
That is to say in will to sin ne spotted of untruth. ne wide of good
works / For thus says our lord in the gospel. Thou shall not come tofore me
with wide hands. he comes with empty hands tofore god that comes to pray
and require him without making present of good werkes^ for to him he closes
his yate that requires him and brings no thing. hereof have we example in
the gospel / which says that the yate was shytte to the folysshe vyrgyns that
had none oil in their lamps. and god said to them I know you not. For god
knows none but them that have their lamps full of oylle / that is to say them
that have the heart full of pity and of grace purged and clean of al sins and
show it by good works / Such people hereth god gladly and opens to them
his yate. and receives gladly their prayers. Now say I then that prayer like
as it rested on four pylers as it is said tofore. and is much playsaunt to god
/ For it geteth lightly of god all that it has need. be it in body or in soul
as says the scripture. whereof saint James says that much auaylleth the besy
prayer of a ryghtwys man. For it avails to hele all maladyes of body and of
soul. and says yet that prayer that comes of faith heleth the seek person /
if he be in sin it shall be pardonned. The holy scripture says that Moses
the prophet vaynquysshed Amalech and his host / not by bataylle. but by holy
prayers. For as it is said of an holy man. Much more auaylleth the prayer of a
saint than the fyghtyng of many thousand synnars. The prayer of a good man
perceth he^en. Then shall he overcome his enemies in earth / A good old and
devout woman geteth more soon a good request of god in glory in prayeng him
deuoutely / than a thousand knights may get of land in long time by force
of arms. and therefore it is good to pray and require god with the orysons of
good folk. and specially of couentes and of relygyous people. which ben
assembled for to serve god. and for to pray night and day deuoutely for all
their benefactours. For the prayer is much worth toward our lord. For like as
says the scripture. More auaylleth. and more may do toward god the prayer of
many good persons than any can express or say. for as it is said of an holy
man It may not be but the prayers of many good persons to gyder be herd of
god and granted. The prayers and requests of all the hole covent togydre. is
sooner passed and herd of thabbot. than the request and prayer of one monk
allone / In like wise hereth god more soon the prayers of them that been
assembled for to serve him. And therefore says god in the gospel. if tweyne of
you accorden togydre to ask and require me. All that they require my fader of
heaven I shall do it. Now have I spoken of seven degrees of the tree of the
virtue of chastyte. by which this virtue grows and mounteth and prouffyteth /
Now byhoueth to say of the branches of this tree which ben seuen^ after the
seven estates of the people / that been in this world.

Of the first estate of them that been entyer and chaste of body capitulo
Cxlviij
THe first estate of the world is of them that been hool and chaste of body. and
have kept their maydenhed. but nevertheless they be not bounden to this / but
that they may be married. In such estate ought a person to keep chastyte /
that is clennesse and purete of heart and of body / wherefore the children of
rich men ought to have good kepars and honest. that they ben dylygent for
tenseygne them. and keep them fro evil company and fro sin. For evil
company fouleth often the children. and enseygne them evil games. and shrewde
words of rybauldrye. lewd touchynges and dyshoneste. by which they fall in
to the sin of lecherye. which is against nature. whereof we have spoken tofore
in the traytye of vices / therefore it needs not to reherce it ageyn. for such
matere is abhomynable. And therefore the children ought to be chastysed and well
drawn forth in good manners / and hold and keep them nyghe that they do no
harm ne sin. as long as they be young / and to accustom them to keep
thenseynemens. For also as says salamon. that which a child is learned in his
yongthe that will he hold in his old age / And the philosopher says that it
is no little thing taccustome well or evil in his yongthe for that is all. For it
is said. that which is learned in yongthe is mayntened in age / Such form as
the shoo takes at the beginning. the same holds it / forth always in such
estate. Then has chastyte need of good keeping / for else it should be sone
lost.

The second estate is of them that been corrupt capo. Cxlix
THe second estate is of them that been corrupt of body and have lost their
chastyte and maydenhede. and yet were never married ne bounden with bond that
might let them to marye. And nevertheless they be confessyd and repentaunte of
their sins. In this estate ought a person to keep chastyte / For he that is
in such estate of repentance ought to have steadfast purpoos. that never he
shall fall ageyn in that sin. but al his life to keep him to his power^ sauf
that he may marye him if he will. he or she that will keep him chaste in such
estate / him byhoueth that he chastyse his body by sharpnes of penance. this
is the ij branch of this tree /

The third branch capitulo CL
THe third estate is of them that be bounden by marriage In this estate ouzt
they to keep chastyte. sauf the work of marriage. For they ought to keep their
bodies that one to that other. and this requires the law of marriage. that the
one bear faith to the other of their bodies. For sith they be joined to gyder
carnally by marriage they been one body as says holy scripture / And therefore
ought each to love other / as them self. For like as the two ben one body. so
ought they to be one heart by true love. ne never ought they to d^parte ne to
deceuere / of their hertes ne of their bodies as long as they live. Then
they ought to keep their bodies clenely and chastely / reserved and sauf the
acts of marriage. And therefore says Saint Poul. that the wymmen ought to love
and honor their husbondes. and ought to be chaste and sobre^ and to keep them
fro al other men. sauf fro their husbondes. and ought to be sobre in etyng and
drynkyng. For ouermoche mete and drink alyghteth the fire of lecherye. Right
so oughten the men to keep their bodies chastely. and not to abandonne them to
other wymmen. Marriage is a state which ought to be holden and kept much
clenly and holyly for many reasons. for it is a state of great auctoryte. For
god ordained it and establysshed it in paradys terrestre in the estate of
Innocencye. tofore that man had ever sinned. and therefore it ought to be holyly
kept by cause that god establysshed it. and also for the holy place where it
was ordained. Also it is a great estate of dygnyte. for god would be borne in
marriage. that is of the vyrgyn marie. which was married to Joseph without losyng
of her vyrgynyte / The virgyn marye made of marriage her mantel / under the
which was conceived and borne the blessed sone of god. under this mantel was
hyd fro the devil the secret counceyll of our redempcyon and of our salvation.
Therefore it ought to be honored and clenly kept. Also it ought well holyly to
b^ kept for the holiness thereof. For it is one of the seven sacraments of
holy church. And sygnefyeth the marriage that is between Ihesu Christ and holy
church. and between god and the soul. Then the state of marriage is so holy
and honest that it makes that which was sin mortal without marriage is
without sin in marriage. and not only without sin but it may be in sum
caas cause to win the life perdurable / And it ought to be known that in three
caases may one do luxury of marriage without sin. and may have great merit
as to the soul / The first caas is when this work is done in entencyon to
have lygnage for to serve god. And in such entencyon was ordained and
establysshed marriage pryncypally / The second is when that one renders to that
other his debt. when it is required. And to that ought to moeue Justice.
which renders to eueryche his right. Then if that one refuse to that other
his right. when it is demanded and required by the mouth / or by sign as
done the wymmen that been honest and shamefast to demand such thing he or
she that refuses to that other that requires it / synneth. For he does wrong
to that other of that which is his own For that one has right in the body of
that other. but he that renders that which he owes does well and right /
when he does it in good entencyon / For Justice moeueth him to do so / and
that is neither sin ne lecherye. The third caas is when a man requires his
wife for such work. for to keep her fro sin. Also when he sees that she is
so shamefast that she never requires her husbond of such thing / and
doubts that she should lightly fall in to sin if he required her not who in
such entencyon renders or requires such thing of such debt. he synneth
not / but he may deserve toward god me ryte / For pity moeueth him to do it. In
these three things is no point of sin in the works of marriage. but in other
caas there may be sin venyall or mortal. And specially in three caas / The
first is when this work is required only for his delight and lecherye / and
in this caas may one sin venyally and dedely. venyally when the delight pass
not the bonds and the terms of marriage. That is to say when the delight is so
subgette to reason that he that in this work and in such estate. would not do
this thing but only to his wife But when the lecherye and the delight is so
great in his wife that reason is deed and so blind. that as much he would do
to her if she were not his wife. In such a caas the sin is mortal / For such
delight passes the bounds of marriage / whereof god is often dyspleased to such
peple^ and gives sometime to the devil great power to noye and grieve them. like
as we read in holy scripture. of Sara daughter of Raguel which was wife to
young Thobye. and had / had seven husbondes tofore. and all were slain of the
devil the first night that they would have layen by her and have known her. Of
whom the angel said to Thobye that he should have her to his wife I shall say
to the said he. in what people the devil puts him in. and has power on
them that putten god out of their heart and of their thought. that they ne
entende to no thing but to their delytes and for to accomplysshe their wicked
desires / like as does an horse or a mule /

And god takes away fro them sometime their lygnage and their fruit that they
may not have children by their sins. Yet may they sin mortally in another
manner that is to wete. when that one treats that other against nature. or
oherwyse than nature of man requires ne law of marriage grants. Such
people synnen more grievously than the other toforesayd. but they that in their
marriage keep the dread of our lord. and kepen clenly and holyly their marriage.
Such people plesen god /

The second caas that may be sin (...) maryage^ is when a man gooth to his
wife in such time as he ought not. that is when she is in the maladye or
sickness that comes unto wymmen oftyme. He that spares not his wife when she
is in such estate / for the parylle of the lygnage that she myzt then
conceive / should be mezel or lepre. he synneth dedely / For as Saint Iherome
says / In that estate be conceived the lame often time. the crooked. and the
lepres. And that time the woman ought for to tell it to her husbond. when she
is in that plyte. desyryng him to abide and suffer all so long as she is in
such point.

Also they both ought for to spare and absteyne them fro the work of marriage
in holy times. That is to say as in the great solemn feestys. for the better
to entende to pray god and to serve and honor hym^ And in the times of
vygyles^ of lent and of fastings commanded by holy church they ought to
suffer and forbere such work. not for that it is sin to do such thing in
that time / For in a good entency on he may do it / but sometime they ought to
suffer of that they may do. for to get the better of god that thing which they
demand of him as says saint austyn. Also in the time the woman lies in
gesyne. or nygh the time of chyldyng a man ouzt to keep him fro the work of
marriage for shame. and also for the peril that might come thereof. It is
founden in the book that speaks of the nature of beestys. that the olyfaunt
shall never abide with the female as long as she is conceived and bears. and a
man by reason ought to be better attempred than a be. and therefore ought a
man in such time wythdrawe him. But nevertheless I say not that is sin to do
the work of marriage in such time for good cause. and true entencyon whereof
god is Judge. The third caas is. that in which one may most grievously sin in
his marriage. that is in holy place. For in holy place as is the church. which
is ordained for to pray god and serve him / ought not be do lecherye of
marriage ne none other sin. for the reverence of the holy place and he that
has no regard in such holy place to do such work he synneth for reason of
the place. For such thing is sin in one place and in one time / that is not
in another. The iiij estate is of them that have be in marriage. but the death
has deceuerd them that one fro that other^ And he or she that is abyden ought
to keep and live chastely as long as he or she is in the state of wydowhede /
This is an estate which Saint poul preyseth much. and says to the wydowes.
that he or she is good that holds him in such estate. and if it playse not
them they may marye them / For better is to marye than to brenne them. for if
he bre^ne so that he conse^te to sin / he synneth. for he put his heart thereto
by will and by desire to the fire of lechery and better it were and more
auaylle to him to marye. than to brenne him self in the fire. that is to
understand of them that been in the state of simple wydowhede and not them that
been in thestate bounden by vow. they may not marye wtthoute dedely sin
after their vow. but nevertheless if the vow be simple and that it be pryuely
made without solempnyte. how be it that they sin dedely that after their auow
marye the^. nevertheless they may abide in their marriage. if there be none other
lettyng And is bounden to do penance of the vow broken / but when the vow is
solemn. or by the hand of a prelate. or by professyon of relygyon. or by
holy order that he has received. as subdeken. deken or priest. Then the
marriage is none. but they must deceuere and depart that so ben assembled by
marriage for they may not be laufully in such estate. To byholde the state of
wydowhede. ought to moeue the example of the turtle for like as says the book
of nature of beestes / Never after the turtle has lost his make she shall never
accompanye her with another. but is solytarye and flees the company of other.
Three things apperteyne much to them that b^e in thestate of wydowhede / The
first is to hyde her self and to be secretlye in her hows. and not to syewe
suspecyous felawshyp. hereof have we a fair example of Iudyth which was a
wydowe. and was a much fair woman and young of which it is said in the holy
scripture. that she held her self in her chamber cloos with her maidens.
wherefore saint Poul repreueth the young wymmen wydowes that were idle and
curyous for to goo and come and Iape and ouermoche speak. but closely and
secretly ought they to be in their lodgyng / and entende to do good werkes^
like as saint Poul enseygneth them / The ij thing is to entende to pray god
gladly. and to yield him thankynges of his benefaytes. And to be in the church
in great devotion in great repentance of their sins. and in teres weeping. As
it is said in scripture by saint luke. that the good wydowe which was named
Anne departed not out of the temple. but served god night and day in prayer /
in fastings. and in other penau^ces. The iij thing is sharpness of metes.
Saint poul says that a wydowe that ledeth her life in delices is deed by sin.
for like as says saint bernard. chastyte peryssheth in delices. in like wise
as he perissheth in the water that is so much under in depnesse that he leseth
his breeth. No man may have his heed in the water. that is to say / his heart
long in the delyces of this world but that he lose his life. That is the grace
of the holy god by which the soul lives in god / In such estate also
apperteyneth humble habyte and not proud ne curyous. After the example of
Judith which left her rich robes and her rich paremeutis / when her lord
and husbond was deed. and took the habyte of wydowhede simple and humble which
was more sign of weeping and of sorrow than of Joy ne of vayn glory. and by
cause she loved the virtue of chastyte / and that she would keep all her life.
she clad her with heyr. and fasted every day except the festes. and yet was she
fair young / rich and wise / But the ^^^nte of her heart and love of chastyte
maad her to do it. thus ouzt he^ or she to live that will keep chastyte in such
estate. and this is the fourth branch of this tree.

The fyfthe branch of the virtue of chastyte and of vyrgynyte Capitulo Clj
THe fyfthe brau^che of chastyte and of vyrgynyte is the fyfthe estate which
is in them that keep and have always kept and yet always keep and purpose to
keep all their life their body hool without corrupcyon for the love of god.
This estate is much to be praised for his dygnyte / for his beauty. and for
his bounte / For this estate has he that keeps him semblable to au^gellys of
heaven as sayen the saints. But much more have the vyrgyns of glory and of
merit than the aungellys. For the aungellys lyuen without flesh. but the
vyrgynes have vyctorye over their flesh. that is their propre body. And that
is a great meruaylle. that they keep so feeble a castle as is the body / against
so strong an aduersarye as is the devil. that secheth all thengynes that he
may to take the castle for to rob the tresour of vyrgynyte. This is the
tresour. of which our lord speaks in the gospel when he says. that the
royame of heaven is like to tresour that is hyd in a field. The tresour hid in
the field is vyrgynyte hyd in the body which is like a field. which ought by
penance to be eered. labored and sown by labor of good werkys. This tresour
is semblable to the royalme of heaven. For the life of vyrgynes is like the life
of heaven. that is the life of au^gellys / wheref our lord says in the gospel^
that in the ressurection general shall be no maryages as ben in this world*
but they shall be as aungellys in heaven. Also I say that this estate is for to
be praised for his beaulte. For it is the most fair estate that is in erthe^
except vyrgynyte clenly kept whereof Salamon says in his book of sapyence in
meruayllyng him self. O says he h^w. fair and chaste is generation with
clerenes and charity / he said well. chaste with clerenes For then is fair
chastyte and vyrgynyte. when it is clear by good life and honest. like as the
clear son makes the fair day. In like wise the clerenes of grace and of
good life makes the virgynyte fair and plesau^t to god. whereof Saint Iherome
says. that much fair and clear is virgynyte tofore other virtues when it is
without spotte and without ordure of sin. for who that is hool and chaste of
body and is corupte of heart and of thought. he or she is like a sepulcre which
is whyt and fair withoutforth and within is full of careyn of deed bodies
stynkyng and rotyn. vyrgynyte is like to a whyt robe wherein the spots be more
foul and more apparau^t / than in a robe of another color. This robe ouzt to
be well kept fro iij spots that is. of fylthe. of blood. and of fire. these
iij spots defoule more this whyt robe than other. The spotte of fylthe / is
the couetyse of the world. which ought not to be in the heart that will plese god
in thestate of virgynyte For none may please god and the world his enemy. as
says saint gregoire. and he shows that there is no friend of god that will
plese the world which is enemy of god. whereof saint Ioha^ says. who that will
be friend of the world. shall be enemy to god. and saint poul says if I would
plese the people of the world I should not be servant of Ihesu crist. It is a
sign that he will not playse the world / that his heart is al set to god / and
he that has over great array and curyous about his body is not so. for no
person secheth never beaulte ne curyosyte of roobes. ne of pareme^ts / if he
supposed not to be seen of the people. and who that secheth most of such
beauty. leseth most the beauty of his soul and of his conscience wythinforth /
by which they should plese god whereof saint Bernard says to them that sechen
these fair and precious robes. and the fair parementes for to please the world
and to show them. The daughters of babylone / ben of confusyon for their
glory shall torn to confusyon / to shame and to perdurable dampnacyon. if they
be not well ware and keep them well They clothe them says he with purple and of
fair precious robes / and under those fair robes is often the conscience pour
and foul. naked of good deeds and of virtues / and full of sins They shine
withoutforth of precious stones. of owches of gold and syluer^ but they be
foul before god and abhomynable. and saint bernard says that they that so
array them in evil entencyon. and done more than their estate requires. synnen
grievously / ^ut all the glory of the daughter of the king of glory. as dauyd
the prophet says is withinforth / that is in holy conscience and in good
virtues. where as is no point of couetyse but for to playse to god / and in
this wise the spot of fylthe defoylleth not. Also a person ought to keep him
fro the spotte of blood That is of thoughts and of flesshly desires. whereof
saint Jerome says that such virgynyte is sacrefice and offryng to Ihesu
christ. which is not entatched in the heart of any evil thought or consentyng /
for like as him self says. Nothing auaylleth vyrgynyte of body. where as is
corrupcyon of heart or of thought / or of conse^tyng. Also the fruit is not
good how well that it be fair withoutforth. when it is full of worms and of
rotynnesse wythinforth / Also he ought to keep him fro the spotte that comes
of the fire. the fire brenneth and bruleth the white robe of chastyte and of
vyrgynyte. that is when gladly they here or herkene foul words that may moeue
them to sin / For thus as says saint Poul^ and also other times we have said
it tofore. The evil words. corrupten the good manners. And therefore says
Seneke. keep the fro evil words and dyshoneste. For who that is so acustomed.
he dredeth no shame / and falls the more lightly in to sin. and therefore
who that will clenly keep the white robe of vyrgynyte. him byhoueth to keep him
well fro saying and heeryng such words as thereby he might brenne / The catte
brenneth often her skin and so does not the wild catte. Virgynyt^ emonge al
other virtues is compared and lykenyd to the flour de lys. which is a much
fair flour. and much white. whereof our lord says in scripture by the mouth of
Salamon. My friend. that is the holy soul of a vyrgyn / is as the lylye among
the thorns. Thespecyal friend of our lord is the soul of them that keep
virgynyte of heart and of body. For that is a virtue by which the soul geteth
most specially the love and the famyliarite of our lord. whereof saint Johan
theuangelist was a clean virgyn. and was emonge al thapostles most famylyer
with our lord and most pryue. as it appyereth in the gospel. nevertheless he
loved well the other / but he loved saint Johan most for his vyrgynyte. this
flour de lys or lylye that keeps his beauty among the thorns of te^ptacio^s
of the flesshe^ for the flessh that is our body humayn is but as a smoke^ that
has no charge as of him self but as thorns and nettles / that is the evil
menynges. which often pricken the soul. but the flour of virgynyte takes no
head of the thorns. wha^ it is well rooted in the love of god which defends
it fro thorns of te^ptacion. and this flour ouzt to have vj leaves and iij
graynes of gold tofore. The first leef is the hoolnes of thy body / that is to
say that the body be entyer and hool without corrupco^n of lecherye. For if a
vyrgyn were corrupt and al ayenste her will. she should not lose therefore the
merit and the reward of virgynyte. whereof Saint Lucye vyrgyn and martyr said
to the tyraunte. if thou corrupt me against my will. my chastyte shall be
doubled as touching the merit of the crown of glory. The second leef of
vyrgynyte is clennesse of heart. For like as saint Iherome says naught
auaylleth to have vyrgynyte of the body^ that has will for to marye him or
her. he speaks of them that has auowed chastyte. For who that has auowed to
keep vyrgynyte or chastyte. he ought to keep his heart clean and chaste. The
third leef of vyrgynyte^ is humylyte. For vyrgynyte with pride pleases not god
/ And therefore says saint bernard that it is a much fair thing of humylyte
with vyrgynyte. And that soul much pleases to god that in humylyte gives
preysyng of vyrgynyte / and vyrgynyte embelyssheth humylyte / I dare well say
says he that without humylyte. the vyrgynyte of our lady saint marye had
never pleased our lord. The fourth leef of the lylye of vyrgynyte is dread of
god. For they that been very vyrgynes ben woned to be tymerous ferful and
shamefast / and that is no marvel / For they bear a much precious tresour in
a much feeble vessel. Then our blessed lady the vyrgyn marie was always hyd
and had dread when the aungel appyered to her. But the dread of god is the
tresorer which keeps the tresour of virgynyte. which the devil may not take
away for it keeps the yates of the castle. wherein the tresour is enclosed.
The yates of the castle of the heart where the tresour of virgynyte is in. ben
the wits of the body. These yates kepen the dread of god. that they be not
opened to the enemy of hell. by vayn curyosyte of seeing or of heeryng. or of
smellyng. of spekyng. or tastyng / or going in evil company. For curiosyte of
seeing or of heeryng the vanytees of the world ben way and cause of the sin
of lecherye. whereof is said in the scripture that Dyna daughter of Jacob when
she went musyng by curiosyte to see the wymmen of the contre. where anon she
was rauysshed and corrupt of the sone of the lord of the town / and therefore
who will keep vyrgynyte. him byhoueth much to with draw and keep his v wits
bodyly fro al vayn curyosyte. and this ought be done by holy dread / for a
person owes always to dread to anger god. This is the sense of the v vyrgynes
of whom our lord says in the gospel. when he said that the royame of heaven is
like to x vyrgynes / of whom five were wise. and the other five were fools.
He calls here the royame of heaven holy church. which is bynethe in this
world. wherein been always good and evil. foles and wyse^ which ben members of
holy church. by the faith that they have received in baptesme. The five wise
vyrgyns sygnefye them that keep and govern well the five wits of the body of
which we have spoken. The five vyrgyns foles sygnefye them that folysshly keep
them. The v leef is sharpenes of the life of penance. For who will keep
vyrgynyte / he must much chastyse his flesh and subdue it by penance / and
that the body do the will of the soul by fasting. by wakyng in prayers. and
other penau^ces Sharpness of life is like a strong hedge for to keep the
gardyn of the heart. that the evil beestes assaylle it not / that been the fendes
of hell to the end that they may not enter. which entende and study for to
stele and take away the tresour of vyrgynyte / and therefore ought this tresour
to be well enclosed and well kept that it be not lost. For who that leseth it
may never recover it. no more than the lamp that is broken may not be made
hole ageyn / The vj leef of vyrgynyte is perseuerau^ce that is to have ferme
purpoos to keep well that is promised to god. whereof Saint austyn says in the
book of vyrgynyte and adresseth his words to the virgyns saying. Follow ye the
lamb says he. that is Ihesu Cryst^ in keeping stronglye that which ye have
auowed to god. Do ardauntly as much as ye may / that the well of vyrgynyte
perysshe not in you. For ye may not do that thing / by which vyrgynyte may
be recouerd. if it were lost / like as we have shewde by ensaumple of the
lamp / and Saint Bernard says. estudye ye to the virtue of perseueraunce. for
she only wynneth and geteth the crown of glory. The syethe leef aforsayd
enbelyssheth and makes much fair the lylye of vyrgynyte. but it byhoueth to
have withinforth three graynes of gold. which sygnefyen iij manners to love
god. For vyrgynyte without love is like as a lamp without oil. wherefore the
fools vyrgyns by cause they filled not their lamps of this oylle. were shette
out fro the weddyng. and the wise vyrgyns that filled their lamps of this
oil entered in to the weddyng with the spouse The three manners for to love god
which ben sygnefyed by the three graynes of the lylye / saint austyn enseygneth
them when he says thus / Thou shall love god with all thyn entendement
without error / with all thy will without gaynsayeng and with all thy mind
without forgetyng. In such manner is thymage of god parfayte in a man after iij
dignytees that been in the life. That is to wete / entendement. memory. and
will. when these iij things ben well ordained to god^ then ben the three
graynes of gold of the lyly / of the gold of charity which gives bounte.
beauty. and valor of all virtue. For without this gold no virtue is tofore
god neither fair ne precyouse / Otherwise says saint bernard of the manner to
love god and says thus. O thou that art a christian man. learn how thou
ought to love god. learn to love him wisely / swetely and strongely. wisely
that thou be not deceived by nycete. Swetely that thou be not moeued by
prosperyte. Strongely that thou be not ouercomen by aduersyte / In this manner
is fair the flour delys of vyrgynyte. when she is such as is said tofore. and
this is the second reason by which thestate of vyrgynyte ought much to be
preysed for her beauty. The third reason wherefore thestate of virgynyte ought
much to be preysed is for her bounte and for the prouffyt that comes of it.
For virgynyte is a tresour of so great value that it may not be preysed. whereof
the scripture says that no thing is worthy to be compared to a chaste heart /
of the chastyte of virgynyte / for virgynyte above al other estates bears the
most grettest fruit and the most grettest proffyt. They that been in marriage
and keep it well as they ouzt to do have the xxx fold fruit. They that been in
wydowhede have the lx fold fruit. But they that keep virgynyte have the
hundred fold fruit. For like as our lord says in the gospel that the seed
that falls in good land makes fruit xxx fold. lx fold / and an hundred
fold / These iij nombres xxx / lx. and an hundred apperteyne to iij estates
toforesayd / The nombre of xxx / which is of x three times which maken xxx
apperteyneth to thestate of marriage / where ought to be kept the x comandements
of the law in the faith of the holy trynyte. The nombre of lx is more great
and is of xvj times For vj times x maken lx. and apperteyneth to thestate of
wydowhede. For in such estate ought to be kept the x comandements. and with
them ought to be accomplysshed the seven works of mercy of which we have
spoken tofore. But the nombre of an hundred which is most great and most
perfyght. for it represents a figure round. which is most parfyght and
most fair emonge the other fygures. For like as the round figure / the end
retorneth to his beginning and makes it round like a crown. Right so the
nombre of an. C. joins the end to the beginning. For x times x maken an
hundred. which sygnefyeth the crown which the wise vyrgyns hadden. and how
be it that in the state of marriage / and in the state of wydowhede may be won
the crown of glory. and have more merit anenst god than have many virgynes.
For many ben in heaven of them that have been in marriage and in wydowhede which
been more nygh to god and have more merit. than many of the vyrgynes /
Nevertheless the virgynes have a specyal crown above the crown of glory
which is common to al sayntes^ by cause the vyrgyns have a specyal vyctorye of
their bodies. For (...) to follow the lamb. what someuer way that he gooth^
that is Ihesu christ. to whom they be espowses^ they have left their carnal
espowsailles. for to be with him in thespowsaylles perdurable. There shall they
been well arrayed and nobly apparaylled of a specyal parement. so gente / so
fayr^ and so auenaunt. that no tongue may tell. and therefore I will no more say^
but that which the scripture says / that speaks of the fair parementes that
they have more especyal. than they that been of other estates toforesayd / and
yet says the scripture that they sing new songs so melodyous and so fair.
that none other sing. that been not in their estate. That new song that they
sing / sygnefyeth a new Joy and especyal merit and preysyng that they have
by cause that they have well kept their estate of vyrgynyte^ And this is the v
estate of chastyte. and the fyfthe branch of this tree.

The vj branch of the virtue of vyrgynyte capitulo Clij
THe vj estate that ought to keep the virtue of chastyte. is in the clerks
ordered for to serve in holy chyrche^ as been subdekens. dekens. prestes /
prelates / and relygyouse. All the people ben bounden to keep chastyte by many
reasons. First for the order which they have received. which requires to live
holyly. by cause that the holy sacrament of the mass is so hye and so holy.
that al they that receive it be bounden to keep chastyte for they may not marye
after that they have promised to holy church. For they be appropred to serve
god in his church. and at his altar. and treaten and touchen with their
hands the things sayntyfyed as the vessels hallowed the chalyce and corporas /
And that which is gretter wythonte comparyson the body of Ihesu Christ which
the priest sacreth / and to them it byhoueth to give it to other.

Now then owen they to be much clean and live right holyly. for reason of
the hye lord to whom they serue^ that is the saint of al saints and lord of
all lords. which hates all ordure of sin. whereof he him self says. Be ye
holy as I am holy / for such a lord such meyney. for the reason of the place
wherein they serve. This is the church which is dedycate to serve god. It is
founden that emonge the paynyms and the sarasyns. the prestes of their law
that seruen in the temple kepen chastyte. and been divided and deceuerd fro the
other by cause they should not lose their chastyte^ Much more ought to be clean
without comparyson and more chaste the priests of crystyante. that seruen to
god in his temple which is sayntefyed dedycate / and approved to serve god.
yet ought they to be more holy and clean by cause they serve at the table of
god of his cup and of his mete^ The table of god is the altar. The cup is
the chalyce. his bread and wyn is his propre body and his propre blood. Much
owen to be holy all they that such service done to god. whereof saint Poul
says that it byhoueth that a bishop and the other mynystres of holy church
be chaste and without sin / This virtue of chastyte was sygnefyed in the
old law. there where god commanded to them that ought to ete the lamb
without spotte. which sygnefyed the body of our lord Ihesu crist they should be
gyrde on they raynes. The gyrdle of the mynystres of holy church owen to be
gyrde. that is with the virtue of chastyte which restrayneth and quenches the
delytes and the vices of the flesh. wherefore god commanded to Aaron which
was priest and bishop of the law. that he and all his sons should be cladde
with lynnen clothes of chastyte. and gyrde above with whyt gyrdylles of lynnen.
Aaron and the children that serueden in the tabernacle sygnefyen the mynystres
of holy church. which owen to be cladde with lynnen roobes of chastyte.
which is sygnefyed by the whyt lynnen. For like as the lynnen towayl tofore it
be well whyt it must be beten and often wasshen / In like wise byhoueth it the
flesh to be beten and corrected by penance / and often wasshen his heart and
his conscience by very confession and repentance to the end that they might
have the whyt cote of chastyte. but this cote ought to have above the whyt
gyrdle. That is to say that chastyte ought to be straytly kept. and strayned by
abstynence as much as reason may suffer which is the boucle of this gyrdle^
Otherwise may it be said that the lynnen cote sygnefyeth chastyte of heart. The
gyrdle above sygnefyeth chastyte of body. which owes to restrain the desires
and the will of the flesh for to keep the chastyte of the soul. This same
is sygnefyed to us in the aube and in the gyrdle that the mynystres of holy
church use to clothe them when they will say mass. For they owen to be chaste
within their heart and without in the body. Much foul is the spotte of sin.
and specially of lecherye in the mynystres of holy church. For they ought to
be the eyes of holy church as says the scripture. For like as the eyes
aduysen the body and thewen to him the way by which he ought to goo. Right so
in like wise owen the prelates and all the other mynystres of holy church to
show the way of health to other / Then also as the spotte of the sin of
lechery is more foul in them tha^ in other persons. Also as the spotte that
is in the eyes is more foul and grievous than in the other members of the body.
Right so is the spotte of the sin of lecherye more foul and more peryllous
in clerks / in prelates. in relygyous and in all other people of the church
than in other folk / Also all the people of holy church ben or owen to be
myrrour and exaumple there. wherein the lay people ought to look in for to take
good doctrine in good exaumple / but when the myrrour is rusty and foul men
may well see the spotte and thordure that is in the myrrour. But he that in
such a myrrour looks / sees not the spotte that is in him self ne what is in
the myrrour which so is foul and troubled. But when the myrrour is well clear
and clean. then may one well see him self therein and know his spots. Also
when the prelate is of good life and of good fame. than ought one to take
example of good life / Also the people of holy church ought to be pure and
clean of al fylthe of sin. and ought to be much holy. by cause they cleanse
and sayntefye and halowe other. For like as says Saint Gregory. The hand that
is foul and fylthy may not well take away the fylthe fro other And the
scripture says he that is foul may not cleanse another^ That is to understand
as touching his merit. for the sacrament that is made and mynystred by the
hand of an evil mynystre is of no less value to him ne werse. ne he is no
less mighty ne virtuous to halowe them that receive it. than if they should
receive it by the hand of a good mynystre For the evil of the mynystre
appayreth not the sacrament. ne his bounte neither / and also amend it not.
But always the evil of the mynystre may empayre other people by evil example.
and also he may by his bounte edefye them by example of good life. and therefore
they that sayntefye and cleanse other / in that they mynystre the sacraments of
holy church ought to be more holy and more clean than the other. For if they
be evil they shall be more punysshed than the other. This is the syxthe estate
in which ought to be kept the virtue of chastyte.

The seventh estate of the virtue of chastyte capitulo Cliij
THe seventh estate in which ought to be kept the virtue of chastyte of heart
and of body. is the estate of relygyon For they that been in that state have
promised to god and auowed that they shall live chastely. Then they be holden
and bounden by such auowe that they may never marye. after that they ben
professyd. And if they marye after that they be professyd the marriage shall be
none / And therefore ought they to set great pain and dylygence in keeping well
their chastyte. and for their estate. which is the state of holiness and of
perfectyon. For of so much as the state is more holy of so much is the sin
of them more great and more foule^ And also as the spotte is more great and
foul and more apparaunt in a whyt robe than in another cloth. And who falls
fro most hye hurts him most grievously. and for to vaynquysshe their
aduersarye that is the devil. which much payneth him to tempte. and to make
fall in to sin them of relygyon. and more he Ioyeth when he may overcome one
of relygyon / than many of other people / For like as the au^gellys of heaven
have great Joy of the synnar when he repents him and does penance and
confession of his sins. Right so enioyen the deuyls when they may overcome a
good man and make him to fall in to sin. And when he is in great estate and
parfyght so much has the fend more Joy wha^ he may deceive him. like as the
fisshar has more great Joy to take the great fysshes than the small. we read
in the book of the lives of faders that an holy man recounted how he was
bycomen a monk. and said that he had be sone of a paynym sarazyn which was
priest of thydolles. And when he was a child on a time when he entered in to
the temple with his fader. he hid him. and there he saw a great devil that
satte in a chayer and many deuylles about him. and then came one of his
princes and adoured him. Then he that satte in the trone demanded him fro
whens he came. he answered and said that he came fro the earth and that he had
moeued and purchaced many wars and many euylles so that much people were
deed and much blood shed The master devil demanded of him in how long time
he had done this. and he ansuerd in xxx dayes^ and the master said have thou
be so long time out for to do so lyte. Then he commanded anon that he
should be beten and evil treated. After him came another devil which adoured
him as did the first and the master demanded him fro whens he came. and he
answered that he came fro the sea. where he had maad many great tempests by
which many ships were broken. and much people drowned. The master asked of
him in how long time he had done it^ he ansuerd in twenty days / Anon the
maystre commanded that he should be beten as that other was tofore. by cause he
had do no more harm in so long time / After came the third devil of whom
the maistre asked fro whens he came / and he said that he came fro a cite.
where as he had been and meued stryt and debate and had purchaced medlynges that
much people were slain. and also he had slain the husboud of a weddyng / The
maistre devil asked him in how long time he had done it. and he ansuerd in x
days. Then he comau^ded that he also should be beten. At last came another
devil which adoured the maistre devil / the prince of the deuylles demanded of
him fro whens come thou. he ansuerd that he came fro an hermyte. where he had
abyden xl year for to tempte him which was a monk in the sin of lecherye.
and he had so much labored that that nyzt he had ouercomen him and had made
him to fall in the sin of lecherye. Then the maistre devil e^braced and
kyssed him. and set a crown on his heed. and made him to sytte by him. and
said that he had done a great thing and a great prowess. Now said the good
man the monk that he had seen this and herd it. and thought that it was a
great thing to be a monk. and for this cause and vysyon he was bycom christian
and a monk / In these words aforsayd may appyere that the deuylles have great
Joy / when they may make a man of relygyon to fall in to sin. for after
that a man is in relygyon. he is like to him that is entered in to a field of
batayl for to fight against the devil and all his temptacyons / when our Lord
would be tempted of the devil he went in to deserte. For the deserte of
relygyon is a field of temptacyon^ Relygyon is called deserte. For like as
deserte is a place sharp and dry and far fro people. So ought to be the
state of relygyon sharp and of holy and parfyght life which is a strong help
and a strong armure against the fendes of hell. Sharpnes of penance is the
remedy against lecherye. For who that will quench the fire of lecherye in him
self. he ouzt to take awaye^ and withdraw fro him all the flesshly delytes.
eases. and soulaces of this world. For all relygyouse people ought to take away
and cut fro his flesh and fro al his body al delytes and worldly* eases by
fastings / by wakynges. by de^o^te wepynges. by discyplynes and by other
penau^ces. Else the fire of lecherye may not well be quenched / who that will
take a cite or a castle. he ought as much as he may to take away and
wythdrawe fro it all the vytaylles / al metes. and the water for to enfamysshe
them. For after that the castle is enfamyned and all vytaylle is take fro it.
It may not long be holden ne kept against his aduersarye. Right so the castle
of the belly. which is the fortress of the flesh. may not hold against the
spyryte when it is enfamyned by fastynges^ by abstynences and by other
penaunces. Also the estate of relygyon ought to be wythdrawen fro the world
that they that been in such estate ne feel ne retche no thing of worldly
things / For they ought to be deed to the world. and live with god as says
Saint Poule / For like as he that is deed bodyly has lost all his wits
bodyly. as seeyng^ spekyng / tastyng heeryng and smellyng / Right so owen the
relygyouse to be deed as to the world that they feel no thing that
apperteyneth to sin / so that they may verily say the word that saint Poul
thappostle says of him self. The world said he is crucyfyed to me. and I to
the world. Thappostle would say that like as the world held him for foul and
for abhomynable like as one were hanged. Ryzt so had he the world for foul and
for abhomynable. as to him that is hanged or crucyfyed for his trespace / In
like wise does he that is in suck estate does flee the world and hate it.
That is to say the couetyse and shrewdness of the world. that he feel no
thing by love ne by desire. so that his conuersacyon be in heaven. as saint
Poul says of him self / and of them that been in thestate of perfection Our
conuersacyon is in heneu / For if the body is in earth the heart is in heaven by
love and by desire / A good relygyouse person ought to have no propre in
earth. but he ouzt to make his tresour in heaven. like as says our lord in the
gospel / If thou says he wylt be perfyght* goo and selle all that thou have and
give it to the pour. And thou shalt have thy tresour in heaven which never
shall faylle. The tresour of a relygyouse man is very wylful pouerte. For the
very pouerte of the spyryte and of will is the money of which the royalme of
heaven is bought / whereof our lord says in the gospel. Blessed be the pour of
spyryte. for the Royalme of heaven is theyres. Certain who that is pour of
spyryte / that is of the will of god. he secheth not in this world no
dely^es. ne rychesses. ne honors / but put it all in forgetyng. In such wise
ought to do good relygyouse people. that will mount up in to the montaygne of
perfectyon. whereof the aungellys said to Loath when he was goon out of the cite
of Sodome^ Rest ne tarry thou not nyghe the place that thou have left. but
save thy self in the montaygne. For he that is goon out of the conuersacyon of
the world ought not to hold him nyghe the world by his will ne by his desire
/ But ought to wythdrawe him as much as he may. And to entende to his health
without lookyng bacward or behind hym^ That is for to say that he set not
ageyn his heart to the world The wife of Loath against the commandment of the
aungel beheld the cite fro whens she came out which brenned and therefore she
was t^rned in to an image of salt. The wife of Loath sygnefyeth them that after
they have left the world^ and ben entered in to relygyon / return ageyn
bacward by will and by desire / which have their body in the cloystre. but the
heart in the world They be like thymage of salt. which has but the lykenes or
semblaunce of a man^ and is as hard and cold as a stone / Right so ben such
people cold of the love of god and hard with out humor of pity and of
devotion. and they retche nothing but of the habyte of their relygyon / and no
thing of the obseruaunces and works. Thymage that was of salt sygnefyeth in
scripture wit and dyscrescyon / For like as salt gives savor to the (...).
Right so ought every relygyouse person to have wit and dyscrescio^ in his
deeds. and in his words. This image then of salt ought to give wit and
understanding and example to them that been in religyon. and after return to
that which they have left. And therefore says our lord in the gospel to his
dyscyples. Remember you of the wife of loath. That is to say. Behold ye not that
which ye have left for the love of me. lest ye lose the life of grace. like as
the wife of loath lost the life of the body by cause she looked to the place which
she had left. wherefore our lord says in the gospel who that puts his hand
to the ploughe and looks behind him. is not worthy to the kingdom of heaven.
For-lyke as he that ledeth the plough sees always tofore him to lead strayt and
to conduyte right his plough. Right so ought he to do that puts his hand
to the plough of penance or of religyon always he ought to have the eyes of
his heart tofore / That is to say his understanding and his will to that.
which is to sore him. and not behind. That is to the goods perdurable which
ought to be tofore the heart and not to the goods temporal. which ought to be
behind. Thus did Saint Poul which said that he had forgoten that / which was
behind him / That is the world and all the couetyse of the world which he
praised at naught. And went allewaye tofore him. For he had always his
entencyon and his desire to god But many men of relygyon setten the plough
tofore the oxen For many there ben. and that is their ^ommage. that more sechen
the things bodyly and worldly / than the things spyrytual / They put that
before which should be behind / that been the goods temporal tofore the goods
perdurable and spyrytuell Such relygyous persons ben in much great peril of
their dampnacyon. For they have ^ought but the habyte of their relygyon. By the
example of Saint Poul. the good relygyouse persons forgete the world / and
leave it byhynde them. and the goods perdurable they have tofore their eyen^
and goon tofore always fro virtue to v^rtu. till they come to the montayne of
Joy perdurable. where they shall see god clearly / and shall love him
perfyghtly / and shall adoure him perdurably. This is the beneurte or the yefte
of understanding. which ledeth them that kepen cle^nesse of heart and of body.
like as we have showed before. And therefore says our lord in the gospel. that
blessed ben they that been clean of heart. For they shall see god. This blessyng
begins here. for they been purged fro derknesses of error / as to the
understanding. and fro the spots of sin / as to the will. and therefore
they see god by faith enlumyned of clerenes. which comes of the yeft of
understanding. ^y which a man knows his creatour^ and all that apperteyneth
to the health of his soul / without slydyng / with out doubtyng. and without
waueryng in the faith of Ihesu Christ where they be so Joined and fermly
founded. that they may not depart them for death ne for to suffer any tormente
what someuer it be / And therefore been blessed they that be clean of heart in
this mortal life. For they have the eyes of the heart. the understanding and the
will so clear and so clean that they see god and believe him by faith ferme
and certain like as we have said tofore / wherrof our Lord said to saint
Thomas. by cause thou have seen me. thou have byleued me^ But they ben blessed
that have not seen me bodyly. and have byleued me certeynlye. but this blessyng
shall be perfyght in the life perdurable. where he that is clean of heart. which
here sees him by faith. that is always derkly^ There in his glory shall see
him face to face al clearly as says saint poule. That is the blessyng to
aungellys and to saints which see him in his precyouse vysage. to know one
god in three persons / to byholde clearly in that myrrour where al things
shynen. angellys and all the saints loken therein. and merueylen them. and taken
there their glory. and never may they be full for to look therein. For there is
all beauty. all bounte. all swetenes / and fontay^e of life perdurable. and
all that which heart may will and desire / But yet I shall say a little / For
like as says the scripture. The eyes mortal may not behold Ne ere here / Ne
heart of man think. what that god has arrayed and maad ready to his friends that
louen / seruen him and keep his commandments. and that keep them fro sin.
whereof Saint Amelme sayth^ Soul says he lift up thyn entendement there aboue^
and think as much as thou may what well. how great. and how much
delectable is that good which conteyneth in him self the Joy and the delight
of all goods / And not such Joy and such delight as is founden in
creatures. but as much more Joy. as the creator and maker is more great and
more worthy and more excellent. than his creatures. O says he thou faytour
thou man that ghost so folyly for to seche diverse goods. to thy soul and to
thy body. love thou and seche one good. wherein ben all goods. and he shall
suffyse the. For the good that god has granted and given to his friends. that
is him self which is the souerayn good. of whom comen and sourden al other
goods. as stremes that yssuen out of the quycke fontayne. Certeynlye right
blessed shall he be says saint austyn which without vylonye shall see the vysage
dyscouerd and the glory of god. and shall be transformed in to thymage of
glory. where as he shall see god as he is / The which sight is glory and
crown with out end. and all the reward and merit of saints / This shall be
all the good of man^ This says maistre hughe of saint vyctor. The man that made
all and formed. For therefore would god bycome man. which made in him self al
men blessed in body and in soul / by cause that the man saw him with the cyen
of his body in his humany^e. and that the soul saw him in his deyte. so that
he fond swetenes and delight in his creator and maker. within and without.
within in his deyte and without in his humanyte. This shall be the Joy of every
creature his Joy. his dely^e ^ life perdurable of this blessed vysyon / That is
the blessyng that they attend which keep clennesse and chastyte of heart and
of body /

Of the yefte of sapyence Capitulo Cliiij
THe last yefte. the souerayn. and the most hye^ is the yefte of sapyence or
of wysedom. which is a grace that the holy ghoost gives to the heart
contemplatyf. by which he is esprysed of the love of god. that he desires ne
secheth none other thing but to see god. to have him. to delight in him / to
love him / to honor and serve him. and dwell with him / This is the so^me of
perfection. and the end of contemplacion The yefte of understanding of which
we have spoken tofore makes god to be known and the things spyrytuel as by
sight and simple byholdynges. But the yefte of sapyence makes to feel and
know god by taste. then sapye^ce is none other thing but a sanery knowleche.
which is with savor and great delight of heart. for otherwise knows nothe the
wyn that drynketh it in a fair vyrre or glass / if he drink and taste it not
and savor it. Many phylosophres knewen god by scripture and by the creatures.
like as by a myrrour wherein they beheld by reason and by understanding his
might. his beauty. his wit and his bounte. in that which they see the
creatures that he has made so great so fair and so well ordained: Then they
knew him. by simple byholdyng of understanding and natural reason But they
never felt him by taste of right love ne by d^uocyon. Right so ben there many
christian persons. clerks and lay. which well know him by faith and by
scripture. but by cause they have their taste dysordynate by sin. they may
not feel him. no more than the seek person may find taste or savor in good
mete. The yefte of sapyence which the holy ghoost puts in a ^erfyght heart.
purges and cleanses it fro all ordure of sin. and lyfteth up so ^he
spyryte of a man that he Joins him to god by ardaunt desire of love. so that
he is al with god / there he fedeth him. there he nouryssheth him. there he
fatteth him. there he delyteth and rests him. and there he slepeth / There he
forgeteth al his trauaylles. al his flesshly desires and erthely. and him self
/ so that he remembers no thing but god whom he loves above al things.
This is the last degree of the laddre of perfectyon that Jacob saw in his sleep
which touched heaven / by which aungellys mounted and descended. The degrees
of this laddre been the seven yeftes of the holy ghoost. of which we have
spoken tofore^ By these seven degrees mounten the aungellys. These been they
that leden the life of aungellys in earth by purete and clennesse of conscyeyce.
which have the heart in heaven by very desire and holy conuersacyon. when they
prouffyte fro virtue to virtue / till they see god clearly and love him
parfyghtly. But when they be mounted unto the last degree sometime byhoueth it
them to descend by humylyte / for of so much as a good man is more parfyght
of so much is he more humble. and less preyseth him self. Then a good man
and a parfyght ought to be like as a tree which is charged with fruit. For the
more that the tree is charged and laden with fruyt^ the more he enclyneth and
boweth to the earth. In another manner may be vnderstonden that the aungellys
descenden / For the good men that leden the life of angellys in earth by their
holy life when they be mounted in to the souerayn degree of contemplacyon where
the yefte of sapyence ledeth them. so that they be Joined to god. that they
forgete all that which is under god for the great swetenes that the heart
^eleth. which is so rauysshed in god which passes al other delytes. So that
it byhoueth them often to descend fro this swetenes and such rest and fro
such delight that they feel of the comfort of god. which have give them to
souke in such sweet contemplacyon / where they that been parfyght ought to
entende. Another reason there is^ whereof it byhoueth to descend fro the hye
degree of contemplacyon where the spyryte of sapyence has led him. For the
corrupcyon of the flesh of the body of the creature humayn is so great / that
the spyryte may not in this mortal life long abide in so hye estate of
contemplacyon / ne feel that great sweetness. which passes all the great
delytes that may ^e felt in this world / like as they know that have proved
it. whereof the countrepoys of the flesh is so heavy that it draws down the
spyryte. will it or nylle it. And therefore this great swetenes that the heart
contemplatyf feleth by the yefte of sapyence in this mortal life. nys but as a
little taste by which one may assauoure and ^ele how god is sweet and sauoury.
But when he shall come to that great tavern* where ^he tonne is / and shall be
set a broche. that is in the life perdurable. there where god of pees^ of love
/ of Joy. of soulace. and of all swetenes shall be abando^ned to every person
in such wise. that al shall (...) filled. like as dauyd says in his psaulter.
For all the desires of the heart shall be accomplysshed when god shall make
descend upon his friends a floode of pees. like as says the prophet. whereof
they shall so much drink. that they shall be all drunk. Of this dronkesse
speaks Dauyd in his psaulter and says thus / Of the glory of paradys shall
all be dronken says the prophet to god. of the great plant that is in your
house. And ye shall give them drink of your swetenes and of your delyces. For
with you is the fontayne of the life perdurable. which faylleth not. That is
god him self which is the fontayne of life which may not deye. whereof sourdeth
and descends upon all the saints that been and shall be in heaven a flode of
Ioye^ of delight / and of pees so great. that al they that drynken thereof ben al
dronken. That is the pees and ^he blessyng that shall be in the world that is
to come. For which Joy to win and to have. one ought to live sobrely in
this world as says saint Austyn. For none ne drynketh of this river. ne is not
drunk of the plant of Ioye^ but if he keep sobrenes. This is the virtue that
the yefte of sapyence planteth in the heart. against thoultrage of glou^onye /
For sapyence enseygneth sobrenes like as Salamon says. which says thus
Sobrenes is a tree much precyou^ for it keeps the health of the ^oule and of
the body as scripture says. and of the oultrage of glotonnye. of etyng / of
drynkyng comen many maladyes and oftyme the death. For of ouermoche etyng and
drynkyng deyen many folk and often the death takes them sodeynlye. like as one
takes the fysshe with an hoke / that is to say the morsel in the mouth. This
virtue of sobrenes ought one to keep above all things. For the goods that it
does to him that well keeps it. First sobrenes keeps to reason and to
understanding his fredom and fraunchyse. so that it puts and takes away
dronkenesse. For he that is dronken is so surprysed of wyn. that he leseth
reason and understanding. and is like as he were drowned in ale or wine. And
when he weneth to drink the wine. the wine drynketh him. The second good that
sobrenes does. is that it delyuerth a man fro over foul seruytude / that is
fro the seruytude of the bely^ For the glotons and they that been oultragous of
wine and metes maken of their belly their god as says saint poul. Certainly he
puts him self in great fylthe. and in foul seruytude. that serves so foul
a lord as is his belly. out of which may no thing issue but fylthe and
s^ynkyng ordure. But sobrenes keeps a man in his seygnorye. For the spyryte
ought to have seynorye upon the body / And the body ought to serve the soul /
like as the chambriere serves her maystresse. and sobrete keeps this order.
The third good that sobrenes does / is that he keep well the yate of the castle
against the host of the devil. that is the mouth which is maystre yate of the
castle of the heart / which the devil assaylleth and makes war to as much
as he may / But sobrenes deffendeth the yate and thentree^ that is the mouth.
And when the yate of the mouth is open. thoost of sins entren lightly. And
for naught fyghteth he against other sins that reteyneth not his tongue / who
has this virtue of sobrenes he has the lordshyp of his body. like as a man
maystryeth the horse by the bridle. Sobrenes has the first bataylle in thoost
of the virtues and keeps and deffendeth the other virtues. wherewyth the devil
tempted first Adam our first fader and Eve our first mother. that was toward the
mouth that they should ete of the fruit which god had deffended. and the devil
overcame them when they consentyd to the temptacyon. For to keep sobrenes
nature enseygneth us and the holy scripture / Nature techeth us. For emonge
beestes a man has the least mouth after his body. Also a man has his members
double / as two eyes. two eeres / but he has but one mouth. and therefore
nature techeth us that one ought to ete and drink lytyl and sobrely. For
nature is sustained with little mete. and by ouermoche mete is often beten down.
The holy scripture enseyneth sobrenes in many manners by many examples. like as
they may see that connen understand scripture / and byholden the lives of
saints. Also every creature techeth to us sobrenes^ For in all nature god
has set a right mesure. which always holds the moyen between ouermoche
and over little. after that which reason enlumyneth and enseygneth by the grace
of god / For in these temporal goodes^ that which is ouermoche to one^ is little
to another. That which should be oultrage to a pour man / should be little
oftymes to a rich man / but sobrenes and attemperaunce setten oueral mesure.
As well in spirituel goods as in fastings in wakynges and in other works of
virtues which been done and made for the love of god and for the health of the
soul as much as reason will / The virtue of attemperaunce is of sobrenes / This
virtue keeps mesure resonabl^* not only in etyng and drynkyng but in all
virtues. like as says Saint Bernard. For this virtue sets al thoughts and
all the menynges of the heart / and all the wits of the body under the
lordshyp of right reason. as says Tullius the wise man / so that reason
enlumyned by the yefte of sapyence. holds in pees the lordshyp of the heart
and of the body. And this is the end and thentencyon of al virtues / that the
heart and the body be well ordained to god^ so that god only be lord and
souerayn in such maner^ that al be in his obedyence. And this makes sobre the
love of god which puts him with all the heart to the will of god. whereof
Saint Austyn says. that the virtue of attemperaunce and of sobrenes is a love
which keeps him in entyernesse without corrupcyon. and wythdraweth us fro the
love of the world. which troubles the heart and puts it to disease / and
takes fro him right knowleche of god and of him self. like as a person sees
not clearly in water troubled. But the love of god which is pure and clean.
and is departed fro al erthely love and fro carnal affection sets the heart
in pees. For it sets it in his propre place. That is in god. there he
rests / there he is in pees. Ne he has no pees ne Joy ne rest but in god
/ whereof our lord says in the gospel / ye shall be oppressyd in this world.
but in me ye shall find pees. And Saint austyn said to god. Lord mine heart may
not be in pees unto the time it rest in the / such love comes not of an
erthely heart. ne of the maryce of this world. But it descends fro that hye
roche upon which is set and founded the great cite of heaven and of holy
church. That is Ihesu christ. which al is set and founded fermely by true
faith that been the holy hertes of good men. Fro this hye roche descends that
fontayne of love in to the heart that is well purged and taken away fro the love
of the world / This well is so clear that he knows him self and his maker.
like as one sees him self in a fontayn well clear and clean. upon this fo^tayne
he rests and the heart fast by. after the trauayl of good works. So as we
read of our lord Ihesu christ. that when he had so much goon that he was weary.
he satte down and rested him upon the well This is the fontayne upon which a
good heart that will save him self-resteth him in the love of god. This fontayne
is so sweet that he that drynketh thereof forgeteth al other swetenes and al
other savor. and therefore it is so sweet and good to drink. for of so much
as the fontayne feleth better the erthe^ so much is it more holsom and better
to drink. This is the fontayne of wit and of savor / For he that drynketh
thereof. he knows. feleth and sauoureth the great swetenes that is in god. and
that is the souerayn wit of man. to know well his maker / and to love him.
dread him. serve and honor him with al his heart. For without this
phylosophye. all other wit nys but folly. Such wit sets the holy
ghoost in the heart / when he gives the yefte of sapyence. which fedeth and
nourissheth the heart with spyrytuel Joy / and makes it drunk with his holy
love. that is the wit which the holy ghoost sets in the heart that is well
purged and clensyd fro all ordures of sin like as tofore is said. This
spirytuel wit that comes of the parfyght love of god makes the heart sobre
and attempred in all things by mesure. so that the heart that is in such
estate is in pees like as it may be in this mortal life. For in this world none
may live without tournoyes and bataylle of temptacyon. which god sends for
to preue his knights / and by cause they can use the arms of virtue / For
otherwise they might not be good knights. if they were not proved how they can
resyste to temptacions. And men be woned to make tournoyes in time of pees /
but when a good knyzt has ouercomen the tournoye. he retorneth home to his
house. and there he rests him at his ease. Right so does the good heart when he
has well foughten and ouercomen the tournoye of te^ptacio^s and well strongely
resisted them. Then he comes ageyn to him self and rests in god. which
comfort him after his trauayll which he has resysted against the sins. so
that he forgeteth there al his trauaylle. and thinks on no thing but on god
in whom he syndeth all that he desires / This is the fruit that the tree of
sobrenes bears which comes of the yefte of sapyence. like as I have showed
tofore. Sobrenes nys noue other thing. but to keep right mesure in all things.
and in vij manners ought a person to keep mesure. which ben like to seven
degrees by which grows and prouffyteth the tree of sobrenes.

Of the first degree of sobrenes and of mesure capitulo Clv
THe first degree of sobrenes is that a man ought to set mesure in his
understanding / Specially in the points of the artycles of the faith. he
passes mesure which will seche reason natural. in that which is above
reason. and above the understanding of a man / as done the heretykes and
myscreau^tes which will mesure their feyth after their understanding but they
ought to mesure their understanding and reason. unto the mesure of the faith as
done good christian men. Therefore says saint poul. that a man should not be wise
more than faith bears. but by sobrenes after the mesure of the faith that god
has given to us. and salamon says to his sone. fair sone says he put in thy
wit mesure. that is to say be thou not of thyn owen propre wit / so fyxed
in thy presumpcion. but that thou bow and enclyne the for to believe good
counceyl. and thou leave thyn own wit for to obey to him that is more wise
than thou art. and in especyal in the artycles of the faith a man ought to leave
his own wit and his understanding to bow and enclyne. and also put him self
in seruage of the faith. as says saint poul. and not for to enserche ne
inquire naturell reason there where as is none. as don the melancolyous men
which ben like to him that secheth muskles emonge frosshes. or he that secheth
here in the egg. or under the hyde.

The second degree of sobrenes and of mesure capitulo Clvj
THe second degree of sobrenes and of mesure / is that one put mesure in
thappetyte. and in the desire of his will so that he late not the rain of the
bridle ouermoche at large that he run not after the desire of his flesh. ne
to the couetyse of the world. whereof the wise man says in the scripture Ne
ensyewe not says he thy couetyses ne the desires of thy body. ne of thy
flesh / And beware and keep the that thou accomplysshe not thy will / For if
thou do to thyn heart his desires / thou shall make Joy to the fendes of
hell. like as he that does to his aduersarye against whom he must fight when
he yeldeth him vaynquysshed to him. he yeldeth him ouercomen of the devil that
consents to evil desires. And therefore says saint Petre thappostle. I
conjure you as estraungers and pylgryms. that ye make abstyne^ce of flesshly
desires anh keep you well / For they make their bataylle and war against the
soul. He that is a pilgrim and a stranger is out of his land and contre.
And is in the contre where as there be many theuys and robbeurs that espyen the
pylgryms and lain in a wait in the ways / wherefore he ought to keep him well
that he fall not in their hondes^ and think how he may goo surely. All the
good men in this world ben strangers and pylgryms. They be strangers. for
they ben out of their contreye. that is heuen^ which is the heritage to good
men / They be pylgryms for they think not but to perform their Iourneyes.
till they come to their heritage. That is the cite of heaven. which the good
pylgryms sechen as says saint poul^ which have not. ne entende not / ne will
not have any heritage in this world. Such pylgryms as will goo surely. see that
they put them self in good company and in sure conduyt. The good company
which ledeth the right way and conduyteth surely is faith and love. Faith
shows the way to pylgryms^ And love be^eth him so that the way greueth him
not or litel. who that has such company has no care ne retcheth of theuys
which awayten the wayes^ They ben the deuylles which taken and robben all
them that goon not in such company. Tho ben they that will here done the will
of their body / and accomplysshe their desires / and bryngen them self in the
net of the deuylles of hell / Faith and the love of god wythdraweth the heart
fro evil thoughts and fro evil desires that they consent not thereto. like as
one holds the hawke by the gesses. to the end that he flee not at his will /
And if he be not retained by the gesses of faith and love. he flees
perylously. so that he perysshe and falls often in the net of the byrdar of
hell / That is the devil which ne secheth ne entendeth but for to take good
men. Therefore the good men and wise ought to restrain their will and their
evil desires by sobrenes and attemperau^ce^ whereof the wise Seneke says. if
thou wylt get the virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce / thou must put fro
the and take away thy desires. and set a bridle against thy couetyses. For
like as a man holds an horse by the bridle. that he goo not at his will /
Right so ought one to reteyne his heart. his desires. and his will. by the
bridle of sobrenes and of attemperaunce^ that he abandonne him not ne give him
self all over to the vanyte and to the couetyse of the world.

The third degree of sobrenes and of the virtue of attemperaunce capitulo Clvij
THe third degree of the virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce is to set and
keep mesure in words / whereof Salamon says that the wyle and well attempryd
mesureth his words. And Saint Iherome says that by the points of words is
the life preuyd. That is to say. after the words may one know the wit and
^he folly of a man. like as an hog or a swyn is known by the tongue / if he
be hool or mezel. And therefore says the wise man in the scripture. That the
words of a wise man be peysed in a balaunce. that is to say that a wise man
ought to peyse his words in the balaunce of reason and of dyscrescion. that he
be not reprehended There ben sum people that may not be stylle ne keep them
fro spekyng. be it true or be it lesyng. which ben like to a water mylle
without skluys that always tourneth after the course of the water. For they have
as many words as water at mylle^ But the wise men set the skluys of
dyscrecyon for to reteyne the water / fro folisshe words that they pass not
the mylle of the tongue. And therefore says the wise man in the scripture.
Reteyne thy words in the skluys of dyscrescyon^ For like as says Salamon. who
suffers the water to have his course at will. it is often cause of plee. and of
stryf and of many euylles that comen of a shrewd tongue. like as I have said
tofore in the traytye of vices / where as I have spoken of the sin of the
tongue. Therefore says the wise man in scrypture^ Put says he thy words in the
balaunce. and a good brydel and good kepar to thy mouth. And take heed that
thou fall not by the tongue tofore thyn enemies which lain in awayte for
tespye the / who that peyseth not his words in the balaunce of dyscrescyon /
and reteyneth not his tongue by the bridle of reason / which owes to
wythdrawe his tongue fro folysshe words. he falls lightly in to the hands
of his enemies. They been the deuylles of hell which every day and night
awayten and espyen us. when thenemyes which warren the castle find the yate
open. they entren lightly. Right so the deuylles which warren the castle of the
heart / wha^ they find the yate open that is the mouth. they take lightly the
castle. And therefore says dauyd in the psaulter. I have set good guard to my
mouth against mine enemy. that is against the devil / The gar^e of my mouth is
reason and dyscrescyon. which examyne the words tofore that they issue out of
the mouth. That is the balaunce of the wise word as I have said tofore. Now
ought the word to be peysed tofore that it be spoken. And it ought to be
known that truth holds the word right. Truth accords the entencyon of
the heart. and the word of the mouth to gydre. so that the mouth say nothing
but truth. like as it is in the heart. This brau^che ought not to hang on the
right side ne on the lift. For neither for love pryue. ne for prouffyt
temporal. ne for hate of other. ought not to be left to say the truth.
there as it ought to be said and need is. Ne lesyng ne falsenesse ought not to
be said for no person.

Of the iiij degree of sobrenes and of mesure capitulo Clviij
Like as a person ought to keep mesure in spekyng / Right so ought be to keep
mesure in heeryng and herkenyng / For as much may one sin in evil heryng /
as in evil spekyng. Then he that gladly hereth to speak evil of another. is
parto^ner and fellow of the sin of him that says it. For none ought to say
gladly evil of another. specially to a great man / if he wene that it pleseth
to him that hereth it. whereof an holy man says. that there should be none
myssayer ne evil spekar. if none would here him. These great and hye lords
ought well to keep them and take heed what they here and what they believe. for
they find but few that tell them truth / And flateryes and lesynges ben
great chepe in their courts / The grettest derthe that is about these great
lords is of veryte and of truth. and therefore been they often deceived / For
they here gladly and byleuen lightly that which pleases them / Seneke says
that there lacks no thing to great lords but true spekars. and sayers of
truth / For of liars they have great plente^ A man ought to have his eres
open. for to here gladly the good words. which auayllen and prouffyten to the
health of the soul. And a man ouzt to have his eres closed and stopped to
lewd and folisshe words which may noye and grieve. and may not help. whereof
the wise man says in the scripture. Stop thyn eres with thorns. and herkene
not the evil tongue. The evil tongue is the tongue of the serpent of hell.
which the evil sayers bear. and enuenymeth him that hereth them / Against
such tongues one ouzt to stop his eres with thorns of the dread of our
lord. or of the thorns. of which our lord was crowned in remembrance of his
passyon^ they should not gladly here the evil sayers. ne the flaterers. ne lewd
words ne dyshonest / In another manner may this word be vnderstonden. Stop
thyn eres with thorns. The thorns that pricken. sygnefyen hard words / by
which one ought to repreue the evil sayers. and show to them that they will not
gladly here them. There is a serpent which is called in latin as^^s which is
of such nature that he stops one of his eres with the earth. And that other
ere he stops with his (...) to the end that he here not thenchauntour. This
serpent enseygneth to us a great wysedom. that we should not here thenchauntour.
That is the flaterer / the liar / and evil sayers which enchaunte often the
rich men. who that would stop one of his eerys with earth / and that other
with his taylle. he should not retche to be enchaunted of the devil. ne of evil
tongues. He stops one of his eeres with earth* that thinks that he is of
the earth. and to the earth shall return. And thus a man remembers his
Infyrmyte and his vylete wherefore he ought to humble him self and no thing
preyse That other ere he ought to stop with his taylle for remembrance of
death which he ought much to fere and dread. who that thus could and would
stop his eres. he would not gladly here ne remember. ne say. ne herkene
words that should dysplease god. Thus shall he be well mesured in heryng in this
fourth degree of sobrenes and of attemperaunce.

The v degree of sobrenes and of mesure Capitulo Clix
THe fyffhe degree of the virtue of sobrenes. is to keep mesure in habyte in
vestymentes^ and in precyouse roobes where a man or woman passes often mesure.
and does great oultrage. and by cause that the making of them is over
curyouse^ or over proud or over great and excessyf of dyspences it is great
sin oftymes and causes many other to do sin and in such things one ought
to keep mesure. For if over precyons and over curyous array were not sin. our
lord would not have spoken so hardly in the gospel. ayenste the evil rich man
which clad him so proudly with soft byse and precious purpre. And certeynly he
is much a fool^ and a child of wit. that of a gown. robe. or what someuer
precious clothyng it be / that is proud thereof / for there is none of what so
hye estate he be / but that he is cladde and arrayed of deed beestes and for to
consydere well. it is all but vanytee and fylthe. and al bycometh ordure.
Certeynly he or she should well be holden for a fool that would be proud to bear
the habyte or the vesture which should not be but as a sign. and a memoryal of
the shame of his fader. and of his sin / This is the usage of clothes. which
was never found but for the sin of Adam our first fader. and of Eve our
first mother. for to cover their confusyon and ours. wha^ we see a biere of a
deed corpse. which is couerd and apparaylled above / It is a sign that there
is within a deed body. Right so it happeth oftymes that under these fair
robes. the soul is deed by sin. Specially in them that gloryfye them and ben
proud. If the pecock be proud of his taylle. or the cock of his crest^ / it
is no meruaylle. for nature has given it to them / and they do after their
nature / But a man or a wyman that has wit and reason. which knows well
that nature has not given to him such a robe or gown he ought not to be
proud of the arayement of his body. which is not but of deed beestes^ or of
that which comes fro the earth. ne also of the queyntys^ or parements that be
in his heed. Therefore says the wise man in the scripture / Ne glorefye the not
in fair roobes. And Saint Poul says that the wymmen ought to array them with
sobrenes and mesure. That is to say by mesure without oultrage. after that
thestate of the person requires. certeynly it is not with out oultrage when
a person has for his body so many gowns and roobes that many pour men
might be sustained of the surplus and of it which is ouermoche. yet if they
were given at last for gods love. it should be somewhat / but they be given
to rybauldes which is so great sin. Therefore ought to be kept in such
things mesure and good ordenaunce. after that / that the state of the person
requires. as I have said tofore.

The vj degree of the virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce capitulo Clx
THe syxthe degree of sobrenes and of attemperau^ce. is that eueryche keep
mesure in good manner / whereof Seneke says. if thou art sobre and attemperate^
take good head that the moeuynges of thyn heart and of thy body be not foul ne
dysauenaunte / For of the dysordynaunce of the heart comes the dysordynaunce of
the body / Sum be so chyldysshe and of so nyce manner. that they make them
self be holden for a fool. It apperteyneth to a man of value which is in great
and hye estate. that he be well ordained and well amesured in all his deeds and al
his sayenges. and of fair and good countenance to fore al people. so that none
take evil example of him / and that they be not holden for a fool^ For as a
philosopher says. A child of age / and a child of wit and of manners ben
all one. and the scripture says that a child of an hundred year shall be
cursyd. That is to say that he that is of great age. and lives as a child
shall be cursyd. whereof saint Poule says of him self when I was a child I did
as a child. but when I came to the age of a par^yght man I left my
chyldehode. For who that holds a man of age for a child. he holds him for
a fool. And therefore says saint poul. Be not a child of wit But in malyee
be little as a child. which has no malice / Now is it then a fair thing /
honest. prouffytable and honorable and specially to great men of hye estate
to keep mesure reasonable. in countenance and in all his governance. and that
he be well ordained ouerall tofore god and tofore the pople. And this is the vj
degree of this tree.

The seventh degree of the virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce Capitulo Clxj
THe vij degree of the virtue of attemperaunce and of sobrenes is to keep mesure
of ouermoche drynkyng and etyng. for thoultrage of etyng and drynkyng does
much harm to the body and to the soul. like as I have said tofore. Therefore
says our lord in the gospel. take good head that your hertes be not grieved ne
charged with glotonnye ne drunkenness. That is to say that ye do no oultrage
of etyng and drynkyng. Sobrenes keeps mesure in etyng and drynkyng that he do
none oultrage. Of thoultrages that a person does in etyng and drynkyng / I
have spoken tofore where as is treated of vices. there as I spoke of the sin
of glotonnye. to which this virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce whereof I
have here spoken is contrary specially. whereof I will now no more say. Now have
thou herd whereby this tree of sobrenes and attemperaunce g^oweth and
proussyteth. And if thou wylt know the branches of this tree. byholde the
other virtues which be contained in th^s book* and thou shalt find oueral
this virtue / For as I have said tofore this virtue is such that it sets
mesure in all things. The virtues of which I have spoken tofore been
branches of this virtue. for it shows it self in all the other. wherefore I
will set none other branches but the virtues toforesayd. This tree bears
much fair fruit. That is pees of the heart like as I have tofore shewed^ For
he that has this virtue. he has his heart dysseuered fro the love of the world.
and is Joined to god by charity / that is the dear love of god which puts
al other things in oblyuyon. which be not ordained to god And in such manner
the heart rests in god / where he has all his comfort and his Joy. that he
thinks on none other delyte^ Such comfort and delight sets the holy ghoost
in the heart that is parfyte in the virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce.
which comes of the yefte of sapyence. like as I have said tofore. Certeynly
who that my^t have such pees of the heart. and feel that he rested in god /
which is the end and the accomplysshement and the su^me of all good desires he
should be well blessed in this world and in that other. For then should he win
that blessyng that god promyseth in the gospel to them that keep this pees
entyerly without brekynge when he says blessed be the peasyble. For they shall
be called the sons of god. They be peasyble says saint austyn that ordeyne
and setten all the moeuynges of the heart. under the seignor^ of right reason of
the spyryte. they be called by right the sons of god / for they bear the
semblaunce of their fader. which is god of pees and of love so says saint
poul. Then pees and love of god is the thing that mooost pleseth god. and
makes a man reasonable and resemble to god. and the contrary to the devil
which is enemy of god / Also they be called the sons of god For they follow
their fad^r more nyghe than the other. For pees and love follow them more nyghe
than any other virtue Also they say their hours to their fader Ihesu Christ. For
god came not in to this world but for to make pees between god and man / between
man and aungel. between man and him self. for when he was borne the aungellis
^ongen for the pees that god had brought in to the earth / Glia in excelsis
etc^ and therefore that the peasyble people seche no thing. and purchacen but
pees as much as they may. toward god. toward their neighbor and toward them
self / they be called specially the sons of god. for they do the works of
their fader. Therefore then by cause they be the sons of god. ben they
blessed in this world by specyal grace. but this blessyng shall be blessed when
they shall be in peasyble possessyon of heritage of god their fader. that is of
the royame of heaven where they shall be in sure pees and in parsyght pees /
where al their desires shullen be accomplysshed. There shall not mow be evil ne
sorrow ne aduersyte ne defaulte. But habundaunce of all goodes^ and plente of
Joy and glory without end* That shall be pees honorable pees delectable /
pees perdurable and pees which surmounteth all wit as says Saint Poule.
And sithe this pees passes all wit and sense it passes all words. For
heart may not think. ne tongue deuyse. ne ere here the pees and the glory that
god keeps to his friends. and therefore I can not say that thing that may be
suffysau^t to the lawde and preysyng thereof. whereof now I will say no more. But
here I shall fynysshe and make an end of my matere to the praysyng and lawde of
our lord. to whom be given al honor. which bring us in to his company /
there / where as is life perdurable Amen.

THis book was compyled and made at request of king Phelyp of France in the
year of thyncarnacyon of our lord / M.CC^lxxix. and translated or reduced out
of frensshe in to english by me wyllyam Caxton. at reques^e of a worshipful
merchant and mercer of london. which Instauntly required me to reduce it for
the well of all them that shall read or here it. as for a specyal book to know
al vices and branches of them. and also al virtues by which well vnderstonden
and seen may dyrecte a person to everlasting bliss. which book is called in
frensshe. le liver Royal^ that is to say the ryal book. or a book for a king.
For the holy scripture calls every man a king. which wisely and parfytly can
govern and dyrecte him self after virtue. and this book shows and enseygneth
it so subtylly. so shortly^ so perceyuyngly and so parfyghtly. that for the
short comprehencion of the noble clergy and of the right great substance.
which is comprysed therein. It may and ought to be called well by right and
quycke reason above al other books in frensshe or in english. the book ryal
or the book for a king. and also by cause that it was made and ordained at
request of that right noble king Phelyp le bele king of France. ought it to
be called Ryall / as tofore is said. which translacion or reducyng out of
frensshe in t^ english was achyeued. fynysshed and accomplysshed the (...) of
Septembre in the year of thyncarnacyon of our lord. ^CCCC.lxxxiiij / And in the
second year of the Regne of King Rychard the third /


