THE QVEENES WELLES.

THAT IS, A Treatise of the nature and virtues of Tunbridge Water.

TOGETHER, With an enumeration of the chiefest diseases, which it is good for,
and against which it may be used, and the manner and order of taking it.

BY LODVVICK ROVVZEE, Dr. of Physic, practicing at Ashford in Kent.

LONDON, Imprinted by John Dawson. 1632.

Recensui hunc librum, cui titulus est, [The Queens Wells, or a Treatise of
the nature and virtues of Tunbridge Water] Qui quidem liber continet triginta
et tria folia, in quibus nihil reperio, quod non cum utilitate publica
imprimatur, modo intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Ex aedibus Fulhamiensibus, Iun. 3. 1632. Guilielmus Bray Episcopo Londinensi
Capellanus Domesticus.

AS diverse medicinable waters are daily found out in many places, so is it a
very profitable labor to make true observation of their effects, and best
manner of using them, specially by men of learning and judicious understanding,
and such as have been accustomed to the frequent use of them, both in
themselves and others, whereby they may make their observations more true and
certain. Such an one we take this Author to be, concerning the Waters near
Tunbridge, whole pains taken herein we doubt not, but will be very useful to
all such as shall have occasion to make trial of them.

John Argent. President of the College of Physicians at London.
Ottuell Meverell. Fellows of the said College. Richard Spicer. Fellows of
the said College.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD Lord Viscount Conway and Kilulta, and one of
his MAJESTY'S most Honorable privy Counsel of his Kingdom of IRELAND.
MY LORD,
INgratitude is the foulest vice in the world, and as the old saying is,
Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris. I may have incurred the imputation of it
these six and twenty years (for so long it is since I harbored under your
Noble deceased Fathers roof) for not expressing my thankfulness for the
courteous usage I found at his hands, both here in England, and at the Briele
in Holland. What want of opportunity hindered me to express to him now dead,
opportunity now offering it self, I will strive to do it unto your Lordship
his living Image. But a small expression it is, God knows, yet all I may at
this time, and though it be very mean, yet do I think that your Lop: will
receive these two fountains of water as courteously at my hands, as Artaxerxes
did the two handfulls of Persian water, which Sinaetas offered him. It is the
nature of Noble and Generous Spirits not to have so much regard to the worth of
the things offered them, as to the affection wherewith they are offered. I have
known your Lop: a teneris vnguiculis, and always observed, even in your
tenderest years, a most Noble disposition, and withal both at the Briele and
at Leyden a natural inclination to follow Minerva as well as Mars. This,
together with the courteous affability it ever pleased you to use me withal,
makes me now believe, that your Lordship will give favorable acceptance to
this small labor of mine, for Acceptissima semper
Munera sunt, Author quae preciosa facit.


Receive it then, My Lord, as an earnest of what would be done, if ability
concurred with desire, by

Your Lordships most humble servant, L. ROVVZEE.

A TREATISE CONCERNING THE Nature and virtues of Tunbridge Water in KENT.
CHAPTER I. Of Water in general.
ALbeit my maine scope in this following discourse, be concerning Tunbridg
water, yet will it not be altogether fruitless, or unpleasant, I hope, to the
Reader, if I say something, as it were by way of Preface, touching water in
general. Water is a substance so absolutely necessary, that no living creature
can subsist without the benefit of it, nor no tree bring forth its leaves and
fruit, nor any plant its seed, if they be deprived of that vivificall
moisture, which makes them all to grow and prosper. That this is true, you may
observe it in Summer, for if Rain be wanting but a few weeks, how hinderly be
all things? How do all plants wither in that season, when they should chiefly
flourish? For this cause perhaps it was, that Hesiodus thought water to be the
most ancient of all the elements. Of this opinion also was Thales Milesius one
of the seven wise Grecians, who made water the sole principle of all things.
Empedocles likewise jumping with them, said that all things were made of water;
and Hippon in Lib. 1. c 2. de anima.
Aristotle terms the soul water. Hippocrates goes not so far, but yet he
calls water and fire the two principles of life. True it is, that by water
Hippon does understand our seed, and Hippocrates our radical moisture. The
Latins upon the Etymology of the word Aqua, water, do derive it from a et
qua, quasi a qua vivimus, vel a qua omnia fiunt, by which we live, or out of
which all things are made. Others will have it quasi aequa, because there is
nothing more equal and smooth then water, when it is not tossed with the
wind. But Exercit. 745.
Julius Caesar Scaliger disliketh these Etymologies, and will derive aqua from
the obsolete Greek word (...), which anciently did signify water. This
Element seems to challenge a kind of rule and dominion over the rest, for it
easily transmuteth air into it self, extinguisheth fire, and devoureth earth.
And to go no higher, then our grandfathers memory, nor farther then our
neighbors, the Ocean Sea swallowed up above one hundred thousand Acres of
ground at one clap in Holland. Nay it aspireth even unto the heavens, and which
is strange, it does not only get up thither in it self alone, but carries
with it whole sholes of fishes, heaps of stones, and diverse other heavy
substances, which afterward fall down with it. Most creatures live without
fire, without water none; and with water only, without any other sustenance, a
Cael. Rhod. Lib. 13. c. 23
Spanish maiden is reported to have lived a long time; and Albertus writes of
a Melancholy man, who by the space of seven weeks lived with water only, one
draught of which he took but every other day. The d.
Lord Verulam also has produced his opinion of late, and holds that Trees
and Plants live and are nourished merely by water, and that the earth is as it
were, but a Stabilimentum unto them, to keep them steadie, and from being
beaten down by the wind. He proves it by Rose bushes, which being put into
water, without any earth, and kept upright in the same, not only brought forth
leaves, but fair Roses also, And the Psalm. 1.
royal Prophet says, that a tree planted by the rivers of water, brings
forth his fruit in due season. Much more might be said concerning water, but
because I intend to be brief, let this suffice.

CHAPTER II. Of the differences of water.
IN the Creation God said, Genesis 1.4, 5.
let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the
waters from the waters. And GOD made the firmament, and divided the waters,
which were under the firmament, from the waters, which were above the
firmament. Psalm. 29.10.
And David says, that the Lord sits upon the flood, that is upon the Orb
of the waters; and where he exciteth the creatures to laud the Lord, he
speaks thus, Psalm. 148. v. 4
Praise him ye heavens of heavens, and the waters that be above the heavens.
Those waters are likened in another place to a Ezech. 1.24.
terrible crystal, and said to be, as it were, Exodus 24.10.
a paved work of Saphir stone. Rabbi Levi Ben Iarehij in Genesis c. 1.
And some go so far, as to define the place and seat of those waters, and
say, that they are as much above the primum mobile, as the primum mobile is
above the elementary waters, but whether they ever were there to take the just
distance, I do not know. That there should be water above the firmament, many
men think it strange, and yet the deluge, besides the express word of God,
proved it to be true. For if all the water of all the Seas, Lakes, Ponds,
Rivers, and Fountains in the world, had been drawn up into the heavens, in
like manner, as we do in distillations, yet would not their quantity have
increased, but there would have returned back again, by rain, no more, then
was ascended up, nor so much neither perhaps, because though you be never so
careful in your distillations, and use Glass vessels never so well luted, yet
will you still receive some loss; and so the flood had not gone fifteen
cubits above the highest mountains. But why this should be stranger, then all
the rest of the wonderful works of God, there is no reason. The massy and
heavy Globe of the earth and water stands, as it were, in aequilibrio in the
center of the world, suspended by the omnipotency of God. Nay all his works
are universally so admirable, that there is no less wonder in the smalest
Gnat, then in the biggest Elephant, in the least weed, that creeps upon the
ground, then in the tallest Cedar. But of those waters, which are above the
firmament, and of those, which were gathered together under the firmament,
namely the Seas, we speak here but by the way, though concerning the Seas
diverse curious and pleasant questions might be handled, as touching the
saltness of it, the ebbing and flowing of the same, why it can endure no
impure things, and the like. These things I say, might bring some delight to
the Reader, but they are beyond our scope, and therefore I will only speak
briefly of those waters, which are potable, and in common use amongst us,
either for diet or Physic.

They are commonly divided into Fountaine-water, River-water, Well-water,
raine-water and pond-water. The pre-eminence thereof is commonly given to
Spring Water, but in general that water is accounted best and wholesomest for
diet, which is pure, and without any taste, but such as water should have. For
most water retains some savor of the ground through which it runs, and
albeit to those, who do not use to drink water, it be imperceptible, yet
diverse of those, who drink nothing but water, will as easily perceive a
difference betwixt water and water, as we do betwixt beer and beer, or wine
and wine. The best water also is lightest, but that lightness is not to be
considered by weight (for snow-water is most light, and yet unwholesome) but by
the thinness of the parts thereof, and by the speedy heating and cooling of
the same, as Hippocrates well observes. Let this suffice to have been briefly
touched concerning the differences of waters in general, and let us now say
something with like brevitie concerning the original of Springs and Rivers.

CHAPTER III. Of the original of Springs and Rivers.
IT is a common received opinion, derived from Aristotle, that the generation
of water proceeds from air condensated into the same, in the bowels of the
earth, and distilling, as water does with us from a Limbicke. But it is hard to
imagine how the nature of air should be so speedily corrupted, and turned
into water, and in that quantity too, that should maintain the continual
course of so many Springs, and so great a number of Rivers as are in the world,
diverse of which are of such vastness, and of so swift a course, that a man
might justly think, that the whole element of air, which in its own nature
is but very thin, should scarcely suffice to maintain the course of that
abundance of water one only day. And as for the reason they allege, that air
is retained within the concavities and porosities of the earth, ad vitandum
vacuum, which nature does abhor, and afterward is converted into water, it
is but a very weak one; For those concavities are still full of air, as well
elsewhere, as where Springs and Rivers do flow. But if the transmutation of
air into water, were the only cause of the flowing of all Springs and Rivers,
surely their streams must needs be but narrow, and their course slow, and of
small continuance. Besides, if this were true, how could the Sea, think you,
contain that excessive abundance of water, which perpetually runs into the
same? The ancient opinion then is the truer, that all fountains and rivers
come from the Sea, and are transcolated through the veins and porosities of
the earth, where in their passage they leave their saltness. Plato Aristotle's
Master was of this opinion, and before him Thales Milesius; as also In Libro de
mundi opificio.
Philo, Lib. 3. c. 9. Not. quaest.
Seneca, and Lib. 1. de ortu subterran.
Georgius Agricola, which without question they had learned from the Hebrews.
For thus speaks the Preacher, Eccles. 1.
All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full, unto the place
from whence the Rivers come, thither they return again. This is a most clear
and express text, and which alone shall suffice to prove this point,
especially seeing the rule and law of Nature does suffragate unto the same; For
wheresoever there is a repletion, there must needs an evacuation be. But some
perhaps may say, we see indeed all Rivers run into the Sea, but we do not
see how they come from it. True, but when we see that for all the abundance of
water, which runs continually into the Seas, the same are not increased
thereby, but remain still the same, we must needs imagine that they disburthen
themselves some where. For otherwise, the waters had long ago overwhelmed the
world, and reached up even unto heaven, seeing that the Genesis 7.
Flood, caused bin by rain of forty days, ascended fifteen cubits above the
highest mountains. Besides our very senses may persuade us, that the original
of Springs and Rivers is from the Sea; for diverse Springs of fresh water are in
sundry places, which seem to sympathize with the Sea, and to imitate the
motion thereof by a kind of ebullition. And which is strange, and yet a thing
avouched by diverse good Authors, those things which were cast into the River of
Alpheus in Grecia, were afterward found in the fountain called Arethusa,
near Syracusa in Sicilie, though there be a great distance of Sea and land
betwixt them, which gave occasion to the ancient Poets (who did use to involue
all the secrets of nature in their fables) to feign that Alpheus and Arethusa
were a couple of lovers, which were transformed, the one into a River, and the
other into a fountain, and of them speaks Lib. 5. Metam.
Ovid, saying

In latices mutor, sed enim cognoscit amatas,
Amnis aquas, positoque viri, quod sumpserat, ore,
Vertitur in proprias, quo se mihi misceat, vndas.
But whereas I said before, that for all the water, which runs into the
Seas, they remain still the same, I would not be mistaken, for I know that the
Seas have sometimes gone beyond their ordinary bounds and limits, but it has
been when they were, as it were commanded so to do by their Creator for the
punishment of men's wickedness, or whenever men have gone about to alter the
natural seat and state of the same, and the ordinary course of Rivers.

Of Gods judgments there are diverse examples, as Lib 2. Of Polybius that
excellent Greek Author, whose works I lately finished to translate into
English, my translation being ready for the Press, if it can find any room
there. And as for Polybius, I dare boldly say here by the way, that there is
not any better or more necessary Author extant in his kind, especially for
three sorts of men, Princes, Statesmen, and Soldiers. And whereas the Emperor
Charles the fifth was wont to say, that there were but three Books necessary
for a Prince, Polybius for Wars, Machiavell for State-matters and policy,
and Castiglio for behavior, if he aimed at a compendium he might very well
have left out the second, seeing for State-matters and honest policy, enough of
it may be found in Polybius, who for judgment, sufficiency, virtue, and
honesty (though but an Heathen) went far beyond Mach^^vell; and f^^ more
(...) ^^^loy^^^t and ex^^^^^ce, ha^ing been in great pla^^s ^f au^hori^^ie,
both in c^vill and marshall affa^res, and fam^l^^rly acqua^nted wi^h that great
Roman Scipio ^fricanus. and with Caius Laelius. Whereas Machiavell was but a
petty Secretary or Towne-Clarke o^ the City of Florence, grown famous only
through the wicked Maxims and Positions contained in his writings, and
especially in his Prince, where he sets forth that Monster ^f Men, Caesar
Borgia, bastard-sonne to the like father, Alexander the sixth Pope of Rome, as a
pattern to be imitated by such, as desir^ to get rule and dominion to
themselves. And it seems by a passage of the seventh Chapter of his Prince,
that he was acquainted with him, and perhaps a Counselor of his in his
murders, po^son^ngs, and other devilish exploits. But Polybi^^ (...) far from
doing the like, that there are infinite digr^s^ion^ in his works, in which he
reprehendeth the vicious act^ons of men more sharply, then some other Authors,
which profe^^ themselves Christians.
Olenus and Helice, two of the 12. Cities which made the Commonwealth of the
Achaeans, which a little before the battle of Leuctra were drowned by the sea.
Antissa, Tindaric, Burrha had the like fortune also, being swallowed up by the
Sea, together with all their Inhabitants. And that it might the better appear
that the finger of God was in it, all such, as thought to have escaped by
shipping, perished as well as the rest, being drowned and overwhelmed by the
waves. And of those who have endeavored to contract and pin up the Sea into
narrower limits, by wrlls, dikes, and other works, diverse of them have often
sustained great damage by the same; as for example, the Hollanders, who, as we
said before, lost above 100000. acres of ground by such means, which the Sea,
after the overthrow of all their dikes and strong works, took away from them,
as it were by Letters of reprisalls. This were enough to teach men that it is
but in vain to go against the order established by God, and the ordinary
course of Nature; yet it is worth the noting also, and a thing not to be
considered without admiration, that all those Princes, who purposed to cut the
Isthmus of Peloponesus, which is a neck of land betwixt two Seas, containing
according to Mercator in his Atlas Major, some five miles in breadth, dyed all
before the work was begun, as Caligula, C. Caesar, Demetrius, Nero, and
Domitianus.

CHAPTER IIII. Of waters of strange nature and effects.
ALL Springs of Waters are actually, either hot or cold. Of those hot Springs
some are of so excessive heat, that a man would think it were water boiling
upon the fire; and amongst other there is a vein of it running under a street
in a village called Porcet near the City of Akin in Germany. In the middle of
this street there is a hole, which they call Hell, with three or four bars
of yro^ over it, in which the neighbors round about, in the Summer time, when
they have no fire, do use to sees their eggs, letting them down with a Net
into the water, and in a small space of time they may be boiled hard; of which
I was twice an eyewitness, being there first in the year 1610. after the
siege of Gulick, and the yielding of the Town to the States, with that brave
Soldier, Sir Horace Vere, now Lord of Tilbury, and the second time with that
worthy Knight, Sir Henry Palmer, now Controller of the Navy. The cause of
those hot Waters is commonly ascribed to Mines of Sulphur or brimstone inflamed
within the bowels of the earth. But few of those hot waters, as at Akin,
Porcet, in the Pyrenean Mountains, at Bathe in Sommersetshire, and elsewhere,
have any great or extraordinary taste of brimstone, as they should of
necessity have, if brimstone melted and burning were the cause of their heat,
that mineral being of so piercing a nature, and of so entensiue a faculty,
that never so little of it burning upon a few coals, when our women dry their
tiffanies, fills a whole room with the strong sent of it. Besides, such a
great quantity of water running continually, and so many years and ages
together, had long since extinguished those fires; or if there were such flames
within the bowels of the earth, the same would long ago dried up the water,
and reduced the earth into ashes. Another reason there is, that you shall find
no hot Springs where fires do break our, and albeit the hill Vesuvius and
Mount Aetna burn continually, yet are there no hot Springs about them, though
they be environed by the Sea. And for all the late wonderful and extraordinary
eruption of fire out of the said hill Vesuvius, or Monte de Soma, as they call
it now; which has been so violent, that the houses of Naples, which are eight
or as others say twelve miles from the same, were all covered very thick with
the ashes thereof, yet do they not write that the water which gushed out at
the foot of the said hill was hot.

Besides, albeit there be many hot waters in Italy (for those that have
written of them, reckon few less than threescore) yet shall you see no where a
mixture of fire and water in those parts. Which makes me think with some, that
the cause of the heat of those waters proceeds from their motion and
agitation in the bowels of the earth, falling from Cataracts and broken
Concavities in the same.

That this may be true, it may be proved by the Sea, for though it be actually
cold, yet if it be tossed by a Tempest but of three or four days (and it is
seldom that a storm lasts longer) the water thereof will sometimes become
very hot. Besides, we have many very sulphurous Springs, which are never but
cold; as for example, one of the four Springs used at the Spa called
Geronster, which tastes so strong of the brimstone (as my self can speak by
experience) that diverse of those, who drink of it, are constrained to hold
their noses whilst they are a drinking, and the Sulphurous fumes of it are so
piercing, that they do speedily intoxicate the brain, and cause drunkenness,
though it be but for a little time, being soon discussed away. Since the
writing of this Treatise, and when I was come to London about the Printing of
it, I lighted by chance upon Dr. Iordans learned and elaborate Discorse of
Natural Bathes and Mineral waters; wherein he has a peculiar opinion
concerning the actual heat of Mineral Water, which he ascribes to the
fermentation of Mineralls, and illustrateth the same with reasons and examples.
I am so far from disliking it, that I applaud it, and leave both his and mine
opinion to the choice of the Reader, for in those abstruse things we have no
certain knowledge, but only probable conjectures. Howsoever, the least
probable of these two opinions is far more likely, then those imaginary
actual fires, which the vulgar opinion holds.


Now for the other Springs, which are actually cold, there are sundry
differences of them, according to the several substances they do run through,
and the nature and effects of some of them are very admirable. Some do turn
into stone whatsoever is cast into them, especially if the things cast in be or
a loose and porous substance, as leather, balls, gloves, and such like; and
Pliny and others describe diverse Springs of that nature.

But not to go out of this Island for examples, there is a Spring of that
nature in Wales in a piece of ground belonging to Sir Thomas Middleton. And the
quick activitie of some of those Springs is wonderful, and almost incredible;
for Bodinus does Lib. 2. The. at. Not.
affirm, that, he has seen sticks of wood, strawes, and such like small
things converted into stone in Lacu Piceno et Alliensi font Avernorum, within
the space of two or three hours. So that Plinies assertion, who Lib. 35. c. 13.
says, that earth is turned into stone in a fountain of Gnidus within the
space of eight months, is no more to be wondered at. The same Author, namely,
Pliny, Li. 31. c 2.
makes mention of two fountains, the one called Cerone, which makes the
sheep, that drink of it, to bear black wool, and the other Melan, which
makes the wool of the sheep, which drink of it white, and if they drink of
both, their wool will become of two colors; And of another called Crathis,
which procures witness, and of a fourth called Sibaris, which causes
blackness in the sheep and Oxen, which drink of the same. Nay, the same
effect is seen also in men, which drink of them, for those that drink of
Sibaris, become blacker, harder, and of a curled hair, and such as drink of
Crathis wax whiter, softer, and of a smooth hair. He brings in also other
Waters, which have the like effect in changing the color of such as use them.
He says likewise, that there are two Springs in Baeotia, near the river of
Orchomenus, whereof the one strengthens memory, and the other causes
oblivion. A fountain in Arcadia called Linus preserves conception and
hinders aborsement, and on the other side, the river called Amphrisus makes
women barren. Cydnus, a river of Cilicia helps the Gowt in the feet, as
appears by the Epistle of Cassius Parmensis to Marcus Anthonius; and
contrariwise by the use of the Water, which is in Traezenen, all men get the
Gowt in their feet. All such as drink of a lake called Clitorius, begin
thereby to hate wine. Polyclytus relates, that the water of a fountain in
Cilicia serves in stead of Oil; And Theophrastus, that the like is done by
the water of a Spring in Aethiopia; and Lycus, that the water of a fountain in
India burns in a Lamp. The like is also at Ecbatana. Iuba speaks of a Lake
amongst the Troglodytes, which for the hurt it does, is called the mad-lake,
and says that it is bitter and salt thrice in a day, and then fresh, and so
again at night. The same Author also makes mention of a Spring in Arabia,
which bubbleth up with such force, that it casts forth whatsoever is thrown
into it, though it be never so weighty. There are two fountains in Phrigia,
the one called Claeon, and the other Gelon, having those Greek names from
their effects, for the first makes men cry, and the second makes them laugh.
There is an hot Spring at Cranon, and yet without excessive hear, which being
mingled with Wine, and kept in a vessel, keeps the same hot by the space of
three days. There is a river in Bithynia called Olachas, into which if
perjured persons be thrown, they feel as much heat, as if they were in a
flaming fire. In Cantabria there are three Springs but eight foot asunder,
which running together make a goodly river, and every one of them by turns
becomes dry twelve times, and sometimes twenty times a day, so that a man
would think there were no more water in it, whilst in the mean time his next
neighbors be full, and flow continually. There is a brook in Judea, which is
dried up every Sabbath. In Macedonia, not far from the sepulcher of
Euripides, there are two brooks running together, the one having very
wholesome water, and the other poisonous and deadly. Quod si quis, says Lib.
31 c. 2.
Pliny, fide carere ex his aliqua arbitratur, discat in nulla part naturae
majora esse miracula. If any man think, that some of these things are past
belief, let him learn that there are no greater miracles in any other part of
nature, than in Waters. But if any man desire to know more concerning the
various nature and effects of Springs and Rivers, let him read the thirteenth
dialogue of Simon Majolus, Bishop of Vultuaria, in that Tome of his Works,
which he intitleth Dies Caniculares, and there he will find wherewith to
satisfy his curiosity. I pass now to mineral and medicinable springs, which
use to be drunk.

CHAPTER V. Of Mineral and Medicinable Springs.
Mineral waters, by their manifold turnings and windings under the ground, are
as it were impregnated with diverse virtues and faculties of the several
mineralls, through which they run, and draw with them, either the faculties, or
substa^^e of the same, and sometimes both. And therefore as mere pureness
commends ordinary Springs and Wells, so does the various mixture of several
things, though sometimes of a contrary and repugnant nature, procure
commendation to medicinable waters. Some of them are beholding for whatsoever
they have to the several kinds of earth, which they pass through, and lick,
as it were, by the way, as Bole, Ocre, Rubricke, Chalk, and the like; Others
to liquors or congealed juyces, as, Alum, Bitumen, Brimstone, Nitrum,
Coperose; And others again to Mettalls, as gold, silver, Iron, Copper, Tin,
Lead. There are some also, which owe their virtues to stone, as Crystal,
Marble, Pumice stone, Lapis Haematites, and the like; and others to the roots
of trees and plants, though these be rare, either because trees do not root
so deep, or by reason that medicinable springs are commonly in barren soyles,
as on the contrary wheresoever there is a fruitful soil, there are no
mineral or medicinable springs to be found. Out of all these subterraneall
substances diverse springs draw sometimes contrary faculties, or at least such
as have but small affinity one with another, and from hence it happens that
oftentimes one and the same medicinable spring cures diverse diseases, which
are either contrary one to another, or at least have but small affinity
together. It is of this as it is of Theriake or Mithridate, which are
compositions consisting of a great number of simples of contrary and repugnant
natures, as it were hudled together by chance; and yet when those compositions
have had their due fermentation, and that those several simples have wrought
one upon another, and become to be incorporated together, there resulteth
afterward an universal form in the composition, which makes it excellent for
most diseases, and as it were a general Panpharmacon. And in that regard some
do merrily call Mithridate the father, and Treacle the mother of all
medicines. But that we may the more accurately distinguish betwixt mineral
Springs, we must consider the nature of the mineralls, and look which of them
have affinity together, and which not. Bitumen, Salt, Sulphur, Coperose
Copper, are hot, and therefore they have a faculty to cut, cleanse, open, dry,
extenuate, and disperse. Lib. 5. de Metallici^.
Albertus Magnus, and after him Andernacus and others, do reckon Sal nitrum
with these, and hold it to be hot, which might be granted them, if by nitrum
they understood that nitrum, whereof Lib. de aere locis et aquis.
Hippocrates, Lib. 5. c. 89.
Dioscorides, Lib. 31. c. 10.
Pliny, Lib. 9. Simp. Medicam.
Galen do speak; But I do not think that either Albertus or Andernacus ever
saw it, because it began to be scantie and hard to be found in the time of
those ancient Authors before cited after Hippocrates. But our Saltpeter, which
is now called Nitrum amongst us, is as far from that ancient Nitrum,

Quantum Hipanis veneto dissitus Eridano. For if gunpowder were not enough to
prove the coldness of Nitrum, in which its opposition and contrariety to
Brimstone is so manifest, yet were the Sal prunellae of the Chemists (which is
nothing but Nitrum purified from its dregs with Flores sulphuris) sufficient to
evince it, a very little of it put into a glass of Wine, making it so cold,
that one is scarce able to drink it. And to this purpose I remember that when
I was in Holland, the Prince of Orange, Maurice, was wont always in the Summer
time to have some of it thrown into the water, where his Wine lay a cooling.
That Sal prunellae also is the best remedy against the heat, dryness, and
roughness of the tongue in all fevers, and especially in that
Hungarian-feaver called Prunella, from that symptom, which gave likewise the
name of Sal prunellae to that purified Nitrum, by reason of the excellency of
it in asswaging the same. And the more to confirm this, one of the four
springs of the Spa called Tounelet, and consisting chiefly of Nitrum, is so
very cold, both in the mouth, and in the stomach, that few can endure it, and
in that regard it is very little frequented; and during my stay there I do not
remember that I ever saw at it more then a Capuchin friar, and another Clergy
man, who used it for the heat of their livers; in which case it may do good,
if the stomach be not too weak.

Silver, Iron, Tin, Lead, are accounted cold, and by reason of their
astringencie, to be at least in the second degree. Gold is likewise placed
amongst these, though a man might perhaps with better right account it
temperate. Now in regard of this variety, some springs are called Nitrous,
Sulphurous, Bituminous, Aluminous, etc. according to the only or predomina^t
mineral, of which they do participate. But yet some there are, in which it is
a very difficult matter to know the same. So the Vberlingunians in Suevia do
dispute to this day, whether their mineral Spring proceed of Lead or Copper.
In like manner, the Italians are not well agreed whether the virtue of the
mineral water about Lucca comes from Iron or from Alum. And a great man,
that was one of the chiefest Chemists of this age, doubted whether he should
call the Empsenses Aquae Aluminous or Nitrous; so hard a thing it is exactly to
distinguish in things, that are compounded and permixt. But it is now time we
should go to Tunbridge water.

CHAPTER VI. Of Tunbridge Water.
THe water commonly known here amongst us by the name of Tunbridge water, are
two small Springs contiguous together, about some four miles Southward from
the town of Tunbridge in Kent, from which they have their name, as being the
nearest Town in Kent to them. They are seated in a valley compassed about with
stony hills, so barren, that there grows nothing but heath upon the same.
Just there do Kent and Sussex meet, and one may with less than half a
breath run from those Springs into Sussex.

It pleased our gracious Queen Marie to grace this Water by her presence two
years ago, so that those Springs may justly be called, as some do call them
now, Queen Mary's Wells. The taste of the water is not unpleasant to those,
who have a while been used to it, and it is a sure thing, that no man is able
to drink half so much of any other liquor, though never so pleasant unto him,
as he may of this. What other mineralls it runs through, besides Iron and
the rubric of Iron, which is seen on the ground, over which the water
runs, is not yet well known, for there has been as yet no digging near
about the same. The greater part of those that drink of it, are purged by
stool, and some by vomit, as well as by urine, which perhaps should argue some
other mineralls, besides Iron. The same may peradventure be discovered in after
times. Howsoever though there were no other mineralls thereabout, besides Iron,
yet Iron being a metal, and all metals, according to the Chymicks,
proceeding of two principles, Sulphur and Mercury, wheresoever there are any
mettalls bred, there must also of necessity their principles be.

Besides this, all mettalls have also their peculiar salts, and Iron in
particular has a great deal of volatill salt, which is it that dissolveth in
the Chalybeate wine now so much in use. Now Iron is of an astringent and
corroborating faculty, and has an opening virtue withal, as may be seen by
the powder of steel (steel being nothing but a defecated Iron) which is used
with good success in the green sickness, and in all other diseases
proceeding from obstructions. But here I shall seem perhaps to some to
contradict my self, in making Iron both astringent and opening, which the
vulgar think to be two qualities inco^patible in one subject, and yet they are
deceived, for to open and corroborate have no such repugnance, but that they
are together in many Simples. Now concerning those two Springs, a question does
often arise amongst those who are there a drinking, which of them should be the
better and stronger, but being so contiguous and near together, certainly
there can be no manifest ods betwixt them, and though I often tasted of both
immediately one after the other, yet can I not say, that I ever found any
perceptible difference betwixt them. Yet will I not deny, but that it may so
fall out, that at some times the one may appear stronger than the other,
according as the Water may participate more of the virtue of the mineralls at
one time, than at another; But I think that there can be nothing constant in
it, though they may alternatiuely something differ one from another. This shall
suffice to have been spoken concerning those Springs. It follows now that we
make an enumeration of the chiefest diseases their water may be used for,
wherein we will chiefly follow experience, seeing it is an empiricall remedy,
and yet so, as we shall not exclude reason. For albeit it be empericum
remedium, yet must we not use it altogether empirically, nor make it a
Panpharmacon, or a Panacea, a medicine for all diseases, and send thither
promiscuously all sorts of Patients, as some Physicians do to the like
Springs, when they are at a nonplus with them, and after a long time can do no
good upon them in Chronicall diseases; For then they send them to those
mineral waters, tanquam ad sacram anchoram. Which causes those Springs to
become infamous, and to loose the credit they justly deserve (the common people
ordinarily judging of things by the event) when some miscarry after the use of
the same, either because they were already too far spent when they were sent
thither, or by reason their diseases were not to be cured by that remedy.

CHAPTER VII. The chiefest diseases, against which Tunbridge water may be used
with good success.
BEing now to reckon up the chiefest diseases, which Tunbridge water is good
for, we will not go a capite ad calcem, from the head to the heel, but
begin at that, which it is most generally good for, and that is obstructions,
which are the causes of infinite diseases. This water then does effectually
open all manner of obstructions, wheresoever they be lurking, and especially
the obstructions of the mesaraicall veins, of the spleen, and of the liver,
and that better, then any Apozemes or other physic whatsoever. For those
obstructions being stubborn, and requiring a great deal of Physic to be
removed, and Physic being both loathsome and chargeable, people grow weary of
it, before a Physician shall have run a quarter of the course, which is
necessary for the remooving of those obstructions; and that is the reason that
so many are troubled with chronicall lingering diseases, which in their own
nature are not incurable; but only remain uncured, either because the Patient
is not able or willing to undergo such a course of Physic, as is requisite
for his recovery, or because he loves his purse too well. But these Waters
bring no charges, and after one has been used a little while to them, the
taking of them is not troublesome at all, but the longer a man continues the
use of them, the more he may, and being taken in a large quantity, they cannot
choose but open effectually. Wherefore they are of excellent use for all
diseases, which have their dependencie upon obstructions, as all long and
tedious agues, quartanes, and the like; for a dropsy, the black and yeallow
jaundise, the Schirrhus Lienis, or hard swelling of the spleen, which the
common people call an ague cake, the scurvie, the green sickness, the whites
in women, and the defect and excess of their courses. And albeit this last
assertion seems to have some repugnancie, in that we ascribe two contrary
effects to one and the same agent, yet there is no such matter, for the one is
done by opening of obstructions, and the other either by cooling the blood,
when it is too hot and sharp, and so provokes nature to expulsion, or by
corroborating and strengthening the retentiue faculty. And it is the property
of all equivocall agents to vary their operations according to the variety of
their objects, and of the matter they work upon; so the Sun melts Wax,
and hardens Clay. This water does also cut and extenuate tough, clammy, and
(if I may so speak) Tartarean phlegm, and in that regard it may be much
available for those, who are used to be troubled with the Colicke, when such an
humor is contained in their gutts.

It scowreth and cleanses all the passages of urine, and therefore is good
against the gravel and the stone in the kidneyes, Vreteres or bladder, where
also it dissolveth and washes away a kind of clammy phlegmatic excreme^t bred
in the bladder, which sometimes stopping the passage of ones water, makes him
believe that he is troubled with the stone; as happened to one, that was
himself a very skilful and famous stone-cutter, who being fully persuaded that
he had a stone in his bladder, gave himself to another of the same profession
to be cut at Namurs; But when he was cut, nothing was found in his bladder, but
such a tough humor, which might have been dissolved and voyded with facility
by the help of the Spa water, which was but a days journey from him. It is
good also (in regard of the astringent and healing faculty it has) for all
inward ulcers, and especially for those of the kidneyes and bladder, and of the
Musculus sphinater, which opens and shuts the same. And in confirmation
thereof diverse have bin cured of a bloody urine, which had long troubled them,
and amongst the rest a worthy Kentish Gentleman, with whom I went thither the
last year.

It is good also against all inveterate Dysenteries or bloody Flixes: as also
all other Fluxes of the belly, whether it be Leienteria, Diarrhaea, or Fluxus
hepaticus. It does likewise extinguish all inward inflammations and hot
distempers, and yet for all that the stomach is no whit hurt by the actual
coldness thereof, but rather corroborated and strengthened, and appetite
provoked, yea in some but too much, as in my self for one; For whenever I
drank either at the Spa or at Tunbridg, I was never able to fast with patience
until noon, but must needs offam latranti stomacho offerre, cast a bit to my
barking stomach, before the rest of my company went to dinner. For this cause
when I was at the Spa, a Spanish Physician, who was come thither with the young
Prince Doria (who was then but a youth) would not let him take the water above
two or three days, when he saw such an effect in him, fearing that he would
receive more hurt by the excess of his appetite, than benefit by the water;
and so after a long and troublesome journey from Italy thither, he returned
home without any profit. The nerves or sinews, and the original of them, the
brain, are strengthened by the use of this water, and consequently it is good
against the palsy, inclination to an apoplexy, lethargy, and such like
diseases of the head.

And some Paralyticks have been seen, who sometimes voyded all their water by
urine, and at other times were as effectually purged, as if they had taken a
strong potion, and withal sweated abundantly all their body over. All these
evacuations, and vomitting also, are sometimes seen in other diseases, as well
as in that; Nay besides that in some women you shall have an evacuation by
urine, and per menses simul and haemorrhoidas. The cause of all Rheumes and
Distillations is likewise remooved by the help of this water, and all diseases
cured, which have their dependencie upon the same, for all that verse of Schola
Salernitana, Iejunes, vigiles, sitias, sic rheumata cures.

Convulsions also, Headache, Migraine, and Vertigo, are driven away by the use
of the same, if the patient be constant and not too soon weary. Against
vomitting and the hickot, it is used with good success. Those that are
troubled with hypochondriacall melancholy find a great deal of ease by this
water. It helps also the running of the reins, whether it be Gonorrhea
simplex or Venerea, and the distemper of the Parastatae arising from thence, as
likewise a certain carnositie, which grows sometimes in the conduite of the
urine, nay and the Pox also, the water having a notable potentiall drying
faculty. It drives away besides all manner of worms, whether they be
ordinary ones, or ascarides or taeniae. It may be used also for the Gowt, but
it must be with some caution, and the body must be extraordinarily well
prepared and purged before, because it has sometimes brought the fit upon some,
who were well when they came thither. Outwardly applied it does help sore
eyes, red pimples, and other external infirmities. More diseases, which have
affinity with these, it may be used for, but I will content my self with this
enumeration of the aforesaid ones, and pass to the time, manner, and order of
taking the water. Yet must I not forget in the behalf of women, to tell them
that there is nothing better against barrenness, and to make them fruitful,
if other good and fitting means, such as the several causes shall require, be
joined with the water.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the time, manner, and order of taking Tunbridge Water.
SOme that shall read the next foregoing Chapter, will perhaps say, that I
make this water a direct Panpharmacon, a remedy for all diseases, and
therefore wiil give small credit unto it. But for all that, daily experience
does, and if it continue to be used, will more and more confirm what I have
said to be true. For very few of those, who live at the Spa (whose Water has
great affinity with that of Tunbridge) and in the Country about it, and make
that Water their ordinary drink, as many do, and my self have seen there
very aged people, that did never drink any thing else; few of them, I say, are
troubled with headache, heart-burning, stone, obstructions of the kidneyes,
liver, or spleen, falling sickness, and the like, and as for the Iaundise,
Dropsy, and Scabbes, they do not know what they are. My self during my stay
there being once rid out to take the air with a couple of Gentlemen, and a
shower of rain coming, we made to a Country house near hand to shelter our
selves, and after the taking of a Pipe of Tobacco, I requested the goodman of
the house (who was a very old man, and yet fresh and lusty, and with very few
gray hairs) to give us a cup of his beer, but he answered me, that he never
had had any beer in his house, if we would drink good Pouhon, it was at our
service, and he had a fresh vessel of it abroach. Pouhon is the name of that
Spring of the Spa, which stands in the middle of the Town, and by the same
name they call also the Water thereof. But to return to our matter, Temporibus
medicina valet, data tempore prosunt,
Et data non apto tempore, vina nocent.
and so water. The time then of taking those waters, is either the season of
the year, when to come to them, or the time of the day, when to drink of the
same, Concerning the season of the year, Summer is the fittest, when there is
a settled warm and dry weather, as in the dog days especially.

Cum Canis arentes findit hiulcus agros. And the chiefest months be June,
July, Angust, and September, although the Dutch, who naturally love good Beer
and Wine better than Water, use to have this riming verse in their mouths,

Mensibus in quibus R. non debes bibere Water. And according as the year
prooveth, a man may sometimes come sooner, and continue later. In general,
whenever the weather is clear and dry, the water is then best, as well in
Winter, as in Summer, yea in hard frostie weather the Water is commonly
strongest, the antiperistasis of the air hindering that there is not so great
an evaporation of the mineral spirits of the Water. For when the weather is
rainy or misty, and that Jupiter does per cribrum mingere, piss through a
sieue, as Aristophanes merrily speaks, the water loses much of its virtue,
My self have known at the Spa a Friar of the reformed order of Saint
Frauncis, a good honest temperate man, who assured me, that having been there
three whole years together continually for the stone (of which he showed me a
box almost full, of several forms and bigness) and taking the Water all the
while, both summer and winter, when the weather was seasonable, he found diverse
times the water better, stronger, and of a more speedy passage in frostie
weather, then in the middle of Summer, without ever perceiving any
inconvenience by the water, no more at that time, then in Summer, for all he
did always drink it cold.

For some that use to take it in cold weather, do warm it, but sure the water
cannot choose by that means but loose a great deal of its virtue, which in the
warming evaporateth away, seeing that in the very transporting of it, the same
does happen. When the Spa water is bottled to be sent away, albeit those who
have the charge of it, be never so careful in stopping the Bottles close with
boiled Cork, and pitching them over, yet will the mineral spirits find way,
in so much, as when you come to open them, you shall still find some want, and
sometimes a pretty deal, especially of the water of the Savenier, which is
more subtle and spiritual, than that of Pouhon. But to return to the matter,
there is no more to be said, but that in a word the Water is always best when
the weather is clearest and driest.

Now concerning the time of the day, the morning, when the Sun is an hour
more or less, high, is the fittest time to drink the water. For when the
Sun begins to be of force, it does attract some of the mineral spirits,
and the water loses some of its strength; and betimes in the morning it is
also best walking. And you are so to drink the water, as you may have taken
the quantity, which you intend to take that day, within as small a space of
time, as conveniently you can, without oppressing your stomach too much, as
within an hour, or less, if you be able. Those that lie not too very far
from the Springs, and are able to use their legs, shall do better to come
thither afoote, than to ride, because so they shall heat their bodies more.
Yet do I not intend they should be so hot, as to sweat, or to be ready to
sweat, for that would do hurt, but I mean only that their natural heat
should be something awaked and excited, because then the water will be the
better attracted, and have the more speedy passage. After every glass, or
every two or three glasses, according as you shall be able to take it, it will
be good to take a few Carraway comfits, or Coriander-seede, some Galingall,
Zedoar, Elycampane, Angelica-roote, or such like, to help the digestion and
passage of the Water. In some it is necessary, that they should have some
Electuary, Lozenges, or the like, appropriated to the grief, for which they
take the Water.

Diverse do take Tobacco after their water, which I do not dislike,
especially if they hold it a good while in their mouths, before they puff it
out. Moderate exercise after it is very available, but I utterly dislike it, if
it be too violent, as running, leaping, jumping, as some in wantonness use to
do. For that kind of exercise is rather a hinderance, than a help, to the
digesting of their water, and many times all the good it does, is to bring it
up again, weakening by that means their stomach, which in vomitting does
always suffer. True it is that if the stomach be foul, it is not amiss
sometimes so to do, and I am not against it. After you have taken your full
quantity, it will do well to walk and stir there up and down, and to
compose your self to mirth with the rest of the company; For those that look
to reap benefit by Tunbridge, must turn away all cares and melancholy.

In your return to your lodging, I hold it better to ride, than to go afoote,
because sitting upon your horse, the inward parts, as the muskles of the belly,
the guts, and the stomach it self are thereby borne up and contracted, and
by the jogging of the horse moderately stirred, and so consequently your water
will be the better digested. The sign of the through-concoction of the same is
commonly when your urine begins to have a tincture and to be colored, and
then may you go to dinner; But of this we will speak of purpose when we
come upon diet. I said before, that the best time of the day to take the water
was betimes in the morning, and I mean also it should be the only time for
that day. For I have known some, who took it twice a day, namely, in the
afternoon also, but I could never approve of it, and my reason is, that if
they take it soon after dinner, their meat will not be digested, and the
water forcing to make way for it self, will draw with it the Chylus raw and
unconcocted, and so cause crudities and obstructions, which will do a great
deal more hurt, than the water can do them good; And if they take it later
after dinner, their water will not be digested before Supper. Once a day then
is enough, least you have worse speed by making too much haste. Now for the
whole quantity of the water to be taken in one morning, it is a thing, which
cannot justly be defined, in regard of the difference of bodies in age, sex,
strength, and other circumstances; But generally those that are able to drink
most, receive the most benefit, so that they do digest and void their water
well. And here it is, if any where, that the Greek Proverb should take place,
(...), aut bibe, aut abi, either drink, or be gone; If you cannot tipple, this
is no place for you. Yet must every man ever have this general rule in
memory, a juvantibus and laedentibus optima judicatio, the best judication or
direction is from those things, which do good, and from such as do hurt. You
shall see some that arise to a great quantity, and Invenies illic, qui
Nestoris ebibat annos,

Three hundred ounces, according to Nestors years. Yea, and some a greater
quantity. And it is a thing, that will make the very women there filling the
glasses to laugh, to see some patients sent thither by ignorant Physicians, and
appointed to take ten or twelve ounces of water, and arise perhaps to twenty
or thirty ounces. But this may be a rule for a body of competent years and
strength to begin at thirty, forty, or fifty ounces, and to arise by
degrees, increasing their quantity every day, to an hundredth, an hundredth and
fifty, or two hundred ounces, more or less, as they shall be able, and so
again to decline and decrease by degrees, ending were they began, when they
are to leave the water.

As for the time of every man's stay there, it is a thing which cannot be
defined; for in some diseases some weeks suffice, in others diverse months are
not enough, nay in some they have need to come thither the next year, and the
next to that too. This I hope will suffice for the time, manner, and order of
taking Tunbridge water, I will now pass to the preparation of the body of such
as are to take it.

CHAPTER IX. Of the preparation of the body of such as are to take the Water.
I Have set down before the chiefest diseases, which may be cured by the help
of this water, but I am not so to be understood, as though I meant that the
water alone were sufficient for the same in all of them, without any other
helps. For albeit this be an empiricall remedy, yet must it not be used
altogether empirically, but with reason, discretion, and circumspection,
otherwise hurt, rather than good, will follow the use of it. Many have fallen
into diseases, as fevers and agues, by coming unadvisedly and unprepared to
those waters, although, as we said before, there is nothing better for agues,
then they are, if they be rightly and advisedly used, the body being first
prepared and purged. For although blood by a sole distemper of heat may cause
a fever, yet cannot the other humors do it, as Lib. 2. de diff. febrium.
Galen well observes, unless they putrify, which they will not do if the
body be free from obstructions, and perspirable, and therefore that body, which
is to be taken with an ague, must first be obstructed. Now these waters being
very diureticall, when they meet with a foul body, having a repletion of
gross humors, they easily and speedily carry the same with them into the
veins, which not being able to give passage to such a quantity of humors, they
are thereby obstructed and stopped, and those humors being there retained and
wedged in, and not perflated or ventilated, they inflame and putrify, and so
produce a putride fever or ague. Wherefore those that love their health and
life, must before they use the water, if they have not a very pure body,
prepare and purge the same to prevent all inconveniences.

Now according as bodies do differ in sex, age, temperature, quality of the
peccant humor, and other circumstances, so must they accordingly diversely be
prepared and purged. And in that regard we have not thought it good to set
down here any forms thereof, but refer those that shall come to the water,
to the advice and counsel of learned and skillful Physicians, and such as are
withal well acquainted with those kind of waters, which is the maine point.
And as for those, that come far off, they may take Physic at Tunbridge, and
it will be best for them so to do, because if they take Physic before, and
presently travel upon the same, it may produce some danger.

If the resort to the Water continue, and that there be competent company at
the same, I do purpose by the grace of God to be there every Summer (for it is
a place I like) and if any be pleased to confer with me, I will be ready to
afford them my best counsel; and they shall find there variety of Physic
appropriated to the several diseases which the Water is to be used for.
Neither is it enough to prepare the body and take Physic before coming to the
Water, but it is requisite also, in some diseases, to take something now and
then during the time they use the Water, to help the working of it, and to
cause a happy and prosperous effect by the same, and so much the more, because
some are not able, either by reason of business, or otherwise, to stay there a
competent time, and therefore have need of some other help. For some diseases
are so stubborn and difficult to be eradicated, that we must fight at all
weapons against the same, and yet all little enough too. Some unlooked for
accidents also happen there sometimes, which have need to be redressed and
helped by other means. But of these things neither my self, nor any man else,
can speak but in general terms, and therefore I will conclude, and pass to
the diet requisite to be observed there.

CHAPTER X. Of the Diet to be observed by those that use Tunbridge Water.
Diet amongst Physicians is taken in a larger signification, than it is with
the vulgar, for besides meat and drink, it comprehends air, motion, and
quiet, things retained and voyded, sleeping and watching, and the passions of
the mind. All these must be rightly ordered, both to preserve, and to restore
health. As for air, it must be taken such as it is found there, and I think
there is no great exception to be taken against it, being thereabout pure and
wholesome enough. Of motion and quiet we have said something before, when we
spoke of exercise, as also of the passions of the mind, when we wished all
such as come to the Water, to compose and frame themselves to mirth, and to
leave all cares and melancholy at home. Concerning sleeping and watching, a
moderation must be observed therein, though it be better to sleep something
too much, then to watch too long, and therefore you shall do well to Sup
betimes, and to go to bed betimes, animo securo, quieto and libero, that the
first, second, and third concoction may be ended, before you take the water.
And as for things voyded and retained, you must endeavor to have the benefit
of nature by all manner of ordinary evacuations, as by stool and urine, and
the private excrements of the brain, at the mouth and nose. And thus much in
brief concerning those things, we will now come to meat and drink. Bread is
commonly, and with most men, the chiefest part of food, and therefore though
always, yet here more especially, you must have a care to have bread of good
pure wheat, well handled and seasoned in the making, and well baked; For the
excrements and ill humors, which are heaped by the use of ill bread, are worse
than those, which proceed from meat. Ravell bread generally is wholesomer,
than manchet, and not so apt to breed obstructions, having some of the branne
left in it, which is detergent, and makes it pass the better. As for meat,
let every one feed upon that, which he has been most used to, so it be good
meat, yielding good nourishment, and of easy digestion; and let him shun
the use of sawces, which have much butter and spices in them. For it was a good
admonition of Disarius, a learned Physician, in Saturn. 7. c. 4.
Macrobius, Vitandos esse cibos, qui vltra sitim and famem appetentiam
producerent, that those meats were to be avoided, which did lengthen appetite
beyond hunger and thirst. If you can, be you contented with one dish at a
meal, for multa fercula multos morbos ferunt, many dishes bring many diseases,
and perniciosa sentina est abdomen insaturabile, an insatiable belly is a
pernicious sink. In foul bodies especially, over-feeding does a great deal
of hurt, according to that Aphorism of Lib. 2. Aphor. 9.
Hippocrates, (...). The more you nourish foul bodies, the more you hurt them.
In a word, a moderate sober diet is always best, but especially here. As for
the kinds of meat, albeit amongst the flesh of fourefooted beasts, Porke and
Veale be chiefly commended in our books, yet here in regard of their moisture,
I prefer Mutton before them. And if Porke be to be avoided, much more Pigge,
Lamb, and such like flashy meat. As for Beef, though it be discommended by
most Authors, yet good Beef, well fed, and of an indifferent age, may be used
without scruple, especially by such as have been accustomed to it, for those
Authors were never acquainted with our English Beef. If Oxen indeed be killed
when they are so old, that they be past labor, their flesh cannot be
wholesome, nor is to be commended. But for our good succulent Beef here, I
verily think, that if those Authors were alive again, and should taste of it,
they would be so far from forbidding it, that to the contrary they would
commend it. For if they do so much commend Veale, I see no reason they can
have to discommend good succulent Beef.

Besides Mutton and Beef, you may sometimes have Capons, Hens, Pullets,
Chickens, Pigeons, Partridges, Pheasants, black-birds, and other small birds,
Rabets, and the like. And because some Hares are sometimes caught about
Tunbridge, it is a question, which some ask, whether those who are there at
the waters, may feed upon them. They are grown infamous and banished from most
Tables vndeservedly, out of a conceit that they are melancholy meat. But I
will now take their cause in hand, and vindicate them from that imputation, if
I can, saying with Martial, Inter aves turdus, si quis, me Iudice, certet,
Inter quadrupedes gloria prima lepus.


And least I seem to give too easy an assent to the Poet, (though he was not
a mere Poet, but well grounded in natural Philosophy) I will strive to
prove, that it is not melancholy meat, but meat for melancholy men.

First, I will bring in Lib. 3. de alim.
Galen to patrocinate unto him, who preferres the blood of a Hare, before that
of Hens, Pigeons, and all other birds, and says that it is most sweet and
dainty. Now if Hares blood be so good, how can the flesh thereof be naught,
which is made and produced by it, flesh being nothing else but blood coagulated
and converted into the same?

The same Author Ibidem initio libri.
says also, that Hares flesh breeds better blood, than Mutton or Beef. And
if these two come every day to the Tables even of the noblest and richest
persons, why should the poor Hare, which is better, and yields better
nourishment then they, be banished from the same?

After Galen, learned Heurnius reckons Hares flesh in the first place amongst
those meats, which alter melancholy in the kidneyes, but to alter and free
from melancholy, and to breed melancholy, cannot both be done by one kind of
meat. For if any man would fly here to similitude of substance, or to an
hidden property, he should deserve to be hissed at. But they say it is a
melancholy fearful creature. What reason they have to call him so, unless it
be because he shunneth and runs away from the dogs, which pursue him, I do
not know; But if that be all, do not Wolves, Bulls, Bears, yea and Lions
also, the like? If we may believe those, who have been in Africa, an old
woman there, or a child with a stick in their hands do drive away Lions, as
we do dogs here. And a Hare is not so fearful, but that you shall see some
of them turn about, and look upon the dogs after a daring manner. They do
not lie in holes and burrowes, as Conies do, which in that regard should be
more melancholy, and yet they are in most common use amongst us, and accounted
the best meat. And as for their food, it is the same with that of Partridges,
the excellency whereof is no where controverted, and with the use of them
only the Pox may be cured, as Cardan holds, who could speak of it by
experience, as having had that disease seven times, as himself witnesses in
that book of his, which he entitleth De vtilitate ex adversis capienda; and
sure his witness is not to be rejected. Let the Hare then return in use, and
be readmitted to his former pre-eminence, so he be not too old, but of a
competent age, as of a year or less. But as for water-foule, you shall do
well to abstain from the same.

Concerning fish, though it be for the most part unwholesome, and apt to breed
excrementitious and slimie humors, yet for a change you may sometimes eat some
river-fish, that is firm and not slimie, as Trouts, Gudgeons, Pikes, Perches,
and the like, either broyled, or boiled in Wine (if you will go to the
charges) rather than in Water, and corrected with Fenell, Spearemints, Thyme,
Rosemary, Parsley or the like. But for Mints in particular, let those women,
that come to the water for fruitfulness, refrain the same, because it is
thought it hinders conception. At your fruit you may use some Raisins of the
Sun, a bit of Marmelade, a roasted Wardon or Pepin mith Carrowayes, or the
like; But in all this you must be sparing.

Now for an end of all, I must repeat what I have touched before, namely, that
you avoyde variety of dishes. For the nature of several meats being diverse,
and sometimes clean opposite and contrary one to another, and some sooner
concocted, and other later, from hence those evils will arise, against which
you come to seek help from the water, as crudities, wind-gripings, pain of
the reins, obstructions of the mesaraicall veins, rawnesse of the Chylus, and
consequently of the blood, which shall be made of the same, and such like
inconveniences, which by a sober and moderate diet may be avoided.

Thus much concerning meat. As for drink, good ordinary clear Beer, and of
an indifferent strength and age, is best, and it is the ordinary drink of this
Island, and which agrees best with the nature of those which are bred in it.
Yet if any having been used to drink Wine at meals, desire to continue the
same, I am not against it, if so be they be not of too hot a constitution, and
have no principal part offended through excess of heat; For a cup of Wine or
two at meals does but help to make the better digestion. And for that purpose
Sack or Claret are better than white Wine, because white Wine, by the
diurecticall faculty it has, passes too soon away, and before the Chylus be
thoroughly perfected, and so it may carry some of the Chylus raw and
unconcocted with it, and consequently breed crudities and obstructions. And
thus much concerning diet.

The Conclusion of this Treatise.
HAving briefly run through the chiefest things needful to be known and
practiced by such, as shall desire to use this Water, I will here end with an
exhortation unto them to be well advised concerning the nature of their
diseases before they come, and when they are come, to observe the rules and
directions contained in this Treatise, as also to be constant in the use of the
Water. And although perhaps some of them perceive little or no benefit at
first by the same, yet let them not be discouraged, but persevere in the use of
it. For some having been there once with small or no profit at all, the next
year after, upon a second trial, have returned home perfectly cured. It is
the ordinary reward of constancy and perseverance in the end to hitte the
mark they aim at. Every thing in this world has a certain period, before
which it cannot come to a full perfection. And so herewith I wish all happy
and prosperous success to all such, as shall come to these Springs, and will
be ready at all times to afford them my best help and counsel.

Now as for this Treatise, I do not look it should have a privilege above
all other writings, to be exempted from controllement and carping; For it were
better luck, than any man ever had, that exposed himself to the censure of
the world. There are far more fools, than wise men in the world, and as a
Spaniard well observes, Un loco haze ciento, one fool makes an hundredth more
such (most men having their wits pinned upon another man's sleeue) and the
greater fool commonly is the bolder censurer, which makes Books to be
variously received, liked, and entertained, according to the variety of the
Readers understanding and capacity.

Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli. Upon the readers wit the fates of
Books depend.

But the best is, that I ever was regardlesse of the multitude, as well in
this, as in all things else. If the judicious Reader find any just fault with
any thing contained in this Treatise, let him remember that humanum est errare,
that to err is incident to the frailty of our humane nature. But I never was
so wedded to mine own opinions and conceptions, but that upon better
information, I ever was, and ever will be willing to acknowledge mine errors,
if I committed, or shall commit any, without esteeming it any shame so to do,
no more than many good and worthy Authors have done, when they published their
retractations.

FINIS.

