FOUR AND TWENTY Certain Godly Rules.
Seek the Lord, and he will be found.
1Think and look on every day, as the last day of thy life: therefore so live
every day, and walk before God so warily, as if it were the day of thy death,
and thy day of Judgment: and as if before night, thou were to give an account
of thy life before the Judge of Heaven and Earth. 2 In what place soever thou
art, in thy house or abroad, in thy bed, or at thy board, whether by night, or
by day, whatsoever thou art doing, set God always before thine eyes: think
that God sees thee; and let the fear of him keep thee from sin, and guide
thee in the ways of holiness, Psalm. 16.8. 3 As soon as thou awakest, when
thou first openest thine eyes in a morning, lift up thy heart to God, in
thankfulness to him for thy preservation that night past: and do the like at
night for the preservation of the day; thou know not any night, but it may
be thy last night: consider, sleep is compared to death, and the bed unto the
grave, and thou may sleep thy last sleep, Luke 12.20. Let this be thy last
thought upon thy pillow, Commending thy self into the hands of God. 4 See that
thou neglect not thy solemn, and set times of prayer, humbling thy self upon
thy knees, first in the morning as soon as thou art ready, before thou enter
upon any work, commending thy self, and all thy ways unto God, and last at
night, when thou go to bed, kneeling at thy beds side, Psalm. 55.17. 5 Task
thy self every day to read some piece of holy Scripture, as some of the
Psalms, and one Chapter at the least of the old or new Testament, see that
thou read heedfully for the increase of knowledge, and the bettering of thy
spiritual estate, as also at thy best leisure take time to read something out
of some other godly book: This thou may do either morn or evening, or
both, without any let or hinderance to thy calling, Acts 17.11. 6 Show thy
self to be a Christian, and a servant of God every day, by laboring
diligently with thy hands in some lawful and honest calling, knowing that he
who will not work, must not eat, and the idle person has no right to apeece
of bread, and a Christian must have a trade or calling, Ephesians. 4.28. 1 Thessalonians.
4.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. 7 As thou art following of thy calling, thou may often
be lifting up thy heart to God upon every fresh occasion; This is one way of
praying continually, as it is exhorted, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. 8 Labor to be
acquainted daily more and more with the Law of God, the ten Commandments: get
some godly book that may expound them fully, that thou may see what is sin,
and what is not sin in every action: by this means thou may daily learn
how ^o shun more sins, and to perform mo duties, Psalm. 19.7. Psalm. 119.104.
Jam. 5.25. 9 Take heed of sinning against knowledge, and of entertaining at any
time a purpose or resolution to sin in any action, for a true faith and
purpose of sinning against knowledge and conscience can never hold together:
and such sins harden the heart, and in time may give a man up to a reprobate
sense, Romans 1.28. 1 Timothy 1.19. 10 Make conscience as much of idle, vain, and
ungodly thoughts, as of idle and unsavory words, or of ungodly actions
considering that with God, who sees and knows the heart, idle thoughts and
vain imaginations are sins, as well as sinful words, or ungodly actions: and
secret thoughts shall be brought to Judgment, Genesis 6.7. Eccles. 12.14. 11 Strive
daily to see and feel that sinful original corruption that thou bear
about thee, how it dulls thee, and makes thee backward, and untoward to good,
and how it inclines thee, and makes thee prone unto evil: groan under it, and
bewail it, as Saint Paul did, Romans 7 18, 19, 23, 24. And let thy sinful
nature trouble thee, as well as gross and actual sins: and being burdened
with it, betake thy self to Christ, and desire God on thy knees for Christ's
sake to pardon it. 12 Strengthen thy self every morning by a firm purpose,
and resolution against thy special sins and lusts, to which by nature thou
art most prone and ready to fall into, as pride, anger, covetousness, and the
like: Argue and reason with thy self in this, or the like manner, shall I be
proud? then I shall surely fall, and God will count me his enemy, for God
resists the proud, James 4.6. Shall I be angry? If I let passion in, I cannot
keep Satan out; nay, by anger I shall grieve the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians.
4.30, 31. Shall I be covetous? then I must needs be exceeding sinful, for
the desire of money is the root of all evil 1 Timothy ^.10. 13 Yet because thou
can not of thy self shun, and avoid these sins, thou must daily go to
God for strength, for he has promised to give thee strength against them, if
thou will beg it of him. Call for the power of Christ's death, and the virtue of
his Resurrection to mortify thy lusts, that is, to kill and slay sin in
thee, and to quicken in thee all the graces of the Spirit. Call and pray that
he may sprinkle pure water upon thee, to cleanse thee from the filthiness and
defilement of every sin, and that he will cause thee to walk in his ways,
to do his Commandments, Ezekiel. 36.25.27. By this means thou shall every day
somewhat weaken thy sins. Then see thou do it every day, that thy soul may
reap benefit thereby. 14 Do not rashly enter upon any course of life, nor
perform any action whatsoever it be, whether in thy calling, or in thy
recreation, before thou be certified concerning it, and be sure it be not
sinful, but an action very good and lawful: for he that doubts whether a
thing be lawful or no, and yet adventures on it, is condemned for sin, Romans
14.23. 15 If at any time against thy purpose, or resolution thou be overtaken
with any sin, great or small, be sure thou do not lie, nor continue in it,
but haste unto Christ, with grief and sorrow for it, and so recover thy self
by timely repentance: and never rest till thou can find thy conscience
satisfied and pacified, and that is, when thou feel in thy soul a
spiritual hatred against that sin, and an earnest desire and care to serve,
and please God better, I say, when thou have sinned, thou can not be at true
peace within thy self, until thou have got thy heart to mourn for that
sin, and find thy self to hate it in thy soul, and that thou art
exceeding careful to avoid it, 2 Cor. 7.11. 16 Labor to be content with thy
condition, whether it be poverty, or sickness, or what estate soever: remember
always that to be the best condition wherein God has placed thee, for all
things work together for good to those which love God. Poverty, sickness and
afflictions, are but rods, and gentle corrections to scourge thee for sin, and
to purge corruption out of thee, Romans 8.28. Philip. 4.11, 12. Heb. 13.5. 17
When any cross befalls thee, study to find out thy particular sin, which
has brought that cross upon thee, and neither grieve, nor weep so much for
the cross, as for the sin which has caused it, so turn thy worldly into
godly sorrow, Job 13.26. 2 Samuel 16.10. 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. 18 When any good thought
or motion arises in thy heart, do not let it die and vanish, for so thou
quenchest the Spirit, but cherish these thoughts, and stir them further up in
thee by prayer, reading, and meditation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. 1 Timothy 1.6. 19 Be
affected with the welfare or the misery of others, as if it were thine own,
Weep with them that weep, and rejoice with them that rejoice, Rom 12.15, 16.
Heb. 13.3. 20 Love even thine enemies as Christ commands thee, get an heart
to forgive them, and an heart to pray for them: be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21. Matthew. 5.44.18.21.25. 21 Endevor thy
self to do every day, what good thou can to others, upon every good
occasion, and rejoice when thou can find time, and any opportunity of doing
good: The more good thou do, the more comfort thou shall have, when thou
come at night to make thy accounts with God, Gal. 6.10. 1 Timothy 6.18. John
14.21. 22 In doing good to others, be careful not only to the bodies of poor
people (which thou will be to feed and releeve them, if God has blessed thee
with riches) but also to their souls, do what good thou can to them, by
teaching and instructing them: he that has truly tasted of salvation, will
study in what he can how he may save others and how he may pluck them as brands
out of the fire, Jude 22.23. 23 Take heed of partaking of others sins, that
is, to see sin committed by others, and to say nothing of it, when as thou
may either thy self reprove it, or inform against it, that it may be
punished: He that has felt the weight and burden of his own sins, will be
loath to increase the burden by the sins of others, Levit. 19.17. 1 Timothy 5.22.
24 Every night call thy self to a reckoning how thou have spent the day, see
what good thou have done, and what good thou have left undone, what temptations
thou have resisted, and what sins thou have committed, thou may find
comfort in the good, and thou must repent thee of the evil, and groaning
within thy self, and grieving for the sins of the day, Call for the blood of
Christ to wash and purge thee from them; thus gaining peace with God, thou
may lay thee down, and thy sleep shall be sweet unto thee, Psalm. 4.48.
Prove. 3.24. and 2 Cor. 1.12.
These are as plain Directions as I can give for thee, who have been ignorant,
and now would be plainly directed. Let me advise thee, if thou can, to read;
if thou can not, to hear them read often over unto thee, even so often as
that thou may get them by heart, or at least become very familiar with them,
and the practice of them will be as sweet as honey to thy soul; yea, thou
shall find a secret sweetness in the practice of any one of them, even in
mourning within thy self for thy secret corruptions, which the world does not
know of, thou shall meet with such joy, as thou would not want for all the
treasures of this world. Oh what joy then will thou find in observing them all?
the practice of them will make thee walk with God, and he will come, and dine,
and sup with thee, he will largely express his love to thee; he will mark
thee out for his own, and set the broad Seal of Heaven upon thee, then shall
thou find such cheerings of the Spirit, and such gleams of joy shed into thy
soul, as will ravish, and transport thee with unexpected sweetness; a carnal
and natural man can never conceive it, none can know it, but those that have
tasted of it; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man the things which God has prepared (even here in this life) for
them that love him, but God has revealed them to us by his Spirit (says the
Apostle) 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. And if thou do so love God, that thou will
faithfully observe these Rules he will assuredly reveal these things unto
thee. Consider then aright, and the Lord give thee heart to love, and practice
them.

EINIS.

