THE DIALOGVES OF WILLIAM RICHWORTH OR The iudgmend of common sense in the
choice of Religion.

Printed at Paris by JOHN MESTAIS, 1640.

TO THE READER.
M.r William Richworth borne in Lincolneshire studied in the English College at
Doway, there was made Priest, and afterward discharged the place and office of
Prefect with much commendation, all which time he was known by the name of
Charles Rosse. Coming into England he lived in diverse places with good esteem
until the year 1637 in which he dyed. He was a man curious in Divinity,
Controversies, Mathematikes, and Physic, but cheefely delighted in
Mathematickes, and by the name of Robinson entertained correspondence with the
learned Oughtred. He affected the rigor of mathematical discourse even in his
controversies, as you may perceive by this work, and thought no man truly
learned but who aimed to do the like. These Dialogues he framed some years
agone, and showed them to several friends of his, which finding they gave
content to diverse judicious persons, he intended to enlarge and publish the^,
but hindered by some occasions so that he could not finish and perfect them
before his death, he bequeathed his papers and this charge to a friend, to whom
he had often communicated his design. Here now you have them divided into
three parts, The first containing and declaring how, and what points of
controversies are of necessity, The second showing that scripture alone is not
a fit judge nor able of it self to decide controversies in Religion, The third
and last demonstrate's an evident and infalible means of determining and
deciding all questions and disputs of faith and Religion, which God grant may
be to your profit.

THE APPROBATION.
Having perused and considered by leave and order from our sacred faculty of
Divinity a little treatise entitled The Dialogues of William Rishworth, or the
judgment of common sense in the choice of Religion, containing 36. sheets in
writing, and 24. printed in 12. we do certify that there is not any thing
contained therein against Catholic faith or Christian piety, but many
rational and connaturall proofs and motives of them both, And therefore do
judge it truly worthy our Approbation and the public. Paris this 7. of April
1640.

E. TYRELL. H. HOLDEN.

The Printer's ignorance of the English tongue has caused many errors in the
print, amongst others these
Page: 87. or. cor. of. 101. at. cor. a 102. the, cor. these. 109. has, cor.
have 112. so be saved cor some may be saved 119. that, cor. that is 120. has,
cor. had. 124. waine, cor, waiue 132. thenth, cor. tenth 144. and in Gouer etc.
cor. in Gouer etc. 149. hat, cor. that 151. o, cor. of 152, n, cor. an 153 th.
cor. that (...) the, cor, ready 162. v, us 187. Religions order cor Religious
236 acd, cor. and 254. posseth, cor. passes 309, ou, cor. out 386. althought
cor. althoug 434. dockrine, cor. doctrine 450. you, cor. your 481. such, cor.
such 482. sitle, cor. little 501 6 af, cor. of 527 prrt. cor. part 529. he, cor
the ^^7. (...), cor. is not, nor etc. 545. de cor do 546. theses, cor. these
553. pleasont, cor. pleasant.
THE FIRST DIALOGVE. What points of controversy in matters of Religion are to
be Known of necessity?
This Dialogue contains 12. parts or paragraphes.
1. THe Preface or Introduction.

2. Whence proceeds and depends the necessity of knowing points of
Religion?

3. That the points wherein the Arrians and other ancient Heretics differred
from the Catholic church were points of necessity to be known and believed.

4. That the belief of the Hierarchy establissed by Christ in his church is
of necessity.

5. That the administration of Sacraments by the Hierarchy is likewise of
necessity.

6. That the resolutions of General Counsels are to decide controversies both
in points of necessity and of indifferency.

7 That the maintenance of the unity of the church is of necessity.

8. That some things may be of necessity in a lower degree, and in particular
the use of pictures.

9. That the honnoring of Saints, their Canonization, and the institution of
Religious orders are necessary in this same degree.

10. That the Sacraments of order and Matrimony, the Generality of
Ceremonies, and the opinion of miracles are also necessary.

11. That prayer for the dead, Extreme unction, and Confession be likewise
necessary.

12. That good institutions are not to be given over for small
inconueniencies, the abuses are to be mended, not the things taken away, and
therefore that the party Which broke communion is (...) to the other.


NEPHEW. Come, uncle, this is the first day of the new year, and therefore me
thinke's it would be a great offense to imploye it wholly in Pastimes, and not
give some hansell to virtue by some serious and good discourse, which may
engage, and serve me for a Pattern of well doing all the year after.
Wherefore though it be late, yet I know uncle, that you (whose well spent age
and trauailles have made you able and fit to give light and guydance to my
unsettled years) can presently give me such a lesson as that I shall easily
better my self thereby all the year following.


Uncle. I should be very unkind, loving coze^, if I should refuse such a
request to you, whom the marriage of my nee rest and dearest kinswoman makes me
love and tender as one who has mine own blood and joy in his care and
custody. But as I am glad to see this inclination in you, which I hope will
strengthen with your age, so does the choice of the time you make, being now
the hoatest season of the day for gaming, make me wonder at your unusual
temperance.


Nephew. Yesternight was the end of the last year, and so I made even with the
world, nor have I as yet begun again, and therefore I took occasion to
withdraw my self when the company sat down to play, with intention to
bestow somewhat better the little that is left of this good day.


Uncle. Why then, cozen, I think I know my theme, you lost all your moneys
yesternight, and now you are weary with looking on others all this day, and
therefore I must tell you how damageable and fruitless a thing play is,
especially to young gentlemen who are coming, or newly come to their estats*
speak plainly, sweet cozen, is it not so?


Nephew. In deed, Uncle, for the first part you have hitt very right, but for
the latter I shall entreat you not to touch upon that string at this time, at
least until the twelft-day be passed. For my father promised me moneys when
mine were lost, and you know how sweet revenge is, so that I shall be in a
better disposition to hear you discourse of this subject after Christmasse
when all the company is gone. What you should now say of this matter, would
be, I fear, a bitter and distasteful pill without effect, my disease being at
this present in it is crisis, Any thing else will take much better, I shall
profit more, and you will be in less danger to loos^ your labor.


Uncle. Well, cozen, seeing you are unwilling of that discourse I will not
trouble you therewith, upon condition that after twelftide you will not faille
to come to me with preparation to receive that doom which I shall lay upon
you for your christmasse trespasses. In the interim I conceive nothing more
fitting then to inform you of the cheifest and most important affair that you
can have upon earth. You know you have been borne and bred a catholic, And
you know it is their belief and tenent that all we catholics are obliged to
venture life and fortunes for the profession of our faith. Is it not then a
great (...) for a catholic gentleman to know full well how to govern his
temporal estate, till his grounds, breed his catell, solicit his suits in
law, and menage all his terrestrial affairs, and not know Why in such an
occasion he ought to hazard, yea and if need be, to loose and cast all away
in the very sight of his lamenting friends, some vpbraiding and some
condemning his action as foolish and indiscreete?


Nephew. I pray, uncle, do not lay so hard a censure upon me, nor think me
so ignorant of those things with out the knowledge where of. I cannot be a
catholic. And you know we cannot be admitted to the Sacraments, nor can we be
esteemed and reputed catholics unless we believe that the reward we expect in
heaven is far beyond the pleasures of this world. And truly considering what
Christ Jesus has done and suffered for us, it were most base and unworthy of
a grateful soul to fear to yield up life and goods when it is for his honor
and glory. Nor do I think that more violent and efficacious reasons and
motives can be given to a noble ha^t then these. I confess if you would search
into the metaphysicall grounds and principles of these truths, I should perhaps
light short of giving a full accounte, but my age and natural unsteadfastness
plead my excuse as yet, peradventure when I grow elder I may prove more
bookish and then turn the scripture and fathers, and so become able to give a
more sollide account of our tenants, but as yet this is not to be expected at
my hands.


Uncle. Fear not, cozen, any hard measure from me Who love you so tenderly,
nether is that the point I intended to deliver unto you. But sithence the
greatter part of your kindred are of a different belief from you, I desire to
enable you to give them satisfaction why you adhere so strongly to the
Catholic party, as to hazard your own and posteritie's welfare for the
maintenance of your faith and profession. Nether am I ignorant of your
youthful disposition, and therefore Will I abstain from mystical and sublime
metaphysikes, and only, or at least cheefely make use of what you know
already, and what common sense and ordinary natural reason is able to
perform. wherefore to make the first breach, I pray tell me, coze^, what
answer would you give to a near friend Wh^ should blame you for ruining your
estate in the defense and maintenance of a position which is against the
judgment of your kindred, friends, country, and state?


Nephew. I would lay open unto him how that our church and our doctrine has
been ever preached and taught from Christ's time in all countries of the
world, what abundance of holy martyrs and learned men we have had, how all
christian nations have been converted by us, and such like motives, which are
able to secure any Wise man from doubting, and must needs convince the truth
to be on our side, our Adversaries being but vpstarts of an hundredth years
old. Which if any should co^test, and deny these things to be true, I Would
offer to produce men Who should prove and justify all I said against any
Doctor he should bring.


Uncle. Very well, bur if your friend reply, that they willingly confess
these things have been done by the common Ancestors of both Catholics and
Protestants, which were the true church, but many errors by little and little
have encroached and crept in amongst the^, which when they were discovered,
those who now adhere to the Roman church would not acknowledge, but through
obstinacy and desire of sovereignty brake communion. And farther that these
divisions are not truly divisions in Religion but in opinion; so that both
sides remain still parts of the true church, though so much tra^sported by
their first heates and passions as that causelessly they deny communion one to
the other. And, saie's he, if you look in to the points of these diuisio^s,
they are but such as be in the Roman church it self betwixt Thomists and
Scotists, Dominicans and Jesuits, who proceed so far as to charge one an
other with Pelagianisme and Caluinisme, which nevertheless does not make
different churches, even by the Catholics own confession. And why then should
the Protestants be of an other church then the Catholics are of? What would
you answer to this?


Nephew. I am not so ignorant but I see well enough that all manner of
differences ought not to make a breach in churches, W^ diff^ces Reli^ man sch^
and yet that some may. For I see men go to law and have quarells, and both
parties not only tolerated in the in the common wealth, but held good members
of it. And yet others I see punished for their quarells and contentions. And if
I do not mistake the reason of this disparitie is, that as long as these
quarells are betwixt private me^, so long they are suffered and borne withal,
but if once the common wealth take part with one side, giving judgment in the
cause disputed and thereby interesse it self in the business, if then the other
side yield not, it is justly accounted punishable and an evil member of the
commonwealth. And in deed thus to disagree under a head or rule which can
bring the disagreers to agreement, is rather to agree then disagree, because
they agree in a thing (to wit in a mutually acknowledged head and common rule)
which is stronger the^ the causes of their disagreeme^t, and therefore their
disageement is only for a time, until that head and rule have a convenient and
fit opportunity to reduce the disagreers to a full and total agreement. This
daily experience teaches us in our own commonwealth, which having once given
a final sentence and determinate judgment betwixt party and party the suite
is ended, and who should disobey would be punished for contempt. So likewise in
the church, which is a spiritual common wealth, such differences as be amongst
those who refer them selves to her judgment, and acknowledge her decisiue
authority, are and may be tolerated to what terms soever the parties grow
amongst them selves. But such differences as trench upon her authority, and
are betwixt those whereof the one party will not acknowledge her defining
power, nor stand to her judgment, such differences, I say, make Aliens and
deserve to be cut of from communion.


Uncle. You have discursed well, but not home at least to the second part of
the replye, about the points them selves, whether they be but matters of
opinion or no, what say you to that?


Nephew, That also is evident to me, to wit that the points disputed betwixt
Catholics and Protestants are most material and substa^tiall ones. For
suppose Christ's body be truly and really in the Blessed Sacrament, and that
it is God him self which the Priest shows the people to adore, it suerly can
be no slight offense not to give him due honor; nor contrariewise no small
crime to adore that for God which truly is not so. If Christ have left the
authority of government to Bishops, of Absolution from sins to Priests, it is
no indifferent nor pettit business to take the^ out of the church. If it be
Idolatry to ho^nor images, pray to Saints, and the like, can we think it no
great matter whether we do so or no, seeing the scripture full of so many
plagues faling upon the Jews for Idolatry?


Uncle. Why, cozen. may not a Protestant answer you likewise, that if one of
the opinions controuerted betwixt Thomists and Scotists be Pelagianisme the
other Caluinisme, can you think that such points are of small importance?
Wherefore he will tell you, that all such points are very hard questions,
grave, learned, and unpassionate men on both sides, and therefore what so ever
the truth be in it self, yet so long as God Almighty see's our hearts to be
right toward him, and that we desire to do what his law teaches us, so far
as we are able to know it, all these and the like opinions are but only
material errors, and do not hinder us from being good Christians.


Nephew. Truly, Uncle, you have puzzled me now, for unless such points and
questions do trench upon the church's authority, why should not the church
bear with such opinions, but so severely cast them out of communion, ad shutt
heaven gates upon the Authors and Beginners of them? Certes unless there be
some necefsitie why certain points are to be known by the whole church,
others not, I confess I cannot answer you, but I come to learn, and
therefore when my own discourse reaches not, I must crave your helping hand
to direct me. And I shall think the year well hanselled if you make me
understand what points are to be known of necessity and why? but first, I
pray, tell me



UNCLE. To set you in the way you must first tell me what you think this
word necessity does importe, so far as it concerne's our purpose?


Nephew. You know I am no great cla^ke, and therefore I cannot speak of
necessity, nether as a Gramarian nor as a Logician, but as far as I
understand and intend by my question, there is two sorts of necessities, the
one so absolute as that the thing we desire cannot without such a means be
any ways gotten or do^ne; the other in respect of such a means without the
which our desire cannot be well and conveniently obtained. For we commonly
say that such or such a thing cannot be done or gotten, when it is extreme
hard and painful to get it. And therefore some times we call that necessary
without which our desire cannot be fullfilled but with great labor and
difficulty, and some times that, without which it cannot absolutely be
compassed.


Uncle. Mary, cozen, you need nether Gramarian nor Logician to help you, The
necessity of knouing points of faith is to be compared to a church or
company of belieuers and not to every particularman.
nor to mende what you have said. But since you are so skillful, and that you
now see what is necessary in general, to wit the know ledge of Christian
doctrine, and what it is to be necessary, I will trouble you with a farther
dema^de, giving you first this caveat, That my intention is not to examine or
declare what express and distinct knowledge or belief ought every particular
and individual man to have, whithout which he cannot possibly be saved, this
being a thing depending of so many secret and unknown circumstances, as that
it seems to be specialy reserved as only befitting God's infinite wisdom and
divine justice. though some times a prudent man may shrodly guess, and in a
possible supposition of a particular man's dying without repentance in a
positive and wilful contradicting belief to the doctrine of the Catholic
church, it would be no breach of charity to conclude his damnation. Yet at
this present we will only speak of the necessity of knowing and believing
several controuerted points of Christian doctrine in respect of a church or
company of professed Christians in common, and not as the knowledge thereof is
necessary to every particular man. Now therefore tell me, what is the end for
which this knowledge of Christian doctrine is necessary?


Nephew. How be knowledge of Christian doctrine comes to be nessarie to
salvation.
That I suppose no man doubteh but it is heaven, or in more learned terms, the
sight or true and proper knowledge of Almighty God, who being the cause and
Creator of All things, he that clearly see's and tru^y know's him, will see
and know all other things in him, which all together fall so far short of
giving such content as is taken by seeing him that the sight of him is only
accounted Bliss, and the sight of all the rest is but a retenue and
conuenience of that first and chief sight, which of it self alone is our
essential Happiness.


Uncle. This I confess, cozen, is both very true and very well said of you,
but yet I must have an other answer: for sure you have over skipp't some
thing. What connection is there, I pray, betwixt the knowledge of Christian
doctrine and seeing of Almighty God? Some thing, I say, must of necessity
be betwixt them, for which, what soever it be, the knowledge of Christian
doctrine will be more immediately necessary. Which if you can tell me what it
is, we shall thereby more easily discover and conceive what and how far this
knowledge of Christian doctrine is necessary for us.


Nephew. Why uncle, you know I have been taught no farther then to know what I
ought to believe and do, and that in believing and doing so, I shall come to
heaven.


Uncle. And were you not taught that the commandments were resumed and
comprehended in two, to wit in the love of God and of your neighour?


Nephew. Yes that I was, but what that appertaine's to your question, that I
understand not, unless peradventure your meaning be, that the accomplishment
of these two laws is the immediate stepp to our Bliss. Which as I see it is
very likely, yet do I not fully conceive why it should be so, unless heaven
go by wishing, whereas I have still been taught it goe's by working, and that
violence must carry it.


Uncle. Did you never take notice of your self, how that if you harken to a
discourse of any thing which you vehemently desire to know how attentive you
are? how fearful that any word should slip unheard or not understood? how
quiet you keep all your thoughts? how still and vntrouble^ your fancy? that
what you hear may sink down into your soul as distinctly, and in the same
frame and order as it flows from the speaker? So you see that the love or
desire to know any thing is the most efficacious disposition we can have to
attain to the knowledge thereof. Now you know that this life and conversation
of the soul in her body is given her to prepare and dispose her self for the
next life, Is it not therefore evident that that soul which most desire's to
see and know God, that is, which most loves God, in this life, and
particularly in the time of her departure out of this world, goe's out of her
body with the best and perfectest preparation and disposition to see and know
God in the life to come, which is our expected and eternal happiness? Nor is
this against what you have been taught, for love is the most active and
consequently the most violent thing in the world, and therefore if heaven must
be obtained by violence, love certainly must be the way. Wherefore you see,
we are to considere the necessity of controuerted points of Religion in as
much as of their own nature and of the^ selves they do cause and make
professors of christianity to love God, and desire to see him. For sithe^ce
this love and desire is the means and way to heaven, it must needs follow
that according as any point or position does produce or contribute to this
effect in the souls of Christians, the necessity of such a point must be of
the same degree. There is a necessity of believing all points of faith in
general, out of an other principle, to wit, in that the church proposes them
unto us as such, which we must accept and believe in all or none, being the
same reason and motive in all, but this I shall take occasion an other time to
show unto you. You will say peradventure if this be so, what neede's the
knowledge of Christian doctrine? can there be imagined a greatter motive of
love then that God is, and that he is goodness it self? Is not this alone a
sufficient motive to make all creatures melt into the love of him? And this
suerly may be known by pure natural reason. Why the^ is the knowledge of
points disputed betwixt the Protestants and us to be held necessary? Nay to
what end must we needs know any part of Christ's law for the attaining of
Bliss, since love will do it, and the most efficacious motive of love is to
be had with out it?


Nephew. You have posed me now, for truly I see that goodneesse is able to
ravish all the hearts in the world, and this is so clear and common that it
neede's no proof. Wherefore me thinke's if me^ would considere and follow this
motive of God's infinite goodness, they would not want love, and not wanting
love, according to your discourse, they must of necessity attain to
everlasting Bliss and Happiness. Why therefore any other knowledge should be
absolutely necessary I see not, much less do I conceive wherefore we should
think


Arrians and other Ancient Heretics differed from Catholics are points of
necessity to be known and believed.
UNCLE. What think you, cozen, if the motive of love which we speak of, were
such, why God's goodness as knowable by nature is not a sufficient motive of
love to all mankind.
as that few men and great clerks only were able to reach and conceive it, not
consequently be moved and affected with it? Do you think some other motive
more easy, more general, and more common, were not necessary, whereby the
people and ordinary sort of men might be moved and affected? Or do you think
that mankind could be said to have sufficient means to attain to Bliss and
Happiness, if it had only such an one, as that very few could make use of?
And that you may the better conceive my question, putt the case, that on the
one side there were such a means as that very few could reach unto it, on the
other side such an one as were accommodated to the capacity of every man, do
you not see, that to say mankind may be saved by this or that means, has a
quite different sense? Mankind in the one signifying the whole multitude, in
the other a small, or as it were no part of the multitude. For that part of
any thing which is so little as that it bears no moral proportion to the
whole, is, in our manner of speaking, accounted as none. Do you not then see
that it is necessary that the means of our salvation be of this more general
and common nature?


Nephew. I doubt it not, and mine own interest make's me more inclined
thereunto, being, God knowe's, I am of the weaker sort. And when I consid ere
the good of salvation, and the harm and misery which follows the loss of
it, and that we all acknowledge every man to be capable thereof, it is evident
that the means of attaining such an infinite good, whereunto we are all
ordained, ought to reach and lie within the power of all, or at least, of the
most part of men. But yet I see not why the infinite goodness of God is not a
motive sufficiently general and common to move and affect all the world.


Uncle. Why, cozen, Three degrees of tending to any good.
you must considere that there be as it were three stepps or degrees by which
we go or tend to any good. The first, to apprehende or understand what it
is, The second to conceit and esteem it, And the third to desire and poursue
it, And in the prosecution thereof to prefer it before all other goods which
deserve not so well, and in our case to prefer it before all other goods
whatsoever, as being the greattest of all. These three degrees be so disposed,
as that the last cannot stand nor be putt without the second, nor the second
without the first, though contrary wise the first may be without the second,
and the second without the third by reason of man's weakness. HoW hard it is
to conceive God's goodness or any spiritual thing.
Now if you considere that God Almighty and his goodness is the most simple,
sublime, and abstract thing that ca^ possibly be imagined, And reflect but upon
the nature of Angels, or of a soul, nay eue^ of a corporal substance
separated from all his sensible accidents, and if you had the experience that I
have, you would say it were hard even for the best wits to apprehe^de
rightly, and discourse consequently of these things. And shall we not then
think that it is either absolutely impossible, or extremely difficile to make
the grosser sort of men apprehe^de or understand any thing likely or to the
purpose of God and his goodness? Suerly we may. And the reason is, because
sense and sensible objects are the perpetual matter and subject wherein our
understandings are exercised, not only in our childhood and youth, but eue^ in
our whole life, unless some few by the study of metaphysikes do eleuate
their understandings above the ordinary pitch of me^ and course of nature. And
therefore it must needs be hard, and as it were impossible, that the greattest
part of mankind should be able to frame any fitting and likely conceit or
Idea of Almighty God, or of his goodness. Look but upon the Jews, who had
this knowledge inculcated into them by perpetual miracles and Prophets, and
yet they could not keep the^ selves long from running after Idols, because
they had nothing to entertain their fancy and their sensible manner of
understanding. And now if you call to mind the common saying of philosophers
that nihil est volitum quod non sit praecognitum, to which is Parallel the
Poet's Apopthegme quod oculi sunt in amore duces, you shall find that what is
not well rooted and imprinted in the understanding, can never be deeply fixed
in the will, nor consequently the will efficaciously moved and affected by it.
And that nothing, and I know not what are of the same force and effect in our
case, according to Aristotle's maxim, that in respect of love it is all one
not to be, and not to be known, it must necessarily follow that the greatest
part of men being not able to make any strong and deep conceit of God and
his goodness; that it is not possible they should be efficaciously moved and
affected therewith. And if a preacher after a long discourse of the love of
God, and of his great benefits toward us in the order of nature, could not
give a satisfactorie accounte, by reason of the weakness of his Auditory, to
one that should ask him who is God, or what is he that has done all these
things for us? Would not his learned labors vanish into a dream, and the
people go away as from a playe^ where they wept at a thing which concerned
them not, and were no longer carried a way then whilst they fate hearing? I
could cite a witness and name a gentlewoman of your acquaintance, of as sweet
a nature and as pure an understanding as is to be found amongst a thousand,
with whom having some times occasion to discourse about the state of the next
life, she has often told me, that she bebelieued all those fine things,
having ever been taught she must do so, but that they seemed to her as
things in a dream, for, quoth she, I shall never be able to conceive what a
soul is, when all the body is taken a way.


Nephew. Truly, uncle, you have quite convinced me, for as I see men talk of
nothing more familiarly then of God and his goodness, so likewise I see that
if they discourse but of an Angel, they presently conceit him to have a body
and wings. And if one would force them out of it, they would be besides
themselves. So that in very deed not one in ten thousand can make any right
co^ceite of spiritual things. And if you talk to the common people of heaven
they conceive it but a dry thing to sit looking upon God Almighty and
singing Psalms for all eternity.


Uncle. Well then, cozen, this being so, Wh^ the knoWledge of the Incarnation
is necessary?
that God's goodness is so abstract and sublime as that very few can either
know or love it sufficiently in it self, Suppose Allmigtie God of his infinite
mercy and goodness toward us, has so tempered and abessed this too high and
inconceiuable object by taking man's nature upon him, and has thereby made it
palpable and tractable even to the weakest and grossest understandings, in so
much that any man, how dull soever, may with sensible facility fix his mind
and love upon it: Nay if he has adjoined there unto the greatest causes of
love that heart can wish and bear, to wit the pains and sufferings of his
sacred life and bitter death practiced upon his divine person as he was man,
the tender expressions whereof we find recorded in the holy history of the
Gospel, can we think that who take's this point of God's Incarnation out of
the church and world, by either denying or doubting of it, but that he does move
an Important stone, and that this dogme can be no less then of extreme and
maine necessity?


Nephew. Certes no, it is clear in my mind, not only what you say, but also
that such a man as would wrest out this corner stone and pull down this pillar
of the church, what soere he prat's of Christ, and beare's his name in show, in
truth and verity is no Christian. For he takes away Christ, and Annullate's
his coming. Wherefore if there be any such, no sword, no fire, no torment
sufficient to exterminate him, no auersion, no horror, The variety of the
Orie^tall errors against Christ's being God and man.
no abomination great enough to make true Christians avoid him.


Uncle. I commend your zeal. Now therefore cast your eyes upon the oriental
Heresies which antie^tly reigned, whereof some denied Christ to be God, some
denied him to be man, some said he was nether God nor man but a third thing
made of both, And some said that he was two things whereof the one was God, the
other was man. All agreed in this, that the same person was not truly God and
man, and conse^quently took away this efficacious means and pregnant motive
of love, that God did do and suffer for us those sensible and easily conceived
benefitts which he could not unless he were man. And in this consists the
great and maine help of humane nature, that by and in the person of a true
and sensible man we might fix our hearts and setle our utmost desires upon our
eternal good and happiness. We may therefore conclude with S. John, that who
soever dissolueth Christ is Antychrist, 1. Ioh. ^.
Which all these ancient Heretics did, to whom we may annexe all the Authors
of heresies concerning the Blessed Trinity, the knowledge whereof being
revealed and delivered unto us to direct us in this great mystery of the
Incarnation, the errors against that must needs reflect upon this, and be of
the same nature and importance, and consequently of the same necessity, by
reason this mystery of the Incarnation cannot stand unless the mystery of
the Trinity be likewoise true.


Nephew. I am fully satisfied in this point, but I pray tell me, good uncle,
is not



FOr what avails it mankind that there be such easy means to come to
heaven, if out of weakness, waywardness, or carelessenesse they will not
look after it? Suerly I cannot see but it is only to the increase of their
damnation. Like unto an ambitious man who whilst he is yet a far of from the
honnour which he aspire's unto, he can bear it patiently, but if once he come
to a fair possibility, and have it as it were in his hand, o! Then if he
miss it, he is incapable of all comfort and consolation, and thinke's him
self the most unhappy and unfortunate man in the word. So I conceive that when
a soul is out of her body and come's to see how easily she might have
attained to that eternal Bliss and Happiness, where unto she was ordained,
and that through her own neglect and carelessenesse she is now to be
everlastingly deprived thereof, o God! Uncle, how infinitely will she be
grieved? how she will curse her self? and thereby increase her pain and
misery.

Uncle. You say well, cozen, Can you doubt therefore, or can a Christian
think, but it is a point of great necessity to man Kind, If there be any
order established by Christ Jesus in his church to make men embrace, accept,
and poursue those facile means to salvation, that they know and believe it?
Can a man of common sense and judgment immagine chat this is not a point of
maine importance? Or that who disagree's about this position does only disagree
in matter of opinion, wherein each one may hold what he pleases, and not in a
matter substantially and fundamently necessary to salvation?


Nephew. I confess, Uncle, when I co^sidere the frailty of man, and see how
easily and ordinarily he is withdrawn from willing and following the means of
his beatitude by the least terrestrial, sensual, and mome^tarie pleasure, it
where madness in me to believe that supposing there be any such order
established by Christ in his church to incite and provoke men to accept and
practice these saving means, it were, I say, madness not to think the
knowledge and belief of such an order to be one of the most important and
necessary points of christian doctrine.


Uncle. Remember then, cozen, the three stepps or degrees we talked of before,
of knowing, esteeming, and poursuing any good. And you will find that, for
the first it is necessary the truth of Christian doctrine be conserved and
often inculcated in to the hearts and minds of Christians, for the second that
those who are to do this, have such qualities as will give them credit and make
men believe them, and for the third that there be means taken (so far as
human nature gives leave) to cut of all such impediments as hinder men from
preferring eternal good before the temporal temptations and sensual
pleasures of this life. The first of these conditions requires that there be
men appointed to have care of the people by instructing and often putting them
in mind of Christian doctrine. Which if Christ have done, it is evident that
whosoever seeks to change his order and appointment does not quarrel upon a
sliglt point, but upon a most weighty and necessary one.


Nephew. I see well that who seeks to distroye such an order established by
Christ, playe's with his church as Esope's wolves played with the sheep,
offering them prey upon condition they would deliver up their dogs unto them,
which being done, they slew and preyed upon the sheep. And me thinke's, common
sense tells me there cannot be a point in all Christian doctrine of greatter
importance then this. For when I considere why treason is the greattest offense
that can be committed in a common wealth, I see it is because no law can
subsiste and hold without guardes and lookers to it, so that who strikes at
these guardes in a common wealth (of what nature so ever it be) strikes at the
very essential form of it, at all the laws, and at all what so ever does
conserve the peace and liberty of the whole people and multitude, where upon
the common wealth does subsiste. Wherefore it is evident by natural reason that
who seeks to remove and abolish those whom God has pla^ed to guarde his
church, strikes at the total ruin thereof.


Uncle. It Is true, and therefore you may infer that questions of the Pope's
authority over Bishopps, of Bishopps authority over Priests, and of Priests
authority over the laietie are of no small moment. And that who goe's about to
distroye this Hierarchy aymeth at no less then the utter overthrow of
Religion, and ruin of the church planted by Christ Jesus with so much sweat
and blood, and espoused so dearly unto him with his sacred promises. These are
the Angels to who^ God has trusted and committed the charge of his flock.
These are they by whose continual succession we convince the perpetuity of
the Catholic church. These are the men who when any new Blasphemy arriseth
meet in Counsels to give testimony to the doctrine of Christ ever dwelling
in the hearts of the faithful, and thereby crush the serpeni's head. These are
they who in their wisdoms, may and ought enacte laws and Canons to Christ's
flock, and correct abuses creeping in both in discipline and morality,
leaving still untouched Christ's sacred institutions, And therefore who seeks
to extirpate or infringe this authority in the church, sets his axe at the
root of faith and virtue, by which the church of Christ does subsiste. Nay
even in schismatic churches the wiser and more learned sort of men have ever
detested and abhorred the confused Anarchie of brainesicke Puritants. And it is
said that wise state's men do vehemently suspect, and have just cause to
suppress all An^y-Hierarchists.


Nephew. Certainly no prudent and moderate man can doubt of the importance of
this point. And me thinke's, uncle, these zealous societies do to the
mainteners of this Hierarchy as Diogenes did to Plato, scorning his vanity
with a far greater pride, for whilst they cry out against the pride of those
who seek these dignities established by Christ in his church, they discover a
far greater pride in them selves by endeavoring to distroy so sacred an
institution, that they them selves may usurp the power and place. But to the
second degree and condition of the division you made, do you think



UNCLE. How say you cozen, what power, preeminencie, and qualities do you
think are necessary for these guardes and teachers of Christ's law and
doctrine, to the end that the people may conceit such things as they tell
them, and think them to be of moment? for surely the most part of men have
need of all the helps that may be, to eleuate and raise their minds to
celestial cogitations?


Nephew. I see well enough that such men must needs have credit with the
people, and ought not only to be accounted wise and good men, but should be
also esteemed wiser and better then the laietie, for I have heard the Prophet's
curse cited, sicut populus sic and Sacerdos. But this me thinke's should not
touch upon any necessary point of faith, seeing it depende's on their
particular lives and employments, which are known by sense and experience, and
not by any tradition from our forefathers.


Uncle. You are mistaken, cozen, for although it is true that the clergie's
evil lives may disgrace the motives of reverence bestowed upon the^ by Christ
Jesus* yet if their lives be but tolerable* Christ may have given them such
eminent power and dignity as that they will not want, that reverence and
respect which is fit and conformable to the function and profession whereunto
he has caled them. And certes not with out necessities, if we considere the
credulity and obedience which are required at the people's hands. Credulity,
of things beyond and above nature, nay beyond all the fables (be it spoken with
respect) that ever man invented. Obedience of hazarding lives and fortunes, nay
of entirely ruining them selves and their posterity (in respect of this world)
in such cases as these instructors shall tell them that the law of God
commande's it and require's it. Wherefore as Kings and Magistrates find by
experience that Pompes and Ceremonies, and the reserving of certain actions
and creations to them selves, do breed in their subjects (yea and in
strangers too) honor and respect, and therefore are very careful how they
imparte and communicate them, still keeping to them selves alone some Regal
privileges and prerogatives. So likewise Christ Jesus not unmindful of his
Ministers, left them, and to them only, the church's Pompes and solemnities,
but specially the Sacraments, to give them credit and authority thereby. To
Bishops the giving of the Holy Ghost or Confirmation (Which is a continuance of
the Mission of the third person of the holy Trinity in the first Christian
Pentecoste, and therefore who slight's Confirmation slight's that Missio^) and
the co^secrating of Priests. Why Priests are to be honored.
To Priests the rest of the Sacraments, except Baptism, which by reason of the
people's necessity could not conuenie^tly be reserved to Priests only, whereof
there were to be but few. But cheefely he gave them charge of the Bloudilesse
sacrifice of his own body, and the power of remitting sins, whereon is
prinpally grounded and subsiste's the reverence due unto the church of God. The
one being a privilege beyond man's inue^tion, and such an one, as if all the
learned clerks that ever lived since the beginning of the world, should have
studied to raise, advance, and magnify some one istate of men to the highest
ptch of Reverence and Eminency that could be imagined, they could never
(without special light from heave) have thouht of any thing comparable to
this, And yet so adapted to the secrets of nature, that who should diue in to
her mysteries would straight at the first proposing of it acknowledge it to be
true, because a thing so hidden in the depth of nature's bowels could not be
invented and applied in this manner by any but the Master of nature it self.
The other being so mighty a power over man's nature and so extremely useful
to mankind, for their help and direction to eternal Bliss, that nether in
respect of the awe which it strike's in to their subjects, nor in respect of
the profit, which (being conuenienie^tly used) resulteth from it, there is
nothing in this world any way estimable in comparison thereof. What think
you then, cozen, who seeks to take away the real presence of Christ's body
in the B: Sacrament, and the power of Absoluing sins, does he quarrel upon
trifles? Be not these points (which we hold as true and as certain, and upon
the same grounds, as we do the Trinity and Incarnation) of maine consequence
and importance? And does not he shake the fundame^tal Basis, and chief
cornerstone of the church's building who take's away this power and
authority from her judges and ministers, whereby they were so reverenced and
honored as that they were believed and obeyed? And finally be these questions
to be left indifferent to every idle brain and private fancy to think and
practice what he please's?


Nephew. I must needs confess I never considered thus much before, for truly
I see that the Administration of the Sacraments are necessary for this end,
thoe I have heard the Sacraments are necessary for many other ends. But now I
easily conceive that if the clergy be not of credit, it cannot have the effect
which it was made and ordained for, and if it has not it is effect, it causes
not the keeping of Christ's law, and if Christ's law be not kept, there is no
salvation. So that it is evident the Clergy needs the greattest proppes and
means of credit and reverence that can be had. And surely what common wealth
soever highly esteeme's of God's law and Christian doctrine, would wish the
Clergy these very qualities, if they had them not allreadie. Wherefore I
wonder not that the Puritants, who mainely oppose Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
do fo hate and deteste the doctrine of the B. Sacrament, because they think
all Popery is built upon that great sacrifice. And I remember when I was in
France, I perceived that going to Mass was h^ld the chief distinctiue sign
and action betwixt a Catholic and a Caluinist. So that considering these
supernatural and never sufficiently honored qualities of Priests, I cesily
believe the story which is told of S. Francis, that he said, if he should
meet a Priest and an Angel he would first salute the Biest.


Uncle. You say well, and surely were all Priest's lives such as did not
partly disgrace theses guiftes bestowed upon them, I doubt not but Kings would
lay their crowns and scepters at their feet, and wear their swords at their
devotion, which antiquity tells us haith been done and practiced. Yea those
Tribunall's and that temporal power and jurisdiction (concerning which the
clergy does now perhaps too much contend with the laietie) were at the first
forced upon holy Bishops against their wills; either by particular men's pretty
and agreement, or by the Emperor's commands. The world then thinking him
unworthy to live that would not condemn him self if the Bishop judged
against him, And both anciently in S. Hugh of Lincoln, and lately in S.
Charles of Milan, the Christian world has seen how great a power the
Reverence of a Bishop has, even in respect of Kings, when his life
corresponde's and seconde's his Dignity.


Nephew. But I pray, uncle, do you think that the greatest necessity (...)
the Sacraments does consist in this, that by the reservation of their
administration to the clergy, the clergie's authority might be more exalted
and fitter to serve the church? I have heard other reasons preferred before
this, and* therefore me thinke's you should more insist upon that necessity
which in it self is the greatest and most forcible, then upon a lesser.


Uncle. Why, cozen, I do not intend to allege all the reasons wherefore the
Sacraments are necessary, but only some forcible one, whereby it may follow
that such questions as are betwixt Catholics and Protestants concerning those
points, may appear to be of impor^ce, and so fundamental, as that Christian
Religion cannot have it is subsista^ce and progress without the knowledge of the
truth in such questions and positions. And certes if credit and authority be
the only, or at least, the maine instrument and principal means whereby the
preachers of Christianity can press and promote Christian doctrine, And that
this credit and authority is incomparably more raised and strengthened by the
Catholic position then by the Protestant's negative, it must needs follow
that the efficacitie of Christian Preachers, and the strength of their cause is
without comparison greather amongst Catholics ten amongst Protestants, which
doubtless cannot but move any reasonable man, who thinke's and belieue's that
our eternal good relye's and depe^de's upon Christian doctrine. I know there
be other necessities of the Sacraments. As for the unity of the church, which
being dispersed though the whole world could not be otherwise conserved then by
the practice of some external actions common to them all, whereby they might
know one the other. As also for the augmentation of charity and grace by the
frequentation of them. But these points have their proper treatises and places
belonging unto them. It suffiseth I have showed you that there ought to be men
appointed whose care, function, and employment is to teach and conserve in the
people the truth of Christian doctrine, and that for this effect those men must
needs have some qualities above the ordinary sort of men to authorize and
give credit to their documents. For although this doctrine of it is own nature
tend to the highest degree of perfection, and consequently deserue's of it
self to be infinitely esteemed and honored; yet being supernatural, that is
far above the innate capacity and reach of man, the preachers and teachers
thereof must of necessity be endowed with extraordinary power and authority
to give credit thereunto. Which supposed we may proceed farthe, to the third
degree and condition of removing impediments hindering the prosecution of our
eternal good, and first enquire whether



TEll me then, cozen, is it think you lawful for a private man to whose care
the church is not committed, to doubt in himself, and breed doubts in
others, touching such points as these pastors of Christ's flock, (who by
their function and profession have the church's gouerme^t committed unto them)
are agreed upon, and teach with common consent to the whole church?

Nephew. First I see, uncle, that such a man shall not easily induce men to
believe him against so great an opposition's and that therefore he had need of
better grounds in such points then in others. Secondly I see that no wise man
will oppose the opinion of so many authorized experts, or held for experts,
and that in a matter of their profession, without far greater and more
pregnant reasons in this particular business, then would be necessary in an
other, wherein he had no^ such maine prudentiall motives against him. But
whether there be any obligation in conscience, or whether this be a matter of
such importance as to make a fundamental point of Religion of it, that I know
not. For contrariewise me thinke's there should be also an obligation in
conscience, when a man finde's that these governors are mistaken, that he
should oppose them to the utmost of his power.


Uncle. You do not fully conceive my question, which is this, whether because
these men have the charge and care to reach God's law in the church (setting a
side all other difficulties) there be an obligation in reason upon this precise
grounds, no^ easily to oppose their determination without being certain and
secure of very good footing? nor to attempt any thing against their verdict
with out evidence? Because, say I, to what purpose is their judgment if it be
as free to oppose them after as before*


Nephew. As for obligation I told you, uncle, I know not of any, but this I
see, common sense and natural reason teaches us, that such as have the charge
and care of instructing others, are supposed to have more understanding in the
doctrine which they teach, the^ those who learn of them. And therefore if any
disputs or controversies arrise in such matters, I see it is ^^ter these
teachers should be the judges thereof then those who learn. And in a matter of
(...) to appeal from them (when a great and universal part of the wisest have
given their co^senting iugdme^t) to the (...), is as absurd as to appeal from
Masters to scholars, or from men of one profession to men of an other.


Uncle. Why this is all I ask, for where one part is absurd in reason, the
other must needs be certain by the same reason, And what is absurd in
practice, it is certain that ought to be avoided. Wherefore if I mistake not,
your discourse conclude's, that wheresoever the question is of ^kill, there no
man ought to appeal from them who have charge and care to teach, to those who
learn in matter of that art. And therefore if those who have the charge and
care to teach Christian doctrine do constantly and generally agree in any
point after they have heard and considered the oppositions made against them,
nether ought any man appeal unto the laietie, nor can the laietie without
presumption and rashness accept of his appeal; nor make them selves judges
in a business of other men's profession, wherein them selves are ignorant, or,
at the most, scholars. Now therefore sithence in our case there is no means
for any man to prevail against the Clergy (whom we suppose agreed amongst
the^ selves in any point or position) but by making the laietie judges
thereof, it is evident that it will be still against reason for any man to
attempt the innouating of any new point or position against the Clergie's
common verdict, and general consent, And consequently an obligation of reason
and conscience not to do it. Hence it fallows that there is a power and
authority in the Clergy of determining and deciding questions of Christian
doctrine (whereof they are the teachers) and a necessity in the laietie (who
are their scholars) of obeying and quieting them selves. For the nature of
sedition and faction is nothing else, What is sedition.
but to remove the question from them who truly have, or by their places are
supposed to have skill, to them who have, or may be presumed to have, none,
that is from the Governors to the subjects, from the skillfull to the ignorant,
and from natives, to Aliens. Secondly it fallows, Nothing but evidence is a
laW full Warrant to opoose judgment.
that there can be but two cases only in which one may oppose these
determieations and decisions. For it is manifest that nothing but evidence of
the truth can justify any innovation of this kind, because where there is no
evidence the case ought to be putt to judgment and supreme judgment being
already known and given (as in our case) there is no farther place for
judgment, and therefore only evidence can be heard. Now this evidence either is
so great as that there neede's no skill to conceive and understand it, and then
the laietie may be admitted as Judges. Or else the Emminence of the Introducer
is such, as that a point may be evident to him, and yet not to the greatest
part of the Clergy, who are the natural judges of this cause. Wherefore
every Innouator must of necessity pretend one of these two. The first he
cannot without charging the whole Clergy of perverse and will full opposition
and contradiction of the known truth; and so plainly known, that every man
see's it at the first opening and proposing of it. Which whether it was ever
done, or is possible to be done, I leave it to the judgment of any indifferent
man. The second cannot any way, belong to the ignorant and unskillful
people, And therefore the Innouator must in such a case s^eke out the most
learned of the Clergy, and to them propose his reasons, but must not in any
case publish his science to the vulgar ignorant (whom we suppose incapable of
it) for fear of sedition and faction. And in this case, as perhapps this
point of doctrine may be necessary, or at least convenient for the higher
orders of the Clergy, so likewise it cannot be necessary for the vulgar
people, sithence we suppose them incapable of it. And therefore this ^mine^t
introducer must never m^ke it common to the laietie, much less appeal from
the Clergy to them? And thus you see that all controversies in Religion must
in be remitted to the judgment of the Clergy, that is in Catholic language to
an oecumenicall Council.


Nephew. Me thinke's, uncle, I could object one thing against your discourse,
to wit, that it is not in man's liberty to think or judge what he will of
any positio^, such an act being a natural operation, and therefore that no
man ought to be forced to believe this o^ that. And to say the truth, what can
I think whether the great Turk be a talle or low man? whether the number of
the stars be odd or even? if my life laid on it, I could not think either part.


Uncle. I, cozen, but if the great Turke's true statua were in westminster, and
that for going thither you might know his height, or that the true number of
the stars were set down in an Almanacke which you might buy for a groate, I
believe if your life laid on it you would easily be resolved to think the truth.


Nephew. Mary, that is true, but then I were not forced to think or judge one
part, but only to seek out the truth, and so come naturally to think it.


Uncle. Why then likewise if the church command you to think and believe
that, which by seeking you may easily come to know, not she but you are to
blame if you do not believe what she commande's. And if her authority be
greater then any argument which can be brought to the contrary, and greater
then the most part of the reasons where upon you build all the beliefs which
govern your life and actions, may you not securely believe what she belieue's?
Or if you please do but seek out the motives which make's the church her
self believe what she teaches, and you will easily believe with her. But if
you will not attend to the means which would make you know and believe the
truth, is it not fitting you should be forced to your own good, as fools and
vicious men are to follow reason? Some men, you know, do things by force which
otherwise they would never do. And as dogs abstain from good bitts for fear
of beating, so passionate men come now and then to reason for fear or
punishment.


Nephew. T is true a passionat man does never see reason, and yet thinke's all
other men unreasonable, his passion ever making him judge amiss. And therefore
truly I do not see why men should not be punished for their passions, and so
be forced to leave the^.


Uncle. If that be so, cozen, you will find that your argument has a greater
extent then you are aware of. For if you considere how few there be that are
not carried away with passion, or interest, and how secretly these dispositio^s
lie hidd in the minds and actions, even of the best men; And then look into
the nature of our soul, and see that nothing but evidence can strongly move
and draw her of it self, or by it is own force, you will plainly perceive that
all opinion is generally grounded upon passion and interest, and therefore
according to your argument all false opinions should be corrected.


Nephew. I think in deed there is a great difference betwixt disputing wildly
to and fro with arguments on both sides, which most men use, and taking known
and agreed principles and proceeding upon them to draw forth a long thread of
science, as me thinke's your manner is. For I conceive that if this method
were strickely observed, men would attain to far more knowledge in things
necessary to our well being, and to a greater Eminence in profitable
curiosities.


Uncle. Howsoever, cozen, I hope you now perceive that this point has
resolved all controversies. For if all disputs betwixt us and others of a
different communion be in matters subject to judgment, and that there ca^ be no
higher judgment upon earth, for the resolution of such difficulties, then of a
General Council, And that we do not refuse communion to any man but for
matters thus resolved, it evidently followe's that all questions betwixt us and
what church soever of different communion are already past judgment, and
consequently past dispute. For what opinion, I pray, can you have of those, who
will not admit, nor be content with any judgment which God has left upon
earth for such matters as they themselves call in doubt? I think both common
sense and natural reason will condemn them. But let me ask you one question
farther. Suppose that some thing be ordered in the church of God according to
the judgment and discretion of those, to whom God has given the power of
Government and judgment in such matters, which perhapps of it self might be
otherwise ordered without any prejudice to the church, but they thought this
way the fittest; now come's others, to whom this charge is not committed, and
say it is ordered amiss, requiring it may be altered, whether do you think
that in this case, this order ought to be changed upon their demand and
proposition?


Nephew. If those controwlers can show an error in the order, the^, me
thinke's, it were fitting to change it, but if not, then I should absolutely
condemn them of disobedience and schsime, if they should persevere to stand
out, And he that should excuse them, were to be suspected as not true to any
authority though he profess to acknowledge it.


Uncle. Softly, cozen, softly there is nothing more frequte^ amongst men then
through passion and oversight to forsake their own principles, and contradict
in one matter what them selves confess in an other. And therefore although it
be true by co^seque^ce of reason, that who soever does rise against the church
in this kind, may upon the same ground and principle be false to any other
authority or government, yet upon other reasons, or by not seeing the
consequence of his fact, he may likewise be true and faithful, And therefore
it were rashness to condemn, for this reason alone, those truths, which such
an one may perhapps mantaine in other matters. Howsoever is not our conclusion
manifest, that there is no place for Ifs and Ands in our case, where there can
be no evidence brought against a point of doctrine, which the highest
Tribunal and Judgment upon earth has already decreed? But suppose some one
or few of these innouators had Evidence on their side, yet the vulgar people,
whom they putt on to mutiny, cannot have it, no nor any certainty that these
their ring leaders have Evidence, being not able to compare understandingly the
worth of diverse men in a business which surpasses their capacity, And
therefore this common people, in such a case, must neede's proceed and do,
whatsoever they do, upon passion, surprise, or interest, And consequently
those innouators who moved, carried, and pressed them thereunto, cannot be
excused from being culpable of temeritie, obstinacy, and Archi-Rebellion. Yet
as a Prince does some times co^descende to his Rebellious subjects, that he may
gain time, and so bring them to reason, as Roboam's wiser Council thought
fit to give ear to the cries of the communities for once, that they might
serve him ever after: So I doubt not but the church both may and will relent
some times a little to establish her Government and good order more strongly an
other time. Nor is she to be reprehended if contrariewise she be rigorous upon
occasions, to wit, when she see's that relenting weaken's her authority, and
does rather increase then assuage the mutiny. But what is now and then
convenient to be done, that belong's to them who are in place to judge, And for
us to obey, and s^ill suppose they do the best.


Nephew. Hitherto, uncle, me thinke's I am well satisfied, but there is a maine
difficulty about the diversity of the rule of faith. I pray, tell me, do
you not think



FOr we profess, you know, that tradition, or the receite of our doctrine from
father to son, is our chief authority, and our prime motive of faith, All
others will acknowledge no other rule then their own interpretation of the
scripture. This in my mind is the most important question of all the
controversies in Religion, and upon the resolution of this point does rely and
depend all other disputs and difficulties of christian faith, nay eue^ our
being truly and properly Christians or faithful. For if Christ was a lawmaker,
not every one who professes his name, but who observes his law is truly a
Christian. What it is to be a Christian.
And if Christ have set down a certain rule or manner, and certain
Magistrates, by whom we are to know this law, whosoever does not follow that
rule and acknowledge those Magistrates cannot be said to observe his law, and
consequently profess Christ's name wrongfully.

Uncle. Do you think, cozen, that who does not observe Christ's law is no
Christian? what then shall become of sinners? shall none of them be Christians,
nor of the church of Christ? you will make a church of only Elects or
Predestinates, as the Puritants do.


Nephew. It may be I go to far, yet certainly who does not keep Christ's
law, or profess to keep it, is no Christian. But then me thinke's I go to
far on the other side, for all those that profess Christ's name, do likewise
profess to keep his law, how little soever they do.


Uncle. Why then cozen, I will help you out, and open the state of the
question unto you. First you must know that this word Ecclesia in it is
primitive sense signifies a meeting or congregation of me^ called out of a
greater multitude, What is a church.
as a Council or Senate is. And because the first Christians were called in
that manner by Christ and his Apostles, Ioh. 15.
Ego vos elegi de mundo, therefore we properly and deservedly call the
multitude of Christians a Church. Now a multitude called to gether, is not only
and simply a multitude, (which may importe confusion) but a multitude gathered
together and united. wherein consist's the unity of the church.
If you ask wherein this multitude, we speak of, is united, it is known that
it is to do the will of the caller, who being Jesus, (that is, savior or
Director to salvation) their calling must be to walk the paths of salvation,
And sithence we have no other Master of our salvation but Jesus Christ, it is
evident that the unity of his church must consiste in the observance of his
law. Secondly you are to note, that there are two sorts of unities, the one of
similitude, the other of connection. We say, all men are of one nature, that is
an unity of similitude, we say likewise, all the parts of a man (though
dislike in themselves) make one man, there is an unity of connectio^. Now if
the church of Christ had been to continue only for his own, or his Apostle's
time, the former unity would have served. Nay even now, if all the Christians,
who live at this day, do, and perform the same things, practice the same
faith and good life, and use the same Sacraments, This unity of similitude
would suffice to make the church of Christ one for the present, but could not
make it subsiste and continue, there being no connection amongst the parts and
members of this multitude to make them stick together. Wherefore Christ having
planted a multitude of faithful which he intended should subsiste and continue
for many ages, no doubt but he has given them such an unity as is necessary
for continuance. Thirdly therefore you must note that there are two sorts of
multitudes in this world which subsiste and continue, the one natural, as the
parts of a living creature, the other moral as the members of communities or
commonwealths, and both have their proportional unities. For the first we see
that in plants all the members have a due connection to the root, from which
being cut of the part dies for want of continuitie. In other living creatures
we likewise find at heart (or some thing else that supplie's it is function) by
connectio^ whereunto every part receives life and subsistence, and whose
passage or communication with that heart being stopped and cut off, the part by
little and little fade's and dye's. For the second subsisting and continuing
multitude, we see in all communities or common wealths there is a head, common
Council, or highest authority, whereunto all the members repair in
necessity, and by their connection therewith, they receive security, life,
and motion in that moral kind of being, every man doing his duty according
to the laws of that community, and the head or supreme authority providing
for the observance of the laws in general, and particularly for the direction
of such cases as the laws reach not unto. So that if you take away this head
or common wisdom, the multitude must of necessity be short lived, and quickly
come to ruin. Hence it is evident to common sense and natural reason, that
the church of Christ being a multitude ordained to subsiste and continue, must
not only have the unity of similitude and be one by the similitude of actions
which Christ has prescribed, and all Christians practice; but also by the
unity of connection to some common head and supreme Council, whereby it may
conserve it self, and keep it is subjects in the continuance of the law of
Christ, and in the practice of those actions which he has commanded. And here
you may note, that were this law natural, there needed no more to be of the
church then to be a member of this community, The Want of the true rule of
faith exclude's from the church.
and he would be out of it, who should not participate of the two unities. But
our Christian law being above nature, and co^seque^tly not to be learned by
man's judgment, but by authority, (that is by receiving it from Christ) those
who do not receive it by that means and rule by which Christ has ordained it
shall be received, are not truly of this community, whatsoever be their
material belief and opinion. Wherefore you are to considere farther, that
this Receipte of Christ's law and doctrine may have been ordained by Christ
himself to be effected two several ways. First by word of mouth, that is,
that this law and doctrine should be vocally taught and delivered from hand to
hand, from father to son to the world's end: secondly, by writing. Now
therefore if Christ have ordained both these ways, who should not accept of
them both, is not truly and properly a Christian, nor consequently of the
Christian community. If Christ have only instituted tradition to be the means
and rule of the receite of his law and doctrine, and has given scripture only
for superabundant instruction and consolation, then who should reject
tradition, and fly to the scripture, making it his only rule and means of
receiving Christ's law and doctrine, were not truly and properly a Christian,
nor of the Christian community. Lastly if Christ have ordained scripture alone
to be this rule and means, then who cleaves to Tradition is not truly a
Christian. The resolution of this question does properly belong to the
Governors of the church, who if they have the true rule, their subjects are
safe, if not, their subjects souls will be required at their hands by whom
they perish. But I will take an other time to give you a full resolution of
this maine difficulty. Three things are required to make a legitimate Christian
In the interim you may infer out of this discourse to our present purpose
that three things are required to make one a legitimate Christian, and such an
one, as every Christian ought to be, if he will be truly one of the
community and church of Christ. Though perhaps one may be in some sort a
Christian, and go to heaven too, by an exttaordinarie means, without having
all these three subsequent dispositions and qualities. The first is, that he
believe and practice the law of God, which in respect of a particular man is
but short, and it is, in a word, to love God above all things. The second is,
that he be united to the multitude of true Christians, that is, that he depend
of the Government left and instituted by Christ here upon earth. And for this
point or quality, as I doubt not but some one or few may be saved without it
(yea peradventure with an opposition to it in fact through ignorance, so his
heart be true and without passion) yet to think this a common, ordinary, and
high way to salvation, and that it is as indifferent to live from under this
Government settled by Christ, as under it, were ridiculous and absurd in common
sense and reason, and in deed it were to annultate Christ's coming, and make
his law void and fruitless. And if you desire to conceive the necessity of
this point more fully, do but reflect and considere the nature of all civil
and political commonwealths, wherein if any member do not live under the
Governors, and depend of the Magistrates established by the highest power and
authority thereof, he cannot be truly and properly said to be a part and
member of that community, nor can he assuredly know (ordinarily speaking) nor
constantly perform the law and orders of it. The third point is, that this
community, whereof every particular Christian is to be a share and member,
has the true rule and means to know and observe the law of Christ. And it is
necessary that this point be more exactly known by those who live amongst
diversity of opinions in this matter. For where there appears learned and
morally good me^ taking parts in this question, a private man seeme's to have
just reason to doubt whether side he shall take for his guide, and therefore
this point well dicussed amongst such, giue's a man full and general
satisfaction for his whole belief and practice. And these two last points
clear one the other, for that community which has the true means of the
receipte of Christ's law and doctrine, that is, the true rule of faith, must of
necessity be it, of, and in which we are to seek, and shall find, Christ's
law: And contrariewise if we find the true community, we are sure it has the
true rule of knowing Christ's law and doctrine. Hence it is that the Catholic
church ever pressed her Adversaries with two special arguments, 1. with the
novelty of their church, showing that none of them ever had a continual
visible succession. 2. that they receive not their opinions from their
Ancestors, and by them from Christ, but that they were invented at such a time,
against the received tenet of the church in that time, that is, tradition for
the church, and novelty of doctrine in her Adversaries. And now I think you
see the resolution of our first question.


Nephew. I think I do, and it is (if I be not deceived) that such as profess
to keep the law of Christ (though in effect they do not perform it) are to
be accounted of the church, and consequently sinners are not to be excluded, so
long as they submit them selves to the church's Government established by
Christ: And on the other side, though diverse pretend to Christ's law and
doctrine, yet unless they be joined and united to that co^munitie which has
this government, and the true rule to know and continue Christ's law, they
cannot (generaly speaking) be saved. HoW some may be saved out of the church.
But you said one thing which truble's me to wit, that some be saved even
without these conditions, which is against our common saying, that there is no
salvation out of the church of God, and therefore, you know, we labor to get
people reconciled and united to the church even in the hour of their death,
which would not be so needful if salvation could be had out of the church.


Uncle. Why, cozen, do you not say, that every man has two legs, two eyes,
and the like, though some particular men be destitute of both? we say men
cannot live without meat, and yet some have lived many years without it. We
say men cannot live in the water and yet it is writ, that the Portugalls in
their discoueries found a man whose habitation was in the sea, and came only to
land as Crocodiles and seacalfes do. So you see we putt universal
denominations upon the common* and general, and that without prejudice to
lawful exceptions of rareties or prodigies. You know there is no general rule
but has an exception, and Logicians say, ars non curat de accidentibus ac
fortuitis.


Nephew. But, I pray you show me, why it is a rare accident for a man to be
saved out of the church. For example, if we look into the tene^^ of our
Protestants, I see not, why they may not be said to hold sufficient points of
faith both to attain to the love of God, which is the chief path of
salvation, but also to live an ordinary and compete^t good life amongst their
neighbors, which is the compleatnesse of God's law.


Uncle. Were not man a civil and sociall animal, that is, to live with
others, I should not deny, but a Protestant might more ordinarily be saved.
For as you said well, they hold as many tenants with the Catholic church as
be in some sort sufficient for the direction of a private ma^'s life. But God
has commanded every man to have care of his neighbor, at least so far, as
not to hinder him from such things as be necessary to his salvation. And many
things being necessary to a multitude, which are not needful to every
particular and private person, he that hindre's the multitude from such
necessary means and assistance, can never be saved himself. As if some
Province or part of a commonwealth* should start up and refuse diverse ancient
laws necessary for the good and peaceable living of the whole multitude, some
private men perhapps of this proui^ce might so live and be^i^^^ them selves as
to correspond and complie with the end and intention of the whole common wealth
in virtue of some such other laws and status (...) might be generally admitted
and commonly received by them all, but sure it is, that the multitude and
community of this province would never reach to this perfection, wanting (as
we suppose) several laws and institutio^s necessar^^ for them in common and in
general. Now that the Catholike's tenants, which the Protestants refuse and
contradict, are of this nature, to wit, that they are necessary for the
multitude, it is evident. As Government of the whole church, and those laws and
Canons which these Governors universally assembled do ennact and ordain for
the good of the total multitude, and in particular, praying for the dead,
praying to Sancts, The use of pictures, Sacraments, Ceremonies and the like,
which Christ, or his Apostle's, or their successors instituted for the benefit
of the universal community and multitude, Amongst whom there being diverse
tastes, one is pleased with one thing, an other with something else. Wherefore
the Protestants in contradicting these points, hinder the multitude of their
salvation (supposing these things be good and necessarily ordained, as we
Catholics suppose, and as I will show yo^ presently) and therefore t^
pronounce generally of the Protestants that they cannon be saved, though we do
no^ absolutely exclude every particular man, who through ignorance may (for
any thin^ I know) be excused from the guilt of Protestancie.


Nephew. I am heartily gla^ to hear you say that some may be excused, for I
sha^ have better hopes of some o^ my deceased friends then hitherto I have had.
But sin^^ you are fallen into this di^course, I pray, let me understand why
the Protestants ce^sure us of being uncharitable when we say, they shalb^
damned unless they be excused by ignorance? For sure they them selves must
needs say as much of us, sithence they accuse us of Idolatry, and other
heinous crimes, and consequently they must be as uncharitable as we, or else
they will run into a contradition.


Uncle. The mixture of Protestants and Puritants in one common wealth has, and
must of necessity draw many into error, who cannot distinguish which be
Protestants which be Puritants, nor whether's doctrine it is, that urged. For
this very blaming of our uncharitableness (which I think is as old as
Protestancie it self) shows that the true Protestants have ever been of
this opinion, that the disputes betwixt Catholics and them, were but matters
of indifferency. I remember when I was a boy there dyed a virtuous Catholic a
Kinsman of mine, and at the same time dyed a moral honest Protestant, and the
country said they were both gone to heaven, but the one by Rome the other by
Geneua, and so the Papist has the longer journey. And the imputation which the
people generally laid upon Catholics was, that they oppressed men with too
great and unnecessary burdens, and forced men to their opinions. And this
cannot be otherwise according to the grounds of Protestants, for we have all
that they have and more, and in particular we refuse nothing that can be proved
by scripture, which is the maine principle of Protestanisme, being the only
rule and fundation of their belief, and we damn, as well as they, who soever
will not believe what is evident in the scripture, only we stick to what our
forefathers have taught us, according to the principles of nature, common
sense, and the examples of all the laws and common wealths of the world, until
the contrary be cleared against us. Wherefore Protestants being strongly urged
must either say in their heat, that Catholics can give no probable or
apparent answer to those places of the scripture which they bring and allege
against them (which must needs be either an ignorant or a madd man's speech) or
else that such questions as are disputed betwixt them and us are of
indifferency and not of necessity. Wherefore I believe that those who say
that they ought, and may, censure us as freely as we censure them, smell of
Puritanisme, leaving the Protestants in the maine point. Nether is this to
answer, but to acknowledge that want of charity which true Protestants object
against us, and so condemn themselves. Why Catholics censure Protestants so
hardly.
But we Catholics censure Protestants, first, because they refuse that, which
we hold to be the true rule of faith, to wit, the church's authority or
tradition. And sithence the rule of faith runne's through the whole course of
our belief, and is the tennor and principle upon which we hold every
particular article, it is evident that who does not accept of this right and
true rule of attaining to the knowledge of Christian faith, cannot believe
aright, nor have true faith but by chance, and therefore will miss it for the
most part. Secondly this rule of ours tell's us, that Protestant's negative
positions are against the general good of the multitude of Christians, that
is, against charity, and God's law, hindering them from diverse important and
necessary means conducing to salvation. Lastly it were mere folly to leave
possession upon a slight argument. For as in equality the better proof,
should carry the cause, the equal divide it, so where there is possession on
the one side, there nothing but such conviction as the nature of the cause does
bear, ought to waine possession, otherwise no human possession would be stable
and constant. Now Catholics are as certain of these two points as that they
live and breath, to wit, that they have possession, And that there is no
evident conviction hitherto passed and showed against them. Wherefore I see not
why a Protestant should be offended that the Catholics censure all their
Adversaries in general so severely, sithence it is manifest, that if they
should not do so, they would not only betraye their own principles, but also
deny their brethren that fraternall rebuke and admonition, which the law of
God and good neighborhood require's at the hands of men so persuaded as these
grounds force and oblige us to be.


Nephew. Surely then this is the reason why the church now and then chasticeth
such subjects as rebel in belief against her, which the Protestants so
exclame at.


Uncle. It Is so in deed, and being no other church can have this principle
against us, if at any time they persecute us for our faith and belief, they
must needs do it more out of passion and revenge, then out of any rational
love and knowing zeal to God and Religion. And now, cozen, I hope you conceive
the extreme necessity and maine importance of these points which we have
talked of, being such as that the church of God cannot subsiste without them,
and essential to Christ's coming, to wit, to establish some to have the
charge and care of teaching and governing his church, And that these teachers
and Governors have great credit and authority, even supernatural and more
then human, And that their judgment in matters of belief and Religion is to
stand good, nor may be subjected to the weak and wavering judgment of the
laietie, that is of men ignorant in the principles of their science and
discipline: And lastly that being thus united they have the true and right rule
of knowing Christ's law, and those things which are to be believed and
practiced. All which you see are of that nature, that the very essence of a
Christian church and community cannot subsiste and continue without any of
them all, And without such a church the Generality of mankind cannot be
maintained in charity, nor without charity arrive to eternal Happiness, for
which both charity and all these other points are absolutely necessary. This
has been the chain of our discourse hitherto, if you have well understood
and conceived my intention. Which likewise you see I have done by the light of
common sense and reason, according to my promis, And sithence you would have me
to go this way, and nether fly up to sublime metaphysickes, nor drown your
memory with tedious allegations of authors, we will still continue in the same
path, insisting in the principles of nature, and showing that diverse points of
our faith and practice, which the Protestants deney, are, even by their
conformity to natural reason it self, and by their own proper force and
efficacitie of causing and producing good and virtuous effects in a Christian
co^munitie (and thereby contributing to salvation) are, I say, of no small
consequence and importance. First therefore tell me, whether you think there
be any other necessity in respect of the points controuerted betwixt us and
the Protestants, then this absolute and maine one, which we have already
talked of? I mean whether there be not an other necessity, which though not
altogether so great in it self, and of it is own nature, yet such an one, as is
sufficient to make a point of importance, and of such importance, as that to
reiecte it, would be a lawful and just cause to refuse and deny communion to
the refractarie and obstinate opposers thereof? And let us put the question
thus.



NEphew. I told you before how I thought necessity might be distinguished into
an absolute necessity, and into a necessity of a means for abtaining the
thing we desire with greater ease and co^ueniencie, and you liked well of it.
But me thinke's it were a hard case to deprive any man of that means and
quality, without which he cannot absolutely attain to his end, that others may
come to their ends with greater ease and security. And therefore I should
think that no other necessity but an absolute one, were sufficient to deserve
excommunication, which I take to be a depriving of a party from that, without
which he cannot obtain eternal Bliss.


Uncle. Why, cozen, let us suppose that in a community of one hundredth
thousand, nyntie thousand would never attain to Bliss (though absolutely they
could) unless the way were made easy, do you think it were fit or
tolerable in any one, or in a douzen, to take away the means whereby the
way were facilitated to the rest? Nay suppose ten thousand of the hundredth
thousand would arrive to happiness with great pains and labors, were it not
better in the Gouernor's eye, who ought to be a common father to them all, to
let the thenth part perish, then all the other nine?


Nephew. I confess I see mine oversight, for truly the church is bound in such
a case to proceed with rigor, And the party which will not condescende to
help the frailty of their brethren, does by this very fact deserve to loose
the protection of charity, which it wilfully abandon's, And in effect such a
party has already putt it self out of the secret community of God's
church, and the Governor is only to perform it in external appearance.


Uncle. Add to this, cozen, that such a party does wilfully stand out in this
manner upon pride and faction to justify their opinion, And that they trench
upon the Gouerme^t ordained by Jesus Christ, them selves not being caled
thereunto, proudly setting themselves in the seat of judgment to determine
what is fit and convenient for the whole Christian community, and struggling to
force their opinions upon the church against the sentence of the church's
Governors, which surely ought to preuaille in such a case. Look but into the
exemples of any polliticall common wealth, and see what inequality there is
betwixt twelve pence and a man's life, and yet our laws ordain the loss of
life for the stealth of a shilling or there abouts, (...) not considering the
value of the thing stolen, but that such a fact is the breach of public
justice in the common wealth, which if it were permitted no man should be
Master of his own. This then being supposed, I doubt not but you will grant
likewise that in a church, virtue is to be engendered and conserved with great
care and diligence, And although the same things which first breed piety and
devotion do afterward conserve it, yet may there be some things more proper
for the conservation then for the breeding of it, and contrariewise others more
proper for breeding then conseruing it, according as the different state of
any thing that growe's toward perfection does require a diverse care and
attendance. Tell me then, cozen, how think you is the breeding of virtue
performed in man kind? I mean not the first breeding, How virtue is bredde in
man.
which is done by instruction, but the flourishing increase of it, and the
bringing of it to strength?


Nephew. Sithence virtue is nothing but the love of what is truly good for man,
and that we cannot love what we know not, virtue must needs be chiefly
increased by clearly seeing and often thinking of the thing we ought to love,
and of such things as belong unto it, and make it appear worthy of love,
Amongst which one is, that it be in our power to obtain it. Where upon I see
that the breeding of virtue consists in three things, often thinking of it is
object, highly esteeming of it, and conceiting it to be possible. Which
corresponde's to the three stepps and degrees, you made, of te^ding to any
good. And if these three things be well observed and performed by any society
of men, virtue must of necessity increase and flourish in that community.


Uncle. I am glad you profit so well, and make such good use of what I say, If
now therefore, cozen, the disputs and differences which are in particular
positions betwixt us and Protestants, do concern^ all these three points, and
that highly, will you not confess that they are of great importance? For the
first you have heard I am sure how God Almighty in the old law would have
men's hearts perpetually busied about his law, how he would have them to think
of it at home and upon the high way, morning and evening, how he would have
his comandments bound to their hands, and so ever wagging before their eyes,
and written upon the frontispice of their houses. All which was to signify
that the memory of God's law could not be too great, being not sufficient to
think of it in the church only, or at vacant times from necessary labors,
but that our thoughts ought ever to be employed that way. The like does the
Catholic church, causing to be erected upon the highwaies, in marketplaces,
and in corners of streets some times crosses with our sauiour's image nailed
upon them, some times his flagellation, his coronation, his resurrection, his
ascension or some other mystery of our redemption, or pious representation, to
putt us in mind of what ought to move us to the love of God, which are
frequently to be seen in Catholic countries in every house, in every room,
over every door, whereof there be yet some marks in our own Country. And
can you think that this diligence of our forefathers compared to those
comma^ds of God Almighty in the old law, to be over much? Or that the zeal
of those who pulled down these memories of Christianity was according to
science? Does not the question of this point clearly concern the increase of
virtue, and the churches Government? Surely it does. For I think no wise and
indifferent man can doubt but that pictures must needs breed many good
thoughts which would never have been without them. What true Christian can
look upon the representation of any bloody passage of our sauiour's passion,
but he will be moved to some good thought or sentiment if he have any feeling
of Christianity in him? Or if some be not moved to pious thoughts by such an
object, will not many others be? And none can doubt but that from such devout
thoughts do naturally proceed and floe many virtuous affections, and these
affections do engender perfection, it being their connaturall leauings and
effect, And this perfection is that which saves our souls. So that you see
some come to salvation, others to a higher degree of perfection, and
consequently of Bliss, by the use of pictures. Where by the way you may note
that if pictures have this effect in our souls, to what degree of reverence
and affection will not the blessed Sacrement it self raise them who truly and
assuredly believe Christ's real, corporal, and substantial presence to be
continually in their churches and upon their Altars? And what a motife of love
do they take from the church, who refuse and deny this point.


Nephew. You speak with reason and common sense in my judgment. And in deed
the price of one soul is more worth then any temporal good, even of state,
nay even of the whole world, which (besides the pregnant reasons I have heard
you give for this point) our savior him self does testify it in express
and plain words. Nevertheless, uncle, Math. 16.
I see it is the course of the world not to esteem of a small part of a great
number, but to look only upon the greatest part. Which whether it be the
shortness of our discourse, and in Government, not able to reach to
particulars, or whether it be the mutabilitie of nature, not suffering it self
to be bound to some one strain though the best and perfectest, which causes
this our unhappiness I know not, but so it is that a small number is not
regarded. Which I speak to this purpose, that one might answer your
discourse in a word, and say. The good which the use of pictures bringe's is
so small and little, that it is not worthy looking after, and therefore may
well be neglected without any great loss. HoW the use of pictures Work it is
effect in man.



Uncle. Few words, cozen, may putt a man to a great difficulty, And the rather
in this matter because the use of images has two conditions, the one that it
worke's it is effect by little and little, so that the present effect is almost
still imperceptible; the other that it is never the jmmediate nor the sole
cause of it is effect, but has euersome other cause joined with it, which may
produce the same effect without it, so that, I say, having these two
conditions, it is hard to show the efficacitie of this cause, seeing we can
nether proceed by showing the want of the effect, this cause being
subtracted, nor by the change of the effect when this cause is putt.
Nevertheless to give you some light and content in this point, Do you
remember the Turner whom I was wont to imploye in London, how by taking away
little shauings, and in deed so small and thin as that you might see through
them, he would in a quarter of an hour bring a great and rough stick to be as
little and smooth as he desired, which suppose he had been three days a doing,
and yet perpetually a working of it, by reason of the matter or quality of the
work, he might be said perhaps to have wrought well and hard, though the
effect of every particular stroke did not appear.


Nephew. I conceive your meaning already, for as those shauings would be
(specially in your supposition) as it were invisible, and a looker on, not
seeing where the shauings were heaped together (for there I doubt not but they
would be easily seen) would think the workman did only press and smooth his
work and noe way lessen it. So I imagine you will tell me, that the pious
affections gained by the use of pictures produce at length a great effect in
our souls, though it be imperceptible in every particular actio^, and
consequently the time employed therein no-lesse profitable for our end, then
the Turner's for his.


Uncle. You are in the right, nephew, only I will tell you Aristotle saie's
that Poetry is a painting in words, And although I intend not to compare the
force of a picture to the force of poetry, yet if you knew as well what strong
and vehement motions and affections may be, and are produced and imprinted in
the people's souls in some countries by mere dumme shows and representations
without all life and action, as well I say, as you know the force of our
plays in London, you would say there is more truth in Aristole's words then
every one conceaue's, And that the effect of pictures and of poetry is of the
same kind, And may be compared as a slow and unready Turner to a quick and
nimble one. And therefore conclude that the effect of pictures is not little,
but but their operation sometimes imperceptible.


Nephew. You have said so much, that now I have a scrupule on the contrary
side, I rather fear that the use of pictures should be taken away, least they
should work too much, and induce men to Idolatry, conceiting that the very
material Images have some hidden virtue in them. So I have heard the Emperor
of Constantinople caused statuas to be taken out of Churches, because some
Priests abused them by counterfeiting miracles, And I am told that in some
Catholic Countries the people will not suffer old pictures to be changed into
new, Nay that even our Deuines attribute I know not what particular assistance
of God to one picture rather then to an other, And lastly hat some ignorant
people having been asked, have professed that a Crucifix was Christ, others
have spoken unto pictures as to living things, and the like.


Uncle. And I have also heard that a pore woman being examined upon her death
bed about the three persons of the S. Trinity, said the son was this great
light which brings us day, nor could she be taken of it, having been long
deceived by the equivocation of sound betwixt son and sun, think you
therefore, cozen, that it were fit to take away the preaching of the B.
Trinity for such errors? I know you do not. In such questions we must
balance the good of the institution with the capacity and likelihood of error
and harm which may come thereby. For every discreet man knows well that
man's nature is subject to do it self mischief even by the best things. How
dull and blockish, and how nothing better then the stock or stone it self
which he admire's, must that man be (if he have but had any indifferent
instruction in Christianity) who can believe that a piece of wood or marble is
that God and man whom he has heard preached to have been borne, lived, and
dyed upon a cross, and now to reign in heaven? Certes, cozen, it is evident to
a wise and moderat man that the fault is not in the doctrine but in the want of
instruction, and consequently, that were to be mended, not the use of pictures
taken away, which do universally good, though some particular harms come by
their occasion from n other cause. Wherefore the Greek Eperour had done more
wisely to have punished severely those impostors, then to have taken away such
an instrument of devotion. And this same answer may be applied whith
convenient proportion to those people who are so zealous toward their old
pictures. And for Diuine's opinions I inte^de not to bind controversies of
Religion to their Quaeres, nor to mingle them in our discourse, the more common
this fault is amongst us, the more it is to be avoided. Only I will add that if
any tell you the frequent use of pictures make's them to be of little or no
effect, your answer is radie, that the like may be said as well of those
common and continually present means which God Almighty ordained in the old
law to put men in mind of his commandme^ts, as also of any other means how
efficacious soever, to wit preaching, prayer, frequentation of the Sacrements
and the like, if they be commonly used and practiced. But to go on in our
discourse, what shall we say, cozen, of


this same degree?
Which that we may discover the better, let us considere the other two parts
and conditions, which you told me were necessary for the breeding of virtue,
to wit of esteeming it, and seeing it to be possible. How the veneratio^ of
Saints breeed's devotion.
And I pray, what means of making a deeper impression of esteem can there be
found then the veneration we give unto Saints? For they being the men who
have footed out the stepps which we must tread, if we intend to come to the
same rewards, and attain to the same happiness whereunto they are arrived,
which is the greatest motive of our virtuous living, can we doubt but the
higher conceit we make of the excellency of their state, the greater and more
ardent must needs be our desire, and the stronger our courrage to do and
perform what they did and practiced. The greater esteem the souldjer make's
of the quality of a commander, the more he is ready to perform those actions
whereby such honors are to be obtained. And the like in all conditions of the
world. Saint are honored three Wai^s.
Now if you considere wherein consist's the honor which we give unto Saints,
you shall find that it is cheefely in three things. 1. In keeping their holy
days, 2 Reuerencing their relics and pictures, 3. In hoping good of them by
praying unto them. For we naturally think the greatest goods to be in those
who deserve honor and can-doe good to others, and therefore we never make any
great conceit of those things whence we can nether expect any good, nor
whereunto we think no honor due.

Nephew. I cannot but interrupt your discourse with admiration to see how men,
who suerly had not cast away all thoughts of virtue, (sithence they had so
many followers and were in so great esteem) should under slight pretenses, so
weaken the maine strings by which pore men were drawn to heaven, and that for
a little vanity and desire to appear more learned then others How true is it,
uncle, that man has no foe but him self? For not all the Tortures and
Tyranies, not all the inundations of waters, and rauagings of fires that can be
immagined, could ever have done so much harm to man kind, as the very
taking away of the esteem and conceit which we Catholics have of the
excellency and greatness of Saints, and of the happy estate which they
enjoy, and which is the end we all aim at.


Uncle. Oh! cozen, if Alexander, Caesar, or any of your great glory hunters
had considered in their life time (what now peradventure to their great grief
they cannot be ignorant of) the difference that there is even in this worldly
and vain glory betwixt Peeter the fisherman or Paul the tentmaker [who never
aimed at this honor, but thought it worse then the dust which they shaked from
their shoes) and them selves, who poursued it so keenely with perpetual
danger of their lives. wasting their estates and Countries, and ruining their
neighbors, if this, I say, they had then known, would they not have changed
their minds, and followed other courses? And do they not now mauger them
selves and tear their very souls in pieces to see their own folly, and
their no less witless then graceless ambition? And do you not then think
that the holy church uses in this a most efficacious means to bring men to a
virtuous life, being she does by this doctrine of honoring and praying to
Saints so strongly commend unto us the glory and Bliss after which we ought
to thirst and hope, if we be true Christians?


Nephew. For the two first points I confess you have reason, but for the third
I fear you will not come so well of, For the easier it is to obtain any good
the more we esteem it ours, and consequently the more heart we have to go
about it. And what way can be thought more easy then to make a co^ceite of
Christ's goodness, and think that without any pains or deserts on our side
he will give us that great reward according to his own pleasure more or less
purely and only out of his mercy and goodness whitout any respect or regard
to our works or lives in this world? Whereas we Catholics make the gates of
heaven so narrow, and the paths thereunto so rougged, that we seem rather to
deter then exhort men to virtuous lives.


Uncle. If either we or they could think to come to Bliss whithout good life,
I should not wonder at your proposition, for in that case it were the best and
only course to have a great confidence in him whose gift it is, But if Christ
has nether left any such way, nor you or any understanding man believe that
faith with a wicked and careless life will bring a man to salvation, Ca^ you
think that such an exaggeration of faith and confidence, and such a
disesteeming of good works can be a means to persuade and incite men to
stick closse and persiste in virtuous actions, which by all our confessions
are requisite and necessary to salvation? Surely the Catholic church takes
the securer way, And the reason is, because works in the way of merit (that
is, done for God's sake and with hope of heaven) cannot be without faith, but
how easy it is for a man to persuade him self that he has much faith without
working, we find by daily experience. Hence it is that the Catholic church
does move and persuade us to labor for our eternal happiness by proposing
unto v the examples of men; The force of examples in man's life.
as we are, who have made this great conquest, in the most exact and solemn
act of canonization of Saints. And also of others who by professing of
extraordinary labors make it appear that the way is not so hard but that
many daily tread the paths of it, I mean in Religious professions, in which
all sorts of austerities are daily practiced before our eyes, which ought not
to be derided and scorned, as many do. For what power the examples and
conversation of good men have, every wise man know's. And for examples we see
that all the dangers of the sea and wars, that diuing into the bottom of the
Ocean, and deluing to the center of the earth, hanging on ropes and scaffolds,
and what soever man has invented in this kind do not deter men, where
there is either profit or Admiration. Let but one desperate beginner show the
way, and he will not want multitudes of followers, so either vanity or gain
second his adventures. And if the force of Example be so great, the loss of
wanting it must needs be equivalent, and consequently the wrong done to
Christians by taking it away must be no less. And therefore the question and
controversy whether it should be maintened in the church or no, is of no small
importance.


Nephew. I perceive well that you still continue (according to your promis) to
show the necessity and importance of controuerted points of Religion by
showing their force and efficacitie of producing profitable and aduantageous
effects for mankind's attaining and coming to eternal Bliss; and I see that
this is a very connaturall and efficacious proof. But I fear all points of
controversies cannot be proved that way. For, I pray, how should any man show
me


opinion of miracles are necessary?
Uncle. You remember I proposed unto you but now a division of some things
which concerned the breeding, others the conservation of virtue and devotion.
For although such things as augment virtue do likewise of necessity conserve
it, yet there may be some things which properly are to conserve it, and not to
augment it, or at least of two things which do both, the one may conserve it
because it breed's it, the other may augment it because it co^serue's it. Now
therefore if we find any thing whose principal effect is only to hinder such
contrarieties as would distroye piety and devotion, such, properly speaking,
do not augment it of them selves, but yet they may be truly said to conserve
it. Farther if you considere you shall find that this hindering of
co^trarieties and opposites to virtue is performed two ways. First by removing
all such things as put men in fear of yiedling to the contrary, which is a
kind of strengthening of man's weakness against these co^trarieties. Secondly
by diminishing and aswaging the force and violence of these contrarieties,
either in them selves, or in their action. In the first manner do contribute
all kind of Ceremonies, and particularly those which are used in the
instalements and Beginnings of offices and charges, as the Sacraments of Order
and Matrimony. And likewise the opinion of miracles. For Ceremonies, their
nature in general is to put in men's heads the conceit of a high and sublime
thing, whereby we proceed with greater caution and wariness in the business
which we have in hand. And for miracles, the belief and opinion of them once
well grounded (as it ought to be) make's the people extremely apprehensiue of
the presence of Almighty God, and of his immediate government of human
affairs. So that as to be over credulous of miracles is the sign of a light
and imprudent man (for according to reason the stranger the thing is, the
greater ought to be the proof which should make us believe it) so likewise not
to think that some miracles in common have been and are now done in the
Catholic church, were to contradict the universal and constant opinion of all
good Christians, and deserue's to be suspected of not believing the particular
providence of Almighty God; which is the maine string where upon all
Christianity and supernatural Religion ha^geth, and which all Masters of
piety and devotion have ever souht to ground strongly in the hearts and souls
of men.


Nephew. But I pray, uncle, how will this be true in Matrimony (for that
concerne's me he use whereof consist's in such a material and sensual
pleasure? I have often reflected why the Catholic church (which make's so
great esteem of virginity) should place marriage amongst the Sacraments, and
make such great Ceremonies in the administration of it.


Uncle. You speak like a youngster, And I would to God your conceit and
thought were not so deeply rooted in the hearts of many young men like your
self. The Apostle tell's you that the right and lawful use of the bed is
honorable, Why it is fit that Matrimony should be a Sacrament? Heb 13. 1. Tim.
2.
and that women are to be saved by (...), that is, bringing forth of Children.
God Almighty has bestowed this procreation of children upon his servants as a
chief temporal Blessing, so we see in Abraham and in the good woman that
entertained Elizeus; and suerly it was the first Blessing that God bestowed
upon his creatures. If you considere for what end God sanctifie's any action,
you shall find it is only for man's use, And then reflect upon the goods which
follow the lawful use of this material action betwixt man and wife, and you
will not wonder that God has placed a Sacrament in matrimony. I do not doubt
but the light of reason tell's you, that in respect of good oeconomie a man's
having but one wife, and his perpetual cohabitation with her, is the best
manner of secular living that can be, both for temporalities sake, and for
having a quiet and contented life. Which supposed, Marriage must needs be a
matter of great consideration. For either a man must live without a woman (which
kind of life is but for few) or with this woman after he has once taken her,
And therefore it is of great importance that this manner of life of it is own
nature be convenient and gratfull. Besides you know a man take's a great deal
of natural content in his wife, generally speaking, (which some times drawe's
him to strange inconveniences, unless his passions and affections be well
moderated and settled) for you know he take's her for his best friend, his best
servant, and his dearest partner in all his busineses, supposing she be wise
and prudent, and consequently ever complying in reason with her husband's
humor. Whereby you see that the making of a Marriage, and the usage of it when
it is made, is the pin whereon does hang the chief content and sweetness of
a married man's life, the good of his posterity, the maine success and
prosperity of his temporal estate or fortunes, And above all the breeding of
his children, and the instilling of piety and virtue into their tender hearts,
which may grow with their age and carry them to felicity. Judge now, cosen,
whether it was not convenient and fitting that in the law of grace this Action
should be elevated and rancked in the highest degree and order of those actions
which God has sanctified for the use of man. And ought we not to commend and
prefer the wisdoms of our forefathers before all other nations for making so
great esteem of it, and celebrating it with such great ceremonies?


Nephew. Truly I am to thank you for this good lesson, because it may be of
special use for my self, And I could wish it were given to all men before
they marry. For my self, I thank God, I am so well sped, that I need not
wish to have learned it sooner. But I pray, uncle, let me know the other part
of your division, that is which be those things you said were necessary to
break the force of co^trarieties and temptations against virtue, and which
might comfort and strengthen men in this distress? I do imagine that you aim
at some things which you will hardly prove. As for Example, do you think that
for this end



UNCLE. Setting a side the temptations of sensual pleasure which we suppose to
be moderated by marriage, there remaine's fear and grieefe. Fear is cheefely
of death and judgment following. Grief is of loss, which to rational men is,
above all other things, of friends, of whom the cheifest is Almighty God, who
is lost by sin; the next is of temporal friends, who are principally lost by
their death. This last is taken away by the belief of their suruiuing, and
that once we shall enjoy them again. Whence proceede's the desire of
continuing amity and communication with them, HoW prayers for the dead do
appease the grief of the living.
which being only to be had by the mediation of Almighty God, it cannot be
performed but by praying for them, if we think they stand in need. And so a
great part of this grief is taken away amongst Catholics by the diuersion of
care to get prayeres said for them, and an other part turned to Almighty God
by hoping good for them at his hands. Whereas others give their friends over in
death with a farewell frost, or else are plunged in incurable sorrow for an
incurable loss, for the belief of enjoying them again when there is no
communication in the interim is but cold comfort, and sinke's not deeply, as
things far from us, do generally little move us. The fear of death is much
moderated by the Sacrament of Extreme unction. How Extreme vnctio^ does
moderate the fear of death.
The assistance which virtuous parish Priests afford to the pore languishing
patient by the Administration of this Sacrament, comforting him and praying for
him, according to S. James his command and the Church's practice, Iac. 5.
must needs be of great consequence in such an Exigent. Nay what comfort so
little which in this periode of distress and last moment of death's agony is
not great? It was not surely without mystery (said a great pattern of
perfection even in our age) that our savior Jesus Christ would have his
Apostles accompany him and pray with him in that dolerous Agony which he
passed in the garden of Gethsemani, Gregory Lopes.
and how much he desired it does sufficiently appear by his twice going to
them to see how they performed their charge, and by his exprobration to S.
Peeter. Now there rests only to seek a remedy for a conscience laden with
sin, which how great a torture it is of it self, you may easily jmagine by
the expression and apprehension which the heathens had of it, who were
persuaded that Diuills or furies did stand continually with burning torches
before wicked men's eyes, and that the Ghosts of murdered persons did haunt the
murderers until they brought them to madness or some mischief. HoW
confession is grounded in nature, and What comfort it bring's to a sinner.
And we are taught both by nature and experience that the best and only remedy
to a soul laden with a secret grief, is, to disclose her case, and the cause
thereof, to some faithful friend who may aftord her comfort and assistance.
For this end did our savior Jesus Christ institute the Sacrament of Penance,
with the privilege of silence not violable at any rate, no nor God nor man's
law can exact in any case the revealing of this secret, what damage so ever
where to come of it. Which let but any impartial and understanding man
considere, and then let him judge of what profit and commodity it is to a
multitude of men, (not rained down from heaven impeccable but framed like
scarabees of the du^g of the earth and thereby full-of imperfection and
weakness) to have by order of law some selected persons of learning and
discretion, unquestionable of what they shall hear, and extremely to be
punished if they speak the least word of what shall come to their knowledge by
this means, set to comfort and direct them for the amendment of their lives,
and on whom they may confidently rely for Counsel, and open the truth of
their cause. He knowe's not what a friend is worth, who knowe's not how great a
benefit this is.


Nephew. I easily believe, (and I think every indifferent man must needs
believe the same) that the practice and execution of this point alone would
make so great a change in the people's behavior, (if it were as well performed
as it may, and ought to be) that hence only it would be clear and evident that
Religion to be better in which this were practiced, and that, the worse which
refused it. But I wonder, uncle, that all this while you have said nothing of
that famous question of communicating under both kinds, which so many very
moderate Protestants stand upon as a chief stumbling block which offends
them.


Uncle. That Is a point, nephew, in which the affirmative part belonge's to
them, Why communicating under both kinds was not commanded.
And therefore it behoue's them to show the utility or necessity of
communicating in both-kindes. Which if they cannot do, and that we know God
giue's us no laws but for our good and profit, a discteete man will easily, and
may justly presume that Almighty God never commanded it, but left it to
discretion. And for them to bring any evident proof of a positive command
(sithence the contrary has been practiced in some churches and to some
persons (as children) in all ages) I think it never was nor can be done. These
points are sufficient to show that it is not out of obstinacy, or vain glory
that the Catholic church mantaine's her positions, and forbidde's communion to
Protestants, but forced thereunto by great necessity and true grounds of
Government, without which no community can subsiste. For if every point may
be thus showed to be of no small importance for the increase of virtue, as it
may be, [according as you see by these which we have talked of) how much more
does the Bulk of all together make a schism deserving to be lopped from the
tree of life? But cheefely that headstrong taking the bitt in the teeth, and
that unbridled ranging in matters of consequence without any respect and awe
of the power and authority ordained by Jesus Christ, or any reverence to
their fore fathers or present Government, the ready way and common maxim of
all sedition and rebellion in what community or common wealth soever either
spiritual or temporal, which we see do ordinarily follow when such
Archi-reuolters begin to feel their party strong.


Nephew. This your last consequence touche's, me thinks, a point which I have
a great desire to hear well discussed, to wit of the Pope's authority, which
you know our Protestants pretend to be a great inconvenience in all political
Government.


Uncle. The old phrase permitte's not the shoemaker to judge of any thing
above the shoe, nor am I willing to meddle in this point or determine what is
convenient or inconvenient of the Pope's authority in respect of secular
Gouerments. For being not skillfull in this matter and discoursing only, as you
see, by common sense, I might perhapps offend, though blameless, in ventering
beyond my skill, which would be imputed to the weakness of my cause. Only,
this I know, I must and will honor the Pope as S. Peeter's successor, and head
of Christ his church upon earth. Which authority I am sure was never
instituted, nor does it tend, of it is own nature, to the detriment or
prejudice of any lawful Government of what quality soever. And if those were
present, who, perhapps as ignorant as my self in the rules of Government, object
so many things against this authority, I durst under take to answer and
satisfy them all.


Nephew. Though you will not be pleased to meddle in this point yet can you not
refuse to teach me how to answer the ordinary obiectio^s which are made
against our Religion, Which if I could sollidly perform, I should make it
clear and evident



Wherefore, I pray uncle, tell me what shall I say to them who cast in our
teeth that the Catholic Clergie's being unmarried fille's the world with
whoredom and Adultery. That the riches of the Clergy depriue's common wealths
of the use of a great part of their Country, by reason of their immunities.
That the Clergie's strength is able to ba^die now and then against the state.
Nay that a Religions order, especially such an one as has great power over
it is subjects, is able, and not vnpractized, to bandie and make good it is part
against both church and state, with no small damage and danger to the^ both, if
it they were not prevented. These things must needs auerie any state, much
more a schismatic one, from out Religion, sithe^ce we suppose them to be of
necessity.

Uncle. As for the Clergie's chastity every one knows we confess it is not a
matter of necessity by the law of Christ. HoW the Clergie's chastity and
single life is convenient.
Yet that it is most fit and convenient, I think, no wise man can doubt. For
of all pleasures the carnal does most affect sensible nature, and produces
the greatest extremities of passion in man, and consequently is the greatest
binder of man to earthly things, and the greatest hinderer from heavenly and
spiritual thoughts that nature has placed in man. It were needless to tell
you how unfit this sensual employment is for those men, whose maine life and
action ought to be in preaching and teaching celestial and supernatural
doctrine, and whose aim, even by their function and profession, is to draw
people from this clodd of earth and eleuate their minds to God and spiritual
affections. From wedlock followe's the love of wife and children, 1. Cor. 7
and the necessary cares of household (which the Apostle cale's the
afflictions or tribulations of the fleth) And from them the Evil Government of
the church, which either must be hereditary, or neglected, the decessour ever
streeuing to leave nothing to his successor which him self can make use of for
the better providing of his children. And lastly the very conceit of
chastity and the sollitude or lonenesse of an unmarried man, breeds an
apprehension of the person in whom they are, whereby the people are much better
governed by such an one. Nor is Celebate the cause of such disorders, as truly
are found in some places too frequent; but the multiplication of Priests. Which
in deed brings this sacred function into contempt amongst the laietie, Why
there should be but few Priests in the church.
(whose tutors and teachers Priests are by Christ's institution) and makes
them esteemed as servants. And this also make's the Priests them selves to have
a less conceit of their own dignity and duty, whereby they become
careless of their honor and carriage. And to say the truth considering the
difficulty of chastity in the frailty of man's nature, it is not likely that
whole multitudes of men living in liberty and perpetual occasions of falling,
should observe so hard a rule as is expressed by Qui potest capere capiat. Mat.
19
Wherefore not the Ecclesiastical comma^de of chastity (which you see is good
and necessary for the Government of the church) but the multiplicatio^ of
Priests [especially of young and unworthy ones) ought to be taken away and so
the scandal would cease.


Nephew. You say well, but I have heard that multitudes of Priests are
requisite for the magnificence of the church, for the convenient hearing of
Mass, especially on Holy days, and for the better Administration of the
Sacraments and helping of both living and dead by the inestimable sacrifice of
the Altar, which causes many to take priesthood merely out of devotion.


Uncle. I have heard many say so too, but they did not considere that the
necessity of Government and instruction is the chief necessity of the church,
and that the Clergy is made and instituted for this Government (having the
administration of the Sacraments pourposly reserved unto them to procure them
veneration and authority for the better performance thereof) and therefore not
any one ought to be made Priest, but for this end, to wit, for the necessity
of instruction and Gouerme^t. And this Bishops ought to take care of, nor to
bestow Priesthood but where the man's creation is necessary for his flock,
and then Priests would live better and be more honored. This was the practice
of the primitive church, until the Ambition of Deacons (who had the
temporalities of the church in their hands) made them desire honor, and so
were made Priests. And the like ambition I believe was the inuentor of those
fair reasons which you allege, for well may it be magnificence in a Prince to
have many servants, but to have many chief heads and Governors that must
needs lessen their esteem. And for hearing of Masses, if the people be well
ordered and governed few Priests will suffice, nor is the inconvenience so
great as the multiplicitie of Priests. And the like may be said for the
administration of the Sacraments, and for the helping of both living and dead
by the holy sacrifice of the Altar. As for those who desire to be Priests out
of devotion, I think their devotion would be more conformable to the piety of
our forefathers, if they did rather ^hunne then desire Priesthood, especially
where there are so many allreadie. And as in my opinion there cannot be an
outward work of greater piety and charity then to provide the people of fit
instructors and Governors, nor alms better employed then to procure this
effect: so contrary wise I think there cannot be an act of greater
sacrilege and impiety, then to order and imploye unworthy subjects in this
kind, and who soever out of faction, friendship, or carelessenesse should do
it are worse then Adulteres, Murderers, or those whose sins cry to heaven
for vengeance. But this I speak only of my own opinion.


Nephew. Truly, uncle, I think you are in the right, though peradventure there
be not many of your mind. For I see well enough that as to multiply
unworthy judges and Governors in a common wealth were to ruin it, so likewise
to multiply unworthy Priests is to hazard the spiritual good of
Christianity, and to make an unworthy parish Priest is in a manner to damn
the parish.


Uncle. For your second objection of the Clergie's riches, That the Clergie's
riches are no prejudice to the te^porall state.
though I am none of those that think the Clergy, or any other spiritual
company whom they affect, cannot be too rich, yet I see no such inconvenience
in their riches but it is easily remedied. For in all Catholic countries there
be means found out to diminish their riches, and make them contribute to the
necessities of the state and common wealth as fully as others in proportion,
though in an honorable way, as to let them have their own Collectors of the
moneys required at their hands. Besides the Clergy not making any vow or
profession of renouncing either riches or honor, and bearing the greatest charge
and office in the common wealth, it is both fitting and necessary that they
have so much wealth as is requisite for the due performance of their function,
as, first to be out of solicitude for convenient mantenance, 2. to have an
equal conversation with their subjects, 3. to give example of the due and true
use of wealth, and 4. to breed a convenient respect of their quality and
persons in those whom they are to govern by their persuasions and authority.
And by these rules it may be easily known when the Clergie's riches are
excessive. You will say perhapps that the Clergie's authority ought to be
grounded upon their learning, Why the Clergy ought to have Wealth besides
virtue.
wisdom, and cheefely upon their virtue. And it is true, but those whom they
are to guide and direct having not, for the most part, eyes to see and judge
clearly of such internal qualities, but generaly esteem of the inward man by
the outward appearance, it is necessary that they likewise have those exterior
helps. For your third and last objection I could quitte my self in a word and
tell you, I intend not to justify the practice of any, but only the tenets
of the Catholic church, And if at any time either Clergy or Religious should
bandie against the state or common wealth it were the fault of the men and not
of the institution, in which case God has left means to curb and punish
them, for the Clergy being an essential and principal part of the commonwealth, as well as either the Nobility or commons, it is the same case for all
three, And such an act were to be imputed to the weakness of man's nature as
well in the Clergy as in the other two. And so I hope you are now content for
this point.


Nephew. I am for the Clergy, and see you have reason, but for Religious
orders it is not the same case, for nether is there the like necessity of them
as of the Clergy, nor are they any public part of the common wealth, but
only private institutions within it. Besides I have heard wise and experienced
men say, that Religious obedience is easily turned into an instrument of
faction. For their subjects being bound under pain of damnation to obey their
superior in any thing that is not manifestly sin, it giue's the superior a
mighty command over the whole body (specially if it be purely monarchical
and that one man govern all) and thereby a maine power to swaye gteat
multitudes at his will and pleasure. And I heard not long ago an able man,
(who has been employed of late by our state in Catholic Countries) say,
that Princes some times were vehemently afraid of their puissant combinations,
and held it no small point of policy to imploye and engage Religious orders in
their interests of state. Whereas for the Clergy they feared them not, having
no such obligation of obedience amongst them, but only according to the Canons,
nor any dangerous dependence of foreign states, but every man for him self
and therefore unable to do the state any great either service or prejudice by
any factious intelligence abroad.


Uncle. Lord! cosen, how different is the truth from the common opinion of the
world. The truth is, cosen, Religious men are governed by vows and rules or
constitutions, their vows make them Religious, their rules are directio^s for
their, living in peace and virtue. Their vow of obedience, which you speak
of, reaches only to the spiritual education and progress of their subjects,
their rules are for the rest. If their vows did reach to their temporal
government, then I confess they were no Religious vows but were to be
suspected of factious co^binations, and both church and state might and would
be jealous of them, but it is not so, and therefore they are laudable and no
ways hurtful in a common wealth. And for the Religious man's rule, which
only, and not his vow binde's him to all temporal subjection, it is of no
great importance, nay some of them profess that their rule obliges not in
conscience (as the canon and civil law does) no not under a venial sin.
Wherefore you see it is far from Catholic Religion to patronize any banding
against either church or state, and so far that every Divine will tell you,
that obedience in such a case is damnable both to the commander and obeyer. Nay
they will tell you that if any Religious order were come to that height of
ambition (which God forbid) as to bend their aims and endeauours generally to
the prejudice of the church or state, seeking to to ruin the antie^t and
lawful government of either of them, to set up their own, that in such a case
it were a sin to enter into any such order, and that the vows of such as
should be already professed therein would not oblige the^ to obedience, nor
could such a institute be truly esteemed a Religious institute. And now I hope
you are fully satisfied. I know there be diverse obiectio^s besides these which
you produce, but either they pitch upon abuses in stead of uses, as these do,
or else they aim to take away the substance of a thing, because of some
accidental harms which fall out in the use and practice of it. As if one
should forbid iron tools by reason some times there happene's mischief by
them, not weighing the utility with the harm. Wherefore the Protestants, what
soever they hold, and say that they do not condemn Catholics (which
according to there rule of the Errabilitie of all me^, and of the liberty they
assume unto them selves, they are bound to do) yet in effect and in practice
they do it, And must needs or else deserte their pretenses and disputes with
the Catholic church at the very beginning. For example if Luther or Calvin
were urged, Is the use of reuerencing pictures Idolatry or no? They must of
necessity answer yes, or else they are convinced to break from the present
church (whereof they are yet apart) without a sufficient cause. If they be
farther pressed, Can you evidently convince that it is idolatry? or may it be
probablely ma^tained that it is not? If they acknowledge they cannot, then they
are oppressed again, If it be but peradventure yes, peradua^ture no, why do
you make a schism and division in the church, and not submit your selves to
the belief of your forefathers and of the present universal church? If they
reply that when nether part is certain, then each one may hold what he
thinke's fit. You urge them again, is this your reply certain? can you
convince it evidently? or is it but only probable? if only probable, they are
still in the same snare, if certain and evident, they might have said so of
the first proposition. But in deed it were against common sense and too
ridiculous for any private man to undertake to make an Evident conviction and
demonstration against the general belief of the universal church for so
many ages. And thus you see that these men who cannot convince any thing
against the Arrians, Nestorians, Pelagians, Berengaria^s and the like (though
condemned many years ago by the Catholic church) and think all probable
that a company of learned and indifferent men have doubted of, yea use this
for a maxim that such points must of necessity be doubted of, as being not
with in the reach of evident conviction, Let but, I say, these men come to
write against Catholics, and you shall have them pretend whole listes of
demonstrations, and whole pages will not suffice to reckon up the absurdities
which they imagine do follow out of some one Catholic point, so necessary
it is that these men contradict them selves who contradict the truth of Christ
and his church.


Nephew. Why the Protestants ought to return to the church of Rome
Your argument, me thinke's, is good against the first beginners of the breach
from the Catholic church, but will not suffice against me^ that now live, who
seem to be a framed and settled church, and have received this doctrine from
their fathers. For we see that possession, though at the first unlawfully
gotten, does in time preuaille, and quarells cease even where Princes are
pretenders. If the welsh men should now pretend to have been unjustly put out
of England by the Saxons, The Romans out of France by the french, The Greeks
out of Italy by the Goths, who would think their quarells just? So likewise
why should the Protestants (though their time be not so long, nor their
possession so quiet) rather yield to the church of Rome, then the church of
Rome to them, or to the church of England for example, unless the church of
Rome can demonstrate her positio^s against the Protestants, which I have not
heard any of our learned me^ say she ca^?


Uncle. Although it be both reasonable in all liklyhood, and peradventure may
be co^uinced, that who first parted and made the division ought in law of good
government to return. And although I could likewise pretend, that the church
of England compared to that church which lives in community with the church
of Rome is but a small part and therefore bound to yield to the greater, (for
to say that the Protestants of England live in community with all other
churches but the Roman is manifestly false, since all other churches will
Anathematize diverse of their tenets, and they also the tenets of other
churches, nor is there any rule of unity and communion amongst them) Although
I say I could urge these and other reasons to this effect, yet I will only
propose you two. The Catholic church cannot come to the Protestants.
The former shall plainly show that the Catholic church cannot yield unto
Protestants without essentially ruining her self, and therefore no possible
union betwixt the churches unless the Protestants will bend. For if the
Catholic church does essentially subsiste and mantaine her self upon this
principle and ground, that she has received her doctrine from Jesus Christ by
word of mouth and succession from hand to hand which cannot fail, put the case
she yeilde's to the church of England in any point which she holds upon
this principle, is it not evident that she must of necessity forgo her hold,
and for sake her only principle where upon is built all her faith and belief?
is it not manifest that she may as well forsake all, as any one point which
she holds upon this tennor and motive? sure it is. But the Protestants
holding their doctrine and positions upon no such tie, but only upon their own
(at most probable) interpretation of the scripture, which they may change upon
better consideration, are upon far easier terms to yield, and that without
prejudice to their Religion or judgment. Because tenets only holde^ upon
probability may be changed upon any good occasion or new known motive
without disparregment to the Author. And certainly what church soever does
not think her self vnerrable in any point, what she holds may be false,
and therefore it were temeritie for such a church to hold any point
certainly true, And if she hold not any point certainly true, why should
not the very reasons of state and interest seek to have them changed and
settled secure and infalible, sithe^ce humane nature is ever inclined to believe
what is for her own profit. The second reason does prove that the Protestant is
bound in nature and by the light of reason to yield to the Catholic communion.
For if nature teach us that a Protestant's practice ought not to contradict his
principles and judgment of his reason, And that the necessity and force of
Experience does convince most evidently, that there is no Government in a church
without prescribing of some tenets and forbidding of others (restraining or
punishing, if need be, such as will not complie with those prescribed Canons or
articles) And that it is likewise evident that this is contrary to the liberty
of opinion which the Protestant putte's for his first and chief maxim to
approve his separation from the Roman church; will it not follow with out
contradiction, that either the Protestants must break with reason and the
nature of man, in holding liberty in their judgments and understandings, and
obliging to obedience in their will and practice: Or else they must close with
the Catholic church in their judgments, and profess the inerrabilitie, of the
church, at least so far as obliges her subjects not to withstand or oppose,
but to submit and obey her Canons and comma^des. And for your examples of
politic states, which by possession and prescription have at length obtained
right, you must remember that all their beginnings and grounds are upon humane
nature and consent of men, and therefore by the same law by which they were
made they may be likewise altered. But the church of God was made by Christ and
his Ministers, and therefore reason tell's us, that her institution is to be
inuiolably co^serued, nor ought or can any prescription of time prevail
against her. Wherefore sithe^ce that church which the Protestants parted from,
held an holds still that the church of God nether is nor can be but one in
all ages and places (which position she professes, to have teceiued in the
same manner and upon the same ground as she has received the rest of her
doctrine) they Protestants must of necessity first show that they are the true
church of Christ, before they can plead possession or prescription. For if
there can be but one church, no prescription can make them that one, sithence
at their very beginning and ever since, an other both was and is in more quiet
possession then they, and pleade's the same title more strongly.


Nephew. Why then, uncle, I see there remains no other question but whether
the Protestants can convince their positions or not? Which I believe would be a
hard task. Wherefore, uncle, I thank you heartily for this good lesson, It
growe's late, I fear I shall hold you up to long, it is time for you to take
your rest.


Uncle. It Is true, nephew, they ought in deed to convince and demonstrate
their tenants, and I know of no other way they have to do it but by the
scripture which we do not hold to be sufficient to determrne controversies
without tradition. So that I have no more to say to you, but wish you may
begine this new year with a good night's rest, which God send us both.


Whether scripture alone is fit and able to decide controversies in Religion?
THis Dialogue contains 15. parts or paragraphes.

1. The Preface or introduction.

2. That tradition for scripture is not of as great force, as for points of
Doctrine.

3. That tradition for scripture is not more universal then tradition for
doctrine.

4. That it is impossible the text of scripture should have remained
incorrupted.

5. What uncertainty the errors of writers and copists has bredd in
scriptures?

6. What uncertainty the multiplicitie of translations has bredd in scripture?

7. That the very repeating and reciting of an others words breeds a
variety and uncertainty.

8. The uncertainty of Equiuocatio^ which of necessity is incident in all
writings.

9. That there rises an uncertainty out of this, that the scripture was
written in languages now ceased.

10. The uncertainty which follows the particular languages of Hebrew and
Greek, wherein the scripture was vritten.

11. That the nature of the books of scripture is not fitting for deciding of
controversies.

12. Two manners of judging of Religion out of scripture.

13. How scripture does determine controversies.

14. what laws are requisite for disputation out of scripture?

15. Of an other manner of disputing out of scripture.


UNCLE. How now, cozen, what make's you so early this morning? could you not
sleep this last night?


Nephew. Yes indifferent well, I thank God, but it is not very early.
Howsoever if I be trublesome I will expect your better leisure, for I am come
only to tell you a scrupule that I had yesternight, which has tormented me
ever since, And it is, that we Catholics who bear so great reverence and
veneration to the holy scripture, receive more of it then others, write
infinite volumes of commentaries upon it (as Paul's church yard can witness),
and are so exact to improve our selves (I mean our learned men] in the
knowledge of it, should nevertheless, when we come to join in the maine
point, that is, to the decision of controversies in Religion, seem to fly of
and recurre to other judges, though we acknowledge it to be Christ own word
and law. And now I have told you my difficulty, I will leave you to your
better employments, knowing how much you esteem, and how precious you account
your mornings, and therefore I will make bold to call for your answer an
other time.


Uncle. Nay stay, cozen, God forbid I should think I could better employ my
time then in giving you satisfaction in: question of such importance, or that
you should be importune unto me by desiring the knowledge of a thing so
necessary and so be seeming you. I were to blame if I would not leave even my
prayers to assist you in this point, and perhaps an other time you will not be
so earnest on it. Although I must confess I am some what unwilling to diue
into this question, for I see by experience, that the one part seeks by all
means to destroy the authority of God's church, and the other seems to
lessen the power of scripture for the deciding of controversies, so that
indifferent men, and as yet unsettled, be left as it were without all means of
coming to the truth. How soever necessity excuses us, for were our
Adversaries able to perform what they promise, that is, to resolve points of
controversies by scripture, we were worse the^ beasts if we should refuse to be
judged thereby. But if to stand to scripture only, as they do, be but a
plausible way to Atheism, and so the question will only be, whether we must
rely upon a church or be Athiests, (for we think by scripture alone; lef^t
without the guard of the church, nothing or at least not enough for the
salvation of mankind, can be sufficiently prouued) then every man will see
that we are forced by reason and Religion to make evident and known, as far
as we ca^, the necessity of relying upon a church, and to use all our power to
persuade men thereunto. And if you remember we said yesternight that Christian
Religion, or the law of Jesus Christ, cannot be learned by wit and study, but
by authority, and by receiving it from Jesus Christ, And that we said
likewise, that he is no true Christian, nor truly of the community of
Christians (what so ever be his material belief) who does not accept of that
rule and means which Jesus Christ has left and ordained for the receipt of
his law (and the like of him who should follow any other rule) which must
needs be either scripture, or tradition, or both, it will therefore eui^^ntly
follow that either we must be no Christians, or accept and acknowledge tradition
to be this rule, if we can show that the scripture is not fit, nor has the
conditions requisite for the deciding of controversies, nor was made or left to
the church for this end.


Nephew. The greater is the necessity of this question, the more gladd am I
that I have moved it, though me thinke's I my self might well see it is not
fit to make the scripture judge of controversies, because we find by
experience that after so many disputations, and so many books written on
either side there is nothing resolved, nor are we the nearer an end, and
therefore it is evident that scripture alone will never decide and determine our
quarells and disputes.


Uncle. Well, cozen, since you will have it so, our first question shall be



ANd first I pray you tell me, do you think that the Apostles, when they
went about the world to preach Christ Jesus, carried with the^ all the books
of the old and new Testament, either ready translated into the languages of
the people whom they preached unto, or else caused them to be translated by the
first Christians?

Nephew. I never thought of this question before, but I see well enough that
they could not carry all with them, for some parts certainly were not made
before they went to to preach, nay I a'm not assured whether any part of the
new testament was made before their dispersion from Jerusalem, so that well
may they have carried the old Testament with the^, if they thought it sitting,
but for the new, they could not, if I be not mistake^.


Uncle. It is very true. I will tell you therefore, cozen, how the authority
of the scripture, that is, Now the neW Testament Was pro aga ted.
of the new Testament, came into the church. An Apostle or Disciple writing a
book or Epistle communicated it to that church or Country wherein he preached
or to which he writ it, that church communicated it to their neighbors as
the work of such an Apostle, so by little and little it grew from one country
to an other until it was spredd over the whole Christian world. So that some
countries had not the new Testament complete, (that is, all the books of it)
for a long time. Wherefore no wonder that some have doubted of several parts
thereof, being not able to auerre, as not assured (by reason of some accident)
that such books were truly the works of such an Apostle or Disciple, which
not withstanding, Why the canon of scripture is cheefely to be had from Rome.
better intelligence being gotten might be afterward received for scripture.
And here you may note by the way, that the Roman church is that church to which
in reason we ought to give most credit touching the canon of the scripture.
For Rome being at that time ^that is, at least for the first 300 years) to the
Christian world or rather to all the Christians dispersed in diverse parts of
the world, as London is to England; And that we see the collection of things
estimable, dispersed in several Provinces of our Kingdom, is sooner and
better made in London then in any other part of our Country, it must needs
follow that the collection of the Holy scripture, or new Testament, was more
exactly faisable at Rome, then at any other place. But this by the way. For my
aim is to make you judge, whether any one substantial point, The state of
the question.
which the Apostles whith common consent preached through the whole world,
compared to any one book of the new Testament, which soever you think first
or best received, whether, I say, of these two have descended unto us with more
certainty, the one to be the Apostles doctrine, the other to be such an
Apostle's book?


Nephew. I should distinguish your question, for either it may be compared to
that particular Province or church where the Apostle him self delivered it
both in word and writing, or to the whole church. And I confess that in
respect of the whole church, that point of doctrine which is every where
preached must needs have more certainty: but where both are equaly delivered
by the same Apostle to the same church, I should think the work should have
more authority the^ the word. For it is an easy matter to let slipp a word
some times, Whereas writing requires a more settled consideration.


Uncle. If the question be but of a particular church or Province, I doubt it
will not be sufficient to give us a firm authority for either one or the
other, unless we add more circumstances then we have declared. And the reason
is, because one Province may have had Religion so ruinated in it by the
incursion of infidells, that recovering the^ selves after a long time they may
as well mistake one book for an other, as one doctrine for an other, and so
this point is not much to our purpose. Although even in this case the doctrine
taught by word of mouth has these advantages. That it is delivered to many,
the book to few, or in some one place. The doctrine heard and understood by
many, the book only to such as can read, nor to all them nether, but to such
as are careful. The book belonge's not much to the practice of the multitude,
the doctrine gouernes their whole lives. The book brought often times by some
one man, as some messe^ger if it be an Epistl, or other wise sent from some
other place or from some one person, as from Titus of Timotheus, to whom it was
first written, and upon whose authority only the whole verity must originally
rely. But to return to our case. Do you not see that the whole church
trusts some one particular man at the first upon whom she builds her
belief tht this is such an Apostles work, that is, scripture? But for any
material point of doctrine she relyeth upon the universal knowledge of the^
who heard it preached in diverse parts of the world. So that, as I do not
intend to say, the one is certain, the other not, (for a particular church's
authority may be certain in some circonstances) yet I must needs say that
betwixt these two certainties, there is such a difference, that if the one were
to bring in verdict upon the other, it would be much more forcible and evident
to conclude, that this book is scripture, because it is according and
conformable to the doctrine taught and preached, then that this doctrine is the
Apostle's, because it is conformable to this book. For if it be true, that the
whole church once relied upon some one particular church for this verity, it
can never come to pass that the certainty of this book prove greater then
was the authority of that particular church at that time, And consequently the
same comparison which is to be made betwixt the authority of this particular
church and of the universal church, the same, I say, is to be made betwixt the
certainty of this booke's being scripture, and of this point of doctrine's
being catholic and Apostolic. And for the inconvenience you were jealous of,
it falls out quitt contrary. For whether we considere the inspiration and
assistance of the holy ghost, or the industry aed carefullnesse of man, you
shall ever find that the end is more principally aimed at, then the means to
compass the end, and likewise amongst diverse means the most immediate to the
end is still most aimed at, wherefore in our case the end both of writing and
speaking being the delivery of this doctrine for the good of the people, no
doubt, I say, but that both the Assistance of the holy ghost, and the care of
man tends more principally to the delivery of this doctrine then to other
things that came in by chance, in which only there might be a slipp, as you
immagine. Wherefore sithence tradition contains not all the words the
Apostles spoke, but merely what belong's to Christian doctrine, (which was
principally delivered, and the chief errand of the Apostles) and that in the
scriptute many things are written upon occasion and as it were by the bye, no
doubt but in both these respects, to wit, of the assistance of the holy ghost,
and of the care of man, the certainty will be greater of the doctrine
delivered by word of mouth, the^ of the holy writ. Besides the slipps you
speak of, are when things are only once delivered, or spoken without great
premeditation, whereas this doctrine was a thing perpetually beaten on, so as
there can be no fear of such slipping. HoW the old Testament came to
Christians hands.
For the old Testament as I confess it is possible that the Apostles might
have delivered it in all Countries where they preached; so likewise I think
it is evident that they never did it, being that the church has no such
memory, And that the Canon has been doubted of by some, and the Jewish Canon
alleged, whereof there had been no use nor need, if the Apostles had left
to all churches the book it self. It is likely therefore that the old
Testament was brought in by the first Christians' of the Circumcision, who
accepted of those books which they saw the Apostles honor and make use of,
and from them it came to the Gentill Christians, and so by little and little was
accepted of by all the Christian church with the same veneration that the
Apostles and Jewish Christians gave unto it. But how soever shall we not
think at least



NEphew. Surely, uncle for my part I cannot think but that the scripture has
a more universal tradition the^ any point of Christian doctrine, or at least
then any of those which are disputed betwixt us and the Protestants, seeing
that all Christians do agree in the acceptance of the scripture, and far
fewer in diverse points of doctrine. For such churches as are in communion with
the church of Rome are no such extraordinary part of christendom if they were
compared to all the rest.


Uncle. For the Extent of the churches I cannot certainly tell you the truth,
because I fear many are caled Christians who have little either in their
belief or lives to verify that name. But you know in witnesses the quality
is to be respected as well, and more the^ the quantity. So that such
countries, in which Christianity is vigorous, are to be preferred before a
greater Extent of such as are where little remains more then the name. But to
come nearer to your difficulty, suppose that in a suite in law, one side had
seven lawful witnesses, the other had as many and twenty knights of the
post, known perjured knaves or unlawful witnesses more, would you cast the
other side for this wicked rabble?


Nephew. No truly, for seeing the law does inualidate their testimony, I should
wrong the party to make any account of them, and therefore I should judge the
parties equal.


Uncle. Why then you see that who will challenge a more universal. Tradition
for scripture then for doctrine, must first be certain that there is no
lawful exception against those Christians whom he calls to witness, to
wit, against the Armans, Nestoria^s, Eutychians and the like. Now the
Catholic church accounts these men wicked in the highest degree, that is,
guilty of Heresy and schism. And therefore the party which esteems of
their witness, must, by taking of them for honnest men, bear him self for
their fellow, and account the Roman church wicked and not fit for testimony,
from whom nevertheless he has received what soever he has of Christ. Besides
the witness and testimony which these men give, is only that they received
scripture from that church which excluded them from communion at their
beginnings, and ever continued in opposition against them, to wit the
Catholic. Wherefore it is evident that their testimony adds nothing to the
testimony of the Catholic church, but only declares what the testifies, nor
consequently makes any tradition more universal. Let us therefore now see
whether



FOr hitherto, we have only compare the and (...) of scripture in itself to
tradition, now we will come a little closser, and compared it as we have it, to
the same doctrine delivered once (...) tradition. I mean that hitherto we have
spoken as if we had those very books which the canonical writer made with
their own hand, and of what authority they would be. But now we will
considere their since we have but copies of them, of what authority these
copies ought to be. Can you resolve this question?

N^phew. I doubt not, sir, but for that end which we seek, that is, to make a
judge of controversies, every word, every letter, and every title must be
admitted of absolute and uncontrollable certain^ie, And so, I hear, the vulgar
edition in latin is commanded to be held amongst us. For I easily see that if
any one sentence may be quarrelled, every one will incur the same hazard,
all being equaly delivered and equaly warranted with reason and authority.


Uncle. You say very well, for where there is no less the^ the souls of the
whole world at the stake, I see not what advantage can give sufficient
security, if there remain any notable uncertainty. Our savior says, what
can all the world avail any man if he loose his soul? So that where the
question is soul or no soul, salvation or damnation, nothing less then
certainty can serve to proceed upon. And therefore no doubt but if the
Apostles had intended to leave the holy writ for the decider of controversies
in Religion, they would also have provided that infalible copies should have
been kept and come down to the church to the end of the world. For such care
we see that private men have of conseruing their bargains and couuenants by
making their Indentures vncounterfeitable, and enrolling them in public
offices, were they are to remain uncorrupted the like care has common wealths
to conserve their records, specially their laws, keeping the very originalls
or authentical copies with very great care. But what need we took into the
examples of ^^^en, seeing all mighty God in his own person has given us a
pattern, commanding the Deuteronomie to be kept in the Arc, which he would
have to be the authen^icall copy to judge betwixt him and his people; and this
with the greatest veneratio^ that could be imagined, or that ever was given to
any thing. But this was impossible for the Apostles to do (otherwise surely
the would have done it, if they had intended that Christ's written law should
have been our judge) by reason of the multitudes of nations and languages
which hindered that not any one book could be conserved with such security
and incorruptibilitie as would be requisite in that case, both because of the
language, and of the mutabilitie of the world, ever subject to a thousand
accidents, whereby such books might fall into the hands of those who would not
only neglect them, but either wilfully corrupt, or seek utterly to destroy
that which was to be the rule and pattern of Christian faith. And for that
which you say is commanded us, you conceive amiss. For no wise man thinks
that the vulgar edition is so well corrected that much may not be mended; How
the vulgar edition is to be received.
but it is that the church has secured us that there is nothing against
Christian faith or behavior contained in those books, which have so long
passed for scripture, and are so in deed for the substance of the books, and
therefore has commanded us not to refuse this r^^^ in any controversy; on
disputation. And this we, and we only ca^ do, for the church's security
^^seth out of this that she has an other more forcible ground of her faith, to
wit, tradition, by which being assured what the truth is, she can confidently
pronunce that in this book there is nothing contrary or prejudicial
thereunto, which no profession that relyeth only upon scripture can do,
because they must first be assured of the text, before they can judge of the
doctrine: wherefore if the text itself need a judge, and that it is
questionable whether this be the true text or no, they must needs be at their
wits end, according to the principles of raison. Let us therefore see what
ambiguitie or question falls upon the text it self by the succession of so
many ages in which it must needs have been in some sort conserved to come
to our hands There be three ways cheefely whereby the text may have been
corrupted. Three Ways have corruptions come into the Text.
The first on set purpose, as the fathers accuse the Heretics of their
times to have done, and the Jews also are suspected of the same. And this
kind, though it extends it self but to few corruptions, yet they come to be
inevitable, when amongst so many copies none can discern which have been so
abused which not; and as it is but in few points or places so it is in such as
be important and material ones. The second sort of corruptions may have come
by the negligence of servants, which copied the Bible, some being mercenarie
people that made copies to sell, others wittlesse people, who greedy and
desirous to have the Bible out of vanity, hypocrisy, or the like, cared not
for more then to say they had it, and a great part of these copists may have
erred in writing the Bible by the very defect of nature, which permits not
an absolut exactness in any thing, and causes a man in his weariness, nay
and in his too much wariness also, to make escapes unwittingly, which be the
more dangerous by how much the copies seem more exact, whereby some times the
bear down true copies. The third way of corruption may have been by
halfe-witted men, who will now and then undertake to correct copies by aim and
understanding, who for having lighted right in some one place, will venture
confidently to spoil ten. And of these men it is like before printing began,
and copies were not so frequent, and so a corruption went not far, it is like,
I say, there has been diverse, who when they met with a place they could not
make sense of, and saw that a little change would make it sense, such rash their
would easily vener to make such a small (as they thought) mutation, not knowing
peradventure how to come to a better copy then their own: The Hebrew and
Greek Testament have been very subject to the first sort of these
corruptions, the former being delivered unto us by the professed enemies of
Christ, who, as it is reported, in the greatest heat of their hatred to
Christianity, sat at Tiberias to determine all the vowels of the old
scripture, the which every Hebritian knows what power it gave them to change
the whole text, and this to men publickely accused of forgerie in that kind.
The Greek, as long as the condemned Heretics held so great power in those
parts, (...) is publickely known they did for some ages, was in little less
jeopardie, they being also taxed with the like impiety. But the other two
ways and means of corruptions are common to all, and in deed unavoidable in
so great a multitude of copies as were in all the three languages, at least of
Greek and latin. And now, cozen, can you tell me what hazard this must needs
breed in the text it self that is


What uncertainty the errors
NEPHEW. Nay mary that posseth my understanding, for if I should calculate so
many copies to have been m^de, and then estimate what errors may have
escaped in every copy, the number peradventure would exceed the words of the
Bible. For let us take a book of 2000. columns, and let us likewise suppose,
(which is very likely) that as many copies were made in some age of an
hundredth year, and let us then put 56. lines to a column, and 6. words to a
line and so there will be in one column 336. Words, And farther may we not
well suppose that there was as many faults escaped in every copy (one with
an other) as there be words in a column, which being supposed you will find
that the number of all the errors escaped in all the copies which have been
made since the Apostles time, will amou^te to 15. or 16. times as many as
there be words in the Bible. Wherefore by this account it would be 15. or 16.
to one of any particular place that it were not the true text. Which me
thinks cannot be true.


Uncle. I do not think that you have taken your proportions too high, for if
you look into the most part even of printed books of such a great volume as
the Bible is, revewe them well and you will find a whole column of errata in
every one, and you know printing is done with more ease and less toil to
the brain, and has ordinarily 2. or 3. corrections before it be drawn, which
helps written copies have not. But yet I must tell you that you missed it in
one thing, you marked not that the errors of so many copies may have been
the same in diverse of them, otherwise truly your calculation would prove that
we migh look for scripture in scripture and not find it, and the like with
some proportion, in all books, I say with some proportion; for to think
altogether the like of Cicero, Demostenes, and others, is not reasonable,
because there were few copies made of them, as only for some curious and
learned men, whereas the Bible concerned every man so nearely that few would
be with out it that could understand Lattin, And yet I doubt not but you
remember well enough, since you were a student what variety of texts and
pretentions of corruptions you found amongst the Critikes and commentaries even
of those profane authors. And to your calculation I will add an other suppose
there were as many written copies extant as the number of your columns, and
as much variety in those which have not been examined as in those which have
been looked into, And farther that Sixtus Quintus for the setting out of his
Bible caused only an hundred to be examined, And that in his Bible the
corrections amounte (as it is known they do) to the number of two thousand,
do you not see that the computation made of the various sections of all those
copies would make twenty for every colu^ne? And truly we cannot, imagine
that there has been so for either Latin or Greek copies; And whereas in this
computation we only esteem them to have been but 2000. suppose, as it is
very like, that there has been at least an hundredth thousand in either
language in so many ages, and in so great an extent of readers, And those
which are not Extant (Whereof none in particular can be rejected) make the case
more ambiguous, because they give me^ power out or such or such a probability
to conjecture a truth, and out of coniecturall proof to believe it. For as we
all confess that what soever is certainly known to be scripture, is not to
be touched, so we know likewise that what soever may be doubted of, whether it
be scripture or no, obliges to no such respect. Wherefore if reason conclude
and tell us, that in all likelihood there has been twenty variae lectiones in
every particular column, though perhapps two or three only are extant, the
rest probably known to have been, yet so as that there is no certain sign
of which or where they were, And now there comes one to press a place in this
or that column, which his opponent thinks to be contrary to other places,
may he not then justly sai^^ sir, I mistrust this place to be corrupted? Or can
his Adversary in prudence urge it on as an assured text* Or can he press and
auerre for certain that this is none of the 17. unknown variae lectiones?
Certes he cannot, abstracting from all warrant and command of the church and
standing to pure and precise reason. So that all controversies would be ended,
where nothing but scripture is admitted as judge, with a Non liquet.


Nephew. I expected you should have showed me how hard it is to agree about the
true sense of the words of the scripture, but as I now perceive there is as
much difficulty to know whether we have the true and right text or no, which
if it were well conce^^^d and understood by our devout and pure citizen's Wifes
of London, who turn and view the text so curiously when the preacher cites it,
I believe it would much cool the zeal of their spirit if such a qualme should
come over their stomachs as to think, these words peradventure are not the
Holy scripture. But to this, uncle, may you not add the variety of
translations: I pray tell me



Uncle. No doubt, cozen, but great uncertainty is sprung from the variety of
translations, Whereof we may first suppose, that there is no constat of any
infalibilitie in the translatours, no not of the septuaginta them selves, what
of the septuaginta translation.
which the Protestants will easily grant. I know there is a story how that the
septuagi^ta being separated one from an other, their tra^slatio^ light to be
the same word for word. Which if it were certain, I should esteem their
translation of as great authority as the original text it self. But we see
that eue^ in the Apostles time some sought to mende their interpretation, as
Theodotion and Aquila, whose translations were nevertheless accepted of by the
church, and conserved and esteemed. Wherefore there is no likelihood that the
Apostles and the church of their times held the septuaginta tra^latio^ to be
specially from the holy ghost. Not does it import that the Apostles some times
used in their speeches or writings this translation, for they must needs use
it or none when they wrote to those whose language was Greek, and therefore
would have thought them to have mistaken the text if they had cited the
scripture's words according to the Hebrew. When the Hebrew was different from
the Greek. Nor can we certainly tell that is was always the Apostle that
used it, and not the Historian, Who writing in Greek and to Grecians cited the
Greek words, what words soever the Apostle had used, being both to the same
effect. The next point which we may considere in this variety of translations
is, why diverse tra^slations in the same tongue.
that never any begane a new version in the same language but for some mislike
in the former. For if he thought a new translation to be necessary, he must
needs conceive that the former tra^slator had in many and important points
missed and altered the mind of the author. Whereby every wisman will see that
a book of importance is never left of to be translated, until there be some
inhibition to the contrrrie. And hence we may conclude that it is impossible
for a translator to be so exact as that his words shall be taken for the words
of the author. Nay contrariewise it is the law of a good translator not to
yield word for word with the very original, but to express the sense thereof
in the best manner he can: For since no two la^guages jumpe equaly in their
expressions, it is impossible that every word of the one should have a full
expression of every word of the other, much less that their phrases should be
the same, so that per force there must needs be a great difference in
particulars, although the substance of the sense and meaning be the same. And
who should confer any one chapter of two translations in the same language,
and see whether any one sentence do so exactly agree as that scanning
rigorously the variety of their words, there may not be some different sense
gathered out of them, And he will not deny but it is impossible to put fully
and beyond all quarrel the same sense in diverse words. And truly I think that
every one will admit at least as much difference and variety betwixt the
original and the translation, as betwixt translation and translation, these
agreeing in the same tongue, those not, and yet having all the other reasons of
disagreeing. And do you not think cozen, that if one should take twenty of
the best scholars in a school and give them an author to translate either out
of latin into English or out of English into latin, that their translations
would so differ in many sentences as that diverse senses might be easily
gathered out of them, And judge there upon that when wits are set
contentiously to discuss every possible variety, what truth can be convinced
where any two may disagree, though both acknowledge the author? An other
considerable circumstance is, that amongst all ancient translations none can be
rejected, because it may ever be supposed, that the reason of this variety may
proceed from a various copy out of which they were translated, and by reason
we cannot disapproue the copy, as we said before, we cannot therefore
likewise nether justly nor certainly refuse the translation, having nothing to
ground such refusal but conjectures and likelyhoods which be very imperfect.
And if we come to calculate, we may very well suppose that there are now some
twenty translations made into several la^guages. I might put more, for there
has been peradventure 200 latin translations, considering the greatness of
the Roman Empire for so many Ages, and the esteem of the book making every
man desirous to have an exact text, none being as yet ever acknowledged for
such, nor any prohibition of translating scripture. Which variety of latin
translations the Protestants them selves acknowledge, and say very well that
they perished after S. Hierome's correction and amendment of the Bible, whose
complaints of the variety of texts all the world knows, and indeed the
inutilitie and discommoditie of such multiplicitie caused them all to be
neglected, though some think our vulgata editio to have ever been conserved.
Howsoever we may go on with our supposition, and add, that of those twenty
tra^slatio^s now exta^t every one is equal to any other, Let then a sentence
be proposed, whose nature and definition is to decide a controversy, but with
this condition, which ordinarily happens in such a case, to wit, that it
depends on the propriety of some word, or on the Emphasis of some manner of
speaking: Is it possible that any reasonable man should think that all these
translations will agree in such a thing? Three or fouer peradventure may, but
for twenty it is absolutely impossible, And if any one of these translations be
substantially different all the rest cannot with certainty or evidence bear
it down, sithence this might be out of a different copy with which perhapps
agreed more then we have, so that we shall still return to our former non
liquet. And hence follows that although a translation in the whole bulk be
morally the same book with the original, yet metaphysically and rigorously
there is great diversity, and at least such, as in our case makes all
translations of the scripture unfit to decide controversies by them.


Nephew. Your discourse will not only make me believe what I have heard
reported S. Augustine should say, Epist. Man. funda. cep. 5.
that he would not believe scripture, unless the church's authority moved
him thereunto, but I fear it tends to the too great weakening of the
scripture, which has been so happily planted in the church, and got this
supereminent authority which it has, to some good effect, without doubt,
though not for the decision of controversies, and therefore you will prove to
much, and in seeking to destroy one error you will be in danger to fall into
an other. This I am sure of, that if you should preach this doctrine at S.
Antolins, the people would stone you with their brasencornerd Bibles, though
peradventure if they laid all their heads together they could not give you a
sufficient answer. But thus much I learn, now when I reflect upon them, that
they have no reason to object against us our trusting of our church and
Pastors for the sense and explication of the scripture, whereas the^ selves
must needs rely upon a douzen or twenty Parsons or Ministers (if there were so
many employed in their translation) for the very text it self, whose skills
or wills might be defective according to their own maxim, so that we rely
upon the whole church, they, pore people, upon what they nether think
certain, nor infalible, nor probable, but as far as they please.


Uncle. I will find a time to satisfy your fears of my diminishing the
scripture's authority, and will show you how all I have said does nothing
prejudice the layfull and intended use of the scripture, and if I should chance
to forget, I pray you put me in mind before we part. For the present I will
propose you an other difficulty, which is,



ANd let us suppose the writer him self play the translatour, As for example,
that our savior him self having spoken in Hebrew or Syriake, the Holy writer
is to express his words in Greek or Latin, And farther that this which we
have said of translatio^s be (as truly it is) grounded in the very nature of
diverse languages, and therefore unavoidable by any art or industry, will it
not clearly follow that even in the original copy written by the
Eua^gelist's own hand, there is not in rigor the true and self-significant
words of our savior, but rather a comment or Paraphrase explicating and
delivering the sense thereof. Nay let him have written in the same language,
and let him have set down every word and syllable, yet men conversant in
noting the changes of meanings in words, will tell you, that diverse accents in
the prononciation of them, the turning of the speakers head or body this way
or that way, the allusion to some person, or to some precede^t discourse, or
the like, may so change the sense of the words that they will seem quite
different in writing from what they were in speaking. So that you see how like
negligent men we commonly use to press words, as the proper and identicall
words of our savior finding them registered in the Holy writ, Which in rigor
and exactly speaking are but in some sort an imperfect and equivocal
paraphrase or expression of Christ's own true words, the weakness of ma^'s
speech and expressio^ bearing no greater exactness. And surely all experienced
men, but especially disputatife scholars (who find means daily to explicate
the planest words of a^ author to a quite different sense) will tell you, that
to seek to convince an exact truth out of bare and dead words, is to put your
self into a dark some and wild laborinth, And to rely upon them, is to fix
the Camelions colors in the curre^t of the wind or water. Wherefore, cozen,
having, I think, sufficiently told you my mind concerning the text it self,
let us go farther and look into


ANd to proceed more clearly we will suppose for the present that there is
but one authentical copy of the scripture, written in some one language, and
hereby abstract from all varieties of texts by translations, or errors, or
any such accident, and merely considere what of necessity follows out of
this, that the scripture is a book written in words of men, and whether, this
supposed, there can be any decisiue and decretory sense evidently and
certainly gathered out of it. Tell me then, cozen, do you think it is an
easy matter to decide controversies by words? or why not?

Nephew. I know words are but signs of what is in our minds, set and
ordained to that end by the will of man, wha ars words.
and therefore that diverse men signifying their minds by diverse signs, come
to make diverse languages. And I know likewise that though it be an ordinary
thing amongst us to hang up a bush to signify thereby that in the house there
is wine to be sold, yet peradventure in an other cou^trye some thing else may
signify the selling of wine, and a bush some other thing. So may it happen
that the same word in one language may signify one thing and in an other, some
thing else, And because I likewise see that it may so fall out that these two
nations join in one, or have much commerce together, by use and custom this
word may come to have two significations, even in the same language, And so
will breed a difficulty in whether of the two senses it is to be taken, which
I conceive is caled Equivocation. The origin of equivocation.
And sithence there is no other ground for either of these significations but
man's will, which cannot be easily demonstrated, I know not well how the truth
can be certainly known.


Uncle. You say very well, for the signification of words must needs depend
of ma^'s will, and of the custom or use of them, two very mutable things.
Wherefore separating these two, and taking words in them selves, you shall
find that man's will does put diverse significations upon the same word, either
by chance, or onsett purpose; by chance as you declared but now, which in
deed does not teach to many words, but is casual as the cause of it is; on
set purpose, and that either for want of words, or by desire of elegance and
variety in our delivery, And this belongs to almost all the words we
have, for there is scarsely any word (if you note it) but may be so used, and
if it may be so taken, it is so one time or other. This multiplicitie of
variously taking words in Logic is said, by who makes the least, to be eight
fold, for some make no end of multiplying the sorts of it, And under the name
of Equivocation or Analogy it much confounds all scholasticall learning. Now
for the custom and use of words there be many things to be respected, as the
varieties of times, and qualities of persons, for in one time a word may
signify one thing, and in an other a quite different thing, So we see that
those who write of eloquence give words their births and old ages. And
likewise who knows not how great difference there is betwixt the use of words
in the Court or university, or great cities, and the use of the same words in
remoter parts and villages. Nay if you mark it you shall find that as
languages in general are the institution of a multitude of men, so almost
every particular man is Master, and as it were founder of some particular
expressions or phrases not common to others, whereby some declare them selves
more exactly and plainly, others more confusedly and ambiguously, in so much
that Critickes, curious in ancient Writings, Will attribute or derogate
certain works from Authors upon this only ground. And now I pray, cozen, in
such an ancient writing as the scripture is how many ambiguities may grow from
all these principles? Or rather what certainty can be had out of such
multiplicitie of vncertitudes? But let me particularly urge one thing, that is,
whether it is possible that a language should be entirely conserved in written
books, which still remain the same?


Nephew. Why not? if there be books enough, How a language is conserved.
for then all the words of that language may be found in them, in all their
senses, and then I think the language cannot perish.


Uncle. Your answer is partly true, but not sufficient, for you were to
considere whether so many books of one language may have been conserved* for
if the Country be little, few books will be written in the language, but if
the language be dispersed through many Countries, it will have it is proper
words and significations for every Country. So that books being written for
the subjects, and not for the language, (as Dictionaries and phrase books are)
it must needs follow that only so much of the language will be conserved as is
necessary for the understanding of those books, which of them selves are so
good, as that the people will still desire to have them and continue them.
Wherefore nether all books that are written, nor, (if we judge by these of our
time any notable part will be conserved, nor yet the whole language contained
in all the books that are written. And if part of the language be lost, part
conserved, of necessity the conserved part must be imperfect by the mistake of
such words as be rarely found, and where they are found, only ghest at by the
rest which are to make sense with them. And all this equivocal ambiguitie is
purely in the bare words, not yet placed in construction.


Nephew. I think so, uncle, for altough I see there be cases, numbers, moodes,
tenses, and persons in every language, yet I hope those do rather take away
equivocation then make it,


Uncle. It is true those things are made to take away equivocation, but if you
reflect you shall find that the want of them, and the confused or vnexact use
of them, does likewise cause it, and where they are more abundant (as in some
languages) there the abuse of them is more frequent people being in nothing
more unwary the^ in their words; And where they are but rare and few, that
likewise of it self causes ambiguitie. And if you will look into those
particular languages wherein the scripture was primitiuely written, you shall
find that the Hebrew has eight moodes wholly different from any of either the
Greek or Latin moodes, and ever varying the sense, as much as the active and
passive do in Latin and Greek. The Greeks have seven tenses all of different
significations, and of numbers, genders, persons three a piece. The Latin six
cases. So that you see new occasions of Equivocation almost in every word, and
consequently what obscurity and doubtfullnesse must of necessity follow any
language or sense relying upon words; and yet for brevity sake, I have not
told you the half of what the matter gives me scope to say. for the
scripture depends and has been originally written in more languages then I
have spoken of, Where of some have much more variety then any of those that I
have expressed. For co^struction you may first conceive that the very pointing
and accenting of words does beget a number of doubts and Equivocations, a
diverse comma or virgula making some times the sense quite different. Secondly
that word which is construed with an other to clear the signification of it,
is some times it self of no less ambiguitie then the other. Thirdly in the
same construction it may happen that the same two words will have diverse
senses. And of all these your Grammar and Oratory Masters, do enlarge their
precepts. And above all there is an Equivocation in the most common words we
use, rising out of a kind of custom depending of particular times and places,
which the compilers of the Civil law thought to be of so great importance as
that they judged it necessary to make a special book de vsu and
interpretatione verborum, and that for the commonest words that were in use.
These reasons, being unavoidable in any language by human industry, are more
then sufficient to let you see that it is impossible to convince and demonstrate
any thing out of bare and dead words, and that who undertakes such a task
does not see what he attempteth.


Nephew. If all these things be true which you tell me I wonder with what face
any man can pretend to convince points of controversies so clearly out of
the scripture, which some do with such confidence, for surely they must either
be proud dunces, and ignorant doltes, not understanding what is proof and
what is not, or else preuaricating miscreants counterfeiting what they do not
believe, and think our learned men unable or unwilling to discover the follye
of their enterprise.


Uncle. Your blood is too hot, nephew, but if you said only, that such men as
promise them selves victory with so much confidence in this case, are rash and
unadvised, I should think you wronged them not. For the truth is, there is none
but is so in his measure. And where interest or affection is joined to some
little appare^ce, which the first sight of the text affords, there is presently
a great impression made. It is true in so grave and important a case they ought
to be more stayed, but he whose conscience quitteth him from all too forward
judging of his neighbors, even in matters of consequence, let him cast the
first stone for me. I will leave them to them selves, and let you see that we
are not yet at an end but farther



FOr not only the languages in which the Holy scrtpture was written, do of
their own nature as I told you, breed great ambiguitie in the text but also
in this, that those languages are now extinct. And therefore we see that the
knowledge of them is not common ad universal, but only of some particular men,
and amongst them in most things mainely controuerted. And of this disputable
uncertainty amongst our famous linguists none can be ignorant, the number of
Critickes in this age, and the multitude of their volumes give sufficient
testimony of it. The uncertainty of criticisme.
Nay they will tell you that an exact and skillfull knowledge in this
Criticisme is a necessary part and quality for all those who will profess
the study or interpretation of scripture. And yet God knowe's upon what slight
grounds they proceed, what weak ghesses are their judgments, how full of
quarells, and mistakes, so that a wise man no sooner sees them, but sees
likewise that there is nothing but varieties of disputs upon coniecturall
probabilities, and nevertheless you shall have the^ cry out, run to the
fountain, go to the spring, see the original texts, not considering that
there is nothing there but trubled waters, that is, obscure co^iectures. I
could tell you also that often times it happens that such as are employed in
the translations of these ambiguous originalls, have got by friends and favor
that preferment, and so have let pass some places in their tra^lations [which
I could cite) against their own judgment, to complie with the will of their
patrons, and higher powers, whom they durst not resist. But in deed their
principles in them selves are so uncertain, as that the best and wisest of
them will confess they have been often mistaken and will not stick to change
their minds now and then even in such points as they thought they had the
greattest evidence their art could aftord them. What think you then, dear
cozen, would become of Christian faith if it were only to rely upon such a
weak fundation? Which must needs follow, if the most substantial points of
Christian Religion must have their only warrant and decision from the bare
written word, and be ever agitated by places of scripture, and never concluded
by a definitive sentence. Were it not too tedious I would let you see the
uncertainty of diverse particular languages wherein several parts of the
scripture are said to have been originally written, but I will only tell you
in a word


FIrst therefore the Hebrew has two proprieties very considerable, the one,
that it is thought to be the shortest language in the world, the other, that it
is the most eloquent. For the first, it consists cheefely in the writing of
the words, and in the scarcity of books. For the writing, all the vowells are
supposed, not expressed in the original copies, and therefore only conserved
by memory, and to memory we must trust for them. I confess they are now
expressed by points, wherein there is great mistaking, the rules thereof being
very uncertain, and the more in that these rules and the practice of them
were varied according to the diversity of the countries wherein the Jews have
been dispersed. The reason of their writing without points I conceive was,
because their vowells being at the first but five, by making long and short grew
to be more; and so the first figures of them to stand only for the consonant
use of some vowells, or else to have no sound. But what soever the origin was,
the effect must of necessity breed a great obscurity and doubtfullnesse in
the language, the vowells though fewer yet in use being very near as much as
the consonants. The words are all of one or two sillables if any be of more,
they are accounted exoticke, and therefore very like one an other, which is
also increased by the neerenesse of diverse of their letters. So that both their
pronuntiation and writing being easily mistaken and confounded bring's a great
disorder in the language. This is likewise augmented by the want they have of
conjunctions and prepositions, which not being of a sufficient number make the
construction very equivocal many times. For the scaretie of books, you may
well conceive it, if you do but know that the legitimate Hebrew is wholly
contained in the old scripture, whereof some parts were not written in Hebrew,
and if you saw the book in a small print, and yet the letter bigger then our
little latin character, you would see it is but a very little book. And what
soever besides is written in Hebrew is not warrantable to explicate the text,
The Rabins affecting many diversities as well in words and style, as in
writing. Nay perhaps I might add to this, that the characters them selves have
been wholly changed since the beginning, and that it is credibly reported to
have been once lost and restored only by the memory of Esdras. So that we
have the least assurance of this language that almost can be of any not
entirely extinguished For the propriety of the Hebrew's Eloquence it
consists cheefely in figures, translations, and number. Figures or schemes
are the highest part of proper Rhetoric, because they contain the greatest
force and swaye that words can give to our appetit, and if they be rightly
applied carry a way the auditor even against his will unto a strong and
sadaine action. These, although the Prophets use them more perfectly then ever
any Poet or Orator did, yet do they not cause much obscurity, unless it be
when they are used in Dialogue form, which where it is used in scripture, it is
hard to discern, How soever they are a conuincing proof that who uses them
much inte^de's not his writings should be dogmaticall and decisiue.
Translations or metaphores are cause of great obscurity, and therefore we see
the Poets who cheefely use them; are not to be redd (until a man be exercised
in the^) without study and pains. Nor do any Greek or Latin examples show
that strength which the scripture has in this kind. The number or Cadence;
which one would think could not be suspected of any such matter, is a cause
of great ambiguitie, for the Hebrews being wholly given there unto in their
scripture, have so many accents of diverse effects, whereof one many times
stands for an other, or is like an other in figure, that you had need of an
Ariadne to lead you thorough. Some of their accents are Grammatical, some
Rhetorical, some musical, and as much a do with them as with the rest of
the words, and very hard it is to know when it is one accent, when it is an
other, and when it has this effect, when that. Who therefore would have
recourse to the Hebrew Text for precise and conuincing decisions, does like
him, that being not skillfull at his weapon, would choose, upon a challenge for
the hour of his combat, a moonelesse midnight, when the skill of his enemy
could not prejudice him.

Nephew. Marry sir I think such a man should do wisely, for the question
being not of fencing but of valor, his enimie's skill would be no disadvantage
unto him. But yet I cannot commend him that chooses obscurity for the
decision of a doubt, unless he fear his cause and think him self in the
wrong, and then peradventure his wit may be commended.


Uncle. It is sufficient for me, that you conceive that this is not the way to
clear the truh. To the Greek text therefore, which I will tell you, that the
ambiguitie of it is nothing so great as of the Hebrew, yet has it two defects.
The one that it wants those sense varying coniugations whereby the Oriental
languages express them selves, the other that by abundance or rather
redundance of unprofitable varieties it is both hard to learn, and uncertain
in sense, the same word signifying diversely, either because of diverse Dialectes,
or of diverse applications of authors, so many having written in several
countries not depending one of an other, and having great diversity of
phansies. Their prepositions both in constructio^ and composition are
irregular, changing some times the sense of the primative very extrauagantly,
in so much that mere guess and conjecture must preuaille, the word, if it be
common, being used in sundry se^ses, if it be rare, the meaning of it must be
gathered out of some thing adjacent.


Nephew. Here is enough, uncle, of this verbal and Gra^maticall stuff.
Wherefore I will now put you in mind of your promise, to wit, that you will
tell me to what end the scripture was left to the church since by reason of
it is ambiguitie it is not fit to be a judge of controversies?


Uncle. I will tell you presently, but first I have a word more to say unto
you, wherein, because I see you are half weary, I we will be short, and it
shall be to show you



TEll me then, cozen, suppose you were to give a law in writing, which should
last for manies ages, and be observed in many countries, how would you cause
it to be written? I mean not for the language, but for the frame of the work,
and for the manner or method of the delivery of it.

Nephew. I do not profess my self able to be a lawmakers, yer according to
the example of our laws, and of the civil law, In What form laws ought to be
made
(and I imagine the like of the laws of other countries) it were me thinke's to
be done thus. I would first cause the most common things to be commanded, then
by degrees I would descend to particulars, still observing that several
matters should be under several chapters or divisions, and not one piece here,
an other there, every chapter containing all things necessarily belonging to
that matter. Farther I would distinguish the degrees of commandes by the
degrees of penalties and rewards, And if any thing were fit, partly to be
declared, partly to be left to discretion, I would express so much that there
might be no mistake, As for the style, I would endeavor to make it the most
proper and exact that possibly I could, explicating ambiguous words to my
power, and declaring in what sense they were to be taken, cutting of all
superfluous words which might any way confound or prolong the sentences
without necessity. In fine I would labor to make it the most ordinary, the
most plain, and the most short that my wits could reach unto, and then
according as I should have followed these rules I should think to have
performed my raske.


Uncle. I see you would make a good states man, And if reason teach you this,
will not the same reason tell you likewise, that if the Author of reason him
self were to give a law, would he not do the same, in a more perfect degree?
And if in any book he has not done it, does not the same reason tell you,
that his intention was not, that that book should be a judging law? Let us
therefore see whether these conditions be observed in the scripture or no, And
if it be manifest that the scripture has them not, this controversy must
needs be at an end, sithence it will evidently follow that God never ordained
the scripture for any such purpose, but for some thing else, and consequently
that it were as ridiculous to seek the decision of controversies out of
scripture, as to cut with beetle or knoke with a straw. Dividing therefore th
holy scripture you shall find, The division of the ^ookes of the old Testament.
that the books of the old Testament (saving Deuteronomie, which is, or
contains the old law, with much admixtion of history) are either Historical,
oratoricall, poetical, or Philosophical, Whereof the three first are excluded
by their very names from the qualities and conditions of a law instituted for
the deciding of quarells, though some co^mandes may be therein contained upon
occasion. The philosophical books are such as touch little upon our
controversies, because they are but either moral instructions for the life and
conversation of men amongst their neigbours, or else they treat and speak
only of such points as we and all our Adversaries agree in. But in deed
there is a maine reason against the whole text of the old law, which is, that
the commandes were given, as we say, personally to one people and did no
farther belong to the rest of the world then in that they were natural
commandes, that is in the virtue of nature obliging to obedience. So that who
soever will argue out of the old Testament must first prove the command to be
natural, which if he do, he needs not produce the text for it. The new
Testament is Historical, Epistolar, The division of the books of the new
Testament.
or Mystical, which by their very names and natures exclude all such
exactness as of necessity is required to a judging law, they being all
written upon special occasions, and for particular ends, many things
repeated, many things left out in one which are found in an other, scarsely
any one knowing of an others writings. Those things which are in the History
and in the Epistles, are expressed as was fitting for the understanding of them
to who^ they were written, or to whom the recited speech was made,
circumstances far different to what is convenient and acco^modated to our
understandings now. And as an able man says of history, that because it must
needs lean and rely upon all circumstances even of small moment, he that
should govern him self by it, must of necessity be misled: so in our case
the want of knowing circumstances, and not comprehending the true meaning of
what was written in a particular occasion, must of necessity make us apt and
subject to take our aim and rule amiss. The mystical book which we call the
Apocalips, being a pure Allegory is the most unfitting of all. This in my
judgment is so evident that if any man of common sense would but reflect and
really considere what is requisite to determine a litigious controversy
betwixt two men passionate of their own opinions he would never say that
scripture is a book either intended by Almighty God, or any way fit for
such a purpose. Besides a prudent and experienced man will tell you, that who
looks in to the various dispositions of men's understandings, but especially
of men's wills, and sees the variety and miltiplicitie of men's interests and
passions, (Which for the most part are publicly noted in every man, or at
least so inwardly hidden and secretly covered, that some times even he who
would and does swear and protest him self free from all such pre-occupations,
is nevertheless the most dangerously entangled) that such an one, I say, will
never think to find two in two thousand who, left to their own liberty,
will agree in the interpretation of any law, how plane soever, where both are
oppositly interressed. But if we put this law to be supernatural and Divine,
full of mystical and sublime commandes, whereunto nature has not the least
inckling whereby to raise her self to the knowledge thereof, but must of
necessity wholly and precisely rely upon authority and captiuate her
understanding in obsequium fidei, and this to the most obscure and dark points
and articles that can be imagined, shall we say, that in this case; every
one is to gather this law, and come to the knowledge of it, as well as he can
out of the scripture alone, so full of infinite ambiguitie as you have seen?
Were it not first to be proved that scripture was made and intended for this
end* which how possible it is to perform, let any indifferent man judge.
Whereas to remitte the judgment of all quarells, disputes and controversies of
Religion unto living men, is more efficacious, more suitable to nature and
discretion, and in a word conformable to the practice of our forefathers, and
to the principles of common sense and reason.


Nephew. I must confess I shall never think scripture was given for a judge
of controversies. For to make so large a book, and to mingle in it so many
things which either appertain not at all to the substance of our belief, or be
very remotely co^nexed unto it, And then to leave it to our ghessing what may
be the meaning of the words, does plainly argue some other intention in the
writer then to set down a standing and authentical text to decide quarells.
And although, I hear, the Protestants say, that a plain passage clears an
obscure, so may it be said, that an obscure passage darkeneth a clear, so
that is all one. Wherefore I long to know for what use the scripture was made.


Uncle. Have yet a little patience, cozen, Diverse substantial points have been
opposed by ancient Heretics.
and make a reflection upon some chief points which have been co^trouerted in
the church of God, As by the Arrians how a spiritual and indivisible essence,
such as God is, could have a natural son. By the Trinitarians and Sabellians
how the same indivisible thing could be three persons. By the Nestorians and
Eutychians how one person could subsiste in two natures. By the Pelagians how
God's foreknowledge and predestination could stand with merits and freewill. By
the Iconoclasts how the adoration of Images tended and ended in the Archetype.
By the Berangarians how a natural body can have corporal presence otherwise
then by it is quantity. By our Wicklefists how all things be not governed by a
fatal necessity, And all these renewed by the liberty and confusion of our
last ages. Considere the subtilitie of these questions, how they are above
nature and above our comprehensio^, how the truths of these disputes are like
the passage betwixt Scylla and Charybdis, limited betwixt two errors so
narrowly as that when they are spoken of at large and not dogmatically,
(specially before they be examined and before the speaker by mistrust of
opposition is made wary) it is almost impossible the speaker should be so just
and straight in his language, as not to give occasion to one who comes after
him, to pretend his favor for the one or the other error. Considere farther
that wrangling wits (such as for the most part they are who first begin a
new faction in the church) have this property, that they reduce their questions
by little and little to logical and abstracted notio^s, and force the Catholics
to follow them, if they will not desert their ancient truths, so that after a
while one knows not where the controversy lies. For example Simon Magus,
and the first authors of our last Breaches, preached that faith did so
justify as that good works were not necessary, now their followers draw the
question to this whether faith or charity be the form of justification, which
is all most pure Logic. Now if an Arrian come and tell you that the scripture
says, Pater mayor me est, and therefore that Christ Jesus was not truly God,
nor consubstantiall to his father (And the like may be said of the rest of
these heresies; and even of all the most substantial and fundamental points
of Christian faith) The Catholic maintaine's the contrary, now, I say, is it
possible that any rational man should think that these and the like
questions can be diffinitiuely resolved by a critical libratio^ of dead and
uncertain words full of equivocal ambiguitie, their sense and meaning lying
in the breast and mind of him who is not to be found, but deceassed many ages
agone? And if they cannot (as it is more then evident they cannot) shall we
think that Christ Jesus has left and established no means or authority upon
earth to take up these quarells and decide these controversies? shall matters
of such maine importance and great consequence ever remain a perpetual
subject of endless dissension and division? shall the Catholic church and
Christian Religion be torn and rent in pieces eue^ in what is most
substa^tiall and essential in her (for still, I say the like may be said of
what point soever) at the will and pleasure of some private me^'s phansies,
and no power ordained to prevent such essential and eternal disorders? If
this be not to ruin and overthrow all government and Religion, and to introduce
confusion both common sense and reason fails. Put this liberty, (of
believing only what he thinks he find's in the scripture) but in to one man's
hands, to wit, the first beginner and brocher of a new dogme, and let him be a
man to whom the sharpness of wit, and some times a seeming good life, has
given authority (though truly his spirit is governed either by a secret pride,
or by some other interest or indignation) and see if such an one be not able to
draw a great multitude, even the third part of the stars after him, especially
if he preach liberty either of mind or body, and have with all the hand of
some Prince full of rewards and punishments to second his inte^tions, Calculate
what the industry of such a formed party heartily cleaving together is not able
to invente. Some have been able to cast mistes even upon mathematikes, and
upon the most certain principles of nature, and laying then those qualities of
scripture, which I have told you of, to the disposition of those factious
persons, what evidence think you can be expected from the conflicts of such
me^ disputing upon such grounds?


Nephew. Truble yourself no farther in this point, for I cannot but confess
that the evidence you have brought is greater then I could expect or desire.
Wherefore I pray hold me no longer in suspense, but tell me



Uncle. Why, cozen, tell me first, do you see the wall before you, some fouer
or five yards from you? and how much of if do you see?


Nephew. I see it perfectly well, God be thanked, and it is white, there is
four pictures hangs on it, and half a douzen chaires stand against it, To tell
you precisely how much of it I see together, that I perhapps cannot, but in a
short turning of mine eye I can see it all, or very near, if I will.


Uncle. I pray go within a spanne of it and then tell me what difference you
find in the sight of the wall.


Nephew. Marry I find now that I see much less of it, but that which I do
see, and which lies directly before me, I see far better and can distinguish
every little part in it, and of what color it is.


Uncle. Did you not tell me, cozen, the wall was white? how comes it to
pass that you tell me now you see what color every part of it is?


Nephew. It seemed all white before whilst I was a good wale from it, but when
I came near it, I could perceive some little parts dunne, others brown, and
the like, but sure the white parts were much more.


Uncle. Why then, cozen, you may think that you did not perfectly see the
color of the wall before, for the color of the wall must needs be the
color of the parts, and you say the color of the parts is not one but
many, and therefore you only saw the color of those parts which did exceed
the rest. And if you took any of those little parts and put it in a
multiplying glass, you would see as great difference of parts, and
peradventure of colors to, in it, as you saw in the wall when you were
within a spanne of it; so that if one should ask you what you have seen you
would hardly quit your self handsomely of the question. Notwithstanding you
perceive well enough that the first sight of the wall serves you for all the
uses of your life, as not to run against it, and generally to know how to
comporte your self or use any thing else which were requisite to be set
toward the wall or in any manner to be done about it. The second sight
serves you only to know the nature of the wall, and to distinguish what is
mixed in it, or of what ingredients it is composed, or the like. So that you
see the easier and more common knowledge of any thing serves for the
direction of our lives, the more particular and exact knowledge is only
required either for the content of the knower, or for some special practice
upon the thing known.


Nephew. I believe I understand already which way you intend to carry me,
for you will tell me that there are two manners of understanding scripture, the
one a Kind of large manner, taking it in gross and a great deal together, as
we take a discourse or play which pleasingly passes away without any great
demurr, or particular weighing of every word; The other more curious and exact
looknig into every little propriety which may breed any diversity. And I
suppose you would tell me that this second belongs only to scholars, but
that the former guides our life and governs our actions. And it is true I see
the people is ordinarily carried a way by their preachers, Ancient common
wealths by their Orators, and in what matter soever an eloquent and elaborate
discourse which passes sweetly in this sort gaine's presently the suffrages of
the Auditorie. Wherefore I must needs confess that what good effect soever is
the end for which the scripture was ordained, if it be any thing belonging to
man's life and conversation, it must be compassed by this gross, common, and
ordinary course of reading and understanding it. Where as if a man should over
examine every word he would not find ground to fix him self with advantage
and utility. Is not this your meaning?


Uncle. You are very right. And surely if we look into what is in the
scripture necessary for our good life and virtuous conversation, we shall
find plainly that it is to be had this way. As the direction of our lives and
actions to God, acknowledging all things from him, Comfort in adversity,
moderation in prosperity, compassion of the afflicted, helping of the needy,
Rewards of virtue, punishments of vice, examples of both, and in a word the
motives of the love of God and our neighbor, and of the contempt of the world.
Who therefore is so blind as not to see that these things are to be found in
the scripture by a sensible, common, and discreet reading of it; though
perhapps by a rigorous and exact ballancing of every particular word and
syllable, any of these things would vanish away we know not how? but to come
yet closser to our purpose, do you think this manner of reading scripture
would make a man a perfect believer that is a Catholic? Which is as much as to
ask



NPEHEW. How should I know that, unless I were able to prove my Religion out
of scripture, or at least that I were able to give a judgment of all that is
in scripture? Which is beyond my capacity.


Uncle. Then I will tell you, coze^, there are two means to make one a
Catholic or a true and perfect belieuer. The one by showing every point of
our faith in particular. And this I dare not say that our common and ordinary
manner of reading or hearing scripture is able to do, for we see those who
write of controversies do allege but few places, nor those unavoidable
nether, for some points of Catholic doctrine. Nor is it to be expected,
Because man's nature being ever to add to what is already learned, And seeing
likewise that long practice makes men perfect in all arts, There being no
prohibitio^ to perfect in some sort the instruction of the faithful, the
oeconomie of the church, and some such other things, which the oppressed
Primitive church could not bring to perfection, no maruelle I say if these and
the like things can not in particular be showed in the scripture; but shall
therefore I know not who rise up and exclame these things be superstitious,
hurtful to the faithful and make a schism to destroy them? Who does not see
that this were plain faction and Rebellion? The other means or way to make
one a Catholic is by some common principle; as if by reading of scripture we
find nothing contrary to the Catholic tenet or practice which our Adversary
call's in question: or also if we find it commended there in general, or the
authors and obseruers of it praised and extolled. And in this way I doubt not
but a sensible and discreet reading of scripture at large, may and will make
any true student of it, a perfect believing Catholic, so he proceed with
indiffere^cie, and with a mind rather to know scripture then to look for this
or that point in it. But now can you tell me, coze^, how it comes to pass
that sithence by an exact and particular examination of the words of scripture
these truths cannot be convinced and beaten out of it, how, I say, is it
possible that by a common and ordinary reading of it these truths should
appear, for that cannot be in the sum, which is not in the particulars.


Nephew. I can tell you that there is the same difficulty in the diverse sights
of the wall, which you made me experience but even now, but to yield you a
good reason either of the one or the other, that passes my understanding.


Uncle. Have you not seen an inue^tion of the Architects, who can so dispose
pillars in a gallerie that setting your eye in a certain position you shall
see the figure of a man or a beast, and walking a long the gallerie to go to
it, it vanishes away and you shall see nothing but pillars? Or have not seen
a silinder or pillar of glass, before which if you lay certain papers full
of scrawolles and scrables and looking into the pillar you shall see the
picture of a man, or the like? As these are do^ne so it happens in our case,
both in the eye and in the understanding. For the art of these things is, that
certain parts may so come together to the eye, as that other parts either by
situation, or by some other accident, remain hidden, and that those parts
which appear being seen without the others, will make this or that shape. In
our case likewise the quantity of the seen parts exceeding the unseen keeps
the whole possession of the eye, in the sight, and of the understanding, in
reading, not letting the rest appear. And hence it is also that this common
manner of using scripture is more secure then the exact ballancing of it. For
nether the variety of translations, nor the errors of copies, nor the
difficulties of languages, nor the mutabilitie of words, nor the multiplicitie
of the occasions and intentions of the writers, nor the abundance of the things
written, nor the different framinges of the books, which be the causes of
uncertainty in a rigorous examination, have any such power as to break the
common and ordinary sense or intention of the writer in general, as all
books testify unto us. And hence it is likewise, that the holy fathers
pressed scripture against the Heretics of their times, partly forced
thereunto because the Heretics generally will admit of no proof but out of
the scripture; but chiefly by reason their works are diffuse and oratoricall,
befitting people used to orations and sermons, as the Greeks and Romans were,
diverse of the fathers them selves bredd in that sort of learning. Wherefore you
shall have them cite many places, some proper, some Allegorical, some common,
all, some times, auoidable if they be taken seperatly, but the whole discourse
more or less forcible according to the natural parts or heavenly light more
or less communicated to one then to an other, yet still in the proportion of
orators who speak to the multitude and not to Socrates or Crysippus.
Wherefore the scripture in this kind was a fitting weapon for them, and the
church's continuing and reremaining in their doctrine shows that they used
it dexterously, and as it ougth to be used with relation and dependence of
tradition.


Nephew. Why then, sir, must all disputation of Religion out of scripture be
abolished? For if there can be no certainty gathered out of it in a decisiue
and definitive way, to what purpose should a man either allege it, or admit
it in disputes of Religion? at least tell me I pray



UNCLE. I am far from disliking disputation out of scripture, so it be done
with those conditions which are fitting, and which may bring the matter to some
vpsh ott. The first rule I would have a Catholic observe is, not to dispute
with a Protestant, unless he promise to prove his position evidently and
manifestly. For since the Catholic knows there may be certain witty
probabilities and hard places of scripture brought against him, it were
madness in him to leave his tenet, custom [optima legum interpres) standing
for him, and the practice of the church being on his side, which is the
greatest argument that can be brought to show how and in what sense the
scriptures, which that church her self delivers, are to be understood, it
were, I say, mere folly in a Catholic to leave his tenent and accept of an
other only for a probable and likely interpretation, his own being confirmed
by that practice which makes it more then probable. And it is clear, the
Protestant must needs plead against possession, for at the first breaking
when the Protestants pretended to reform the church, she was surely in
possession of those things which they pretended to take away, and in
possession of that sense of the scripture which they pretended to be false and
wrong. And surely no man of common sense who is in possession, and has the law
in his own hands, will yield it up without evidence on the contrary part. The
second rule I desire a Catholic should observe is, not to think his cause
lost because him self cannot answer the arguments proposed against him, nor to
venture his cause and his possession upon his own wit. For the disputation
being in a matter wherein, according to the Protestants grounds, there is no
certainty, it follows that who has the better wit, or is more practiced in
this matter, may bring an argument a good scholar cannot solue at the first
sight, though afterward either he or some other may. And what a folly were it
for a man to venture his soul and conscience upon a subtilitie or present
flash of wit, whereof peradventure within an hour he him self will see the
falsitie, and condemn his own error. Wherefore a Catholic is not to venture
the cause upon his own head, nor to confess it weak because he cannot
defend it, for both may he improve him self, and some others perhapps may go
far beyond him. The third rule is, that the Catholic should never undertake
to convince his Adversary out of scripture, but content him self that these
words may well bear this sense, which is in favor of the Catholic church,
And this is both more easy to perform and sufficient for his purpose. For
the Catholic has an assured ground of his faith besides scripture, and which
relyeth not upon it, nay he holds that his Religion cannot be wholly convinced
out of scripture, to what end therefore, (unless he would show his wit) should
he undertake to prove his tenants, by scripture? For this were to strenghen his
opponent in his own ground and principle, to wit, that all is to be proved
out of scripture.


Nephew. You would bind Protestants to very unequal conditions, if you will
oblige them to convince, and the Catholic not, nay that it shall be sufficient
for the Catholic to show this may be the meaning of this or that place of
scripture, whereas the Protestant shall be forced to prove clearly and evidently
that this is the very sense of the text.


Uncle. Not I, cozen, but the Protestants them selves oblige the^ selves to
this hard measure, for if a man should strongly ma^taine that a Beetle were the
best instrument, to cut withal, and you say no, were no he bound to cut with
a Beetle, and it were no sense, to say, that you should be forced to do it,
since you mantaine it to be impossible. So they who hold that the scripture is
the true judge of controversies, and fit and able to decide all quarells and
dissensions about the Christian faith and law, bind them selves, by holding
this, to convince their positions by scripture, which cannot be exacted at his
hands, Who says scripture was not made for this end, nor is sufficient for it.
And look upon Luther and the Heretics of his time^, nay upon the Puritants of
our days, and see if they do not all ma^taine, that they can convince their
tene^ts by scripture, and say that our forefathers were wholly ignorant of
scripture, and that we now living know nothing of it. But to go on with our
rules of disputing out of scripture. The fourth condition shall be that the
Catholic do not admit any negative proofs, as to say, this is an error
because you can show no scripture for it. For this is no proof unless they
will suppose that nothing is true but scripture, or that there is nothing to
be done but what is ordained by scripture, which were absurd, for nether
Catholic, nor, I think, any good Protestant will admit of that
supposition, being it were not only to take away the power of the church, but
even nature from nature, for nature teaches us to help our selves where
scripture does not contradict, and as a Puritant seeks a pulpit or high place
to preach in, without looking whether he have a warrant for it in the scripture
to command him, so rational and sensible men do seek a particular habit for
a preacher or Clergy man whereby he may be more decent and comely, and his
words and exhortations be received with more respect and authority, and this
without any co^mande of the scripture, which, where it commands, it makes
the thing commanded, to be necessary, where it is silent, there it makes
nothing unlawful.


Nephew. If the Protestants were to disput upon these conditions they would
keep of I warrant you. Yet this I must tell you, that it were a great
satisfaction for indifferent men, that have been brought up in this verbal
and apparent respect of the scripture, to see that the positions you would
induce them unto, can be and are maintened by scripture, and that they are
grounded therein. This perhapps you can do by showing me some other way of
dealing with the^, and whether there be not



Uncle. For their sakes, cozen, I will tell you of an other sort of
disputation, wherein the Protestant shall have no other disadvantage but of his
cause. For I think that the Catholic cause may not only be maintened by
scripture, but also that it has the better standing precisely to scripture
alone. I confess this kind of disputation is not fit for many Auditors, but
only for moderate and understanding men. And it is to make this, the question.
Whether party is more probable if only scripture were to be alleged. This
Question requires diverse suppositions where upon both sides are to be agreed,
which I fear will be some what hard. As what texts are to preuaille, what
commentaries or explicatio^s shall be allowed of, what is a proper and an
improper speech, amongst improper speeches which must be preferred, what
copies of every text shall be held for good, what conjectures shall be accounted
null against the natural sense, And many other such positions which would not
be easily resolved. This done let both sides bring their places for the point
in question, and so the disputation will only be of the qualificatio^ of the
places, that is, to show whether are more appare^t and likely of the two. And
for this I see lekewise that so many logical principles are first to be
resolved, which partly are found as yet amongst the critickes disputations, as
that all the Logickes hitherto invented would not afford sufficient light and
instruction, to make an evident conclusion, whether side were more apparent in
words and Tetxs. And therefore you may guess how far these disputations out
of scripture are from clearing doubts, what little good comes of them, unless
they be well governed, And how for the most part the best credit or the best
tongue carries away the day by the Auditor's preiudicat opinion or weakness.
In a word the scripture being not written for this end, to wit, for the
decision of controversies, it is not to be expected that it should be, of it
self, without the church's authority much profitable for that purpose, but
to inform our lives by an ordinary reading of it, or by preaching, singing,
and such like uses, things recommended in the very letter it self, whereas we
are never sent to the word for the deciding of controversies. And now I hope
you are fully satisfied.


Nephew. I am so in deed, and give you many thanks, for I see that how few
points soever the Protestants pretend to be necessary, yet ca^ there not
any thing be convinced out of bare words inuoluing so many uncertainties as
you have told me of.


Uncle. It is to little purpose for them to say that some few substa^tiall and
necessary points may be proved out of scripture, it were fitter they would
first prove that the scripture is an instrument made to determine
controversies, or any other of those principles, which I showed you must of
necessity be true, if scripture be our rule. But this they can never prove,
And therefore they seek first to withdraw, us from a secure and natural
means of relying upon our forefathers, (Which nevertheless in all civil and
oeconomicall conversation they them selves can not live without) and then to
leave us to a labyrinth of voluntary and vnendable disputations. Reflect then I
pray, cozen, upon what we have said, and compare our yesternight's and this
our morning's discourse together, considering first how many things are of
necessity to be conserved in the church for the preservation of faith and
good life in her subjects; Then see how many points have been and are
quarelled, and if any have escaped, how all the rest may be caled in question
with as much probability and appearance as these are, Then look upon the
qualities of that Decider of controversies where unto all the Adversaries of
the Catholic church do seek to draw us, by which there can be no other end
of controversies but to leave every man to his own will. And then conclude
that these positions being put, there will nether remain government in the
church, nor certainty or constancy in belief, nor any thing to be taught
and practiced worthy God Allmightie's sending of a lawgiuer, muchlesse of
sending his own son upon those hard conditions which we apprehe^de of Jesus
Christ and read in the Gospel.


Nephew. It is very true but if your leave me thus I shall be like him who
had fargot his Pater noster but not learned his Our father. For you have taught
me what I cannot rely upon, but not what I ought to rely upon, And there is so
much said against the authority of the church by all her Adversaries, that a
man who has been ever beaten to those objections, cannot easily leave them
without some scrupule.


Uncle. You are in the right, the most necessary part is yet behind, for a
little building is better then a great deal of pulling down. Therefore when
your leisure serves you I will be ready to give you satisfaction to the best
of my power. But now this morning is too far spent to begin so large a
discourse as that question does require, Take an other time, and the sooner the
more welcome, But for the present God be with you, I have some prayers to save.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE. By what means Controversies in Religion may be ended.
This Dialogue contains 15. parts or paragraphes.
1. THe Preface or Introduction.

2. What force the arguments of Protestants against Catholics ought to have?

3. That standing in likelihood the Catholic party is greater, more learned,
and more virtuous.

4. Of what efficacitie is this argument?

5. That it is no hard matter that Christ's law should have descended entire
unto us.

6. That if Christ's law could have been conserved, it has been conserved

7. That no great error could creep in to the church of God.

8. That the truth of the Catholic doctrine has continued in the church.

9. That the dissension of Catholic Doctors concerning the rule of faith does
not hurt the certainty of tradition.

10. That the teaching of Christian doctrine without determining what of
necessity is to be believed and what not, hurte's not the progress of
tradition.

11. That no error can pass universally through the church of God.

12. That these precedente discourses bear an absolute certainty.

13. Some objections are solued.

14. The Examples of traditions which seem to have failed are examined.

15. The conclusion of the whole discourse.


NEPHEW. I am come, uncle, to challenge you of your promise, for I cannot be
quiet until you have settled me in this so weighty a matter. If the points
which are in controversy be as you say, and as you have clearly showed me, of
great consequence, and that by scripture we cannot decide them against
contentious me^, I see that either we must seek some other means, or else all
Religion wilbee confounded, and the truth of Christ's law unknown and
neglected. Wherefore I pray (if you can) give me a strong resolution in this
point.


Uncle. Why, nephew, if this fervor continue you will not need be a scholar
but for a year, and a day, I pray you co^sidere it is a fair day, and you
never want employment for the afternoones when the wether's fair, if I should
stay you now, you would perhapps so repent it, that I should not, I fear, see
you again this month, be not so greedy as to take a surfeite.


Nephew. I fear my own inconstancy and therefore I pray refuse me not,
discontinuance may breed coaldnesse, specially if what you have already
taught me should be sullyed with worse thoughts, and then I should not be so
capable of your instructions as I hope I am at this present, Which I have good
reason to make great esteem of.


Uncle. Well if you will have it so, you must give me leave to trench upon a
good part of your Afternoon, for I may be long in this point, and I would be
loath to break of in the middle. Yet I will be as short as possibly I can.
Tell me then, had Jesus Christ ever a church or no? And I would have you
answer me, what you think a judicious Protestant would say to the same
demand.


Nephew. I doubt not but any Protestant of them all would answer you, that at
least in the Apostles time Christ had a visible church, consisting of the
faithful which adhered to the Apostles and such Bishopps as were made by them;
but that since that time it is fallen into great errors, and either mainely
Apostated from the true doctrine of Christ, or at least ^o deformed it, that a
reformation was necessary even in points of belief, And this reform their
forefathers undertook.


Uncle. You are likewise persuaded, I suppose, cozen, by the same evidence,
that in the Apostles time this church was a communion with the particular
church of Rome and therefore I will go a little further and ask you, whether
you do not think, that this church, Whereof the particular church of Rome was
a part (and peradventure the principal) Was not to be obeyed by every
particular man and every particular church, she being the whole they but
members or parts? She having received Christ's doctrine, and therefore able to
teach it, she having received the Keys of heaven, and therefore who refused to
hear her should be esteemed as a heathen or Publican. And in a word she being
the spouse of Jesus Christ, and the mother of this faithful children.


Nephew. All this is so evident that I think nether Protestant nor Puritant
will deny it. But what do you draw out of this?


Uncle. Nay softly, cozen, I must ask you one question more before I conclude
any thing, and it is. What became of this church when it fell from Christ? I
mean, were the men and their governors suddenly extinct, and others raised in
their places, or did there still continue a public face and successiue
government of the same church even in their errors, and so the external church
remained and descended to our days, though with corrupt faith and doctrine?


Nephew. This I doubt not likewise but every one will grant you, for all the
Protestants that ever I heard do acknowledge it, nor do I imagine that any
will deny it.


Uncle. Why then, cozen, we will draw this conclusion, that, That church which
is now in communion with the particular church of Rome, was once the true
church, or if you please to say, she was but a part of the true church, so let
it be at least she had the true faith and doctrine, and every particular man
or church with in her own compass was obliged to obey her, as having those
worthy titles which you acknowledge even now to be then due unto her. But now
if a Protestant tells you, she has since fallen and lost those goodly
titles, How would you convince him? or at least can you tell me.



NEphew. To convince a Protestant in this point I would have recourse to books
and learned men, who should mantaine and show that his position were false, for
I am not so well learned as to be able to prove it of my self.


Uncle. I hold you not for a wary gamester at this play, for why would you
leave your best wa^d and put your self upon the disadvantage? I mean why will
you put your self to prove the negative, your adversary being obliged to
convince the positive? for if he confess, as he does, our church was once the
true church, we have the presumption on our side, until he prove the
contrary. Besides our church was once the spouse of Christ by their own
verdict, though now the style her the whore of Babylon, Erroneous, and
Adulteress. And how I pray you, cozen, would your self take it, if one should
lay the like imputation upon your bedfellow without sufficient proof to make
it good? And imagine Christ Jesus will be no less offended to see his dear
spouse, who^ he bought and washed with his own hearts blood, so shamefully
traduced without a legitimate cause and just occasion. Do you think he will
not brand such accusors for infamous and sacrilegious calumniators? Or if such
an accusor should faille of his proof, does he not convict him self of the
most heinous crime that can be imagined? And likewise if this same church was
erected and instituted by God him self for our lawful Lady and true
Gouernesse, can you think that who reuolteth from the loyalty and obedience
due unto her, without evident proof of her escheate from that throne and
dignity, does not declare him self a traitor and rebel to God and her? And in
a word if she once were that church to whom Christ gave the rodd of justice,
and sent all professors of his name to hear her voice and sentence under
penalty of being reputed heathens and publicans, does not he incur those
curses and deserve those ignominious titles, who does leave her and divide him
self from her without legal warrant of his separation? Does not therefore
common sense conclude, that who soever confesses the Roman Catholic church to
have been the true and lawful church of Christ, is by this very deed
obliged to prove clearly and evidently her fall from that majesty, or else in
his own conscience and judgment must needs be liable to those faule and
unworthy taintes of trayson and rebellion against God and his church?


Nephew. I confess you speak no parables, nor is there any deep learning
required to conceive the evidence of your discourse. Yet this I must tell you
that I fear you might have spared your labor, for there is no protestant but
will easily undertake to prove that the Roman church is gone astraie, for if
they cannot do this they can do nothing, their whole Religion being but, as
they them selves confess, a taking away of abuses crept in, and their
Divinity no other then to show this. And if you would show their proofs to be
insufficient, I fear you would require a greater scholar then my self to
comprehend your reasons.


Uncle. Be not discouraged, nephew, but look into the case, and tell me what
Kind of proofs you think the Protestants are bound to bring to (...) them
selves from those heavy censures I told you of* Do you think it were
sufficient to bring such arguments as some philosophers brought to prove snow
to be black? Or such as by man's wit, and the art of topickes, a good logician
may frame upon a subject given him? in which kind some great men have taken
pleasure to commend baldness, blindness, and the like imperfections, others
to contradicte manifest truths, as that there never was any war of Troy. Nay
do you think, cozen, it is sufficient that their arguments be only as good as
those which the Catholics bring against them? Or in a word ought not their
arguments to be evident and unanswerable in every indifferent and
understanding man's judgment? That is, should they not be such, as that a man
expert in controversies and of a sound and unpassionate judgment, having seen
what the most learned Catholics can say against the protestants proofs, must
nevertheless think in his heart that they nether have given nor can give any
contenting and satisfactorie answer thereunto?


Nephew. The plain truth is, if it were my case betwixt my wife and my self, I
should not think to have corresponded with my loyalty toward her, nor with
that care of her honnour which I ought to have, until I had ventured my life
to have his hearts blood who should have sought to wrong her reputation so
highly without such proof as you require. Nether do I believe that any
Prince or state would think him a loyal subject, who should conceal and
foster that man that should disperse and so we in the hearts of their subjects
the like suspicions against their gouerme^t. It Is true I should be willing to
hear of my wiue's misdemainours before they come to that height and evidence,
for mine own caveat, if (which God forbid she should prove untrue. But there
is a great difference betwixt giving warning of likelyhoods and apparences of a
mischief, whereby it may be prevented, and blemishing or staining my wiue's
and mine own honnour with the deepest disgrace that can fall upon such an
individual couple. Besides I know the bond of love and duty betwixt man and
wife to be so great, as that ordinary suspicious ought not to persuade (...)
^rea^^ in so strong a knot, the greater and harder effect must have a more
powerful cause, and it were a folly to think all proofs sufficient and
befitting all cases. And in my mind the reason is, because no amity nor
fidelity can subsists, if such principles were suffered to be taught and
mantained. For how is it possible human accidents of them selves being
intricate and variable, and men now adays so witty to do harm and mischief)
but that every false tongue shall set dissension betwixt the nearest and
dearest couples, And mutiny and stir up to sedition the most faithful
subjects against their Prince, if less then moral evidence be sufficient to
prove matters of this nature and quality? Wherefore I do not think his
Majesty would suffer his preachers to draw their PediGree from Rome, if he
did not persuade him self they were able to bring satisfactorie proofs of
their relinquishing that authority, for this were to authorize a Rebellion
against the court and state of conscience, Which has a greater force and power
then pure temporal Allegiance, this being grounded upon oath and duty, both
which receive their strength and virtue from conscience. If therefore you
inte^de to give me full satisfaction in this point, you must clearly show
unto me that the Protestants proofs are insufficient. Which though I doubt not
of it, seeing our men have ever been so ready to buckle with the Protestants
even upon most disaduantagious conditions, yet I conceive that this cannot be
otherwise effected then by experience, bringing them to dispute together.


Uncle Dear cozen I am heartily glad to hear you discourse so strongly and
solidly, it giue's me great hopes of your future abilities. But if you will
have patience, your self shall be judge of my question, nor do I think it
needful to have recours to any farther learning then common sense and
natural reason, first therefore let us see whether



SVppose then you had a case in law of great difficulty, and that you should
consult in Council a douzen or twenty lawyers reputed the best of the
Prea^^^e, or at least the worst of them far beyond your skill to judge whether
he were not as able as the best, And of these twenty seventeen or eighteen of
them should say, you would infalibly loose your cause, if you took such or
such a course in it, the other 2. or 3. should as constantly affirm you would
win it, in so much that the question would be brought to this contestation,
whether lawyers were more learned and skillfull. To which side would you cleave
in this case?

Nephew. If you suppose me unable to judge of their skill and learning, and
that they be all equaly reputed ho^nest men (though in deed I cannot well see
how they can come to such an obstinate co^testation if they be all as they are
reputed) I must needs choose the multitude, and either take with the seventeen
or play the fool notoriously. I see well enough what you aim at, to wit,
that because Catholic countries are greater then Protestants, judgment
therefore is to be given on the Catholics side. But I pray, how shall I know
that there be more learned men amongst Catholics the^ amongst Protestants? Or
that the Catholic Doctors be more learned them ours at home? It Is true I know
our learned men say that they Protestants of other countries are not of the
same Religion with ours hear in England, yet I see they agree all together
against us, what discordes soever they have amongst them selves.


Uncle. Your fresh wits run to fast, Remember you were supposed to be
ignorant of the proportion of their learning in your lawyers case, and
therefore choosed the multitude. Wherefore as long as it is constantly
confessed that there be far more learned men Catholics, then there be learned
Protestants, so long the lay people ignorant and unable to judge of learnings
must stand convinced by the multitude, of which this vulgar knowe's no more but
that they are accounted learned by those amongst whom they live, as ours are
hear with us. And to give you farther satisfaction in this point, There be
more learned Catholics then Protestants
you know that man for man, by all likelihood, Readers of Divinity are the
greatest scholars, their exercise and profession (specially if they be of
many years) enabling and improuing them more then others who have not the
like occasion. Of these compare the number which England afforde's to the
multitudes which Catholic countries yeildes. You have been in Paris where you
might have seen in some one house or College more then be in all England,
whereof some have taught Divinity a douzen or twenty years, five or six
actually reeding, and as many perhaps, who having spent a great part of their
age in that profession, have now given over, I speak no secrets, the most
ignorant man that is may see and prove what I say with his own eyes either in
Italy, spain, Germany, France, or Low countries. And I may add that the
time which one of the^ spende's in study is double to what one in our
Universities hear in England does imploye. These being married men having care
of their wives and Children, and are, says S. Paul, divided, 1. Cor. 7.
one half to their books, the other to their househould, And you know wives
are no friends of books, learning and children spring both from the brain,
and both require abundance of spirits, and therefore not well mached together.
And sure amongst Catholics a learned resolution is rather to be looked for at
a Priest's hands (ordinarily speaking) then from a married man, by reason his
time, breeding, and employment are more proportioned thereunto. To these
learned me^ now living you may add all that lived for many ages, not so
unlearned as the Protestants persuade themselves, sithence the very first
beginners of Protestancie met with their matches, such as they either did not
dare to meet face to face, or if they did, they still came of with dishonor.
Wherefore every man that vnderstande's any thing more then his own home must
needs grant that if number or likelihood of persons may carry the cause, the
question in ended. Whereunto I could add that reason which you mentioned, how
the Protestants in diverse countries are not of our Religion, nether in respect
of belief or Government. No two Protestants of one Religion
They Tiff^^i^ so many points that they da^^^ one the other for (...)
belieuers. Do but examine whether the positions wherein they disagree amongst
themselue^ be not of as maine importance as those wherein we differ from them
all, and you shall find many of the^to be the very same. Naythere be not two
Doctors or persons bear in England of one Religion, no nor two lay men, who
give them selves to expound scriptures, and make their private spirit judge of
their belief and tenets. And this, not only because so many variable
pha^sies, grounded every one upon it self, cannot possibly agree (whereupon
you shall hardly see two meet and confer of Religion, but they will disagree
if they talk long) but also because all knowledge has it is unity from some
settled and certain principles, which being not to be found out of the
Catholic church in matters of Religion, there can be no unity or belief
amongst Protestants. For althought our Parliament has commanded diverse articles
to be ^^ght in the churches of England, yet does not the Protestant Clergy
acknowledge that the Parliament, who are the^^ ^^^ke and taught by the (...)
any power to judge or determine points of doctrine. And in deed it were
ridiculous for those, who think that an universal Congregation of Bishopps,
and the body of the whole church may err in belief, should (...) no
attribute this v^errable power to their own scholars. Nether do they, that I
know of, but still mantaine constantly their chief ground that all when are
fallible and subject to err. why Protestants ought not force any man to
believe with them.
Where by the way you may note, how hardly they deal with Catholics in
punishing them for professing a different faith from theirs, seeing that if we
believe differently we must needs profess differe^tly: and they, by their
own confession, not having any authority whereby they can or ought force
any man to believe as they do, it is evident that they must per force
contradicte their own principles if they will persecute us. Now therefore
seeing, that to be of one faith, is to be of one settled opinion, and settling
cannot be without infalibilitie or necessity, the Protestants having no common
principles which them selves esteem infalible (every man expounding
scripture, (their only rule of faith) at his pleasure, nor any having power or
authority to control an others interpretation of any passage what soever)
it is impossible any two ministers should be of one faith and Religion. It Is
true, per chance they may be of one mind to day, but ear night if either of
them light of a place of the scripture which after more consideration seems
to have an other sense then he thought before, they may well be of different
opinions; And this in what point how material or essential soever. These men
therefore may be said to be some times of one mind or opinion, but never of
one faith and Religion, faith being like marriage, not to be taken up for a
year and a day, but for all Eternity. The learned Catholics be more learned
then the learned Protestants.
And now to return to the discourse we aim at. As the number of our learned
men does far exceed the number of learned Prostants, so likewise by all
likelihood does their learning. The English Divinity, generally speaking, is
nothing but controversies, which are but the fourth or fifth part of Catholic
Divinity. For besides controversies, we have scholasticall Theology, which
explicate's the mysteries of our faith, and shewe's their conformity to nature
and natural reason. We have moral Divinity, which searche's into the
practice of the Sacraments and Precepts of good life. We have scripture
lessons, which diue into the deep sense of the written word of God without
farther application. We have mystical Theology, which examine's the
extraordinary ways of conversation with God. And lastly we have
Ecclesiastical history, which shewe's the progress, increase, and practice
of Christian faith through all ages and places. And of all these we have, I do
not say books or volumes, but whole libraries written and extant amongst us.
And for other eruditions, as languages, Poetry, Rhethoricke, Logic, and
Philosophy, if the Protestants have any, let them look into their samples,
and they shall find the most eminent and worthy men to have been and to be
Catholics, so that as of all Religions the Christian, so of all Christian's
the Catholic is without question the most wise, and the most learned
profession. And what I say is not to be sought out in old manuscripts or
learned papers, your eyes and ears will tell it you in Catholic countries,
and even in Paule's church yard, where you may find multitudes of volumes of
all these sorts of learning written by Catholics, And if their shopps were
well shaked up, I doubt not but for books of worth (except some English
pamphletts and a few controversies) one hundredth for one would be found to have
been written by Catholics. What appearance the^ can there be, that the
Protestants arguments should be so mighty and so clearly better then what
Catholics can say for them selves, as to bear down the right of Antiquity
and possession, whereof the Catholics are the sole Claymers.


Nephew. I cannot deny but that your discourse is sound and grounded upon
common sense, and upon such evidence as when I was in Paris I heard was there
to be seen, but my mind was then more fixed upon the Tennis court then upon
such enquiries. But why might not one replye that all this and more is
necessary for the justifying of so evil a quarrel? If Catholics be not
honest and virtuous men the more learned they are, the more dangerous and more
able to mantaine a false position. And it is like the Protestants would replye
in this manner, for they tell us, that the Pope has gotten so mighty a power
over our very understandings that for many ages we have bent all our wits
how to mantaine his tiles and decrees without any care of truth or
probability, wherefore the more wit and learning the more blindness of
passion and interest. As the learned Catholics are more learned the^ the
learned Protestants: so they are more virtuous then they.



Uncle. I did not think that learning had deserved so ill at your hands as to
censure it so severely. No, no, cose^, one man, or two, or three may be the
more dangerous for their learning, but not whole multitudes. For of it is own
nature it is a great instrument of virtue, being the Companion of truth, so
that there can be no greater sign of truth in any Religion, then to see it
bear the touch of reason, and that the professors of it be addicted to
learning. Besides, I pray, remember I speak to one who professes no
schollershippe, and therefore do not inquire what is, or is not, but what is
most likely and apparent. It must therefore be known that the Religion is
false, before it can be presumed that me^ be^d and strain their learning to
mantaine a falsitie; For otherwise the very fame of learning beare's with it
the credit and esteem of truth and honesty; And who delight's in learned
labors is commonly free both from quarrellsome interest, and hurtefull
pleasures, out of which do spring all cunning fraud and circumvention,
whereupon a mere scholar is quitte, by this very name, from suspicion of
guile and craftiness. But how soever our Religion has, besides learning,
manifest signs of honesty and virtue. For all the points wherein we differ
from Protestants are of that nature, that they incite us to the practice of
some virtue or other. As we say charity and the keeping of the commandments
do justify, and deserve eternal reward. Confession bring's the remembrance
and sorrow for our sins, satisfaction is performed by good deeds, Praying
for the dead, praying to Saints, keeping and reuere^cing Pictures of Christ
and his Saints, And above all the presence of God in the B. Sacrament, All
which be matters of great moment and consideration continually provoking us to
lift up our minds to God and heaven, to think of the life to come, and to
practice virtuous actions. The most earnest Protestant, who has but cast his
eye beyond the sea, cannot deny but there is a maine difference in exterior
devotion amongst Catholics above Protestants. Our churches are open every
day, service and Masses said all the fore noone, and in diverse there is
service a great part of the after noone. Our service is much longer then the
Protestants. Our ceremonies and magnificence very spectable. Our Sacraments
more in number, more frequented, and done with more state and reverence. The
riches of our churches, Altars, Pictures inestimable. Our solemnities and
Triumphs glorious, perpetual sermons on festifall days, and on every day in
the lent and Aduent, the B. Sacrament often exposed with great concurse of
devout people, as all Protestant travelers can witness. Add to these the
multitudes of Religious men and women, whose profession is retired from
busineses and the world to have more time to converse with God. The often
miracles, the frequent Saints and holy men, that cannot be denied but at least
we think and say we have the^. In a word the Protestant's faith seeme's like
the piece of money buried in the ground, and the Catholike's like a burning
torch which forces all within it is sphere to cast their eyes upon it. I know
the ready answer is, that all is but hypocrisy, and that there is as great
wickedness amongst Catholics as amongst Protestants. But I could wish that
he who is thus rash and ready to say this, were as curious and careful to
know how to prove it. For it were absurd to think that who strike's but one
blow in twenty in a smith's shop should make as great a dinte as he who
strike's twenty. And suerly no less foolish it were to think that whose
hearts and hands are continually busied about God and godly things should make
no greater impressio^ in their souls the^ they who say not a prayer once a
mo^th, and whose chief devotion is to hear a man make a pleasing discourse in
a pulpit. I wll not deny but that there be as foul sinners and as many
amongst Catholic as amongst Protestants, if not more and wickeder. For
sacrilege cannot be so great where sainctitie is less, and who best knowe's
his Masters will must needs deserve most stripes for his trespass. No man
could damn his posterity but who had original justice to loose, nor could
any betraye Christ but who had eat bread at his table. Wherefore Protestants
cannot be so wicked as Catholics, having not such a saintly faith nor such a
sacred church to disgrace and abuse. Yet do I not think but that a good
argument may be made for our church by it is saintitie, remembering well what an
English Protestant Clergy man of note, who had been at Rome after his
conversion, was wont to say when he heard any speak against the vices of the
Court of Rome. I have known, quoth he, many and many of the Protestant
clergy as honest men as ever I met withal in my life, in whose hands I durst
ve^ture my state and life, but I never knew any who had the reputation and
esteem amongst wise me^ to be a saint, or of extraordinary holiness: Here in
Rome I see in a small number of great Prelates two or three that have the fame
of extraordinary virtue, and the like I find of all sorts both of church men
and laity, some to be reputed exemplarly holy. As for the vices, whereof I
hear the reports, and doubt not but they are to true, yet I see they are
carried discreetly and break not forth into any public scandal. So that
although Protestants have diverse moral honest men and Catholics many wicked,
yet does it not follow that they are equal in behavior. For Catholics have
some Saints Protestants none, Catholics faults are in proportion fewer,
Protestant's good works very defective in the like proportion, And this
difference is such an one as worthily make's a mark of the Catholic church,
and as in deed is befitting a church made of men who bear immortal souls in
vessels of flesh and blood.

The Pope's spiritual; poWer is no tyranie but Was ever the same.
But I had almost forgotten the difficulty you made of the Pope's tyrannizing
and forcing all men's wits to serve him. Do you think he tyranize's the
bodies or the minds? If the minds, why then he has persuaded them his pwer
is lawful, given by Jesus Christ and continued since his time. Wherefore these
me^ who are thus persuaded being so many, so learned, and withal so upright,
as that for conscience sake they will forgo the very liberty of their
understandings, make a great argument that the truth is as they say. For
otherwise how easy were it for a king of France, or spain, or Emperor to
follow the example of England, Holla^d, and diverse states of Germany who would
aid and back the^ if they would renounce this pretended Tyranny, whereas
these Reuolters from the church of Rome did it without any present example,
nay with the detestation of all their neighbors. Besides all the Pope's names
and actions are registered if they did any thing of note, if they changed but
their attire, consecrated a Bishop, sent a Cardinal's cappe, or the like, all
is upon record; Only this action of conquering the whole world in the way of
an universal father, of setting this spiritual throne not only above Kings
and Monarchs Bishopps and Patriarchs, but even above the wisdom of the
sages, and above the valor of undaunted courages, this only, I say, by all
Historians must have been accounted unworthy of mention. But remember, cosen,
that common sense teache's us, That a thing so much against the general
current of the public church of Christ for so many ages ought to be well
proved according to the rule you granted me even now, before it pass without
control.


Nephew. Truly, sir, me thinke's you speak with reason and common sense. Yet
this authority being so great, I see not, Why it may not of it self, and by
it is instruments work such an effect, as that learned men (upon whose number I
am to rely) may not become partially affected in the judgment of Religion, and
consequently the greater number be more corrupted then the lesser, and so the
opinion of three were to be preferred before the opinion of the seue^teene. Nay
in my judgment experience tell's us that not every tenth person amongst
learned Catholics do know the true value and force of our Adversaries
arguments, but with a preoccupated disposition undervalue them when perhapps
they cannot give a full and satisfactorie answer unto them. And how should it
be otherwise, sithence from our childhood we are taught to rely upon the church
for matters of Religion, and to reject and hate any man who should seek to
make a contrary impression in us. This being planted in us in our tender age,
and growing with nature cannot choose but make a vehement preoccupation in us
when we come to be able to judge of controversies in Religion. Nor is it to the
purpose whether it be fit that we have such an impression or no, for I oppose
not the thing, but the argument which vrge's for the greater number of learned
men.


Uncle. And have you not marked the like amongst Protestants, and much more
amongst Puritants? And do you not find that those who slight Catholic
arguments, are no less preoccupated then the Catholics* you speak of? Nay if
you mark it, they greatest contemners of their Aduersarie's arguments, be they
Catholics or Protestants, are commonly the most zealous, or rather the most
ignorant of the zealous. So that in deed the true cause of this partiality is
ignorance, and not any prohibition, which contrariwise is a great prouoker to
make men doubt of their Religion. For ever since our Grand mother Eve harkened
to the first why did God, all precepts (whose reason we understand not) have
been suspicious unto us. Tell me then, I pray, if you were in a shipp where
there were a Pilote and his mate, and some Captane who had never been at sea
before, and in a controversy about their iournay they fall to variance, The
Pilote and his Mate saying this is the way, the Captane by reports or guesses
of his own, saie's, that is not the way, And thereupon the Company in the
shipp take's parts, whether side in this case would you judge to be partial?


Nephew. It Is clear that those who join with the Captane are partial, for
where the one side has skill the other none, it is evident that if the question
be of skill we ought adhere to the skillful. This I say is evident, if there
be no particular circumsta^ce or special reason to the contrary, As in our
case if the Pilote had some interest to carry his shipp out of the way, then
it were an other matter, but standing precisely in the terms of your case,
it is clear o^ which side the partiality is, for the Pilote having skill the
captain none, the Pilot's advise were to be preferred in common sense, and to
side with him were wisdom.


Uncle. Why then who adhere's to unskillful iudgers in matters of Religion are
partial, and who adhere's to experts in those matters are wise and rational.
Wherefore if the seventeen adhere to the Mistrisse and teacher of Religion,
and the three fly from her, does not these by this very act make them selves
partial, and those impartial? You must first know whether side goes the right
way before you can suppose either side to be partial, and consequently the
number will still preuaille as long as it is in doubt whether side is partial,
And if one side adhere to that part which was in prepossession, the other plead
against possession, you are bound by the law of nature, by the institution of
all co^munities, and by common sense to judge the pleaders against possession
to be partial until they have proved their motion so reasonable, as will over
bala^ce the great authority of possession which is against them. Farther if
you considere that Christian Religion is supernatural, that is, such an one as
cannot be learned but from Almighty God, to wit, from the Apostles, or from
them who^ the Apostles or their Disciples have taught, you will see that there
is no disputing about Religion, but only to ask what has been taught us,
which none can tell us but those whose life and profession it is to teach us
that doctrine which them selves first learned, to wit, the Bishopps and Pastors
of the church. So that who doubt's of what these me^ have taught and do teach
us, must needs be ignorant of the means and way of knowing Christian
doctrine, and passionately refuse the true and certain rule thereof.


Nephew I see mine error, and it was the same as if one should condemn a man
of partiality who keepe's possession of his own, because he yeild's not up
the state, whereof he is possessed before judgment be given against him;
whereas contrariwise in the Civil law (which I once studied a little) if one be
put out of quiet possession, his Adversary may not plead until he be put in
again. And sure of all cases the fowlest is to doubt in matters of Religion
before one has reason, for where authority is plainly on the one side, there
none ca^ doubt without wronging that Authority unless he have a reason which
does over balance it. And so I am satisfied in this point.


Uncle. Take this with you nephew, that generally no controversies of Religion
fall out without some motives of interest on both sides, and so both sides may
be suspected of partiality, but cheefely that which beginne's the change.
Wherefore suppose men were forbidden to doubt, that would be of little force if
once they saw their commanders were interessed, unless they saw withal that
they could not mende them selves. Besides in our schools all things are caled
in question, which would not be suffered if it enda^gered the church's
belief. Lastly being it is great scholars that govern men's judgments, if
they did find by their learning any other sure ground of Religion. then
standing to the church's authority and judgment, they would esteem as much
of her Commandes and Sampson did of the Philistines shutting their gates upon
him. And so we see by experience that all truly learned and vnpassionat me^ on
our side (besides the motife of the church's authority) adhere upon pure
reason to the Catholic tenets, and will protest upon all that is holy that they
would be of the same Religion though there were no command, finding it most
conformable to reason and to the grounds of Christianity.


Nephew. The truth is I know not how to answer your discourse, yet perhapps a
Protestant would say that all is but probability and likelihood, and therefore
to hazard a ma^'s estate upon peraduentures were something hard and not very
rationally done. Wherefore I should be glad to conceive more fully



UNCLE. Why, cosen, what security do your marcha^ts, your states me^, your
soliers, those that go to law, nay even those that till their grounds and
work for their livings, what security, I say, do all these go upon? Is it
greater the^ the security which these grounds do afford? Surely no. And yet
no man esteeme's them foolish. All human affairs are hazardous, and have some
adventure in them. And therefore who require's evident certainty only in
matters of Religion discouer's in him self a less mind to the goods promised
in the next life, then to these which he seeke's here in this world upon weaker
assurance. Howsoever the greatest evidence that can be to him that is not
capable of conuincing demo^strations (which the greatest part of mankind fall
shortof) is but co^iecturall, for men do not generally distinguish betwixt a
solid and a witty proof, and are as soon taken with a gloss or jesting
speech as with a demonstration. Let but this very proof I have told you be
put to some two men, the one more, the other less judicious, and the one
perhapps will hold it for evident, the other only for apparent and likly. And
certainly it is manifest that if our church was once the true church, they who
made a breach from her must needs have evident proofs of her corruption, or
else be culpable of faction and schism. And yet of these two men I propose,
the one peradventure will take this argument only for plausible, and at the
least check forgo it, the other looking into the nature of Gouerme^t and
seeing what a flaw the contrary position breede's in it, and how in effect it
destroye's all Government will think it so strong that what soever is or can be
said against it, is but the playing of wit against pure evidence. Farther if
we Catholics hold the truth of scripture as conscientiously as any
Protestant, and therefore that all controversies betwixt us and them are only
concerning the sense of it, and not touching the truth of it, it is manifest
that Catholics must either be such dull dunces as not to understand their
arguments, or so wilful as not to acknowledge what they see and know,
otherwise surely they would agree with Protestants in all points which they
could convince and demonstrate. And again this man who perceth deeper into the
strength of this argument see's, that although some times learning may fail,
and that virtue may have a bridle for a while, yet would not learni^g be
learning if it should not for the most part work it is effect in men, and make
them more capable of reason then others: And much less can it be true virtue
which is seldom efficacious, sithence virtue's nature is to be operative.
Wherefore this understanding man that see's there is a more constant poursuite
of virtue and learning on the one side then on the other, conclude's evidently
that there ca^ be no extraordinary weakness on the learneder and more
virtuous side in comparison of the other. And where he see's more means,
pains, and fruits of learning and virtue on the one side then on the other, he
will no more doubt (supposing this be a constant and settled course on both
sides) but that of necessity there must be more learning and virtue on that
side where he see's these effects, no more, I say, the^ he can doubt whether
necessary causes will have their effects, as whether fire and towe put
together will burn, or whether effects ca^ be without their causes, as howses,
clockes, and the like without Carpenters, smiths, and other Artizans. Yet
perhapps he that barely looke's upon the superficies of this discourse take's
it only for a pleasing and probable consequence. Join to this, the multitudes
of Antiquity (I mean those ages wherein the Protestants acknowledge the
Reign of Popery) and surely the^ there will not remain to an understanding
man any just cause to fear or complain of hazard, but rather a great
occasion to admire and praise God's wisdom, who has provided so short and
secure a means for every man who is so happy and careful as to acknowledge
and embrace this guide of eternal salvation; looking with an eye of
commiseration upon those, whose dispositio^s being not fitted to the sight of
this truth, remain in doubt and ignorance by diuing into questions wherein
they are not able to find satisfaction, and so cast them selves away, not for
want of means, but either through their own pride, or by the misleading of
their Directors, Who not seeing what is convenient for the dispositio^s of their
disciples, throw the^ upon the Rocks in stead of giving them a fit harbor to
anchor in, for if they would rely upon this plane and open way of our
discourse, common sense would tell them (if not what is true) at least what they
ought to follow, and that as clearly as that two and three are five.


Nephew. I confess the evidence you plead is great, yet me thinke's one
might object, that seeing we hear it so often and so strongly beaten into us
that all men are falible, and that nature it self seeme's to teach the same,
therefore as on the one side your reasons force me to grant that it is the wiser
course to ve^ter this way; so on the other, I still remain with this
disposition that it may peradventure be false, which is able to shake a man's
resolution and cowle his affection.


Uncle. Cosen, you desire great matters, and peradventure more then your age
and wavering dtsposition is able to bear. Yet to complye with your good
desires, I will put you in the way if you will have patience to follow the
tracke, and you shall see



FIrst therefore tell me, I pray, what time think you Christ and his Apostles
employed in preaching the Gospel in any one country?

Nephew. I know Christ employed some three years and a half or thereabouts,
for I think the time is not precisely agreed upon by Cronologers, But for the
Apostles that I know not, nor ca^ I guess to what purpose you ask me this
question.


Uncle. Is it not like the Apostles bestowed near about as much time? S. Paul
him self saie's so, telling the Clergy of Ephesus, that for three years he
had not ceased day and night to exhort them with tears, and warn them to
take heed of false teachers. And we may well think the like of the rest of
the Apostles, wheresoever they could conveniently do it, but specially in the
churches in which they made their Residence. But why think you took they so
much time for so short a doctrine, as you see Christian doctrine is, being
included in our Creed.


Nephew. No doubt but their employment was to make their disciples and the
people understand perfectly, and fully comprehend all points of Christian
doctrine, to resolve all doubts and difficulties, to make the apprehension of
the doctrine sincke into the very souls of the people, and to setle a form
of Government and Conversation, and to invre the first Christians to the
practice of this doctrine whereby it might subsist and continue as long as
possibly it could. For this I see is the dictame^ of prudence and wisdom in
such a case, and the course all those who found new institutions.


Uncle. You say well. And surely such a time for a little Province of about two
or three days iournay's semidiameter was very sufficient for the instructing
of their disciples in all material points and settling of instructers to
succeed them. But in case immediately after the decease or departure of the
Apostle there should arise (according to our saviors forewarning) false
Prophets or Ravenous wolves under pretense of sainctitie endeavoring to devour
the flock, nay that even some amongst them selves out of vanity should
begin some new doctrine, How controversies were decided immediately after the
Apostles.
drawing disciples after them, and so making them selves head of a party and
of a doctrine contrary to that which the Apostle had taught, urging reasons
out of nature and texts out of that Apostles own writings by whom they were
taught, or out of his follow Apostles, and strengthen his party by the
adherence of many of the weaker sort, what I say would the Governors and
teachers of the faithful do in this case? How would they behave the^ selves
to hinder the ruin of their weaker brethren?


Nephew. I do imagine that meeting together they would examine this new
Doctrine, taking sor their rule that doctrine which the Apostle delivered unto
them, And knowing that he could nether contradict him self nor any of his
Brethren, being all inspired by the Holy Ghost, they would conclude, that the
Innouators reasons were captious, his texts wrong understood if they were
obscure, or corrupted if they were plain. For nothing could be so evident unto
them as that, which for three years together had been perpetually beaten into
them, where in they had been continually examined and cleared, and which had
been so long the fundation of their new manner of life and practice; so that,
this must needs be the most evident unto them of all things, and therefore
they would surely forgo all other rules to govern them selves by this, as
being most fry from error,


Uncle. Your conclusion fallows plainly. For they having no other stay of
their belief, then that S. Paul (for example) had taught them so, it is clear
that to them these two questions were but one, whether the opinion proposed was
true? and whether it was accordimg to what S. Paul had taught them? And
therefore to be against that which they had been taught, to them, was to be
false. So that there nether was nor could be any other question in the church
at that time in matters of faith, but whether the Apostles had taught such a
doctrine or no? For the Apostles having spent so much time in teaching
Christian doctrine in so little a Province, what they had not taught must needs
be presumed not to be necessary, and consequently not deserving to make a
schism and breach amongst Christians, and what they had taught to be without
all controversy true and certain. Wherefore if such an Innouator would not
stand to this judgment, he was to be expelled the church, as disagreeing from
the Christians in the principal rule and soueragne Tribunal of Christianity
by which, and only which, they could at that time decerne and decide what was
Christian doctrine what not. Happy that age in which it was so easy to
resolve any difficulty arisning, for it was no more then to meet together
and ask one an other, How have you been taught? And all was ended, and who
should have resisted this decision was to be cast out with common consent as a
reprobate. But tell me, cosen, how long do you think this Happiness
continued in the church?


Nephew. For the time of the Apostles and of their disciples (who are commonly
caled Apostolical men) there is no question to be made; no nor of the age of the
disciples of these Apostolical men; To whom I see not why I may not add yet an
other age, for doubtless those Apostolical men must needs have been of that
reputation as that what soever was constantly remembered to have been their
doctrine, was likewise to be esteemed the doctrine of the Apostles their
Masters, supposing it was known to be universally and generally theirs, and
not the opinion of some one or two of them only.


Uncle. And will it be a stumbling block unto you if we add yet an other
descent, to wit, of the Grandchildren of these Apostolical me^, for the
memory of public and generally practiced things is fresh from Grandfathers
unto their Grandchildren. So that this degree or golden age may well consist of
five descents, that is, of some 200 years, allowing 40. years to a desce^t,
which is not much, seeing that witneses of 60. years are ordinarily found in
every business in the same Province, and therefore where the question is of a
public and universal practice which concerns many countries and nations
who have intercourse and communication together, such witneses may be much more
easily found. But what shall we say of the next ensuing age?


Nephew. I conceive that these descents you speak of may easily have reached
to Consta^tine's time, when Christian Religion being public, the multitudes
of fathers and writers would supply the deiect of this (...) or self seeing
into the well spring of Christianity. But whether you drive that way or no, I
know not.


Uncle. It is not needful, for sithence the last age does directly know what
was the Apostles doctrine, All such ages as can reach to know the doctrine and
practice of that last age, are able certainly to resolve (though in a lower
degree) any arising difficulty; not because they ca^ immediately tell, that
such a point is contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles, but because they
can tell that it is against the doctrine of the fist desce^t, which doctrine
they know to be the dokrine of the Apostles. Wherefore upon the like ground we
may add five desce^ts more, which according to our former computation will make
up 400. years, und peradventure by exte^t may reach to five or 600 years
after Christ that is; to the second conversion of nations, I mean to the
conversion of those barberous people which ouerunne the Roman Empire, and
brought almost all the world back unto the formerly extirpated paganism.


Nephew. Why then we need no more, for the Protestants confess that Popery
has reigned since Phocas his time; nay they stick not to say that Gregory
the Great was the last good and first bad Pope, seeming to think that from him
began, that which they call Popery. And truly in his Dialogues which are
set out in English there is more then enough to show that the Religion of his
time was the same which we now profess And we that have our conversion from
him (according to venerable Bede) we, I say, who are descended from the
Saxons, never have had any Religion but that which the Protestants call
Popery, And therefore to us English men, it is most clear, that we never had
any Religion since Gregory the great's time, but Popery. And therefore if
the Religion that then reigned was the faith of the Apostles, it will evidently
follow that Popery was their faith.


Uncle. Surely not only writers but even Records and Monuments are so thick
since the conversion of those nations which over run the Roman world, that no
perverse man ca^ requite more evidence, And surely it was God's providence who
settled as it were a new world, and purged the old, whilst Religion could yet
look back and see her head, as it were, with one vewe. But I hoped you would
have induced a farther consequence and applied the argument to later ages.


Nephew. I am afraid these calculations may over reach me, for I fee the
father and the sonne's age do concur in some part, and therefore by counting
them severally the number of years will be greater then in deed ought to be
allowed.


Uncle. You say well, and therefore we will only take that number of years
which the father ordinarily lives before the birth of his son, As if the
son be supposed to be 20. years of age when the father testifies, and the
father 60. Which you see is very common, and so the number of years of one
descent will be 40. Which is the number we put. But if the father be 80. when
the son is 20. then the number of one descent will be 60. Which though it be
some what great, because it is rare that a man has a child at 60. yet it is not
so rare but a thousand may be found in a competent extent, as in the Kingdom
of England, and this number is amply sufficient for the effect we desire, for
five descents of 60. years make 300. years. And having told you how a
general practice of any country is known by a kind of self seeing for five
descents, which include's at least 200. years, it will follow that cou^ting
down from Christ time to ours by two ages at a time, we may frame our
discourse thus. As those who lived in the beginning of the third age could
certainly know they held the Apostles doctrine; so those who lived in the
beginning of the fifth age, could certainly know they held the doctrine of
those of the beginning of the third age, that is, the doctrine of the Apostles.
And by the like co^seque^ce those of the 7. age will be certain they are in
the same faith of those of the fifth, and those of the 9. in the faith of those
of the 7. And so to our very selves, And all are certain that they are in the
faith of the Apostles. The reason of this consequence is, because two ages is
not so great a space, but that certain knowledge of public and general
cha^ges through a kingdom (much more through many) may be easily had; nor yet
are two ages so little, as that a great error could lurk unseen and lie
smoothered for so long a time. We therefore who now live in communion with the
Roman church know certainly, that our forefathers of the 16. and 15 ages did
conceive that this faith and doctrine which we hold, did, I say, conceive and
think it to have descended unto them from the Apostles, And we know likewise
that they could not conceive and think so, but that they knew the 14. and 13.
ages did believe the same; Nor those of the 14. and 13. ages could not have the
same belief, unless they had seen and received it, in and from the 12. and
the 11. age. And putting all these together, (the certainty whereof is
immediately founded in this our age) you see they comprehe^de six ages, if we
put 40. years to a descent, and will comprehend 8. or 9. ages if we put 60.
to a descent. So that two or at must three such co^positio^s will reach beyond
Christ's birth, And therefore we do not, nor cannot, want evidence but eyes to
see it.


Nephew. Your discourse will be good, supposing the point in controversy be
some public and great matter, or a notorious change in the face of God's
church. But why might not some speculatiue point creep in without being taken
notice of, such as was the point of the Arrians or Pelagians, if there had not
happened with all so great an opposition and quarelling as shaked almost the
whole church. why no neW point ca^ creep into the church without a great
change.



Uncle. There be two reasons why no point of Christian doctrine can be so
small as to creep in without a great change. The one is because Christian
doctrine is a discipline whose parts are so knit together as that one thread
cannot be broken but it will rauell through many stiches, As from the Arria^
heresy denying Christ to be God, it would follow, no Trinity, and so
Christians would easily become natural philosophers and Pagans, no
Incarnation, that is, no God and man in one person, All the payeres and
adorations which the church had used hitherto were to be changed, The form of
baptism were to be altered, And thus we might go through the most part of
Christian doctrine, if we look into the sequels of Arrianisme. And such like
consequences may be deduced out of Pelagianisme, and out of almost all othet
heresies, which have not run beyond all face of Christianity, because they
were quickly opposed, and so hindered from showing the serpent's tail which
lurked behind. The other reason is, because no new doctrine can prevail in
the church of God without impeaching tradition, the rule of faith, for that
being once broken and rejected, by the same right and principle by which they
profess one error, they may profess any, And you see the disciples of
Heresiarckes never fail to grow worse the^ their Masters, Luther broke the Ice
by appealing to scripture, Suinglius went farther then he, the Anabaptists
exceeded the Swinglians, the Adamistes, passed the Anabaptists, the Socinians
the Adamistes, and some went beyond Christianity, others even beyond common
sense, wherefore it is impossible any breach should be made in the church
without a maine and notorious change in the whole face of Christianity.


Nephew. I see now, uncle, it was not without cause you asked me, what time the
Apostles employed in teaching Christian doctrine to some one Province or
Country, your whole discourse seeme's to depend upon this, that the Apostles
did not barely tell the faithful what Christ had done and taught, bud did
inculcate and beat it into the^ both by words and actions, invring the^ to the
practice of their belief, their belief being the ground of their actions, and
their actions the effects of their belief, and therefore could not be altered
without a maine change both in their faith and practice, their belief
mantaining their practice and their practice strengthening their belief. And
truly I see this is a co^naturall way to keep Religion uncorrupted, And that
nature, and necessity, drove the first Christians upon occasion of any
controversy, to seek what the Apostles had taught, which being once begun
the ensuing Christians would follow the same course, as long as controversies
could be resolved this way, which by your discourse may be done at this day.
But I learned in Philosophy that a posse ad esse is no good argument, for if
it were sufficient to prove a thing has been done because it could have
been done no man would be innocent, but who is impotent, And therefore I
fear we are not much advanced, unless you ca^ show me



Uncle. Why so, nephew; you know if any man be accused, his denial cleere's
him sufficiently until proof be brought against him* And when it is brought
it is yet sufficient for his defense to show, it does not convince, which if he
can do, the law laye's no hold of him. And shall not the claim of so great a
part of the world standing in possession and mantaining the innocentie of the
church be heard and esteemed good until the adverse party has made his
proofs clear and evident against them? Certes you have forgotten your
resolution concerning your wives honor for whom you were so earnest but now.
Again we must surely co^ceite the church to be a thing planted by Almighty
God with no less blessing then that which he gave to men and beasts at their
creation, whereby they have been conserved to this day, for sithence our
Redemption cost him no less then our creation, we cannot esteem his Blessing
of continuance to be of less worth and virtue in the one then in the other.
And it is much more easy to conceive how the church is and may be continued,
the^ how mankind has been and will be conserved, whereof I think no man
doubts. And truly do but considere how unequal and unjust a condition it is,
that the claim of the present church shall not be heard, unless she can
confute all the peraduentures that wit may invent, And solue all the arguments
which the infinite variety of time, place, and occasions may have given way
unto, And then you will see how unreasonable an Adversary he is who will not
be content with any satisfaction but such as man's nature scarsely afforde's.
Yet to answer fully to you maxim, first I will oppose an other unto it, and
by comparing the^ we shall better understand the meaning of them both. And it is
that frustra est potentia quae nunquam reducitur ad actum, Whereunto we may add
that God, the Author of nature, never made any thing in vain, so that when
the same power or possibility is ordained for diverse effects or ends, then if
any of it is effects be brought to pass it has so far arleast got it is end
as that it cannot be said to have been made in vain, And therefore it is no
good argument to argue from the power or possibility to any one of it is
effects in particular, because it is e^d may be sufficiently observed by an
other effect. But if the power or possibility have but one effect then your
first maxim faile's, by reason of the second, for being the power has but one
effect, if that be not put, the power must needs be in vain. Wherefore
putting such a possibility, least it should be frustrate. you must needs put
the effect, and consequently the argument is still good, there is a power or
possibility therefore an effect. And this fallows most clearly in our case,
for if Almighty God have set causes which may and ca^ make his church
eternal, that is, if he have put a power or possibility of eternal duration
in his chureh, This effect, to wit, everlasting continuance being of such a
nature that it can be but one, it is evident that either this effect will follow,
or else the possibilie is frustrate and put to no end, which in a work of such
a moment as that it is the very aim and end of all Gods works, it were more
then absurd in common sense to grant such a consequence. And to declare this
more particularly let us considere that where there are many varieties, that
which causes defect in one causes abundance in an other. As if in diverse
countries under several climats, Why Christian faith cannot be destroyed.
there be long drought or rain, the drought in spain will cause want of
corn, here in England and in the low countries a main harvest: And
contrariewise much wet here causes dearth, in spain and Affricke plenty. So
likewise the Catholic faith being dispersed through many several countries,
what in one country make's it fail, in an other will make it flourish. The
hate betwixt France and spain made Luther's proceedings to be favored in
Germany by the Princes which leaned to the french, and the same hatred made
spain and Italy to oppose them more vehemently. The power and authority of
some one man in one country may oppress the church, whereas in an other, even
to discountenance that man, it shall be vpheld. And as in place so in time,
diverse occasions make it now favored now misliked, but it is impossible, it
being truth and conformable to reason, that there should be any so general
and universal occasion as to make it hated in all times and places, which
would be necessary for a total ruin. And this is it, which mantaine's all
the progress of nature, to wit, because it has roots and principles in
being, for no one sort of living things, which have being in many far
different Climats, can be exterminated, by reason the contraries which must
distroye it, are nether universal in place nor time, and therefore those
contraries being spent, the seeds of nature recover them selves, sprout out,
and budd again new branches of the same kind. So it fares with Christian
belief and doctrine, which because it is so like and so connaturall to nature,
all it is opposites must needs be against nature and violent, and consequently
not durable; which being gone, then must of necessity those, in whose hearts
Religion is rooted, blossom again and bring forth such delightful savors
and fruicts as will draw and attract me^'s souls, and spread it self amongst
the multitudes, from whom it had been violently banished. Wherefore that the
church in this or that time, be oppressed, is a thing within the compase of
natute's mutabilitie; But that in all Countries and at all times it should be
oppressed to death surpasses the power of mutable causes, Which were not
mutable if they should so long and in so different circumstances ever have the
same effect; yea nature it self and it is Author would be overcome if such long
violence could so oppress it as to extinguish it, It being nature's chief
flower and greatest treasure planted by the express handy work of the
omnipotent and wise framer thereof.


Nephew. Your discourse seemee's good, for I see that me^, who in a case of
great importance will not be content with what is proportional to their
capacity, but seek a certitude so great as them selves are not capable to
judge of, being not beaten to thoses sciences in which such certainty is
usual, those men, I say, must needs come short of what they desire, if truly
they do desire it, for I believe the affection of wealth, pleasure, or some
fore-made judgment does carry them against the simple and plain direction of
free reason. How soever, uncle, seeing it was so easy for the church to have
been conserved entire in faith, me thinke's it should not be hard to show in
effect and in particular from age to age that it has been conserved.


Uncle. If we could prove that Bishops either in General or National Counsels
had once in two or three hundredth years taken care that no corruptions should
be introduced, this might be effected, but that depende's upon books (...) and
history; which you and will not now meddle withal.


Nephew. I believe those histories are not so doubtful but that generally
Protestants do and will acknowledge the^. And by my pore skill I know that
there never passed 300. years since Christ's time without a Council, and
without condemning some heretic, so that it is clear the church has had
sufficient care in this kind. Yet because I have heard your self complain of
the sloth of men who seek not into the grounds of sciences, and often say,
that fair more the^ is, might be known if the principles were rightly laid
for it, and the way trodden, nay that all God's works hang so together by
connection of causes and effects as that there is no effect whose cause by
diligence might not be found. I must therefore entreat you to condescende a
little even to the hardness of those men's hearts, who require more in this
subject then in any other, and seek the cause why the church and faith of
Christ cannot faille. For sithe^ce we have found by experience these 1600.
years that it has not so failed as that it has not ever been generally and
universally visible, and has both dured and flourished thus long, surely it
has some forcible cause, and in deed such an one, as can never fail, but
will still work the same effect, And this were to show.


That noe great error could creep into the church of God.
Uncle. Cosen, you lay to^^ what ask upon me. Who knowe's why the world has
dured thus long? Or why mankind was not extinct many years ago? And must I
tell you why God's church has not nor cannot fail? I am ashamed to answer
every licentious brain, the negatiues of a witty naturalist may pose the
most learned Christian upon earth. Yet to content you I will endeavor above my
strength; but you must ease me a little, and answer me to what your self see's
evident. First you know that the church being the Congregation of the faithful
cannot fail but by the loss of faith, How faith is lost.
And faith may be lost two ways, by ignorance, or by error. For so we see a
particular man who once had faith if he come to loose it, it is either by
negligence and not conning it, and so forgette's it; or else (...) dissuaded
from it, and induced to believe some differrent doctrine. So likewise to a
multitude of men the one or the other must needs happen or else they cannot be
deprived of the faith which they once had. And because pure ignorance is a
mere negative, or not knowing, the first question I will ask you, is, Whether
you think a people once instructed in any Religion can so forget it, as that
they fall not into some other Religion ^^ but live quite without any Religion
at all?


Nephew Truly I think it impossible, both because I never heard of any nation
that had no Religion at all, no not the Caniballs; as also because I have heard
that absurd Religions have continued from father to son for many
generations together, and never left until an other Religion was brought in,
and then too with much ado, the people being loath to be drawn from their
former belief. Yet if one should confidently say the contrary, why all
people have some Religion.
I do not know how to convince him.


Uncle. You must look into the causes which make men Religious, and if you
find the^ to be universal and perpetual, you may be sure that all sorts of
Peoples have some Religion in the^, though more or less according as these
causes are more or less in force amongst them. But let us know, can you tell
me what is Religion in general, as it is commone to both true and false?


Nephew. I imagine Religion to be a conceit or persuasion of the people
concerning one, or more, what is Religion in general.
excellent natures which govern humane life, giving us those goods which of
our selves we cannot attain unto, and inflicting upon us those pains whereof
we do not know the causes; And this persuasion reaches also to the manner
and form of pleasing this or these Governors and commanders, Whereby to
obtain goods and eschew evils. And the reason why I make this conceit of
Religion is, because I see these things are in all sorts of Religion, and all
authors which write of the Religion of what nation soever touch cheefely these
points.


Uncle. Your remarque is good, Which be the causes of Religion, and Why it
cannot perish.
and if you look into your definition you shall find the causes of Religion.
You say Religion is a conceit of the Governors of man's life in gifts and
punishments, whose causes we do not know. Then you see Religion must needs
be a faith, for when we do not know things, we cannot make any conceit of
the^ but by believing and trusting others whom we think know the things that
we know not, and therefore Religion in general is taken upon trust. Farther
you say that Religion is a method of pleasing those Governors, whereby to get
goods, and eschew evils, so that the desire of goods, and the fear of
evils, are the authors and causes of Religion, we have then hopes and fears
for the will ignorance and a conceit of an other man's knowledge for the
understanding; which be the parents of Religion. Now think you, cosen, can
these causes be defective and failing in any age?


Nephew. Surely they cannot. For it were no generation of men, but beasts, that
were so do^ltish and sottish as to see so many goods and harms, which happen
to all men we know not whence, and think that there were no cause thereof,
And therefore it is the most easy and most natural conceit that man can
have, to conceive that some thing is the cause of these goods and hurtes. Now
man's conversation being cheefely with one an other, men naturally apprehende
all things to be done by some understanding thing, as they see their own
actions are. So that if there were a co^pagnie of men sprung out of the earth,
like Cadmus his people, or raised out of emitts, like the Myrmidons, yet would
they (if they were truly men) within a little while frame them selves some
Religion, according as by chance, or some one's apprehe^sion or pha^sie they
should conceit their goods and evils to proceed from some visible or
invisible thing Wherefore I admire not that some people adored the sun, some
the stars, others some rare men from whom they had received in their life time
great benefits, imagining that even after death they were power full and
beneficial. And surely it is much more impossible that a people which once
has had some Religion, should quitte forget it, and come to have none at all,
for these causes will be ever knocking at their hearts, putting them in mind,
and driving them into the co^ceite of some God or Governor, if therefore the
effects of perpetual causes must be everlasting, these causes of Religion (to
wit, effects whose causes are hidden, and the good and evil which come unto us
by them) being never awanting, it is impossible that Religion should ever cease.


Uncle. And think you not, cosen, that these same causes do as well move
those who are settled in a faith or Religion to continue without changing their
once received belief, as well I say, as they do keep them, from forgetting
that Religion which they are once possessed of?


Nephew. I confess it seeme's evident to me, that the change of Religion can
not come by pure negligence and sleepiness, no more then the loss of it,
being these warnings of nature which force us to Religion do also continually
call upon us to keep our once practiced faith and credulity, unless there be
greater causes to countermande it, which I do not see but may be easily found
some times.


Uncle. Peradventure not so easily as you imagine, for an Error is a
persuasion of the mind, And nothing can work upon our understanding but it
self, and our will, who soever therefore will make such a persuasio^ must work
upon one of these two. The will you know is moved and weilded by hopes and
fears, the understanding by reason and authority. How error in bred in man.
Whence arise three ways by which such an opinion may creep into me^'s
minds, 1. by bringing more reason for it the^ ca^ be brougth on the contrary
side, 2. by the authority of some so great, as that their verdicts are held
beyond examining, and 3. by the power of some whose hands are full of pains
and pleasures, and who can thereby move the will, which being moved can make
the understanding believe what she desire's. Do you know any other means?


Nephew. Not I, uncle, for I see that if I should bring any other, you would
reduce it to some of these three. But me thinke's such an opinion might steal
upon the church at unawares, some obscure man broaching it at the first, and
others accepting of it by a kind of negligence and indifferency to any
opinion, or by too much credulity, not distinguishing right from wrong, though
I see this touche's some what upon authority, and so will be reduced to that
member of your division.


Uncle. It importe's not to what member it be reduced so there be no fourth
way. But I though you had learned sufficiently already to exclude this, for
what make's more notice to be taken of any thing, then that, which changes
some public and universal practice? Look but if any one go through the
streete's in some strange and new fashioned apparel, how all staire and gaze
upon him, the very boys leave their play to follow him and look at him. And
therefore to say such an Innovation can be brought in without being taken
notice of, is as much as to say, the cause of admiration or taking notice can
be set before our eyes without working it is effect. Which is to say that fire
and tow should lie together without burning, or a stone hang at liberty in the
air without falling down; these be impossibilities in nature, and are in the
rack of those things against which nature folliciteth by hi^ continual causes
of hopes and fears, which made you confess but now, that negligence was not a
sufficient cause to produce the change of Religion. Wherefore let us see if by
any of these three ways which I have proposed the change of Religion can
happen.


Nephew. Nay, sir, I will do you the favor to exclude one of them, to wit,
the way of persuasion, or by alleging more reason against the true Religion,
then can be brought for it, for seeing truths bear witness to one another, and
that the Religion we speak of is supposed to be true; it is impossible that
more reason should be brought against it, then for it, Nor is the greatness of
any man's wit, who should stand to maintain the error, to be feared, for this
error being to pass through a great part of the world, it is not credible that
one man should so far surpass in wit the rest of the world as to put them all
from their standing without contradictio^. Or that in so much time as is
necessary for the spreading of such an error into the maine of the church, no
man should have wit enough, if not to bring more potent arguments for the
truth, atleast to find out the weakness and fallacy of those which are
brought against it, which would be sufficient to hinder the progress of such
an error, for who is in possession of an opinion must have an insoluable reason
to put him out of it, if he be wise and constant, Much more those who ground
their tenets upon receiving them from their forefathers, and hold all reason
insufficie^t to prove their faith, because of it is supernaturalitie, and
therefore ought more to harken to what was delivered, the^ to any reason which
may seem to urge the change of what is known to be delivered. Thus much I
confess is clear, but why the authority of some one, or more, whose words
are above examine, or the power of some who hould's the balance of good and
badd, of pains and pleasures, may not work an error into the church, that I
do not understand.


Uncle. You have drawn the question from an universal to a particular, for we
spoke of a change betwixt two Religions in common, and you speak of a change
from a true one to a false one. Yet this being sufficient for our intent, I
will add that if you had that conceit of the true Religion, which much thought
has bredd in me, to wit, that it is the most high, wise, rationnall,
conformable to man's nature, to government, to all things fitting for man's
life, that can be imagined, of all disciplines and learnings possible, that it
leads into greater secrets of nature the^ otherwise we should ever reach
unto (...) and exceeds all the knowledge which made ancient and modern sages
so proud, If you had, I say, this conceit of the true Religion you would be
much more confirmed and strengthened in this persuasion: But why do you not
think it impossible that the authority of one man should ouerswaye all the
wits of the world? Surely the Diuill him self would rather help the church
then permit so little pride amongst me^, Never yet any great man wanted his
Antagonist, who had he such a flawe in is credit as this our subject would give
him, it would quiekly hinder the extent of his authority. Not any of our
never so much esteemed fathers is received in all things; nor is any of their
authoritie's received in such an eminent height, as is necessary for the
effect we speak of. Who was greater then Origin? And yet was he condemned even
when he was in greatest vogue. But I need not appeal to examples where nature
by it is own force strike's the stroke. For either this new doctrine is brought
in openly by the strong and earnest endeauours of the author him self (whose
authority must swaye the world) and of his followers, And then by this very
negotiation it will discover it is newness; and being false the more it is
handled the more it will show it is weakness, and at length go out like a
snuff of it self. Or else it come's in neglectedly, being written by the bye,
and the Innouator's authority urged by others upon occasion; and then the
very manner beare's with it so little likelihood and small efficacitie as that
it would be every where chechked by reason of it is, newness, and therefore
could never pass vncontrowled through any great extent. And if we put the
case, as before, to be in the Catholic church, where the truth is not to be
handled by learned reasons, as being above nature, but by what our forefathers
have taught us, you see this great man's authority presently vanishes into
smoke, being there is no place for any man's authority, where the constant
and universal verdict of the present world is against it, in respect whereof
he is but a single man. Concerning force or power you must suppose, before you
can make any apparent argument of it, 1. that this power is over the whole
Christian world, 2. to be so strong that it fears not to give distaste to the
people, 3. to be vehemently desirous to quell the old faith and bring in a new
one, 4. that it has zealous ministers for the same end, And lastly that all
these dure and continue until all the ancient faith be extinct. And when all
is done yet will it remain upon record and be known when this new opinion
began, and the violence being ended there is a root in men's hearts to reject
this new opinion and return to the old supposing as we do, there is more
reason for the old then for the new. So that in common sense and nature's
principles the Pope had just cause to write to the Emperor in these terms.

Niteris incassum nauem sub^^ergere Petri,
Fluctuat, at namquam mergitur illaratis.
But to conclude this point, tell me, cosen, what time think you is necessary
for the introducing of an error by little and little before it will pass for a
thing delivered by hand to hand from Christ? For such an opinion we call a
Tradition.


Nephew. I see it must gain this reputation you speak of by making it quitte
forgotten that the other opinion was ever either generally held or practiced.
For as long as it is known that the other opinion was antienter, they strive in
vain (...) this was delivered by (...) s^^^ and so defec^^^d (...) to hand.
Wherefore (...) it can be (...) ^^^trarie was in vog^^, (...) ^east and some
what more (...) needs be the (...) broching and (...) if I remember we (...)
for 4. or 600. years the generally practiced (...) of (...) church (...)
certain (...) a^ I see that at (...) ^e i^ necessary, and as much more as is
(...) by (...) yet will there still remain writings of that time in which such
a point was in dispute, which will to s^^^^e, atleast in (...) of the
prevailing side, (...) such a controversy (...) has (...) and that the fallen
side was antienter and consequently (...) will s^^ll be evidence (...) there
was an other faith (...) doctrine delivered by the Apostles before this came
up, which in deed ought to be (...),


Uncle. Then cosen, let us put 200. years to be sufficient for such an
extinction, (which (...) great a circuit, and for a (...) rooted in men's hearts
and practiced in their actions is but a small time) and join th^^ the 4. or
600 we speak of, And considere whether any violent mutation ca^ continue
against nature for 6, or 800. years, be it either of Tyranie, authority, or
what other occasion soever, and this to oppress the true faith grounded in
nature. Might we not as well say there would be perpetual fair wether for
many years together through a great part of the world ^ as that there should
be such a perpetual disposition against reason and our natural inclination to
the utter ruin and overthrow of our every where received faith?


Nephew. You have reason, uncle. For although when I considere the mutabilitie
of mankind alone, and contriue with my self how this might be effected, it
seeme's plausible to say that an other opinion might come in and destroy a
received tenet, yet when I deeply weigh what you say against it, and balla^ce
the one with the other, I see my frame is limited within a small compass and
few years, but reaches not to the universality and general Dominion or
Government of nature. For I could make the like argument for not raining,
blowing, shyning and the like, that is in deed, for the destruction of nature.
And I do not think you inte^de to make the church stronger then the pillars
of nature, on which it stande's. We ought not therefore to esteem nature
universally defectible, because we cannot reach to see fully how every
particular encumbrance is avoided, for it is not that in either of these subjects
they causes are not certain and infalible, but that my discourse comprehende's
them not.


Uncle. I do not in deed intend to make the strength of faith greater the^
the strength of nature, why faith is stronger then nature.
though perhapps I could, supposing (which is certain) that nature was created
and built for the supernatural gifts and goods which God bestowe's upon it,
they which being greater and better then nature, it is fitting they should have
stronger mantenance and holds then nature it self; And therefore it is likely
that nature is strengthened by principles and fundations above it is pitch, to
the end it may be a fit and sure proppe of faith and supernatural gifts. But
this point concerne's not our present discourse.


Nephew. I confess I now clearly see that the Christian church has conserved
it self from error, supposing that the Pastors and Governors of it have
carefully taken notice from time to time of their forefather's doctrine, and I
am beholden to you for this lesson. But may not the church have been neglected
herein? Though I scarsely have courrage enough to ask you this question, for I
see you will answer me that nature must needs have it is recourse, and that
howsoever at some times or places it may have defects, yet must it of
necessity at other times and in other places have it is returns, and freshly
renew it is care and be sollicitous of so great a good, which cannot but fall
out once within 5. or 600. years, that is within the term prefixed wherein
she may discover the doctrine of her forefathers constantly held and generally
delivered to be the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Nevertheless if you
could show me that the church had in effect so conserved it self, I should be
more able to convince a perverse opponent and demonstrate



Uncle. Is it possible you should be so unreasonable as to ask me to prove a
thing which depede's of ma's will yet that you may see how great the works of
Almighty God are, and how nothing is so variable but that he can fix and make
it constant, I will endeavor to let you understand as much as my self in this
point, so you will be attentive and raise a little your understanding to answer
me in the way of rigorous discourse, which you have some experience in, by the
mathematickes you have tasted. Tell me then do you think, that if any great
congregation of men now living hold this maxim for their faith and Religion,
that nothing is to be held for certain and as a revealed truth, but what they
have received from their forefathers as a thing delivered by hand to hand from
the Apostles, And that what soever is not so received is not immutable but may
be altered if reason command, do you think, I say, that this Congregation
could in this our age have begun to hold this maxim? or that as they
received the rest of their doctrine from their forefathers, they must not also
have received this tenet?


Nephew. Truly I cannot tell you, for me thinke's it were absurd to receive
all the rest from their forefathers and take this of new, which is the rule of
all the rest; yet I do not see it so clearly as that I am able to convince
that it is so.


Uncle. Why, cosen, let us put the case that there were a General Counsel of
all Christendom sitting for example in the year 1600. And aftermuch
disputation about finding a rule to setle matters of Religion, they should
agree, that to receive nothing but what had been delivered unto them by hand
to hand from Christ and his Apostles, were the best way to end all
disputations of Religion, and there upon decree, that hereafter nothing should
be held for certain and immutable, but what were so received; And that amongst
these Bishops one should rise up and make this difficulty, we cannot know that
any thing is received by hand to hand from Christ unless our forefathers who
lived in the last age 1500. have delivered it unto us as such, which they
cannot have delivered unto us but by one of these two ways, either because we
know they had this same principle, which we seek here to setle, (to wit, that
they took nothing for immutably certain, and of faith but what was so
delivered unto them) And then we know what soever they have delivered unto us
for a matter of faith, was like wise received by them, or atleast they thought
it to be received in the same manner, and therefore we may be confident of it:
Or else they must have declared unto us what is so received, what not, that the
one part may be accepted by us and established as matters of faith, the other
held in less esteem and as no points of faith. This second we know has not
been done, And therefore if our forefathers had not this principle, how should
we have it? For if they had it not and have delivered our doctrine and Religion
unto us without distinction, we must of necessity accept much for Religion,
faith, and as received from Christ, which we know not whether it was so or no;
And therefore we must either wilfully deceive our selves and our successors
accounting and esteeming things which were never received from Christ to have
been received from him, and so falsely deliver them for such to our successors,
and consequently ground both our faith and theirs upon this untruth, that our
tenets were received from Christ: Or else we must content our selves as our
forefathers have done, and setle no new ground of ending controversies in
Religion. If one, I say, should make this difficulty in that grave Assembly,
would it not puzzell them all and put them of from their resolution?


Nephew. Truly, uncle, it could not choose, unless they were obstinately
resolved to damn the^ selves and all their posterity, and that impudently in
the sight of the whole world, which would reproach them with so notorious an
imposture. Nor can I imagine how such a position though once begun should
take root, The whole world being able to see and deteste the indignity of it.
And because I foresee your drift, I will grant you may frame the same argument
for any age, and co^seque^tly there is no age in which this resolution could
have been first taken up, but only in such an one, in which it was clearly
known what the Apostles taught and what they did not by witness from the^ who
had their doctrine from their own mouths, that is, the very next age after
the Apostles. So that we may evidently conclude that a church which now holds
with universal consent this principle, which you speak of, must of necessity
have held the same from the next age after the Apostles.


Uncle. But can you now tell me, cosen, whether this congregation as long as it
adhere's to this principle can receive any thing of this nature and quality
contrary to what their forefathers delivered unto the^ upon this same
principle? And note, I pray, I do not ask whether they can receive any thing
but what they apprehe^d to be so; but I ask whether they can receive any
thing as such but that which truly is so delivered, that is, whether they can
be cosened in this question, Whether their forefathers delivered it unto them
so or no.


Nephew. It Is evident they cannot. For although one man may be deceived in what
is told him, specially at one time, yet to say whole nations are deceived in
what is told the^, not once or twice, but what they are bredd and beaten to,
is as much as to say all men are deceived in judging white from black,
because, for sooth, some weak eyes are now and the^ mistaken, or as to say,
no body can walk, because some have the palsy: which were in deed to
destroy nature and it is constancy in vniuersalls, because of it is
defectibilitie in it is particulars, which is against common sense and reason.


Uncle. Well then do you think their immediate forefathers could teach the^
any thing as of this quality but what themselves believed and had received in
the same manner?


Nephew. No surely, their immediate forefathers could not deliver any thing as
of this nature to their successors against the doctrine which they had received
from their predecessors, ever standing in this principle, that nothing is to
be believed as of necessity in this degree but what came by hand to hand from
Christ or his Apostles.


Uncle. Tell me then, I pray, whether in the two last points, that is, whether
either we can be deceived in what was delivered by our immediate forefathers
unto us as of this kind; or they deliver us any doctrine as of this quality
but what them selves received in the like sort, whether I say in either of
these two points there be any difference betwixt any former age and this our
presentage, or that what you have granted of this age, the same must not
necessarily hold in all other ages ever since Christ?


Nephew. I confess I see noe difference.


Uncle. Reflect then upon what you have granted, and considere whether any
error against a received doctrine and practice of this nature could so creep
in, as that there shoud be no determinate age of it is beginning, in which it
first took root and flourished?


Nephew. It Is not possible that any thing should begin and yet begin in no
time. For I conceive that an age is no small time and giue's no little growth to
any thing that beginne's, so that to say any point of doctrine is a whole
age in growing, and to say with all it is imperceptible, and after a whole age
insensible, is without doubt senseless. Yet if any should say that an error
had been begun by a private man and taught to some in one age, which being
neglected grew into practice in some one country, and from thence by the like
neglect grew likewise to be customarie in the next adjoining, and so spredd it
self until it had possessed the heart of Christendom, and this for many
years, so that now all memory that ever the contrary had been in credit and
practice were lost, if this, I say, one should tell me; I doubt whether I
should be able to give him a conuincing answer and demonstratiue satisfaction.


Uncle. Cosen, this question trencheth upon what we have already talked of,
therefore I will only give you such a hint as your self may work upon. First
it is as manifest an impossibility that a change of Religion should be
introduced insensibly into any one Country, as that a burning fever should
for as long time consume the same whole country without being taken notice of,
or sought to be prevented, sithence as we said nature permit's us not
generally to be sleepie in Religion. Secondly to say it shall pass
imperceptible from country to country and so get possession of the whole
Christian world, is far more impossible, men's natures and dispositio^s being
so diverse that if they were put to we are cappes or shoes a like it could not
be effected but by some public force or command. Thirdly that this should be
for so long a term that the contrary practice should be quit forgotten to
have been formerly in use and request is yet beyond both. So that who soever
is troubled with this doubt does not rightly understand the nature of Christian
Religion, which is a truth of the quality of science hanging all together,
Whereunto a truth may be added and yet remain whole, but if any falsitie or
cross position be admitted, it will not only destroy the positio^ immediately
opposite, but also what soever depends of it, that is, all in deed but
cheefely tradition. And so we see by experience that none ever moved any point
of faith, but if their revolt dured long, they proceeded so far, as to take a
way tradition the rule of all we are to believe. But can you tell me, have we
reached to the resolution of your demand and are you fully satisfied?


Nephew. This you have concluded that if our church rely upon tradition now, it
ever did so; And if it ever did rely upon tradition it must needs have
maintained the same doctrine from Christ's time to ours; for nether could any
former age deliver any thing contrary to what they had received upon this
principle, nor we mistake what they delivered; so that nothing contrary to the
first received doctrine can be admitted. This yet, me thinke's, wa^teth, To
show that the present Roman church rely's upon tradition, which I confess to
me is evident, at least that what soever we have received from our forefathers
as coming byhand to hand from Christ, that we reverence and receive all such
points as being necessary to be believed. Only I have one scruple wherein I
must crave your help, And it is Whether this rule of tradition which you, give
to be so constantly held to be the rule of faith, whether I say, it be so
admitted of by all Catholics or no, for I fear the variety of contrary
opinions which I hear are amongst our learned, men will prejudice your
argume^s. Wherefore I could wish you would show me



FOr I am told (how true I know not) that some of our Deuines mantaine that in
the person of the Pope reside's the rule of faith, by a singular gift and
privilege bestowed upon S. Peeter and his successors; And this so rigorously
that no General Council, no not although the Pope's Legates be present and
confirm it, is of force to oblige ^^ of faiht until the personal
confirmation of his Holiness be obtained. Others, they say, esteem the
Council above the Pope, and so do not hold the Pope's approbation of a
Council to be necessary, but that this rule of faith reside's in the
Council: Others I hear, to make all safe, join both in one, and nether admit
the Council without the Pope, not the Pope without the Council to breed any
obligation of faith. And farther I hear that amongst these Deuines, of what
opinion soever they be touching the subject in which this rule or highest
authority does reside, there be some which think that not any new doctrine
or position can be broached or proposed as certain and as an article of faith
by what authority soever, unless that doctrine was esteemed certain before,
and ever believed as such. Yet I am told there be many who mantaine and ^ouch
that this highest authority of the church (wheresoever it be) may and can
define points of doctrine not certainly known hitherto, nor ever expressy
believed before. Which how they may be reconciled amongst them selves or stand
with this, that tradition is our rule of faith, I confess I know not.

Uncle. Truly, cozen, your objection is strong, yet I hope to content you. For
the first part of it, I see no great matter in the variety of opinions amongst
our Deuines, for you see they seek out the Decider of points of doctrine,
that is by whose mouth we are to know, (upon occasions of dispute) what and
which be our points and articles of faith, to wit, whether the Pope, or the
Council, or both. Which is not much material to our purpose, what ever the
truth be, supposing we acknowledge no articles of faith but such as have
descended unto us by tradition from Christ and his Apostles. The second part of
your objection seeme's to be of greater force, because some Deuines seem to
acknowledge an authority in the church which has power, not only to determine
either speculatiue or practical points of doctrine new, or old, in such manner
as that the whole church is obliged to accept or not oppose it is definition,
(which every Catholic grante's, and the reasons I told you in our first
conference do evidently convince) But also that this authority can so
determine even a speculatiue point of doctrine, which hitherto was ever
uncertain nor ever acknowledge as reueiled, or esteemed as an article of
faith, that here after the vhole church shall be obliged to receive, acknowledge,
and believe it as a revealed and necessary point of Christian doctrine, and as
an article of faith. Which opinion you must know, is but an opinion, nor do
the authors of it oblige any man to believe it as certain, nor do they
condemn those who nether do, nor ever, will acknowledge any such positio^,
and therefore this ought not to trouble you. Nay contrariwise all Deuines will
generally tell you, that no new articles of faith can be made, that there is now
no revelations for new points of doctrine, and that Christ Jesus was our only
law maker in this kind, having suggested to his Apostles all that is
necessary of this nature and quality, and the Apostles likewise taught their
churches all that was necessary to be known of this degree. Wherefore you see
all agree upon tradition, nor any one either deny it, or doubt of it, Whereas
it appeare's by the diversity of their opinions that they do not universally
and generally agree in any other means or rule of faith, though some admit
of another in way of opinion: Yet to give you farther satisfaction in this
business; I will teach you a point of philosophy which perhapps you never fully
understood. I am sure you will not deny but it is a different question to ask
how an herb or tree growe's, and to ask how Aristole or Theophrastus says it
growe's, for in the same growing there can be no variety but in their opinions
there may So in man, it is a different thing, what he does or is done in him,
and what he thinks he does or is done in him, as in sickness, disgestion, and
other natural works it is evident, yea and in voluntary actions too, Which
depend of corporal instruments, as to go, run, turn our eyes, speak,
cough, spit or the like, which we do freely and voluntarily, yet were we
examined by what instruments and motions we do the^, peradventure who seeme's
to know most would be found short, at least amongst many there would be diverse
opinions. But do you think the same happen's in our thoughts and judgments
which be purely spiritual?


Nephew. I cannot tell, yet me thinke's the soul should be so well acquainted
with her own actions as that she should not need any help to know them. And
all men agree that only man upon earth can see his own mind, and therefore if
it be not clear to man what himself thinke's, nothing is clear.


Uncle. You are deceived cosen, for as long as we are in this world we cannot
know any thing of our own thoughts and affections but as we reflect upon the
corporal motions which accompany them, and which because none feel but our
selves, none can know bur our selves, though sometimes it happene's quite
contrary, when these motions break forth into outward appearance, for the^
others discrye our minds, and we our selves through the violence of passion
are not so well able to judge of them as others who see us. But to speak of men
free from passion, and who use to reflect much upon their own thoughts, even
in them their internal actions proceed from a principle directed by a
superior guide then their own reason, as appeare's by this that they know
nothing of their own thoughts but by reflection, and the reflection is a
distinct act from the former upon which the reflectio^ is made, so that nether
the reflectio^ it self is alwaise made by voluntary design, nor any act
which is made without reflection. Besides considere, I pray, how few know by
what verue their understandings are made certain of those principles and
positio^s which they cannot doubt of, or by what virtue they adhere so strongly
to the conclusion of a sylogisme, not one of a thousand who do these things
every day. Wherefore it is evident that even in our spiritual actions, not all
that we do is done by our proper understanding, that is, with knowing
reflection and design, and therefore, the same man may eue^ in these
intellectual acts do one thing and think he does an other, and diverse men
may agree in what they do, and yet disagree in their opinions of what it is
they do. And now to close with your difficulty, seeing faith is a persuasion
or an agreeing in some points by reason af authority, All the Doctors of the
Catholic church may agree in believing, that is, in acting and practizing
their faith in the same manner, and yet be divided in their speculations by
which they seek to determine what it is they do, And it is their doeings
which make's them Christians, and not their sayings, for they live and believe
as Christians, but speak and deliver their opinions as Doctors, which be
qualities far different from being a Christian. And do you not see that these
Doctors believe after their speculations and framing of their opinions as they
did before they thought of, or studied this difficulty?


Nephew. I do not doubt but they do, for the faith of all Christians must
needs be the same, and consequently all must go upon the same motive, though
one may understand better and apprehende deeper that motive then an other does.


Uncle. You say well, Considere then that when these Doctors were young men,
and had not yet studied Divinity, and you shall find that they had no other
motive of their belife but the authority of the present church, and therefore
how soever they discourse learnedly in their books, the conclusion must be in
their lives to rest upon the authority of the present church as before they
did.


Nephew. Nay if you go that way to work I fear you will fall short of your
intent. For the child belieue's father and mother, the parishoner his Pastor
without reflection of the present church. It Is like therefore these Deuines
rely upon the motives which they mantaine what soever they did when they were
young.


Uncle. Not so nether, for as the water of the new river which is brought to
London come's to a particular house by a small pipe, yet it is continuate to the
whole body of the river: so the instruction of faith though it come to a child
by his parents and to a parishoner by his Pastor, yet the dependence of the
doctrine is from the whole church, whose members and instruments these parents
and Pastors are, if they be in the church, to which you know I told you what
is required. And it is the like when parents teach their children, what is to be
done or avoided according to the laws of the country, for though the father
speak, yet it is the common wealth which prevails and binds.


Nephew. At least me thinke's, uncle, such great Doctors should not be ignorant
of a point agreed upon by the whole church, and therefore since they disagree
about the motive of faith, I do not see how you can say it is generally agreed
on in the Catholic church.


Uncle. Had this agreement been made in a General Council, or in some
universal meeting of faithful Christians, and so recorded, I doubt not but
these learned Clerks would have known it; but it was not so agreed on. Yet as
by the universal blessing of crescite and multiplicamini, Genesis 1.
all men and beasts agreed upon feeding and filling the world, every one in
his kind, by the direction of their maker, knocking at their stomachs when
they were hungry, and at their pharisie when they were full to set on work
those instruments by which the se commands of Almighty God were to be
fullfilled: Marc 16
Even so by the like blessing of Euntes in mundam vniuersum praedicate omni
creaturae, the Apostles being dispersed into all nations by the virtue of
doing miracles found credulity, or rather forced faith out of the flintie
hearts of the corrupted world, and having settled Christ's doctrine, dying left in
their successors souls and minds this agreement, To believe what was
delivered from them, and to trust those who had heard them speak, and
afterward to trust those who had heard it from them who had their instruction
from the Apostles, and lastly to trust the public consent which affirmed that
they held their faith by entaile from them though many ages after. This
agreement being written in hearts and not in books, it is easy for learned men
who seek their learning in books and not in hearts to mistake. As in
Philosophy, whilst great Clerks seek nature not in it self, but in other
men's sayings, they are divided, and few in the right, the truth being but one.


Nephew. You have been as good as you word. For I see it importe's not that
our Deuines be of different opinions in this point, so that in their lives and
practice they agree. And truly I never heard of any Catholic that either
doubted, but that Christian doctrine was descended by Tradition, or thought
that what was so descended could be false, nay I think every moderate and
wise Protestant will make no question of that which he conceiues to have
descended from the Apostles by succession. For Catholics we all rely upon the
censure of the present church, nor can or ^are any man appeal from it and
call him self a Catholic, for we all account them infidels and publicans who
are refractorie to this tenet. Wherefore it is evident that what soever the
church speake's and deliuer's for Tradition, is agreed upon by all Catholics
to be certain and vnrefusable, and sithence all other motives or rules of
faith are not universally received, it is evident likewise that this is the rule
which can oblige us to certaintiem matters of belief. But I have an other
great difficulty, to wit, that I see our Catechists and preachers, when they
teach us Christian doctrine, tell us, this you are to believe, this you are to
practice, without expressing the differences which are betwixt the points of
doctrine, whereof perhapps some are but only the answers of learned men, some,
definitio^s of the church, and some, matters of tradition, And the like I
believe of former ages, Christian doctrine descending unto us in a heap or
confusion, and therefore it is hard to distinguish what is of Tradition, what the
general consent of the church, and what only learned men's opinions. Why then
may not some position of this last rank pass for a tradition by the adoption
of some ages, in which it will be forgotten that ever it had it is beginning
from the wit and industry of private men? And to satisfy me in this point you
must let me see how that


The teaching of Christian doctrine without determining what is of necessity
to be believed what not, hurte's not the progress of tradition.
Uncle. If I should answer you, that former ages have been more exact in
distinguishing things certain from uncertain it would not be without ground,
as you may see by the framing of ancient creedes and other professions of faith
as occasions required, but this were to send you to antiquity, whereas in this
discourse you know we both desire that common sense and reason without farther
enquiry should be our judge. Wherefore the point you speak of, which you fear
might deceive us by the likeness of tradition, is either true or false, if
true, then I pray, what inconvenience is there, if it surprise us in the
quality of it is certainty?


Nephew. This I fear and think, that it would break the rule and certainty
of Tradition, Where upon relye's the whole building and frame of our faith
according to your discourse. For if once truth not delivered by tradition may
pass for so delivered, what security can we have that a falsitie may not
likewise pass in the same manner, and so bring an error amongst us?


Uncle. I put you only that part of the question, if the point were true, which
you draw into the contrary, if it were false, wherefore if it do not follow
that an untruth can deceive us in that kind, then there is no inco^uenie^ce in
the consequence of the former part, to wit, that truth may be taken as
delivered by tradition, which truly is not so delivered. And the reason is
clear, for seeing the truths of Religion are known for the framing of our
lives conformably unto them, it importe's little, in respect of virtue, upon
what grounds they are held in particular, so they be universally and constantly
held, for an action done in consequence of such believed truths is never the
worse for the quality of the certainty of it is object. Yet for your farther
satisfaction this I will add, that how soever the common people do not
distinguish what is of Tradition, and what is but of some learned men's
opinions, nevertheless those whom we call Deuines (if truly they be such as
the name require's) may and do distinguish positions of such different
natures. For Christian doctrine is not a bundle of loose positions (as those
who negligently look on it may think) but a true discipline hanging together
by consequences and order tending to one end. And of this doctrine and
discipline some parts be such as cannot be known but by immediate revelation,
others such as no sensible man can doubt of, if he believe the former. And
learned me^ know that of both these two, the one is expressly delivered by
tradition, the other is as firm as if it were so delivered. For as it was
reueiled that our savior is truly God and man, so every man of common sense
knows that he had two wills, Divine and human, against the Monothelites. Other
points there may be which need art and study to deduce and fetch them out of
the two former. And of these likewise a true Divine cannot be ignorant, being
they are be fruits of learning and study, and consequently have ever been in
the souls and writings of learned Masters. And these points every one knows
who is conversant in Logike, and in judging the qualities of such propositions
as belong to science, And your self I am sure by the little skill you have
therein, and by the small light of this discourse, will eastly judge that this
is reasonable.


Nephew. I conceive your meaning, but whereas you say that the points of the
second order are as firm as those which are delivered by Tradition, me
thinke's that is not reasonable, sithence Tradition relye's wholly on God and his
word, but the other only upon man's discourse which is falible and easily
mistaken, and therefore must of necessity be much inferior.


Uncle. I would not have you take my words so precisely, not in so rigorous a
degree of comparison, for so even of demonstrations the precedent will be
esteemed more certain then that which is deduced out of it, though in a moral
e^ti^ation the certainties be equal. And so it is in those two degrees, for
truly that little discourse which is required for the second degree is
infalible, certain, and evident, and therefore the knowledge proceeding from
it may well be rancked with the former degree. But I suppose you expect to
hear why it does not follow, that if a truth not delivered by Tradition may
nevertheless pass for such, why, I say, an error may not have the same
progress, and surprise the church that is,



ANd this I will show you in a word, because it falls into the repetitio^ of
what we have already discoursed on. The impossibilities are three. First it
trencheth upon the resolution we formerly made that one man's authority could
not prevail against, and over the whole church; for this is the difference
betwixt a truth and a false hood, that a truth though it begin from one yet
may it be accepted of by all, by reason of it is evidence, Which when one has
laid open, others may follow, not for the man's authority, but for the love of
the seen truth: Whereas falsehood, which cannot bring evidence with it, must
be bolstered up by the man's credit and reputation, which you know is
insufficient. Secondly it is impossible an error should generally preuaille by
reason of the immutabilitie which is in the universality of contingent causes,
whose particulars may be defective, but the vniuersalls cannot. So that as it
is impossible in nature that all children should be borne with one eye, all
coltes with three legs, or the like, so were it a monstrous accident, and that
in a higher and more immutable nature, if an error should generally prevail
and pass through all mankind, or through so great a part of it as we make
accounte the Catholic church is, and will ever be. The third impossibility
is, because it trencheth upon the stabilitie of Religion, for sithence we
agreed that it is impossible for any nation to have no Religion, and as
impossible to change a true into a false, And likewise that Christian doctrine
has the nature of science, so far as that no error can fall into it but
must bring contradiction and opposition against the principles and received
practice of the church, and so make a breach against the ancient possession, it
does therefore plainly appear, that as it is impossible for such a breach to
become universal in time and place, so likewise must it needs be impossible
that an untruth should be universally received for tradition, having not been
delivered as such.

Nephew. I must confess your reasons seem good, yet might one say all your
reasons are but moral persuasions, which may fail; as if one should say, it
is reasonable to think an honest man will not lie, yet I doubt not but some
times the contrary happene's. Wherefore I pray you tell me



Uncle. I fear it will be to far on the night before I can satisfy your
difficulty, yet I will show you breefly and familiarly what may suffice. Tell
me then, do you think there is such a town as Rome or Constantinople?


Nephew. That I do, I would I knew what I ask as well.


Uncle. Why, who told you there were any such towns?


Nephew. Truly I do not remember who told me so in particular, but I have
heard so many talk of them without doubting that it were folly to doubt of
it.


Uncle. But if I or some other, of whose honesty you do not doubt, should
tell you we have been there and have seen those towns with our own eyes,
would you believe it more certainly then you do?


Nephew. No in deed, uncle, for although I should, in that case, make no doubt
of it, yet their authorities upon which I do already believe it are no less,
nay far greater, seeing that if it were not fo, many more of no less credit
and reputation must be liars, who^ though I cannot name yet nature tell's me
that if thousands had not reported it of their own knowledge it could not
pass so consta^tly and vncontrowlably as is does.


Uncle. But if a man should come with many great reasons and motives to
persuade you, that there is, not ever was any such cities a we speak of. Nay
let us suppose that if you lived but 20 miles from London where every day you
fawe hundreth's come from thence, and your self had never been there, And
there should come unto you a man who should labor to show by reason that it
were a folly to think there were any such town as London. Or to make our
supposition more strong suppose you had lived diverse years in London and had
never seen London Brige which every day you might see if you would, And some
man would persuade you there were no such thing, what would you do?


Nephew. I would give him hearing as I would do to a fool or a madman, and so
much power should his fair reasons prevail with me. For although I never had
been at London, yet could I not choose but know there were a London more
certainly the^ any learned discourse could make me know any other thing. For
it is as impossible that so many men should conspire in a lie concerning a
thing which might be so easily discovered, and that no body should co^tradict
so many who should daily say they had seen and felt it, as it is that men
should be no men, And far more possible for me to be deceived in a reason
never so evident then so many to swerve so far from human nature.


Uncle. Why then if you think it madness in a man to doubt or not to believe
such a thing, what strength do you conceive these our arguments must have?
must you not needs think they have as much force upon the mind, as color
conveniently disposed has upon the eye? as the objects of smell and taste have
upon the nose trill and palate? or in deed as a demonstration has upon the
understanding? And in fine, if any do not admit of these arguments as good
is it not evident that it is not for want of force in the object but of
disposition in the person?


Nephew. I confess it seeme's to me so, yet do I not see why it must he so,
for there is so great difference betwixt natural things and moral, and the
will of man is so much more murable then nature, that I cannot conceive how
any certainty can be had in moral things.


Uncle. I see you seek to engage me into a long discourse but I will cut you
short. Do you think it is against nature to tell a lie, or that it is a
natural action?


Nephew. I think it is a moral action nether with nor against nature, and I
think the like of all virtues and vices, nor do I know why I should think
otherwise.


Uncle. You know we say that children and fools tell true, and that fools
are caled Naturalls, as working by nature. And have you not marked in your self
that being asked a question, if you be heedlesse you presently answer the
truth, but if you be upon your guard, you considere and resolve how far to
answer, and what to conceal. Nay if you have marked it, HoW a lie is framed
against nature.
you have never told a formal lie but you have been forced to from a new
thing in your mi^de which before was not in it, so that what nature and the
course of learning and speaking breede's would never lie. To lie therefore you
must have art and change some natural position of your fancy to make or
frame it, as if a man would turn his hand or face backewards, And so we say
in latin mentire est contra mentem ire, which is to cross that which is in our
minds, Whereas words are by nature made conformable to our understandings.
Whence it is manifest that a lie is against nature, and cannot be done but by a
voluntary resolution to change the course of nature. For although a falsehood
may be told naturally, if that which is false be in our mind, either by settled
opinion or by the surprise of inconsideration, yet a lie, which is the putting
by of that which is naturally in our mind, or at least the hindering of it to
manifest it self and the subornation of an other thing to go out in its place,
cannot choose but be voluntary, and done for some end or respect which we aim
at. And the like may be said to prove all vices to be against nature. HoW all
vice is against nature.
For if nature be the principle of action in us, and none who bears the face
of man from the boy that play's at push pin, to the Bishop that judges for
heaven, but professes to follow reason and exact's it of an other, no doubt
but reason is the verse nature of man; Wherefore if vice be nothing else but
the defect of our action from the rule of reason, it is evident that when we do
any thing against reason, we must needs work against the nature of man, and
consequently vice is against the nature of man. And so we see that man is
generally ashamed of vice, and what he is not a shamed of, he will not repute
to be vice, but will defend it as reasonable.


Nephew. Give me leave to interrupt you sir, For I fear I did not well declare
my self. It was not my mind to say that reason is not the nature of man, But
that there is a maine difference betwixt the nature of man, which we call
reason, compared to his moral actions; and betwixt the nature of other things
(as of the elements) compared to their actions. And therefore although
philosophers may show perhapps impossibilities in nature, yet will it be hard
to de the like in the actions of reason, or rather of the will, whose ways
seem to be uncertain.


Uncle. No, cosen, I did not mistake your intention, but I make no difference
betwixt the nature of man and of other things but in excellency, and I
conceive this excellency of man's nature to consiste in a greater consta^cie
of working, and so think an impossibility as easily showed in man's actions
as in the actions of any other nature. For cannot we say of many things
before they be done, that no wise man will do them, and therefore that who
does them is not wise. For example, can you think that any wise man will take
a ball to cut withal, or a pikestaffe to fetch water in? Be not such things as
theses as easily known, as whether there be any place without a body, or
stuffed with more then one? Wherefore we may besure that if a wise man go to
fetch water, he will take some thing else then a pikestaffe to fetch it in, HoW
reason come's to fail in any man,
or if he be to cut, he will not take a balle; so that it is manifest reason
has as firm principles as any other nature, And that as the nature of one
thing will hold until a stronger contrary do cross it, so there must be in
any particular man a contrary disposition stronger then reason in him, to
make him go against reason. Now therefore if you can cast up the force of
reason and of it is contraries, you may certainly know what a man will do;
which although perhapps you cannot exactly balance in a particular man, yet in
a great number and in whole multitudes you may in some things know it as
certainly, as you ca^ do any thing by a demonstration. For example, suppose
there were an Assembly of grave and wise me^, as our Parliament or the like,
which had had a very fair sun shine day to fit on, And one should tell you
that in the next sessions following they would decree it had been a very
foul day, and would command under pain of death every man to believe and
profess foe. Which though I think you will say it were impossible they
should make any such decree, yet would I know how you would go about to prove
it. Would your not considere what force of fears of hopes were necessary to
induce one of these men to tell such a notorious lie, whereby he were to hazard
his conscience and reputation for ever, and then increase and augment the
difficulty by the multitude? And farther would you not urge that there were no
such hopes or fears as were able to quell any one, or at least a were
necessary to ouerswaye them all, considering that the same hopes or fears
could not fall upon such variety of estates and humors as all these men were
of, And knowing certainly any of these three you would assuredly pronunce the
supposed assertion to be false. For say you, such a force is necessary to
break reason in this Congregation, but such a force at this present cannot be
had, and therefore reason at this present cannot be broken in them. In which
discourse a Mathematician will tell you, his demonstrations hang upon the very
same gimalls. Wherefore as men cannot ordinarily demonstrate, that one body
cannot be in two places, nor two in one, yet are we certain there is a
natural demo^stration for it, and we are by nature assured of it. So no doubt,
but there is a demonstration to him that lives in London, that there is a
London bridge, and he is naturally certain of it, though he cannot frame the
demonstration by articles and sylogismes as a true philosopher can do, for
surely a philosopher, if he will take pains, may find a demonstration for
both.


Nephew. I heartily thank you for this discourse, both for the present subject,
wherein you have contented me beyond my expection, as also because me thinke's
I conceive by it, that there may be certain knowledge, not only in
mathematikes, but in all other sciences, sithence there is so clear and
efficacious means of proceeding even in moral matters, which seem the most
mutable and uncertain of all, and where I thought scarcely any reason was to
be expected.


Uncle. O! cose^, though he was a great man that said Ars longa, vita breuis,
yet he must give me leave to be his interpreter, for it is not the length of
art* but our not taking the right way, which make's it long, otherwise art
would be but a convenient solace to our lives. Would you think that a private
man following the wars without help of others writings by his own industry
should surpass the greatest clerks that have pored double his time upon
books? and, Monsieur des Carts.
this, our age has showed in a french gentleman, yet not only living but young.


Nephew. Me thinke's, uncle, it were a good work and necessary for the
Christian world, if your self or some other would take the pains to set down
the principles of our faith in form of demonstration. For that I conceive
would take away all controversies, and make all Christians of one belief and
Religion.


Uncle. You are a young man, and conceiue's not the dai^tinesse of the pallates
of this age, they would not taste such rugged and bitter stuff, nay they
cannot digest any thing which is not sugered with quaint and pleasont jests.
Who would read such a work? Who would have the patience to study it to
comprehend it and make it his own? This very discourse which has passed
betwixt you and me is so thornie and full of so many chained consequences,
that were it public few would carry it away. Let us therefore content our
selves to make it known to our own acquaintance, to whom upon occasion you
may deliver it by the way of familiar discourse, wherein peradventure it will
savor better and profit more.


Nephew. I pray leave me not thus give me at least some special light to
answer such objections, as without doubt will be proposed, when I shall
deliver your discourse to those who are better red then my self. Wherefore
least I should disgrace your learned lessons, I pray, tell me how



Uncle. I can not give you a better rule the^ to stick to the church's
authority for Tradition, and not to be easily beaten of by great names and
words, for if you considere that a Tradition, or a point of faith delivered by
tradition, is a point universally preached and delivered by the Apostles and
imprinted in the hearts of the Christian world; And by an universal belief and
practice continued unto our days; whereof our warrant is no other then that we
find the present church in quiet possession of it, and whereof no beginning is
known, if this I say you considere and stick well to this apprehe^sio^, you
need not fear any objection which can be made against you. For you rely upon
the testimony of the whole Christian church, you rely upon the force of nature
borne to continue from father to child, you rely upon the promises of Jesus
Christ of continuing his church unto the end of the world, And upon the
efficacitie of the Holy Ghost sent to perform it, by whom Christ's law was
written in Christians hearts and so to be continued to the day of doom, So that
you see no human authority, by which our Estates and lives are governed; No
proofs of courts or law, which nevertheless are admitted as Iuges of those
affairs which too many (God knowe's) esteem more weighty and important then
Religion, No consent of history, And in fine (if what we have said be true) no
demonstration better, nor greater, nor peradventure equal. On the other side
you shall find all obiectio^s fall of their own weakness. As, some do
object the Millenarie error for a tradition, whereof there is no certainty,
nor consent of those who write of it, whether it have been publicly preached
by the Apostles or no, And even thence it is excluded from the nature of such
tradition as we rely upon. Others finding diverse fathers agreeing in one
opinion, urge them presently for, or against, tradition, As if fathers in their
days were not private Doctors, and might not be mistaken in some points as well
as the Doctors of the present church, It Is true we reverence the fathers in
many titles above any living Doctors, yet every Catholic knowe's that
diverse fathers have some times light into the same error. Wherefore you must
note, cosen, that the fathers speak some times as witneses of what the church
held in their days, and some times as Doctors, and so it is often hard to
distinguish how they deliver their opinions, because some times they press
scripture or raison as Doctors, and some times to confirm a known truth. So
that who seeke's Tradition in the fathers and to convince it by their
testimony, take's a hard task upon him, if he go rigorously to work and
have a conning Critic to his Adversary. How so ever it is not a thing fitting
for ordinary and unlearned people but only for such as have time at will and
great reading and understanding.


Nephew. You have many Adversaries in this opinion, for generally men seek
tradition out of the fathers, and think they have found it, when in every age
they find several fathers of the same opinion.


Uncle. I intend not to detract from their labors who have taken pains in
this kind, for they are profitable and necessary for the church of God, and
excellent testimonies of Tradition, but I nether think it to be the body of
Tradition, but only an effect and consequent of it, nor that the multitude of
Christians, whose faith is to be regulated by Tradition, need to have recourse
to those learned works. Wherefore although diverse fathers in the same or
different ages be found to contradict some point, whereof the present church is
in quiet and immemorable possession, their authorities ought not to prevail;
nor are they sufficient to prove there was not even in their days a contrary
Tradion. For our faith being in some sort naturally grafted in the hearts of
Christians, learned men may now and then mistake some points of it, as well as
the causes and effects of their own nature it self, according as I told you
but now, And as in other points so even in this, to wit, in the resolution of
faith, wherein as our Doctors seem to differ now a days, so might the fathers
also, And in particular S. Cypria^ seeme's to think that the resolution of
faith was to be made into scripture and not into Tradition, though in deed he
opposed not scripture to Tradition, but to custom, which is a far different
thing, the one relying upon the doctrine of the Apostles, the other upon the
authority of private Doctors, And supposing he was mistaken, it were no more
the^ what we now see to consiste with the unity of the Church. There is one
objection and but only one of moment, and it is that S. Augustine and Innocentius
with their Counsels held that the communion of Children Was necessary for
their salvation, and their words seem to be apparent. But who looks into
other passages of the same Authors will find that their words are
metaphorical, and that their meaning is, that the effect of sacramental
Communion, to wit, an incorporation into Christ's mystical body, which is
done by Baptism, is of necessity for Children's salvation. I remember not at
this present any other objection of monent which may not be easily solued out
of these principles.


Nephew. I will suggest you one or two if you please, The one of Communion
under both kinds, wherein our Adversaries say, we leave a known and
practiced tradition for many ages. The other concerning the books of
scripture, where they say we accept of a new scripture, or rule of faith
without tradition.


Uncle. I did think, cosen, you could answer these your self. For the first
there is two parts of it, The one that the B. Sacrament was given under both
kinds ordinarily, the other that some times it was given in one kind only, And
Catholics being in possession of both parts by tradition, those that will
prove that Catholics go against Tradition must prove that it was never
administered under one kind only, which our Adversaries nether go about nor
ca^ perform, but ply only that part which is granted them, to wit, that
ordinarily it was administered under both kinds. For the second it is not
sufficient to show that some have doubted of this or that part of the Canon,
unless they can prove that those who did not doubt, were not a sufficient
party to make a Tradition from the Apostles time. And so you see it falls
into the question we mentioned before, that some fathers or Doctors being of a
contrary mind break not the force of tradition.


Nephew. I am loath to leave you, uncle, because me thinke's I am not
sufficiently armed to answer all objections, And yet what soever I call to
mind falle's into some of these conditions you require.


Uncle. Let me see how skillfull you are, I will try how you can answer me to



FIrst therefore betwixt Ada^'s being cast out of Paradise and the Deluge there
are accounted about two thousand years, which according to the long lives men
enjoyed at that time made not fully three desce^ts, and yet in Noy's time the
forgetting of God's law was so great that a general flood was necessary for
the cle^sing of the world. Sem was Noy's son, and before his death both the
Divisions of Nations happened, because of their pride against God, And (as most
Historians think) the selecting of Abram's family into God's service, the
rest of the world having aba^doned it. Likewise what is become of all antien
Religions, the most part of them delivered by Tradition, they are all gone and
rooted out. So that plain experience is against those fine discourses you
approved so higly, What answer would you make to this?

Nephew. Marry I would deny it to be true, I mean I would say that God's law
was not forgotten, but neglected before the flood, And the like at the building
of Babell; And for Abraham's time, we know that Abimelech, and Pharao, and
Melchisedech, and others (as Job when soever he lived) observed God's law. As
for heathen Religions they were written in books, for any thing I know, and
therefore prejudice tradition no more then a written law, and consequently
belong not to this controversy. And thus I think I should quitte my self well
enough.


Uncle. Soon enough at least, but let us see if it be with as good speed as
much haste. For suppose they should reply that the neglect of God's law must of
necessity breed oblivion, and therefore that either God's law was forgotten or
shortly would have been, if the punishment of the Deluge had not prevented
it. And for the men you cite of Abraham's time they were but few, and though in
that time God's law had yet some little force, look but into Mose's time and
you shall see all ouerru^ne with Idolatry. For Heathen Religions it is said of
the Druides that their Ceremonies were not written, but delivered by memory in
verse from the Elder to the younger and so conserved; And the Histories of the
welsh and Irish seem to have been conserved in the like manner by the Bardes,
which how full of fables they were every man knowe's. So that these things
seem sufficient to discredit Tradition.


Nephew. I must entreat your helping hand to fasten me upon this shaking flore,
otherwise I perceive I am to weak to stand of my self.


Uncle. It Is not the flore you stand upon, but the want of confidence which
make's you so vnsteadfast. For tell me, I pray, if you remember whereon rely's
the firmness of Tradition?


Nephew. You told me, the Tradition of Christian faith was a great while a
planting in the hearts of men by the force of miracles, and that not only in
their understandings but also in their wills and affections, and so cultiuated
until the maine of the people were constantly persuaded there was no salvation
without it. This was done at the same time in many Countries, not knowing one
of an other, nor being able to correspo^de and frame any draught of belief
together, but every one receiving what was delivered him from his preacher.


Uncle. Why now then, cosen, rerurne to your obiectio^s and look how they urge
and what force they have against this your declaration of tradition.


Nephew. As for Adam's children I see that one man and one woman were the only
witneses of such a thing as the partys to whom they told it could hardly
believe, it was so strange, Nay them selves had so little experience of those
strange things which they told, that (for any thing we know) they never as
much as tasted of any fruit in Paradise but of the forbidden tree, And what
care they had of any Religion more the^ to reco^me^de God's service to their
children, and that only as long as they lived with them, we know not, so that
it seeme's what they taught took no strong root, nor in many. For Noth the
same answer may be given, two of his sons parting shortly from him either
into far countries, or at least into such a distance, as that they seldom
came to see him, Wherefore I perceive there is a great difference betwixt the
delivery of Christ's Gospel and of the law of God to those fathers of the old
Testament.


Uncle. Your remarkes are good ones; And in deed seeing we have required that
Tradition should have the continuance of nature, We must see that it be planted
accordingly, which you have well noted to have been performed in Christ's law,
but not in the tradition of the old law, the fathers and people of that time
being much hindered by the great business of the world's plantation, Every man
seeking to plant countries, build cities, find out commodities for the
co^seruation of man's life, Which were occupations far different from the
thoughts of heaven, and things of the next world. To this you may add that
there was not then any settled orders of Priests and men whose fu^ctio^ should
be to inculcate the necessity of Religion into men's ears and hearts, which we
know the Apostles had care to perform every where. Again there was no such
corresponde^ce betwixt country and country in those times as has ever been
amongst Christians, specially by the mediation of a chief Bishop which Christ
has set amongst us. And no doubt but these two last points be two maine and
chief causes of the propagation and conservation of Christian faith. You may
yet add that eue^ the points of faith were not then able to work upon man's
nature so powerfully as since Christ's coming, according to our yesternight's
discourse. So that the root and strength of Tradition being grounded upon
this, that such a belief is fixed in peoples hearts of several nations, the
examples fail in three things. First that the multitude was not capable of it,
it being so spiritual and abstract. Secondly that it was not inculcated with
that fervor of spirit, assistance of the holy Ghost, and abundance of
continual miracles, as Christ's law was. Thirdly that there was not a set
form and institution of Priests and Governors to join all nations in
communion for the conservation of their belief. Wherefore it never had the
root and nature of an universal Tradition. And by these examples you may
easily answer all other objections of this nature. And now I will leave you
least I should over weary both you and my self.


Nephew. You say well, uncle, yet that I may be sure to have fully conceived
the maine drift of your instructions, I pray let me see if I can make



IT was first your intention to give me a rule how to govern my self in the
choice of Religion, Then you concluded that scripture could not be this rule,
Where upon you laid me down two ways how to resolve my self. The first was
that standing upon the ground of prepossession there was no likelihood or
probability that the Protestants arguments could be sufficient to over
balance the Catholics, because they must be conuincing clearly or else were
to be rejected, And that the Protestants should bring any co^uincing and
demo^stratiue arguments against the Catholics there is no appearance,
Catholics being more in number, in quality greater scholars, and in life
more virtuous; And on the contrary side Protestants having no principles or
comma^de which may make them agree amongst themselves. And you showed me that
though this persuasio^ did not evidently convince the Catholic faith to be
true, yet did it manifestly prove that the Catholic was to be chosen by an
unlearned man. Your second way was by giving a direct proof that the
Catholic doctrine is true, which you did in threeseuerall manners. First by
showing that it was no hard matter for the Catholic church to conserve the
truth of her doctrine, if she were careful, which histories plainly show she
was. Secondly showing that nature does force men to have care of Religion, and
therefore that it was impossible any error should so creep into the church as
that it should be universally received, the very nature of man and human
affairs contradicting it is progress. Thirdly, showing how the church now
relying upon Tradition, must of necessity have ever done so, and that if it
has ever done so, it could not let any falsehood creep in, nor suffer any
error to be generally admitted. This is all I remember, saving the soluing of
some objections and the discovering of some of my impertinent answers, which I
hope you will excuse and forget. If I have missed I pray direct me.

Uncle. Yo have taken good notice, and I think my pains well bestowed, only I
would entreat you to make a little reflection and comparison betwixt the
knowledge which we have by these means, and that which scripture afforde's us
if we handle it in a litigious way, as in controversies we necessarily must.
And you shall find that Tradition is grounded upon that which all men agree
in, and upon that which is common to all ages, all nations, all conditions. But
the knowledge which we have by scripture is grounded upon that which is
different in every nation. Hence spring's an other difference, to wit, that
the one is planted in nature, and in what God created in man: the other in what
men them selves framed, and that not by design or art, but by custom and
chance. Out of which again ensues that the one is capable of necessity, and
consequently of a perfect demonstration, as all natural things are, the other
not. The one is fixed upon vniuersalls, the other vagabonde in particulars. As
for example who is able to demonstrate that a word in controversy has no
other sense then that which is necessary for his purpose? Or where the
constructio^ may be made diverse ways, that the true one is that which he
pleads? Who can demonstrate amongst varieties of texts which was in the
Autograph? Or that the copies we have are not defective? And the like, which
ordinarily are necessary if we will euindently convince our intent out of the
place we choose. On the other side, To show that whole multitudes of several
nations cannot miss in what has been a thousand times over and over
inculcated unto them, That a world cannot conspire to cosen their posterity,
That mankind cannot accept of a doctrine against an evident principle, which
they likewise hold and ma^taine (these being the maxims Tradition depende's
on) to show, I say, these things there needs no deep learning, being both
known of them selves, and also as necessarily conioint and dependant of man's
nature as his other natural actions be, and therefore may bear as good a
demonstration as they; which if we have not, it is not through any defect or
incapacitie of the subject, but through the want of our looking into it, and
that either because we do not take the right way, or that we do not bestow
sufficient pains in the prosecution of it. So that in fine although the Roman
church had fallen (which is impossible) into those errors which the Protestants
prete^de, yet were it better for a man to content him self with the Good that
remains in it, then to cast him self into an endless and fruitless maze of
disputations with trouble to all the world, and that to no other effect, then
to make people unsettled, and by their vnnsetlednesse to neglect Religion. But
God's wisdom (as you see) has provided an Evidence for those that will take
pains to seek it, 1. that the points in controversy are of importance and
necessary to be known, 2. that they cannot be so known by scripture as is
requisite for decisions against contentious men, and 3. that they may be
certainly known by resting quiet in the bosom of the Catholic church, which
God of his mercy give you and me grace to do both living and dying.



