THE NIGHT-RAVEN.

By S. R.



All those whose deeeds do shun the Light,
Are my companions in the Night.
LONDON, Printed by G: Eld for John Deane and Thomas Baily. 1620.

THE NIGHT RAVEN.
ALthough the Owl, and I, a custom keep,
To fly abroad, when other Birds do sleep,
Changing our course from those of other feather,
Yet do not we consort a nights together.
I haunt not barnes, for either Mouse or Rat,
As does the searching two-foote flying Cat,
Nor into bushes after birds to pry,
There Is difference t'wixt that devils face and I:
For secret things, being of another kind,
In obscure darkness, I apparent find
Those evil actions that avoyde the Sun,
And by the light of day are never done,
But lurk in corners, from disclosing eyes,
Not daring open view in any wise:
Those most familier are made known to me,
I take a notice who, and where they be,
Drunkards that drink until they cannot speak,
Villains and Thieves, that into houses break
Whores and Whoremongers trading for the Pox,
And reeling Watchmen, carrying Rogues to Stox,
With many knauish matters that be fall
Which, turn and read, and you shall know them all,
I neither tattle with lack-daw,
Or Maggot-pye on thatched house straw,
Nor with your hopping cage birds sing,
Nor cuckoo it about the spring:
Or like your Blacke-bird, Thrush, and Stare
Whissell in cages, for good fare:
Or cackell with your scraping Hens,
Nor hiss with Geese, (that find you pens)
Or like your durty Ducks do quacke,
That in the water, water lack,
Nor crow as does your dunghill cock,
Clown almanacke, and Shepherds clock,
Or prate as greene-coate Parrot does,
Like an old-wife, with never a tooth,
Nor mourn like Pigeons fed with pease:
I am consort for none of these.
My watchful eyes awake I keep,
When all such idle creatures sleep.
Were I not black, as all crows be,
I should even blush, at things I see.
Three fearful Thieves.
A Gentleman, lying awake in's bed,
Having good Christian motions in his head,
How he had spent the day, worse then he should,
Omitting to perform the good he would,
Committing those things which he ought not do,
As Satan, World, and Flesh, did urge him to.
Under his lodging very close and near,
A conference twixt certain thieves did hear.
Quoth one of them, my counsel pray embrace,
Let Us break in here, this is the weakest place.
No said another, I do doubt we shall
Find this so strong, that here is a double wall.
Then quoth the third, break out the iron bars
For too long lingering all our business marrs:
We must not only here this night abide,
For we have houses to attempt beside.
The Gentleman unto the window goes,
And thus he spoke, unto his theeuing foes;
My friends (quoth he) forbear this quoyle to keep,
And come anon, I am not yet a sleep.
When they heard this, away with fear they fled,
And he securely, did return to bed.
A Rogue in the Stocks.
A Base rude rascal of the Roguish crew,
For misdemeanors that by him there grew,
Set by the heels (according to desert)
Made himself merry with this knauish part:
The night obscure, as dark as night could be,
Hearing one come, Stand, who goes there? quoth he:
The fellow (seeing neither watch nor bill)
Replied an honest man, that means no ill:
Sir (quoth he) I here protest and swear
As I am Constable, step one foot near;
And in the stocks thou shall till morning sit,
Or I my self, will for thee furnish it,
The fellow back again his course did take,
With all the have that both his legs could make,
Supposing it was some Constable in's rage,
Whose fury was no less, then stocks or cage.
An Apology for Women.
There Is an abuse which comes unto my mind,
Unjust imposed upon women kind,
When men have done things that distasteful be,
And that their words from actions disagree,
In saying one thing, doing of another,
A speech is used their guiltiness to smother,
Sure he is a man would have performed the same,
But the night Raven is in all the blame.
Casting the cause by slander on the wife,
When she (good soul) is o^ (...) ^^rtuous life,
That from his word she no way ^^^^ persuade,
Although rash promise had (...) made.
Therefore kind hearted men (...)
Term them no more night (...)
True hearted Turtles, constan^ (...)
Mylder then men, and of less (...)
More pitiful, and more (...)
Less envious and less (...)
And of themselves so rare (...)
Not proving bad, till bad (...)
A night Swaggerer.
TEll me the Watch is set! why thou art an ass!
What Constable dare say I shall not pass?
Who ever bids me stand, i will make him lie,
And cut his watchmen out like steakers to frye.
I am a gentleman in three degrees,
And for three worlds my tytles i will not leese:
A gentleman by true descent of blood,
My ancient stock, was long before the flood.
Then for my schollership a gentleman,
Both read and (...) cast a count I can.
Then third degree of gentleman I claim
Is my profession (...) Soldiers name,
^^oke but (...) for eighty eight,
(...) you have me straight.
(...) that I will stand in fear,
(...), asking who goes there?
(...) and will bear sway,
(...) not so by day,
(...) it best,
(...) I fear arrest.
Fashions, out at the elbows.
Tailor, I take thy want of manners ill,
Do come to supper to me, with thy bill?
Have thou no time, but come at candle light?
Or do thou fear I mean to vanish quite?
My choler tells thee, thou art a botching slave,
Thy Iourny-man, a very pricklowse knave.
My Sattin-sute is most malignant made;
Go burn thy bill, and so resolve thou art paid:
And cutter-out think you are a happy man
To escape my fury thus, sirrah I can,
Arest you for the spoiling of my stuff,
And yet that action shall not be enough,
I have at least several nine or ten
To teach a knave, how he wrongs gentlemen:
As making it according to French-nation,
When I should have it of the Spanish-fashion.
Then bringing it in June home, past your day,
When I should had it seen at court it May.
Then for two lice (I will be sworn I found)
Upon my Pickadilly, creeping round,
But since thou art poor, I some compassion taking
Will punish thee, with, nothing for the making.
The Roaring-boy, and his Punke.
PVnck I lack money, how have thriu'd to day?
To morrow I have laid a plot will pay,
And strap thou shall have interrest to boot,
Count me a villain if I fail to doot.
Apox upon thee, roaring rogue (quoth she)
When we should get I wonder where you be:
Here was a city-young-man, by this token,
Search you the purse, a pretty youth well spoken,
And says on thursday heel be here again,
With him let me alone, I have his vain:
But I lacked you to swagger with a gull,
A gallant that had crowns his pockets full,
A shame light on thee, had thou then come in
And cursed, and swore thou had my husband bin,
The fearful slave, would willingly compound,
Rather then in a baudy house be found,
Be here on monday-night in any case,
I shall have an Italian then in chase,
Besides a Dutchman comes to try a Punke
Swagger it bravely then, be soundly drunk.
The Gull, and the Domineering Constable.
Sir, what are you? where is your dwelling place?
Sirs bring the Lantern, let me see his face.
Do know him Beadle? Surely sir not I.
Ant please your worship I do lodge hereby,
I have bin forth at supper with a friend.
Tell me of supper, tut a puddings end
You kiss the Counter sir that is flat,
I Will teach you know my place deserves a hat.
Ant please your worship, I confess it does
But pardon me, my head's not well in sooth.
You think all hours of the night to march
Because you are in your yellow close-stoole starch.
Have not Tobacco, and a tynder box?
The knave may fire the town, have him to stocks*
Please your good worship not a Pipe I have.
Do think I sit here to keep sheep thou knave?
No sir, with reverent magistrates I match
Your worship, and the gentlemen, your watch,
Well sir since your duty does appear,
I am content, this time you shall go clear.
Depart in peace, and play no knauish pranckes,
I give your worships all, most humble thanks.
Terrible news, for Taber and Pipe.
AN odd companion, walking up and down,
To pipe a living out from town to town:
Being at a Wedding busy at his play,
Forgetting danger of his tedious way,
Belated was, yet be it ill or good,
He did resolve to wander through a wood.
And as he went with knap-sacke full of scrapps,
And Taber at his back, by fortune happs
That he far off by Moone-light chanced to see,
A cruel Bear, which forced him take a tree,
The beast, with sudden speed came feircely to it
And fell to scrape and scratch about the root.
Poor Taborer so scared was with the Bear,
He sweat and trembled, in a stinking fear.
At length he thought upon his wedding scraps
And threw them to the Bear, to fill his chaps.
Who for the time from mining did refrain;
But eating all, fell hard to work again.
Oh now (quoth he) I have no hope at all,
The tree begins to shake, and I must fall,
Adieu my friends this Bear will me deuouer,
Yet as a farewell at my dying hour,
Even in dispight of Paris-garden foes
I Will have a fit, as hard as this world goes,
And so betakes him, to his Pipe and Tabor,
And does them does, so sound and brave belabor,
The Bear amazed from his scratching runs
As if at's breech had bin a peale of guns,
Which when the Taborer with joy did see,
Well Bear (he said) if this your humor be,
Would I had known to use the charming feate,
You should have daunc'd, before you had my meat
So down he comes, and without longer staying,
Through the wood goes homeward, al night playing;
Then sends for all his friends, that they may hear
The story of the Piper and the Bear,
Vowing his Tabor was more dear to him,
Then was Arions harp, when he did swim
Upon the Dolphins back, most safe a shore,
And that same Instrument for euer-more
As monument, unto Tompipers race,
Should show his valor, and the Bears disgrace.
To all slothful Servants.
I Often in the night (as I do fly)
See burning houses flaming to the sky,
At which most dreadful accidents that fall,
A sudden terror terrifieth all,
People amazed crying fire, fire,
And in perplexed manner help require
Some in their beds consumed to ashes quite,
And some for ever frantic with the fright,
Some wealthy men at setting of the Sun,
And ere the rising, beggars clean undone.
And when that people seriously inquire,
How all this great misfortune comes by fire;
The common answer is, (and it is too true)
Most slothful servants, it is long of you,
You that no care do in your callings take,
Nor christian conscience of your ways do make,
To look unto your fire and your light;
Of which in duty you have ouer-sight,
But slight the danger that to other grows
Because your selves have nothing for to loose;
Assure you this, a careless queen or knave,
Even such as they have bin, shall servants have.
A wicked Wife.
IN darkesome shade of melancholy night,
There did appear to one, a walking sprite,
Which put him in a fearful fit to see,
At length unto Hobgoblin thus said he,
If thou belong to God, and bear good mind,
Thou will not use me cruel and unkind,
Because no hurtful things to him belong,
That will do us (poor humane creatures) wrong,
But if thou do pertain unto the Devil,
Yet for his sake forbear to do me evil,
For I have married late, a lump of sin
Which is his sister, therefore pray for kin
That is between the devil and my wife,
Affright me not with fear of limb, or life.
Have thou (quoth he) nay then if it be so,
I will not urge thee unto further woe:
A wicked wife, cross upon cross begins,
She Is plague enough, to plague thee for thy sins.
A wounded Drunkard.
A Drunkard, (whom the cup did tardy catch)
Came very late a reeling through the watch,
Who called him with the common who goes there?
But he in staggers would not seem hear,
The Constable, (with drowsy Bill-men mand)
Said sirrah, in the Kings name look you stand.
What rebel knave (quoth he) wilt not obey?
So looking by their Lantern, down he lay
And to the watchmen, holding up his hand,
Said now I charge you all to help me stand,
Or else in sober sadness, (you fox getters,)
I Will make you anuswere it before your betters,
Mark what I say, for now I charge you all,
To make me stand, and look I do not fall.
With that they got him on his legs and staid him,
Saying here is the Constable, you disobay'd him,
And were it not for shame, (base drunken clown)
We would (as we may lawful) knock thee down.
With that he fell unto the ground again
And cried out murder, murder, I am slain,
My scull is cleft, they have put out mine eyes,
And cut off both my legs, Hosts, Dick dies.
Like Mistress like Maid.
Svsan, would meet with Richard and with Ned,
As Soon as ere her mistress was a bed,
For a Sack-posset they agreed to eat,
And she besides would have a bit of meat,
And so be merry, that they would in sadness.
But even about the time of mirth and gladness,
When both the young men were bestowed within,
One that had long her mistress lover bin,
Knocks at the door, whereat her self came down
(As loose of body as she was of gown)
And in the dark put Letcher in the room,
Where both the youths attend till Susan come,
Who in mean time to light a candle went,
So did her mistress for the same intent,
And meeting with her maid, oh strange (quoth she)
What cause have you at this time here to be?
Mistress (quoth she) unto you i will be true,
There Is two as honest youths as ere I knew,
Came late to see me, (pray you be content)
Wench this may be (said she) and no hurt meant,
For there is an honest man, to make them three,
That came in kindness for to viset me,
Good Susan be as secret as you can,
Your master is foolish Jealous man,
Though thou and I, do mean no hurt or ill,
Yet men take women in the worst sense still,
And fear of horns, more grief in hearts has bred
Then wearing horns does hurt a cuckolds head.
A Shifters Rifling.
MOst loving friends on Thursday next at night
One master Needy, kindly does inuit
Some four or three score gallants (at the least)
To rifle forhis Nag, a passing beast,
That he indeed did borrow of a friend,
But being come unto his iournies end,
And finding it is no good husbands way,
To be at horse expense for oats and hay,
Which idle stands and pampers in the stable,
Besides himself unwilling, purse unable,
To be at further charges with the Jade,
Will rifle him, his friend can be but paid
As they shall afterward agree of price,
When he his horse-play has performed at dice.
Each a Iacobus, come in any wise,
His whole estate, upon the bu'snesse lies,
His money wants and patience now perforce
Depends upon the credit of this horse,
Fail not his rifeling therefore but come to it
Or you ore-throw a gallant horse and foot.
Quarrel upon debate.
TWo chanced to fall at some dissension late,
And waxing weary of their fond debate
Wherein (like fools) law-money might be spent,
Agreed to put it to arbitterment,
Each of an honest friend did make his choice,
And bound themselves to their awarding voice,
The arbitrators met to end the Iar,
And argued matters in a heat so far,
That knave, and knave between them both was dealt,
And so from words, the force of fists they felt,
Their noses bled, their eyes were black and blew,
As feirce a buffet fray, as ere you knew.
At length those twain they met for to make friends,
Came in, to hear their matter how it ends,
And what award they did intend to make.
Quoth th'arbitrators; Masters for your sake,
We met together, your debates to smother,
And very soundly we have beat each other,
Now as your selves mean to be dealt withal,
Take up our matter, ere we end your brall,
We two that came your quarells to discuss,
Do now want two to cese debate for us.
He has little to care for, that has little to lose.
VIllains by night into a Kytchin brake,
Supposing brass, and pewter thence to take.
The good-wife heard them, and her husband calls,
Telling him thieves were breaking through the walls
And therefore to prevent them willed him rise,
Quoth he (kind wife) I am not so unwise.
To put my self in danger causeless so,
The night is dark as any pitch you know,
And if they there can find out goods by night,
When thou and I, see nothing by day light,
I Will say they conjure or do use some charm,
For there is naught to lose can do us harm
Wife let us both laugh at them in our sleeves,
That with our empty kitchen we gull thieves.
An English Canniball.
A Roreing boy, (of the late damned making)
Sat moneylesse, alone, Tobacco taking,
For he had thriu'd so well by candlelight,
He lost ten pound by eight a clock at night,
So cursing dice and Fortune for this wrong
A saucy Fiddler offers him a song,
Ha, song quoth he? Sir wilt sell thy Boy?
I have an use for such a kind of toy.
Why sir (said he) what will you put him too?
Eat him (quoth he) that I intend to do.
Sad melancholy makes my senses weary,
And that same boy shall make me inward merry,
The Fiddler down the stayres with all have hies,
Quick boy be gone (says he) one of us dies,
The diuell's in him sure, and he may fall,
To eat us up alive, fiddles and all,
Some greedy plannet certainly does strike-him,
He has a hungry look, I do not like-him,
Yet for his diet we are most unmeet,
Because through fear, there is neither of us sweet.
A Fool probatum.
A Grave Physician, in the night at's book,
(That did dame Natures secrets ouer-looke,)
Found (amongst other things) this one worth hearing
That a long beard was but a foolish wearing,
With that he took the candle and the glass,
And went to see what size his own beard was,
Which as he viewd, and did stroking handle,
He set the same on fire, by the candle
Burning it suddenly unto his chin,
Which had before down to his middle bin,
Now do I find (quoth he) it is a true note
That he which is long bearded (like a Got)
Is but a fool, my self can this protest,
So set it down in's book Probatum est.
Jesting turned to good earnest.
GEntlemen kindly in a Tavern met,
And as they all to supper down were set,
Came in a Iester, (unto some there known,)
Who at the table boldly makes one,
Where like an impudent audacious ass
He turns his foolish idle scoffs to pass,
Not caring whom, nor how he did abuse:
But one amongst the rest, whom he did choose
To play upon, and in a vain to run
Did quiet put up all, till supper done,
Then rising, came and took him by the hand,
And said familiar sir, I understand
The ripeness of your wit to break a jest
It seems your brain is busily possessed
To utter all your humor does allow,
And therefore for your boldness with me now,
Although I cannot break a jest, I say,
Yet I can break your pate, take that I pray.
Go to the Barbers shop, and there reueale-it,
And Jest a plaster out of him to heale-it.
The Horn Plague.
INto a jealous passion one did fall,
And kept his bed, not being sick at all.
A friend of his did come to see him, and
The cause of his not being well demand.
Tell me (quoth he) where do you feel your pain?
In head or heart, where does your grief remain?
What member is it that is ill affected,
That Physic may the better be directed?
Truly (said he) of head I not complain,
Nor does my heart partake of any pain.
Nor lights nor lungs, nor kidnes do torment,
But an ill Liver is my discontent:
And none can help it better then my wife,
If she would seek to mend her queanish life;
It Is this bad -Liver does the horn plague breed,
Which day and night my Jealous thoughts does feed.
The Tragedy of Smug the Smith.
A Smith for felony was apprehended,
And being condemned for having so offended,
The townes-men, with a general consent
Unto the Judge, with a petition went,
Affirming that no smith did near them dwell,
And for his Art they could not spare him well,
For he was good at edge-toole, lock and key,
And for a Farrier, most rare man (quoth they.)
The discreet Judge, unto the clownes replied,
How shall the Law be justly satisfied?
A thief that steals must dye therefore, that is flat.
Oh sir said they, we have a trick for that:
Two Weauers dwelling in our town there are,
And one of them we very well can spare,
Let him be hanged we very humbly crave,
Nay hang them both so we the Smith may have,
The Judge he smyled at their simple jest,
And said the Smith would serve the hangman best.
Of two evils choose the least.
A Scriuener (about nine a clock at night)
Sat close in's shop, and earnestly did write,
The villainy abroad suspecting not,
While two observing him, thus laid a plot,
Quoth one to the other, snatch thou off his hat:
The which he did, and ran away with that:
The Scriuener in have his shop forsakes,
And for to overtake him undertakes,
So while he follows him that runs away
The other rascal watching for his pray,
Enters the shop as bold as bold might be,
And takes his cloak and so away goes he.
Scriuener comes back, bare headed as he went,
Missing his cloak was far worse discontent,
Quoth he what case am I brought in to night,
Of hat and cloak being uncased quite?
I will not cry Hamlet Revenge my greeues,
But I will call Hangman Revenge on thieves.
To the City and Suburbs.
There Is not a night I fly throughout the year,
Be it obscurely dark, or Moon light clear,
But I behold abuses things unmeet,
By such as do untimely haunt the street.
I hear a knocking at your City gates,
By your good-fellowes, with their drunken pates:
I note the places of polluted sin
Where your kind wenches and their bawds put in.
I know the houses where base cheaters use,
And note what Gulls (to work upon) they choose,
I take a notice what your youth are doing,
When you are fast a sleep, how they are woing
And steal together by some secret call,
Like Piramus and Thisby through the wall,
I see your prentises what pranks they play,
And thing you never dream on can bewray,
But i will give warning first, for reformation,
Which if it fail then of another fashion
I Will tell a tail, some will be loath to hear,
Therefore let these amend and i will forbear.
The coniuring of a Spirit.
A Seruing-man, his fellow did persuade,
To play the spirit and make a clown afraid,
Thou know (quoth he) Tom of his manhood boasts
That he like butter-flies esteems all Ghoasts,
Thou shall at night under a stayre-case stand
Bound in a sheet, the dogs chain in thy hand,
And as that way toward bed he does prepare
Thou like a Ghoast, most bravely shall him scare.
Content (quoth he) withal my heart agreed,
I am the man that will perform the deed.
Fitted at night, under the stayres he got,
The other he reueales the bug-beare plot,
Saying Tom take thou a cudgel, and rib roast him.
Let me alone (quoth Tom) I will be ghost him.
So coming to the place, the spirit groans,
Tom with his cudgel, well bebasts his bones.
Hold, hold, (quoth he) for Gods love, (I protest)
I am no devil, but a spirit in jest,
Untie the sheet, behold me by the light,
I Will kill the rogue, that made me play the spirit.
The Gallant, and his brother Beggar.
A Stately gallant in his fashions brauing,
A beggar followed, and alms went craving
Good gentleman (quoth he) some succor grant,
To a poor man in misery and want.
Sirrah (said he) there is four farthings take them,
Oh (quoth the beggar) all men now forsake them,
Kind gentleman, afford to your poor brother,
Some silver piece will pass from one t'another.
Brother (said he) how came that neerenesse in?
I pray which way are we become of kin?
Sir (quoth the beggar) brothers we may call
Cause Adam was the father of us all,
Sure brother beggar, it is true (quoth he)
And this is all the hurt I wish to thee
All Adams sons alive under the Sun,
Would give their brother but as I have done,
Yet then I fear the Proverb would prove right
A beggar set on horseback nere would light.
A mad voyage for old Moons.
A Merchant lost by shipwreck all he had,
And thereupon he fell distracted mad,
But in the humors of his frantic fits,
He plotted matters did amaze good wits,
As to have plowes to go with canuas sails,
And meat well boyld, and sod in wooden payles,
With many matters he did strange, project,
Whereof a number came to some effect,
But a rare voyage came at last in's head,
Should stand the commonwealth in wondrous stead
Only one trade he would undo thereby,
(The Chaundlers he did hate exceedingly)
And therefore (quoth he) to his friends, you know
That every month there does a new Moon grow,
And then the old gives place to that, you see,
I Will make a voyage, where the old ones be,
(You cannot be in th'Indies half so soon,)
Then will I sell to every man a Moon,
And that shall give him all his life time light
And thus i will beggar all the Chaundlers quite.
Mistaking in the dark.
CHaucer, amongst his merry jests does write,
Of one that went a woing in the night,
It being extreme dark, as dark might be,
Unto the widows window comes he,
And there entreats her favor for a kiss,
And she affords him, such a one as it is,
Opening the casement, to her clownish friend
She turns out to his lips her lower end,
Which past away for current in the dark,
A better man might so mistake the mark,
And like to him have go away with thanks.
Well this was one of Chaucers widows pranks.
But we have diverse night men now a days,
That in the dark become such wilful straies,
When they should go unto their wives chaste bed,
Do get unto the maids, in mistress stead.
And so the ancient proverb does allow,
That Ioanes as good, as is my lady now,
But he whose honest wife cannot suffice him
I wish the Surgeons tools might circumcise him.
The Constable cannot do it.
A Warrant to a Constable was sent,
Of special charge, disorder to prevent,
(Which was suspected from men ill inclind,)
All those he after ten a clock did find,
He should disarme of weapons they did bear,
Not suffering any one a dagger wear.
A humorous odd fellow heard the same,
And to the constable he serious came,
Sir (quoth he) hearing you have oversight
For to disarme all weaponed men by night,
I do entreat you, for your office sake,
A rapire and a dagger you would take
From one that is armed, and a man I fear
A Broker, that my weapons now does bear,
If Load-stone-like by you they could be drawn,
From, (Day's broke,) that has them now in pawn,
My credit (sir) would be sharp set again,
Which now lies desperate rusting in Long-lane.
Mistress Newfangle.
HOw am I plagued with a scuruy maid?
In all I do command her, disobay'd,
To no good quallity she does inclyne
But she is my husbands servant none of mine,
It is his will to have her in the house,
But if I find his Flea, or body Lowse,
Between my sheets, (as I do shrewd suspect,)
I Will have their itch killd in Bridewell direct.
Set her to starch a band, (I vow it is true)
She ever spoils the same with too much blew.
Last night she served me, a most roguish trick,
Fell fast a sleep, and burnd my poking stick,
Nay heard you of a verier queen then this,
She laid my Fan where rats and mise did piss.
And calling hasty for my Mask and Fan,
She was at her Tobacco with our man,
And brought it to me smelling so of smoke,
That almost for to sound it did provoke.
If that it had not fortuned so well,
That I had on my perfumed gloves to smell:
Pray speak, had you this vexer and abuser,
And were thus plagued as I, how would you use her?
The valiant Butcher.
Four thieves, that all the day had bin to take,
At night between themselves would even make
Within a wood under a hedge on ground
They spread a cloak, and sat about it round,
And there their monyes equally divide
Into four parts, laying to each man's side
His share according to th'amounting sum,
Thus as they sat, a Butcher chaunc'd to come
A long the hedge, who sound of voice did hear,
And prying softly through, saw money there,
Bouldly resolved to share it from them all:
Breaks through with his staff and loud did call,
Here masters here, the villains are we look,
Come through quick, with that the thieves forsook
Money and cloak, and take themselves to run,
That they the danger of their necks might shun,
Constrained by guilt and put to flight by fear.
As if a hundred armed men were there,
The Butcher took the money and the clooke,
And to himself in joyful manner spoke,
Here Is the best match, that I have made of long
As speech is used, I Will pocket up thi^ (...)
The Conclusion.
ALL you usurpers of the nights dark hours,
(As though those times, were for abuses yours)
Drunk in the Tauerns, making Alehouse scores,
And in Tobacco shops, smoking like-Moores,
You that with Fox and Wolf, by night do pray,
For that must feed your theeuish throats next day,
You that are inmates to the devils Inns, Baudy houses.

Filled with corruption of the rotten sins,
You in a word, that are most vile, most base,
And live like men that have renounced grace,
When you do act the devils reuells thus
(More black of souls, then blackest Crow of us)
If you but saw what ugly feinds of Hell,
Embrace you, for your pleasing them so well,
And how about you numberles they swarm,
And with the Seven deadly sins do charm
Your sinful lusts, to draw you down to Hell,
You would reform your ways, with doing well,
Arming your selves against the devil stronger,
And so be children of the night no longer.
FINIS.

