SIR BENJAMIN RVDIERD HIS SPEECH IN BEHALF OF THE CLERGY, AND OF Parishes
miserably destitute of Instruction, through want of Maintenance.

CONFIRMED BY THE Testimonies of Bishop JEWEL, Master PERKINS, and Sir HENRY
SPELMAN.

DEVTER. 33.11. Bless O Lord Leuies substance, and accept the work of his
hands; Smite thorough the Loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again.

Printed at Oxford, 1628. And are to the sold by Ph. Stephens and Chapter Meredith
at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

SIR BENJAMIN RVDDIERD 'S speech in behalf of the Clergy.
Mr Pimne. I did not think to have spoken again to this bill, because I was
willing to believe that the forwardnes of this Commit would have prevented
me, but now I do hold my self bound to speak, and to speak in earnest.

In the first year of the King, and the second convention, I first moved for
the increase and enlargement of poor Ministers Livings; I showed how necessary
it was to be done, how shameful it was, that it had been so long neglected.
This was also commended to the House by his Matv. There were then, as now, many
accusations on foot against scandalous Ministers. I was bold to tell the
House, that there were scandalous Livings too which were much the cause of the
other: Livings of five Marks, of five pounds a year, that men of worth and of
parts would not be mufled vpto such pittances. And that there were some places
in England, which were scarce in Christendom, where God was little better
known then amongst Indians. I exampled it in the utmost skirts of the North,
where the prayers of the common people, are more like spells and charms then
devotions; the same blindness and ignorance is in diverse parts of Wales, which
many of that Country do both know and lament.

I declared also, that to plant good Ministers in good Livings, was the
strongest and surest means to establish true religion, that it would prevail
more against papistry then the making of new laws, or executing of old. That
it would counterworke courte-conscience and luckewarme accommodation. That
though the calling of Ministers be never so glorious within, yet outward
poverty will bring contempt upon them, especially amongst those, who measure
men by the acre, and weigh them by the pound, which indeed is the greatest
part of men.

Mr Pimne, I cannot, but testify how being in Germany, I was exceedingly
scandalized to see the poor stipendiary Ministers of the reformed Churches
there despised and neglected by reason of their poverty, being otherwise very
grave and learned men. I am afraid that this is a part of the burden of
Germany, which ought to be a warning to us.

I have heard many objections and difficulties even to impossibilities against
this bill: to him that is unwilling, there is ever a bear or a lion in the
way. First let us make our selves willing, then will the way be easy and safe
enough.

I have observed, that we are always very eager and fierce against papistry,
against scandalous Ministers, and against things which are not much in our
power; I should be glad to see that we did delight as well in rewarding as in
punishing, and in undertaking matters within our own reach, as this is
absolutely within our power. Our own duties are next us, other men's farther
off: I do not speak this, that I do mislike the destroying or putting down
of that which is ill, but then let us be as earnest to plant and build up that
which is good in the room of it; for why should we be desolate. The best
and the gentlest way to dispell darkness, is, to let in the light; we say
that day breaks, but no man ever heard the noise of it; God comes in the still
voice; let us quietly mend our. Candlestickes, and we cannot want lights.

I am afraid this backwardnes of ours, will give the adversary occasion to
say, that we choose our religion, because it is the cheaper of the two; that
we would willingly serve God with somewhat that would cost us naught.
Believe it Mr Pimne, he that thinks to save any thing by his religion, but his
soul, will be a terrible looser in the end. We sow sparingly, that's the
reason we reap so sparingly, and have no more fruit. Me thinks whosoever
hates papistry, should by the same rule hate covetousnes, for that is idolatry
too. I never liked hot professions and cold actions. Such an heat is rather
the heat of distemper and disease, then of life and saving health.

For scandalous Ministers, there is no man shall be more forward to have them
severely punished, than I will be: when salt has lost his savor, let it be
cast out upon the unsavory place, the dunghill. But Sir, let us deal with
them, as God has dealt with us. God before he made man, made the world, an
handsome place for him to dwell in; so let us provide them convenient livings,
and then punish them in Gods name, but till then scandalous livings cannot but
have scandalous Ministers. It shall ever be a rule to me, that where the
Church and commonwealth are both of one religion, it is comely and decent,
that the outward splendor of the Church, should hold a proportion, and
participate with the prosperity of the temporal state: for why should we
dwell in houses of Cedars, and suffer God to dwell in skins.

It was a glorious and religious work of King James, (I speak it to his
unspeakable honor, and to the praise of that Nation, who though their
Country be not so rich as ours, yet are they richer in their affections to
Religion) within the space of one year he caused to be planted Churches
through all Scotland, the Highland and the Borders, worth 30l a year a piece,
with a house and some glebe land belonging to them; which 30l a year,
considering the cheapenes of the Country, and the modest fashion of Ministers
living there, is worth double as much, as any where within an 100. miles of
London. The printed Act and Commission whereby it was executed, I have here in
my hand, delivered to me by a noble Gent. Of that nation, and a worthy member
of this house Sir Francis Steward.

To conclude, though Christianity and Religion be established generally
throughout this kingdom, yet until it be planted more particularly, I shall
scarce think this a Christian Commonwealth. And seeing it has been moved
and showed in Parliament, it will lie heavy upon Parliaments, until it be
effected. Let us do something for God here of our own; and no doubt God will
bless our proceedings in this place the better for ever hereafter. And for
mine own part, I will never give over soliciting this cause as long as
Parliaments and I live together.

TO confirm the complaint of this worthy and religious Knight: there follows
the testimony of two excellent men of God, whose piety and zeal may move some
to consider of the matter more seriously, then they have done hitherto,
especially if they will please to read what is written more at large in
their sermons of this argument.

The Reverend and learned Bishop Jewel in his sermon before Queen Elizabeth
on Psalm. 69.9. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up. says thus. In
England, since the Gospel has been received, the maintenance of learning
has been decayed; and the lack of learning will be the decay of the
Gospel. Loath I am to speak, yet the case so requires, that it is needful to
be spoken: I trust I shall speak in the hearing of them that will consider
it. Maintenance of learning whereby an able and sufficient Ministry may grow
and be established in all the Churches of this Realm, is to be wished for.
The good estate of this noble Kingdom, the comfort of posterity, the stay of
religion, the continuing of the Gospel, the removing of darkness hangs
upon it. One asked sometimes how it was, that in Athens, so good and great a
City, there were no Physicians: to whom this answer was made, because
there are no rewards appointed for them that practice physic. The same
answer may be made for our times; the cause why the Church of God is so
forsaken, is the want of zeal in them that should either for their courtesy,
or for their ability be fosterers of learning, and increase the Livings, where
occasion is, and give hope and comfort to learned men. What said I? increase?
nay the Livings and provisions which heretofore were given, are taken away.

Have patience, if any such be here (as I well know there are) whom these
things touch. Suffer me to speak the truth, it is Gods cause; the Livings of
such, as are in the Ministry, are not in their hands, to whom they are due.
All other laborers and artificers have their hire increased double as much as
it was wont to be; only the poor man that labors and sweateth in the
vineyard of the Lord of hosts has his hire abridged and abated.

I speak not of the Curates, but of the Parsonages and Vicarages, that is of
the places, which are the castles and towers of fence for the Lords temple.
They seldom pass now adays from the patron, if he be no better than a
gentleman, but either for the lease, or for present money. Such merchants are
broken into the Church of God, a great deal more intolerable, then were
they, whom Christ vvhipped and chased out of the Temple. Thus they that should
be careful for Gods Church, that should be patrons to provide for the
consciences of the people, and to place among them a learned minister, who
might be able to preach the Word unto them, out of season, and in season, and
to fulfill his ministry, seek their own, and not which is Jesus Christ's.
They serve not Jesus Christ, but their belly. And this is done, not in one
place, or in one country, but throughout England. A gentleman cannot keep his
house, unless he have a Parsonage or two in farm for his provision.

O merciful God! vvhereto will this grow at last? if the misery which this
plague works would reach but to one age, it were the more tolerable: but
it will be a plague to the posterity, it will be the decay and desolation
of Gods Church: young men which are toward and learned see this, they see,
that he which feeds the flock has least part of the milk; he which goes
a warfare, has not half his wages; therefore they are weary and
discouraged, they change their studies, some become prentises, some turn to
physic, some to law, all shun and fly the ministry. And besides, the
hinderance that thus grows by the wicked dealing of patrons, by reason of
the Impropriations, the vicarages in many places, and in the properest market
towns, are so simple that no man can live upon them, and therefore no man
will take them. They were wont to say, Beneficia sine cura; benefices
without charge: but now may be said, Cura sine beneficio: charge or care
without benefit.

But there be many which can say, such as be ministers in the Church should
teach freely, without hope of recommence, or hire for their labor; our
preachers are no bettet than Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles. They are
no better than the holy Prophets, who lived poorly, poverty is a commendable
state, So say some in like devotion, as did Judas. What needs this waste?
this might have been sold for much and given to the poor, not that he cared
for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare that
which was given. I doubt not there are many which teach Christ for Christ's
sake, which say in their soul, the Lord is my portion; who seek you and not
yours; I doubt not there are such.

But for the hope of posterity, I report me to all you which are Fathers and
have children, for whom you are careful: although your selves have a zeal
and care for the house of God, yet will you breed them up, keep them at
school, and at the University, until 30. or 40. years old, to your great
charges, to the end, they may live in glorious poverty, that they may live
poorly and naked like the Prophets and Apostles. Our posterities shall rue
that ever such Fathers went before them, and chronicles shall report this
contempt of learning, among the punishments and murraines, and and other
plagues of God, they shall leave it written in what time, and under whose
reign this was done.

In the mean time, what may be guessed of their meaning, who thus ruin and
spoil the house of God, which decay the provision thereof, and so basely
esteem the Ministers of his Gospel? they cannot say to God, the zeal of
thine house has eaten me up: howsoever in other things they do well;
howsoever they seem to rejoice at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek the
safety and preservation of the Lords anointed: yet needs must it be, that by
these means foreign power, of which this Realm by the mercy of God, is
happily delivered, shall again be brought in upon us. Such things shall be done
unto us, as we before suffered in the times of popery; the truth of God shall
be taken away, the holy Scriptures burnt and consumed in fire, a marveilous
darkness and calamity must needs ensue. etc.

The ox that treads out the corn is musled, he that goes to warfare,
receives not his wages, the cry hereof goes up into the ears of the Lord of
hosts; he will not abide so great contempt of his word and preachers, his
own name is thereby dishonored: our Savior says: Luc. 10. he that
despises you, despises me. and Saint Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. he that despises
these things, despises not man but God; and think we, that he will suffer
his holy name to be despised? nay his wrath is already kindled, he has
already begun his judgments, and therefore many places are left desolate,
there is none that can warn them of their sin, none that can move them to
repentance, none that can preach unto them forgiveness through Christ, none that
can instruct them in the comfort of everlasting life.

For this cause you live still in your sins, in adultery, in covetoussnes,
and in pride, without any feeling of conscience, without any fear of God, thus
we provoke God to anger; many walk (of whom we cannot think but with
weeping) they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ; the name of God is
blasphemed among them. etc. These words happily seem sharp and over vehement,
but the darkness of our hearts against God, and the lack of zeal for his
house, enforce me to them: we are almost fallen into the lowest pit; we are
left without zeal as senseless men, and as if we had clean forgotten our
selves, as the Heathens which know not God: therefore unless we repent, the
kingdom of God shall be taken away from us: he will send upon this land a
famine of the word. Jerusalem shall be overthrown and made an heap of stones,
the man of Sin, and they which have not the love of the truth shall prevail
with many, and withdraw them from obedience to the Prince; this noble Realm
shall be subject to foreign nations; all this will the zeal of the Lord of
hosts bring to pass.

I could have spent thy time in opening of some other matter, but nothing, in
my judgment, is more worthy your good consideration and speedy redress, etc.
Wherefore he concludes with a grave exhortation to her Majesty, as follows.

O that Your Grace did behold the miserable disorder of Gods Church, or that
you might forsee the calamities that will follow! It is a part of your
kingdom, and such a part, as is the principal prop and stay of the rest: I
will say to your Majesty, as Cyrillus sometimes said to the godly Emperors,
Theodosius and Valentinian, Ab ea quae erga Deum est pietate Reipub. vestrae
status pendet, The good state and vvelfare of your commonweal hangs upon
true godliness, you are our governor, your are the nurse of Gods Church, We
may open this grief before you; God knows if it may be redressed it is
run so far: But if it may be redressed, there is no other besides your
highness, that can redress it. I hope I speak truly that which I speak
without flattery, that God has endued your Grace with such measure of learning
and knowledge as no other Christian Prince; He has given you peace, happiness,
the love and the hearts of your Subjects. Oh turn and employ these to the
glory of God, that God may confirm in your Grace the thing which he has
begun. To this end has God placed Kings and Princes in their State, as David
says, that they serve the Lord, that they may see, and cause others to see to
the furniture of the Church. The good Emperor Justinian cared for this as
much, as for his life. Constantine, Theodosius, and Valentinian, and other
godly Princes called themselves vassales, the subjects and bond-servants of
God. They remembered that God furnished them in their houses, and were not
unmindful to furnish his house.

When Augustus had beautified Rome, with setting up many fair buildings, he
said. inveni lateritiam, marmoream reliqui. I found it made of brick, but I
leave it made of marble. Your Grace, when God sent you to your inheritance and
the right of this Realm, found the Church in horrible confusion, and in
respect of the true worship of God, a Church of brick; or rather, as Ezekiel
says, dawbed up with untempered mortar. Your Grace has already redressed the
doctrine, now cast your eyes toward the Ministry, give courage and
countenance unto learning that Gods house may be served: So shall you leave a
Church of God, and a testimony that the zeal of the Lords house has eaten you
up.

Let us have care for the house of God, whosoever is not after this sort
zealous, is a man of a double heart, we may not halt between two opinions: If
the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal be he, then go after him. He that is
not with Christ is against him. Many talk of the Gospel, and glory in their
knowledge, but it is neither talk nor knowledge, which shall save them in that
day: he that fears the Lord, and serves him with a pure heart, and may
truly say, the zeal of thine house has consumed me, he shall be saved; if
they shall not escape, which have zeal without knowledge, what shall become of
us which have knowledge without zeal.

And you whosoever you are, that have decayed the Lords house, and abridged the
provision and maintenance thereof, and see the miserable wrack of Gods Church,
if there be any zeal of God in you, if you have any fellowship of the spirit,
if any compassion and mercy, if you love God, if you desire the continuance of
the Gospel; Oh remember you have the patrimony due to them that should attend
in the Lords house; you take unto your selves wrongfully that which was not
lotted for you. Give unto Caesar those things that belong unto Caesar, and unto
God the things which appertain unto him, and make for the beauty and furniture
of his house. Enrich your selves by lawful means, and without the spoil and
waste of Gods Church. Let not the Ministry by your means be despised. You
enriched them heretofore in the days of Popery, which mocked, and blinded, and
devoured you: spoil not them now, that feed, and instruct and comfort you.

That reverend man of God Mr Perkins in his sermon of the duties and dignities
of the Ministry gives 3. reasons of the rareness and scarceness of good
Ministers. The first is, the contempt and disgrace of their calling by wicked
and worldly men. 2. The difficulty of discharging the duties of their calling.
The 3. reason is more peculiar to this age of the new Testament namely: Want of
maintenance and preferment for men that labor in this calling. Men are flesh
and blood, and in that respect must be allured and won to embrace this
vocation by some arguments, which may persuade flesh and blood: the world has
in all ages bin negligent herein, and therefore God in his law took such
strict order for the maintenance of the Levites; but especially now under the
Gospel, this calling is unprovided for, when it deserves best of all to be
rewarded: certainly it were a worthy Christian policy to propound good
preferments to this calling, that thereby men of the worthyest gifts might be
won with it; and the want thereof is the cause, why so many young men of
special parts and greatest hope, turn to other vocations, and especially to
to the Law, wherein at this day the greatest part of the finest wits of our
Kingdom are employed, and why? but Because they have all the means to rise;
whereas the Ministry for the most part yeldeth nothing but a plain way to
beggerie: this is a great blemish in our Church, and surely I wish the Papists,
those children of this world, were not wiser in their kind in this point then
the Church of God: the reformation hereof is a work worth the labor of a
Prince and people, and special care is to be had in it, else it will not be
reformed: for doubtless had not God himself in the Old Testament taken such
straight order for the livings of the Levites, they had bin put to no less
extremities then is the Ministry of this age, and this reason added to the
other makes them perfect, and all put together make a reason infallible: for
who will undergo so vile a contempt, and undertake so great a charge for no
reward: and where there is so great contempt, so heavy a burden, and so mean
a reward, what Marvel if a good minister be one of a thousand?

Rulers and Magistrates are hereby taught, if good Ministers be so scarce, to
maintain and increase, and do all good they can to the Schools of the
Prophets, to Universities, Colleges and Schools of good learning, which are
the Seminaries of the Ministry: herein the example of Samuel is very worthy to
be followed, in whose days the Schools of the Prophets flourished; and eve^
Saul himself, though he did much hurt in Israel, yet when he came to the
Schools of the Prophets, his heart relented, he could do the^ no hurt, nay he
put of his robes and prophesied amongst them. So should Christian Princes and
Magistrates advance their Schools, and see them both well maintained, and well
stored; the reason is evident and forcible, a good minister is one of a
thousand, if therefore they would have the number increased, let the^ maintain
the Seminaries. And again if Antichrist to uphold his kingdom (the kingdom
of Satan,) be so careful herein to erect Colleges and indow them with livings
to be Seminaries for his Synagogue, and use so great means to sow his tares
in the hearts of young men, that so they may sow them in the hearts of the
people abroad, shall not Christian Princes be as careful, or rather much more
zealous for the increasing of the number of Godly Ministers? shall Baal have
his 400. Prophets and God have his Elias alone? great shame must it be to Ahab,
or to any King, whose kingdom is in that estate.

Add hereunto that passage of an excelling and worthy knight, Sr Henry
Spelman, in his tract, de non temerandis Ecclesiis.

Perhaps Lay Approprietaries think they may hold Parsonages and tithes by
example of Colleges, Deanes and Chapters, Bishops of the land, and of diverse
of our late kings and Princes. Before I speak to this point, I take it by
protestation that I have no heart to make apology for it; For I wish that
every man might drink the water of his own Well, eat the milk of his own
flock, and live by the fruit of his own vineyard: I mean that every member
might attract no other nutriment, but that which is proper to it self: yet are
they greatly deceived that draw any juice of encouragement from these examples,
for all these are either the Seminaries of the Church, or the husbandmen of the
Church, or the Fathers and nurses of the Church; all de familia Ecclesiae, and
consequently belonging to the care of the Church, and ought therefore to be
sustained by it. For Saint Paul says. He that provideth not for his own and
namely for them of his household, he denies the faith; and is worse then an
infidel. 1. Tim. 5. Therefore before the statute of suppression of Abbeys,
those that were not merely Ecclesiastical persons, yet if they were mixed, or
had Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, they might by the laws of the land
participate Ecclesiastical livings, and tithes particularly. And this seems
to take some ground out of the word of God. for the provincial Levites (as I
may term the^) who^ David severed from the Temple, and placed abroad in the
country to be rulers of the people, in matters pertaining to God and the
Kings business, 1 Chronicles. 26.30.32.
(That is spiritually and temporally) had their portion of tithes
notwithstanding, as well as the other Levites that ministered in the Temple.

For a farewell; hear what Saint Augustine says homil. 48. ex lib. 50. homil.
tom. 10. maiores nostri ideo copiis omnibus abundabant quia Deo decimas dabant
and Caesari censum reddebant. Our Auncesters did therefore abound in all riches
because they did pay tithes unto God, and tribute unto Caesar: but now they are
not willing to do either.

Act. 28.24. Some were persuaded with the things that were spoken, and some
believed not.


FINIS.

