A SERMON Preached at Greenwich before the Kings Majesty upon Tuesday in
VVhitson week being the 14. of June. 1603.

By the Reverend Father in God Antonie Rudd, Doctor of Divinity, and Lord
Bishop of Saint David's.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA


LONDON, Imprinted by I. H. for Thomas Man and Clement Knight. 1603.

TO THE Christian Reader.
For So Much as I was at this sermon among other auditors, who judged it very
diuinelike for the matter and the manner of handling of it, and afterward
understood that diverse which hard it preached, and more which did only hear
of it by the report of others were very desirous to have the view either
written, or rather printed: therefore having obtained a copy of it for mine
own use, I thought it expedient to commit it to the press, for the public
good of all such as will vouchsafe to read it with patience, and judge of it by
the rule of charity.

A Sermon preached at Greenwich before the Kings Majesty upon Tuesday in
VVhitsonweek, being the 14. of June. 1603.
Psalm. 101.1. I will sing mercy and judgment, to thee O Lord will I sing.


IN this Psalm the kingly Prophet David declares, how he will behave himself
in his kingdom: first touching his own person: and afterward touching his
subjects, both in the Court, and in the country.

In this first verse of the Psalm, he undertakes or promises to sing; the
dittie of the song is mercy and judgment. The person to whom he sings is
expressed in these words: To thee O Lord will I sing.

In that he assumeth to sing the matter which he has in hand, it implies that
he will do it with joy, with a loud voice, and with his full power. It argues
joy: Iam. 5.13. Psalm. 137.1.2.3.4.
For is any man among you afflicted? let him pray: is any merry? let him sing.
And how should the children of the captivity sing one of the songs of Zion in
a strange land, when they sit mourning and weeping by the rivers of Babell,
where they have hung up their harps upon the willows that grow thereby? And as
a pleasant song requires a merry heart, so does it also a stretched out voice
with great strength put thereunto. So then by this example of David we are
taught in the meditations of our heart, the words of our tongue, and the
actions of our life tending to godliness and justice to do all with
cheerefulnes, feruencie, and to the utmost of our power. For example, in the
case of our inward affection toward God, our duty is, To love the Lord our God
with all our heart, with all our soul, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
and with all our strength. In the matter of Gods worship, joined with the
advancing of his glory, and the furtherance of our salvation: 2. Sam. 6.14.
Behold David daunceth before the Arc with all his might: Of the kingdom of
Christ it is prophesied. thus by the Psalmist: Psalm. 110.3
Thy people shall come willingly at the time of assembling, thine army in holy
beauty. Psalm. 69.9.
The zeal of Gods house did eat up the princely prophet. And from the time of
John the Baptist hitherto, Mat. 11.12
The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, Act. 17.16.
and the violent take it by force. If Paul come to Athens and see the City
subject to Idolatry, his spirit will be stirred within him. And if he and
Barnabas being at Listra perceive the people ready to sacrifice unto them by
the names of Jupiter and Mercury, Act. 14.14.
then they will even rent their clothes in sign of detesting and abhorring it.
Exodus 32.15. unto the 21.
If Moses when he comes down from the Mount understand that the people in
his absence have made a golden Calfe, and given worship unto it, then his wrath
waxes hot, and he casts the tables (which were the work and writing of
God) out of his hands, and breaks them in pieces, and taking the Calfe, he
burns it in the fire, and grindeth it to powder, and stroweth it upon the
water, and makes the children of Israel to drink of it, to despite them of
their Idolatry. If we speak of charitable alms, the^ by S. Paul's rule, The
Lord louech a cheerful giver. 2. Cor. 9.7.
If execution must be done upon the enemies of God and his holy Church, Ier.
48.10.
then Jeremy pronounces him cursed that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Romans 12.11.
We should by Paul's advise to the Romans, Tit. 2.14.
be fervent in spirit. And by his admonition given in the epistle to Titus, we
ought to be zealous of good works. And surely, if any do frame themselves
after the pattern of the Laodiceans who were lukewarm, Apoc. 3.16.
neither hoar nor cold, it will come to pass that God shall spew them out of
his mouth.

To prevent which inconvenience, David here affirms that he will sing this
heavenly dittie of mercy, and judgment: the which words may be construed two
ways, the Analogy of faith preserved. First, in respect of the time past by
way of praise for Gods mercy toward himself, and Gods judgments against his
enemies. Secondly, in regard of the time to come touching the government of the
kingdom by way of practice of mercy toward the good, and of judgment against
the bad.

The first interpretation yields unto us this doctrine in general, that we
should show our selves thankful unto Almighty God for all his benefits
bestowed upon us according to the commandment of God, joined with a
comfortable promise, Psalm. 50.15
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and so will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And after the example of the Psalmist saying: Open thou my lips O
Lord: (that is, Psalm. 51.15.
give me occasion to praise thee) and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. And
if God vouchsafe to deliver David's desolate soul from the sword and the power
of the dog, Psalm. 22.20.21.22.
from the lions mouth, and the horns of the Unicorns; then will David declare
his name unto his brethren and praise him in the midst of the congregation. But
alas if a view be taken of us upon whom the ends of the world be come, it is
to be feared that we shall be found no better in this case, then they were in
the days of our Savior Christ, when as of ten leapers that were cleansed
only one returned to give thanks. Luke. 17.15.16.
And verily so have worldly minded men been usually accustomed to mistake the
original and springhead of the temporal benefits which they receive, that
the Nimrods of the earth which lived in the days of Habacuk, Hab. 1.15.16.
whe^as they took up al with the angle, and catched it in their net, and
gathered it in their yearne, whereof they rejoiced and were glad, then they
sacrificed to their net, and burnt incence to their yearne, because (in their
false imagination) by them their portion became fat, and their meat plenteous;
that is, they flattered themselves, and gloried in their own wit, force, and
power, as though thereby they had gotten all their victories with increase of
wealth and honor, and so they robbed God of his glory.

In revenge of such kind of unthankfulness, when as superstitious people in the
time of Hosea, Hos. 2.5. to the 11.
ascribed unto their lovers (that is, to their Idols) the gift of their bread
and wine, corn and oil, wool and flax, silver and gold, then Almighty God
returned in high displeasure, and took away his corn in the time thereof, and
his wine in the season thereof, and he recovered his wool, and his flax which
he had lent unto them for a time to covet their shame withal.

But David to avoid the like both sin and punishment also thereof, protests
here, that he will sing the mercy of God. I say the mercy of God toward him,
and not his own merits. And hereupon it was that being hardly beset, and
greatly distressed and perplexed in the days of Saul, while his hope of the
kingdom was suspended, he makes his prayer in these terms. Show thy
marvelous mercies, Psalm. 17.7.
thou that art the savior of them that trust in thee from such as resist thy
right hand. And he hops one day to come into the house of God, Psalm. 5.7.
in the multitude of his mercy. Look back to former ages and you shall find
Jacob at his return from Mesopotamia homeward in the way to Canaan being
greatly enriched after the service of almost three apprentiships under Laban,
framing his prayer of thanks giving in this wise. O Lord I am not worthy of
the least of all thy mercies and all the truth, Genesis 32.10
which thou have showed unto thy servant: for with my staff came I over this
Jordan, and now have I gotten two bands. And I conceive assured hope, that by
this example my gracious sovereign does often meditate upon the mercy of God
toward himself, in respect of the great increase of temporal blessings which
he has found and felt, since the time that he first peaceably entered the town
of Berwicke, and so passed over the river of Tweede. And as for us beloved, all
of us which be ranged in the number of subjects, considering on the one side
the manifold and heinous sins, which have formerly reigned amongst us, both
unpunished and unrepented of: and on the other side the fearful dangers that
we have escaped, I can say nothing but that which Jeremy spoke in his
lamentations long ago: Lam. 3.22.
It is the mercies of the Lord the we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. Pray we therefore on the behalf of our King, that it would please
Almighty God to pronounce of him as he spoke in elder time by Nathan of
Solomon: 2. Sam. 7.14.15.
I will be his father, and he shall be my son, and if he sins, I will
chasten him with the rod of men, and with the plagues of the children of men,
but my mercy shall not depart away from him. Pray we likewise for this Church
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, that God would vouchase to hallow it with
that blessed promise which in Isai was uttered over the whole Church of Christ
militant by the spirit of prophecy thus. The mountains shall remove, and the
hills shall fall down: but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall
the covenant of my peace fall away says the Lord, that has compassion on thee.

This done, then may both King and subjects even every of us utter with
joyful cheer that which we read in the Psalm: Psalm. 89.1.
I will sing the mercies of the Lord for ever.

Thus David having already song the mercy of GOD toward himself, he will sing
also the judgment of God toward his enemies. And to begin with his grand and
capital enemy King Saul: after that he had been wounded by the archers of
the Philistines, 1. Sam. 31.3.4.
fearing least the vncircumcissed should have come and thrust him through, and
have mocked him, he took a sword and fell upon it himself: and so a cruel
life had a desperate end. And as for David's chief enemies in the Court among
Saul's fauorties, namely Chush and Doeg, we read the ruin of them both. For
Chush travailed with mischief, and brought forth a lie: he made a pit, and
dug it, Psalm. 7.1.15.16.
and fell into it himself, his mischief returned upon his own head and his
cruelty fell upon his own pate. And after that Doeg had for a space boasted
himself in his wickedness, that being a man of power, he could do mischief,
Psalm. 52.1.5.
at the length God plucked him out of his tabernacle, and rooted him out of the
land of the living. Beside these particulars, God gave unto David the necks of
his enemies in general, Psalm. 18.40.42.
and he did beat them as small as the dust before the wind, and he did tread
them flat as the clay in the streets. Thus let thine enemies perish O Lord, and
the Kings enemies likewise, but let him be as the Sun when he rises in his
might. Iud. 5.31.
And blessed be God who has put into his head to celebrate every Tuesdaye
with public prayer, and preaching in remembrance of Gods mercy toward
himself, The earl of Gowries conpiracie.
and Gods judgment toward his enemies, by that which was acted at Saint
Ionstone upon the fifth of August, in the year 1600.

Now the good that may ensue by the consideration of the fall of Gods and the
Churches enemies, is of two sorts. First, God is thereby magnified, as may
appear is the person of Pharaoh, whom God appointed for this cause, to show
his power in him, Exo. 9.16.
and to declare his name throughout all the world. And in the destruction of
the Babilonians, the earth was filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord, Hab. 2.14.
as the waters cover the Sea. Secondly, men, (if they have grace) may be
thereby edified, according to the confession of the faithful in Isai saying:
Isay. 26.9.
We O Lord have waited for thee, in the way of thy judgments: for seeing
thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world shall learn
righteousness.

Hitherto David has sung mercy and judgment, in respect of the time past by
way of praise and thanksgiving. Now he proceeds to sing the same song in
regard of the time to come, touching the administration of his kingdom by way
of practice, knowing that the duty of princes and public Magistrates, Romans
13.3. 1. Pet. 2.14.
is, to be the ministers of God for the wealth of them that do well by the
exercise of godliness and honesty, and to take vengeance on them that do
evil committing impiety and iniquity. And these two, mercy and judgment,
must go hand in hand, being in association combined together, least if they
were altogether, and utterly severed, then mercy without judgment might turn
into foolish pity, and judgment without any temper of mercy might become
extreme cruelty.

And first to speak of Mercy, happy is that Prince who has the wisdom and
the will to be merciful to whom, and when, and where it is expedient. Pro.
20.28. Psalm. 85.10.
For such mercy and truth preserves the King; and his throne shall be
established with mercy. Moreover happy is that country where mercy and
truth meet together, and so righteousness and peace kiss one another. And
worldly happy are those subjects to whom the prince vouchsafes to show mercy
and loving kindness. For the Kings wrath is like the roaring of a Lion, and as
messengers of death: Pro. 16.14.15. and 19.12.
but in the light of his countenance is life, and his favor is as a cloud of
the latter rain, and like the dew upon the grass. And David well knowing how
laudable and honorable it was to be merciful with discretion, being
established in his kingdom, 2. Sam. 9.1.3.
he made inquiry if there remained yet alive, any of the house of Saul, on
whom he might show the mercy of God (that is, such mercy as is acceptable to
God) for his old dear friend Ionathans sake. And we find it to be a laudable
custom of princes at their first entrance into their kingdoms to show mercy
at their pleasure in this wise, that I may speak in the scripture phrase in
the Psalms, by hearing the mourning of the prisoner, Psalm. 102.20
and delivering the children of death. And in Isai, Isa. 58.7.
by loosing the bands of of wickedness by taking of the heavy burdens, by
letting the oppressed go free, and by breaking every yoke, former extortions,
exactions, and other grievous oppressions: O how fair a thing is this mercy
in the time of anguish and trouble? Eccles. 35.19.
it is like a cloud of rain that comes in the time of drought. Thus can
David show Mercy when he thinks it meet, and Judgment also when the matter
so requires it. For he is not ignorant, that the establishment of the Kings
throne, Prou. 16.12 Isa. 32.17.
is Justice, and judgment: and the (...) thereof is peace. Yea manifold is the
good effect which follows the executing of Justice upon malefactors.

First of all it is profitable to the offenders themselves, Pro. 22.15.
for affliction gives understanding. Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a
child: but the rod of correction shall drive it away from him. Pro. 29.15
The rod and correction give wisdom: Pro. 20.30
the blewnes of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within the
bowels of the belly: that is, sharp punishment which pearceth even the inward
parts, is profitable for the wicked to bring them to amendment. But on the
contrary, Pro. 13.24.
he that spares the rod spilleth the child: witness the example of Hely toward
his sons Hophni and Phinehas. And of David toward his son Adonijah who^ he
would not displease from his childhod, to say, 1. Sam. 2.12.22.23.24. 1. Reg.
1.6.
why have thou done so? and so in the end he proved a presumptuous traitor, and
rank rebel.

Secondly, this exemplarie justice is commodious unto others that are
bystanders and beholders, who may learn to beware by their neighbors harms,
Deu. 13.11. and 17.13. and 21.22.
according as Moses wills punishment to be afflicted upon transgressors of
the law that Israel may hear and fear.

Whereupon Solomon groundeth this exposition of policy or judicial
proceedings: Prou. 19.25.
Smite a scorner and the foolish will beware: that is to say, the simple and
ignorant men learn their duty when they see the wicked punished. And for this
cause did God by Moses command, that the censers of Korah and his accomplices
being 250 in number, who had been destroyed and consumed by a fire that came
out from the Lord, should be taken and beaten forth into broad plates, for the
covering of the Altar, Numb. 16.37.38. etc.
that they might be a sign to the children of Israel of Gods judgments
against all mutinous, seditious, and rebellious persons. Whereas on the other
side, If the incestuous person at Chorinth be not censured by excommunication,
behold, 1. Cor. 5.6. Eccles. 8.11
a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump. And by the judgment of the
preacher, because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the children of men, is fully set in them to do evil:
that is, by way of abridgement, where Justice is delayed, there sin reigns.
Therefore the princely Psalmist promises in the last verse of this Psalm,
Psalm. 101.8.
betimes to destroy all the wicked of the land, that he might cut off all the
workers of iniquity from the City of the Lord.

Thirdly, the executing of heinous and notorious offenders withholdeth the
wrath of God from the public state of the Realm by taking evil out of
Israel. But the vnpunishing of Achan, Deu. 17.12. and 22.22. Josh. 7.1.5.
(though his crime was unknown) was so hurtful to the host of Israel, 2. Sam.
21.1.6.14.
that the hearts of the people melted away like water. Neither could the great
dearth in David's time be removed, nor God fully pacified for Saul's cruelty,
long before committed against the Gibeonites, till seven of Saul's offspring
were hung up to the Lord in Gibeah of Saul. In brief, due execuitio^ done upon
great and grievous malefactors, is a sacrifice acceptable unto God, and a
preservative of the state of the Church and Commonwealth. Therefore, a wise King
scatters the wicked, Pro. 20.26.
and causes the wheel to turn over them.

But here must be inserted a caveat against all cruelty in execution of
justice. Deuteronomy. 22.6
For by the law of Moses even in seeking of birds nests, it was not lawful to
take the damme with the young. Neither might the body of the executed
malefactor remain all night upon the tree. Deuteronomy. 21.22 23.
Beside this, God would not turn to them of Damascus, because they had treshed
Gilead with threshing instruments of iron: neither would he turn to the
children of Ammon, Amos. 1.3.13.
because they had ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might
enlarge their own border: there is like to be judgment merciless to Pilate,
who would show no mercy: Iam. 2.13.
but mingled the blood of some that had offended him, Luke. 13.1. Pro. 12.10.
with their own sacrifices. Yet no marvel it is that he did so, for though
the richteous man regards the life of his beast, yet even the mercies of the
wicked and cruel.

Howbeit, though cruelty is always to be abhorred, yet remissnes in dealing
with the adversaries of the truth, the practisers and maintayners of a false
worship, is likewise to be excluded, because it is most perilous to the Church
of God, as appears by the history of the Canaanites, who by the conniuency of
the Israelites being permitted to converse with them, Nom. 33.55.
and to live quietly among them, became pricks in their eyes, and thorns in
their sides. When Ioash the King of Israel came down to visit Elisha lying
sick upon his death bed, he was willed by the prophet to take into his hand
the arrow of the Lords deliverance against Aram, and to smite the ground: 2.
Reg. 13.14. to the 20.
whereupon he smote thrice and ceased: But the man of God was angry with him
and said, thou should have smitten five or six times, so thou should have
smitten Aram till thou had consumed it, where now thou shall smite Aram but
thrice. The meaning is, that Ioash deserved just reproof and great blame,
because he seemed content to have victory against the enemies of God, for
twice or thrice, and had not a zeal to overcome them continually, and destroy
them utterly. And surely Saul cannot spare Agag saving to his own hurt. 1.
Sam. 15.22.23.
Neither can Ahab have the life of Ben-Hadad, but with his own loss. 1. Reg.
20.42. 2. Chro. 15.16.
Wherefore King Asa did not fail to depose his grandmother Maachah from her
regencie, because she had made an Idol in a grove, which Idol he brake down,
and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.

Consider here a little with me (beloved) the mishap, (that I say not misery)
of diverse princes (keeping me within the limits or bounds of the holy
scripture) in this case of showing mercy, and practicing of judgment.

For first of all it falls out not seldom, that those notorious malefactors
deserving death, whom princes do pardon in mercy, (if not upon foolish
pity) do afterward most unthankfully and treacherously seek to take the
Scepter out of the hand, and to pull the Crown from the head, and to withdraw
life from the body of their benefactors, who had graciously forgiven them
their crimes, and so consquently given to them their lives, lands, goods,
liberty and all. This may be fitly exemplified in Absalon, who after that he
was pardoned for the murdering of his brother Amnon, 2. Sam. 15
and restored to favor in court, rose up early, and stood hard by the entering
in of the gate, and reached forth his hand to every suitor of account, and by
slander, flattery, and fair promises, he stale away the hearts of the people,
and at the length he brast forth into actual rebellion against his natural
father. 2. Sam. 3.27:
Ioab likewise when he had escaped without punishment for stabbing of Abner, he
was thereby emboldened to proceed forward to the murdering of Amasa, Ibid.
20.9.10.
and this done without controlment, he presumed to aid aspyring Adonijah to
the prejudice of Solomon, 1. Reg. 1.7.
who was to succeed in the kingdom by the appointment of his father David yet
living.

Secondly, Princes have been sometimes ouerawed by the peers of the Realm, or
otherwise for fear of tumult in the state, they durst not either show kindness,
and give entertainment to good men whom they loved, or to execute mighty
malefactors, as in duty they should have done. Of the first sort we have an
example in Achish the king of Gath, 1. Sam. 29.6.9.10.
who confessed that David pleased him as an Angel of God, but therwithall he
told him that he must be packing out of his company, because the princes of
the Philistines did not favor him. Of the second sort we have an example in
David, who though he spoke and did much in detestation of Ioabs murdering of
Abner, yet he durst not put him to death for it, as it may be collected by
these words of his: I am this day weak and newly anointed King: 2. Sam. 3.39.
and these men the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me: 2. Sam. 3.36.
the Lord reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.

1. Reg. 2.5.6.8.9.31.44.45.46.
But this falls out well and rightly, that whom David spared in policy,
those Solomon executed in judgment, as railing Shimei, and bloody Ioab.

Here let me stand a little upon David's promise to sing Mercy and judgment,
and consider whether he performed the same always or not. I will put the case
in the example of lame Mephibosheth the son of his old and dear friend
Jonathan, 2. Sam. 9.1.3.7:
to whom I confess he did kindly show mercy for his fathers sake, by
restoring unto him all the fields of his Grandfather Saul, and licensing him to
eat bread at his own table continually: but when he came to the point of
judgment, I find him defective. For when David fled before the face of
Absalon, Ziba the servant of Mephiboseth meets him with a large present of
his masters goods, 2. Sam. 16.1.2.3.4.
and presenting the same unto him, he frames sycophantly a most false
accusation of treason against his master, as though he had said, this day shall
the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father. Whereupon rashly
without leaving the one ear for the defendant, he gave sentence, condemning
the innocent in favor of the plantiffe, being a calumniator; saying to Ziba,
behold thine are all that pertained unto Mephibosheth. And when as Mephibosheth
afterward met David returning victoriously after the overthrow of Absalom, and
fully cleared himself of the heinous crime of treason wherewith he had been
falsely charged, then David gives sentence in this wise, 2. Sam. 19.29.
thou and Ziba divide the lands. Herein David did evil in taking his land from
him, before he knew the cause, but much worse that knowing the truth, he did
not restore them. And here we may observe, that in the case of justice our
(...) is more upright then our (...): our contemplation is sounder then our
practice. Or to speak to the capacity of the meanest hearer, a man may more
easily, pen the cause of Justice in his private study, then rightly practice
it in public upon the bench. For in solitary meditation, a man may without
difficulty abandon all rashness, and partial affection, but in Judicial place
abroad, respect of persons, and other corruptions do easily enter into our
minds and hearts, by the ministry of our eyes and ears.

Now the way to prevent this mischief, is to do that sincerely, which David
promises here to do; namely, to sing unto the Lord, that is to show mercy,
and practice Judgment to the glory of God, whereunto all things ought to be
referred, according to Saint Paul's direction, whether ye eat, drink, 1. Cor.
10.31.
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Insomuch as alms must be
given in charity without the sound of a trumpet: Mat. 6.1. to the 7.
and prayer must be made of devotion without public ostentation. And to
descend from the general doctrine to the particular instruction which I have
in hand, miserable was the case of that wretched Judge who did right to the
poor widow, Luke. 18.4.5.
not for fear of God, or reverence to man, but only to avoid her clamor and
importunity. And no better was the case of the-Philistins in the book of the
Judges, who when as the Timnite gave his daughter being Samsons wife, Judge.
15.1. to the 7.
to an other man, they regarded not to punish this unjust and adulterous act:
But when as Samson in revenge of this wrong, had with three hundred Foxes
turned tail to tail, having firebands fastened thereto, set on fire, and
burned up the rickes and the standing corn with the vineyards and Olives of
the Philistines: then they came up in troops and burnt the Timnite and his
daughter with fire. Thus the wicked punish not vice for love of Justice, but to
be revenged in respect of former loss, and for fear of future danger which
else might come unto them.

Again, to thee O Lord will I sing; that is, howsoever by the chaunting of
this dittie of mercy and judgment, I shall seem to howl in the ears of the
ungodly, yet my song to thee O lord, shall be thought very melodious. Whereby we
are taught this general doctrine, that in doing of our duty in our several
vocations, this ought to be our comfort, that our words and works are pleasing
unto God, howsoever they be displeasing to the world of wicked men. So though
Noe was scorned by the men of his time, for preparing the Arc, and urging
repentance to prevent the peril of the Deluge to come: yet is he by the
providence of God, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, chronicled for a preacher of
righteousness. And though David for dancing before the Arc, being girded with a
linen Ephod, 2. Pet. 2.5. 2. Sam. 6.14.16.20.21.22.
was by his wife Michal despised in her heart: yet was he had in most high
reputation by the maids of honor attending upon Michal. Yea David will yet be
more vile then thus, and he will be low in his own sight, knowing that all
shall be acceptable in heaven, which is here on earth done before the Lord,
that is for no worldly affection, but only for the zeal which we leave to
Gods glory. Isa. 8.18. Wisd. 5.15.


Isai and the children which God gave unto him, were as signs and wonders in
Israel: yet their reward was with the Lord. If John come neither eating, nor
drinking, they say he has a devil. Mat. 11.18.19.
And if the son of man come eating and drinking, they say, behold a glutton,
and a drinker of wine, Act. 26.24.25.
a friend of publicanes and sinners; but yet wisdom is justified of her
children. If Festus be judge of Paul's speeches, 1. Cor. 4.9.13.
then Paul is beside him self, much learning does make him mad. Howbeit,
Paul is not mad, O noble Festus, Ibid. ver: 3.
but he speaks the words of truth and sobernes. The Apostles were made a
gazing-stock vnvnto the world, and to the Angels, and to men, they were counted
as the filth of the world, 2. Cor. 4.15.16.
and the ofscowring of all things: howbeit they passed very little to be
judged of man's judgment: knowing that they were unto God the sweet savor of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them which perish: to the one, the
savor of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life.

Thus the sweet singer of Israel promises to sing the divine dittie of mercy
and judgment, 2. Sam. ^^.^
to the Lord of Lords, even God the father, the son and the holy Ghost; to
whom three persons and one everliving God, be all honor and glory both now,
and for evermore. Amen.


