A MATCH AT MIDNIGHT. A Pleasant Comoedie: As it has been Acted by the
Children of the Revells.

Written by VV. R.

LONDON: Printed by Aug. Mathewes, for William Sheares, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Britains Bursse. 1633.

The Actors Names.
3 Captain Carvegut. 4 Lieutenant Bottom. Ancient Young. Bloodhound, A
Usurer. Alexander Bloodhound his two sons. Tim Bloodhound. Randall, A
Welchman. Eare-lacke, A Scrivener. 1. Sir Marmaduke many minds. 2 Sir Ianus
Ambodexter. Sim, the Clown. John, servant to the Widow. Iarvis, the Widows
Husband disguised like her servant. A Smith. Bussie, A Constable. VVatch.
Widow. Moll, Bloodhounds Daughter. Widows Maid. Mistress Coote, a Bawd.
Sue, A VVhoore.
A MATCH AT MIDNIGHT.
Actus Primus. Scaena Prima.
Enter as making themselves ready, Tim Blood-hound, and Sim the man. Sim. GOod
morrow Master Tim.


Tim. Morrow Sim, my father stirring Sim?


Sim. Not yet I think, he heard some ill news of your Brother Alexander last
night, that will make him lie an hour extraordinary.


Tim. Hum, I am sorry the old man should lie by the hour, but oh, these wicked
Elder Brothers, that swear refuse them, and drink nothing but wicked Sack,
when we swear nothing but niggers noggers, make a meal of a bloate Herring,
water it with four shillings Beer, and then swear we have dined as well as
my Lord Mayor.


Sim. Here was Goody Finne the fish-woman fetched home her Ring last night.


Tim. Ye should have put her money by her self, for fear of wronging of the
whole heap.


Sim. So I did fir and washed it first in two waters.


Tim. All these petty pavvnes sirrah, my Father committs to to my managing, to
instruct me in this craft, that when he dies, the commonwealth may wanta good
member.


Enter Mistress Mary. Sim. Nay, you are cursed as much as he already.


Mary. Oh Brother, it is well you are up.


Tim. Why, why?


Mary. Now you shall see the dainty Widow, the sweet Widow, the delicate
Widdovv, that to morrow morning must be our Mother in Law.


Tim. What the Widow Nagge.


Sim. Yes, yes, she that dwells in Blacke-fryers, next to the sign of the
Fool laughing at a feather.


Mary. She, she, good Brother make your self handsome, for my father will
bring her hither presently.


Tim. Niggers noggers, I thought he had been sick and had not been up Sim.


Sim. Why so did I too, but it seems the Widow took him at a better hand,
and raised him so much the sooner.


Tim While I tie my Band, prithee stroke up my fore-toppe a little, Niggers,
and I had but dreamed of this an hour before I wak't, I wood have put on my
Sunday clothes, 'mailes my shoo^s are as pale as the check of a stewd Pander,
a clout, a clout Sim.


Sim. More have, the worse speed, here is never a clout now.


Tim. What Is that lies by the books?


Sim. This it is a Sumners coat.


Tim. Prithee lends a sleeve of that, had a Noble on it last night, and never
paid me my Bill money.


Enter old Bloodho^nd, the Widow, her maid, and man. Blood. Look, look upon,
and ready, all ready Widow is, he is in some deep discourse with Sim,
concerning moneys out to one or another.


Wid. Has he said his prayers sit?


Blood. Praver before providence, when did ye know any thrive, and swell tha^
uses it, he is a chip o'th old block, I exercise him in the trade of thrift,
by turning him to all the petty pawnes, If they come to me, I tell 'em I have
given over Brokering, moyling for mucke and trash, and that I mean to live a
life Monasticke, a praying life, pull out the tail of Cressus from my pocket,
and swear it is called Charities looking glass, or an exhortation to forsake
the World.


Maid. Dainty Hypocrite.


Wid. Peace.


Blood. But let a fine fool that is well feathered come, and withal good
meat, I have a friend it may be, that may compassionate his wants, I Will tell ye
an old Saw for it over my chimnie yonder, a poor man seem to him that is
poor, and prays thee for to lend, but tell the prodigal (not quite spent)
thou woo't procure a friend.


Wid. Trust me a thristy saw.


Blood. Many will have virtuous admonitions on their walls, but not a piece in
their coffers, give me these witty politic sawes, and indeed my house is
furnished with no other.


Wid. How happy shall I be to wed such wisdom.


Blood. Shall bed it, shall bed it wench, shall have it by infusion, look, look.
Enter a Smith.


Smith. Save ye Master Tim.


Tim. Who Is this, goodman fyle the blacksmith, I thought'had been our old
collier: did you go to bed with that durty face goodman fyle?


Smith. And rise with it too sir.


Tim. What have you bumming out there goodman fyle?


Smith. A vice sir, that I would feign be furnished with a little money upon it.


Tim. Why how will you do to work then goodman fyle?


Smith. This is my spare vice, not that I live by.


Tim. Hum, ye did not buy this spare vice of a lean Courtier, did ye?


Smith. No sir, of a fat Cook, that strained of a Smith for's rent.


Sim. Oh hard hearted man of grease.


Tim. Nay, nay, Sim, we must do it sometimes.


Blood. Ha thrifty whorsonne.


Tim. And what wood serve your turn goodman fyle?


Smith. A Noble Sir.


Tim. What upon a spare vice to lend a Noble?


Sim. Why sir, for ten groats you may make your self drunk, and so buy a vice
outright for half the money.


Tim. That is no noble vice I assure ye.


Sim. How long vvood y^ have it!


Smith. But a fortnight, it is to buy stuff I protest sir.


Tim. Look ye being a neighbor, and borne one for another.


Blood. Ha villain, shall have a^l.


Tim. There is five shillings uppon't, which at the fortnights end goodman Fyle
you must make five shillings six pence.


Smith. How sir?


Tim. Nay and it were not to do you a courtesy --


Blood. Ha Boy.


Tim. And then I had forgot three pence for my Bill, so there is four pence,
and nine pence, which you are to tender back, five shillings six pence,
goodman Fyle at the end of the fortnight.


Smith. Well and it were not for earnest necessity, hay boys, I come, I come,
you black rascals, let the Cans go round.


Tim. Sim, because the man's an honest man, I pray lay up his Vice, as safe as
it were your own.


Sim. And if he miss his day, and forfeit, it shall be yours and your heirs
for ever.


Blood. What, disbursing money boy? here is thy mother in law


Clown Your nose drops, '^will spoil her ruff.


Tim. Pray forsooth -- what is a cl^cke.


Maid. Oh fie upon him Mistress, I thought he had begun to ask you blessing.


Wid. Peace, we will have more oa't. Walk's toward him.


Tim. I wonnot kiss indeed.


Sim And he wonnot, here are those that will forsooth.


Blood. Get ye in you Rogue.


Wid. I hope ye will Sir? I was bred in Ireland where the women begin the
salutation.


Tim. I wonnot kiss truly.


Wid. Indeed you must.


Tim. Wood my girdle may break if I do.


Wid. I have a mind.


Tim. Niggers noggers I wonnot.


Blood. Nay nay, now his great oath's past, there is no talk on it, (...)ke him
nere the worse, there is an old savv sort,

A kiss first, next the feeling sense,
Crack say the purse strings, out fly the penee.
But he can talk though, whose Boy are you Tim?


Tim. Your boy forsooth Father.


Blood. Can ye turn and vvind a penny Tim.


Tim. Better then yourselfe forsooth father.


Blood. You have looked in the Church book late, bovv old are you Tim?


Tim. Two and twenty years, three moneths', three days, and three quarters
of an hour, forsooth Father.


Wid. He has Arethmaticke.


Blood. And Grammar too, what is Latin for your head Tim?


Tim. Caput.


Wid. But what for the head of a block?


Tim. Caput blockhead.


Blood. Do ye hear, your ear.


Tim. Aura.


Blood. Your eye.


Tim. Occules.


Blood. That Is for one eye, what is Latin for two.


Tim. Occulies, occulies.


Wid. An admirable accidental Gramarian I protest sir.


Blood. This boy shall have all, I have an elder rogue that sucks and draws
me, a saverne Accademian: one that protests to Whores, and shires with
High-vvay lawyers; an arrant unclarified Rogue, that drinks nothing but
wicked Sack.


Enter Clown, Alexander drunk. Clow. Here Is a Gentleman would speak with you,


Blood. Look, look, now he is come for more money.


Widow. A very hopeful house to match into wench, the Father a Knave, one
son a drunkard, and the other a fool.


Tim. O monster Father, look if he be not drunk, the very sight of him
makes me long for a cup of six.


Alex. Pray Father, pray to God to bless me.


Blood. Look, look, takes his brother for his Father.


Sim: Alas Sir, when the drink's in, the wit's out, and none but wise children
know their own Fathers.


Tim: Why I am none of your Father, brother, I am Tim, do ye know Tim.


Alex. Yes, umph -- for a coxecombe.


Wid. How wild he looks: good sir we will take our leaves.


Blood. Shall not go faith Widow: you Cheater Rogue, must I ha my friends
frighted out my house by you, look heel steal nothing to feast his Bawdes,
get ye out sirrah, there are Constables, Beadles, whips, and the College of
extravaging, Eclipt Bridewell ye Rogue, ye Rogue there is, there is -- mark
that.


Alexander. Can you send me a Mark upon this Ring sir, and there set it down
in your Book, and vmph -- mark that.


Blood. I Will have no stolen Rings, picked out of pockets, or taken upon the way,
not I.


Alex. I Will give you an old saw for it.


Blood. There Is a Rogue mocks his Father, sirrah, get 'ye gone, Sim, go let
loose the Mastiffe.


Sim. Alas sir, heel tear and pull out your sons throat.


Blood. Better pul't out, then a halter stretched, away out of my doors rogue,
I defy thee.


Alex. Must you be my Mother in Law?


Wid. So your father says sir.


Alex. You see the worst of your eldest son, I abuse no body.


Blood. The Rogue will fall upon her.


Alex. I will tell ye an old saw.


Wid. Pray let us hear it.


Alex. An old man is a bed full of bones,
and who can it deny,
By whom (vmph) a young wench lies and greanes,
for better company.

Blood. Did ye ever hear such a Rascal? come come, let us leave him: I Will go
buy thy wedding Ring presently, you are best be gone sirrah: I am going for the
Constable, I and one of the Churchwardens, and now I think on it, he shall
pay five shillings to the poor for being drunk, twelve pence shall go into
the box, and the other four, my partner and we will share betwixt us, there is a
new path to thrist wench, we must live, we must live girl.


Wid. And at last die for altogether.


Sim. It Is a Dyamond.


Tim. You Will be at the fountain after dinner?


Alex. White, twill run boy.


Tim. Here Is a noble now, and I Will bring you the other as I come by to the Tavern,
but I Will make you swear, I shall drink nothing but small Betre.


Alex. Niggers naggers thou shall not, there is thine own oath for thee, thou
shall eat nothing and thou woo't, but a poacht spider, and drive it down with
sirrup of Toads. Exit.


Tim. Ah, prithee Sim bid the maid eat my breakefast her self.


Sim. Has turned his stomach, for all the World like a Puritanes, at the sight
of a surplesse, but your breakefast shall be devoured by a stomach of a
stronger constitution I warrant you. Exit.


Enter Captain Carvegut, and Lieuetenant Bottom. Captain. No Game abroad
this morning, this Coxecombe Park, I think be past the best, I have known
the time the bottom twixt these hills has been better fledged.


Lieu. Look out Captain, there is matter of employment at foot o'th hill.


Captain. A business?


Lieu. Yes, and hopeful, there is a morning bird, his flight it seems for
London, he hallowes and sings sweetly, prithee let us go and put him out of
tune.


Cap. Thee and I have Cratchets in our pates, and thou know two Crotchets
make one quaver, he shall shake fort. Exit.


Enter Randall. Rand. Did her not see her true Loves,
As her came from London,
Oh, if her saw not her fine prave Loves,
Randall is quite undone,
Well, was never mortal man in Wales, coo'd have wagd praver, finers, and
nimblers, then Randals have done, to get service in Londons: whoope, where
was her now, just upon a pridge of stone, between the legs of a couple of
pretty hills, but no more nere mountains in Wales, then Clim of the Cloughes
bow, to her Cozen David's Harp, and now her prattle of Davie, I think yonder
come prancing down the hills from Kingstone a coupl of her the other cozens Saint
Nicholas Clarks. the morning was so red as an egg, and the place ferry full of
dangers, perils, and bloody businesses by reports: augh her swords was trawne,
God please us and her cozen Hercules was not stand against too, which shall her
take if they take Randalls, will rippe Randals cutts out, and then Randals
shall see Pawles steeples no more, therefore her will go directly under the
pridge, here was but standing to knees in little fine cool fair waters, and
becat if her have Randalls out, her shall come and fetch Randalls and her will,
were her nineteen Nicholas Clearkes. Exit.


Enter Captain and Lieutenant Lieu. Which way took he?


Cap. On straight I think.


Lieu. Then we should see him man, he was just in mine eye when we were at
foot o'th hill, and to my thinking stood here looking toward us upon the
bridge.


Cap. So thought I, but with the cloud of dust we raised about us, with the
speed our horses made: it seems we lost him, how I could stamp and bite my
horses ears off.


Lieu. Let Us spur toward Coomb house, he struck that way, sure he is not
upon the Road.


Capt. 'Sfoot if we miss him, how shall we keep our word with Sander
Bloodhound in Fleetstreete after dinner at the Fountain, he is out of cash,
and thou know by Cutters Law, we are bound to relieve one another.


Lieu. Let Us scowre toward Coomb house, but if we miss him.


Cap. N^ matter, do see yonder Barn o'th left hand?


L^eu. What of that?


Cap. At the West end, I tore a piece of board out,
And stuffed in close amongst the straw, a bag
Of a hundred pound at least, all in round shillings:
Which I made my last nights purchase for a Lawyer.

Lieu. Do know the place to fetch it again?


Cap. The torn board is my land mark, if we miss this,
We make for that, and whilst that lasts -- oh London,
Thou Labyrinth that puzlest strictest search,
Convenient Innes of Court, for highvvay Lawyers,
How with rich wine, Tobacco, and svveet Wenches,
we will canvase thy dark case.

Lieu. Away, let us spur. Exit.


Enter Randall. Rand. Spur did her call her, have made Randals stand without
pootes, in ferry pitiful pickles, but her will run as nimbles to Londons, as
Creyhound after Rabbits, and yet now her remember what her Cozens talked, was
some wiser and some too, Randals heard talk of Parne upon left hand, and a
prave bag with hundred pounds in round shillings Cod please us, and yonder was
Parnes and upon left hands too, now here was questions, and demands to be made,
why Randals should not rob them would rob Randals, her will go to parnes,
pluck away pords, pull out paggs, and show her cozen a round pair of heels,
with aule her round sillings, mark her now. Exit.


Enter Captain and Lieuetenant. Lieu. The Rogue rise right, and has out stripped
us this was staying in Kingstone with our unlucky Hostess, that must be
dandled, and made drunk next her heart, she made us slip the very Cream o'th
morning, if any thing stand augward, a woman's at one end on it.


Cap. Come, we have a hundred pieces goodyet in the Barn, they shall last us,
and Saunder a months mirth at least.


Lieu. Oh these sweet hundred pieces, how I will kiss ye, and hug ye with
that zeal a Usurer does his bastard money, when he comes from Church, were
not for them, where were our hopes, but come, they shall be sure to thunder in
the Taverns, I but now, just now I see pottle pots thrown down the stayres,
just like Serieants and Yeomen, one in the neck of another.


Cap. Delicate vision. Exeunt. Ent. Ran.


Rand. Her have got her page and aule by the hand, and her had ferrily thought
in conscience, had not bin so many round sillings in whole worlds but in Wales,
it was time to supply her store, her had but thirteen pence half penny in awle
the worlds, and that her have left in her little white purse, with a rope her
sound py the parne, just in the place her had this: Randals will be no serving
man's now, her will buy ^er prave Parrells, prave Swords, prave Taggers, and
praue ^eathers, and go a wooing to prave comely pretty ma^ds, r^b Randalls,
becat and her were ten dozens of coz^ns, Randals rob her, mark her now. Exit.


Enter Captain, and Lieutenant. Lieu. A plague of Friday mornings, the
unfortunate day in the whole week.


Capt. Was ever the like sat, 'sfoote when I put it in I was so wary, though
it were midnight, that I watched till a cloud had mask't the Moon, for fear
she should have seen't.


Lieu. Oh luck.


Cap. A Gale of wind did but creep ore the bottom, and because I heard things
stir, I stayed, 'twas twelvescore past me.


Lieu. The pottle pots will sleep in peace to night.


Cap. And the sweet clinkes.


Lieu. The clattering of pipes.


Capt. The Spanish fumes.


Lieu. The more wine boy, the nimble a^on, ^non sir.


Cap. All to night will be nothing, come we must shift, sfoot what a vvitty
rogue 'tvvas t(...)ave, this fair thirteen pence halfepenny, and this old
halter, intimating a^tly.

Had the hangman met us three, by these presages,
Here had bin his work, and here his wages.

Lieu. Come, come, we must make friends. Exeunt.


Enter Bloodhound, Tim, and Sim. Blood. There sirrah, there is his bond, run
into the Strand, s^xe weeks the ^allow Chandler fetched my hundred mark^, ^^ent
him to set him up, and to buy great, this is his day, I Will have his bones fo^'^
^se, so pray tell him.


Tim But are a Chandlers ones worth so much Father?


Blood. Out Coxecombe.


Sim. Worth so much, I know my Master will make dice on them, then it is but
letting Master Alexander carry them next Christmas to the Temple, he will make a
hundred marks a night of them.


Tim. Mass that is true.


Blood. And run to Master Eare-lacks the informer, in Theeving lane, and ask
him what he has done in my business he gets abundance, and if he carry my
cause with one false oath, he shall have Moll, he will take her with a little,
are ye gone Sir?


Tim. No forsooth.


Blood. As ye come by Temple-barre, make a step to the Devil.


Tim. To the Devil father?


Blood. My Master means the sign of the Devil.


Sim. And he cannot hurt ye fool, there is a Saint holds him by the nose.


Tim. Sniggers, what does the Devil and a Saint both in a sign?


Sim. What a question's that, what does my Master, and his prayer book a
Sunday both in a pew?


Sim. Well, well, ye Gipsy, what do we both in a pew?


Blood Why make a fair show, and the Devil and the Saint does no more.


Blod. ^'are witty, you are witty, call to the man o'th house, bid him send in the
bottles of wine to night, they will be at hand in the morning, -- will ye run
sir?


Tim. To the devil as fast I can Sir, the world shall know who is son I am.
Exit.


Blood Let me see now, for a posie for the Ring:
Never an end of an old saw, it is a quick Widow Sim,
And vvood have a vvitty posie.

Sim If she be quick, she is with child, whosoever got it you must father it,
so that you come o'th nicke, forth widdow's quick, there is a witty posie for
you quick Widow*


Blood. No, no, I Will have one shall savor of, of a saw.


Sim. Why then 'twill smell of the painted cloth.


Blood. Let me see, a Widdovv vvitty.


Sim. Is pastime pretty, put in that for the sports sake.


Blood. No, no, I can make the sport, then an old man.


Sim. Then will she answer, if you cannot a younger can,
And look, look sir, now I ta ke of the younger,
Yonder Is Ancient Young come over again, that
M^rgaged sixty pound Per annum before he went,
I am deceived if he come not a day after the Fair.

Blood. Mine Alminacke.


Sim. A prayer book sir.


Blood. A prayer book for devote beggars I hate, look I beseech thee, Fortune
now befriend me, and I will call the plaguey whore in, let me see, six months.


Ant. Yes, it is he certain, this is a business must not be slackened sir.


Sim. Look I beseech thee, we shall have oat meal in our pottage six weeks
after.


Blood. Four days too late Sim, four days too late Sim.


Sim. Plummes in our pudding a Sunday, plummes in our pudding.


Ant. Master bloodhound as I take it.


Blood. You are a stranger Sir, you shall be witness, I shall be rayl'd at
else, they will call me devil, I pray you how many months from the first of
May, to the sixth of November following?


Ant. Six months and four days just.


Blood. I ask, because the last first of May, a noble gentleman, one Ancient
Young.


Ant. I am the man sir?


Blood. My spectacles Sim, look Sim, is this Ancient Young?


Sim. It Was Ancient Young sir:


Blood. And is it not Ancient Young?


Sim. No sir, you have made him a young Ancient


Blood. Oh Sim, a Chair, I know him now, but I shall not live to tell him.


Ant. How fare ye sir?


Sim. The better for you, he thanks you sir.


Blood. Sick, sick, exceeding sick,


Ant. O'th sudden, strange.


Sim. A qualme of threescore years come over his stomach, nothing else.


Blood. That you beloved, you, who of all men in the world, my poor heart doted
on, whom I loved better then Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncles, Aunts,
what wood ye have, that you should stay four days too late.


Ant. I have your money ready,
And sir, I hope your old love to my Father.

Blood. Nay, nay, I am Noble, fellow, very Noble, a very rock of friendship,
but, but, I had a house and barn burnd down to the ground, since you were
here.


Ant. How?


Blood. How burned ask Sim?


Sim. By fire, sir, by fire.


Blood. To build up which, for I am a poor man, a poor man, I was forced by
course of Law to enter upon your Land, and so for less money then you had of
me, I was feign to sell it to another, that by four days stay, a man should
lose his blood, our livings, our blood, o my heart, o ny head.


Ant. Pray take it not so hamons, we will go to him. I Will buy it again of him,
he wonnot be too cruel.


Blood. A dog, a very dog, there is more mercy in a pair of unbrib'd
Bailiffes, to shun all such solicitings, he is rid to York, a very
cut-throate Rogue, but I Will send to him.


Ant. A honest old man, how it mooves him, this was my negligence, good Sim
convay him into some vvarmer room, and I pray, how ever Fortune, she that
gives ever with the dexterity she takes, shall please to fashion out my
sufferings, yet for his sake, my deceased Father, the long friend of your
heart, in your health, keep me happy.


Blood. Oh right honest young man Sim.


Sim. Sir, Blood. Have I don't well?


Sim. The deu'll himself coud not have don't better.


Blood. I tell thee an old saw sirrah, he that dissembles in wealth shall not
want, they say doomes day is coming, but think you not an't, this will make
the pot sees Sim, good Sir talk no more, my mouth runs over, Sleep, wake,
worthy beggar, worthy indeed to be one, and am one worthily -- how fine it is
to wanton without affliction, I must look out for Fortunes, over again, no, I
have money here, and it is the curse of merit^, not to work, when she has
money: there was a handsome Widow, whose vvild man j^alous husband died at
Sea, let me see, I am near Blackfriars, I Will have o^e start at her, or else
--


Enter Blood^ound, Daughter Mol, with a bowl of beer. Mol. By my troth it is he
Captain Yongs soon, I have l^ved him even with languishings, ever since I was
a girl but should I know it, I should run mad sure, what handsome Gentlemen
travaire and manners makes, my Father begun to ye Sir, in a cup of final Beer.


Ant. How does he pray?


Moll. Pretty well now Sir.


Ant. Mas it is small indeed -- you will pledge me?


Moll. Yes sir.


Ant. Pray will ye tell me one thing?


Moll. What is it.


Ant Which is smaller, this Beer, or your maidenhead?


Moll. the Beer a great ^eale Sir.


Ant. I in quality.


Moll. But not in quantity.


Ant. No?


Moll. Why?


Ant. Let me try, and I Will tell you.


Moll. Will you tell me one thing before you try?


Ant. Yes.


Moll. Which is smaller, this Beer or your wit?


Ant. O the Beer, the Beer.


Moll. In quality.


Ant. Yes, in quantity.


Moll. Why then I pray keep your quantity of your wit, from the quality of my
maydenhead, and ye shall find my maydenhead more then your wit.


Ant. A witty maydenhead by this hand.


Exeunt severally. Actus. 2. Scaena 1.
A Table set out. Enter two servants, Iarvis and John, as to cover it for
dinner. John. Is my Mistress ready for dinner?


Iar. Yes, if dinner be ready for my Mistress.


John. Half an hour ago man.


Iar. But prithe^ sir, is it for certain, for yet it cannot sink into my head,
that she is to be married to morrow.


Ioh. Troth, she makes little preparation, but it may be she wood be wedded,
as she wood be bedded, privately.


Iar. Bedded call ye it, and she be bedded no better then heel bed her, she
may lie ^antaliz'd and eat wishes.


John. Pox on him, they say he is the arrantst (...). i er, we shall never live
good day with him.


Iar. Well, and she be s(...)ipt by threescore and ten, may she live sixescore
and eleven, and repent twelve times a that is once an hour.


Wid. Set meat o'th board. Enter Wid.


John. Yes. Exit.


Wid. Why does your fellow grumble so?


John. I do not know.
They say you are to marry one that will feed us.
With horse-plummes, instead of Beef and Cabidge.

Wid. And are you grieved at that?


John. No, but my friends are.


Wid. What friends are grieved?


John. My guts.


Wid. So it seems, you begone Clown?


John. Yes, and shall conclude Coxecombe, and I be fed with herring bones,
'sfoo^e, I say no more, but if we d^e want as much bread of our dany
allowance, as wood dine a Sparrow, or as much drink as wood fox a Fly, I
know what I know.


Wid. And what do ye know sir?


Ioh. Why, that there goes but a pair of sheets, a promoter, and a knave, if
you know more, take your choice of either.


Wid. It Is well sir, set on dinner.

Enter John with a Rabbit in one hand, and a dish of ogges in another, and the
Maid. John. O Mistress, yonder is the mad gallant, Master Alexander Bloodhound
entered into the Hall.


Wid. Ye should have kept him out.

Maid. Alas, nere a wench in town could do it he is so nimble, I had no sooner
opened the door, but he thrust in ere I was aware. Enter Alex.


Alex. And how does my little handsome dainty, delicate, welfavoured,
straight, and comely delicious bewitching Widow.


Iar. 'Sfoote here is one runs division before the Fiddlers.

Wid. Sir, this is no seasonable time of visit.

Alex. It Is pudding time wench, pudding time, and a dainty time, dinner time my
nimble eyd witty one, woot be married to morrow sirrah. sets to table.


Iar. She will be mad to morrow sirrah.

Alex. What, art thou a fortune teller.

Iar. A chip of the same block, a fool Sir.

Alex. Good fool, give me a cup of cool Beer.

Iar. (...) your Master a cool cup of Beer.

Alex. Pish, I spoke to the fool.

Iar. I thought you had brought the fool with you Sir.

Alex. Fool, it is my man, shall sit in faith wench,

Wid. For once I be as merry as you are mad, and learn fashions, I am set you
see Sir, but you must pardon Sir our rudeness, Fridayes fare for my self, a
dish of eggs and a Rabbet, I looked for no stranger faces.


Alex. Strange, mine is a good face in faith, prithee Busse.

Iar. Why here is one comes to the business now.

Alex. Sirrah, woot have the old fellow?

Wid. Your Father, yes.

Alex. I tell thee thou shall not, no, no, I have such --

Iar. There Is but one raw bit Sir?
this rabbits raw too
Alex. Thy Iester sure shall have a coat.

Wid. Let it be of your own cut Sir?

Alex. Nay, nay, nay, two to one is extremity -- but as (...) was telling
thee, I have such a husband for thee, so knowing, so discreet, so sprightly,
fill a Cup of Claret, so; Admirably, in desires so excellently, Admirably
deserving, that an old man, fie, fie, prithee -- ha to thee.


Wid. The man's mad sure.

Iar. Mad, by this hand, a witty Gallant.

John. Prithee peace, shall hear a Song.

Enter Ancient Young. Wid, What copes-mate's this trow, who let him is?

Iar. By this light, a fellow of an excellent breeding.
He came unbidden, and brought his stool with him.

John. Look Mistress, how they stare one at another?

Iar. Yes, and swell like a couple of gib'd Cats, met both by chance in the
dark, in an old Carret.


Wid. Look, look, now there is no fear of the wild beasts, they have forgot
their spleenes, and look prettily, they fall to their pasture, I had thought
they had bin angry, and they are hungry.


Iar. Are they none of Duke Humsreyes furies, do you think, that they devised
this plot in Paul's to get a dinner?


Wid. Time may produce as strange a truth.
Let Us note them.

Enter Randal. Rand. Her loved her once, her loved her no more,
Saint Tauis so well as her loved her then.

Wid. Another Bar, this is the Cooke-maids leaving, open the door, and this
is the daintiest dish she has sent in, a Widgia in Welsh sauce -- pray lets
make a merry day on it.


Rand. What do her keep open house, had her heard her was Widdovves that
dwelt here, are you Widows good wo^^ns?


Wid. I want a husband Sir.

Rand. Augle Randalls comes in very good times, you keep Ordinaries her think,
what have you set a cat before gallants there?


Iar. They will eat him for the second course -- these are suitors to my
Mistress sure, things that she sleights, set your feere boldly in, Widows are
not caught as maids kiss, faintly, but as Mastiffes fight, valiantly.


Rand. Is her so, I pray bid her Mistress observe Randals for valors, and
prave adventures?


Ant. Some Beer.

Wid. Let them want nothing.

Ant. Here VVidow.

Wid. I thank you Sir.

Alex. Some Wine.

Iar. Here is Wine for you Sir.

Ran. Randals will not be outprav'd I warrant her.

Alex. Here VVidow.

Wid. I thank you too Sir,

Rand. Sounds some Metheglings here.

Wid. What does he call for?

Iar. Here are some eggs for you Sir.

Ran. Eggs man, some Metheglings, the wine of Wales.

Iar. Troth sir here is none in the house, pray make a versue of necessity, and
drink to her in this glass of Claret.


Rand. Well, because her will make a great deals of necessities of virtues,
mark with what a grace Randals will drink to her Mistress.


Maid. He makes at you forsooth.

Wid. Let him come, I have ever an English virtue to put by a welsh.


Rand. O noble Widows, her heart was full of woes.

Alex. No noble Welchman, her heart was in her hose.

Rand. 'Sounds, was that her manners to take away Randalls cups?


Ant. No, it showed scurvy.

Alex. Take It you at worst then.

Ant. Whelpe of the Devil, thou shall see thy Sire for it.

John. Iar. Gentlemen what mean ye?

Randals. Let her come, let her come, Randals will redeem reputations her
warrant her.


Wid. Redeem your wit sir, first for you Sir, you are a stranger, and see you,
-- but you, fie Master Bloodhound.


Ant. Ha, Bloodhound, good sir let me speak with you.

Ran. Sounds, what do Randals amongst ploodhounds, good Widows lend her an
ear.


Alex. Ancient Young, how false our memories have played through long
discontinuance, but why met here man, is Mars so bad a play master, that our
Ancients fight under Cupids Banner?


Ant. Faith this was but a sudden start begotten from distraction of some
fortunes, I pursue this Widow but for want of wiser work.


Iar. The Welchman labors at it.

Rand. A pair of a hundred of seepes, thirty prave Cowes, and twelve dozen of
Runts.


Wid. Twelve dozen of Goose.

Ran. Give her but another hark?

Alex. He has the morgage still, and I have a handsome sister, do but meet at
the Fountain in Fleetestreete after dinner, o I will read thee a History of
happiness, and thou shall thank me.


Ant. A^, read all is well, or weapons.

Alex. A word Iarvis?

Ran. Oh prave Widows, her will meet her there, he^ know her times and her
seasons, her warrant her, Randalls will make these prave Gallants hang her
selfs in those garters of willow Garlands apout her pates, mark her now, and
remember. Exit.


Ant. Adieu sweet widow, for my ordinary --

Wid. It Was not so much worth Sir.

Ant. You mean, 'tvvas worth more then, and that is another handsomely begged.


Wid. You conclude women cunning beggars then.

Ant. Yes, and men good benefactors, my best wishes wait on so sweet a Mistress
-- will ye walk? Exit.


Alex. I Will follow ye, woo't think on it soon at night, or not at all?


Iar. I wood not have my wishes wronged, if I should bring it about handsomely,
you can be honest?


Alex. Can, do conclude me a'satt in cheat?

Iar. No, a smooth Gallant sir, do not you fail to be here soon at nine,
still provided, you will be honest, if I convey you not under her bed, throvv me
a top o'th Tester, and say me o^^ o'th way like a rusty Bilboe.


Alex. Enough, drink that, fare ^el, Widdovv, Fate, the Destinies, and the
three ill favored Sisters, have concluded the means, and when I am thy
Husband?


Wid. I shall be your wife.

Alex. Do but remember these cross Capers, then ye pitter sweet one?


Wid. Till then adieu ye bitter sweet one.

Iar. This dinner would have showed better in bed-lane, and she a the other side,
holds her whole nest of suitors play, what Art decks the dark Labyrinth of a
woman's heart. Exit.


Enter Mary Bloodhound, and Sim Mary. Marry old Earelacke, is my Father mad?

Sim. They are both a concluding on it yonder, to morrow's the day, one wedding
dinner must serve both marriages.


Moll. Oh Sim, the Ancient, the delicate Ancient there is a man, and thou
talk of a man, a good face and sparkling eye, a strenght body, a delicate
hand, a clean leg and foot, ah sweet Sim, there is a man worth, Maidenhead.


Enter Bloodhound, and Earelacke. Sim. But I say, Master Eare-lacke the old
man, a foot like a Bear, a leg like a bed-staffe, a hand like a hatchet, an
eye like a pigge, and a face like a vv^^ter Pigme, there is a man for a
Maydenhead.


Mol. Oh look, look, oh alas what shall I do with him?


Sim. What, why what shall fifteen do vuith sixty and twelve, make a
screene of him, stand next the fire, whilst you sit behind him, and keep a
friends lips warm^, many a wench vvod be glad of such a fortune.


Blood. Your oath struck it dead then? o my sides.

Ear. Five hundred deep of your side itaith father.

Blood. Mol, come hither Mol, I hope Sim has discovered the project?


Ear. And to morrow must be the day Mol, both of a day, one dinner shall
serve, we may have store of little ones, we must save for our family.


Mol. Good Sir, what rashness was parent to this madness, marry an old man --
Eare-lacke the Informer?


Blood. Madness -- you are a whore.

Ear. Is she a whore Sim?

Sim. She must be your wise, I tell --

Blood. An arrant vhore, to refuse Master Innocent Earelacke of Rogue-land,
that for his dwelling, next that he does Inform now and then against
enormities, and has bin blancketted, it may be pump't in's time: yet the
world knovves, he dos't not out of need, he is of mighty means, but takes
delight now and then to trot up and down, to avoid Idleness, you whore.


Sim. Good Sir.

Ear. Pray Father.

Mol. This wound wants oil, good sir in all my paths
I will make you my guide, I was only startled,
And with the suddenness of the word marriage
In that I knevv, that this deserving Gentleman
And I, had never so much conference,
Whereby this coal of Paph^s, by the Rhethoricke
Of his love-stealing heart, Captivating Language,
Might be blovvne into a flame.

Ear. Does she take Tobacco Father?

Blood. No, no, man, here are out of ballads,
She has all the Garland of good will by heart.

Ear. Snailes she may sing me asleep a nights then Sim^

Sim. Why, right Sir, and then it is but tickling you o'th forehead with her
heels, you are awake again, and never the worse man.


Moll Is he but five years older then your self sir?

Ear. Nay, I want a week and three days of that too.

Blood. I Will tell thee an old saw for it girl, old, say he be, old blad^s are
best, young hearts are never old.


Ear. Ah Hay.

Blood. Gold is great Glee, gold begets rest, what fault is found in Gold?


Sim. I will answer presently Sir, with another Saw.

Blood. Let Us have it, lets ha'te.

Ear. Mark Moll.

Sim. Young, say she be young, young Mutton's sweet, content is above Gold, if
like an old Cock he with young Mutton meets, he feeds like a Cuckold.


Blood. A very pretty pithy one, I protest, look and Moll dee not laugh, shall
have a pair of gloves for thee, what leather do love?


Sim. Calfe Sir, sh^^p's too simple for me.

Blood. Nay, it is a witty notable knave, he should never serve me else.


Enter John with a letter. John. My Mistress remembers her love, and requests
you would endure her so much to your patience, as to read that.


Blood. Love letters, love lies, do mark Sim, these Women are violent, Sim,
whilst I read the lie, do you rail to him upon the Brewer, swear has
deceived us, and save a cup of Beer by it.


Sim. I will save you a cup at that rate fir.

Ear. I can make thee a hundred a year jointure wench, at the first indeed, I
began with petty businesses wench, and here I picked, and there I picked, but
now I run through none but things of Value.


Moll. Sir, many thoughts trouble me, and your words carry such weight, that I
will choose a time, when I have nothing else to do, to think on 'em.


Ear. By my troth, she talks the vvittiliest, and I wood understand her.


Blood. Oh nimble, nimble Widow, I am sorry we have no better friends, but
pray commend me, tho in a blunt dry Commendations at the time and place
appointed, I wonnot fail, I know she has a nest of suitors, and would carry't
close, because she fears surprisall.


Ear. What news Father?

Blood. Shall lie there all night son.

Ear. Was that the first nevves I heard on it.

Blood. I must meet a friend in the dark soon, let me see, we lovers are all a
little mad, do you and Moll take a turn or two in the garden, whilst Sim and I
go up into the Garret and device, the guess come.


Sim. He Is a little mad, and I had best hang him upon the cross beam in the
Garret. Exit.


Ear. Come Mol, come Molkin, we will even to the Camamile bed, and talk of
household stuff, and be sure thou remembrest a Trade.


Mol. Please ye go before Sir?

Ear. Nay, an old Ape has an old eye, I shall go before, and thou vvoo't
show me a Love-tricke, and lock me into the Garden, butterflies, I will
come discreetely behind Moll.


Moll. Out upon him, what a suitor have I got, I am sorry you are so bad an
Archer sir.


Ear. Why Bird, why Bird?

Moll. Why, to shoot at Buts, when you should (...) prick-shafts, short
shooting will loose ye the game, I a^ (...) you sir.


Ear. Her mind runs sure upon a Fletcher, or a Bowyer, howsoever, I Will
inform against both the Fletcher, for taking whole money for piec't arrows,
the Bowyer for horning the head men of his Parish, and taking money for his
pains. Exeunt.


Enter in the Tavern, Alex. the Captain, Lieutenant, Sue Shortheeles, a
whore, Mistress Cook, a Bawd. Alex. Some rich Canarie boy.

Draw. Anon, anon Sir.

Alex. Possible ^^us cheated of a hundred pi^ces, A han^some halter, and the
Hangmans wages pop'^ in the place, what an acute witness we have in
wickedness.


Cap. It Is done, and handsomely you.

Enter Drawer. Draw. Here Is a pottle of rich Cannary, and a quart of neat
Clarret Gentlemen, and there is a Gentleman below, he says he is your Brother,
Master Bloodhound, he appointed to meet you here.


Capt. The expected thing that bought the Bristovv stone.


Alex. Send him up prithee, remember how it must be carried?


Bawd I am her Grandmother, forg^t not that by any means.


Alex. And pray remember that you do not mump^ as if you were ch^vving Bacon,
and spoil all.


Draw. I vvarrant ye.

Enter Ancient. Alex. And hark.

Draw. Are these the company sir?

Ant. Yes, but those I ^^k^ not, the^e are not they, I Will stay in the next room
till my company come.


Draw. Where you please Sir, pray follovv me.
Exit.
Capt. I hear him coming up gingerly.

Alex. Oh he tramples upon the bosom of a Tavern with that dexterity, as
your Lawyers Clearkes do to Westminster Hal upon a durty day with a pair
of white silk stockings, Brother Tim, why now you are a man of your word I
see.


Tim. Nay I love to be as good as my say, see brother, look, there is the rest
or your money upon the Ring, I cannot spend a penny, for I have never a penny
left, what are these, what are these?


Alex. Gallants of note and quality, he that fits taking
Tobacco is a Captain, Captain Carve-gut.

Tim He will not make a Capon of me, will ^ee.

Alex. Are you not my brother?

Alex. He that powers out that sparkling sprightly
Claret, is a Lieutenant under him, Lieutenant B(...).
He was a S^rg^ant first.

Tim. Of the Poultry, or of Woodstreete.

Alex. Of the Poultry, of a Woodcock:
A Serg^^nt in the Field, a man of blood.

Tim. I Will take my leave brother, I am in g(...) ha^^.

Alex. That delicate sweet young Gentlewoman.

Tim. Fough this Tobacco.

Alex. That bears the b^^sh of (...)ing upon her cheeks, whoseeyes are like a
pair of (...)ing Twi^^es.


Tim. Sh^^ looks ^ust upon ^e.

Alex. I think you are in have.

Tim. No, no, no pray:

Alex. Whose lips are beds of Roses, betwixt which
There steals a breath sweeter th^n Indian Spices.

Tim. Sweeter then Ginger.

Alex. But then to touch th^se lips -- you stay too long sure.


Tim. Pish I tell you, I do no^, I know my time, pray what is her name?


Alex. But it is descended from the (...)cian steeme, the great tributie L(...)
her (...)e, th^^ ^^ci^^t ^^^^on is her reverent Granham.


Tim. Niggers I have read of her in the Mirr^^r of Kaighthood.


Alex. Co^^ they shall know you.

Tim. Nay brother.

Alex. I say they shall.

Tim. Let me go down and wash my face first.

A(...). (...) ^^ce is a ^^ne face my brother Gentle^^^.

Capt. Sir, you are victoriously welcome.

Tim. That word has ^^'ne conque^d me.

Li^^. I desire to ki(...) your hand Sir.

Tim. Indeed but you shall not Sir, I went out early, and forgot to wash them.


B(...)d. Precious Do(...)il.

Capt. Sir, I shall call it^ (...)efie if you shall (...) to vouchsa^e to
pledge me.


Tim. What is it brother four or six?

Alex. ^oure or six, it is rich Canary, it came from beyond the Sea^.


Tim. I wi^^ do no courtesy at this time Sir, yet for one cup I care not,
because it comes from b^yond the Seas.

I think it is Outlandish win^.

Sue. Look how it glides.

Tim. Now truly the Gentleman drinks as like one Master Widgen a kinsman of
mine.


Lieu. Pox on ye hei^ding.

Tim. I have heard of that Widgin, I have been taken for him, and now I think
on it, A cup of this is better then our four shilling Beer at home.


Lieu. You must drink another Sir, you drunk to no body.

Tim. Is it the law, that if a man drinks to no body, he must drink again.


Omnes. I, I, I. Fill his glass.

Tim. Why, then I will drink to no body once more, because I will drink
again.


Alex. Did I not tell ye. More wine there Drawer.

Sue. This Pageant's worth the seeing by this hand.

Tim. Me thinks this glass was better then the to'ther Gentlemen.


Capt. Oh Sir, the deeper the sweeter ever.

Tim. Do ye think so?

Lieu. Ever that when ye drink to no body.

Tim. Why then I pray give me the other cup that I may drink to some body.


Bawd. I have not drunk yet sir.

Alex. Again ye Witch? drink to the young Gentlewom^n.


Tim. Mistress Lindabrides.

Sue. Thanks most ingenious sir.

Ant. She Is a little shame faced, the deeper the sweeter for^ooth.


Tim. Pox on ye for a Coxcombe.
Enter Ancient.
A(...) In The next room I have seen and heard all. -- Oh noble ^ouldiers.


Tim. Here Boys, give us some more wine. There Is hundred Marks Gallants. It Is
your own. And do but let me bear on Office amongst ye. I know as great a
matter has been done for as small a sum. Pray let me follow the fashion.


Capt. Well, for once take up the money, Give me a cup of Sack. And give me
your hand sir, and because our Flemish Corporal was lately choakt at Delph
with a Flapdragon. Bear you his name and place, and be henceforth called
Corporal Codshead. Let the health go round.


Tim. Round. And this go not round. Some wine there Tapster. Is there never a
Tapster in the house?


-- Ancient she was himself. Alex. My worthy friend, thou art Master of thy
word, Gentlemen it is Ancient Young, you are Soldiers, come come, save cap,
complement in cup. Prithee sit down.


Ant. Are you a Captain sir?

Cap. Yes.

Ant. And you a Lieutenant.

Cap. Yes.

Ant. I pray where served you last?

Cap. Why, at the battle of Prague.

Ant. Under what Colonel. In what Regiment?

Cap. Why, let me see: but come in company: let us sit sir. True Soldiers
scorn unnecessary discourse, especially in Tauernes.


Ant. It Is true, true Soldiers do: but you are Tauern-rats.

Cap. How?

Alex. Prithee.

Ant. Foul food that lies all day vndisgested,
Upon the queasie stomach of some Tavern,
And are ^pewed out at midnight.

Tim. Corporal Codsheads health sir.

Ant. In thy face fool.

Tim. This is a cruel Ancient.

Ant. ^ee are but the worms of worth,
The sons of shame and baseness,
That in a Tavern dares out-sit the Sun,
And rather then a Whore shall part unpledg'd,
You Will pawn your souls for a superfluous cup,
Though ye cast it into the reckoning,
The true soldier, who is all over, a History of man,
Noble, and Valiant, Wisdom is the mould,
In which he casts his Actions, such a discreet temperance
Does daily deck his doings, that by his modesty,
He is guest the son of merit, and by his mildness
Is believed Valiant, go, and build no more
These ^yrie Castles of hatched fame, which fools
Only admire and fear you for, the wiseman
Derides and jeeres ye puffes really of
Virtue and Valor? (These fair twins
That are borne, breath and die together) then
You Will no more be called butterflies, but men:
Think on it, and pay your reckoning.
Exit.
Cap. Shall we suffer this Saunder?

Ale. I must go after him.

Sue. Kill him, and there be no more men in Christendom.


Ale. I know my Sister loves him, and he swears he loves her, -- and by this
hand, it shall go hard if he have her not, smock and all, brave excellent
man, with what a strength of zeal we admire that goodness in another, which
we cannot call our own. Exit.


Lieu. He Is a dead man I warrant him.

Cap. But where is our Corporal, Corporal, Corporal?

Tim. Well, here is your Corporal, and you looks out can be quiet.


Sue. Look and he have not in^const himself in a wooden Castle?


Tim. Is he gone that called us butter-flies?

Bawd. Yes, yes, has taken wing, and your Brother's gone after him, to fight
with him.


Tim. That's well, he cannot in conscience but do us the courtesy and kill him
for us, come gallants, what shall we do? I Will never go home to go to bed with
my guts full of (...) shillings beer, when I may replenish them with Sack, --
Hay, now am I as lusty, me thinks we two have blew ^^eards, is there nere a
wench to be had? Drawer bring us up impossibilities, an honest Whore, and a
conscionable reckoning.


Lieu. Why here is all fire, wit, where he will or no.

Sue. Ah whore, o tempting, handsome Sir, think of a rich Wife rather.


Tim. Tempting handsome Sir, she is not married is she Gentlemen?


Cap. A woodcock spring'd, let us but keep him in this bachavalian mist till
morning, and it is done.


Tim. Tempting handsome Sir, I have known a woman of handsome tempting
fortunes, throw her self away upon a handsome tempting Sir.


Lieu. Hark you sir, if she had, and coo'd be tempted to it, have you a mind
to marry: wooed ye marry her?


Tim. Oh, and a man were so, worthy tempting Sir.

Lieu. Give me but a piece from you.

Tim. And when will you give it me again?

Lieu. Pray give me but a piece from you, I Will pay this reckning intoth'
argaine, and if I have not a trick to make it your own, I Will give you ten
for it -- here is my witness.


Tim. There it is, send thee good luck with it, and go drunk to bed.


Lieu. Do not you be too rash, for she observes you, and is infinitely affected
to good breeding.


Tim. I wonnot speak I tell you, till you hold up your finger, or fall a
vvhistling.


Cap Come, we will pay at Bar, and to the Miter in Bredstreete, we will make a
mad night on it, please ye sweet Ladies but to walk into Bredstreete, this
gentleman has a foo^ish slight supper, and he most ingenuously professes, it
would appear to him, the Meridian Altitude of his desired happiness, but to
have the table decked with a pair of perfections, so exquisitely refulgent.


Tim. He talks all sack, and he will drink no small Beer:

Bawd Pray lead, and he shall follow.

Sue. Bless mine eyes, my heart is full of changes.
Exit.
Tim. Oh, is it so, I have heard there be more changes in a woman's heart in an
hour, then can be rung up on six bells, seven days, well go thy ways,
little do thou think how thou shall be betrayed, within this four and
twenty hours, thou shall be mine own Wife, flesh and blood, by Father and
Mother, o tempting hansome Sir.


Exeunt. Actus. 3. Scaena. 1.
Enter John, and the Maid. John. But sirrah, can tell what my Mistress
means to do with her suitors?


Maid. Nay, nay, I know not, but there is one of them I am sure worth looking
after.


John. Which is he, I prithee?

Maid. Oh John, Master Randall, John.

John. The Welchman.

Maid. The witty man, the pretty man, the singing man, he has the dantiest
dittie, so full of pith, so full of spirit, as they say.


John. Ditties, they are the ends of old Ballets.

Maid. Old ends, I am sure they are new beginnings with me.


John. Here comes my Mistress:

Enter Widow, and Iarvis. Wid. Who was that knokt at' Gate?

Lar. Why your welsh wooer.

Maid. Alas, the sight on's eyes enough to singe my little May denhead, I shall
never be able to endure him.


Exit Maid. Enter Randall. Rand. When high King Henry, second ruled this land,
the couple of her name,
Besides her Queen, was teerely loved,
a fair and Princely -- Widows,
Hark you Widows, Randals was disturbed in cogitatiens, about Lands,
Ploughs, and Cheese presses in Wales, and becat her have forgot where her, and
her meet soon at pright dark Evenings.


Wid. Why on the Change, in the Dutch walks.

Rand. Oh haw, have her -- but Randals was talk no Ducth, pray meet her in
the Welsh walk, was no Welsh walk there?


Wid. Fie, no, there are no Welsh Merchants there.

Ran. Mas, was ferry true, was aule Shentlemen in Wales, her never saw her
Shamber-maid, pray where was her Shamber-maid?


Iar. Taken up in the Kitchen Sir.

Rand. Can her make wedding pedd pravely for Randals, and Widows?


Wid. Pray tell him Iarvis where she can or no.

Iar. Sir, not to delay, but to debellitate the strength of your Active
apprehension of my Mistress favor.


Rand. Was ferry good words.

Iar. Hark in your ear, she will have her nest feathered with no British
breed.


Randall. Zounds, was not Prittish so good as English?


Iar. Yes, Where there is Wisdom, Wit, and Valor, but as amongst our English,
we may have one Fool, a Knave, a Coxecombe, and a Coward, she bid me tell
ye, she has seen such wonders come out of Wales in one shirt, you are an Ass,
and she will have none of you


Rand. Augh, S. Tauie, Owen Morgan, and aule her Cosins, was Widow her self
^ay so?


Wid. Good sir, let every circumstance make up one answer, take it with you.


Iaruis. And the R^mane answer is, the English goose Sir.


Rand. Sounds, her was kill now, gog, and gogmagog, a whole dozen of shiants,
make ^oole of Randals, Randalls was wished to as prave match as widows was,
know one Mary Bloodhound, was ha aule, when her father kick up heels, and
becat though her never saw her, her will send her Love letters presently, get
her good wills, and go to shurch and marry, and her were eight and thirty,
two hundred and nine and fifty widows, mark her now.


Iar. He pelts as he goes pitifully.

Enter Mary. Wid: Where Is Mary?

John. Mary.

Wid. Pray go to Algate, to my Sempstris for my ru^^e, I must use it say too
morrow, did ye bid her hollow it just in the French fashion cut?


Maid. Yes forsooth.

Wid. It Was well, we have no other proof in use, that we are English, if we
do not Zany them, let John go with you.


Maid. Yes forsooth:
Exit.
Iar. But pray forsooth, how do you mean to dispose of your suitors?


Wid. Shall I tell thee, for this thou have given him this cure, and he is past
care, for old Bloodbound the Saw-monger, I writ to him, to meet me soon at ten
in the dark, upon the change, and if I come not by ten, he should stay while
twelve, intimating something mystically, that to avoid surprizalls of other
Rivals, I mean to go from thence with him to lie at his house all night, and
go to Church with him in the morning, when my meaning is only kn^very, to make
my self merry, and let him cool his heels there till morning.


Iar. And now have I a whimsey, newly jumpt into the coll of ingenious
apprehensive, to sauce him daintisy, that for that, what think ye of the
Gentleman that brought a a stool with him out of the Hall, and sat down at
dinner with ye in the parler?


Wid. They say he is an Ancient, but I affect not his C^llours.


Iar. But what say ye to the mad victorious Alexander?

Wid. A wild mad Roarer, a trouble not worth minding.

Iar. He will mind you ere morning: troth Mistress There waytes a Gentleman
in the next room, that has a long time loved you, and has watched for such an
hour, when all was out of doors, to tell you so; and none being within but
you and I, he desires you would hear him speak, and there is an end on it.


Wid. What is he?

Iar. An honest man.

Wid. How know ye?

Iar. Why, he told me so.

Wid. And why were you such a fool to take his own word?


Iar. Because all the wit I had cood get no bodies else.


Wid. A Knave will ever tell you he is an honest man.

Iar. But an honest man will never tell you he is a knave.


Wid. Well sir, your Mistress dares look upon the honest man.


Iar. And the honest man dares look upon my Mistress. Exit.


Wid. It Is the roughest bluntest Fellow.
Yet when I take young Bloodhound to a retired collection of scattered
judgment, which often lies disioynted, with the confused distraction of so
many: Me thinks he dwells in my opinion, a right ingenious spirit, vailde
merely with the vanity of youth and wildness: he looks me thinks like one
that could retract himself from his mad starts, and when he pleased turn
tame: his hansome wildness me thinks becomes him, could he keep it bounded
in Thrift and Temperance: but down these thoughts, my resolve rests here in
private, -- But from a fool, a Miser, and a man too jealous for a little
sweetness love, Cupid defend me.


Enter like a Gentleman very brave with Iaruis clothes in's hand. Iar. And to
a Widow wife,
Nobly liberal, and discreetely Credulous,
Cupid has sent me.

Wid. Pray prove as you appear a Gentleman. Why Iaruis?


Iar. Look ye here is Iaruis haangs by Geometry, and here is the Gentleman. For
less I am not that afar off taken with the Sainted praises of your wealthy
beauty, your person, wisdom, modesty, and all that can make woman gracious,
in this habit sought and obtayn'd your service.


Wid. For heavens sake what is your intent?

Iar. I love you.

Wid. Pray keep off.

Iar. I wood keep from you. Had my desires bodies
How I cood beat them into better fashion,
And teach them Temperance, For I rid to find you;
And at a meeting amongst many Dames,
I saw you first: Oh how your taking eyes,
Those actiues sparkling sweet discovered twins,
In their strong captiuating motion, told me
The story of your heart, a 10^0 Cupids
Me thought sat playing on that pair of Christails,
Carrying to the swiftness of conetous Fancy,
The very letters we spell love with.

Wid. Fie. Fie.

Iar. I have struck her to the heart, through my face
Apparelled with this field of gravity,
The neglected roughness of a Soldiers dart.
These diamond pointed eyes but hither through, and you will see a young spring
on it, but question times fair ones.

They 'le confess, tho with a blush they have often found good wine at an old
bush. My blood is young, and full of amorous heates, which but brancht out into
these lusty veins,

Wood play, and dally, and in wanton Turnings
Wood teach you strange constructions.
Let time and place then with Loves old friend opportunity instruct you to be
wise.


Wid. Alas Sir, where learned you to catch occasions thus?


Iar. Of a Lawyers Clarke wench, that with six such Catches, leapt in five
years from his Deske to his Coach drawn with four horses.


Wid. Do ye mean marriage?

Iar. Marriage a cloying meat, marry who thou woot to make a show to shroud
thee from the storms round headed opinion, that swayes all the world, may let
fall on thee. Me Cozen? thou shall call once in a month, or so: I Will read
false Letters from a far distant Uncle, insert his commendations to thee, hug
thy believing husband into a pair of hansome horns. Look upon him with one
eye, and wink upon thee with the other. Woodst have any more?


Wid. The return of Servants, or some friendly visit will intercept us now:
reassume your habit, and be but Iaruis till no morrow morning, I now by the
potent truth of friendship, I will give you plenty of cause to confess I love
you truly, and strongly.


Iar. ^'are in earnest.

Wid. On my life serious, let this kiss seal it.

Iar. The softest wax ever sealed bawdy business.
Now for old Bloodbound, I will meet you upon the Change Sir, with a blind
bargain, and then help your son to a good pennyworth: this night shall be
all mirth, a Mistress of delight. Exeunt.


Enter Bloodhound, Earelacke with Letters, Sim, and Moll. Blood. Nay, nay, nay,
mark what follows, I must bring her home^'th dark, turn her up to bed, and
here she goes to Church: my Cloak sirrah.


Sim. It Is a very dark night sir, you will not have a cloak for the rain.


Blood. I am going to steal the Widow from I know not how many.


Sim. Nay, then I let your cloak for the rain alone, and fetch you a cloak
for your knaverie. Exit.


Blood. To bed, to bed -- good son, what Sim I say.

Mol. Sir.

Blood. I charge ye let not one be up ith'house, but your self, after the
clock strikes ten, nor a light be stirring, Moll, Trick up the green
bedchamber very dainti^y.


Sim I shall Sir.

Blood. And well remembered Moll, the keys of my Compting house, are in the
left pocket of my hose above in the wicker chair, look to them and have a care
of the black box there I have often told thee of, look to that as to thy
Maydenhead.


Moll. I shall sir.

Blood. Pray for me all, pray for me all.

Sim. Have you left out any thing for supper?

Blood. Out Rogue shall not I be at infinite expense to morrow, fast too
night, and pray for me.


Sim. An old devil in a greasy Satin doublet, keep you company.


Blood. Ha, what is that?

Sim. I say, the Satin doublet you will wear too morrow, will be the best in
the company sir.


Blood. That Is true, that's true, I come Widow, I come VVench.


Moll. Oh sweet Sim, what shall I do to morrow, to morrow must be the day,
the doleful day, the dismal day, alas Sim, what do thou think in thy
con-science I shall do with an old man?


Sim. Nay, you are well enough served, you know how your rother not an ho^^e
ago, lay at you ^o have the Ancient, one that your ^eeth^e'ne water at, and
yet you cry, I cannot love him, I wonnot have him.


Moll. I coo'd willingly marry him, if I might do nothing but look on him all
day, where he might not see me, but to he with him, alas I shall be undone the
first night.


Sim. That Is true, how will you go to bed else, but remember he is a man of
War, an Ancient, you are his colors, now when he has nimbly displayed ye,
and hansomly foulded ye up against the next fight, then we shall have you cry,
o sweet Sim, I had been undone, if I had not been undone.


Moll. Nay, and then the old fellow would mumble me to bed.


Sim. A bed, a Bawd with two teeth would not mumble Bacon, so then he so
sparing you, shall wear nothing, but from the Brokers at second hand, when
being an Ancients wife, you shall be sure to flourish.


Moll. Prithee go in and busy the old man with a piece of Reynard the Fox,
that he may not disturb us, for at this hour I expect Ancient Young, and my
Brother.


Sim. Well, I leave you to the managing of Ancient Young, while I go in and
flappe the old man in the mouth with a Fox tail. Exit.


Enter Alexander, and Ancient. Moll. Look, look, and he have not brought him
just upon the minute, o sweet silken Ancient, my mind givesme^, thee and I
shall dance the shaking of the sheets together.


Alex. Now, you Mistress fig-^aile, s^he Wind come about yet, I ha brought the
Gentleman, do not you t^ll him now, you had rather have his room then his
company, and so show your breeding.


Moll. Now fie upon you, by this light you are the wicked'st fellow, my Brother
but abuses y^u, pray Sir go over again, yo'ue a hansome spying wi^, you may
send more truth over in one of your w^ll penned pamphlets, then all the
vveekely nevves we buy for our penny.


Ant. Pox on it, I Will stay no longer.

Alex. Sfoote thou shall stay longer, we will stay her heart her guts out.


Moll. Ha, ha, how will you do for a sister then?

Alex. Prithee Moll do, do but look upon him?

Moll. ^^s, when I ha no better object.

Alex. What can thou see in him thou unhansome (...)ous thing, that merrits
not above thee?


Moll. What wooed I give to kiss him?

Alex. Has he not a hansome body, straight legged, a good face.


Moll. Yes, but his lips look as if they were as hard as his heart.


Ant. Foot, shall try that presently.

Moll. You Are basely sir conditioned, -- Pagh.

Alex. Why, do you ^^it?

Moll. Ye may go by this light, he kisses sweetly.

Alex. Do b^t stay a ^i^t^e Moll, prithe Moll, thou know (...)y Father has
wronged him; make him amen^s and marry him.


Moll. Sweet M. Spe^dall spare your busy breath,
I must have a wise man, or else none.

Alex. And is not he a wise man?

Moll. No.

Alex. Why?

Moll. Because he keeps a fool company.

Alex. Why, you are now i^'s company.

Moll. But birds of a feather will fly together, and you and he are seldom
asunder.


Alex. Why you young witch, call your elder brother ^oole; but go thy ways,
and keep thy may denhead till it grow more deservedly de^pi^ed, then are the
old base boots of a half stewed Pander: Lead a Welsh Morris with the Apes
in hell amongst the little devils, -- or when thou sha^t lie sighing, by the
side of some rich fool, -- remember thou thing of thread and needles, not
worth three pence half penny.


Moll. Too late I fear I ha'be^ne too coy, you are to be married then sir?


Ant. I am indeed sweet Mistress, to a Maid
Of excellent parentage, breeding, and beauty.

Alex. I ha'thought of such Musicians for thee.

Ant. But let it not be any way distast^ull unto you, that thus I tried you,
for your brother persuaded me to pretend love to you, that he might perceive
how your mind stood to marriage, in that (as I guess) he has a husband kept
in store for you.


Alex. I, I have provided a husband for thee Moll.

M^ll. But I'^e have no husband of your providing, for alas now shall have the
old man whether I will or no.


Alex. I have such a stripling for thee, he wants one eye, and is crooked
legged, but that was broke at Footbale.


Ant. Alas, we cannot mould men you know.

Alex. He Is rich, he is rich Moll.

Moll. Ha'him and his riches good sir, you are to be married in earnest.


Alex. In earnest; why, do ye think men marry as Fencers sometimes fight, in
jest?


Alex. Shall I show her Mistress Elizabeth's Letter I snatched from thee?


Ant. Not, and thou love me.

Moll. Goo^ brother let me see it, sweet brother, dai^ty brother, honey broth^^.


Alex No in^eed, you shall not s^e't, sweet sister, dainty ^ister, honey sister.


Moll. Oh good si^, since so long time I have loved you, let me not dye for
your sake.


Alex. The tide turns.

Ant. Long time^ ued me?

Moll. Long ^re you w^nt to Sea I did.
I have loved you very long with all my heart.

Alex. Think of Besse; think of Besse, it is the better match.


Moll. Ye wicked brother, Indeed I love you better, then all the Besses in the
world, and if to night I shift not into better fortunes, to morrow I am made
the miserablest wi^e marriage and misery can produce.


Alex. Is It possible?

Moll. Alas Sir, I am to mary an old man, a very old man, trust me, I was
strange in the nice timorous temper of a Ma^^, I knovv^'tis against our sex to
say we love, but rather then to match with sixty and ten, threescore and ten
times I wooed tell you so, and tell them ten times over too, truth loves not
virtue with more of virtuous truth, then I do you, and wonnot you love me
then? Weeps.


Ant. And lie with thee too by this hand VVench, come let us have fair
weather, thou art mine, I am thine, there is an end of the business, this was
but a trick, there is the projector.


Moll. Oh you are a sweet brother.

Alex. And now thou art my sweet Sister, I know the old man's gone to meet with
an old wench that will meet with him, ^r Iarvis has no juice in's brains, and
while I in the mean time, set another wheel a going at the Widows, do thou
soon about ten, for it is to be very conveniently dark, meet this Gentleman
at the Nags head corner, just against Leaden-hill, we lie in Lime-streete,
thither he shall carry thee, Accomodate thee daintily, all night with Mistress
Dorothy, and marry thee in the morning very Methodically.


Moll. But I have the charge of my Fathers keys, where all his writings lie.


Ant. How all things jumpe in a just equivalencie, to keep thee from the thing
of threescore and ten, did thou not see my Morgage lately there?


Moll. Stay, stay.

Alex A wl^te devil with a red fox tail, in a black box.

Mol But yesterday my father showed it me; and swears if I pleased him well, it
should serve to ^^mp out my portion.


Ant. Prove thine old Dad a Prophet, bring it with thee Wench.


Moll But now at's parting, he charged me to have a care to that, as to my
Maydenhead.


Alex. Why, fine have thy Maidenhead and that into the bargain, thy c^arge is
performed, away, get thee in, forget not the hour, and you had better fight
under Ancient Yongs colors, then the old Man's standard of sixty and ten. Exit.


Mol. Remember this, mad-braine.
Exit.
Actus 4. Scaena. 1.
Enter Suo, Tim, Captain, and Bawd. Tim. Ha, ha, ha, Grandmother, I Will tell
thee the best jest.


Sue. Prithee chicke.

Bawd. Jest kether, here will be jesting of all sides I think, if Iarvis
keep his word.


Tim. Sirrah, whilst thou were sent for into the next room, up came our
second course, amongst others in a dish of blackebirds, there lay one, that I
swore was a Woodcocke, you were at Table Captain.


Cap. That I was, and our brave mad crew, which for my sake you were pleased
to make vvelcome.


Tim. Pish, vve'le have as many more to morrow night, but still I swore it was a
Woodcocke: she swore '^vvas a backe-Bird, ^ovv who shall we be tried by, but
Serieant Sliceman, Captain Carveguts Cozen here, a trifling wager, a matter
of the reckoning was laid, the Serieant swore it was a backe-Bird, I presently
paid the reckoning, and she clapped of the breast presently, and swore 'tvvas a
Woodcocke, as if any other wood pass after the reckoning was paid.


Bawd. This was a pretty one I protest.

Tim. Made sure before such a mad crew of vvitnesses, sirrah, Granham, all is
agreed, Sue's --.


Sue. I you may see, how you men can betray poor maids.


Enter Lieutenant. Lieu: Do you hear Corporal, yonder is Serieant Sliceman, and
the brave crew that supt with us have called for three or four gallons of wine,
and are offering money.


Tim. How, prithee Granham look to Dab, do you two but hold them in a talk,
whilst I steal down and pay the reckoning.


Lieu. Do It daintily, theyl'e stay all night.

Tim. That Is it I would have man, we will make them all drunk, they will never
leave us else, and still as it comes to a crown, I Will steal down and pay it
in spite of their teeth, remember therefore that ye make them all drunk, but
be sure you keep me sober to pay the reckonings.


Omnes. Agreed, agreed.

Bawd. Oh Iarvis, Iarvis, how I long till I see thee.

Exeunt. Enter Mol Bloodhound, and Sim, with a letter, Mol. There we must meet
soon, and be married to morrow morning, Sim, is it not a mad brother?


Sim. Yes, and I can tell you news of a mad Lover.

Moll. What is he in the name of Cupid?

Sim. Why one Master Randals, a Welchman, I have had such a fit with him, he
says he was wished to very wealthy Widow, but of you he has heard much
Histories, that he will marry you, though he never saw you, and that the
parboyl'd Aetna of his bosom, might be quenched by the consequent pastime, in
the prittish flames of his prittish blood, he falutes you with that love letter.


Mol. This is a mad Lover indeed, prithee read it.

Sim, Mas, has writ it in Welsh English, we had been spoiled else, for want of
an interpreter, but thus he begins, Mistress Mary's.


Mol. He makes two Mary's serve one Mistress?

Sim. Ever while you live, it is your first rule in Weleh Grammers, that her
forsake Widows, and take Maids, was no creete wonder, for Sentlemen ever love
the first cut.


Mol. But not o'th Coxecombe, he should have put in that.


Sim. The Coxecombe follows by consequence, mark else. I Randall crack, of
Carmaerden, do love thee Mary Ploodbounds, of H^^^ds-ditch, dwelling Aulgate,
and Pishops gate, just as between hawke and buzzard.


Moll. He makes an indifferent wooing,

Sim. And that her loves Maryes so moustrous, yet never saw her, was because
her hear her in all Societies so ferry fillanously commended, but specially
before one Master pussie Constables of her Parish, who made her self half
fo^'^ by swearing by the Wines, that Mary's wooed be monstrous good Marriages
for Randals.


Mol. Master busy it seems was not idle.

Sim. If Mary's can love a Prittaine of the plood of Cadwalader, which
Cadwalader, was Prutes great Crandfather. Randalls was come in proper persons,
pring round sillings in her pockets, get fathers good will, and go to Surch a
Sunday, with a whole dozen of Welsh Harps before her, so her rest her constant
Lovers, Randall William, ap Thomas, ap Tavy, ap Robert, ap Rice, ap Sheffery,
Crack.


Mol. Fie, what shall I do with all them?

Sim. Why, he said, these all rest your constant Lovers, whereof, for manners
sake, he puts himself in the first place; he will call here presently, will
you answer him by Letter or word of mouth.


Mol. Troth, neither of either, so let him understand.

Sim. Will ye not answer the Love-sicke gentleman.

Mol. If he be sick with the love of me, prithee tell him, I cannot endure
him, let him make a virtue of necessity, and apply my hate for's health.


Sim. I, but I Will have more care of the Gentleman I warrant you, if I do not
make my self merry, and startle your midnight meeting, say Sim has no more
wit then his Godfathers, and they were both Head-men of this Parish.


Enter Randalls. Ran. Farewell Widows prove, her sall no Randals have,
Widows was ferry full of wiles,
Mary Ploodhounds now, Randals make a v^^,
Was run for Moll a couple of miles.

Honest Si^ki^s, what said Mariee to Randals Letters? Sam. ^are a mad man.

Rand. Augh, her was very clad her was mad.

Sim. The old man has money enough for her, and if you marry her, as if your
project take, you may, she will take you more then a man.


Ram. More then man's, what the?

Sim. Trough cannot you tell that, this is the truth on it, she wood be married
to morrow, to one Ancient Young a fellovv she cannot endure, now she says, if
you coo'd meet her privately to night, between ten and eleven, just at the
great Crosse-way, by the Nags head Tavern at Leaden Hall.


Ran. Was high, high pumpe, there as her turn into Graces street.


Sim. There Is the very place, now because you come the vvelcomest man in the
world to hinder the match against her mind with the Ancient, there she will
meet you, go with you to your lodging, lie there all night, and be married
to you in the morning at the Tovver, as soon as you shall please.


Rand. Becat her will go and prepare Priests presently, look ye Simkins,
there is a great deal of round sillings for her, her was very lucky sillings,
for came to Randalls shust for all the World as Fortune was come to Fool,
tell Maryes, her will meet her, her vvarrant her, make many puppy Fools of
Ancients, and love her very monstrously. Exit.


Sim. Ha, ha, ha, so, so, this midnight match shall be mine, she told me
she was to meet the Ancient there, I Will be sure the Ancient shall meet him
there, so I shall Iye a bed to laugh, to think if he meet her there, how
she will be startled, and if the Ancient meet him there, how he will be
cudgelled, bevvare your ribbs Master Randall. Exit.


Enter old Bloudhound. Blood. I vvonder where this young rogue spends the day,
I hear he has received my hundred Marks, and my advantage with it and it may
be, he went home since I went out. ^^^uis was with me but even now, and bid
me watch, and narrowly, for fear of some of my Rival spies: For I know she
has many wealthy Suitours, all love money. This Iaruis is most neat in a love
business; and when we are married because many mouths much meat, I will
requite his courtesy, and turn him away; the Widdowe's all I look for. --
Nay, let her fling to see I have her possessions, there is a Saw for it.

There Is thriving in Wiving: For when we bury
Wives by halfe-dozens, the Money makes marry.
Oh money, money, money, I will build thee
An Altar on my heart, and offer to thee
Enter John and Iaruis My morning longings, and my evening wishes,
And had thou life, kill thee with covetous kisses.

Ioh. But now and she speak she spoils all, or if he call her by my
Mistress his name, have thou no: tricks to enjoin them both to silence till
they come sure.


Iar. Phaw, that is a stale one, she shall speak to him in her own accent, he
shall call her by her own name leaving out the Bawd, yet she shall violently
believe he loves her, and he shall confidently believe the same which he
requires, and she but presents. Enter Mistress Coote.

Fall off, she comes.

Bawd. Iaruis.

Iar. Here I have discovered him, it is he by his coughes, remember your
instructions, and use few words, for though till to night you knew it not, and
will he married early in the morning, to prevent a Vintners Widow, that lays
clay me to him.


Blood. Iaruis.

Bawd. Good old man, I know him by his tongue.

Blood. Is she come? is she come Iaruis?

Iar. Ask her if she wood live sir, she walks a loose yonder.


Blood. We shall cozen all her woers.

Iar. Nay, amongst all of you, we will cozen one great one, that had laid a
pernicious plot this night, with a cluster of his roaring friends to surprise
her, carry her down to the water side, pop her in at Puddle-dock, and carry
her to Graves end in a pair of Oars.


Blood. What, what is his name I prithee.

Iar. He Is a Knight abounding in deeds of charity, his name Sir Nicholas Name.


Blood. And wood he pop her in at Puddle-dock?

Iar. And he cood but get her down there.

Blood. By my troath we shall pop him fairly, where is she? where is she?


Iar. Ha, do you not perceive a fellow walk up and down muffled yonder?


Blood. There is something walks.

Iar. That fellow has dogd us all the way, and I fear all is frustrate.


Blood. Not I hope man.

Bawd. This it is to be in love, if I do not dwindle.

Iar. I know him now.

Blood. It Is none of Sir Nicholas spies, is it?

Iar. He serves him.

Blood. He wonnot murder me, will he?

Iar. He shall not touch you, only I remember this afternoon, this Fellow by
what he had gathered by caves dropping, or by frequent observation, asked me
privately if there were no meeting betwixt you and my Mistress to night in this
place, for a Widow he said he knew you were to meet.


Blood. Good.

Iar. Now I hansomly threw dust in's eyes, and yet kept the plot swift a foot
too, Itold him you were here to meet a Widow too, whom you long loved, but
would not let her know it till this afternoon, naming to him one of my Aunts,
a Widow by Fleete-Ditch, her name is Mistress Gray, and she keeps diverse
Gentlewomen lodgers.


Blood. Good again.

Iar. To turn the sent then, and to cheat Inquisition the more ingeniously.


Blood. And to bob Sir Nicholas most neatly.

Iar. Be sure all this night studably in the hearing of any that ye shall but
suspect to be within hearing to call her nothing but Mistress Coote.


Blood. Or Widow Coote.

Iar. Yes, you may put her in so, but be sure you cohere in every particle,
with the precedent Fallacy, as that you have loved her long, tho till this
day, and so as I did demonstrate.


Blood. But how and she wooed say she is not Widdovv Come, and that she knows
no such woman, and so spoil all?


Iar. Trust that with her wit, and my instructions we suspected a spy, and
therefore she will change her voice.


Blood. Thou have a delicate Mistress of her.

Iar. One thing more, and ye meet presently, mine Aunt has had mine husbands,
tell her you will hazard a limb and make the tenth.


Blood. Prithee let me alone, and Sir Nicholas were here himself, he shooed
swear 'twere thine Aunt.


Iar. Go forwards toward him, be not too full of pratle, but make use of
your instructions.


Blood. Who Is there, Widdovv Coote?

Bawd. Master Bloodbound as I take it.

Blood. She changes her voice bravely, I must tell thee true Widow, I have
loved thee long time, look how the Rogue looks, but had never the wit to let
thee know it till to day.


Bawd. So I was given to understand Sir.

Iar. Is It not a fool finely?

John. Hansome by this hand.

Blood. I like thy dwelling well upon the Fleet ditch.


Bawd. A pretty wholesome Air Sir, in the Summer time.


Blood. Who would think 'twere she Iarvis?

Iar. I told ye she was tutored.

Blood. I Will home with her presently, some stays up in the dark.


Iar. Fool and he have any private discourse with her, they discover
themselves one to another, and so spoil the plot, no trick, no by no means
sir, to hazard your person with her, the bold rogue may come up close to
discover her to be my Mistress, and recover her with much danger to you.


Blood. He has got a dagger.

Iar. And a sword six foot in length, I Will carry her home for you, therefore
not a light be stirring; for I know your Riualls will watch your house, Sim
shall show us the chamber, we will conduct her up ith dark, shut the door to her
above, and presently come down and let you in below.


Blood. There was never such a Ieruis heard off, bid Si^ to be careful, by the
same token, I told him he shood feed to morrow for all the week after: good
night Widow, Coote my man stays up, we will bob Sir Nicholas bravely. Good
night sweet widow Coote. I do but seem to part, we will meet at home wench.
-- Exit.


Bawd. Adieu my sweet dear heart.

Iar. Go you with me, so, so, I will Cage this Cookow, and then for my young
Madcap, if all hit right, this mornings mirth shall crown the Craft o'th
night, follow me warily.


Bawd. I warrant thee Iaruis, let me alone to right my self into the garb of
a Lady: Oh strange to see how dreams fall by contraries, I shall be coacht to
morrow, and yet last night dreamed I was carted: prithee keep a little state,
go Iaruis. Exit


Enter Randall. Randall. Was ferry exceeding dark, but here is high pumps,
sure here is two co^pie of cross ways, and there was the street where Grace
dwells, one hundred pound in mornings in round shillings, and wife worth one
thousand ere her go to bed. Randalls fortunes comes tumbling in, like Lawyers
Fees, hudole upon huddle.


Moll. Oh sweet Ancient, keep thy word, and win my heart, They say, a
Moone-shine night is good to run away with another man's wife, but I am sure a
dark night is best to steal away my Fathers daughter.


Rand. Mary.

Moll. Oh, are ye come Sir? there is a box of Land and livings, I know not what
ye call it.


Rand. Lands, and livings?

Moll. Nay, nay, and we talk, we are undone, do ye not see the Watch coming
up Gracious-streete yonder, this Cross way was the worst place we could have
met at, but that is yours, and I am yours, but good Sir do not blame me, that
I so suddenly yielded to your love, alas you know what a match an't I should
have to morrow else.


Rand. Her means the scurvy Ancient.

Moll. In The morning we shall be Man and Wife, and then, alas I am undone, the
Watch are hard upon us, got you back through Cornehill, I Will run round about
the Change, by the Church corner: down Cat-eaten street, and meet you at
Bartholomew Lane end. Exit.


Rand. Cats street was call her, sure Randalls was wrapped in mothers smock.
Exit.


Enter Constable, and Watch. Constable. Keep straight toward Bishops-gate, I am
deceived and I heard not somebody run that way.


Enter Chambermaid, Hugh with a Band box. Watch. Stay Sir, here is somebody
come from Aldga^e-ward?


Maid. Alas, I shall be hanged for staying so long for this Cuffe.


Watch. Come before the Constable here.

Maid. Let the Constable come before me and he please.


Constable. How, how, where ha you bin pray Da^^e, ha?

Maid For my Mistress Ruff, at her Sempstris Sir, she must needs use it to
morrow, and that made me stay till 'twas done.


Constable. Pray who is your Mistress, where dwell ye?

Maid. With one Mistress Wagge in Blackfriars, next to the sign of the
Feathers and the Fool sir.


Constable. Oh, I know her very well, make have home, it is late. Come, come, let us
back to Gracechurch, all is well, all is well.


Enter severally Ancient and Moll. Ant. I escaped the Watch at Bishopsgate with
ease, there is some body turning down the Church corner toward the Exchange,
it may be Mistress Mary.


Moll. Ancient.

Ant. Yes.

Moll. Are ye here again, you have nimbly followed me; what said the Watch
to ye?


Ant. I past them easily, the gates are but now shut in.

Moll. As we go, I Will tell you such a tale of a Welsh wooer, and a lamentable
Loue-letter.


Ant. Yes, Sim told me of such a Rat, and where he lodges, I thought I should
have met him here.


Moll. Here, out upon him: -- But the Watches walk their station, and in few
words is safety, I hope you will play fair, and lodge me with the Maid ye
told me of.


Ant. She stays up for us Wench, in the word of a Gentleman, all shall be
fair and civil.


Moll. I believe you.
Exeunt.
Enter at several doors Randalls and Maid. Rand. Zounes was another Fire
Drake walk in Shange, we will run pack, mas Maryes have saved her labors, and
was come after Randalls, Maryes was Randall that loves her mightily Maryes.


Maid. Master Randall.

Rand. How did Watch let her go at Graces street?

Maid. They knew me, and let me pass.

Rand. Well now, her understands Maryes loves Randalls so mighty deal.


Maid. If John have not told him, I Will be hanged.

Rand. Maryes shall go with Randalls to lodgings, and that her Father work
no diuorcements, he will lie with her aule t'night, and marry her betimes
next morning, mean time her will make Lands and Livings fast.


Maid. How Father? this is a mistake sure, and to fashion it fit for mine own
following, I will both question and answer in ambiguities, that if he snap
me any way, I may make my self good ith the other, and as he shall discover
himself, I Will pursue the conceit accordingly: but will ye not deceive me,
many minds are many men's Almanacks, the dates of your desire's out, we serve
for nothing but to light Tobacco.


Rand. If Randall false to Maryes prove,
Then let not Maryes Randalls love:
For Randalls was so true as Io^e,
And Maryes was her joy.
If Randalls was not Pritaine borne,
Let Maryes Randalls prowe adorn.
And let her give a foul great horn to Randalls,
Her will love her cret deal of much her warrant her.

Maid. And it is but venturing a maydenhead, if the worst come to the worst, it
may come back with advantage. Exit.


Enter in her night-cloathes, as going to bed Widow and Maid. Wid. Is not Mary
come home yet?

Maid. No forsooth.

Wid. It Is a fine time of night, I shall thank her for it, it is past eleven I am
sure. Fetch, the prayer-booke lies within upon my bed.


Maid. Yes forsooth.
Exit.
Widow. I wonder what this Gentleman shood be that caught me so like Iarvis,
he say he has fitted old Blood^ound according to his qualitic -- but I must
not let him da^^y too long upon my daily company, Lust is a hand-woolse, who
with daily seeding, one time of other takes a sudden start upon his
benefactor.


Enter Maid. Maid. Oh Mistress, Mistresie.

Wid. What Is the matter wench?

Maid. A man, a man under your bed Mistress.

Wid. A man, what man?

Maid: A neat man, a proper man, a welfavoured man, a ha(...)ome man.


Wid. Call up John, where is Iarvis?

Maid. Alas, I had no power to speak, his very looks are able to make a woman
stand as still as a Millers horse when he is lading, o he comes, he comes. Exit.


Enter Alexander. Wid. How came you hither Sir? how got you in?

Alex. As Citizens wives do into Maskes, whether I wooed or no nay, nay, do
not doubt the discretion of my constitution: I have brought nere a groat in my
bosom, and by this hand, I lay under thy ^^d, with a heart as houest, and a
blood as cold, as had my sister lay near top -- will ye have me yet?


Wid. You are very rude, uncivil fellow.

Alex. Vnc^uill, and lay so tame while you set up your foot upon the bed, to
u^^ie your shoe, such another word, I will uncivillize that injured civilitie
which you so scurvily slander, and reward you with an undecencie proportionable
to your understandings, will ye have me, will you marry me?


Wid. You, why tomorrow morning I am to be married to your Father.


Alex. What, to sixty, and I know not how many, that will lie by your side,
and divide the hours with cou^hes, as Cocks do the night by instinct of
Nature.


Wid. And provide for his family all day.

Alex. And only wish well to a fair wise all night.

Wid. And keepe's credit all day in all companies.

Alex. And discredit himself al night in your company.

Wid. Fie, fie, pray quite my house Sir.

Alex. ^oars, it is my house.

Wid. Your house, since when?

Alex. Even since I was begotten, I was borne to(...), I must have thee, and I
will havethee, and this house is mine, and none of thine.


Enter Iarvis. Iar. Oh Mistress, the saddest Accident in the street yonder.


Wid. What Accident prithee?

Iar. You must pardon my boldness, into your bedde-Chamber, there is a
Gentleman slain in a fraye at the door yonder, and the people wonnot be
persuaded, but that he that did it, took this house, there is the Constable,
Churchwardens, and all the Head-men of the Parish, be now searching, and they
say they will come up hither to your bed chamber, but they will find him, I Will
keep them down as long as I can, I can do no more then I can. Exit.


Wid. Are not you the murderer Sir?

Alex. I ha been under thy bed by this hand this three hours.


Wid. Pray get you down then, they will all come up, and find you here and
all, and what will the Parish think then? pray get you down.


Alex. No, no, no; I will not go down now I think on it. makes himself
unready.


Wid. Why, what do you mean, you will not be so uncivil to unbrace you here?


Alex. By these Buckles I will, and what they will think on it --


Wid. Alas, you will undo me.

Alex. No, no, I will undo my self look ye.

Wid. Good Sir, I will off with my doublet to my very shirt.


Iarvis. Pray sir have more care of a Woman's reputation.


Alex. Have a care on it thy self Woman, and marry me then.


Wid. Shood they come up and see this: what coo'd they think, but that some
foul uncivil Act of shame had this night stained my house, and as good marry
him as my name lost for ever.


Alexand. Will you have me before the other sleeve goes off?


Wid. Do, hang your self, I will not have you -- look, look, if he have
not pulled it off quite, why you wonnot pull off your boots too will you?


Alex. Breeches and all by this flesh.

Wid. What, and stand naked in a Widows Chamber.


Alex. As naked as Grantham steeple, or the Strand May Pole by this spur, and
what your grave Parishioners will think on it?


Iar. Gentlemen pray keep down.

Wid. Alas, they are at the stairs foot, for Heavens sake Sir.


Alex. Will you have me?

Wid. What shall I do? no.

Alex, This is the last time of asking, they come up, and down go my
breeches, will you have me?


Widow. I, I, I, alas, and your breeches go down
I am undone for ever.

Alex. Why then kiss me upon it, and yet there is no cracking your credit,
Iarvis is come in, Iarvis.


Enter Iarvis. Iar. I have kept my promise Sir, you are caught the old one.


Wid. How caught, is there no body below then?

Iar. No body but John, for sooth, recovering a Tobacco snuff, that departed
before supper.


Wid. And did you promise this Sir?

Iar. A woman cannot have a hansomer cloud, then a haire-brain'd Husband: I
will be your Cooze, he shall be my Cuckold.


Wid. I love ye for your Art.

Iarvis. Come, Come, put on Sir, I have acquainted ye both with your Fathers
intended marriage, ^th morning you shall certify him very early by Letter,
the quality of your fortunes, and return to your cbedience, and that you and
your wife, still concealing the parties, will Attend him to Church, John and
I Will be there early, as commanded by my Mistress, to discharge our
attendance: about goes the plot, out comes the project, and these's a wedding
dinner dressed to your hands.


Alex. As pat as a fat Heir to a lean Sharke, we shall hunger for it, honest
Iarvis, I am thy bedfellow to night, and to morrow thy Master.


Wid. You Are a fine man to use a woman thus?

Alex. Pish, Come, come, fine men must use fine Women thus, it is fit, plain
truth takes Maids, VViddovves, are won with wit.


Iarvis. You shall wear horns with wisdom, that is in your pocket.


Exeunn. Actus 5. Scaena. 1.
Enter Sim, and John, passing over with a Basin of Rosemary, and a great
Flaggon with Wine. Sim. Come John, carry your hand steddily, the guess drop
in a pace, do not let your wine drop on it.


John. It Is as I told thee, Master Alexander, thy Mistress eldest son will be
here.


Sim. Rose, I pray burn some pitch in the Parlour, it is good against ill airs,
Master Alexander will be here.


Exeunt. Enter old Bloodhound, and larvis. Blood. I am up before ye son
Earelacke, will Ancient Young be here with a rich Wife too? thy Mistress is
not stirring yet sirrah, I Will hold my life the Baggage slipe to thy Mistress,
there they have e'ne locked the door to them, and are tricking up one another:
oh these women! but this Rogue Tim, he lay out to night too, he received my
hundred Mark, and I fear is murdered: Trusse, Trusse, good Iarvis.


Iar. He has bin a wooing Sir, and has fetched over the delicat'st young Virgin,
her Father died but a week since, and left her to her marriage, five thousand
pound in money, and a parcel of Land, worth three hundred Perannum.


Blood. Nay, nay, it is like, the boy had ever a captivating tongue to take a
woman -- o excellent money, excellent money, Mistress of my devotions, as if
my Widows estate is little less too, and then Sander, he has got a monied
woman too, there will be a bulk of money, Sim is puling sir, I may tell thee,
one that by natures course, cannot live long: ^other, a Midnight sur^et cuts
off, then have I a trick to cozen both their Widdovves, and make all mine, o
Iarvis, what a monied generation shall I then get upon thy Mistress?


Iar. A very virtuous brood.

Blood. Has't done?

Iar. I have done Sir.

Blood. I Will in and get some m^^^cke for thy Mistress, to quicken her this
morning, and then to Church in earnest, it is done, where is Sir Nicholas Nemo
and his words that watch so for her? Ha, ha, ha, all is mixed with honey, I have
mirth, a sweet young Widow and her money, o that svveete Saint, called money.


Enter Alexander, Widow, Ancient, Moll and Sim. Ant. Joy I, and a 100 pound a
year in a black box to the bargain given away in the dark last night, to we
know not who, and to be heard of we know not when. Sfoote and this be joy,
wood we had a handful, some slice of sorrow to season it.


Alex. By this light 'twas strange.

Mol. Believe me Sir, I thought I had given it you, he that took it called me
by my name.


Sim. Did he speak Welsh or English?

Moll. Alas, I know not, I enjoined him silence seeing the Watch coming, who
parted us.


Sim. If this were not Master Randalls of Randall Hall that I told ye of, I Will
be fleaed.


Alex. Be maskt, and withdraw a while, here comes our Dad.


Enter Bloodhound, Sir Marmaduke Many minds, Sir Ianus Ambodexter, and Master
Busy. Blood. Why Master Busy, asleep as thou standst man?


Sim. Some horse taught him that it is worth god a mercy.


Constable. I watch all night, I protest Sir the Counters pray for me, I send all
in Cut and long tail.


Sir Marma. What, what?

Constable. I sent twelve Gentlewomen, our own neighbors last night, for being so
late but at a woman's labor.


Blood. Alas Sir, a woman in that kind you know must have help.


Constable. What Is that to me? I am to take no notice of that, they might have let
her alone till morning, or she might have cried out some other time.


Sir Mar. Nay, nay, Master Busy knows his place I warrant ye.


Blood. Son Alexander welcome, and Ancient Young to, I have heard all.


Alex. You must pardon the meritable rudeness of the Gentlewomen Sir, in not
unmasking, they entreated me to inform you: there are some ith house to whom
they wood by no means be laid open.


Blood. They are witty, they are witty.

Alex. But for my self, I am now your most obedient virtuous Alexander.


Blood. Obedience, hang her virtue, let her starve; has she money? has she
money?


Alex. Two Chests of silver, and two Vtropian Trunks, full of gold and Jewels.


Blood. They are all Alexanders women, do ye mark?

Wid. Alexander was the Conquer^ur Sir.

Blood. Come, come, we will to Church presently: Prithee Iaruis whilst the
Musicle plays just upon the delicious close, usher in the Brides, the Widow,
and my Moll.


Exit. Sim. I tell ye true Gallants, I have seen neither of them to day.
Shall I give him the lie?


Blood. They are both locked up itaith, trimming of one another. Oh these
women, they are so secret in their business, they will make very Coxcombs of
us men, and do it at pleasure to, it is well said friends, play, play, where is
Sim?


Ant. How he bestirres him.

Alex. Yes, he will sweat by and by.

Sim Here is the sign of Sim Sir.

Bload. Have the guests Rosemary without?

Sim. They have Rose the Cooke-mayd without, but they say you have Mistress Mary
within.


Alex. Well said Rascal.

Blood. Marie's above good man Blockhead. Call my son Earelack, bid him for
shame make have.


Sim. He shall make have for shame.
Exit.
Blood. I am so busied, you must bear with me Gentlemen, they leave it all to
me here.


Coast. But I will go charge some of the inferior guess in the Kings name to
fill some wine.


Blood. No, no, good Master Busy, we will first usher the brides.


Sim. Oh Gentlemen, where are you? where are you?
Where are you Gentlemen?

Omnes. What Is the matter?

Blood. Where Is Moll Sim, the Widow Sim, the dainty Widow?


Sim There is no Moll, there is no dainty young Widow, but a damnable Bawd we
found a bed with a face like an Apple half roasted.


Omnes. How Is this?

Blood. Why Gentlemen?

Ant. Now it works.

Blood. Iaruis you are a Rogue, a Cutpurse Iaruis, run Sim, call my son
Earelack, he shall put her into the Spiritual Court for this.


Sim. Nay, has put her in there already, for we found him a bed with her.


Omnes. Possible.

Blood. Ha Boys, the Informer and the Bawd, the Bawd and the Informer have got
a devil betwixt them Gentlemen.


Sim. Nay Sir, the jest was, that they should fall asleep together, and forget
themselves, for very lovingly we found them together, like the Iemini, or the
two Winter mornings met together: Look, look, look where they come Sir, and
Iaruis between them, just like the picture of knavery, betwixt fraud and
leachery.


Enter Iaruis, Earelack. Iar. Tim is a puling Sirrah, I may tell it thee, a
midnight surfeit too may cut off Sander, I Will cozen their Wives, make all mine
own, and then, Oh Iaruis what a moneyed generation shall I get, upon this
widow Coote that has two teeth.


Blood. Did we bring you to Music with a mischief Earlack? thou art a Goat,
thou have abused the best bed in my house, I Will set a Sumner upon thee.


Earla. Bloodhound, thou art a Usurer, and take forty in the hundred, ^^e
inform against thee.


Blood. Are you a Bawd huswife, ha?

Bawd. Alas Sir, I was merely ^nuied, betrayed by Iaruis, but as I have been
Bawd to the flesh, you have been Bawd to your money; so set the Hare Pie
against the Goose g^ble^s, and you and I are as daintily matched as can be sir.


Blood. Sim, run to the widow Wagges, tell her we are both abu^'d, this
Iaruis is a ^ugler, say.


Ant. I can save Sim that labor Sir, I assure you the widow is married to
your son Alexander, and as a confirmation she is come her self to witness
i^. Discouers.


Alex. ^our fair young daughter is wife to this Ancient, who is come likewise
to witness it.


W^d. The plain truth is Master Bloodhound, I would entreat you to keep the
kennell, the younger dog being of the better sent, has borne the game before
ye.


Alex. We have clapped hands on it Sir, and the Priest that shood have married you
to her, is to marry her to me, so sister, talk for your self.


Blood. Ha brave tricks and conceits, can ye dance Master Earelack?


Earl. Ha, ha: the old man's a little mad: but thou art not married Moll?


Mol. Yes indeed Sir, and will lie with this Gentleman soon at night: do you
think I wood chew Ram mutton, when I might swallow Venison, that is none of
Venus documents Monsieur Dottevill?


Earl. ^ox of that Venus, s^ee is a Whore I warrant her.


Blood. And were not you the the other Iugler with Iaruis in this, hey pass and
repasse.


Alex. Good Sir be satisfied, the Widow and my sister sung both one song, and
what was it, but Crabbed age and youth cannot live together. Now we persuaded
them, and they coo'd not live together, they wood never endure to lie together,
this consequently descended, there was the Antecedent, we clapped hands, sealed
lips, and so fell unto the relative,


Iar. This was your bargain upon the Exchange Sir, and because you have ever
been addicted to old proverbs, and pithy Sawes, pray let me seal up the
mistake with one that will appear very seasonably.


Blood. And I pray let us hear it sir.

Sim. You, a new fangled fowler, came to show your Art in the dark, but take
this truth, you caught in truth a Cookow for it. Enter Tim.


Blood. Heyday, we are cheated by the rule^ faith, now sirrah, they say you
are to be married too.


Tim. Yes indeed Father, I am going to the business, and Gentlemen all, I am
come whether you will or no, to muite ye all to my marriage, to this
Gentlewoman, who though a good face need no Mask; she is maskt to make a man
think she has a scurvy face, when I know (...) has a good face, this is S^cke
to them and out of their Element.


Blood. But sirrah, setting aside marriages, where is my hundred Mark you went
to receive?


Tim. Hum, upon such a match of mine, talk of a hundred Mark, this is to
drink ignoble ^onre shillings beer, a hundred Mark, why your Lawyer there
can clear such a trifle in a Term, and his Clients never the better.


Blood. Such a match, I pray discover her, what is she?

Tim. What is she, here is my Brother knows that she is well enough, come
hither Dab, and bee^ known unto you, her name is Lindabrades, descended from
the Emperor Tribatio of Greece, and half Niece, some six and fifty descents
to most unvanquisht Claridiana.


Alex. Who Is this? pox on it, what vnmasks her. makes that Bawd yonder?


Bussy. I am very much deceived, and I did not send this Gentlewoman very
drunk the other night to the Counter.


Tim. I tell thee prattling Constable, it is a lie, Lindabrades a Drunkard?


Alex. Hark ye brother, where lies her living?

Tim. Where, why in Greece.

Alex. In grease.

Sim. She looks as if she had sold Kitchinstuffe.

Alex. This is a common whore, and you a cheated Coxcombe, come hither, you
rotten Hospital, hung round with greasy Satin, do not you know this Vermin?


Bawd. I winckt at ye Sue, and ye coo'd have seen me, there is one I^rni^, a
rope on him has juggled me into the sudds t^o.


Constable. Now I know her name too, do not you pass under the name of Sue
shortheeles, minion?


Sue. Go look Master little wit, will not any woman thrust her self upon a
good fortune, when it is offered her?


Blood. Sir Marmaduke, you are a Justice of peace; I charge ye in the Kings
name, you and Master Ambodexter, to assist me with the Whore and the Bawd, to
Bridewell.


Sir Mar. By my troth and we will, by that time we shall have an excellent
stomach by that time dinners ready.


Ambodex. I, I, away with them, away with them.

Bawd. Oh this Rogue Iarvis.
Exit.
Blood. Now, now, you look like a melancholy dog, that had lost his dinner,
where is my hundred Marks now you Coxecombe?


Tim. Truly father, I have paid some sixeteene reckonings, since I saw you, I
was never sober since you sent me to the Devil yesterday, and for the rest of
your money, I sent it to one Captain Carvegut, he swore to me his Father was
my Lord Majors Cook, and that by Easter next, you should have the principal,
and eggs for the use indeed sir.


Blood Oh Rogue, Rogue, I shall have eggs for my money, I must hang my self.


Sim. Not before dinner pray Sir, the Pyes are almost baked. Enter Rand.


Rand. And Maryes now was won, and all her pusinesse done, and Randalls now
was run, her have made all sure I her warant her.


Alexand. Look, look, yonder is the conceit, the mistake happened upon last
night.


Ant. And the very box at's girdle.

Rand. Cot please her Father Ploodhounds, Randals have robbed Ancients her
warrant her.


Ant. Sir it is known how you came by that box.

Rand. Augh was her so, will hear an Noble Prittaine, how her gull an English
Flag?


Ant. And you ought to cry.

Rand. Oh noble Randalls, as her meet by Nags-head with Mayres Plood, prave.


Blood. Here Is another madman.

Ant. Hark in your ear, you must deliver that box to me.


Rand. Hark in her the other ear, her will not deliver her, and her were nine
and forty Ancients, and five and fourscore Flaggs.


Ant. Let my foe write mine Epitaph, and if I tear not my birthright from thy
bosom?


Sim. Gentlemen, there is Alegant in the house, pray set no more abroach.


Rand. Nay let her come with her pack of needles, Randalls can pox and bob,
as well as her, her warrant her.


Blood. What box is that? I shooed know that box.

Ale. I will resolve ye sir, keep them asunder.

Ant. You will restore that box?

Rand. Her will not restore her, 'twas Mary Ploodhounds gave her the box,
Randals have married Mary Ploodhounds and gul'd Ancients, mark her now.


Wid. Mark him good Sir, me thinks he says he has married Mary Bloodhound.


Ant. Hang him, he is mad!

Rand. Zoun's, make Tog of Randalls? come out here Mary's.

Look here was Mary Ploodhounds. Enter Maid and Hugh. now, I pray tumble down
of her Mary-po^es, and ask her father plessing?


Ale. This, why this is your Maid Widow,

Ear. This is Mary the Widows Maid man.

Alex. And here is Mary Ploo^hound, my chollericke shredde of Cadwallader,
married to this Gentleman, who has a hundred a year dangling at your girdle
there.


Wid. I pray Mistress are you married to this Gentleman?


Maid. By sixe^'th morning forsooth, he to^ke me for Mary Ploodhound, having
it seems, never seen any on's before, and I being something amorously
affected, as they say to his Welsh ditties, answered to her name, lay with him
all night, and married him this morning, so that as he took me for her, I
took him as he was forsooth.


Sim. She means for a fool, I am feign to answer for you.


Blood. Ha, ha, ha, Cupid this twenty four hours has done nothing but cut
cross capers.


Alex. Do ye hear, sir Bartholomew Bayard, that leap before ye look, it
will hansomly become you, to restore the Box to that Gentleman, and the
Magnitude of your desiree, upon this dainty, that is so amoro^slie taken with
your ditties.


Rand. Her wail in woe, her plunge in pain.
And yet becat her do not neither, Randalls will prove her self Prittaines
borne, and because her understands Ancients was prave fellows, and great
Travailers, there is her box for her.


Ant. I thank ye.

Rand. And because was no remedies, before her aule, here will Randals embrace
Mary's, and take a pusse -- kisses.


Enter Iarvis brave. Iar. Save ye gallants, do ye want any guess?
Call me thy Coz, and carry it hansomelie.

Blood. Who have we here trow?

Alex. Do thou know the Gentleman that whispered to thee?


Wid. Oh wondrous well, he bid me call him Coz, and (...) it hansomely.


Iar. Widow, wood I were off again.

Wid. Know all, this Gentleman has to obtain his Lust, and loose desires,
served me this seven months, under the shape and name of Iarvis.


Omnes. Possible?

Wid. Look well, do ye not know him?

Blood. The very face of Iarvis.

Tim. I truly Father, and he were any thing like him,
I would swear 'tvvere he.

Iar. I must cast my skin; and am caught -- why Coz.


Wid. Come you are cozened,
And with a Noble craft, he tempted me
In mine own house, and I bid him keep's disguise
But till this morning and he shooed perceive,
I loved him truly, intending here before ye,
To let him know it, especially in the presence
Of you Sir, that intend me for your Wife.

Ans. What shooed this mean?

Alex. Some witty trick I warrant thee, prithee dispatch him presently, that
we were at Church.


Wid. First, then know ye for truth sir, I mean never to marry.


Alex. How Woman?

Sim. She has dispatched you Sir.

Wid: And for a truth sir, know you, I never mean to be your Whore.


Blood. This is strange.

Wid. But true, as she whose chaste immaculate soul,
Retains the Noble stamp of her integrity,
With an undefac't perfection -- perchance as these
Nay Common Fame, has scattered you, conceive me,
Because pale jealousy (Cupids angry Fool)
Was frequent lodger at that sign of Folly;
My husbands soon suspicious heart, that I
In a close clouded looseness, shooed expose him
To that desperate distraction of his fortunes,
That sent him to the Sea, to nourish her,
With your vain hope, that the Fame of frequent suitors,
Was but a Mask of loose scapes, like men at Lotteries:
You thought to put in for one Sir, but believe me,
You have drawn a blanke.

Rand. Beca^ her look ferry black indeed,

Wid. Oh my beloved husband,
However in thy life, thy jealousy
Sent thee so far to find death, I will be
I will be married to nothing but thy memory.

Alex. But shall the pyes be spoiled then?

Iar. Let her alone, if her husband do not know this.

Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

Blood. Her Husband I told you was a madman.

Ant. Why her Husbands dead sir.

Iar. He is not dead Sir, he had it spread a purpose, he is in England, and in
your house, and look: do ye not see him?


Wid. Where, where?

Iar. Here, here he is that has found rash jealousy,
Loves joys, and a wife whose discreet carriage
Can intimate to all men a fair freedom.
And to one be faithful, such a wife I prove,
Her husbands glory worth a wealthy Love.

Wid. You are welcome to my soul Sir.

Blood. By my troth Master Wag this was a waggs trick indeed, but I knew I
know ye, I remembered you a month ago, but that I had forgotten where I saw
you.


Sim. I knew you were a crafty Merchant, you helped my Master to such bargains
upon the Exchange last night: here has been the merriest morning after it.


Alex. My Pitchers broke just at the Well head, but give me leave to tell you
Sir, that you have a noble Wife, and indeed such a one as wood worthily feast
the very discretion of a wise man's desire, her wit ingeniously waytes upon her
virtue, and her virtue advisedly gives freedom to her wit, but because my
marriage shall seriously proceed, I wed my self Sir to Obedience, and filial
regularity, and vow to redeem in the duty of a son, the affection of a
father.


Rand. Becat was as well spoke as Randall her self cood talk.


Blood. All is forgotten now my best son Alexander, and that my wedding want
no good company, I inuit you all.


Iar. Come my deserving Wife,
Wisdom this day remarries us. And Gentlemen
From all our errors we will extract this truth,
Where vicious ends prepose, they stand on wheels,
And the least turn of chance throws up their heels:
But virtues Lovers ever green do last,
Like Laurel which no lightening can blast.

FINIS.

