A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT AT WHITE HALL before the Kings Majesty, upon
Sunday being the 13. of May 1604.

By Anthony Rudd Professor of Divinity, and Bishop of Saint David's.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Man. 1604.

To the Reader.
AFter that I had by great means obtained a copy of the Sermon following, and
read it over for mine own instruction, I thought it expedient to publish it
for the edification of others, who shall vouchsafe to peruse it at their best
leisure, reading it attentively, and judging of it charitably.

T. W.

A Sermon preached at the Court at White hall before the Kings Majesty, upon
Sunday being the 13. of May 1604. By Anthony Rudd Professor of Divinity, and
Bishop of Saint David's.
Psalm 101. verse 2. I will do wisely in the perfect way till thou come to
me. I will walk in the uprightness of mine heart in the midst of mine house.


THis Text contains a promise of David's after his entrance into the kingdom
of Israel. And it consists of three parts. First, concerning his public
conversation or open carriage, he says, I will do wisely in the perfect way.
Secondly, touching his private demeanor or secret behauior his words be these,
I will walk in the uprightness of mine heart in the midst of mine house.
Thirdly, if it be asked, how long David will continue in the doing thereof, it
is here answered, Till thou come to me: that is, till thou (o God) come and
call me away from hence by death; or briefly thus, during my natural life.

David said in the first verse to show his godly mirth, that he would sing
mercy and judgment: and now here he affirms, that he will do wisely. So
that he promises to be at once both merry and wise. The which in worldly
account is judged and in experience is found to be a matter of great
difficulty. Whereupon when Jobs sons gave themselves to feasting, Job. 1.5.
their father addressed himself to sacrificing for them, doubting some
unadvised oversight in their ba^quetting. And indeed it was the singular
blessing of God, Eccles. 2.9.
that Solomon could taste of all courtly delights, and yet his wisdom
remained with him. Deuteronomy. 6.10.11.12. and 8.14. etc.
For although the people of Israel were forewarned, that when they were once
possessed of cities which they builded not, and houses furnished with all manner
of goods which they filled not, and wels which they dug not, and Olive trees
which they planted not, they should beware least they lifted up their hearts,
and forgot the Lord, which brought the^ out of the land of Egypt from the
house of bondage: yet for all that he that hold have been upright, Deu. 32.15
when he waxed sat spurned with the heel, and forsook God that made him,
regarding not the strong God of his salvation. In like sort, king Vzziah, 2.
Chro. 26.5.
when as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper: but when he was strong,
Ib. verse. 16.
his heart was lift up to his own destruction. Thus commonly Ease slays the
foolish, Pro. 1.32.
and the prosperity of fools destroys them.

But David intends even in his royal prosperity to do wisely: knowing that
it is an evil thing under the Sun, Eccl. 10.5.
when an error proceeds from the face of him that rules. VVheras on the
other side, the multitude of the wise is the preservation of the world; Sap.
6.24.
and a wise king is the stay of the people. And if the matter come to strokes,
for the defense or honor of the kingdom, better is wisdom then weapons of
war. Eccles. 9.18
Yea verily, Eccles. 10.3
an unwise king destroieth his people, but where they that be in authority are
men of understanding, there the city prospers.

I have learned of Solomon himself certain points of difference between the
wise and the unwise. Whereof one appears in their look or countenance. Pro.
17.24
For wisdom is in the face of him that has understanding: but the eyes of
the fool are in the corners of the world. So that if you mark the look of
Shechem, Genesis 34.2.
his eyes be fixed upon Dinah. If you observe the countenance of Saul, 1 Samuel
18.9
you may perceive that he casts the eye of envy upon David. Behold the face
of Ahab, 1. Reg. 21
and lo his eyes be settled upon Naboths vineyard. 1. Ioh. 2.16
Let us not therefore love that which is in the world: one of the 3. principals
whereof is the lust of the eyes. And this cogitatio^ moved David to beseech
Almighty God to turn away his eyes from regarding vanity. Ps. 119.37.


Another difference of the wise from the unwise is this, Eccle. 2.14
that the wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness:
that is, the prudent man foreseeth things which the unwise cannot for want of
understanding. As for example, provident David in the first entry into his
kingdom, 2. Sa. 1.18.
having his eyes in his head to forecast and to prevent future perils,
commanded the children of Judah to be taught to shoot, that so they might be
able to match their enemies the Philistims in that martial Art, whether the
war should be offensive or defensive. But the people of Laish, whose Seignoire
was very large and fertile, living long in peace and plenty, wanting eyes in
their head, became careless without mistrust, till the Danites having espied
both their wealth and their weakness, Iud. 18.27.
surprised them on a sudden, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and
burnt their city with fire.

Among the effects of wisdom this is one put down by Solomon, Prou. 20.5.
that whereas Counsel in the heart of man is like deep waters, yet a man of
understanding will draw it out (by presumptions and probable conjectures.) So
that if Absalom rise up early to talk of justice in the gate, 2. Sam. 15. 1. ad
7.
offering his hand and cheek to such as come near unto him: undoubtedly a
wise man will apprehend this to be a practice to aspire to the kingdom. Genesis
31.2.
If Labans countenance be not toward Jacob as it formerly has been, the^
surely there is malice conceived in his heart. Isa. 22.15.16.
If my Lord Shebna bearing great sway under Hezechiah, though he see the
thrice-potent Emperor of Ashur attempting the conquest of Jury, with an army
judged invincible, and yet he do hew himself out a sepulcher in Jerusalem,
wise Hezechiah will gather thereby, that this is a temporizing Statesman,
underhand entertaining friendship with the Assyrian Prince, and being an
intelligencer unto him, because he would live safely in all chaunges of Church
and Commonwealth, Court and country. If two women strive before Solomon about
the living child, 1. Reg. 3.16. ad fin.
and the cause prove difficult upon the pleadings on both sides, he will at the
length adiudge the child to her in whom he finds a motherly affection, which
cannot abide to heart that bloody speech of partition: Nec mihi nec tibi, sed
diuidatur.

If danger be imminent for the punishment of sin, Pro. 22.3.
verily A prudent man sees the plague and hides himself, but the foolish go
on still and are punished.

As for reprehension (which is one of the episcopal or pastoral duties,)
Rebuke not a scorner least he hate thee: Prou. 9.8.
but rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.

If we consider the use of the tongue: behold, Eccl. 21.26.
The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their
heart.

If we look into the actions of men, then we see, Eccl. 10.2.
that the heart of a wise man is at his right hand: but the heart of a fool is
at his left hand. And consequently a wise man does all things well, orderly,
and justly, whereas the unwise man does quite the contrary.

In the case of hearing and crediting other men's speeches: Pro. 14.15.
The foolish will believe every thing: but the prudent will consider his
steps: and so be armed against flattery on the one side, and sycophancie on
the other side.

Thus David will do wisely. Wherein? In the perfect way: which is that integrity
of sound religion and honest conversation that is prescribed in the word of
God, of which it is said that the law of the Lord is perfect. Psalm. 19.7.
And it is styled the perfect law of liberty. Iam. 1.25.
Whereupon we are commanded to be changed by the renewing of our minds, Romans
12.2.
that we may prove what that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God is,
comprehended in the holy Scripture, the whole and every part whereof is given
by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and
to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works. Perfect I say in respect of knowledge of things
necessary to salvation: otherwise, 1. Cor. 13.9
we know now only in part, and prophecy in part. Again, perfect unto all good
works in regard of knowledge what ought to be done, but not in respect of
power and ability to perform the same. Insomuch as when our Savior bids
us to be perfect as our heavenly father is perfect: Mat. 5.48.
those words imply only a like quality, but not an equality. And when some
in the Scriptures are said to be perfect, 1. Cor. 2.6. Philip. 3.15
it is to be understood in respect of Gods imputation, and not of their own
actions: or in comparison of others who are ruder in knowledge, or weaker in
the faith, or not so abundant in good works: or in regard of their
affectionate desire and sound purpose of heart without hypocrisy, but not of
their effectual operation in full practice of works without defect. And in
truth one way to perfection hoped for after this life, is the knowledge of our
imperfection while we continue in this life. But yet so, that having once
known what the perfect way or will of God is, we must daily march on, or
proceed toward perfection in obedience to Gods commandments: the observation
whereof is in the judgment of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
our wisdom and our understanding in the sight of all people, who seeing our
good works shall glorify God and say, Only this people is wise and of
understanding.

And those Princes are judged to have done wisely in the perfect way of true
religion, and the sincere worship of God, which have not only practiced the
same in their own persons, but have labored also by all means to bring all
their subjects to conformity therein. Ios. 24.25.
As did Joshua, who made a coueant with the people, in joining God and the
people together, by mutual promise of protection from the one, and of
obedience in the other.

2. Chr. 15.9 12.13.15.16.
Likewise king Asa being assured of the truth of the religion which he
professed, caused all his subjects to make a covenant by oath to seek the Lord
God of their fathers: and they rejoiced at the oath, for they swear with all
their hearts. And the penalty was, that whosoever would not seek the Lord God
of Israel, should be slain, whether he were small or great, man or woman.
Neither did king Asa spare his mother Maachah, but he deposed her from her
regemie, because she had made an idol in a grove.

Also king Iehosophat went through the people from Beer-sheba to mount Ephraim,
2. Chr. 19.4
and brought them again to the Lord God of their fathers: that is, from
idolatry to the knowledge and obedience of the true God.

And at the coronation of young king Ioash, 2. Reg. 11.17.
Iehoiada the high Priest made a covenant between the Lord and the king and the
people, to the end that both the King and the people should maintain the true
worship of God, and destroy all idolatry. And moreover, between the King and
the people, that he should govern, and they obey in the fear of God. 2. Reg.
18.3.4.


After this king Hezechiah purged his country of all monuments of idolatry and
superstition (which was rife in many places at his first entrance into the
Kingdom) and he turned the Brazen serpent into nehushta^ (that is, a piece of
brass) and by writ he summoned all the chief of the people of his dominions,
2. Chro. 30.5.6.10.11.12.
to assemble at Jerusalem, for the celebrating of a most solemn Passover;
that so the hearts of all men might be discovered, who were religious and who
were superstitious.

Not inferior to him in zeal, if not superior, was king Josias, who not only
did uprightly in the sight of the Lord, 2. Chr. 34.2
walking in the ways of David his father, without bowing to the right hand or
to the left, but also put down the Chematims, 2. Reg 23.5.6. etc.
and caused the altars of Baalim to be defaced in his own sight, as also the
carved and molten images to be broken and stamped to powder, and then strewed
upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them: and having gathered
together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem, Ib verse. 3.
he made a covenant before the Lord that they should walk after the Lord, and
keep his commandments with all their hearts and with all their soul. And all
the people stood to the covenant.

I may not omit Nehemias, Nehem. 13 23.24 25.
who perceiving the children of his people to speak half in the speech of
Ashdod, and not perfectly in the Jewish language, took an oath of them by God,
that they should not thenceforth make any such entermariages with them of
Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab.

What would Artashasht king of Persia have done if he had been instructed in
the law of God, Ezrae 7 12 14.25.26.
seeing that being but a profane Prince, yet he gave authority to Ezra to
restore all things according to the word of his God, and to punish the
disobedient, judging them without delay, whether it were unto death,
banishment, confiscation of goods, or imprisonment?

What zeal for the honor of the God of heaven, and the advancement of the
true worship of God, would Nebuchadnezzar king of Babel have showed, if he had
been trained up in the knowledge of the word of God, seeing that being only
moved suddenly by the greatness of a wonderful miracle (to praise God with
his lips, without any deep inward touch of the heart,) he made a decree in
all have, Dan. 3.29.
that every people, nation, and language, which spoke any blasphemy against
the God of Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, should be drawn in pieces, and
their houses should be made a place not to be named in this presence.

Verily, Joshua, Asa, Iehosahat, Ioash during the life of Iehoiada, Hezechiah,
Josias, and Nehemiah aforesaid, neither would nor could in true wisdom admit
the profession and exercise of any saving the right and true religion. Deuteronomy.
22.9.10.11.
Knowing that God by Moses commanded, that no man should sow his vineyard with
diverse kinds of seeds, nor plow with an ox and an ass together, nor wear a
garment of linsey wolsey. 1. Reg. 18.21.
Eliah could not endure halting between two opinions, but would have God only
to be followed, Baal being wholly rejected. They of the new Colonies sent from
Babel, Cuthah, Aua, Hamath, 2. Reg. 17.24.25.33.34.
and Sepharuaim, into the cities of Samaria which had been dispeopled by the
king of Ashur, had indeed no religion, because they had made a compound of two,
namely, a true and a false. Zephaniah could not abide that some should swear
by Malcham, Zeph. 1.5.
when others did swear by the Lord, or that one should swear by both. No man
can possibly serve two masters, Mat. 6.24.
which be at open variance together.

What wise husbandman having sown good seed in his field, Mat. 13.24 25.
will (unless he be sleeping) suffer the enemy to sow tares among the wheat?
And what else have the Jesuits and Seminary men done within this Realm for
the space of many years? But one watchful King sitting in the throne of
judgment, Pro. 20.8.
Cant. 2.15.
will chase away all evil with his eyes: and ther-among the he foxes which
destroy the vines. That it may appear plainly to the whole world, that he
will do wisely in the perfect way.

Howbeit, see what impediments in the best courses good Princes have found. 2.
Chro. 20.32.33.
For though Iehosaphat was fully bent to make a perfect reformation, yet the
high places were not taken away, because the people had not hitherto prepared
their hearts unto the God of their fathers. And when Hezechiah sent letters
abroad by posts into every quarter of the realm to summon the people to
assemble at Jerusalem, 2. Chro. 30.10.
for the celebrating of a most solemn passe-ouer: they of Ephraim and Manasseh
laughed the messengers to scorn and mocked them.

Nevertheless David for his own part will do wisely in the perfect way: and
more then that, he will walk, that is, converse or behave himself. How? In
the uprightness of his heart. Where? In the midst of his house.

David (I say) will walk in the uprightness of his heart, for otherwise
neither his words nor his works could be acceptable to God. So that all the
outward semblance of conversion and reformation in the old Israelites, Psalm
78.34.35.36.37.
was but mere flattery and dissimulation, because their heart was not upright
with God, neither were they faithful in his covenant. Though Simon Magus
intruded himself into the Apostles company, Act 8.21.20.
yet he had neither part nor fellowship in their business, because his heart
was not right in the sight of God. Ananias also and Sapphira lose the reward of
their contribution if Satan fill their hearts and move the^ to lie unto the
holy Ghost. If the devil have once put treason into the heart of Judas, Ioh.
13.2. Mat. 26.
no good can be expected from him, no not when he saluteth and kisseth. Prou.
26.23.24.25.
As silver dross ouerlaid upon a potsheard, so are burning lips and an evil
heart. He that hates will counterfeit with his lips, but in his heart he
lays up deceit. Though he speak favorably believe him not, for there are
seven abominations in his heart.

2. Reg. 10.15.16.
But on the other side, Iehonadab the son of Rechab was judged worthy to be
taken up into the chariot of Iehu, and to see the zeal which he had for the
Lord, because his heart was upright as Iehues was toward him. And Solomon at
Gibeon (where the tabernacle then was) confesses, 1. Reg. 3.6.
that* God had showed to his father David great mercy, when as he walked
before him in truth and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with
him. Also when as God appeared to Solomon the second time, 1. Reg. 2.4.
he made unto him this promise, that if he would walk before him in pureness of
heart, and in righteousness as his father had done, then the throne of his
kingdom upon Israel should be established for ever. Isa. 38.1.3.
When Hezechiah received a doleful message from God by the mouth of Isaias,
saying, Put thine house in order for thou shall die and not live: this was his
only comfort, that he had walked before God in truth and with a perfect heart.
This was David's stay in trouble and danger in Saul's time, Psalm. 7.10.
that his defense was in God, who preserves the upright of heart. They that
read the Psalms with attention do observe, Psalm. 32.10.
that though many sorrows come to the wicked, and God shoots an arrow at
them suddenly, and their strokes shall be at once, yet when judgment shall
return to justice, Ib 64.7. Ib. 94.15. Ib. 32.11. Ib. 97.11.
then all that are upright in heart may be joyful. For assuredly light is
sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Light (I say) that
is, peace, joy, and perfect felicity, is sown for them though they do not
presently reap it; and it is laid up in store for them, though they do not
presently enjoy it. And therefore David walked in the uprightness of his
heart, and that in the midst of his house.

Many indeed who pretend holiness and honesty while they are ouerlooked by
two good tutors, Daylight and Open place, Ephesians. 4.19.
afterward give themselves to wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with
greediness, when as they are covered with the mantle of a dark night, or shut
up within the walls of their private lodgings, falsely persuading themselves
that as they go beyond the knowledge of mortal men, so also the Lord shall not
see, neither will the God of Jacob regard it. Psalm. 94.7. Psalm. 36.4.2
Thus the wicked man wanting the fear of God before his eyes, and imagining
mischief upon his bed, flattereth himself in his own conceit, while his
iniquity is found worthy to be hated. Job. 24.13, 14, 15, 16, 17
Job knew by experience that the murderer rises early to kill the poor and
needy: and that thieves dig thorough houses in the dark which they marked for
themselves in the day time: and that the eye of the adulterer disguizing his
face, waits for the twilight: and consequently that the morning is unto al
these (and the like) even as the shadow of death. Ezechiel also being brought
to Jerusalem in the spirit, Ezekiel. 8.12.
saw that the ancients of the house of Israel did in the dark every one in
the chamber of his imagerie, that which they durst not do openly and in the day
light.

But seeing that many by the instinct of nature, even for common civility, are
ashamed to act or execute those impieties and iniquities openly which they
commit in secret very willingly, how abominable and damnable is the case or
state of them which dare and presume without blushing to practice heinous
offenses and outrages in the Sunshine, and at noone tide? Genesis 10.9.
As Nimrod who was prouerbially entitled, The mighty hunter before the Lord,
because he passed not to commit cruelty even in Gods presence. And of this
consort was Absalom who blushed not to spread a tent upon the top of the
Kings palace, 2. Sam. 16.22.
and to go in to his fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel. In this
rank are to be ranged they of whom Isay affirms, Isa. 3.9.
that the trial of their countenance testifies against them, yea they declare
their sins as Sodom, they hide the^ not. And in respect of such shameless
dealing, the same Prophet challenges the people of his age to have not only a
neck made of an iron sinew, Isa. 48.4.
(for obstinacy) but also a brow of brass (for impudency;) and to have not
only set up the remembrance of their idolatry behind the doors and posts of
their houses, Ibid. 57.8.7.
but also openly made their bed of spiritual fornications upon a very high
mountain exposed to the view of al men. Moreover, the great whore that sits
upon many waters, Apoc. 17.1.4.5.
being arrayed in purple and scarlet, does not closely hide, but openly bear
and show in her very forehead a name written, A mystery, great Babylon, the
mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth.

Howbeit David is so far absent from transgressing in public, that he
purposes to walk in the vprightnes of his heart in the midst of his house:
knowing that their turning of devises shall be esteemed as the potters clay,
Isai. 29.16.15.
which seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord: and that the righteous
God who knows the hearts and reins, Psalm. 7.9.
will one day bring every work unto judgment, with every secret thing whether
it be good or evil. Eccles. 12.14.
And therefore he will walk in the uprightness of his heart in the midst of
his house.

But now how long will David continue in doing wisely, and walking uprightly?
Till God come and call him away out of this world by death, or in a word,
during his natural life.

There was hope that David would perform this promise for the expectation of
the kingdom of God, seeing that he had formerly given proof of his rare
patience in his distressed estate during the expectancie of the kingdom of
Israel. For though in that Interim of sundry years attendance, after that
Samuel had anointed him before the crown fell unto him by the death of king
Saul, he sustained many grievous troubles, inconveniences, and dangers, yet he
still possessed his soul in patience without seeking unlawful means to
hasten his own advancement, by the making away of his Sovereign. Insomuch as
though Saul, 1. Sam. 24.3. and 268 9.10.11.12.
who deadly pursued him, was twice by the providence of God, offered into his
hands that he might have done his pleasure with him: first, in the wilderness
of Engedi: and secondly, in the desert of Ziph, yet he spared his life, and did
no viol nce to his person, leaving him to Gods judgment, and referring his own
cause to Gods merciful providence, patiently attending the Lords leisure till
he should vouchsafe to come and put him into the possession of the kingdom.
And now that he has it, he will persevere in a godly course to the end, in
expectation of the joys of heaven.

Thus David's course will be clean contrary to that of the Apostaticall
Angels, Ioh. 8.44.
who abode in the truth but a short time after their creation. Like as
afterward Adam and Eve continued but a small while in their innocence in
Paradise. Genesis 3.6.
Genesis 19.26.
Also Lots wife had not far to go, and yet she locked back before she arrived
at the place of safety. Gen 42.15
Joseph after some abode in the king of Aegypts Court learned to swear by the
life of Pharaoh. The Israelites were soon turned out of the way which God
commanded them. For while Moses was but forty days absent from them, Exodus
32.8.
in the mean while they made to themselves a molten calfe and worshipped it. 1.
Sam 13.
Saul began well, but he held not out; and so for disobedience he was utterly
rejected. Hos 6.4.
The goodness of Ephraim was but as a morning cloud, and 5.
and as the morning dew it went away. Asa in the beginning of his reign did
that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord. 2. Chr. 14.2
But afterward for fear of Baasha king of Israel, he made a covenant with
Benhadad king of Aram: and imprisoned Hanani the Seer because he reproved him
for it. Ib. cap. 16. ver. 1. ad 11
And in the end of his life being extremely pained in his feet, he sought not
to the Lord in his disease, but to the Physicians. Ib. verse. 12.
Ioash king of Judah did uprightly in the sight of the Lord all the days of
Iehoiada the Priest: 2. Chr. 24.^^
but after his death by the advice of the Peers of the Realm, (that is, the
Princes of Judah) he fell to the practice of gross idolatry, and gave warrant
for the execution of Zechariah the son of Iehoiada, by stoning to death, Ib
verse. 17. ad 23.
for protesting against those proceedings. VZZiah sought God in the days of
Zechariah, 2. Chr. 26.
who understood the visions of God: and when as he sought the Lord, God made
him to prosper. But in his prosperity he presumed to intermeddle with that
which appertained not unto him, Ib ver. 16. ad. 22.
which thing wrought his woeful overthrow. O foolish Galathians, Gal. 3.3.
after ye have begun in the spirit, would ye now be made perfect in the
flesh? Ye received Paul as an Angel of God, Ib^^. verse. 14.15.16.
yea as Christ Jesus: and ye did once so affect him, that if it had been
possiible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes and have given them unto
him. Is he therefore now become your enemy, because he tells you the truth? Is
it so Demas that you have forsaken Paul and embraced this present world? 2. Tim
4.10.
No marvel then if Himenaeus and Alexander have put away a good conscience, 1.
Tim. 1.19.20.
and made shipwreck of faith. Surely these went out from us, but they were not
of us: ^. Ioh. 2.19.
for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us: because the
foundation remains sure, and has this seal: The Lord knows who be his. 2.
Tim. 2.19
Suppose (which God forbid) that all the people should fall away and serve the
gods of the Amorites, yet Joshua and his fathers house will serve the Lord.
Josh. 24.15
Though Israel play the harlot, Hos. 4.5.
yet let not Judah sin. Be it hat the evil one comes and catches away that
which is sown in his heart, who received the seed by the way side. Mat. 13.18.
ad 2.24.
Admit also that he which receives the seed in stony ground, is for want of
rooting in himself offended as soon as tribulation or persecution comes
because of the word. Put case likewise that the care of this world and
deceitfulness of riches choke the word and make it unfruitful in him that
receives the seed among thorns. Yet certainly there be and ever will be
diverse apt to receive the seed in good ground, who will not cease to bear
fruit, and to bring forth some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, some thirty
fold. Though many of our Sauiors Disciples went back, and walked no more with
him after the conference at Capernaum, Ioh. 6.66.67.68.69.
yet Simon Peter and the rest of the faithful company would not depart from
him, because they knew and acknowledged that he had the words of eternal life.
Mat. 10.22.
And likewise they were not ignorant that only he which endures to the end
shall be saved.

Be constant therefore in weldoing, but brag not of future constancy. For
without the especial assistance of Gods grace, Mat. 26.33 34.
even Peter himself, notwithstanding his presumption in the morning, will deny
his master in the evening. Apoc. 2.4.
And the Angel of the Church of Ephesus will leave his first love. Yea,
without the same, David will step awry in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1.
Reg. 15.5.
and afterward by the provocation of Satan he will number Israel in the pride
of his heart. 1. Chr. 21.1
Likewise Solomon in his elder years will yield to the feminine sex in their
seducing vain. 1. Reg. 11* 4.5. 2. Chr. 18, 1.
Also Iehosophat will join himself in affinity with Ahab. 2. Chr. 32.25.
In like sort Hezekiah will be insolent for the victory obtained against the
inuading Saneherib, and will show his treasures to the Ambassadors of Babylon,
Isa. 39.1.2.
by way of ostentation. Finally Josiah will undertake war, not consulting
with the Lord, and so fight unfortunately against Pharaoh Necho at Megiddo.

Seeing then these dangerous and fearful examples in others, whereby as in a
glass we may observe our own infirmity, 1. Pet. 5: ^
let us pray unto the God of all grace which has called us unto his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, to make us perfect, confirm, strengthen and stablish
us, that we may do wisely in the perfect way, walking in the uprightness of
our hearts in the mids of our houses, till the time come that we shall be
called out of this land of our pilgrimage and valley of misery, and so
translated to the place of perpetual and most happy rest, that when as dust
is returned to earth as it was, and the spirit is returned to God that gave
it, Eccles. 12.7
we may thenceforth for ever be partakers of those heavenly and unspeakable
joys which are purchased and prepared for us by the passion and the mediation
of our Savior Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor
and glory both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

