THE KNAVE OF Clubbes.



Printed at London for W. Ferebrand, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Palace. 1609.

TO FVSTIS Knave of Clubs.
FVSTIS, the humors of a Knave,
To thee I dedicate;
Which has bine christened knave of Clubs
By Gentlemen of late:
For thy notorious swaggering life,
Thou live about the Town;
And Fleete-street fraies, when Prentices
With Clubs did knock thee down:
Thy tricks, and feats thou have at cards,
To cut upon a Knave,
That let a man draw where he will,
Thy picture he shall have.
Thy haunting of the Dicing-house,
To cheat a living theare,
The Panders profit out of Whoores,
For whom thou't sight and swear,
Thy bold and brazen faced exploit
In want, some quoine to get,
At Bedlem-bowling alley late,
Where Citizens did bet:
And threw their money on the ground,
To which thou did incline,
And taking up an angel, swore
By God this game is mine.
While they upon each other look,
Not knowing what to say,
Clubs calls (come sirrah) to his man,
And goes with quoyne away.
These and a thousand villainies,
Which now I will omit,
Has got Thee placed captain here
Because thou merrits is,
March in the forefront of my book,
And say I use thee kind,
A crew of madmen, knaves and fools,
Thy fellows come behind.
S. R.

A Whoore-monger.
AN ancient wooer matched himself for gold,
Unto a widow foure-score winters old,
Whose wholesome money, did beget good will,
She brought him bags, 4. husbands helped to fill
As arrant misers as the earth contains,
Which with their moyling care, and pessant pains
Had scraped thousands, yet even such they were,
As ISIS Ass which loads of gold did bear,
And was himself an object toyling beast,
Burdned with that which he inioyed least.
This golden Grandham loved a cup of sack,
Which her kind husband would not see her lack:
but willingly a nights would make her drunk,
Because indeed he kept a servant puncke,
Who when her mistress had it in the head,
Would come and creep into her Masters bed.
This held out long, until one night, kind IONE
Hearing her master cough, and Mistress groan,
Prepared herself (the cough was still his call)
To tell the naked truth she stripped of all.
And coming like a Wench of willing sprite,
To do her Masters business in the night,
Such tumbling in the Bed (belike) did keep,
She waked her quiet Mistress out of sleep.
Who was by this recouer'd in the brain,
And gotten sober by her sleep again.
Perceiving plainly how the matter went,
And why the kindenes of the sack was meant,
Starts up and cries, ah Whore am I your bawd?
Out wicked Knave, and with her Nails be clawd
Them cruelly, that Wench and Master bled,
Then with her feet she spurned them out of bed,
The violence of that same furious fall,
Threw them both down, with chamber pot and all,
So that the scratching, washed with filthy smell,
Did kill the Itch, like whipping in Bride-well.
A Pander.
A Country blew-coate Seruing-man,
In Tearme-time sent to Town:
Would range the City for some news
To carry with him down.
At length he got into More-fieldes,
Viewing the Walks and Trees:
And thence to Garden-Alley goes,
Where at a Door he sees,
A Puncke prepared for passengers,
Set out for baudie sale,
Who smiling said, kind Gentleman,
Bestow some Bottle-Ale
Upon me, if you love a Wench,
Whom you shall ready find.
To counteruaile your courtesy,
In what you will, most kind.
Some bottle-ale (quoth he) where is it?
Have any near at hand?
Yes sir (said she) I pray come in:
Thus she was seruing-mand.
He sits him down into a chair,
And to his liquor falls,
While she unto her maid for cakes,
Stewd prunes, and pippins calls:
Which being brought them, down she sits,
And as they both embrace,
A swaggering rogue breaks open door,
And's Rapier did uncase,
Villain (quoth he) and damned whore,
Before the Lord you die,
For this deflowring of my wife,
What have thou to reply?
Sir said the clown you do me wrong,
Upon me thus to rail,
As I came by she called me in,
To drink some bottle-ale,
And by this bread I touched no more,
But only hand and lip:
No, said the Ruffian, speak you whore,
And look thou do not trip,
Else had you thousand lives you dye,
She falling down with speed,
Cri'de out, dear husband pardon me,
We have been naught in deed.
Sir what say you now (quoth he)
She has confessed it plain:
Villain thou dyest: oh hold (says he)
Hear me one word again,
Five pound is all the coin I have
That will I freely give,
Here take it sir with all my heart,
So you will let me live:
Five pound (quoth he) do think i will sell
My reputation so?
Five hundred will not satisfy,
My wife was chaste (I know)
Before thou broughtst her unto this,
Speak did offend before?
Never kind husband (quoth. the whore)
Nor nere will wrong you more.
Well, huswife well, your tears prevail
Joined with a faithful vow,
Give me five pound, and for this time
I Will pocket al up now.
You seem an honest simple man,
Refrain to tempt men's wives:
The only cause I let you live
Is to amend your lives.
A Sharke
TWo hungry Sharkes did travel Paul's,
Until their guts cride out,
and knew not how, with both their wits,
To bring one meal about:
Says one to the other, what coin have?
My famisht entralls groans,
I find but hungry diet here,
Amongst these rotten bones:
He did reply, faith not a cross
To bless me in this case,
I must go seek to mend my self,
In some more wholesome place.
And I but one poor penny have,
In all the world is mine,
(Quoth the other) but I Will try my wits,
How that can make me dine.
So toward Smithfield he departs,
Unto a Cooks thereby,
And calls for his Can of beer,
The boy comes presently,
And brings it him: Sir said the youth,
Will It please you eat a bit?
I Will fetch a dainty slice of beef,
Is hot upon the spit.
Sirrah (quoth. he) why do and twoot,
Which nimble Jack did bring,
And he as nimbly eat it up,
Yet still his guts did wring.
Jack sees al gone, says Gentleman,
Wilt please you taste good cheese?
I boy an twoo't (quoth he again)
Thought Sharke, this well agrees
With my most woeful stomachs state,
So Jack with cheese comes in,
And that was soon deuowred up
Even as the beef had bin.
Being thus dispatched, he lays down Jack
A penny for the shot,
Sir what shall this do said the boy?
Why rogue discharge my pot:
So much I called for, but the rest
By me shall nere be paid,
For victuals thou did offer me,
Do and thou woot I said.
Jack seeing he no more would pay,
Unto his master went,
And told him there was one within,
That had much vittails spent,
And would not see the house dischargd,
The Cook unto him goes,
Requesting him of courtesy
To pay the debt he owes:
Sir said the swagg'rer, I protest,
I called but for a Can,
According to the coin I had,
As I am Gentleman,
My hunger was exceeding great,
Your boy did offer beef,
And bread, and cheese, which when I heard,
Unto my stomachs grief,
Quoth I, why bring it boy and t'woot,
Leaving it to his will,
Which he did bring, as if he meant,
My hungry corpse to fill.
I could not choose but feed thereon,
(This is the truth mine Host)
Yet score it up, when God sends coin,
I will discharge your poast.
The Cook sees nothing to be had,
Lets him depart away,
Who meets his fellow Sharke,
In Paul's again next day,
And told him how exceeding well,
He for his penny sped,
On roasted beef, good bread and cheese,
Only for that he fed,
Preethee (quoth he) but tell me where?
That Host shall sure be mine,
Marry (says he) in such a place,
A Cook at such a sign:
Go there, and call but for a Can,
And there is a dapper knave,
Comes, gentleman, what dainty bit
For diet will you have?
A stately piece of roasted beef,
Fine cheese, what will you eat?
Then say you, sirrah I an t'woot
You need not pay for's meat.
Oh excellent (quoth he) I Will go,
Such simple fools to gull,
And spend a pot withal my heart,
To fill my belly full.
Away he walks unto the house,
To feed him on the jest,
Sir (says he) a Can of beer,
And look you bring the best:
The boy according to his use,
Returns with nimble speed,
Saying, Gentleman is it your desire,
On fine roast beef to feed?
Fine beef (quoth he) I boy an t'woot
The boy runs down amain,
Cries master, come, bring Tom and Georg,
Heeres I an twoot again:
His master brings up both his men,
In all the haste might be,
And I an twoot be basted so,
He had no eyes to see.
They larded and be greasd his bones,
Until his shoulders sweat,
And gave him sower sawee good store,
Unto his fellows meat.
A politic Thief
AMongst free-booters by the hie-way-side,
Such as men's purses woefully misguide,
Unto some Inn the owner never meant,
To be beyond a Lordships lowance spent,
A Gentleman that could dispend by year,
Five hundred pounds (when purchase came in clear)
Whose living only made him to repine,
Because the Hangman was to have a fine,
At Burstow-cawsie, Gads-hill and Coome-parke,
Had taken up about some hundred-marke,
With which to London he was forced to fly,
And get him clear of fearful Hue and Cry,
Meeting with one just of his own dispose,
With him he plotted to escape his foes,
And told him in what terms his case did stand,
What extreme danger eminent at hand,
But (says he) if thou will afford consent,
My policy their purpose shall prevent.
I Will frame a Bill that I am in thy debt,
And to the same an Ante date will set,
Thou shall arrest me, I Will to counter go,
And they may search, until their hearts ache so,
No man will look for me in that same place,
It Will be my castle for some three months space,
while they search Tavern, rifle victualing-howse,
There I secure will drink a healths carowse,
This was agreed unto the bill was made,
Purse-taker was arested, there he staide,
Until no further danger did appear,
Then with his creditor the debt did clear,
and being discharged, they to a tavern went,
Quoth plotter here is an angel to be spent
Only in kindenes, prithee back restore,
What I have paid in jest, six Angels more
The other wished, God might his soul confound,
If he gave back a penny of that three pound,
I saved thy life (quoth. he) and will be paid,
Although the plot thereof by thee was laid,
Th'effecting it by me thou did obtain,
Nay, I have venter'd hanging for my pain:
And do thou think ten shillings spent in wine,
Sufficient pay for this good turn of mine?
My staying here in town to pleasure thee,
Is many purse out of the way to me,
Had been mine own as sure as this is plate:
Drink, no more words, a penny I Will not bate.
Quoth the other, wilt not? and his poniard drew,
Stabs at him, saying, villain thou shall rue
This cheating of a better man then thou:
Says the other, thou art an arrant thief I vow,
Drawing his dagger, wounding him again,
With that, house-guests pressed in the room amain,
And understanding how their quarrel grew,
The robbery, and plot that did ensew,
The falling out for challenging three pound,
They present were for newgate voyage bound:
From thence up Holborne-hill they were conuaide,
And so at Tiburne all the quarrel staid.
A cunning man alias cousening knave.
A shifting knave about the town,
Did challenge wondrous skill:
To tell men's fortunes and good haps,
He had the stars at will.
What day was best to travel on,
Which fit to choose a wife,
If violent, or natural,
a man should end his life.
Success of any suit in law,
Which parties cause preuailes
when it is good to pick ones teeth
And ill to pare his nails.
So cunningly he played the knave,
That he deluded many,
With shifting, base and cousening tricks,
For skill he had not any.
Amongst a crew of simple guls,
That plid'e him to their cost,
A Butcher comes and craves his help,
That had some cattle lost,
Ten groats he gave him to his fee,
And he to conjure goes,
With characters, and vocables,
and diverse antique shows.
The Butcher in a beastly fear,
Expected spirits still,
And wishd himself within his shop,
Some sheep or calfe to kill:
His color changed red and pale,
The sweat ran down his face,
and by the smell a man might judge,
His hose in filthy case.
at length forth of an od blind hole,
Behind a painted cloth,
a Devil comes with roaring voice,
Seeming exceeding wroth,
With squibs and crackers all about,
VVilde-fire he did send,
which swaggring Bal^ (the butchers dog)
So highly did offend,
That he (...) D^uill flies,
And shakes his horns so sore,
Even like an Ox (most terrible)
He made Hobgoblin roar,
The cunning man, cries, Gods love help,
Unto your mastiffe call,
Fight Dog, fight Devil (butcher said)
And claps his hands at Ball,
The Dog most cruel tore his flesh,
The Devil went to wrack,
And looked like a totterd rogue,
With never a rag on's back:
Give me my money back again,
Thou slave, the butcher said,
Or I will see your Devils heart,
Before he can be laid:
He gets not back again to hell,
Ere I my money have,
Nay, and I will have intrest too,
Besides mine own I gave.
Deliver first mine own ten groats,
And then a crown to boot,
I smell your Devils knavery out,
He wants a cloven foot,
The Coniurer with all his (...)
The money back repaies,
and gives five shillings of his own,
To whom the Butcher says,
Farewell most scuruy Coniurer,
Think on my valiant deed,
Which have done more then English George,
That made the Dragon bleed:
He and his Horse the story tells,
Did but a Serpent slay:
I and my Dog, the Devil spoiled,
We two have got the day.
Brawling contention,
Two railing creatures fell at strife,
and such a clamor made,
That people passing by, stood still,
To hearken what they said.
amongst the rest a woman comes,
Demanding of the rout,
I pray (quoth she) what is the cause,
Of all this falling out?
One presently made answer thus,
You are a whore (quoth he)
Thou art an arrand scuruy knave,
and rascal rogue (said she)
Why thus (quoth he) these two fell out,
The quarrel that they have,
Began at first as we do now,
With calling whore and knave.
Master make-shift.
A Needy Poet of a poor complexion,
Whose purse was sick of very long infectio^,
That writ (as beggars crave an alms) for need,
Often wanting meat when he would gladly feed,
(Who when he traueld to Parnassus hill,
Was much beholden to tobacco still,
For how so e're his chimney wanted fire,
His nose was smoking to his hearts desire)
Come's to a tavern, where he understood,
A dinner was prepared exceeding good,
For diverse gentlemen, of which kind crew,
Some half a doozen very friends he knew,
So boldly did intrude into the place,
With hungry stomach, and a brazen face,
They welcome him, and kindly do entreat
To do as they do, sit him down and eat,
Which wholesome word no repetition needs,
For like a starueling, he falls to and feeds:
Little discourse long time he could afford,
But answers, true sir, unto every word:
It Is right forsooth, and so again crammes in,
As if a fortnight he had fasting bin:
Plying his victuals thus an hour at least,
Like unto VVolnor that same ravening beast:
His pudding-house at length began to swell,
And he took leisure some strange lies to tell:
And those he swears unto by cups of wine,
(For now to liquor he does whole incline)
Well, growing late they for a reckning call,
and Vintners boy brings up a bill of all,
So every man does cast his money down,
Ten groats, 3. shillings, other some their crown:
Which all upon a trencher was conuaid
To Poet pennilesse, and him they prayed
To make the shot: nay Gentlemen (quoth he)
I do entreat you all to pardon me,
I Will spend my crown, and put his hand in's hose,
where not a penny could be found, God knows:
While still they swear that he shall make the shot
at last the money in his hand he got,
and rising, to the fiddlers turns about,
Come on (quoth he) what new thing is come out?
Sure Gentlemen (said they) we have not any,
Then sing me, I could fancy lovely Nanny,
(And here is for you, I Will but go and leake,
Call for a pot, there is not a rogue will speak)
So takes his cloak and down the stairs away,
With all the money was laid down to pay:
The Gentlemen suspecting no such thing,
Discourse together, and the fiddlers sing,
Until they miss their Poet ouer-long,
Who took his leave most kindly with a song:
They knock and call and send to seek below,
But what is become of him, there is none does know
He Is gone to walk, his dinner to digest,
Of all the money they laid down possessed,
Some fifty shillings the had gotten clear,
In curtezie, for all the great good cheer.
Now every man must to his purse again,
In Vintners debt, and Fiddlers they remain,
Some swear, some swagger, others laugh thereat,
Wishing the reckning would make thin-gut fat:
A pox upon this Poet one did curse,
He has not left a penny in my purse:
Five shillings not a farthing more I had,
And thus be-guld, does make me almost mad,
With all my heart I Will spend a crown, or twain,
To meet the rascal in my dish again:
I wo^ld bestab his skin, like dublet cuts,
And garter up his stockings with his guts.
Then down the stairs the villain should be tossed
Like ^^ a footeball in a winters frost.
Gentlemen says another, silence now,
It Is but a folly to protest and vow,
Although plain dealing be a jewel still,
We must use double dealing against our will:
And pay our shot again was paid before,
For yet you see we stand upon the score:
We are well served if things be rightly scand,
To put our reckning into Make-shifts hand.
But laugh it out, least we be laughd to scorn,
Good wits are worthy to have charges borne.
A Gull.
One wittily described a Gull,
In different sort and kind,
and to the life does paint a fop,
For eyes that are not blind,
His first Gull fears a silken wench,
Her velvet gown does scare him,
Another wears a silver hilt;
Yet every boy will dare him;
Next comes fashions Iack-an-apes
A Gull composed of pride,
That has his goodness in good clothes,
And nothing good beside.
And lastly he is a Gull of Guls,
That makes an outward seeming,
Yet has not one poor ounce of wit,
That Is worth wise men's esteeming,
But unto these let us ad a Gul,
That Is very late found out,
Will spend his living, land, and wealth,
To find conclusions out,
Heel'e make you bread of pompion seeds,
Shall far excel all wheat,
And with a kind of burning glass,
In Sun, roast any meat,
Heel'e teach an ape to speak good french,
Iacke-daw to write and read,
And has a trick to use a Cat,
That she shall Ferrets breed,
Yet these are all inferior things,
To those his wit has found,
Such secrets never were disclosed,
Upon this earthly ground,
For shortly he intends to fly,
One wing is almost made,
To put down simple Dedalus,
He does himself persuade.
But see how wise ingenious men,
Do often ouer-slip!
A craftier knave then he (of late)
Had got him on the hip,
Which sold him a familier sprite,
A Devil in a box,
An artificial fly of silk,
(A devil with a pox)
For this my Gull gives twenty pound,
(Would I might sell him flies)
But he should learn besides forsooth,
To make a devil rise,
This was allowed to the match,
And he must fall to charm,
So both against the pointed day,
Themselves for spirits arm,
The Gull gets on a surplis,
With a cross upon his breast,
Like Allen playing Faustus,
In that manner he was dressed:
And having all his furniture,
He steps into the ring,
Says his instructor stir not out,
I must go fetch a thing
Is left below, I needs must have
So out of door he hies,
Unto an officer hard by,
Saying sir in any wise,
Come with all expedition,
I will bring you to a place,
Where a most wicked creature is,
A wretch that wants grace,
Raising of devils, which you know,
The law does straight forbid,
The action is so horrible,
I durst not keep it hid,
The officer in all the have,
Unto the house repaires,
And his director wills him go,
Directly up the stairs:
Mean while, ^^mselfe slips clean away,
The Constable comes in:
And in the Kings name charge him,
To cease his hellish sin,
Art thou a raising devils here,
I charge thee to obey me,
Quoth Gull, if I should stir a foot,
Ten thousand spirits would slay me,
Keep out my circle, come not near,
Say you fair warning have,
Depart before the Devil comes,
Least hell be made thy grave,
I Will raise the ghost of Hercules,
Shall brain thee with his club,
Do thou not see a smoke appear?
Why now comes Beelzebub,
I conjure thee be gone I say,
Depart by Fee, Fa, Fum:
Now Rago, Crago is at hand,
Look where his horns do come.
The officer imagining,
He saw something arise,
Ran down the stairs half mad with fear,
And help, clubs, halberds cries:
So apprehended him presently,
And carries him away,
Unto a Justice, where the fool
Had not a word to say,
But only that he meant no harm,
And would a devil see,
Why quoth the Maiestrate, thou shall,
I Will send thee where they be,
Incarnate devils, such as do
Assume a humane shape:
To newgate with him presently,
For playing Plutoes ape,
where when he came he found the knave
That taught him coniuration,
Villain (quoth he) base rogue and slave,
Is this your charming fashion?
To cosen me of twenty pounds,
And bring me here to hell?
Kind Gentleman (said he) forbear,
I Will recompense you well,
Of purpose I have met you here,
Because you shall see art,
To morrow by a spirits help,
We both from hence will part.
And all things I have promised you,
Shall be performd at full,
So next day got himself released,
And there leaves goodman Gull.
A Cuckold.
A City wanton full of pride and lust,
Of Venus strain and disposition just,
That could her husband on the forehead strike,
And make his browe to swell Acteon like,
Yet he poor seely man, never felt it smart,
But took al kind that came from his sweetheart,
Had two choice friends to sport herself withal,
Two cousens, you may cuckould-makers call:
The one a Captain and a martial wight,
Was champion in his mistress cause to fight,
And for the service that he did by day,
She did reward him with a nightly pay.
The other was a courtier gallant, brave,
That great content to her sweet person gave:
Her dear Adonis, quick and pleasant witted,
With these, the virtuous citizen was fitted:
To them she gave kind entertainment still,
Having a maid sorted unto her will,
Which for the service she did much applaud,
Being her mistress crafty cunning baud,
A trusty messenger from each to other,
Who for her pains got money, and the the other
They call good turn, which Betteris would not leese,
Because her service did deserve such fees
The courtier one time having understood,
By cuckolds absence, how the time was good,
To go a grafting, hyes him to the place,
Where he might give loves mistress, loves embrace.
while he was in his courtly complements*
The maid comes in, and heavy news presents,
Saying the captain was a coming in,
Which to the courtier ever foe had bin,
For they bare hatred of a jealous spite,
And each had vowed where e're they met, to fight,
Oh love (quoth she) creep underneath the bed,
This is no fighting place, sweet hide thy head,
For love of christ keep you unseen asunder,
Well for this time (quoth he) I will creep under,
Because thy name in question shall not be,
Else would I dye on him for love of thee.
So up comes Captain and he falls to court,
With speech befitting Mars and Venus sport,
Kind love quoth he now Vulcan is not here,
I Will claim the rites befitting love my dear,
Had I the courtier here loved thee before,
While we were busy he should keep the door,
Or I would make incission in his guts,
And carue his carcass full of wounds and cuts,
With that, the maid again comes up the stairs
Crying dear mistress now begins our cares,
My masters coming what shift will you make*
Now hold out wit, it is for our credits sake:
Captain (quoth she) to rid all doubt and fear,
Unto my counsel lend a willing ear,
Put but in practice what I shall advise,
And on my life no prejudice will rise,
Draw out your weapon, and go swearing down
Look terrible, (I need not teach you frown)
And vow you will be revenged some other time
And then leave me, to make the reason rhyme,
I will says he, so down apace he goes:
with Rapier drawn, such fearful looks he shows
The cuckold trembles to behold the sight
And up he comes as he had met some sprite*
Ah wife (said he) what creature did I meet?
Has he done any harm to thee my sweet?
A verier ruffian I did never see,
The sight of him almost distracted me.
My loving husband as I here sat sowing,
Thinking no harm or any evil knowing,
A Gentleman came up the stairs amain,
Crying, oh help me or I shall be slain,
I of compassion husband (life is dear)
Under our bed in pity hid him here,
His foe sought for him with his rapier drawn:
While I with tears did wash this piece of lawne,
But when he saw he could not find him out,
(After he tossed all my things about)
He went down swaggering even as you met him,
My saving the poor man so much did fret him.
A blessed deed (quoth he) it proves thee wise,
Alas the gentleman uneasy lies,
Wife call him forth, I hope all danger's past,
Good Bettris look that all the doors be fast.
Sir you are welcome to my house I vow,
I joy it is your Sanctuary now,
And count my self most happy in the thing,
That such good fortune did you heather bring,
Sir (said the courtier) hearty thanks I give,
I will requite your kindenes if I live,
But know not how to gratify your wife,
For this great favor saving of my life:
Yet Gentlewoman this assurance take,
Some satisfaction I in part will make,
If not in whole, accept a willing mind,
That vows to honor al your sex and kind:
More loving far in heart then men you be,
Extending your affections bounteous free,
Most affable and pitiful by nature,
The worlds even supreme all excelling creature
Fond men unjustly do abuse your names,
With slaundrous speeches and most false defames,
They lie, and rail, and Enuies poison spit
But those are madmen that do offer it,
They that enjoy their wit and perfect sense,
will hate the heart should breed a thoughts offense
Accounting it a woman's greater honor,
To have a senceles fool exclaim upon her,
Farewell my life's protector, health attend thee,
With what I have, I ever will befriend thee.
Signieur word-monger the Ape of Eloquence.
AS on the way I Itnerated,
A Rural person I Obuiated,
Interogating times Transitation,
And of the passage Demonstration,
My aprehension did Ingenious-scan,
That he was merely a Simplitian:
So when I saw he was Extrauagant,
Unto the obscure vulgar Consonant:
I bad him vanish most Promiscuously,
And not Contaminate my company.
Craft cousens covetousness.
A Greedy minded gripple Clearke,
Had gatherd store of gould,
And studied for a place secure
His hoorded heap to hold,
At length into a ancient toombe,
He put an iron chest,
Crammed full of coin, and wrote thereon
These words, Hic Deus est.
A subtle Sexton seeing it,
And greedy of the pray,
Came very secret in the night,
And took the gould away,
Then blotting out those latten words,
The Priest had writ thereon,
Wrote Resurrexit, non est hic,
Your God is risen and gone,
A cowards hold challenge that was beaten with a broome-staffe.
WHereas of late thou did provoke mine ire,
To burn in choler like mount Aetnaes fire,
Rowsing my courage forth of valors den,
To fight with monsters, and to combat men,
Know I am for thee, from the cannon-shot
Unto the smallest bodkin can be got,
Name any weapon whatsoever thou will,
May Pole, or ship-mast for to run a tilt,
On horse or foot, in armor or in shirt,
Thou shall find me true valorous expert,
Pike-staffe and Pistol, Musket, two-hand sword,
Or any weapon Europe can afford,
Let fauchon, Polax, Lance, or Halbert try,
With Flemings-kniues either to steake or snye,
I Will meet thee naked to the very skin,
And stab with pen-kniues Caesar's wounds therein.
At length this Gull that seemd of tongue so tall,
Was by his adversary met withal:
Whose blows the champions fury did allay,
And with a stick, his rapier took away.
The Devils health-drinker.
WHo dares dispraise Tobacco,
While the smoke is in my nose?
Or say but fogh my pipe does smell,
I would I knew but those
Durst offer such indignity,
To that which I prefer,
For all the brood of Black-a-moores,
Will swear I do not err,
In taking this same worthy whiffe
What valiant caueleere,
That will not make his nostrils smoke,
At cups of wine and beer?
When as my purse cannot afford
My stomach flesh or fish,
I sup with smoke and feed as well
And fat, as one can wish.
Come into any company,
Though not a cross you have,
Yet offer them Tobacco,
And their liquor you shall have.
They say old hospitality
Kept chimnies smoking still,
Now what our chimnies want of that,
Our smoking noses will.
Much victuals serve, for gluttony,
To fatten men like swine,
But he is a frugall man indeed,
That with a leaf can dine.
And needs no napkin for his hands,
His fingers ends to wipe,
But keeps his kitchen in a box,
And rost-meat in a pipe.
This is the way to help dear years,
A meal a day's enough,
Take out Tobacco for the rest,
By pipe or else in snuff,
And you shall find it physical,
Within a year will shrink so small,
That one his guts may span,
It Is full of physic, rare effects
It works sundry ways,
The leaf green, dry, steept, burnd, the dust
Have each their special praise,
It makes some sober that are drunk,
Some drunk of sober sense,
And all the moisture (hurts the brain)
It fetches smoking thence:
All the four Elements unite,
When you Tobacco take,
For Earth and Water, Air and Fire,
Do a conjunction make,
Your pipe is Earth, the fires therein,
The Air your breathing smoke,
Good liquor must be present too,
For fear you chance to choke.
Here Gentlemen a health to you all,
It Is passing good and strong,
I would speak more, but from the pipe
I cannot stay so long.
AT Gads-hill late (where men are theeuish crossed)
An honest friend, his purse with ten pounds lost,
And as the villains, were new gone away,
Three horsemen came, to whom the man did say
Oh gentlemen, most happy all you be,
To escape two thieves, even now have robed me,
it was great good fortune that til now you staide,
Nay frind (quoth. they) thou art deceived they said,
The thieves were happy as the matter stands:
For by our stay, they have escaped our hands.
Hypocrisy, thou lying knave well met,
I have thee Rascal in my paper net,
Thou that wilt sell salvation for a shilling,
And entertain thine own damnation willing,
Thou go about with many a lie and fable,
To get thy diet at another table.
Yet love no man, be he small or great,
Thy love extends no farther then his meat*
But villain, take this guerdon for thy hyer,
Be first of all approou'd a common liar,
Then for each time thy cursed tongue has tript,
Be thou from great men's houses soundly whipped.
And last of all, when God and men detest thee,
A Hempen halter with a noose molest thee.
A shee-deuill made tame by a Smith.
A Smug of Vulcan forging trade
Besmoak'd with sea cole fire,
The rarest man to help a horse
That Carmen could desire,
For any Jade he physic had,
That ever load did draw:
The apoplexy, falling evil,
The headache, crampe or haw,
Poll-euill, canker in the eye,
Or ulcer in the nose:
The lampasse, crest-fall, withers grief
The nauill-gall: all those
with diverse teadious to rehearse,
Crowne-scab, and quitter-bone
Strangulion, glaunders, yellowes, worms,
Smug would give ground to none,
Yet this rare smith to cure one plague
That vexed him, was too young,
(Which made him weary of his life)
It was his wives cursed tongue.
If to the ale house he had gone,
To take or give a pot,
Being of a dry complexion,
(For a Smith you know is hot)
His wife was present at his heels,
And rong him out this peale:
Rogue, rascal, villain, thief, and slave,
(Her alms thus would she deal)
Come home thou drunkard to thy work,
Each knave has thee at beck,
A pox take such a husband,
And the Devil break thy neck:
Thou sit at the alehouse here,
While I at home do spare:
Not caring so thy guts be full,
How thy poor wife does fare.
Thy servants do even what they list,
Thy children they may starve,
Hanging's to good for such a rogue,
Far worse thou do deserve,
Out filthy beast I loath thy looks,
And hate thee like a toad:
Drunk every day ungodly wretch,
And when thou have thy load,
Call for Tobacco, that thou art
As black within as soote:
Before the Lord, were not for shame,
I Would stamp thee under foot:
Get thee to work: out villain out,
Thou drinkst not one drop more,
I would these whores that trust such knaves,
Might never be paid their score,
They never knew what sorrow meant,
But griefs to others give,
A mischief light on Hostesses,
That do by drunkards live.
This was her daily kindest phrase,
From morning until night,
That Smug would tremble like a leaf,
When she appeared in sight.
At length more wearied with her tongue,
Then travel tires a jade,
Unto himself most resolute,
A cruel vow he made,
Which was, when she did scould again,
(Which sure would be next morrow)
To knock her down most valiantly,
And make an end of sorrow,
This being decreed, his wife next day
Begins a fresh alarm,
With rogue and thief: Smug takes a bar
Of Iron, breaks her arm.
The neighbors all admire at this,
To hear the patient Smith,
Had broake an arm of his cursed wife,
To tame her tongue therewith.
Well there is a surgeon fetched in have,
To take the queen in cure,
Who for the space of many months
Did extreme pain endure
For of all flesh, ash rows, they say,
Is very hard to heal:
Therefore no wiseman willingly
Will have therewith to deal.
But cured at length (though long before)
And like to cost her life,
The Smith did ask the Surgeon,
In the hearing of his wife,
What would content him for his pains?
Who of an honnest mind,
Did answer thus, I see you are poor,
Therefore I Will use you kind,
I Will take but forty shillings friend,
With that I Will be content:
Why then quoth Smug hold here is four pound
Which payment thus is meant,
One arm I pay for has been broke,
And the other forty, hold
Against I break her other arm,
The next time she does scould.
His wife hears this, and sees him pay
Before hand for a cure,
Does live most gentle, quiet, meek,
Guiding her tongue so sure,
That Smug became a happy Smith,
Unto his hearts desire,
And had her ever at command,
In all he could require.
The knave of Clubs his part has plaide,
But now we want Heart, Diamond, Spade,
To show themselves like in true shape.
The reason why they do escape
Is this: of late they fell at jar,
Dispersed asunder very far,
Hearts in the country at new-cut,
And Spades in newgate safe is shut
And Diamonds he is gone to seas,
Sick of the scuruy: which disease
If he escape, and get on shore,
We will present you with all four,
And make them march unto the press,
To utter all their roguishnes,
So till they be together drawn,
Pray keep the Knave of Clubs in pawn.
FINIS.

