A Crew of kind Gossips, all met to be merry: Complaining of their Husbands,
with their Husbands answers in their own defense.

Written, and newly enlarged by S. R.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for John Deane, and are to be sold at his shop at
Temple-barre. 1613.

To the Maids of London.
VIrgins, that live your weary Mayden-liues,
Wishing with all your hearts that you were Wives,
Longing continually to hear it said,
This is last time of Asking; farewell Maid.
Note here your Sisters, that are gone before,
What wholesome Gossips talk they have in store,
Consider how their Husbands they abuse
Amongst their Cups, to find each other news:
Think whether there is not much discretion lackes,
When men are wronged thus behind their backs.
Observe this Conference, survey it all,
And judge how kindest hearts are dealt withal,
Which when you shall perceive (as it is most plain)
When you are Wives, do you the like refrain:
Abuse not Husbands at each Gossips feast,
When they (good harmless men) offend you least:
For if with any fault you can them touch,
It only is, their loving you too much.
S. R.

A Crew of kind Gossips, all m^tte to be merry.
MY Masters that are Married, look about,
For matter of Complaint is coming out
Against your persons, stand upon your guard,
Either your Wives be bad, or you deal hard:
Your credites are in question very far,
And now or never, either make or mar.
You are accused of many heinous things,
And swift Report has very nimble wings*
It flies about the Town from ear to ear,
And most will credit even all they hear.
What will the world suppose, to have your Wives
Give out, their Husbands live such odious lives?
What will our Batchelers and Maidens say,
That are preparing for their wedding day?
Why, they will censure of the married life,
To be a state full of Domesticke strife.
Stand to it stoutly, now as you are men,
First hear them speak, and shape an answer then:
They are no less then half a dozen strong,
Armed with such Tongues as will endure no wrong:
Six Gossips that of late together met,
Besprinckled finely, well with Cla^ret wet:
Apt to discourse of all that ere they knew,
As it is the humor of the Gossip-crew,
Did find themselves greatly agrieued all,
^
The first of th^^, (...)me,
With Tongue enough, and C^u^^ge to the same,
That drank Ca^o^ses to the other five,
And had a care to see the Vintner thrive:
That had her Pint for Pint, her Quart for Quart,
Loving a cup of Clarret with her heart:
That scorned to be entreated for her D^inke,
But would hold out, when twenty Wenches shrink;
And take her Cups, even with a courage down,
Play the Good Fellow kindly, spend her Crown
With any she that durst, a merry Wife,
That never playde the Mizer in her life:
Only her Husband did a humor see,
Which did not like him; she was too too free:
And that (indeed) will not do very well,
For diverse reasons which a man might tell:
But we will leave them to be thought upon,
And turn her to her Tale; which thus goes on.
The first Gossips Complaint.
KInd Gentlewomen, though I sport and jest,
I have small cause to do it, I protest;
If you knew all the Crosses Fortune bringes,
Ah little do you know where my Shoo wrings*
I am often merry, and I cannot choose,
If one should hang me, pleasure I must use:
Unto the Proverb I do still agree,
Care ki^'d a Ca^, so shall it not me.
Yet I am husbanded with such a Clown,
'Twould pull a merrier heart then mine is, down:
There Is nothing in him, it is a very Gull,
His mind's of Money-bags, to fill them full:
There Is nothing that comes from him with good will,
But he is ever grudging, grumbling still:
Let me but ask him somewhat for to spend
At such a time as this, with Friend and Friend;
His Purse will be a coming out so slow,
And such a dogged look he will bestow,
With mind unwilling going thereabout,
I could spend thrice as much ere it comes out.
Is this the way to please a woman's mind,
That is unto good fellow-ship inclin'de?
And never to this day regards dross,
Sometime a Crown, and sometime never a cross:
To take allowance at a wretches hand,
Not having Gold and S^luer at command.
Whom does he spare for, we no Children have?
Indeed he does allow me to go brave;
But that is his credit, full as much as mine,
And now and then at Meals a pint of wine:
Marry sir Muffe, yea, and Gra-mercy Horse,
I will have more, by fair means, or by force:
I scorn to take allowance like a Child,
There Is nothing got, when women be too mild.
This by my Sister Sara prove I can,
All London does not yield a kinder man
Then Thomas is; yet at the first I know,
He did but use her (as they say) so so.
But what did she? Marry, grew somewhat stout,
And when he looked for kindness, loure and pout,
With Pish and Phew, no joy (poor soul) I have,
I could now wish, that I were in my Grave;
And sigh, and weep, and often eat no meat;
And then the Ass (her Husband) would entreat,
I prithee (Sweetheart) what do ayle my dear?
Why should this sorrow in thy looks appear?
Do thou want anything, I prithee speak?
Then would she sigh, as if her heart would break,
And make as though she wept, and rubbed her eyes,
Till her kind fool in earnest sits and cries,
Protesting to do ought that might her please:
Then laying open to him her disease,
She told him that her only grief of mind
Proceeded from hard usage she did find:
For other women (to her extreme care)
Were full of Money, when her purse was bare.
He hearing this, accounted it good hap,
And threw a bag of Angels in her lap:
Then took her by the hand, and (kissing) swore,
While he had Coin, she should complain no more:
So to this day, his honest word does keep,
Only because his Wife did sit and weep*
Now which of us will not almost do so,
Our tears are cheap and plenty, you do know,
For be it spoke in secret twixt us here,
A penny for a pottle is too de^re.
Well, I intend to try my Sisters trick;
I Will first be sullen, after I Will be sick:
And if one after the other will not do,
I will be sullen, sick, and dogged too,
And cha^e, and pout, and loure, and fret, and sweat,
And in a week not touch a bit of Meat:
And when my Husbands tongue he still does hold,
Then I will be most apt to braule and scold;
But when he speaks, and would have me reply,
I Will hold my peace, and (frowning) look awry.
These are the Rules that I intend to keep,
A Shro^ is ten times better then a Sheep.
The Husbands Answers in their own defense.
The first Husbands Answer.
THere is an ancient Proverb used of old,
The first tale's good, until the next be told:
A Liars tongue, i^tearmed Falsehoods mint,
We have been slandered by our Wives in print,
Yet have been silent it appears too long,
The world may censure we have done them wrong,
Because with silence it has past away.
But Gentlemen, now give us leave, I pray
To use Apology, and by no means
Give credit to such cunning crafty Queanes:
For they have s^andred us, upon our lives;
The case may be your own, if you have wives:
And therefore be not partially inclined,
But hear the matter with indifferent mind.
A Tavern for their parley they did choose,
And there (forsooth) as pra^ling Gossips use,
Like Catoes wife, they presently be led,
To utter all that comes into their head.
And first my Ione, (a very prating Dame)
Of sparing, and of hardness, does me blame:
She wants Money (as she says) to spend:
Sirs, can a man get Coin unto that end?
My Purse (she says) is slowly coming out,
But her Hand is too nimble thereabout;
She Will set it going, she can make it fly,
And if I speak, she answers, What care I?
I Will be maintained Gentlewoman like:
Then bendes her fist as if she meant to strike,
That sometime I am glad to speak her fair
For quietness: and it is an honest care,
To have command, only by manly carriage,
For I do know the civil wars of Marriage
Too well, by diverse of my Neighbors lives,
That are ore-matcht in combat with their Wives;
Blows therefore we do never put in ure,
But a Shrowes tongue I daily do endure.
Give me some Money; Money is her song,
She loves to be a spending all day long.
Householders judge, if all things be not dear,
She g^^ me not a Penny in a year,
And pen^es me pounds a week, yet still complains.
That never takes any other pains
But st^^ch a Ruff, and sit and prick a clout,
Then walk abroad; this work she goes about.
Shall I maintain an idle Huswife so?
There Is not an honest man but will say no.
He that does let his wife have what she will,
Being a Fool, she will keep him Woodcocke still.
No, I Will be Head, my title I Will not lose,
She Is well maintaind, as all my Neighbors knows:
Nay, I Will be sworn it makes my Purse-strings crack,
To ruffle her in her pride, and gown her back:
She has six Gowns for wearing never the worse,
I would I had five of them in my purse:
But it is her humor, and it must be thus;
Pride pleases them, how ere it pincheth us:
There Is not a newfound toy, if once they crave it,
Poor Husbands shall not rest until they have it.
The Second Gossips Complaint.
NExt to the first, a second neat one sat,
Which took a cup of Wine, and drank up that:
Then filling it unto another, said,
Ah, wish I could, that I were yet a Maid.
We are so forward in our youth, you know,
When past a dozen years we once do grow,
We long, and wish, and look, and daily think
For you know what, Cupid is meat and drink
Unto our hungry thoughts, his praise we sing:
Forsooth a Husband is your only thing.
Poor foolish Girls, we know not what we do,
But take a pride when Fellows come to woe,
I Will tell you one thing, but no words I Will have,
I know I speak it to the wise and grave:
When I was Maid, with Chalk behind our door,
Some five and forty Suitors I did score:
And I would use the Fools alike (all kind)
For which, continual favors I did find:
I Will tell you truth, the Gloves which some did give,
Are more then I can wear out while I live.
Each was resolved, he did my love possess;
For like a crafty queen (I must confess)
I gave kind words, and smiles, and kisses too,
And things that shall be namelesse I did do:
Which shall be left to youth, it is gone and past,
I have not bin the first, nor shall be last
Of waggish Wenches: for when we are gone,
There Is little ones new bred, are growing on.
But (in good sadness) I am plagued now
For all my knavery, I Will tell you how.
Of all my choice (for forty five was plenty)
I took a Clown, the very worst of twenty,
Indeed he does allow me Coin at will,
For to belve the Devil it is ill:
But here is his fault, he will cross me many a way,
When I would have my humor, he says nay.
Let me bid one do this, he says do that,
My wife talks oftentimes she knows not what:
Yea, when that many strangers are in place,
He Is not ashamed to offer this disgrace;
For which, we two have often fallings out,
And sometimes at the ^^sts we have about.
I care not greatly whosoere it know,
If he strike me, I Will match him blow for blow;
For though he be my head (as people talk)
About his pate my fist sometimes does walk;
He shall have even as good as he does bring,
I will not dye in's debt for any thing.
Unto my parents I do seem the liker,
For well ^ wo^, my Mother was a striker:
And I have seen her take my Father down,
That he was even afraid to see her frown.
He would sometime come wrangling in a door,
But when my Mother with a cudgel swore,
And said but to him, Richard shall I com^?
Why present he had not a word but Mum.
I noting this, unto my self would say,
That same trick will I have another day:
For if I meet with one that is like my Father,
I Will take no blows, I Will see him hanged rather.
Indeed I find my Husband but a bragger,
His humor is, he will a little swagger,
And seems as if he were Knight of the Sun.
But let me stand to him, and he has done.
At first (indeed) he put me in a fear,
When as I heard him but begin to swear:
Then spoke I fair, and to him was right kind,
Thinking to put him in a better mind,
I tried him thus a while, but it was a wonder
How he would dominiere, and keeke me under.
Nay then (quoth I) I Will try my Mothers trick,
And valiantly took up a Faggot-sticke.
(For he had given me a blow or twain)
But as he likes it, let him strike again
The blood ran down about his ears, apace,
I brake his head, and all bescratch't his face:
Then got him down, and with my very fist
I did bepommell him until he pist.
So from that hour unto this present day,
He never ^^st begin another fray:
But is content to let all fighting cease,
A Faggot-sticke has bound him to the peace.
The Second Husbands Answer.
Masters, you hear my Huswife wantes her will,
She tells her Gossips I do use her ill:
And yet she does confess that I am kind,
In letting her have Money to her mind:
Yet that is not all the Gentle woman's longing,
There Is other matters to her humors wronging.
She would be Master to command in all,
Do what she list; check me: ma^ry and shall.
She says, I cross her; but she crosses me
In my affairs, still busy she will be:
I must yield her account whither I go,
In every thing, Good Man why do you so?
This likes not me, prithee let us have it thus,
I scorn to see my neighbor put down us;
We will have Plate as rich as they have any,
And yet not be beholding for a penny.
How like an Ass my foolish Husband goes?
Buy me a Satin Doblet to them Hose.
I can be well content with going plain,
But that my wife is of another vain:
She swears she will go brave, I shall maintain her,
Or it is an argument I do disdain her;
And that her only care to go so fine,
Is but for credit both of hers and mine.
Indeed by this my credit sure is tried,
For I owe Money to maintain her pride.
With Mercers Books I am acquainted still,
And large I furnish out the Toylors Bill.
This is the only credit that I get,
For Bravery to run my self in debt.
And when I tell her private twixt us two,
Wife let us be wise, these courses will not do,
You do not go according to my purse,
In Parish charges I shall speed the worse,
We must be wise, if you far meaner went,
It would best pleasepray, who should you content
But me? Therefore go to your husbands mind,
And I shall take it (Love) most wondrous kind.
Oh on the ^odaine how she will rage and swear,
That none in London baser mind does bear,
She Will call me Gull, and sit her down and cry,
Then out in terms, What cursed hap had I?
Weary I am of this same wretched life,
Would thou have me go like an Oyster wife?
Oh scuruy minded man, I even scorn thee,
And could find in my heart base ^^aue to () thee.
Go thou about to offer this disgrace?
I would that I had never known thy face;
When first I saw thee, surely I was mad,
For choice of fourteen propper men I had;
Yea, even as handsome creatures to mine eye,
As ere were girt in Girdles, (it is no lie)
And yet I left them all, to marry thee.
What greater cross then this, could light on me,
To have a Fellow grumbling at me still,
And all I have, comes from him against his will:
O wretch, O Lob, who would be thus beclown'd?
I deserve better for two hundred pound.
Two hundred pound in Gold my Father gave,
To match me with this miserable Knave,
Whom with my very heart I do disdain:
Oh would my bargain were to make again,
Then I would flaunt it, I would cut it out,
And wiser, ere I l^apt would look about:
I would have none, but I would make him swear,
That when I list, I might the Breeches wear:
My Sisters life is happy, I may say,
Her Husband dares not cross her any way,
She says, in's life he never gave her check,
But can have any thing even with a beck:
And why not I attain the like degree,
That am as proper (I am sure) as she?
Nay, and a little fairer too, I know,
Who sees both Faces, he will swear it is so,
But well, within my head I have a trick,
Some have their Foreheads swell that be not sick:
I Will have my will to be maintained in all,
And if one will not, then another shall.
Masters, how like you this? judge I beseech,
(On Monday last this was her very speech)
Nay, and she stands unto it wondrous bold.
The first tale's good, until the next be told,
Upon my life, this is a woman's vain,
To wrong her Husband first, and then complain.
The Third Gossips Complaint.
Well done in truth, yea, and gra-mercy Besse,
Would I had part of thy brave valiantness;
I lack it Wench, (in sadness) very much:
For I have one all Hell affords none such,
He uses me in all things as he list,
Oh that I could but rule him with my fist,
As thou do thine: how happy should I be,
If I had but a courage like to thee;
It grieves me to the heart I cannot do it.
Nature has not enabled me unto it:
I have as tall a tongue as others have,
And can afford him Rascal, drunkard, knave,
Gull, cox^ombe, noddy, idiot, and ass,
The veryest Calfe that ever went to grass,
Block-neaded buzzard, and a hundred like,
But I could never have the heart to strike.
If that I durst once venture for to beat him,
As in mine anger I could even eat him,
In conscience I might be his Master sure,
If I the trial of it durst endure.
Sometimes me thinks I could a cudgel take,
But then my very heart begins to quake,
For to my self my inward thoughts do speak,
My husband is too strong, and I too weak:
Which makes me often wish I had the power
To make my self a man but half an hour,
That so I might revenge my self awhile,
I would be talked of many a hundred Mile
For valor, I should make him tremble then,
And be example unto other men.
Oh I would teach my dom^^iering youth,
To strike a woman while he lived, in truth.
One time he came home drunk, and then thought I,
Now for to cudgel him I will go try:
His case was then so weak he could not stand,
And I might easy get the upper hand:
But I conceived 'twill turn unto my sorrow,
The drunken fool would think upon it to morrow:
And then I shall be sure to pay for all,
I know the weakest must unto the wall.
This made me very soa^efull to proceed,
And for my life I durst not do the deed:
But in his way I s^t a little Stool,
And over that* down comes my reeling fool:
That was to plague him somewhat for his sins,
For I am sure it mortified his shins;
And then I seemed to be exceeding sad*
Saying, dear Husband, what a fall you had?
Give me your hand that I may help you rise;
And took a Handkerchiefe, and wiped mine eyes,
As if that I had wept for very grief,
Being my self the causer of it chief:
But of a troth (as you may well believe)
I laugh't most bravely at it in my sleeue.
And then into a Chair I did him set,
Asking him, if a Surgeon should be fet,
And tying of a Kirchiefe 'bout his head,
I left him fast a sleep and went to bed:
All this I did to please in outward shows,
Being my policy to escape from blows.
But the next morning in his soberness,
I rang his ears a peale, you will hardly guess.
Thou filthy beast (quoth I) have thou no shame,
To make thy self a common laughing game?
Art thou a man thus to abuse thy Wife?
Assuredly, it is pity of thy life.
I sit all day even like a prisone^ here,
And thou come home laden with Wine and Beer,
And if I tell thee for thy good thereof,
(Like all lewd Knaves) good counsel thou do scoff.
My tongue thou tearmest but a Serpents sting:
Thus does the Devil, lead thee in a string,
Thou have no power good motions to embrace:
Came thou not home last night in scuruy case,
Bleeding, and hurt, my sorrow to provoke?
It were no matter if thy neck were broke.
Thus did I rattle him, till Choler grew,
And then he at my head a Cushion threw;
Saying, there Skold, take somewhat for thy pains.
Go too (quoth I) you are best beat out my Brains
With Cushions now, to make the Proverb true:
Then outgoes he to meet the cursed crew,
And to inquire who it was did hurt him so;
But I Will keep that (my Wenches) close, I trow.
The third Husbands Answer.
BEware a Widow, Oh that I were free,
Such mischief never more should light on me:
I Will pawn my heart, yea even my dearest blood,
Not one amongst five hundred that proves good.
They are not kind, they cannot right be said,
To have such pure affection as a Maid:
I Will stand to it, and bring my Wife to swear it,
And Batchelers believe it, you that hear it,
Though I (till death do bail me) am fast bound,
( Would it were tomorrow for five hundred pound)
Yet by my harms, I would have you escape,
That have a Devil in a Woman's shape:
A Woman-diuell, and a Diuel-wife,
That makes me weary of a Husbands life.
I cannot speak with tongue, nor write with pen,
The woeful state of such distressed men
As I my self; yet somewhat may suffice,
To paint her in this Paper to your eyes:
That those which with such creatures would be doing,
May by my Pattern, go to Hell a woing.
She is most impudent, and shameless bold,
Since I was borne, I near heard such a Scold.
When she is up, she rayles me out of door,
When I come in, she rayleth ten times more:
If I entreat her, she will swear and curse,
If I say nothing, she grows worse and worse:
I am as patient as a man can be,
When this vile woman thus tormenteth me.
If I be hungry and demand some meat,
She Will wish me choked with the next bit I eat,
Then with a dogged countenance will say,
Spite of my heart I shall her leisure stay.
If I do reason mildly with her then,
For every word I speak, she gives me ten,
And tells me of her the other husbands praise,
With whom she lived all her happy days,
That he would weep, even at her finger ache,
And to content her any pains would take,
He was the kindest loving man alive,
And day and night to please his wife would strive:
Then wishes in his grave with him she lay,
Amen, think I, that were my happy day.
For sure a man that is mach't with such a wife,
Has but two happy days in all his li^e*
The first of them's the day whereon they marry,
For then the thing for which they long did tarry,
With wishing and much expectation still,
Is with great joy effected to their will.
The second merry day we married have,
Is when our wives are carried to their grave:
For we are freed from former thraldom then,
And shaking of the yoke, become free men.
Then we may joy that we have got release,
Attayning to a Batchelers sweet peace,
When Serpent dies, adue poison and sting?
When my wife's gone, farewell venomous thing.
But that is not like to be a long time yet,
Death is too slow in challenging his debt,
Such happiness to me it will not bring,
She will live longer then a better thing.
The other day a cunning prancke she plaide,
One of her Gossips she brought to persuade,
That I should furnish her in have to ride
Unto a Gentlewoman, near allied
Unto my wife; to see her being sick:
I did it, but was couz^n'd by the trick,
It was her Cozen as they both gave out;
But su^e they kindred made of me, I doubt,
I sent one after them to be my spy,
An honest f^^^d I know, that will not lie:
He says both Gentleman, and country Boore,
Abroad report my Cozen is a Whore,
And she has gallants haunt her far and near:
What should my wise and her conso^t do there?
No goodness sure? a mischief take them both:
To wear a pair of Ho^^es I would be loath.
But who can help, the deed once being done,
It is a thread so close with cunning spun,
But Masters, keep it secret I do pray,
Do not acquaint my wife with what I say:
Hark in your ^are, If I can prove her so,
I Will be diuorc'd, and farewell all my woe:
I do intend to let her have full scope,
And then a Whore will prove a Whore I hope:
Let her keep company with whom she list,
Let her suppose mine eyes be dimn'd with mist,
Let her not care into what sin she sinkes,
I Will come upon her when she little thinks:
And where she takes me for a silly Mome,
For all her knau'ry, then I Will pay her home.
The fourth Gossips Complaint.
WEll Gentlewomen (said the fourth) I see
You have great reason to complain (all three)
Upon your Husbands, they are bad indeed;
But I have one (in conscience) does exceed:
The chiefest thing wherein he takes delight,
Is to be up at Dice and Cards all night.
He is a Gamester, though no Cock of game,
For I do find he does his business lame,
In things (you know my meaning) scant worth praise,
But fast and welcome, as a number says;
All Is one for that, my care has ever bin,
Because he will not stay a nights within,
But ^unneth still abroad from place to place,
Wasting away his Money ^ewd and base:
His Gameste^s companies heel not refuse,
For all the mild behau^our I can use;
Entreat him, kind dear Husband play no more,
And speak him fair until my tongue be fore:
Request him, if (...) love with Cards he be,
That he would play at Noddy but with me:
Or if he love the Tables so a life,
Why then to play at Nublets with his wife.
No, no, it is death unto him, out he must,
To keep the Money in his purse from rust:
Novum and Passage, scour his Metal bright,
New-cut even makes a Beggar of him right.
Look, here is the best Apparel that I have,
The very Wedding Gown my Father gave:
He never gave me yet a pair of Gloves,
I am beholding more to others loves
Then unto him, in honest manner tho,
And (Gossips) I beseech you take it so.
There are kind Gentlemen, some two or three,
And they indeed my loving Kinsmen be,
Which will not see me want, I know it I,
Two of them at my house in Term time li^,
And comfort me with testes and odd device,
When as my Husband's out a nights at Dice:
For if I were without a merry Friend,
I could not live a twelue-month to an end:
One of them gave me this same Ruf^e of Lawne,
It cost three pound, but last week in the Pawn.
Do y'thinke my Husband would have bin so free?
Alas he never made so much of me.
Nay, the other day at Church I spide a Hat,
My mind and eye was never off from that,
The only fashion to content alone;
Yet think you he would buy me such a one,
No, I prote^^, but when I made the motion;
Oh wise (said he) pray where was your devotion?
Go you to Church to find new fashions out?
Is this the exercise you are about?
In that same sacred place (ordaind for Prayer)
Are you so void of fear and de^out care?
How now (quoth I) here is Vice will ^olly teach,
Take in your Geese, the Fox begins to preach,
What have we here: a mortified man?
Is Dice and Cards become a puritan?
Oh admarable change, I pray New-cut,
Into what gracious humor are you put?
And thus I fitted good man counterfeit,
For he had put me in a chafing heat,
And surely being moved, I home can speak;
Some wit I have, a Knauish jest to break.
My husband he was hushed, and went his way,
The Cox-combe Ass had not a word to say:
But out a doors he got exceeding grim,
It Was next day noone ere I set eyes on him.
This man will talk full well, and speak of heaven,
Yet leaves his loving wife at six and seven:
Goes forth one day, and comes home the next,
To prove this lawful, sure he has no text.
Well, ere the week do end, I make no doubt,
But we shall have another falling out,
I Will cross him he was never better crossed,
And put him in a heat against the frost
For that same Hat, wherein he did me wrong,
(As you know what it is when women long)
He shall repent it (mark what I do say)
Ten times within a twelve month and a day,
I Will keep the rest of that I have intended,
A little said (they say) is soon amended,
But even as true as I was borne a Maid,
I owe him that good turn which shall be paid.
The fourth Husbands Answer.
MY prating Gossip must have answer next,
I beyond reason with a Wife am vexed,
At first a Beggar, once scarce worth a Lowse,
Whom I have made the Mist^is of my house:
Even my Maid, a very Kitchen drudge,
Of whose conditions I entreat you judge.
Daily till ten a clock a bed she lies,
And then against her Lady-ship does rise,
Her Maid must make a Fire, and attend
To make her ready, then for Wine she will send,
(A morning pint) she says her stomack's weak,
And count* feits as if she could not speak,
Until ele^en, or a little past;
About which time, ever she breaks her fast:
Then (very sullen) she will pout and loure,
And sit down by the Fire some half an hour.
At twelve a clock her dinner time she keeps,
Then gets into her Chair, and there she sleeps
Perhaps till ^oure, or somewhat thereabout,
And when that lazy humor is worn out,
She calls her Dog, and takes him in her lap,
Or falls a beating of her Maid (perhap)
Or has a Gossip come to tell a tale,
Or else at me she will curse, and swear, and rail;
Or walk a turn or two about the Hall,
And so to supper and to bed; heeres all
The pains she takes: and yet I do abuse her,
But no wise man I think, so kind would use her:
I am a Fool to suffer that I do,
Yet love and kindness leads me so thereto,
I cannot choose but yield unto her still,
This makes bad wives to have their will:
And thus they grow from evil unto worse,
Yet when I do intend another course,
It will not be, she shows her cunning art,
I ouer-comes my honest, true, kind heart:
Sometimes her looks will carry such a sway,
That for my life I cannot say her nay:
Sometimes her teates do charm me in such wise,
That I give credit to deceiving eyes.
Sometimes her words in such great force do stand,
I yeel ^to every thing she does demand:
And sometimes her out-ragious madding fits,
Makes me as mad as she, beside my wits.
And where she says, I am a Gamester, sirs,
It Is but a villainous device of hers,
That men should of this hard opinion be,
If that we do not thrive, it is long of me.
Believe it not, alas it does appear,
That I play scarce at Tables in a year:
Dice I detest, and Cards as much I hate;
Neither am I, as she says, out so late,
As was reported when your Wives and she
At Vintners Hall, were making their tongues free.
What is it that such tatling Gossips dare not?
To wrong their husbands, nay (themselus) they care not;
For rather then with silence they will sit,
Against themselves they will utter out their wit,
As my Wife did in one complaint she made,
About a Hat, that I to her denaide,
'Twas her devotion at the Church to spy it,
And there continually (she says) she eyed it,
With great affection, yet by me denide.
Where were your thoughts, on Prayer, or else on Pride?
This shows what sollies they do entertain,
And that their speeches (like themselves) be vain.
All men that know* what creatures Women are,
For ta^^ing of their wives do little care.
It Is but a breath, even like Tobacco smoke,
Which if they should not utter, they would choke.
If they conceive a thing within their mind,
(Although the substance of it be but wind)
It must be vtt'ered forth, and have quick vent,
Or with themselves they grow most disconteet.
Well, I am further charged with untruth,
By this my male-contented female youth,
She says, I never gave her Gown: Oh lie,
Who paid for that last week? belike not I:
I give her Money still, and she buys Stuff.
But now I smell a Ratte, I have enough;
Belike some Gallants do their bounty show,
And for her kindness, kindness they bestow:
She traffickes with them, changing ware for ware,
And so my Money in her Purse does spare:
It may be thus, and now I much suspect,
Unto my Brows I Will have a more respect?
I have been troubled much with Headache late,
Something I fear does swell about my pate:
Most curiously I will observe the thing,
If it do bud, as now it is toward the Spring,
I will not be a Wittoll and an Ass,
But even next Summer turn my wife to grass.
The fifth Gossips Complaint.
SVre (quoth the fist) I do not mean to flatter,
Were all such husbands hanged, it made no matter.
I have a sound card for a woman's stay,
He Is durnke but once a week, that is every day.
Oh it is the filthiest man I do protest,
That ever was of giddy pate possessed:
Himself all day in Tauernes he bestows,
And comes to bed at night in shoes and ^ose;
And there he lies as cleanly as a Hog,
Perfumed as sweet as any stinking Dog,
With filthy leaves he smoakes his head with all,
Such Weeds as Indians do Tobacco call:
But sure as Black-amores look outward skin,
So Collier-like are Englishmen within,
That take such trash: for there be Doctors say,
The memory of Man it does decay,
And poisoning the Brain, it makes it dull,
When loathsome vapors fill each passage full.
I am a woman, yet I Will undertake,
The credit of this fire-worke quite to shake,
Against any Maister-gunner of the trade,
No reason in the world that can persuade
Virtue remains in a little smoke,
That to our senses does offense provoke:
Hold but your face where wood a kindling lies,
Apply the Medicine to your nose and eyes,
Into your mouth let it have passage free,
And note how welcome this same stuff will be.
Fie, out upon it, it makes a filthy smell,
My nose likes a Sir-reuerence as well:
I think a thousand times I do complain,
And tell my husband that he should refrain
This making of a Chimney of his nose:
He had a breath as sweet as any Rose,
Before he used this same scurny trick,
But now if I do kiss him I am sick,
With this same fough; beshrow your heart say I,
Tobacco stinkes, you poison me, I dye.
Then what does he, but says, Go hang thee Queen,
This wholesome Physic keeps my body clean,
I Will take it for to anger thee withal:
Then for a Candle and a Pipe he will call:
A Trencher Whore, let there a Rush be got,
Some Paper, make the Fire-shouell hot,
A Knife, some Match, and reach a little VVyre,
A Tinder-box, fetch me a coal of Fire.
Why heeres a stir, what woman can endure it?
And yet this life I have (Gossips) assure it,
But now and then I fit him in his kind,
When any smoaky stuff of his I find:
For when I meet with his Tobacco Box,
I send it to the Privy with a Pox.
Then he will go raging up and down, and swear,
He misseth such most rare and wholesome gear,
The like did never grow on India ground,
And every Ounce for goodness worth a pound.
Thus does he live, and make a daily course
To smoke himself, keeping an empty Purse,
With Beer, Wine, and Tobacco; what cares he,
Sink I, or swim, it matters not for me.
Is this a life, judge Gossips, judge I pray?
My discontent succeeds day by day.
When first I married with this drunken drone,
I was a p^ope^ wench it is well known:
And though I say'^ that should not, one or other,
In all our parish was not such another,
I did refuse as handsome men and wise,
As ever girdle girt, let that suffice.
And if good fortune I had not withstood,
I might in Conscience sure have worn a ^ood.
My husband had as much with me (that Curie)
As Mistries Susans husband had with her:
Besides I know all you that are in place,
Will judge that I have far a better ^ace,
More propper body, and for hand and foot
I Will put her down, and give her legs to boot:
Yet notwithstanding my good pa^ts, you see
How La^y-like she is maintained to me.
But well, if I prove widow ere I dye,
It shall go hard but I will look as hye.
The fi^t Husbands Answer.
Here Is a brave world indeed if this gear hold,
When honest men by sluts are thus contrould:
In absence, to have credit overthrown,
And we made Guls for them to play upon,
Shall we endure it, and be made fools still:
No, I Will curb mine, upon my life I will,
And keep her somewhat shorter in a door,
A Tavern tell-tale she shall be no more.
Neighbors, I think you know me, all are here,
Although I love a Cup of Wine or Beer:
And as good fellow, sometime trade therewith,
Yet did you never see me Smug the Smith:
Did any of you ever know me reele?
Or in a storm of Wine turn up the heel?
In all your lives did any see me so,
That with these pair of Legs I could not go?
Pray speak my Masters, for I may mistake*
A man will venture much for good Wines sake*
But if I have been sometimes ouer-shot,
In calling for too much by the other pot;
Shall my wife chatter till her tongue be weary,
And term me Drunkard, when I am but merry?
Will any loving wise be so unkind?
Or does not duty and good manners bind
A woman to forbear, to wink, and hide,
And not to rail, to slander and to chide,
She might have laid in private certainly,
Husband, last night you sung a pot too hye,
Or my dear love, pray thee where have thou bin?
In truth (Sweet heart) you are a little in.
All this were well, indifferent to be borne:
But shall she lay me open (as in scorn)
To her companions scoffing at me so,
As if I daily could not stand nor go?
She terms me Sound card for a woman's stay,
Drunk once a week, and that is every day.
The filthiest Drunkard (thus she does protest)
That ever was of giddy brain possessed.
And further, to the world she does disclose,
That I come into bed in shoes and hose:
And horrible Tobacco do so drink,
That she is almost poisoned with the stink.
Well, this is good, but mark the end at last,
In a new mould this woman I will cast,
Her tongue in other order I will keep,
Better she had bin in her bed asleep,
Then in a Tavern, when those words she spoke:
A little pains with her I mean to take:
For she shall find me in another tune,
Between this February and next June:
In sober sadness I do speak it now,
And to you all I make a solemn vow,
The chiefest Art I have I will bestow,
About a work called taming of the Shrow.
It makes my heart to fret, my looks to frown,
That we should let our wives thus put us down.
But for mine own part I have now decreed,
To do a good and charitable deed.
If she begin her former course a fresh,
I have a trick to mortify her flesh:
Unto you all example I will give,
Perhaps you will thank me for it while you live
But for your selves, to nothing I Will persuade,
Because the blame on me shall not be laid:
Other men's wives I mean to let alone,
I shall have work enough to tame mine own.
The sixth Gossips Complaint.
FRiends (quoth the sixth) each has reueald her grief,
Yet give me leave to think that mine is chief:
Would with your worst I might a Husband change
Sure I would think my hap less hard and strange.
Your five in deed are bad, I must confess,
But mine is even the worst of all the mess:
All yours may be endured, but it is a hell,
When men do love their neighbors wives too well.
Think that I do not speak it of ^ll will,
(As true as this is Wine I mean to fill)
Not out of jealousy, take it not so,
Into that humor I did never grow:
I speak it Gossips (first I Will drink) do y'heare?
E^'n from the wrongs that I do know I bear.
My Husband's leawd, given to go astray,
His love to me now daily does decay;
Quite altered from the man that he has bin,
Even given over to the fleshly sin.
There Is not a Whore in London, nor about,
But he has all the haunts to find her out.
He knows the Panders that can fit his turn,
And Baudes that help good follows to the burn:
Tassitie Queanes, and fine light silken Whores,
That have the gif^ of Pox in their own powers,
And can teach French in half a day by noone,
As leacherous as a Monkey or Baboone:
That daily go like Ladies in attire,
And live by hackning out themselves to hire;
More common rid, re rid, and ridden over,
Then any ^ade betwixt Grat^esend and Dover:
And let me ask, what is such a one, or she
With ^aune and Mask? His Cozens all they be.
What Is she that has the Jewel in her hair,
And on her back the Cobweb-Lawne, most rare,
Having a Vintners bush upon her head,
All trimmed with Shoo stringes tawny, green, and red?
Whose ^an weighs more, tried only by the ^eather,
Then all her honest tricks, being joined together?
For ^^oth his Cozen, she is most near of kin,
This lying humou^ he is ever in.
He has all that to villainy belonges,
The hugest number of such baudy Songs,
You even would wonder (Gossips, this is plain)
That any man could bear them in his brain.
He has a Song called, M^stris will you do?
And, My man Thomas did me promise too,
He has the Pin^ace, rigd with silken sail,
And pretty Birds, with Garden Nightingale,
I Will tie my Mare in thy ground a new way,
Worse then the Players sing it in the Play:
Besse for abuses, and number more,
That you and I have never heard before.
And these among those Wenches he does learn,
Which by actiuitie their liuinges earne.
His Crowns upon them ^rankly he bestows,
Not caring for his wife, or how she goes:
Let me complain for any kind of Stuff,
What answers he? Thy clothes are good enough,
I like thee well, and should if thou went worse.
These are his cogging tricks to save his Purse,
So he me may spare to spend it upon me,
He never does regard on whom it be.
Let me but walk with him along the steeete,
It Is wonderful how many he does meet
That do sa^ute him, looking all like Queanes;
But then heel scarcely speak by any means,
Only he winkes on them, and pass^s by,
Making account, The blind eats many a Fly.
But I can smell the knavery of him out,
And very shortly (I do make no doubt)
To take him napping, I have laid a plot
Shall cool the Gentleman is grown so hot.
I ^ay no more, there is somewhat in the wind,
The Cat o^t winkes, and yet she is not blind.
All friends, no wo^des, be merry: come who drinks?
Little our Goodmen knows what their wives thinks.
Let Us point a time when we shall meet again,
And she that ^ayles, we will inioyne this pain,
Five Shillings spent in Wine, Gossips pawn down;
And to give good example, there is my Crown.
The Sixth Husbands Answer.
Friends to conclude, believe my word in this,
No kind of Cross like a bad Woman is:
I know your hands are full, Neighbors it is true,
And I my self make one as well as you;
I share in Shrow indifferently well,
One that does make my House resemble Hell:
Because her devilish nature is so bad,
No quietness can at her hands be had.
Will you believe me? Sirs I will not lie,
She has the most accursed jealous eye
That ever I have known, or ever shall:
And I perceive, that here is none of you all
Equal with me, for wicked woman's flesh;
Sh^e'le rail all day, at night begin a fresh,
And with that tune into her Bed she lies,
Scouldes in her sleep, and scouldes when she does rise.
And why is this think you? Marry I Will tell,
She says, I love my neighbors Wives too well;
But i^ I were this instant hour to die,
I Will take it on my death, that she does lie.
Sometimes I ask my neighbors how they do,
Give them a Pint (perhaps) and kiss them too:
Why what of this? and if a man do so,
May't not be done, and yet no evil grow;
Kindness may lead a man unto kind carriage,
And yet he may be constant in his marriage;
But for my Wife I do not care a Pin,
What scuruy mind soever she be in,
To slander me with Whores; my credit's known,
She has a lying tongue (friends) of her own,
To say that I bad Houses do frequent,
And there on Common Whores my love is spent.
I never was in Ba^dy house but twice,
And there indeed a friend did me entice
To see some fashions; only there we drank,
And saw a gallant Queen, her name was Frank,
In a Silk Gown, loose bodyed, so was she:
Not that I tried her, but as they told me:
She gave us good Tobacco, sweet, and strong,
And of mee^e kindness sung a bawdy Song.
This I protest was even all we did,
Yet (Oh) when I came home, how I was chid:
Some Rascal told my Wife, that ought me spite,
And I was villain'd for it ^ound at night:
And ever since, if any strife arise,
She asks me where Mistress Francis lies:
Calls her my Whore, and says that I and she,
Both of a hair and of a humor be.
But well, it skils not; let her talk and spare not,
I have set down my rest, in troth I care not:
I see it is no wisdom any way,
To storm in mind at that which women say:
Their Mouths cannot contain their Tongues within;
For when they are Maid(...) wedlock they begin,
At every meeting, then they do discover
The disposition of each kind of Lover.
Ione has a propper handsome Man in truth,
But Iudiths is not half so kind a youth:
Nan knows not what a Jewel she has got;
But Dorothies sweetheart, I like him not,
Thus being Maids, they do their Lovers use,
And being Wives, their Husbands they abuse:
Therefore in this case, let us be content,
It Is now too late our Bargains to repent:
But let us hope they will shortly to their Grave,
And then we quiet lives a piece shall have:
And he to whom kind Death this freedom gives,
Let him take heed of wi^ing while he lives.
The end of the Six Gossips, and their Husbands.
The Censure of the Batcheler and the Maid, upon the former Complaints.
Batcheler. GOod sister Maid (...) amazed in mind,
To hear that married Wives deal thus unkind
Against their Husbands, when the Gossips meet:
Me thinks to live still Batcheler is sweet,
For what I read here of their iarring strife,
Makes me afraid to enter married life.

Maid. Friend Batcheler, I do not blame your care,
But do confess it is fit you should beware
How you do match your self unto a Shrow;
For there is too many of that kind, I know:
But seeing Men in wit put Women down,
And there be civil Wenches in the town;
Me thinks a wiseman may embrace the one,
And let the Gossips with long tongues alone.

Batcheler. Wench, thou say true; but how can we do this,
When such false shows with womankind there is?
Still humor them, and have most sweet behavior:
But cross their follies, worse then Gall they ^auour.
Why thou thy self (I speak it to thy praise)
Art a kind creature, all that know thee says;
Yet is it doubtful, when thou art once a Wife,
How with a Husband thou will lead thy life.

Maid. Brother, it is true; but is it not so with you,
That are of this same smoth-face civil crew?
Love's in your lips, your eyes, your smiles, your tongue;
And yet all this, from cunning may be sprung:
As you of us, so we of you, make doubt;
But both must venture, ear we find it out,
And marry for it: But choose Maiden love,
For Widows always pra^ing Gossips prove,
Upon their former Marriage, bold they bear them.
In truth we Maids are often ashamed to hear them:
But I will cease and end with blushing fears,
Least I do bring them all about mine ears;
For some of them will swagger worse then Men:
So farewell Brother, till we meet again.

Batcheler. Thanks gentle Sister, thou have taught me wit,
I Will near have Widow, here is my hand on it:
Lets get good will of Father and of Mother,
And then we will marry, and go try each other.

FINIS.

