GUSTAVE ADOLPHE Roy de Suede Tue a la Bataille de Lutz ente 16. g.bre 1632 age
de 3^ ans.


THE Two Famous Pitched Battles of LYPSICH, AND LUTZEN; Wherein the
ever-renowned Prince GUSTAVUS THE GREAT lived and died a Conqueror: WITH AN
ELEGY UPON his untimely death, composed in Heroic Verse By JOHN RUSSELL,
Master of Arts, of Magdalene Coll. in CAMBRIDGE.

-- Me castra juvant, and lituo tubae
Permistus sonitus, bellaque matribus
Detestata --
Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1634.

And are to be sold by Philip Scarlet.

AD NOBILISSIMVM SUUM PATRONUM EPIGRAMMA.
TV mihi sis Phoebus, mea sit tibi Luna libellus,
Quem facis (en!) radiis ipse micare tuis.
Sidereos volui titulos, and nomina clara
Suprema in nostri figere part libri,
Quo possent plene suffundere luce corusca
Quaelibet in scriptis inferiora meis.
Jam mea si Livor contorto lumine spectet
Carmina, percussus sydere, mutus erit.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, TRULY VALOUROUS, AND HEROIC GENTLEman, WILLIAM Lord
CRAVEN, BARON of Hampsteed, MARSHALL, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THe ardent affection wherewith the best and sublimest Spirits have ever
embraced the Sons of the Muses, is not in any example so apparent, as in that
matchless pattern of true Valor and Magnificence, ALEXANDER the Great; who
having finished the Conquest of Persia, and hearing every day of more Victories,
did thus express his sorrow and discontented affection; Think you to please me
with any news, unless ye can tell me that HOMER is alive again? Such was his
ambitious love to Poetry. Under protection of this invincible example, I
boldly make my Approaches. My Lines are already drawn and perfected, whereby I
am resolved to attempt your Lordships Favor; and I hope I shall win the same
without any danger or repulse. Yet do I not think to carry it by any
advantageous surprise, or forcible irruption; but only by a free and
voluntary yielding, which you may easily perform, without any derogation to
your Honor and Valor. And seeing now my speech is to a Soldier, give me
leave in that little that I have to speak, to keep the same dialect. Forasmuch
as I am now to expose my self to a World of Enemies, I thought it fit to
marshall these my lines after a warlike order. I have prefixed the approbations
of my judicious in the front of this Book, to be as it were a Vantguard. Then
follows in the middle my own Poem, which I account as the Main; and upon this
I do most of all rely. Then I have reserved in the last place some few
Elegiack Verses; which because they have already past the Pikes of sharpest
censures, and come off clear in the judgment of the world, I make them my
last refuge, and have placed them (as you may see) in the Rear. In this order I
stand ready to receive the assaults of envious Carpers, and curious Critics.
I do not stand in any fear of your Honorable acceptance, and gracious
interpretation of these my labors. The name and subject of my Book, which is
GVSTAVVS Battles, is enough to assure me from all doubts and suspicions. Seeing
you have not thought much to spend your best blood in defense of his cause, I
cannot think you will be backward to patronize the memory of his Name.

The unfeigned Admirer of your Heroic Virtues, JOHN RUSSELL.

To the Candid Reader.
LEst any Cynicall Critic should compare my book to the Town of Mindas, which
being but a small City, was notwithstanding beautified with stately gates; I
am in this respect forced to Apologize for my self, and my learned Friends, who
have adorned this small volume of mine with their ample Approbations. Know
then, Courteous Reader, that I could not subtract these Encomiasticks, without
apparent wrong to the subject of my Book: for you shall find that they have
imitated that cunning Engraver, who had with such art inwrought his own Image
with the Image of Minerva, that they could not be separated without defacing of
both: so have my Friends here interwoven my most undeserving Name with the
sublime praises of GUSTAVUS, that the one cannot be separated from the other,
without manifest disfiguring of the Poem. Besides, there are some that are more
delighted with brief and concise Epitomes, then with larger Treatises: these
Verses which I have premised, seem to have contracted that which I have more
amply handled, the Honor and Praise of GUSTAVUS the Great. And to conclude,
that which these Critics would fain make an argument of arrogance and
ostentation, seems to me a perspicuous testimony of my timorousness and
modesty, in that I dare not enter into the world, without so many to guard me
and usher me the way. Farewell.

J. R.

TO HIS FRIEND THE AUTHOR, IN DEFENSE OF HIS Heroic Poem.
WHat will thou answer, Poet, for this wrong,
To make a King thy Subject and thy Song;
A King, whose Fame and long-lived actions scarce
Can be contained in measure of a verse?
O inconsiderate Muse! Of him is it fit
That every budget brain and common wit
Should write a farthing Pamphlet? Every one
At's death can have a verse in brass and stone.
Thus will censorious Critics talk, and those
That the Empire claim of Poetry and Prose.
Yet care not. Once GVSTAVVS was a scoff,
And Tinker called; at last came bravely off:
He clipped the Eagles wings, and took from thence
A quill for thee, Fabritius: art thou since
Silent? Go, take thy pen, grave Doctor, write:
Thy Muse methinks this Poem might excite.
J. PULLEN, Fellow of Magd. Coll.

TO HIS FRIEND THE AUTHOR of this Heroic Poem.
I Nothing find unhappie in thy Book,
But (what is not thine) the subject. When I look
Upon thy Muse, and find it full of blood,
Yet I conclude thy Vein is sound and good,
And shall live long by that which is not thine,
But lively represented in thy line.
That Hero's death thou do with life declare,
And in that which thou giv'st thou wilt surely share.
R. BULKLEY, Fellow of S. John's Coll.

To my Friend Master RUSSELL, upon this ensuing Poem of the King of Swedens
Battles.
'TWas a Proud Greek, whose vast Ambition
Pined for new Worlds, who vowed his Counterfeit
Should be pourtraid on pain of death by none,
But best Apelles. Pride surnamed him Great.
And 'twas a prouder Tuscan, misemployd
His dying thoughts about his Elegy;
Charging his Marble might be rather void,
Then not adorned by Prince of Poetry.
Thus did not Sweden taint his greatness: He
Suffers all Prose, or Verse. Nor does his Shade
Disturb, but help the Artist. Deity
Accepts an offering from the meanest trade.
Friend, thy first fruits are sacred. GVSTAVES Name
Is then (O Muses) more authentical.
Nor shall't be Heresy in verse to claim
Aid from live Names, and still Imperial.
He shall preserve thy Papers, and vent more
Then an enlarged Edition. His Name
Shall be thy Title too, and fill the door
Of the rich Shop it lies in; like the Frame
Of some rare Frontispice, with neat device
Tying unto it the Spectatours eyes.
So both in equal tie are excellent;
Thy Book's His Elegy, He its Monument.
WHat loose Prose could not pay to Swedens Hearse,
Thou have discharged in thy Heroic Verse,
The Intelligencers Feet, on which he will run
Now round the world, like a surveying Sun.
'Twas greater art to choose thy Theme, then write
Some Poems. But to pen it in despite
Of others grief, or silence, argues Love
Great as thy Art. And if the People prove
Thy hand has rudely op't a public wound
Newly closed up; the Magistrate's not bound
(As Athens mulcted Phrenicus) to be
Their Censor, and to fine thy History.
No: Let us know, our Guilt that Matchless Man,
Whose Dirge thou sing'st, has murdered. Nay, I can,
And dare tell how too: 'Twas the fond excess
Of our big thoughts decreased his Happiness;
Whose modest Soul we vexed with restless cry
Of love pretended, Proud Idolatry.
His purer Breast divined as much, while we
Mad men still tempted him with Prophecy.
Oh! had this Frenzy rested in the heart
Only of us the People, little Art
Might frame a Plea. But our great Rabbis too,
(Oh Learning, what huge mischiefs may thou do,
Seduced by Pride and Flatt'rie!) nay, those Brains
That wear the Sacred Cappe, through all their veins
Descri'd infected blood, whose tainted streams
Danger'd the Nations, whilst noisome steams
Exhaled as high as Heaven. That starrie Sphere,
Stranger to vapors, could not now be clear.
Egypt examined Stars, and fathered lies
On their pure Substances: all Mysteries
Are pri'd into, and stretched. The Chiliast
Takes several shapes; now poses us in vast
Contemplative just nothings, and then slips
Into a Cassock, picks the Apocalypse,
And shows us Wonders, which poor I dare swear
His fleering heart well knew were never there.
The unclaspt Book was read, the Signs unsealed,
The Trumpets, Phials, and the Beast revealed:
The Pope and Caesar slain outright, and all
By GVSTAVE, and by Heaven. This was his fall.
The Sin was ours; the troubled Virtue his.
So Evil hasted Goodness to her bliss.
Now the An'grams blush: and had not Pirrhus art
Excused the letter, when the Authors heart
Glowed with a lie; by this time Levi had,
Like Iss'chars ass, coucht under's burden, glad,
Though strong, to be released. Let this suffice,
We all confess we slew him, and our eyes
Shall testify our sorrows. LYPSICH may,
And LUTZEN tell his Life some half the way:
What we confess, tells all; perfects the Story
More then the Annals of his living Glory.
Oh! this Confession well-penn'd would be
His Chronicle, his Tomb, his Elegy.
T. RILEY, Fellow of Trin. Coll.

TO THE AUTHOR OF this ensuing Poem, Master RUSSELL.
HOw dares thy mortal Fancy undertake
A Theme Divine, unless for Virtues sake?
The Germane Eagle, to advance thy skill
In praising Swethland, lends a conqu'red quill.
Yet when thy Self and lofty Bird have done,
Neither are able to behold this Sun.
Go strive to write, and cast away thy pen:
Repent thy self, and take it up again.
Sometimes thy self, and sometimes Swethland blame:
And midst thy praises check his glorious Name.
Tell valiant Swethland, if thy Eagle brings
A flight too low, his Greatness clipped her wings.
CAESAR WILLIAMSON, Fellow of Trinit. College.

To his ingenious Friend Master RUSSELL, upon his Heroic Poem.
LEt those soft Poets, who have dipped their brains
In amorous humors, thaw to looser strains.
Let Cupid be their theme, and let them pay
Service to Venus in a wanton lay:
And let these Rhymers of our silken Age
Unlade their Fancies on an empty page.
Mars is thy theme; thy Muse has learned to talk
The Cannon-language of the War, and walk
A lofty March; while thy faint readers dread
And tremble at each syllable they read.
Lead on, Stout Poet, in thy Martial state;
And let these Pages on GVSTAVVS wait,
Armed with verse of proof: and those that aim
To wound thy Muse, or print upon thy Name
Their darts of malice, in their full pursuit,
Charmed like those stones thrown at the Thracian Lute,
May they forget their message, and in fierce
Career dance at the music of thy verse.
And if those eyes, with pois'ned flame that shine
Like Basilisks, shed poison on a line,
To blot a syllable that sounds the least
GVSTAVVS War, Jove turn them to that Beast.
Then rest GVSTAVVS: do not change thy room
Within this Book, for any marble tomb.
Each line's a golden chain to hoise thee far
'Bove Fate: then blaze as fastened to a star:
And for these Leaves presented thee, a bough
Of Laurel shall adorn the Poets brow.
JOHN SALTMARSH, Magd. Coll.

To his friend the AUTHOR.
INgenious friend, that do so bravely sing
The conquests of the Swethes Victorious King;
Who by thy thundering lines do seem to follow
As Well the tents of Mars, as of Apollo;
And in depainting of a bloody fight
Do intermingle Terror with Delight:
Though I could tell thee that thy verses worth
Abundantly will gild and set them forth;
Although I might (without base flattery) say
Thy forehead does deserve a wreathe or Bay;
Yet I forbear: thy modesty is such,
I dare not praise, at least, not praise thee much.
Indeed what need'st thou my too slender praise,
To usher thy so sweetly-soaring lays
Into the world; since that the very name
GUSTAVUS will more highly grace the same,
Then if the rarest Laureats choicest quill
To pen thy praise should show its utmost skill?
How richly is thy work rewarded! See!
Thou make GUSTAVUS live, GUSTAVUS thee:
And by thy lofty Muse I know not now
Whether shall more be honored, he or thou.
Sweds Great Anagram of GUSTAVUS
AUGUSTUS! Oh how could I dwell
Upon that Name! How often could I spell
Its every sacred syllable; and when
I Have done't a thousand times, begin again!
That Name who honors not, Oh may he be
Overwhelmed with never-dying infamy!
His blessed Memory who adoreth not,
Oh may he be eternally forgot!
Thy book, my friend (if I do not mistake)
Will please and sell for Great GUSTAVUS sake.
STEPHEN JONES, of S. John's Coll.

THE BATTLE OF LYPSICH.
HAve you not heard the ever-restlesse Ocean
Beat on the shore with waves continual motion,
Which fill our ears with sad and murmuring tones;
Just like the doleful sighs and hollow groans
Of thousands, that together have conjoined
TO express the sorrows of a wounded mind,
For some disastrous Fate; perhaps the death
Of some dear Prince, untimely reav'd of breath?
They fill the troubled air with confuse cries,
Which are resounded by the trembling skies;
Which these sad tunes so often do repeat,
That now the woodie Choristers forget
Their wonted strains, and either stand as mute,
Or to these notes their warbling voices suit,
The willing air instructing to express
To humane ears soul-moving heaviness.
Sweet Philomel now thinks upon her rape
And former wrongs; that she may fitly shape
A tune of lively sorrow, and make known
The grief of others, fully, as her own.
Like this was that amazed time, when first
Our ears those more then frightfull rumors pierced,
Of great Gustavus dismal Fate; with whom
All then did seem their hopes and hearts t'intombe;
And did express in sighs and drouping looks,
Sorrow enough to have filled most spacious Books:
You might have read, in thought-discov'ring eyes,
Volumes of sad and mournful Elegies:
While Fame does with a thousand tongues resound
Such trembling murmures, as our hearts do wound.
My fainting Soul, not able to sustain
So often redoubled blows, nor such dire pain,
Sunk to the ground: then over all my limbs
A frigid sweat and dewie vapor swimmes:
A Death-like sleep closed up my eyes; and I,
As one eternally entranced, did lie.
But then methoughts my Genius did appear,
And words of comfort whispred in mine ear:
Then led my airie Spirit by the hand,
Through darksome shades, to that Inferior Land
And Region, where Unbodied Souls reside.
There what my fancied thoughts to me descri'd,
I now prepare unto the World in verse,
By favor of the Muses, to rehearse.
Those two so bloody Battles there I viewed,
Lypsich and Lutzen, dreadfully renewed:
But now more furious and a greater ire
Their bloud-enraged spirits did enfire.
Oh that those raptures, which then filled my brain,
Would burn in my impris'ned Soul again;
That I might so in vivid colors paint
Those dreadful fights, as should make Mortals faint
With horror and amaze, and when they read
My Bloud-besprinkled verse, their hearts should bleed!
Divine Melpomene, whose chiefest glory
Consists in sounding of a Tragic story;
Fill me with vigorous heat, and for a while
Let thy rapt Fury guide my iron style:
Send Virgils Genius to direct my quill,
His grave Majestic vein do thou instill;
Or rather Lucans, whose so lofty rhymes
Do best befit the Genius of these times.
But oh! what sudden numnesse do I feel
To damp my boiling blood! and now I reel,
As when an Epilepsie does surprise
Some feeble mortal, and his senses ties:
Or, when as the Cumean Sibyls breast
Some dire Prophetic Spirit has possessed;
She madly rages, struggles all in vain
To shake away her Furie-caused pain:
She raves, she frets, she storms, and tears her hair,
Stamps with her feet, and like a Ghost does stare:
Mean while, within her rage-distracted soul,
And troubled thoughts, discording Passions roll.
Thus am I rackt, while to my working heart
My Fancy does such jarring thoughts impart.
For this to every Poet is enjoined,
That he shall feel in his impressive mind
The real Thoughts and Passions of all those,
Whom he in verse presumes to disclose.
Judge what a world of discords circling run
Within my breast, like Atoms in the Sun,
That cross, and meet, and meet, and cross again.
So many Passions of so many men,
And such repugning thoughts torment my mind,
As when two Armies have with fury joined:
Rage and Revenge march first, with burning Ire:
Dread, Fears, and Terrors make them to retire:
Then Shame, and Valor, with malicious Hate,
Their reinforced Troops precipitate:
They charge them home: these break, and scatt'red fly
Unto their main Battalia, which stood nigh.
Here dire Despair was ranged, double-rankt
With Fury, and with Rashness strongly flankt.
These and a thousand more oppugning Phansies
Phoebus in my enraged breast advances.
Faint not, my Muse, but with a fearelesse pace
March through the midst of Furies, and outface
Armies of Terrors, vengefull Wrath, and Ire,
Affrightfull Death, devouring Sword, and Fire.
Shrink not at all to hear the hellish jaws
Of thundering Cannons roar with hideous noise,
Mixed with a thousand shot, that roughly tear
The tender welkin, and affright the ear.
Let not their clamorous shouts and confuse cries,
Which seem to wound the air, and pierce the skies,
Move thee at all: Let not the yelling noise
Of some half-murdred wights make thee to pause,
Or draw remorsefull pity from thy heart:
Be like a Rock of stone; shrink not, nor start:
Be as regardlesse of their shrieks and groans,
As they themselves have been to others mones.
If to such tender thoughts thou yeeld'st, my Muse,
Thy Martial Fury thou will quickly lose;
And none, but fearful Mothers, then will praise
Thy soft-strain'd verse, and heart-relenting lays.
But now a little breathe, my Muse, and hear
The plaints of others, sounded to thy ear.
The Nymph Germania does her self present,
With face disfigured, and with robes all rent,
And sprinkled over with blood: her golden locks
She tears, and furiously her breast she knocks;
Then wrings her hands, lifts up her woe-sick eyes:
And thus at last to the unpitying skies
She speaks, Oh heavens, how long, how long shall we
The only subject of your vengeance be;
Plagued with continual war, dire cruelties,
A thousand slaughters, and calamities;
While miscreant Ethnicks, who deride thy power,
Are undisturbed, and flourish to this hour?
The cursed Pagans laugh, when they behold
How many miseries on us are rolled.
The barbarous Turk insults with spiteful scorn,
To see us Christians by our selves so torn;
And on our bodies those deep wounds to bear,
Which he so much from us himself did fear;
To see our Forces by our selves o'return'd,
Which having joined, might easily have spurned
Him, and his Vassal Kings; and once again,
Like their dire Scourge, resistlesse Tamerlane,
Have hewed their Armies, as a field of corn,
Which is by reaping sickles quickly shorn:
And then their Sultan, in an Iron grate
Shut, like some monstrous Beast, should curse his Fate,
And rail upon his Grand-Impostour-Prophet,
That vagabond Arabian, Mahomet:
Then, if courage served him, valiantly
He might dash out his wretched brains, and die.
Then Stampoldam (now his Imperial seat,
That over-looks the World) with flaming heat
Enkindled once, should send such direful smoke,
As should these Infidels for ever choke:
Then in black clouds enwrapt, the fumes should whirle them,
And Devils to the lowest hell should hurl them.
And thou bloud-sucking Tartar, who of late
Proffredst thine aid, my wounds to aggravate;
But were rejected by that powerful King,
Who his Commission from the Heavens did bring,
To scourge me for the sins of me and mine:
Do thou rejoice to see the Powers Divine
Inflict such rig'rous Justice on my Soil,
Whose very bowels now with torments broil,
And raging War; like the Sicylian Hill,
Whose vaulted caverns sulph'rie flames do fill?
Thou cursed Rover, who do spend thy days
In wandering up and down a thousand ways;
Whose cold and barren Climate fears no War,
Not worth the sword of any Conqueror:
Cease for to triumph over my woeful state;
Lest at my prayers the Heavens precipitate
A vengeance on thy head, shall equallise
Wars bloody mischief and dire cruelties;
The dreadful Pestilence, whose poisonous blast
Into the grave thousands at once shall cast;
Or pinching Famine, whose long lingering stroke
Shall by degrees the vital spirits choke;
Or, what thou fear most, some rig'rous frost
Shall seize upon thy coldly-sited coast,
And freez the very air, that want of breath
May make you yield unto unsparing Death.
But why disturb I thus my wretched heart,
By wishing unto others such like smart
As I now feel? Would this give ease to me,
Or any whit abate my misery?
It would. Oh that the All-wise Providence
Would on these Miscreants such like plagues dispense;
That they might roar with their calamities,
And with their louder clamours drown the cries
Of my distressed children, whose sad mones
Do wound my heart, and pierce the very stones!
How many thousand Mothers at this time,
Within the limits of my wretched clime,
Weep without ceasing, and with shrillest notes
And bitter exclamations tear their throats!
How many tender Widows curse their Fates,
By raging War robbed of their dearest Mates!
How many aged Fathers lift their eyes
Drowned over with tears, to the unpitying skies,
Admiring that the fulgent Sun displayes
On their so wretched Land his cheerful rays!
Is there no pity in the heavens at all?
Cannot the grief of Mortals once appall
You Spirits divine, that 'bove us do reside,
And the rapt Spheres do in their courses guide?
They wonder that the rolling stars still shine,
And never at their torments do repine.
If their dire imprecations might prevail,
They would have had them muffled in a vail
Of mournful hue, and in a pitchie cloud
Swollen big with tears their heavenly luster shroud;
That with their hearts the whole earth might agree,
And once again a confused Chaos be.
Who can these blame that thus excessive moan,
Who have been spoiled of more lives then one;
That in so short a time (alas!) have lost
That which so many cares and years has cost?
Cease, cease, my Children: your so woeful cry
Will make my swelling heart in sunder fly.
Who can endure such shrieks as pierce my ears?
Who can, unmoved, view such floods of tears?
I dare not upward lift my fainting eyes,
Lest they descrie new woes, new miseries:
For wheresoever I turn me to behold,
My cities are in flames and smoke enrolled.
Huge heaps of Ruins, Wars dire Monuments,
Cruel Bellona every where presents.
All this great mischief and disastrous woe
From Rome, as from a poisonous spring, does flow.
And thou, proud Friar, whose ambitiousnesse
A Triple Diadem can scarce depresse;
Thrice cursed be thy deadly pride, that thus
With wars and ruins have o'rewhelmed us.
Most flintie-breasted Tigre, that can brook,
With heart unpitying, and unmoved look,
To see so many at thy feet to die,
And fall lower then hell, to keep thee high!
To see so many Nations choicest flowers
Cut down by sudden death, in so few hours!
And all this will not move thee to relent,
Nor win thee to revoke thy proud intent.
Thy Predecessors Christians could inflame
With courage, to a war of better fame:
Against Saracens to advance their warlike bands,
And to reconquer from those Pagans hands
Captived Judea, and the Diadem
Of weeping and forlorn Jerusalem.
Surely these Infidels accursed Tribe
Do covertly with some rich presents bribe
Thy avarice, that by thy devilish art
Our Christian unity thou might dispart.
Time will descrie the truth, and Heavens just Power
Will on thy head (I hope) just vengeance shower.
Here, with a sigh, as if her soul were pressed
To fly away, her mournful speech she ceased.
Then did I turn mine eyes about, to see
Whose part was next in this sad Tragedy.
LYPSICH, that fatal town, did then appear,
Whose walls and towers trembled, methoughts, with fear,
As if some aguish earthquake now did strive
Her very bowels piecemeal for to rive.
Surely there was just cause of horrid fear,
So many Furies being now so near,
Who threatened had to trample under feet
All that their armed Rage could find or meet.
Upon a spacious plain, that did present
Unto the eye a smooth and large extent,
Two Armies stood, marshalled in fair array,
Their waving Colors to the wind display:
Their well-contrived Ranks yet even were,
Their Files completely straight, their Battles square:
Their equal spears, their weapons glistring bright
Did yield, methoughts, a dreadfull-pleasing sight.
Here the Renowned Great GVSTAVVS stands,
Strongly environed with those warlike Bands,
Which the cold Region of the North had sent,
And unto them such hardened bodies lent,
As, like the roughness of their native Soil,
Cannot be broken with laborious toil.
The big-bon'd Lappians, who with nimble pace
The swiftest and the wildest beasts can chase:
Whose precious skins and furs of richest price
They send abroad for rarest merchandise.
The Finlanders were there, who, clad in buffe,
Did think their sturdie limbs armed proof enough:
Better to wound their foes they were prepared,
Then to defend, or stand upon their guard.
The warlike Goths, once of renowned Fame,
Whose Ancestors with fire and sword did tame
Great Rome it self, and her usurped crown
Snatched from her head, and proudly trampled down;
Making her fields to drink the blood that flowed
From her own children, who in heaps were strow'd
Upon the crimson-stained ground. Their steel
The sunne-burnt Spaniards too did deadly feel:
Within whose barren and scorcht Territory,
There still remain some Ensigns of their glory.
Here were they now, and seemed to reclaim
Their Predecessors long-obscured Fame.
And here were troops of Vandals seen, that made
The Ancient World even of their Name afraid;
And had as many Kingdoms over-runne
Almost, as does the all-incircling Sun.
Those that inhabit near the Dofrine Hills,
From whose cold tops the snow continual drills,
Had to this Battle sent an armed Troup,
That scorned at dangers once to shrink or stoup.
The duskie-colour'd Swethes stood next their King,
Who now had made their wondered Name to ring
Through farthest Regions, which so long a time
Had seemed congealed with their frozen clime.
Here likewise might you other Nations find,
Drawn by the vigor of a Martial mind:
Irish, French, English, and the hardy Scot,
Whose noted valor never will be forgot.
There likewise were the German-Saxons seen,
Who heretofore as much renowned had been,
As the ancient Goths, or the adventurous Gaul,
That did so often the Roman Hosts appall.
Such was their number, that even they alone
As a full Army might themselves have shown.
Opposed to these, an Army as complete
For fair proportion, and full out as great,
Presents its dreadful Front, that seemed to breathe
Naught less then ruins, wounds, and speedy death.
Tillie, whom long experience in the war
Had often taught to be a Conqueror,
Did range these Troops; and, as he thought, so right,
And in so firm a posture, that they might
With ease overcome their undervalu'd Foes,
Who now were marching on to meet their blows.
'T was vain with long orations to delay
Their burning courage, which could brook no stay.
Like two vast Woods, whose waving tops do dance
With gentle winds, these mighty Hosts advance.
The very luster that their arms did cast,
Would have a coward killed with lightning blast:
But to a Soldiers eye not any fight
Could be presented, that would more delight
His lofty sprite. And look how Sols bright beams,
By art redoubled, kindle burning streams:
So the refracted rays of fulgent steel
Make Soldiers hearts new burning courage feel.
Scarce can the fiery Steeds endure the ground,
Now that they hear the echoing Trumpet sound:
They champ their curbing bits, and proudly neigh,
Vexed that their masters do their Fury stay.
The Footmen fain would double their slow pace,
But that they fear their order to displace.
Now is the Signal given: with a shout
As loud as thunder, all the warlike Rout
Do make the air and fields adjacent ring.
Then to a charged Cannon Swethlands King
Gave fire: straight does the swift-wing'd bullet fly
Unto their foes with a rough Embassy;
And in so high a tone delivers it,
As might so great a King as him befit;
Speaking like awful thunder, whose dread sound
Our ears amazes, and our hearts does wound.
To second this, were other bullets sent
From fired Cannons, that so rudely rent
The first front of their Battle, that you might
See their fair order now dismangled quite:
And like a confused heap it does appear,
Till resuppli'd by the advancing Rear.
The Imperials are not slack, but roundly they
With answ'ring shot their former loss repay:
A Rank of Cannons, all at once enfir'd,
Did presently attain their mark desired.
The angry Swethes their hellish fury feel,
Whose rough encounter made them more then reel;
It makes a spacious breach, and the weak wall
Of bodies batt'red piecemeal now does fall
In ruined heaps, and with a crimson juice,
That like a torrent flowed, the ground embrews.
Help me, my tragic Muse, infuse new strains,
And re-infire my quite amazed Brains.
Methinks I feel my vigor to relent,
Stricken with horror and astonishment,
To think upon those direful slaughters, when
Those hellish Engines did so many men
Dismangle in a trice, and with a blast
Their noble souls from their stout bodies cast.
Here a brave Captain, as he fairly stands,
With words encouraging his warlike Bands,
His head snatched off among them flies, and there
Speaks in a language now of dread and fear.
Here, as another waves his sword on high,
To dare his foe, a fiery Ball does fly
Full in his face, and makes him with a dash
With his own sword himself in sunder slash.
There stood another, who enraged did breathe
Against his Foes revengefull threats of death:
But as his words yet in the air did fly,
A double Cannon makes a loud reply,
And with a greater anger far did strive
His words again into his throat to drive:
What he in vain had threatened to his Foes,
Makes his own Soldiers feel by reverst blows:
His shiv'red skull and arms all shatt'red flew
Backward, and some that stood too near him slew.
Here one, whom some great shot affrighted, shrunk;
But all in vain: upon his armed trunk
The swift-wing'd Bullet lights; and from his heart,
With fear and wounds, his soul at once does start.
A rank of Brothers and near friends here stood,
Never more true then now allied in blood,
Rent by the fury of two Culverings,
That arms from shoulders, heads from bodies flings;
Then altogether mixed them in a Mass,
And with their Limbs strowes the discolored grass.
Some Demicannons among a troup of Horse
Did likewise show their cruel murdering force.
Their Iron Cuirace was of small avail:
Corslets of Steel and Coats of well-wrought Mail
Could not divert the fury of such strokes,
As would have stricken down the tallest oaks,
That in the Caledonian woods are found,
Or spread their roots in the Hercinian ground.
Some Riders wounded are, while th'untoucht Horse,
Feeling his reins now slack, with all his force
Kicks, flings, and starts until his Master reels;
Then, most ungrateful, spurns him with his heels.
Sometime the terror of the shot does light
Upon the Horse; the Rider scapes not quite:
For though the bullet spare him, yet his Steed
Never rests, till of his troubling burden freed:
Then casts him on the clotted sand, and straight
Beginning for to sink, with all his weight,
Over him that erst he bore he now falls over,
And him that rid him once he now does cover:
To him his back afforded once a room,
And now his body makes for him a tomb.
Brave Spirits, but too (alas!) unfortunate,
How does my Muse lament your unfit Fate,
Snatched by those devilish Engines fiery force,
That murders without mercy or remorse;
That cut you off at one disastrous blow,
Ere that you could your fearlesse faces show
Unto your Enemies, and make them feel
Some mortal strokes from your sharp-edged steel!
Cursed be that Hell-sprung wit, that did devise
This fiery Engine, whose dire Batteries
Scorn all resisting force that can be tried,
And most approved valor do deride;
That humane bodies rend like fields of corn,
Which by the cutting sith are quickly shorn;
Not so content, but all-dismangled dash them,
And in a thousand confused pieces pash them:
Here making one, with his disshatt'red Head
His best and dearest friend to strike stark dead.
Renowned Archimede of Syracuse,
Who by an Engine of thine own did bruise
Thousands of foes at once; when from a Tower
Whole loads of stones upon their heads did shower:
Thy rare invention now may seem a toy,
Compared with this, which does far more destroy
At further distance; and, like dreadful thunder,
Has often killed some with fear and wonder.
But thee posterity shall ever praise,
Because thy new device thou did not blaze
To aftertimes; but did at first intend
That with thy life the same should have an end.
But now against that more then hated Name,
From whom this sulphurie invention came,
Let every Age their fury so enlarge,
As volleys of dire curses to discharge:
Let brimstone burn his odious brains; let smoke
His very memory for ever choke.
By this time did the Armies nearer preasse:
The thundering Cannons for a while did cease,
And gave permission to the enraged bands
To try the vigor of their eager hands.
Then both at once impetuously do rush,
And against each other feircely counterpush:
As when two Seas against each other roam,
And break their billows into spatt'red foam;
Making the air to tremble, and the shore
With dreadful sounds and frequent Echoes roar:
Such was the noise, when these two Hosts did close,
And made the air to ring with strokes and blows.
Now Pistols, Muskets, and Caliver play:
Through fire and smoke they find themselves a way.
No shot falls now amiss: in this close fight,
The random-guided Bullets surely light,
And drench themselves in blood: no armor here
Can stop their force, which is by much too near.
Now forward on the close-rankt Pikes advance
With steadie arm, and fearlesse countenance,
Shaking their pointed spears, which in the breast
Of their encountering foes do quickly rest.
Here was true Fury seen and val'rous Spite;
To which if you compare the other fight,
It well might seem but Sport, or Play at most:
When as the shot at distance does accoast
The unseen Foe, and as it were by chance,
Guided at random, at the mark does glance:
While fiery flashes and thick clouds of smoke
Do blind their eyes, and the pure air do choke;
Preventing them from seeing of their foe,
And who it was that gave their mortal blow.
Nor here can any one with shining blade
Revenge the death of his slain Camerade:
But all their vengefull spleen they do at large,
And at adventure, in the air discharge.
But among the sturdie Pikes 'twas otherwise:
Their Fury is directed by their eyes:
And at the sight of their enraged foe,
Redoubled courage in their hearts did flow.
Here were two Captains met; with pike and targe,
Like furious Rams, they do each other charge;
Till at the last the thorough-piercing steel
Made one of them begin to faint and reel:
His valor does outlive his strength; for so,
When now he cannot wound his conquering foe,
Forward he falls; that he may never be found
To have shrunk back, or yielded any ground.
Then being down, threatenings in vain does breathe;
Calls on his soldiers to revenge his death:
Who, fired with shame and rage, with one joint push
The short-surviving Conqueror o'rerush.
He falls upon his foe, whom but of late
With steadie spear his arm did penetrate.
Now with loud shouts and vengefull cries, they rear
Their angry spirits far above all fear:
Full on the points of spears they forward run:
There is not one that wounds or death does shun.
Now had they raised within a little while,
Over these Chieftains corpse a fun'rall pile
Of slaughtred bodies: For it seemed they meant
Their Captains should not want a Monument.
Two brave Conductours here brought on their bands,
To try the vigor of their hearts and hands.
The valor of their soldiers they excite
Not now with words, but with exampled fight.
Had you but seen two Bulls in fury meet,
Spurning the yellow sand with angry feet;
And forward then with headlong force to rush,
Till that their horns do make the blood to gush
From many wounds, and their black-speckled Hide
By this be with another color di'd:
Then might you have conjectured, with what spite
And burning rage these two brave Soldiers fight.
This on his sword relies, with it does hew
And nimbly cut the others spear in two.
But he as lightly from his side does snatch
A ready pistol, which did over-match
His neare-hand-threatning sword, and in a trice
Quite through his breast the fire-sent bullet flies.
See! here another with his stretcht-out pike
Quite through the body of his foe does strike:
But ere he back again the same could pluck,
He with another through the heart is struck.
And now his vanquished foe with joyful eye
Beholds his Victour on the ground to lie.
There might you see a noble-courag'd Swethe
Advance himself without all fear of death:
His furious ire made him alone intend
To kill and wound, not caring to defend.
A big-bon'd Germane meets him at the point,
And with their spears they rush so equal joint,
That both at once were wounded, both withal
Began to sink, and both at once did fall.
Not far from hence you might have seen a crew
Of sturdie lads, that thrust, and hack, and hew.
An Ensign they had slain; but could not yet
Into their hands his waving colors get.
Often had they stoupt to take them from the ground:
But from their foes such hindrance still they found,
Who doubled on their heads such frequent blows,
That look who stoupt, again he never rose.
Now was the fury of the fight grown hot,
The air resounded with their frequent shot.
Fair Victory on both their Hosts does gaze,
And does behold their courage with amaze:
Now these observes, then those again beheld;
Knows not as yet to which her self to yield:
Like to some novice Virgin, whom a Crew
Of amorous Youths with eager suits pursue;
Her mind from fixing for a while she draws,
And yet delights on every one to pause;
Denies not any, yields unto none:
To all alike het equal love is shown.
Have you not seen a field of yellow wheat,
Upon whose tops some gentle winds do beat?
They seem to bend, and backward for a while,
Compelled by force, they orderly recoil:
Then reassuming vigor, with a blast
They bend themselves forward again in haste:
Such was the manner of these warlike Forces,
Who seemed to charge with interchanging courses.
Now forward rusht the Swethlanders: anon
They back retire: the Imperialists come on,
And with such fury charge them, as if they
At that encounter would have won the day.
But finding good resistance, this their heat
Is quickly cooled, and backward they retreat.
The Swethes and Almains now with doubled might
Renew the vigor of this bloody fight;
March over the bellies of their slaughtred foes,
And strictly preasse them with unsparing blows.
But here a Regiment, in this their Rage,
Fearing themselves too far for to engage
Among their circling enemies, did sound
A fair retreat, and yield their conqu'red ground.
Thus did the well-experienc'd Swethes, who knew
When to retire, and when they might pursue.
They did not their rough charges here perform,
Like to the rage of some unguided storm;
Or like the fury of an headless, rude,
Confused, and disord'red multitude:
But as one body, with so many hands
Move all at once, obeying the commands
Of one Conductour, who, even as a Soul,
These Organs does direct, guide, and control.
It is not Fury, nor a fearlesse Heart,
That winnes the day; but Valor mixed with Art.
This did the Saxons find, who now begun
Disorderly to waver, and to shun
The rage of their approaching foe, who far
Did them excel in discipline of war;
And had in often combatings and fights
Learned many Martial Stratagems and slights.
Long did the Saxon Troops stiffely sustain
Their rough encounter, and a while maintain
The Conquest doubtful. Their dismangled bands
They fill again with other fighting hands;
Advancing forward with a fearlesse face,
Each striving to defend his fellows place,
Who at his feet did now half-murdred lie,
Staining the verdant grass with crimson die.
But still their foes pressed on, who too well knew
The least advantage gained to pursue.
Then did they stagger, and scarce willing are
Their shatt'red ranks and order to repair;
But flying back in heaps, by force and fear
They break the ranges of their troops in Rear.
Words now and threatenings are of small avail:
Their Duke himself could not as then prevail
With fair entreatings, nor with rough commands,
To stay the flight of his disscatt'red bands.
Where fly you Cowards? Think you thus to shun
The slaughtring sword? You cannot sure out-runne
The nimble horse, who now without all trouble
Will cut you off, and tread you down like stubble.
Turn, turn again; once more your forces try:
Stand to your arms; this is the way to fly
From threatening dangers. Boldly your breasts oppose,
And not your backs to your encountering foes.
See! the brave Swethes still fairly stand in range,
Nor yet for fear or dread will break or change.
Shall we forsake them, that have come thus far
To undertake for us this dangerous war?
The world will brand us with eternal shame,
And after-Ages will deride our Name.
Fear made them deaf; and now their Princes words
Are drowned with noise of shot and clatt'ring swords.
They fly in heaps and quite disord'red ranks,
Like to some flood that has born down his banks.
Tillie rejoicing at so wished a sight,
Beholding half his enemies in flight,
Spoke thus insulting; Courage, hearty Blades,
My noble Soldiers, and brave Camerades:
The day is ours: let these base Cowards fly,
And now let us these other squadrons plie;
The sturdie Swethes, whose Kings victorious Name
Keeps them from flying, with a forced shame:
But charge them home, and with unsparing hands
Rush boldly on their now half-stagg'ring Bands.
This having said, he, with a sp'rit as high
As these his words, among his foes does fly;
Who him receive with courage nothing less,
But with a greater ire his rage repress:
As when the angry Ocean with a shock
Strives for to break some firmly fixed rock,
Which stands unmoved, and his swelling pride
And vain-spent Malice seems to deride;
Making his waves, which did so rashly roam,
To dash themselves into a spatt'red foam:
Thus was the Crabats fury broke in sunder,
Who fell upon the Swedish troops like thunder.
And their brave General, who had thought his sight
Sufficient was his enemies to fright,
Escaped not unwounded: for the leaden shower
Feared not at all his mortall-feared Power;
Though it be still unknown, from whose hand came
The force that wounded so renowned a Name.
It Is not a single wound that can restrain
Or check his valor; but enraged again
With doubled fury, he assails his foes,
Who will not yield him any thing but blows.
By this time great GVSTAVVS wachfull eye
An opportune advantage does epsy
To break the squadrons of their ranged Horse,
Who charged them so often with headlong force.
A Regiment their stations quickly change,
And now stood ord'red in a treble range:
The first rank couched on their knees: the next
Stood halfway bended: but the third erects
His armed trunk upright. Thus as one rank,
Were all their muskets levelled point blank.
At both their wings stood troops of ready Horse,
Prepared to second with a speedy course.
Then at a word did all give fire, and power
Among the enraged Horse a leaden shower,
That flew as thick as hail, when Boreas blast
Does from the clouds his frozen treasure cast.
Had I an hundred tongues, an Iron heart,
And all the help the Muses can impart;
Yet could I not in this my stagg'ring verse
The shadow of that slaughter now rehearse:
When in the twinkling of an eye did fall
So many wounded wights, Horse, Man and all.
And that fair Squadron, which so lately stood
Like to some thick and closely-ranged wood,
Confusedly does now appear, and scatt'red.
Their order spoiled, their ranks in sunder shatt'red:
As when in Autumn some tempestuous blast
From half-dead trees their feeble leaves does cast,
And with another garment then her own
The under-sited ground is thickly strown:
Thus was the field with bleeding bodies spread,
That had been wounded by the piercing lead.
But while the rest, filled with amaze and wonder,
To see the effects of this so sudden thunder,
Knew not which way to turn or bend their faces;
A Regiment of Horse with doubled paces
Fly in amongst them; in their teeth discharge
A second volley; make the breach more large.
Then forward on with rage and force they push,
And their fear-strucken foes soon over-rush;
Who now had lost all mind and heart to fight,
And did betake them to a sudden flight.
This their example made their other Bands
Begin to faint, and fight with trembling hands.
And as their feeble vigor does decrease,
The Swethlanders does double: on they preasse
With greater courage now, then ere before:
The ground does swim with streams of humane gore.
At last, not able for to fill so fast
Their slaught'red ranks, as the rough Swethes did waste;
Backward they throng in heaps, disord'red quite,
Not willing now nor able for to fight.
But while that all tumultuously do strive
To escape away, they do the foremost drive
Headlong before them: over these they stumble,
And so the next, and next to them does tumble.
(Strange for to see!) here lay a Soldier dead;
Over whom an heap of living bodies spread.
Sure he enjoyed a far more noble Tomb,
Then those which do the Egyptian Kings inhume;
The lofty Pyramids, whom loud-tongu'd Fame
One of the world's chief wonders still does name:
Or then that so renowned Sepulcher,
Which does Mausolus Kingly bones interre.
All these were cov'red with dead marble stones:
But here is one entombed with living bones.
The fiery steeds, that never mercy knew,
Proudly themselves in spatt'red blood embrew.
Here against a sprawling body one does spurn,
And from his former wounds makes blood return.
Another there a living head does crush,
And from the same makes blood and brains to gush.
Meanwhile their masters with unsparing hands,
Now none resist, murder at once whole Bands.
And where the sword does fail, the trampling horse
Quickly dispatches with an headlong course.
The former slaughter of this bloody day,
Compared with this, might seem Bellona's play.
The Sun no longer could endure this sight,
But in compassion did withdraw his light:
And that he might their further rage prevent,
With speedy wings the welcome Night he sent;
Who, muffled in a vail of sable hue,
Quite over the heads of these fierce Victours flew;
And then before them casts such a mist,
As made their hands and vengefull Heat desist.
So a fierce Lion, a Getulian Swain
(If antique stories do not miss, or feign)
Did with his garment muffle over the head;
Then this so furious Beast did stand as dead:
Stirs not one jot; but, as amazed quite,
Loses his cruel fury with his sight:
And while that he thus strangely seems to pause,
The fearful Swain scapes his devouring jaws.
THE BATTLE OF LVTZEN.
THe hel-born Furies, who delight in blood,
And had of late swumme in a purple flood,
Which not at all their vengefull thirst abates,
Do now again invoke the Powerful Fates
To hasten forward such another day,
Where they in midst of fire and smoke might play;
And with their poisonous breath and fiery brands
Inflame GVSTAVVS and the Imperial Bands.
The All-disposing Providence above,
Whose presence makes the trembling heavens to move,
Does yield to these infernal Hagges desire.
Let none presume a reason to require:
It was his will; let that alone suffice:
And sure 'twas just; though that the feeble eyes
Of our dim mortal judgment never can
With punctual knowledge heavenly actions scanne.
Weep, mournful Germany; For once again
Thy childrens blood thy wretched fields must stain:
And to augment thy loss, that Powerful King,
Who hopes of peace and victory did bring,
Must there receive his mortal wound, with whom
Shall thousands more receive their Fatal doom.
Thy freedom, which thou have so long time sought,
Must with more streams of humane blood be bought.
Oh happy England, who wilt scarce confess,
Drunk with security, thy happiness;
That do enjoy such Quietness, such Ease,
Such calm Tranquillity, and blessed Peace;
And that not purchased by laborious Toil,
By fire, and sword, by ruin, and by spoil;
Nor by the loss of thy choice Youth, whose Fate
Thou would not fear against Heaven t'expostulate:
But it has cost thee nothing: for behold,
On thee the Almighty has his blessings rolled,
Without all labor or desert of thine,
Merely by instinct of his love divine;
And has enricht thee with a gracious King,
At whose blessed Birth Angels of peace did sing:
Oh look upon thy neighbor Germany,
Drowned with a flood of tears and misery;
Whose towns are ruined, and whose Cities burn,
Whose fields do flow with blood, whose people mourn*
Think but on this all you that cannot weep,
Who in the arms of happy Peace do sleep.
Is It irksome to your ears? Your tender Heart
At these molesting sounds (methinks) does start:
From Wars and Woes y' have been so long secure,
That now you cannot their rough Name endure.
Are you become like to the Sybarite,
Whose soft'ned spirit, sottish appetite
Could no harsh noise endure, nor that shrill sound,
That does from hamm'red Steel and Brass rebound?
And therefore such Artificers as those,
That did molest their ears with clatt'ring blows,
By a preventing law they did compel
Far off in some obscurer place to dwell.
Shall these my verses, that with clatt'ring ding
The strokes of War and furious Rage do sing,
Displease our British ears, who are of late
(It seems) grown tender and effeminate?
Your Amorettoes think them far too rough,
Not smooth, nor pleasing, nor half low enough:
They cannot screw them any ways to suit
Or consort with their sweet-tun'd warbling Lute:
They are too lofty for a Woman's voice,
And drown all sweetness with a rattling noise.
Some hollow-sounding Drum, or Trumpet shrill,
Or thundering Cannons, that the ear do fill
With frightfull sounds, fit Instruments would be
To Echo forth my lines melodiously.
The smaller shot shall serve for repetition,
While clatt'ring swords shall represent division:
And the more Discords that my verses show,
The better Harmony from thence will flow.
Then cheerfully my lofty Muse proceed:
There will be some that will thy verses read;
Such generous spirits, in whose manly breasts
An ardent love of Fame and Honor rests;
Who still retain some sparks of that desire,
Which did their Ancestors brave hearts enfire,
When they did make Pagans and Cypriots feel
The direful force of their resistlesse steel:
Or when so often, to their lasting glory,
They did o're-runne the Gallick Territory;
Or when the Worlds Disturber they did tame,
Who Europes Monarchy alone does claim:
Such men as these will far above thy merit
Approve thy lines, applaud thy lofty spirit,
That thus have chosen with industrious brains
To show thy vigor in Heroic strains;
And not in soft-tun'd Ditties, or such lays
As Ladies only and their servants praise.
The Sun had finished now his annual Race,
Since Fatal Lypsich with a mournful face
Beheld GVSTAVVS, and his warlike Force
Her fertile plains die with a bloody sourse;
Which scarce as yet fully exhaust appears,
And scarce had Lypsich wiped away her tears,
When lo, not far, upon a neighboring plain
Bellona sounds her dreadful trump again:
And Lutzen is appointed for the stage,
Where Mars intends to act a second Rage;
Lutzen, that Fatal Town, whose very sound
I feel my grief-disturbed heart to wound.
There Great GVSTAVVS, so renowned, became
(Dire alteration!) only now a Name;
Once of such power, that his conquering hands
Could tame stout Nations, and subdue their Bands.
CAESAR himself would blush, and never dare
His Conquests with GVSTAVVS to compare.
For had he lived to see what skillful hands
And valiant hearts are in the Germane Lands,
Who go not naked now, but clad in steel,
And will not easily be made to reel;
Sure he had startled, and his conquering course
Had been prevented by a stronger force.
Let not black Envy then presume or dare
GVSTAVVS worthy glory to empair,
Who conqu'red had in such a narrow time
So many Lands, in such a warlike Clime.
Let the Proud Spaniard to his lasting shame
His many Conquests of the Indians name:
And let him boast, how many Millions too
Of unresisting People there he slew;
While a few Belgian Merchants in despite
Of all his Pride, Ambition, Power, and Might,
Will not be tamed, nor be made to yield,
But still affront his Armies in the field;
Having no Kingdom, but a narrow State;
Yet his Imperial Greatness Check and Mate.
What Honor then belongs to Swethlands King,
Who to subjection could such Nations bring,
That had been so inured unto Wars,
And ever exercised in bloody Jarres!
Had Mars himself, attended with a Band
Of dreadful Furies, entered in their Land;
They would have met him with a fearlesse heart,
Nor should his Name or Power have made them start.
But whither takes my roving Muse her flight?
I must not here a Panegyric write,
Nor spend my self in such admiring lays,
As sound naught else but Great GUSTAVUS praise.
A Battle is my scope, so dire, so fierce,
That my sad Muse does tremble to rehearse;
And seeks an hundred slights, a while to stay
The black recital of this bloody day:
Like to some timorous Heart, that from the cry
Of Hounds and Huntsmen hastily does fly:
Now here, now there he turns; then back again
Breaks through the woods, scuds over the spacious plain,
And tries a thousand shifts, ere at the last
Himself on hazard of a fight he will cast.
Thus my slow Muse digressions does premise,
And large preambles (as you see) devise;
Only to stay a while, ere she recite
The sad narration of black Lutzens fight.
Swethlands Heroic King his Martial train
Near Naumburg City spreads upon a plain:
Of fighting yet no hopes there did appear:
His purpose only was to march more near,
And join his Forces with the Saxon Bands;
That so the surer with united hands
They might to all their foes attempts reply,
And not be forced coy Fortunes grace to try.
It Is found too deer a bargain in these days,
By valor only for to purchase praise.
He Is valiant now, that winnes the Victory,
Be it by Number, Slight, or Subteltie,
By Stratagem, by Cunning, or by Skill,
By Courage, Fury, or by what you will.
And sure it is vain for an Heroic Breast,
That will not but on equal terms contest;
That scorns advantages to seek, or take,
But would that Valor should him Victour make;
While that his subtle foe does sliely watch
All proff'red opportunities to catch,
And thinks it no disgraceful cowardice,
To wound or kill him as he sleeping lies.
Might Valor of it self alone suffice
To win the day in every enterprise,
The noble Swethes with Great GVSTAVVS Name
Would like the Macedons the whole world tame.
Think it no wonder, that their Mighty King,
Whose presence only often did conquests bring,
Should notwithstanding, like to one afraid,
Expect, and wish, and seek for further aid.
It was not fear, but Martial Policy,
That made him thus to others help complie.
Had he been ever thus, and never transcended,
This temperate Virtue had him safe defended:
He might have lived and flourisht to this hour,
And still should Rome have feared Swethlands Power.
But it is a wonder that he could so rule
His burning Sp'rit, and it so often cool
By moderate counsel, checking Policy.
Admire who will that he so soon did die:
My sorrow-strucken Muse admireth more
That he so venurous was not slain before.
As now he marches with his valiant Bands,
Some straggling Prisoners fell into his hands,
Who did ascertain him, that not one Foe
Did of their march and near approaching know:
Not far off Wall'nstein with the Imperial Host,
Securely lay enquartred in that coast,
Not once supposing that his Enemy
Was in the field, or now had marched so nigh.
When Swethlands King heard this intelligence,
Rapt with exceeding joy, his first pretense
He changes, now resolves without more aid
His foes thus unexpecting to invade:
Then to his Captains shows his new intent,
Who to his high design gave soon consent.
Only Knipphausen a stout Colonel,
And long experienced, liked it not so well:
And sure he did his judgment strictly join
Unto the rules of modern discipline.
The course of War is like a game at Dice;
Where Skill with doubtful Fortune mixed lies.
It is the scope of cunning Management,
Fortunes deceitful hazards to prevent;
And never to her blind Favor once to stand,
But when compelling accidents command.
They that renouncing skill commit their game
To unknown Chance, deserve to lose the same.
This fickle Goddess, that the world so fears
With doubtful hazards, never more blind appears,
Then when in Warlike actions and in fight
She does express her overruling Might.
Skill joynd with Valor, and a Powerful Host
Can but the conquest promise at the most.
The Victory is never sure till won;
And none can triumph till the fight be done.
The wisest Captains in these modern days
Do seek to win the conquest by delays.
It Is no disgraceful Cowardice to stand
(Though uncompell'd) on the defensive hand.
It is the surest course and safest held,
To shun a Battle, but to keep the field.
They that can best prevent their furious foes,
Shall win the Conquest without stroke or blows.
My noble Prince, this is my free advice:
But if your Royal will shall enterprise
Some more sublime design, my heart and hand
Shall readily obey your just command;
And I would rush alone through midst of Foes,
Though that a thousand deaths should counterpose.
Thus grave Knipphausen spoke with stayed look,
And mind unmoved. But the fiery Duke,
Bernard of Saxon Weimar, who could never
Endure the shadow of a seeming fear;
Whose burning courage could not brook delays,
His resolution in such words displayes;
Now is the wished time, the expected hour
Yielded to us by Heavens disposing Power,
That we may now our former-vanquisht foe
Extirpate quite with his last overthrow.
Their hearts are quail'd already; and shall we
Want hearts to meet them who desire to flee?
Shall we, that have so many Conquests won,
So many Lands and Provinces o're-runne,
Begin to faint, and show we are afraid,
And dare not these half-stagg'ring foes invade?
Oh shame to think! Could we do more then thus,
If they had vanquished and quite conquered us?
Shall we be so ungrateful unto Heaven,
Who unto us such victories has given,
To make us fearlesse in so just a cause,
And to proceed without demurre or pause?
Shall we neglect so fair and fit occasion
T'assail our foes with undescri'd invasion?
Long, long we may expect, ere once again
The Heavenly Fates such favor will us deigne:
And be assured, that if we do retreat,
We quite shall damp our soldiers vigorous heat.
And make our Enemies become more bold,
When they shall once our timorous march behold.
These words, like oil poured on the greedy fire,
Made Great GVSTAVVS burn with fiercer ire.
He gives command, that with the swiftest speed
His Royal Army forward should proceed.
The hollow-sounding drum and trumpet shrill
The Soldiers ears with cheerful clamours fill;
While with the air the waving colors play,
And by their motion point them out the way.
Forward they troup to Lutzens bloody soil,
And with glad thoughts and hopes the time beguile.
Often did the strictness of the enclosing way
Their hasty speed and expedition stay:
Egged on with hopes of victory and spoil,
They did refuse no sweating pains and toil.
Had you but seen those valiant Bands advance
With nimble feet, with cheerful countenance,
And doubled pace, you would have rather guessed
That they were hasting to some welcome feast,
Then marching to their grave, which was the event
Of many thousands that then gladly went.
But notwithstanding all the haste they made,
So many lets and obstacles delaid
Their numerous Bands, that now the setting Sun
Swifter then they his usual race had run,
And did begin to drown his shining beams
Within the Oceans vast incircling streams.
Some troops of horse that nearest lay, began
To-skirmish with the Swethes approaching Vanne,
Who with much loss of time had lately past
A narrow bridge, which stopped them in their haste.
These light-armed Crabats first of all did feel
The deadly force of their victorious steel.
From them an Ensign too they did surprise
Depainted with an ominous device;
With happy Fortune, and Joves princely Fowl,
Whose Name did once the spacious world control.
But the Finlandian Duke so small a prize
Beheld with sad and discontented eyes,
Grieved that so soon the All-endark'ning night
Did stay their hands, and hide their foes from sight.
Once the Days Charioter his circling pace
Vouchsafed to stop in middle of his race;
While Judahs Champion with unsparing hands
Hewed down the Ethnicks Heav'n-accursed Bands:
But the blessed name of Christians has a force
To win from heaven an undeserved remorse;
And that they may so great a slaughter shun,
Sol his diurnall Race will swifter run.
Now does the Imperial Grand Commander hear
Frequent Alarms resounded in his ear:
Post after Post are sent to certify
Of their so neare-approaching Enemy.
Here three at once quite spent and out of breath,
Yet told their minds by looks as pale as Death.
The amazed Duke startled when he did hear
That the bold Swethes had gotten now so near:
Then frets with anger, when he calls to mind
How all his troops lay scatt'red and disjoined.
'Twas now no time to sleep, though the moist Night
The tired senses did to rest invite.
He recollects his spirits, and his eyes
Up to the Heavens he elevateth thrice:
At last spoke thus; Thou Power Omnipotent,
Great God of Hosts, that do our Foes prevent;
Thou All-foreseeing Sentinel, whose eye
Through thickest clouds our Enemies does spy:
Perpetual Glory and divinest Fame
Be rendered to thy ever-honour'd Name,
That thus have sent thy messenger of Night
To stay these cruel Heretics from fight,
That against all Piety and humane Laws
Would trample under feet thy Catholic cause.
This said, he hastens unto consultation
For best directions, and for preparation:
He sends abroad his letters, and commands
For quick assembling of his scatt'red Bands:
Now thinks he on the fittest place to advance
His greater Shot and fiery Ordinance.
Some Mounts were raised already to his hand,
Where some of Ceres airie Engines stand;
But now rough Mars does shoulder for the place,
And on the same his warlike Engines trace.
The Pioners had with laborious spade
About these Batt'ries strong Entrenchments made,
To guard them from their foes, who otherwise
Might with some headlong onset them surprise.
Meanwhile did Swethlands grieved King command
His Royal Army on the place to stand.
Here for a space their Martial Rage and Spite
Lay buried in the drowsy arms of Night.
It was not yet the wished time, which they
Resolved to make a black and bloody day.
In fair Battalia lay these warlike Bands,
With wearied limbs stretched on the frigid sands:
Their Muskets near them, ready to be found
At first alarm: upon the champian ground
Their Spears most orderly erected stood,
Like to some square and even-planted wood.
Here one his Helmet casts from his head,
And for a pillow underneath does spread:
Another there upon a rugged stone
His drowsy head most willingly has thrown.
Now did the dampish Earth their Spirits cool,
Who scarce of late their burning heat could rule.
Here on his back a tired Soldier lies,
And does behold the stars with steadfast eyes;
As if in them he searched to descrie
What was appointed for his Destiny;
And every star, that twinkling does appear,
He thinks does tremble with presaging fear:
Then turns aside, and folds acrosse his arms,
And seeks to drown these thoughts with sleepie charms.
Here did a Soldier with amazed heart
And troubled thoughts, like one affrighted, start:
His dreaming Fancy made him to suppose
That he was round encompassed with foes;
And too too plainly (as he thought) he viewed
How they in sunder had their squadrons hewed:
He snatched his ready Weapon, and begun
To look how he their feared rage might shun:
As round he casts his terrour-stricken eyes,
Nothing but cause of horror he descries:
He sees his Fellows on the ground are spread
No otherwise then wounded men and dead:
He had no heart nor power to fly; but stays
Till time and space diminisht his amaze.
Many brave Chieftains on the earth did lie,
Having no other Covering but the Sky,
No easier Pillow then the rugged Ground,
No softer Mantle then their Arms they found:
They stretched their limbs, as if they sought what room
And space would serve them for a future tomb.
Renowned GVSTAVVS, whom delicious ease
And Courtly softness never once could please,
In middle of his armed bands did rest;
Whose troubled thoughts a thousand cares molest:
His Royal heart with sadness almost sinks,
As often as on his weighty charge he thinks:
A World of lives now hazarded did lie
Upon the single fortune of his Die.
Remembering this, his over-burd'ned Soul
Innum'rous Fears and doubtful thoughts does roll:
It by no humane tongue can be expressed,
How many cares his noble heart distressed,
Who for so many thousands did endure
All that such troubled motions could procure:
The burning agitations of his breast
Deprived his spirits of their desired rest;
And those moist vapors, which the brain did send
To cause refreshing sleep, their heat did spend.
So does Sols scorching beams, which are reflected
Upon the land where Memphis is erected,
Where Nilus fertilising stream does flow,
Where their high tops the Pyramids do show:
Those liquid vapors, which the Earth in rain
Expects to be returned down again,
Are by the Suns so powerful heat made rare,
And then do vanish into subtle air.
Now the soft-gliding Stars were seen to have run
Half round the Earth, when Swethlands Prince begun
With eyes erected to the Heavens, t'invoke
The All-pow'rfull God of war: and thus he spoke;
Dreadful Jehovah, who did first inspire
Into my heart this vigorous heat fire,
And did inflame me with a Rage divine,
That I might tame these enemies of thine,
And free those Christians, who with groans and cries
Have pierced so often the all-cov'ring skies:
Be pleased now this Enterprise to bless,
And our Designs to crown with good success.
Thou know (O Lord) I neither fight for Fame,
Nor yet on Earth to win a Glorious Name:
'Twas not the scope of those my painful toils,
Thus to enrich my self with ill got Spoils:
Nor do I thus with Wars these Lands o'rewhelm,
That I might stretch the limits of my Realm:
But 'twas the instinct of thy Power above,
That to this high Design my heart did move.
If any other sinister intent
Be in my heart, let not thy aid be lent:
No further do we pray for Victories,
Then in thy Name we only enterprise.
The sable Night being vanished, a black Day
Begins his fatal luster to display:
But Phoebus, who foresaw what dire mishap
Was drawing on, his mournful face did wrap
Within a muffled vail, a foggie mist,
Which did the piercing of his beams resist;
And thus he seemed to extend the night
By this obscuring of his cheerful light.
But notwithstanding such a sad presage,
Did both these Armies boil with longing rage
To meet each other, and to try whose steel
Should soonest make their opposites to reel.
Ranged in Battalia, both the Armies stood,
Resolved ere long to march in streams of blood.
The Imperial Viceroy did present a fair
And spacious Front rankt with exactest care:
To such a distance both their Wings did stretch,
As sixteen furlongs full their breadth could reach.
The Right Wing Coloredo did command,
Under whose Banner ord'red now they stand,
Ready prepared at their Captains Breath
Boldly to meet inevitable Death.
The Duke of Friedland did his colors spread
In the Main Battle, which by him was led.
Count Henrick Holck Felt Marshall for that day
In the Left Wing his Banner did display.
Here diverse Nations had from Countries far
Been sent to try the Fortune of the War.
There might you see the Austrian, whose Name
Is branded with an execrated Fame,
For that their Princes in ambitious rage
Did with these wars the Germane Lands engage;
And to enrich themselves with others spoil,
So many States with discords did embroil:
The cold Hungarian, whose bord'ring lands
Are ever harried with Turkish Bands,
Who his best Cities have already won,
And half his Territories overrunne;
Though he could scarce be spared, yet here he came,
In this fierce fight to win perpetual Fame:
The bold Bohemian, whose fruitful soil
Had been the stage of bloody Mars erewhile,
Who had them taught to think most dangerous fights
But warlike sports and tragick-pleasing sights.
Next unto these was seen the Palatine,
Whose spoiled Country borders on the Rhine;
Who, as he flowing by, their ruins views,
With tears and crystal drops his banks bedews,
And grieves to think his waves could not o'rewhelm*
And quench the fires of that deplored Realm.
The stout Bavarian does likewise claim
Within this catalogue a noted Name:
Him did Revenge fire with a Martial spite
Gladly to try the hazard of a Fight.
The sunne-burnt Spaniards too were present there;
And if proud looks their Enemies could fear,
Sure, though but few they were, yet they alone
A greater Army would have overthrown.
The Italian, now renowned more by far
For amorous Courtship, then for skill in War,
Yet hither came, resolved for to die,
Or to defend Romes hated Monarchy.
And now, my Muse, repeat each great Commander,
That did attend Swedens Imperial Standard:
For sure it is not fit their Names should die,
Or yet in dark oblivion buried lie.
Duke Bernard, the sole Glory of the day,
The Left Wing did for their prime Guide obey.
The King himself did the Right Wing command,
And at the Head of Steinbocks Troops did stand.
The Battle was conducted by Grave Neel,
A valiant Swethe, and clad in shining steel.
Betwixt them and the Rear a complete Band
Of Musquettiers did Hinderson command,
A hardy and experienced Scot, whom Fame
Has in these wars eternis'd with a Name.
The Battle of the Rear Knipphausen led,
A Noble Soldier, and a skillful Head;
To whose fair conduct did their Enemies owe
The greatest part of their sad overthrow.
The Right Wing Bulach led, a Colonel
Of no small Spirit, as his foes can tell.
Ernest of Anhalt did the Left Wing guide,
A man in Wars well exercised and tried.
Behind their backs, and in the utmost Rear,
A Regiment of Horse reserved were,
Which are by Oeme conducted, whose stout heart
Not any dangers could have made to start.
Now had GVSTAVVS speech his soldiers fired,
And double vigor into them inspired:
Make me (says he) your Pattern; if you see
That once I shrink, I give you leave to flee.
This having spoken, without further pause,
With speedy hand his shining blade he drawn:
Then waving't over his head, he does advance
Toward his Foes with fearlesse countenance.
And now their throats those fiery Engines stretch,
Whose sound and fury such a distance reach,
And ere one can behold or see his Foe,
Does wound him deadly with a farre-sent blow.
In Aetna's sulph'rie cell enclosed does lie
(If we will credit grave Antiquity)
A Monstrous Giant, who is imprisoned there,
For that to fight against Heaven he did not fear:
As often as he turns his sides for room,
He fills Trinatria with a pitchie fume,
Disgorging from his hellish jaws such smoke
And duskie flames, as the pure air do choke.
Even thus black Lutzen for a time did shroud
Her mournful face within a pitchie cloud,
Proceeding from the Cannons fiery breath,
That never speaks less then slaughtring, wounds and death.
No sight does now appear, but the bright blaze
Which the inflamed sulph'rie dust does raise.
Here many Noble Spirits, who did scorn
To shrink for dangers, were in sunder torn
By those resistlesse Balls, whose furious Course
Cannot be stopped by any humane force.
Oh how my Muse deplores the Fates of those,
Who nothing wished but to behold their foes;
That so their Valor, when they once had tried,
Might by their Enemies be testified!
Some murdering shot their noble thoughts prevents,
And furiously their corpse in sunder rents;
And, which their manly hearts could not endure,
Kills them within a cloud of smoke obscure.
The angry Steeds, offended at the noise
That thundered from the Cannons iron jaws,
Do fling and spurn; and scarce the curbing rein
Can their proud spirits in any rank contain:
They fain would rush through midst of smoke and fire,
As if their breasts did burn with greater Ire.
The slaughtred heaps that round about them lie,
Cannot at all their Courage terrify:
The brazen Trumpet Echoes in their ears,
Whose pleasing sound does fright away all fears.
What Muse is able to rehearse or tell
What direful slaughters in this fight befell;
When humane Bodies only do oppose
Against the Cannons castle-rending blows,
Whose Fury would make hardest rocks to shiver,
Whose very sound does make the earth to quiver,
Whose hellish breath is able to command
Most firm-cemented stones to fly like sand?
Squadrons of men were too weak walls to stay
Such dreadful force, as would have found a way
Through Rocks of hardest iron, and would make
A spacious Tower with its blast to shake.
No wonder then to see the field so spread
With scatt'red limbs, and bodies stricken dead;
When as the Cannon and the Culvering
Their flaming fury round about do fling.
A murdering Curto here a rank does spoil,
And there another sweeps away a file:
A brace of Demi-cannons here does play,
Which through a squadron make a rugged way.
So blustering Boreas, when his rage he doubles,
And Sea and Land with furious motion troubles,
From sturdiest Oaks their rended branches throws,
And all the field with these his ruins strowes.
The unaffrighted Swethes marched forward still,
And up again those breaches quickly fill.
Valiant GVSTAVVS with an angry eye
Sees how his foes their greater shot did ply
With too too much advantage: for he found
Their Pieces mounted on the higher ground;
And on firm platforms the Imperialist
His Ordinance could traverse as he list,
While that the Swedish more uncertainly
Did in their motion at their Foes let fly.
The Swethes had left them now no other way
To hinder this their so unequal play,
But on their Cannons mouths to march, and so
To stop their throats, and make them overthrow
Their own defenders. For these Engines are
Of such a hellish temper, that they care
Neither for friend nor foe; but both alike
With equal slaughter will their fury strike.
In ancient fights, when as they used to advance
In their first front a square of Elephants,
Who wheresoever their unresisted force
They chanced to bend, they made an headlong course,
And with their massy Bodies over-laid
All that their fury would have checked or staid:
Sometime on their own Squadrons they would turn,
And under feet their chiefest friends would spurn
With such a vengefull Rage, as if that those
They had mistaken for their deadliest foes.
Thus in these modern Wars it often does chance,
That the loud-roaring Shot and Ordinance
Being once reverst upon their friends will thunder,
And without mercy tear their ranks in sunder.
Courage, my Hearts, cries Swethlands noble King;
And then his troops through showers of lead does bring
Just in the Cannons face, who roared and spoke
So loud, that all the neighboring Hills did quake.
But in their way a traverse ditch was made,
From whence with frequent shot their Enemies played
Full in their teeth. This trench them safe did hide,
And made them all the Swedish shot deride;
Till the provoked Swethes came storming on,
And made them wish them further off and gone.
At that same time the Crabats had a mind
To fall upon their carriages behind,
To seize upon their Arms and Ammunition,
And to blow up their Powder and Provision.
Bulach observes them with a watchful eye;
He charged them home, and made them quickly fly.
These light-armed Crabats never use to stand
For any space, and fight it hand to hand;
But if at first encounter they have mist,
They then resolve no longer to resist;
But turning faces do retire amain,
Waiting till Fortune shall be pleased again
Some fitter opportunity to send,
And then the are ready for to reoffend.
Thus the wild Hawk, whom never humane art
Has yet instructed with a constant heart,
With short and sudden flights pursues her prey,
And will not long in such an action stay:
If that she cannot win them with a snatch,
For some more fit occasion she will watch.
But while that Bulach did return his Horse
To their first station with a wheeling course,
They break their order, and had now begun
Not in fair Squadrons, but in heaps to run.
Surely it is no easy thing to force
So many Regiments of headstrong Horse
To keep a full proportion in their speed,
And not beyond their ord'red bounds proceed.
But then the Heavens, unwilling to permit
Their Foes should spy a season too too fit
To reassail them, at the instant space
Did with a vap'rie mist surround the place,
And hides them, till their confused cornets are
Ralli'd again, and made complete and square.
Thus Venus once her warlike Son did shroud
Within the circle of an hollow cloud;
Which armor, though but weak it was, prevents
The blows of Fortune, and all feared events.
Now bold GVSTAVVS and the Imperial Horse
Had met each other with an headlong course.
A Regiment they were of Cuiriassiers,
Whose complete Armor freed them from all fears.
But thou GVSTAVVS, in whose haughty breast
Not any spark of fear could ever rest,
Thy offered Armor did refuse, and chose
Thy Royal Body naked to expose
Against a storm of lead, which often does pass
Through hardest steel, through iron, and through brass.
It Is not a valiant Heart, and Coat of Buffe,
That in these wars is Armor proof enough.
Rare Jewels do deserve a costly Case,
And to be lodged within the safest place:
But Thou, the rarest Jewel of this Age,
O're-sway'd I know not by what Martial Rage,
Would not at all thy Princely limbs enclose
In any Arms, or Steel repulsing blows.
Was it because thy too too narrow Fate
The Cassiopeian star did antedate,
Whose glorious rays were seen but for a time
To be displaid over thy warlike clime?
Or was it, as w' have all conjectured since,
Our great unworthiness of such a Prince,
That thus has short'ned thy victorious days,
Which has all Europe stagg'red with amaze?
If ardent wishes might have proved charms,
Thou should have had impenetrable arms,
Of such well-temp'red Steel, and of such might,
As should a Culvering deride and slight;
As should have made a Cannons Massy Ball
Without transpiercing back again to fall;
Of firmer Metal, then that solid Plate
Which Vulcans Cyclops once did fabricate
For Venus Son, when he the Latian soil
With farre-sent wars and slaughters did embroil;
Of better temper, and compacted more
Then that same Armor which Demetrius wore,
Which the Greek Artist did so firm contrive,
That without fracture it could backward drive
A massy arrow from an Engine shot,
And never shrink, nor give, nor yield a jot.
But these our wishes of no virtue were:
They with our breath are vanished into air.
For see! Renowned GVSTAVVS murdered lies.
Here with full tears my Muse does close her eyes,
Not willing longer to behold the light;
But fain with him would vanish out of sight.
He that could never conqu'red be, is slain;
And He that never would yield, is prisoner taken.
He, upon whom the hopes of thousands stood,
Is sunk, and now lies weltring in his blood.
The Armies life is stricken with pale death:
Like-dying men they struggle (see!) for breath.
He, from whose hand was sent that cursed lead,
That with GVSTAVVS struck so many dead,
Lived not to triumph, no nor scarce to view
What he had done: a Storm of Bullets flew
Like lightning at him, and his wretched Soul
An hundred ways did from his Body roll.
But soon as e're the Imperialist had found
That Great GVSTAVVS had his mortal wound,
With doubled Fury and Couragiousnesse
The amazed Swethes they did both charge and preasse,
Who now began to shrink and backward start.
Oh! can you blame them, when the had lost their Heart;
Him, whom his Foes still feared, though he were slain,
And thought it Valor for to wound again
That Royal Corpse, whose very Breath and Name
So many Armies heretofore could tame?
Just at this time a duskie Mist did fall:
The Heavens lamented his sad Funeral,
And so amazed his Foes, that they forget
To bear away his Body: For as yet
Among a heap of slaughtred Corpse it lies;
A ruefull Spectacle to mortal eyes,
To see him laid so low, that was of Late
The glorious Head of such a mighty State.
But by this time the Swethes had recollected
Their Spirits, and now again their hearts erected.
Stollhanshe, enraged with a furious course,
Leads on a Regiment of nimble Horse,
Who gave the Imperialist a charge so hot,
And with such frequent volleys of their shot,
As they not able to endure, begun
To yield their ground, such furious blows to shun.
Then the sad Swethes did raise a mournful cry,
When on the ground their murdered King they eye;
Whose bloud-distained Corpse in heavy sort
From fury of the Battle they transport.
Meanwhile the Swedish Foot did backward beat
The Imperialist, and made them to retreat.
Grave Neels, a valiant and courageous Swethe,
That never cared for wounds, nor feared for death,
His Yellow Regiment so bravely led,
That now they might have di'd their Name quite red.
And Winckle too with his Blew Regiment
At that same time so stoutly forward bent,
That now the Wall'nsteiners did gladly choose
Their ground and Cannon both at once to lose.
But then the Mist to such a thickness grew,
That the enraged Swethes could not pursue
This their advantage; but were then compelled
To stand and pause until the mist dispelled.
At that same time a sudden strange affright
On part of the Imperial Troops did light,
That with such terror struck their courage dead,
That straight they turned their bridles, and then fled;
Not once their eyes reflecting back, to view
If any foes behind them did pursue.
Some mutt'ring tongues a fearful rumor spread,
That all their Troops were fully vanquished.
Some fifteen hundred Horse were then beheld
With swift Career to gallop out of field.
Fear taught them haste, and made them cruel too;
For in their headlong speed their friends they slew:
Their Bedets and their Women in the Rear
They trampled down, and some they killed with fear.
There many Ladies, who that day did wait
With trembling hearts upon their Husbands Fate,
Fling from their Coaches, then their Harness part;
(What will not fear enforce a tender heart?)
In Manly posture did these Females stride
Their sturdie Beasts, and so away they ride.
These fear-tormented Wights my Warlike Muse
Does scorn to follow, when none else pursues.
Return we to those Noble Hearts, who never
Would shrink a jot, though all the world should fear;
That now in midst of fire and smoke did strive
Their Enemies before them for to drive.
Now Pappenheim being come, did reinforce
The Imperial troops with new supplies of Horse:
He added Courage to their stagg'ring Bands,
And made them charge again with willing Hands.
He ranged himself in the Sinister Wing,
Which (as he thought) opposed Swethlands King.
But as his Cornets now stood ord'red fair,
And he himself did for the Charge prepare,
A Bullet from a Falconet is sent,
Whose deadly force his arm and shoulder rent:
Soon it transcoloured his shining Steel
With blood, and made this haughty Captain reel;
He that the town of Magdenburg did spoil,
And levelled all her buildings with the soil;
Whose Execrations, as we may presume,
Did hasten on his unexpected Doom.
But when his Captains and Commanders saw
Their General his latest breath to draw,
He Is slain, He Is slain, aloud they all did cry;
Then facing it about, away they fly,
Ere they had fought one stroke, or in the field
The faces of their Enemies beheld.
But those Imperials, whom his presence set
On a fresh charge, stood to it stiffly yet,
And with such massy Squadrons overlaid
The Swedish Troops, that they were backward swaid.
Here Coloredo, and Tersica too,
With Picolomini, the fight renew
With no small Fury, and with many hands
Which light upon Grave Neels and Winckles Bands.
The first of these above the knee being hurt,
His Soldiers from the Battle did transport,
Though after this he did not long survive.
And thou brave Winckle were fetched off alive
With double wounds. But thy Vice-Colonell
Was stricken down, and did not escape so well.
Though thus the Imperialist victoriously
Did for a while the Swedish Squadrons plie,
And now his Cannon had resumed again,
Which erst he lost; yet for it was he fain
TO exchange so many of his bravest men,
The flower of all his Infantrie, and then
So soon their deer-bought bargain to give over,
Which the bold Swethes quickly from them recover.
There did old Bruner on the Imperial part,
A skillful Captain, lose both life and heart.
The young Count Wall'nstein by some unknown hand
Was likewise there shot dead upon the sand.
There Fulda's Abbot di'd, whose sacred head
Was pierced by the rude and impious lead,
That never to distinguish yet would learn,
Nor be conjured a Mitre to discern
From a steel Helmet, but impartially
At all alike his unstaid force does fly.
Here had the fiercest of the Battle been,
Here likewise was the greatest slaughter seen.
The sturdie Swethes had learned to fight and die;
But never yet had learned to shrink or fly:
The ground, which erst their warlike hands defended,
They cover with their Bodies now extended.
Death well might win from them their lives; but lo,
Their ground he cannot force them to forgo.
But now Knipphausen, who with watchful eye
The slaughter of his Vantguard did descrie,
Most ready is to stop encroaching fear:
He sends them up two Brigades from the Rear:
The one Count Thurn, the other Mitzlaffe led,
Who gladly did their waving Colors spread,
And marching forward with a speedy pace,
Their now triumphing Enemies do face.
Having within a reaching distance got,
They did salute them with their thundering shot,
Which without ceasing they so roundly pli'd,
That now the Imperials hearts were terrified:
Being so lately tired, they could not
For any space endure a Charge so hot.
What could be done by Valor or by Skill,
Was there performed; they stand it out, until
The eager Swethes by force and weightinesse
Expelled them from the place they did possess.
Once more the Imperial Cannon they had won;
And turning them, to thunder now begun
Against the Wall'nsteiners. At that same hour,
Bernard, that noble Duke, with all his Power
Of Horse and Foot fiercely assails those bands
And Regiments, where Coloredo stands;
Who did as then, like some unmoved rock,
Receive the impression of his mighty shock:
At which the Duke did slacken his first heat,
And back again did orderly retreat.
But here once more the vap'rie mist descended,
And for a while both sides from blows defended.
But when this cloudie curtain drawn aside
Gave space to both the Armies to be eyed,
Wall'nstein did two of his chief Captains send
To see what now the Swethlanders intend.
At that time Bernard and Knipphausen joined,
And both together had their Troops combined:
Their shatt'red Regiments they did repair
With fresh supplies, and made them straight and square.
These Scouts returned, and to their Duke relate
How that the Swedish meant to iterate
The fight afresh and did in Battle ray
Their bloody Ensigns once again display,
And orderly were marching on amain,
Resolving for to conquer or be slain.
Duke Bernard does epsy the Imperial Horse
Retreating from them in an even course;
Then twenty Cannons did he make to roar
With such a vengefull fury, that they tore
Both Horse and Man, defaced both rank and file,
And their fair Martial order quickly spoil,
Making their troops confusedly to show,
While on the grass their mingled blood does flow;
And which before not any color knew,
But the fresh green, is di'd with purple hue.
Here the proud Steed, who scorned and spurned the ground,
Stretched dead upon the same is quiet found:
And there another, who did fiercely neigh,
And bravely did his reared crest display,
Is with a fire-wing'd bullet stricken dead,
And mangled lies without a crest or head:
Here was a file of Horsemen cut in sunder
By direful force of this resistlesse thunder,
While the untoucht Horse do start and fling about,
And so the next disorderly do rout.
The Swedish Cornets soon the advantage spy,
And with a sudden charge upon them fly.
Before it thundered; now a storm of hail
And smaller shot their stagg'ring troops does quail;
And then these haughty Cavaliers begun
With swift and more disord'red pace to run.
Their Infantrie no better then did fare;
These also by the Swethes repulsed are,
Who now pressed on, and pli'd their Volleys round,
And shouldred out the Imperials from their ground.
As when two Currents do adversely roll,
And seek each others motion to control:
A while they seem poised with an equal force,
And both alike repel their spatt'ring sourse;
Till one of them assisted with a blast,
The others waves does headlong backward cast:
Thus did the Swethes by force and Martial toil
Compel the Imperials backward to recoil.
But those that in the mud-wall'd Gardens lay,
Far more securely for a while did play,
Under protection of those earthen Banks,
Upon the Swethlanders encroaching ranks.
But they, enraged at this unequal fight,
Advanced toward them with a vengefull spite;
And like a Tempest stormed upon their trenches,
Which soon with slaught'red blood their fury drenches.
And now the Sun, wearied with this sad sight,
Began from them to hide his shining light:
He now did seem with his declining beams
To kiss the Oceans azure-colour'd streams;
When lo a rumor was dispersed by some,
That Pappenheims Foot-Regiments were come:
Duke Bernard then rallies again his Horse,
Resolved t'assail them with his utmost force.
But when the Signal was again resounded,
The cheerful Soldiers, as no whit astounded,
Strictly did each embrace his Camerade,
And, Must we charge them once again? they said;
Then let us bravely and with manly Hearts,
And like true Soldiers, act our latest parts.
Then with such rage and fury did they close,
As if they had reserved all their blows
For this last onset; and those new-come Bands
Did quickly feel their over-weightie hands:
They found that though the light did still decrease,
Yet the stout Swethes would not their fury cease.
After they had sustained for a while
Their rough encounter, and no little spoil,
They did betake them to a shameful flight
Under protection of the wings of Night,
Leaving the field to their victorious foes,
Who on the same their wearied limbs repose.
Among his wounded Friends and Enemies,
On the cold ground the conquering Soldier lies;
And never complains of so hard a Bed,
Where VICTORY her pleasing arms has spread.
FINIS.
AN ELEGY UPON THE IMMATURE AND MUCH LAMENTED DEATH OF that most Christian
Soldier and Renowned Prince, GVSTAVVS THE GREAT, King of Swethes, Goths, and
Vandals; etc.

Composed immediately after the first rumor of his death, by JOHN RUSSELL.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1634.

An Elegy upon the death of the King of SWEDEN.
WHat strange sad silence does the world astound?
Why does not Fames still echoing trumpet sound?
She Is grown forgetful, or else hoarse, I fear,
That we no more victorious sounds can hear.
'Twas but of late, when as the thundering noise
Of doubled triumphs, conquests, and applause
Filled our Horizon, and the air did ring
With shouts of praisse to Sweds victorious King.
Was this a dream and fancied apparition,
And now is vanished like a fleeting vision?
Could all the world be thus deluded? No:
'Twas surely real, and no feigned show.
Those bloody battles and those dismal fights
We lately heard, were not like vap'rie sights,
Composed of airie breath, which to the eye
Two dreadful Armies grappling do descrie.
These, these were real; and thy direful steel
(Victorious Prince) shall after-ages feel:
And those deep wounds, which in thy furious ire
Thou did inflict by force of thundering fire,
Shall leave wide scarres upon the Germane land,
Which shall for ever to their terror stand.
This thou have done already, and amazed
Remotest kingdoms, where thy deeds are blazed.
But on a sudden, lo! thou do appear
To stop in middle of thy full career:
All tongues are silent, and our greedy ears
Hear nothing now but terrors, doubts, and fears.
Or Fame her self is dead; or he that gave
Life unto Fame, is sunk into his grave.
Fame cannot die. Oh! can he die, whose look
So many thousands dead at once has struck?
What mortal durst give him a wound, whose eye
Has made grimme Death to start and turn awrie?
Sure he is not dead: Swethland for grief would roar,
And make their groans heard to our English shore,
If he were dead, whom they have prized more dear
Then their own proper lives, and did not fear
To run like Lions, at their Princes words,
Upon the mouths of Cannons, points of Swords.
He Is dead, I fear: For can he living be,
And we no spoils nor further conquests see?
Can he be living, and not heard to thunder,
To batter cities, trample kingdoms under;
Whose very soul was fire Aethereall pure,
Such as no mortal bodies can endure?
His breath was direful smoke, and from his hands
Flew showers of iron balls, that quelled whole lands.
Can that Sulphurious dust, more quick then wind,
Once touched with flame, in prison be combined?
Not steel, nor iron, nor the hardest brass
Can stay its fury for the shortest space.
Though mighty mountains pressed this living flame,
Yet would it tear them, and an entrance frame,
His Hellish breath and dismal noise to vent;
Nor would it cease, till all its furie's spent.
Thus has it been with Europes Northern Star,
And Sweds Victorious Prince, made all for war:
Whose Spirit, touched with fire from heaven, did blaze
Like to some Comet, sent for to amaze
And scourge us mortal wights; whose direful breath
Does shoot down vengeance, terrors, plagues, and death.
Had Turk, and Tartar, and the Triple Crown
That awes the Christian world, and treads down
Monarchs as slaves, themselves in one combined;
This Heav'n-sent Fury had, like lightning wind,
Shot through them all; and, like to scatt'red corn,
Their feeble squadrons had been rent and torn:
Till his Celestial vigor were quite spent,
No Wars, no Ruins could his ire content.
But now his date is out, and his Commission
Is stopped from heaven with a new Prohibition.
He Is dead. Oh bitter word, enough to make
Stones for to weep, and iron hearts to ache!
So soon? alas! in so unwisht an hour
Is all our joy quelled by some secret power?
Why do not we then breathe such doleful groans,
And pour such melting tears, as should hard stones
Dissolve into salt drops; that they and we
Might so express one mournful Elegy?
What! are we spent and dry? I see no tears;
I hear no groans; no wailings pierce my ears.
Oh pardon me! I fear my faltring tongue,
Distract with troubled sorrow, does you wrong.
It Is slender grief that does by weeping vent;
And it is not much that can by tears be spent.
But this, this sorrow, like a mortal wound,
Strikes deep, and does our senses quite astound;
Lies like a lump of lead or heavy weight
Upon our heart, and pincheth it so strait,
That neither sigh nor groan can issue thence;
But lies as dead, and quite bereft of sense.
Since then it is so we cannot weep; let us borrow
From others help, so to express our sorrow.
Ye glistring lamps above, ye Northern stars,
That roll about the Pole your frozen Carres;
In Thetis waves plunge over head and ears,
That ye may have your fill of brinish tears,
And by sad influence make the heavens to lowre,
And to the earth send down a weeping shower;
But chiefly on that place, that cursed ground,
Where Adolph first received his mortal wound.
Let never grass nor verdant herb grow there;
Nor any tree, nor ground it self appear.
Let it be all a lake, whose face may look
Just like the color of the Infernal brook;
Like pitchie Styx, or black-stream'd Acheron;
Or like Cocytus, or dark Phlegethon:
That it may seem to all a mourning vail,
That does the surface of that ground empale.
And let its murmuring waves make such a noise,
As may express to us the doleful voice
Of some that cry, that roar, that shriek, that groan;
Of some that mourn, that weep, that wail, that moan:
That after-ages to their children may
Tell this sad story, when they pass that way;
These souls do mourn for Swethlands conquering King:
But these, whose clamours fearfully do ring,
Are such as in this place di'd by his power,
And thus express their horror to this hour.
Meanwhile, Renowned Prince, sleep thou secure,
No further pains nor travels to endure.
The dreadful Cannons, which so often did roar
And thunder in thy ears, shall now no more
Disturb thy rest, nor force thee to arise
In sudden haste: glut now with sleep thine eyes,
While that a Quire of Angels in a ring
Shall round about thee blessed music sing.
FINIS.
EPICEDIVM, SIVE Carmen Funebre, GVSTAVI ADOLPHI, Suecorum, Gothorum, and
Vandalorum, etc. Regis Invictissimi MEMORIAE SACRVM.
QUisquis es, and tumuli spectas haec Marmora nigri,
Quae cernas, oculis perlege flebilibus.
Ille, cui vivo libarunt sanguinis undas,
Defunctus lacrymas vendicat (ecce!) tuas.
Nonne vides, madidis ut splendent Marmora guttis?
Sudorem lapidum forsitan esse putas:
Sive repercussos quos frigida saxa vapores
Duritie nimia congenuere sua.
Ah! non sunt. Sacris, Spectator, credito Musis:
Sunt lacrymae, atque oculis debita rapta piis.
Ne numerum stupeas: tota hic Europa dolores
(Ut cernas) madidos egemuere suos.
Et, nisi quod Pietas vetet hoc, mactare parassent
Ad tumulum vitas millia multa suas.
Nil minus in campo tecum, GVSTAVE, libenter
Magna Caterva (vides) occubuisse velint:
Et, quo descendas ad Regna Inferna triumphans,
Victorisque instar clara Trophaea feras;
Captivorum Vmbrae moeste tua Signa sequuntur:
Implentur diris Tartara nigra sonis.
Invidia and lacrymis iterum sibi vulnera figunt;
Et misere subeunt bis sua Fata necis.
Sed tu magnanima cinctus, GVSTAVE, cohorte,
Faustis and niveis pergito vectus equis;
Donec in Elysii campis spatieris amoeni:
Illic Heroum turba beata manent.
Secula felices ducunt sine fine futura,
Aeternisque ardent pectora laetitiis:
Et feriunt aures mortalibus usque negati
Ca^^us, Siderei quos sonuere Poli.
Haec mihi divino retulit spiramine Phoebus,
Et jussit numeris reddere nota meis;
Ne Suecus, vel qui GVSTAVI funera deflent,
Immersi lacrymis in sua Fata ruant.
Qui visus fuerat violento Numine raptus,
Et quasi devictus succubuisse neci,
In nova migravit felicia Regna; Triumphat,
Ostentans Stygiis magna trophaea diis:
Inter and Heroas, and coetum Semideorum,
Jam ducat laetos and sine fine Choros.
J. R.

DIALOGVS. Vmbra GVSTAVI ADOLPHI, and Fama.
Umb. QVo ducis? Quo Fama juvat volitare? recessus
Quos petis ignotos? Patrias jam liquimus oras.

Fam. Me duce carpe viam: seeds tibi Fama beatas
Ostendet. Petimus divisos orb Britannos.
Non unus Suecum GUSTAVO sufficit orbis.

Umb. Siste fugam; satis est nobis: de Marmore surgit
In Patria Tumulus; celso struxere Columnas
Vertice subnixas, Monumentaque splendida fulgent.

Fam. Quae Monumenta sonas? memoras quae Marmora?
GUSTAVI Manes angusto pixide condi.
Fama and Fata vetant: long meliora parantur Sordent
Ossibus (en!) Monumenta tuis: non fictilis urna
Te capit; at Musis descripta volumina sacris
Nomina GUSTAVI aeterno splendore fovebunt.
Optatas jamjam Musarum attingimus oras.
Cernis, ut irriguis stagnare paludibus undae
Contendunt, geminoque procul Mons vertice surgit?
Pieridum ille cluit Parnassus. Limpidus amnis,
Deliciae Phoebi, doctis hic labitur undis.
Hic Vatem, GUSTAVE, tuum spectato sonorum,
Cui mentes animumque afflarunt Numina sancta.
Cernis, ut incedit sudans stipante caterva
Pieridum? Flammis (en!) luxuriantur ocelli:
Oratument. Furit haud aliter Cumaea Sibylla,
Fatidicos quoties ignes inspiret Apollo.
Ecce locum sparsum foliis, ubi Fata recondit
Inclyta GUSTAVI, mediisque insculpat ovantem
Te spoliis. Juvat has late dispergere Chartas,
Nomina GUSTAVI resonent ut murmr rauco
Et Sylvae, and Venti: responsans accinet Echo.
Jam patrias seeds repetasque cubilia terrae:
Et dum Terra Parens cupidis circundabit ulnis
Ossa, gemens secum tua Fata suprema volutet;
Insuetosque halitus, tanquam suspiria, mittat,
Percutiensque sinum tremulo eructabit hiatu.

J. S. Magd. Coll.

FINIS.

