A BRIEF TREATISE AGAINST DETRACTORS OF DIGNITIES.

Published BY RA: RVGBIE Esquire.

Allowed by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by George Eld. 1622.

AGAINST DETRACTORS OF DIGNITIES.
NImium admiror vestram hanc insolentiam, Tho: Walsingham page 21 n. 30.
eo quod sapientium ministerium, and gradus vsurpastis, sapientiae autem
studium, and operam neglexistis; It was a saying of King Aelfrea's unto
certain persons, which did take upon them to judge without learning, and may
be well applied to those, who question Dignities, and presume to censure Statum
and Dignitatem Baronettorum, thus without any true Precedent, or ground. It is
showed in the book published by his Majesty touching the Creation of
Baronets: The Book published by his Majesty, touching the creation of
Baronets, page 19. printed 1611.
That there is nothing of honor, or value, which is sought, or desired (be the
motives never so good) but may receive scandal from some, who wanting the same
good affection to the public, or being in other considerations incapable, can
be contented out of envy to those, that are so preferred, to cast aspersions
and imputations upon them: And out of which of these, or whether from them all
this proceeds I know not: but certain I am, great was their error, to reach at
prerogatives so transcendent, and of this high mystery: when as no
Democraticall government could ever ascend unto it, it being an Imperial
right, due only to Monarchs to dispose of Dignities. Regnerus Sixtinus de Iure
rega: ca. 2.
Estius Regalium, vel ius Imperij, creandi Magistratus, dandi Insignia
Nobilitatis, sive Nobiles creandi, ad famam and honores restituen di: Regnerus
Sixtinus de Iure Rega: And herewith agrees the Act of 31. of King H: 8. Stat:
31. H: 8. cap: 10.
That it appertains to the Kings Prerogative Royal to give such honor,
reputation, See also Smiths Common wealth of England, page: 28. and 48. accord
and place as to his most excellent wisdom shall seem meet. Wherein his
Majesty has that absolute power, that if it had pleased his Highness, there
might have been as well inserted the like Clause in their Letters Patents, for
the Creation of this Dignity, as was formerly in a Charter made by his Royal
Auncester King H: 7. sct. 2. Part Patent: anno 1. H: 7. memb. 21.
Quod Rex non vult arguendum, communicandum, aut disputandum, per quoscunque.
The which follows the opinion of Bracton, Justice, Bracton f: 6. and f: 34.
in the time of King H. 3. sct. De Chartis Regijs, and factis Regum, non
debent, nec possunt privatae personae disputare. And that it is against the
duty of a subject, to deteriorate his Highness Prerogative. See the Mirror of
Justice, The Mirror of Justice, cap. 5.
that by the ancient Common Law of England, It was held a crime against
Majesty: And that he was perjured against the oath of a Subject, See the Stat:
36. E: 3. cap: 16. The care had for preservation of the rights of the Crown.
who did any way substract, or diminish the Rights, or Prerogatives of the
King: Yet that these nevertheless will impugn his Majesty's Prerogative, and
disable his Highness in that power his Royal Progenitors had: This shows they
did not as the wise men of the East, (in Math. 2. Math: 2. Dier f: 94. Seldom
Hon: page: 208. Co: li: 7. f. 33. Ranulphus of Chester f: 387. Camden Brit: page:
165. and 167.
) follow the right star. Did not King E: 3. create Dukes, and King R: 2.
Marquesses to be hereditary Dignities, to precede, and go before Earls, and
Barons, that were far auncienter? Did not afterward King H: Davis Report: f:
60. Co: li: 9. f: 124.
6. create Viscount's to be an hereditary Dignity likewise, and gave them the
place and precedence of Barons? Was not also the Institution of the Order of
the Garter, Smiths Commonwealth, page 25. Camden Brit. page 171. 172. Seldom
Hon. page 353. 359. 362.
and Banneret's created by E: 3. and Knights of the Bath by H: 6. Mils page 24.
to take place of Knights Bachelors? and yet were they subsequent Dignities
unto them. And has not the place been ever given at the Prince his pleasure,
and sometimes the Precedencie before them of the same degree, though they were
after them created. Vide Rot: Parl; 23. Chapter a. 23. H. 6. memb. 26. n. 24. See
Camden Brit. page 570.
H: 6. where King H: 6. granted to Henry Earl of Warwick, And it appears in
the Cha. ab anno 27. vsque 37. H. 6. n. 24. and Orig. 31. H. 6 Rot. 27. That
afterward H. 6. created Edmond Hadham Earl of Richmond, and to take his place
as the first Earl of England.
this Preeminence to be the first, and chief Earl of England, and to carry
this Style, sct. Henricus Praecomes totius Angliae, and Comes Warwici, and
afterward created him Duke of Warwick, and by these express words of his
Patent, granted that he should take his place in Parliament, and elsewhere,
Camden Brit. page: 570.
next unto the Duke of Norfolk, and before the Duke of Buckingham: Chapter 25. and
26. H. 6 memb. 31.
Vide 25. and 26. H: 6. Humfridus Stafford Dux Buckingham, quod sit primus
Ducum in Anglia. Billae signatae anno 21. and 22. H. 8.
See 21. and 22. H: 8. a Grante to Anne Rochford of the Dignity of
Marchioness of Penbroke, to take her place before all of her rank, excepting
the Kings Issue: Vide 18. Pat. 18. H. 6. part 2. memb. 20. and 23. H. 6. This
was the first honorary, and hereditary Viscount after the Conquest.
H: 6. Rex 120 die Februarij concessit Iohanni Domino de Beaumont, nomen
Vicecomitis de Beaumont, cum 20. marcis percipiendis annuatim sibi, and
haeredibus suis masculis; and quod habeat locum ante, and supra omnes
Vicecomites fiendos, sive creandos, and haeredes, and filios omnium Comitum, ac
sedem, and honore^ immediate, and proxime Comitibus regni Angliae, in
Parliame^tis: etc. Vide a: 2. Part Pat. an. 1. E. 4. memb. 13.
1. E: 4 Robertus Botill Prior Hospitalis sancti Iohannis Jerusalem. in Anglia,
See also Seldom Hon. page 283.
primus Baro Regni Angliae, etc. Pat. anno 5. H. 3. memb. 5.
Et vide a: 5. H: 3. Rex etc. salutem: Obtentu dilecti Militis nostri Domini
Rogeri de Leyburne, volentes ipsum propter ipsius grata merita, and accepta
servitia culmini nostro gratanter impensa benigno favore prosequi, and
dilectione; vniversitatem vestram affectuose rogamus, quatenus ipsum vbicunque
locorum, de caetero tanquam nostrum Militem ob nostram reverentiam honor
debito velitis prosequi, and gratia speciali, etc. Has not his Majesty the
like power? And wherein is this creation of Baronets more grievous, and
hurtful, then those former hereditary Dignities were? Was there ever any
exception taken to them? No not any. It is said only that King R: 2. Camden
Brit. page 165. and. 217.
made John of Beaufort son to John of Gaunt, Seldom Hon. page 217.
and Earl of Somerset Marquess of Dorset; of which he was afterward
deprived by King H: 4. And when a Petition was in Parliament by the Commons for
his restitution, he most humbly prayed the King, that in regard the name of
Marquess was a strange name in this Kingdom, that he would not restore him
to it, neither would he willingly accept thereof: which for your better
satisfaction herein, there is here exemplified the Record it self, in haec
verba, sct. Rotulo Parliamenti, Parl. 4. H. 4. memb. 18. Art. 18
a: 4. H: 4. n: 18. Le lundy lo 6. jourde November. les Commons viendrent devant
le Roi, and les Snrs. en Parliament, and enter autres chooses, et matires
illonques monstrez, et parlez; Mesme les Commons humblament recomendantz les
bone, et honorable port, et governance del Conte de Somerset, prierent au Roi,
que mesme le Conte, purroit estre restore a ses nosme, et honor de Marquis,
queux il avoit per devant, de quel prier, le Roi, et le Snrs. enuntierent les
dits Coe^s. Et le Roi lour desoit quil voiloit estre avise, et ent fair ceo
que luy sembleroit pur le mieux touchant cel matire, Et sur ceo le dit Conte
engenulant, mult humblament pria au Roi, que comme le nosme de Marquis feuist
estrange nosme en cest Roialme, quil ne luy voiloit ascunement doner cel nosme
de Marquis; quar jammais per congie du Roi il ne voiloit porter n'accepter sur
luy null tiel nosme, en ascun manner: mais nient meins le Conte molt cordialment
remercia les Snrs. et les Coe^s de lour bone coers, et volente en celle party.
And herewithall whosoever will observe: first how the said John of Beaufort
Earl of Somerset obtained this Dignity of Marquis a: 21. R: 2. Secondly, that
in Parliamt a: Rot. Parl. anno 21. R. 2.
1. H: 4. He was there dishonored, Rot. Parl. anno 1. H. 4.
and deprived of this Dignity. Lastly, the Kings answer to his said Petition
made by the intercession of the Commons in Parliament, a: 4. H: Rot. Parl. a.
4. H. 4.
4 That he would be advised, and do that which should seem unto him the best
in that behalf; he may then plainly discern, in what manner he did refuse
it. Yet admit he did, what will they conclude of this, that because one has no
stomach, therefore others must fast also: I think few will like of this
reason. And though in distribution of Honors, his Majesty is not limited, or
tied to Precedent, but being the fountain of Honor may create what Dignities
he pleases, and may as well confer Honors upon any man, Davis Reports f. 25.
as he may give value, or worth to any metal to make it of esteem, and
current: Yet it is easy to prove (what opinions soever there are to the
contrary) that the name of Baronet is no strange name in this Kingdom. Camden
Brit. page 171. Seldom Hon. page 354. and 355.
13 E. 3. and appears, clans. de anno 15. E. 4. memb. 11. pro Willo^. Norreys
Milite liberate.
Vide temp. E. 3. Thomas de Bradeston per Regem E: 3. 15. Octobris anno regni
sui 13. factus Baronettus; cui, vt ipse statum Baronetti eo decentius
manutenere queat, Rex dedit 500. marcas annuas habendas sibi, etc. See also the
printed Stat: of 13. R: 2. ca: 1. and 14. R: 2. ca: 11. 2. Stat. 13. R. 2. cap.
1. and 14. R. 2. cap. 11.
for Baronets, and vide anno 24. H: 6. Originale de anno 24. H. 6. Rot. 31.
Aquiten.
Rex 18. die Septembris concessit Raimundo de Pys Baronet Capitan: and
balliagium de Sauvetere, habend' pro termino vitae suae ad valorem 4. li. per
annum. See also the book case of 35. H: 6. for Baronet. 35. H. 6. f. 46.
It appears also by certain Court-rols, and Evidences in E: 4. time, Temp. E.
4. These remain in the hands of one Mr. Gittins of Burntwood in Essex.
that one Sir William Craiford of Mungham in Kent, had then, and therein, the
title, and addition of Baronet Vide 4. and 5. H: 8. Billae signatae annis 4.
and 5. H. 8.
Rex Omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. See also Holinshed Chron. page n. (his 3.
volume for 322. 40. a. Baronets. 331. 30 b. Baronets. 359. 60. a. Baronets.
373. 60 a. Baronets. 384. 10. a. Baronets. 865. 10. b. Baronets.
Sciatis quod nos defidelitate, providentia, strenuitate, et industria,
diligentiaque, et experientia, ac integritate charissimi Consanguinei, et
Consiliarij nostri Georgij Comitis Salop: Senescalli Hospitij nostri, ac
Militis Ordinis nostri Garterij plurimum confidentes: cundem locum tenentem
nostrum generalem, Ducemque primarium, and gubernatorem totius primae acici, et
exercitus, ac Armatae nostrae, favente altissimo, ad parts exter as
profecturae, ac omnium, et singulorum Capitaneorum, vicecapitaneorum, et
locatenentium, Baronum, Baronettorum constituimus, Billae signatae anno 4. E.
6. and Originale de eodem anno, Rot. 20. and 9. part Paten. 4. E. 6.
etc. vide 4. E. 6. Rex etc. Cum in consideratione fidelis, et acceptabilis
servitij nobis per dilectu^ servientem nostrum Radul: Fane Militem in guerris
nostris, quam aliter antehac facti, et impensi, idem Radu^s ad Statum, Gradum,
Honorem, et Dignitatem Baronetti per nos erectus, suscitatus, et creatus
extiterit, Billae signata anno 1. Maria Reginae.
etc. Et vide 1. Maria; Willielmus Howard Miles Dominus Howard de Effingham,
magnus Admirallus Angliae, Wallia, Hiberniae, Normanniae, Gasconiae, et
Aquitaniae fit locum-tenens generalis; Duxque primarius, et Gubernator totius
Classis armatae nostrae regiae, in quibuscunque partibus super mare, ad
tuitionem, et defensionem Amicorum nostrorum profecturae, ac omnium, et
singuloru^ Navium, Capitaneorum, et locum-tenentium, Baronum, Baronettorum,
etc. Yet notwithstanding the testimony of these, and others, I will not
affirm, that the distinct, and hereditary Dignity of Baronets was ever known
unto us, before the Creation of them by our present Sovereign: See 2. Stat. 5.
R. 2. ca. 4. in the Abridgements of Stat. for Baronet, and in the Stat. at
large Baneret, and ye shall also find the same person in one and the
selfsame Record, sometimes written Baronet, and sometimes Baneret. For which
see that of Bradeston, 13. E. 3.
For I am not ignorant of the opinions of the learned concerning the former,
that Baronulus, Baronettus, et Banerettus, were aunciently all one, and were
promiscuously used for Banerets. Touching this kind of hereditary Knighthood,
See Mils page 24. that there are hereditary Knights at this day in Italy.
which (say they) was never before heard of, see the Patents in 13. Rot. Vascon
13. E. 3. memb 13. For this also you have an Author entitled, The Treasury of
Times, page 527. herewith concurring.

And it is further proved ex claus. 7. R. 2. memb. 32. in dorso.


E: 3. unto William de la Pole, and the like unto Bradeston; which shows that
Banerets were then hereditary, and that for maintenance of their Dignity, lands
were given unto them and their heirs. And our ancient feodary Knights, Math.
Paris page 1249. Stat. 1. E. 2. 7. H. 6. f. 14. 15. See Camdens Brit. page 174.

That they fined for not being knighted. See also Seldom Hon. page 319. 320.

Vide Dorso clausarum de anno 3. H. 3. memb. 24. Quisquis Laicus plenae
aetatis, qui feodu^ vnius Militis tenet, and Miles non est, arma capiat, and se
Militem fieri faciat, sicut feodum vel feoda sua diligit.


here in England, were in a manner hereditary: For, if a Knights fee which was
20. li. land per annu^, had descended unto one, he was compellable to take, and
it seems, of right might have demanded a Knighthood, and also the arms, and
equipage of Knighthood, which belonged to a Knights Fee; That is to say, His
Horse, Seldom Hon. page 321. 322.
Spear, Sword, and Target was to descend unto the heir, and not to go to the
executors, as it is of other personal things. For this read likewise Roger
Hoveden. Roger Hoveden page 611. 614.
The Constitutions under King H: 2. sct. Quicunque habet Feodu^ vnius Militis,
habeat loricam, et Cassidem, See Ranulphus f. 61. and in the end of the old
Mag. Char. f. 168. and Seldom Hon. page 278. That of these Knights fees, there
were aunciently in this Kingdom many thousands, and of Baronies 250. at one
time.
and clypeum, and lanceam, and omnis Miles habeat tot loricas, cassides,
clypeos, and lanceas quot habuerit feoda Militum in Dominio suo, and si quis
haec habens arma obierit, arma sua remaneant haeredi suo, and si haeres de tali
aetate non sit, quod armis vti possit, si opus fuerit, ille eum qui habebit in
custodia, habeat similiter custodiam armorum, and inveniat hominem, qui armis
vti possit in servitio Domini Regis, si opus fuerit, donec haeres de tali
aetate sit, Vide Fleta li. 9. ca. 9.
quod arma portare possit, tunc ea habeat. By which also, as by this that
follows out of Bracton, and others, it appears, Bracton fol. 5.
that from our ancient Nobility arose the principal strength, and fasegard
of this Land, Vide Rot. Parl. anno 21. R. 2. viz. Pur ceo que le greinder
supportation de chescun Realm consiste des dignes person's de state, and de
honor que purront enforcer, and fortifier le Scepter du Roi, etc.

See also the Preambles of Letters Patents for creation of Dignities accord.


(who writes thus of those that were in his time,) Comites, quia a Comitatu,
sive societate nomen sumpserunt, qui etiam dici possunt Consules a consulendo,
Reges enim tales sibi associant, ad consulendum, Vide Hotoman, li. 1. Feud.
Tit. 1.. 1. and tit. 7. Alij sunt Capitanei Regni, quo verbo Duces, Comites,
Marchiones, intelliguntur.
and regendum populum Dei, ordinantes eos in magno honor, potestate, and
nomine, quando accingunt eos gladijs: Gladius autem significat defensionem
Regni, and Patriae: Sunt and alij Potentes sub Rege, Vide Bracton, li. 2. ca.
34. f. 76. Nisi capitale Mesuagium illud sit caput Baroniae propter ius Gladij,
etc.

See Camden Brit. page 175. Knight aunciently the name of charge, and function.


qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est Robur belli: Sunt and sub Rege Milites, sct. ad
Militiam exercendam electi, vt cum Rege, and supradictis militent, and
defendant Patriam, and Populum Dei, etc. And as you have heard how by these
Dignities, and Persons of Honor, this Kingdom was aunciently fortified, and
defended, so shall you likewise find, that by this increase of Dignity, there
will be an increase of strength to the Commonwealth; and that these will be
eminent, whenas others peradventure of greater ability, Vide Johan. Basanum,
li. 2. page 125. Sicut Coelum stellis, sic terra Nobilibus, and heroicis
personis insignitur.
will neither desire, nor deserve Honor, but rather seek obscurity to shun
the charges of the Commonweal; then be discovered, upon the Act of 33. By
this Act of 33. H. 8. ca. 5. Certain persons nobled are to find a horse for
service, and such whose wives shall wear, any silk, or Velvet, gold, pearl,
or precious stone.
of King H: 8. to find Arms for defense of their Country, though it were in
time of greatest necessity. And that the public good is advanced by this
addition of Honor, hear also the opinion of a principal Secretary to King E:
6. who holds, Smiths Commonwealth of Engl. page 29.
that the more Dignities there are, the better it is for the Commonwealth: For
says he, the Gentleman is more charged then the Yeoman, which he bears the
gladlier, and dare not gainesay it, for to save, and keep his honor, and
reputation, and in any Show, or Muster, or other particular Charge of the place
wherein he is resident, as for the poor, or otherwise, he opens his purse
wider, and augments his portion above others, or else he does diminish his
reputation. For this you may read him at large. To return to the matter, and
to answer him who holds that this Dignity of Baronets is against the Law,
because no hereditary Dignity (as he would have it) can be entailed within the
Statute of Westmr. 2. Stat. Westmr. 2 ca. 1.
but it must have relation to a Realtie, and have lands to go therewith: I
confess his opinion may well agree with the phrase in our writs; Quod injuste,
Register of Writs, f. 196.
et sine judicio cepit, etc. And according to this vain runs his tongue, F.
na. br. f. 177.
but not with the Law: For unless it were by him, See Co. li. 7. f. 33.
it was never so adjudged: And he may learn thus much, that constructions of
Dignities are not always taken according to the strict rules of the
Common Law: Nor if you are to try the right of a Dignity, shall it be tried by
Jury; Co. li 11. f. 1. Mils page 71.
neither do the Maxims, Vide Rot. Parl. apud Westmr. anno 27. H. 6. memb. 4.
Art. 18.
or grounds in Law, hold in matter of Honor, for there is no copercenary of a
Dignity; Bracton li. 2. cap. 34. f. 76. Mils page 27. See also the Customs of
Normandy, f. 120. Mils page 76.
nor have you a Tenant by the courtesy of a Dignity: neither is there
Possessio fratris of a Dignity: Co. li. 3. f. 42.
No more can a Dignity be transferred, though it be given to a man and to his
heirs. And whereas it is objected, that Baronets being an hereditary Dignity,
if they fall into poverty, they and their heirs shall notwithstanding take the
place of Knights. I answer, that this is a chance incident unto all Dignities,
and to Knighthood also: yet that there is a remedy for this, and the like
grievance, they may understand, that if the possessions of any persons nobled
are so decayed, Smiths Commonwealth of England, page 21. 22. Mils page 29.
that they have not wherewith to support their Dignity, there is a means to
deprive them of it. Rot. Parl. anno 17. E. 4.
See how in 17. E: 4. John Marquis Montague, and George Duke of Bedford, were
by Act of Parliament degraded of all honorable Titles in these words, sct.
Whereas before this time, the King our Sovereign Lord, for the great love, and
zeal he bare to John Nevill, late named Marquis Montague, and other
considerations him moving, did erect and make George Nevill the eldest son of
the said Marquis, to be Duke of Bedford: And at that time, for the great love,
that his said Highness bare to the said John Nevill, purposed, and intended to
have given to the said George for sustentation of the same Dignity sufficient
livelihood: and for the great offenses, unkindness, and misbehavings that the
said John Nevill has done, and committed to his said Highness (as is openly
known) he has no cause to depart any livelihood unto the said George: And
forasmuch as it is openly known, that the said George has not, nor by
inheritance may have any Livelihood to support the said Name, Estate, and
Dignity, or any name of Estate. And oftentimes it is seen, that when any Lord
is called to high estate, and has not livelihood conveniently to support the
said Dignity, it induces great poverty, and indigence, and causes
oftentimes great extortion, embracery, and maintenance to be had, to the great
trouble of all such Countries, where such Estate shall happen to inhabit:
Wherefore the King by the advice, and consent of his Lords, spiritual, and
temporal, and of the Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, has ordained, established, and enacted, that from
henceforth the said erection, and making of Duke, and all the names of Dignity
given to the said George, or to the said John Nevill his father, be from
henceforth void, and of none effect: And that the said George, and his heirs,
from henceforth be no Dukes, nor Marquesses, Earls, nor Barons, for no
erection, or creation before made: But that the name of Duke, and Marquis,
Earl, and Baron, in him, and his heirs, cease, and be void, and of none
effect (the said Erection, or Creation notwithstanding. Ye shall also read in
Nevils Case reported of by Sir Edw: Co. li. 7. f. 33. and 34. Quinetiam si
posteaquam electus esset Senator Censum labefactasset, Ordinem amittebat.
Sigonius de antiquo iure Civiu^ Romans li. 2. ca. 2.
Coke, that, As in ancient times the Senators of Rome were elected a Censu, of
their Revenues: so, in former times in conferring of Nobility here with us;
there was respect had unto their Revenues, by which their Dignity and
Nobility might be supported, and maintained; through the want whereof great
mischief may ensue: Britton f. 68. 29, E. 3. f. 42. 11. H. 4. f. 15. 1. H. 5.
f. 14. 14. H. 6: f. 2. Co. li. 6. f. 52.
For no Capias lies against a Lord of the Parliament, Id solum privilegium
habent Nobiles a regibus in gratificationem obsequium Reipublicae. Molin.
Tract. 2. page 1456.
in that the Law presumes he has sufficient freehold ad sustinendum nomen, and
onus, and wherewith to satisfy either debt, or trespass; the which wanting,
all remedy in such case fails: Therefore Antiquity has set down a
Competencie of livelihood for these degrees following, Co. li. 9. f. 124.
sct. 12. Plough-lands for a Knights fee, as sufficient to maintain the degree
of Knighthood: 13. Co. li. 7. f. 33. and 34.
Knights fees to be a convenient living for a Baron: 20. for an Earl: 26. for
a Marquis: 40. for a Duke. According to which, his Majesty has likewise been
pleased to set down the revenue of a Baronet, The Book published by his
Majesty touching Baronets, page 17. printed 1611.
to be 1000. li. land per annum de claro, of Inheritance, whereof two parts at
the least to be in possession, and the third in reversion. And though true it
is, that, Vtilior est sapientia cum divitijs conjuncta: Lamb. Peramb. page 368.
Yet it is not hereby intended, Qui vtiliter, and decenter Magistrate fungi
debent, sint divites bonis animi, doctrinae, iustitiae, sapientiae, pietatis
auro abundent. Plato li. 7. de Repub.
that virtue is measured by the acre, or that it consists in riches: For
strength is not always found by greatness, Fulbeck li. vlt. ca. 9. f. 67.
nor in multitude, no more is inward ability by outward wealth: See Stat. 18.
H. 6. ca. 11. 9. E. 2. 4. E. 3. 9. 5. E. 3. 4. 14. E. 3. 8. 1. H. 8. 8. 3. H.
8. 2. 35. H. 8. 6. 2. E. 6. 32. and Stat. 27. Eliz. cap. 6.
Nor were those Laws which require freehold in Justices, Shierieves, Coroners,
Escheators, Jurors, Register of Writs, f. 178. 12. H. 7. f. 4.
and Bailiffes of Liberties, made out of any other respects, then merely to the
end, that if these transgress in their office, or duty, they should render
satisfaction for it, as well by their estates, as otherwise. To conclude,
seeing it is his Highness pleasure to create this Dignity, and in that, it is
lawfully granted, and is no way more preiudicious in the continuance, then any
other former hereditary Dignity is, or has been: And it so being, that his
Majesty, who is the chief Judge of virtue, and merit, is pleased to esteem
them worthy of this Dignity, it is not for you nor any then to dispute it. See
Sir Drue Duries Case, Co. li. 6. f. 73. 74.
that if the King knighteth one within age: who is unable to do Knights
service, Tout's sont conclude a dira le contrary de ceo, pur ceo, quant le
Roi, que est le sovereigne, and supreme Judge de Chivalrie, ad dubbe luy
Chivaler; il per ceo ad adiudge luy able. See likewise the ancient Laws of
this Land, both before, See Ranulphus f. 61. Saxon in his description of
England, cap. 71. Britton f. 49. b. Bal. l. Obser. Petrus Geral. in suis
Singular. 33.
and since the Conquest; and also the Civill-Law, against traducing of Honor,
or Worship. And see 2, 2. Pet. 2.10. in the last Translation. Jude 8.
of Peter 2.10. Presumptuous are they, selfwilled, they are not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities. Camdens Remains page 138.
See Camdens Remains, or in the Code of Theodosius; Codicis Theodos. li. 6.
Tit. 5.
Tit. Vt Dignitatum ordo servetur: Si quis indebitum sibi locum vsurpaverit,
nulla ^e ignoratione defendat, sitque plane sacrilegij reus.

FINIS.

