A SACRED MEMORY OF THE MIRACLES wrought by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Written by Samuel Rowlands.

JOHN. 10: If you believe not Me, believe the works that I do,

depiction of Christ performing miracles

LONDON. Imprinted by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at his house by Saint
Annes Church near Aldersgate. 1618.

TO ALL SORCERERS, ENCHAVNTERS, CHARmers, Nigromancers, Coniurers, Magitians,
Southsayers, Witches, Fortunetellers; And all the rest of the Devils Iuglers,
Whatsoever, and Wheresoever.
MOnsters of men, whose souls damnation claymes,
Appear, come forth, and answer to your names;
Like Pharao's black Enchaunters all assemble,
And like unto his drowned host, all tremble:
What are the wonders that you undertake?
But lying signs, amazed fools to make,
The mere illusions, false and fained shows,
Which Satan's power upon his sons bestows;
A miracle, most truly to define,
Is a rare work, wrought by sole power divine.
Apparently against th'instinct we find
Of any course in Natures cause or kind:
And in it self a true work it must be,
Most sensible, and visible to see:
Not on Illusion to deceive the eye;
Such as the Devil still deludeth by;
Neither is it celerity of hand,
No Iuglers tricks with miracle will stand,
Actiuity containing what they do;
And mere deceit the only help thereto:
The miracles of God no such things need;
But are most real true in power and deed:
Those wonders which the Lord himself has done,
And miracles of Jesus Christ his Son,
All by the Prophets and Apostles wrought;
Do utterly confound, and bring to naught
The counterfeites of Satan and his route,
Which they even like Gods apes do go about,
And therefore when strange things to sense appear,
To know the power, and be resolved clear,
(Whether it do proceed from that great might,
Which only works miracles aright)
Examine if in actions true esteem,
It be a work, or only so do seem;
A work that rarely is admirde of all,
Which for distinction sake, I rare do call,
Because of Gods great works, some usual be,
Which all of us, do ordinary see,
As is the preservation of mankind,
This every one continually does find,
By Gods eternal counsel and decreeing;
In him we live, and move, and have our being;
But since it is effected day and hour,
By his great provident protecting power,
No Miracle this properly is found,
That with amazement does man's sense confound;
For miracles have in them operation,
To overcome the mind with admiration;
As when our Savior Christ wrought miracle*
The holy blessed Evangelists do tell
The Effect thereof, thus present did befall;
The people were with fear astonished all,
And said; How can he that a Sinner is,
Perform the works of such a power as this?
Thereby insinuating, there was none
Could work true miracles, but God alone:
Vanish therefore like vapors of the night,
You that would rob the Lord, of power and might,
Confounded be all Hell Hounds, howl and bark,
And fall as Dagon fell before the Arc,
Idolaters, that unto senseless things,
Will give the honor of the King of Kings.
You Coniurers with circle and triangle,
That boast you can the fiends of hell outwrangle,
And make them come obedient at your call,
Herein old Satan does deceive you all:
For is he such a friend to come at beck,
Or can you overrule him with a check?
No, you are much mistaken; by this way,
He does misguide, and lead your souls astray:
You that depend on miracles and signs,
And will see wonders ere you be Divines:
Know all the miracles that Jesus wrought:
Confirm that doctrine his Apostles taught:
And they which do rely upon the same,
Within the Book of life shall find their name,
Sa: Rowlands.

TO ALL TRVE FAITHFVLL CHRISTIANS, Believing and beloved Servants of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.
Dear Christian soul, with humble mind and thought,
Admire the wonders that thy Savior wrought,
The most true miracles that have been done,
By Gods beloved de^re and only Son,
When he for sinful man (without entreat)
Descended from Gods own right hand and seat;
The mansion of the blessed Cherubins:
To dye on earth for our accursed sins,
When no inducing merit, thine or mine,
Could thus procure his mercy to incline:
But when free love, his life's free ransom cost,
To save the sinners that themselves had lost:
Then living lowly in contempt and scorn,
Despised of the world, most poorly borne,
With painful travel, preaching up and down.
On shore, in ship, in mountain, field and town;
Confirming, that he taught to be divine,
By many a wonderful admired sign,
Even such as the beholders did confess,
The very hand of God, and no power less
Effected, for so wonderful they were,
That all spectators stood amazed with fear,
They saw his works to be so strangely rare,
So Admirable, and so past compare;
Those (that borne blind) did never see worlds light,
To have perfection given them of sight,
Dead Lazarus that lay four days in grave,
Calde forth from thence, his life again to have,
The dumb to speak, the cripples sound to go,
The fig tree cursde, to dye and never grow,
The winds and seas when they outrageous swell.
At his rebuke turn calm as any well:
The devils driven out of men to Swine,
The water turned into purest wine,
The Soldiers (in the false betraying hour)
All stricken to the ground by Jesus power;
The dropsy healed, and the Leapers cured,
His presence by the Devils not endured,
His walking on vnfirme and liquid water,
His giving life unto the Rulers daughter,
His healing Malcus ear most perfect sound,
When Peter's sword had lopt off to the ground:
And many more (as those four holy men,
Which did the life of our Redeemer pen)
Have registered, of wonders Jews did see,
Which Jesus only wrought, that we might be
Faithful, and true believers in his name;
And in our lives express and show the same.
These Miracles for Christians may suffice,
(...) Not any thing of truth in actual deed*
And therefore as the Scripture warnings give,
Those men that will not in obedience live
Unto the truth, but do the same despise,
They shall by strong deceyuings, follow lies,
False Christ's shall come, and shall such wonders show,
That many will believe them to be so,
Not having knowledge to discern aright
Gods power, true working from the wicked sprite.
But Christian soul, most constantly abide,
Let not the Devil draw thy heart aside,
For that which Christ and his Apostles taught,
And all the miracles which they have wrought,
For to confirm what they had preached before,
Is all sufficient, and we need no more:
And he thou mindful what S. Paul does say,
Within thy souls best treasury it lay,
If I, says he, strange doctrine should defend,
Nay should an angel from the heaven descend,
And preach another Gospel then the first,
Receive it not, but hold him for accursed*
Remember God of his free loves intent,
Has left an everlasting testament
Unto us all, in Christ our Saviors blood:
In this alone consists all our good;
All Prophesies had hereunto relation,
All miracles to this gave confirmation,
Therefore if any take in hand to frame
A miracle in Saint or angels name,
If any mortal creature undertake
His power that makes the earth and heavens quake,
If Satan and his Ministers endeavor
To work strange wonders, this believe, that never,
Can any miracles be truly done,
But by the power of God, and Christ his Son:
To which eternal majesty and power,
Ascribe we, till the worlds last ending hour,
Till Sun and Moon decay, past date of days,
All honor, glory, Worship, endless praise.
Sa: Rowlands*

(...) And take of them those gifts himself did give:
If all the Monarchs that the earth contains,
All Kings and Princes with their noble traynes,
Were to a royal feast assembled all,
To make some wedding most maiesticall;
Yet were that presence very mean and base
Unto those guests that Gallile did grace;
As thus with men, the Son of God did dine,
The blood of grapes, the sad-heart chearing wine,
Began to fail, which blessed Mary seeing,
Spoke thus to him, in whom all things have being;
They have no Wine, knowing his power could grant
A full supply, in needs extremest want;
Six earthen vessels there were standing by,
As the Jews custom was to purify,
Those pots of stone, our Savior Christ did will
Up to the brimme with water they should fill,
And to the Governor present the same;
Which instantly true perfect wine became;
He ignorant what power the same had made,
Unto the Bridegroom thus in private said;
At the beginning men present the best,
And worst at last, unto the well-fed guest;
But contrary to usual custom, thou
Set'st forth the worst, and kep'st the best till now.
This was the first of wonders Jesus wrought,
Even by the power that formed all of naught,
Which miracle at marriage he began.
To show himself true God and perfect man;
As man to eat with men he did incline,
As God he turned water into wine.
depiction of Christ performing miracles
A Leaper is cleansed, the Centurions servant healed, Peter's wives mother cured
of a Fever, diverse dispossed of Devils, the winds calmed with rebuke, two men
possessed of Devils, and being cast forth, they enter into Swine. Math. 8.

DEscending a most hie cloud-checking hill;
From painful preaching of his Fathers will:
To save those souls which hell (for sin) did claim,
A Leaper met him, and himself did frame
In humble manner falling at Christ's feet,
With such due worship as to God was meet,
Oh Lord he cries, of health the only mean,
If so thou will, it is thou can make me clean;
It Is in thy power, and in no power but thine,
Most blessed Jesus, to my help incline.
The Son of God no sooner heard the cry
Of this poor wretch, plagued with leprosy,
But in his mercy, of which none do fail
That ask by faith, (Faith ever does prevail)
Replied thus, and did his suit fulfill;
Because thou say I can, I say, I will,
Then touched him with his holy hand most pure,
And absolute he wrought a perfect cure:
So to the Priest to offer being sent,
As Jesus into Capernaum went,
Came a Centurion, and besought him thus;
O Lord, my servant lies grievous,
Pained with a palsy: Jesus did reply,
When I do come, i will cure his malady:
The Captain answers, Lord, that pains forbear;
I am unworthy that thou should come near
The place of my abode, great Heavens King,
That have thy seat where Cherubins do sing;
Speak but the word, I know thy only breath
Can heal my servant, and give life in death;
For I my self that at thy favor stand,
By power imposed, have soldiers at command,
I bid one come, he comes, another go,
A third do this, and they perform even so,
When Jesus heard his faith, our Savior says,
In peace do thou depart, and go thy ways,
And as thou have firmly believed on me,
So I Will extend my grace, and do for thee.
To Peter's house then did our Savior go,
His god-like power, by miracle to show,
Whereas the mother of the apostles wife
(Subject as others in this mortal life
To frail diseases) lay with grief oppressed
Of Fever fits, most painefully possessed
Her Jesus, with his healing hand did touch,
And presently her healthful state was such,
That she arose, praising the King of Kings;
And ministered unto them needful things.
When glorious Phoebus with his shining light,
Was drawn to West, at the approaching night,
They brought to Jesus many woeful wights,
That were possessed with Devils and foul sprites,
Which with his powerful word he did expel,
And sent them to their Habitation, Hell,
With his Disciples then forsakes the shore,
Betakes himself where stormy tempests roar,
Where ship is tossed with hazard up and down,
And raging waves do ouerwhelming drown,
Where great Leuiathan in deepes do sail;
And all the rest that swim with finne and tail,
Do keep their watery commonwealth together,
There in the great extremes of foulest weather,
The frail Disciples all amazedly
Expected nothing but to drown and dye:
Those blessed eyes that watch of all things keep,
Were then (as God was man) closde up with sleep,
Help master help, the poor Disciples call,
Arise, and save us, or we perish all:
He that made wind and wave unto them says,
Why are ye fearful, ye of little faith?
And then arose their frightfull thoughts asswaging,
And did rebuke his creatures for their raging;
Which instantly were calm and quiet sound,
As if the waters were secure like ground,
Causing beholders strangely to admire,
To reason with themselves, and thus enquire;
Why, who is this that bears such powerful sway?
His very word makes wind and sea obey.
Being arrived on the other side,
Two men with Devils met him, and they cried
Jesus, that son of God art known to be,
What have we (hellish fiends) to do with thee?
Before the time do thou intend prevent us?
Wherefore art thou come hither, to torment us?
Thy power does make us tremble, dread and doubt,
From our possession thou will cast us out:
Which if thou do, thus much to us incline;
Grant we may enter yonder heard of Swine,
That are a feeding, if we part these men,
Of those same hogs give us possession then;
Suffer us, as our fellow devil said;
When he a spoil of all Jobs substance made,
Then said our Savior to the Devils, go,
And they into the Swine departed so,
Carrying them in a fury from the ground,
Into the sea, and there they all were droun'd:
The Heards-men at this fight with terror run
Reporting in the City what was done,
How from those men (that put them all in fear)
The fiends (by Jesus) dispossed were:
Then getting leave of that great power divine,
Into the Sea they carried all their swine,
Which when they heard, they all came forth to meet him,
And suing for his absence, thus did greet him;
Jesus of Nazareth, with one mind and heart,
We do entreat, that hence thou will depart.
depiction of Christ performing miracles
One cured of the Palsy, lying sick in his bed, the Rulers Daughter raised, a
woman healed of a bloody Issue, two blind men receive sight, a dumb man
possessed, healed. Math. 9.

FRom Brutish Gergesenes our Savior goes,
That were so far their own souls mortal foes,
They from their coast did banish the most highest,
Esteeming more their cattle, then their Christ,
Who leaving those ungrateful, wicked men,
By ship did pass to his own City then,
Where being come, the people to him brought,
One sick in's bed of palsy, and besought
That he would heal him; when he saw their faith,
To the distressed creature, thus he says,
Son, be of comfort, and rejoice herein,
For I remit and pardon all thy sin:
Whereat the Scribes within their hearts did say,
This man blasphemeth, and is far astray.
When Jesus saw, in thought they did him blame,
(For with hearts hid from him that made the same)
He thus replied; Why does this ill arise?
Which you in cogitation do devise:
Tell me, which speech is easiest, for to say,
Arise, and walk, or sins are done away?
But that you all may know the truth of this;
My power on earth can pardon sins amiss,
Then said he to the sick, thy self prepare,
Take up thy bed, and to thy house repair.
Then came a man of woe, with sorrow pained,
A Ruler of the Jews, and he complained,
Jesus, my daughter even now is dead:
But thou that life's true path do only tread,
Come, and upon her do but lay thy hand,
And she shall live; give death a countermaund:
The Lord was moved with his sad lament,
And as he sorth with his Disciples went,
A woman with a bloody issue grieved,
That could not be in twelve years space relieved:
Behind him came, and touched his vestures hem,
Being assured faith could help all them,
Which did believe; resolving thus in thought,
If I but touch his garment, health is wrought:
This faith with Jesus such a comfort found,
He turned and said, Daughter thou art made sound:
And as he spoke, that very instant hour,
She was made perfect by his perfect power.
Then came he to the Rulers dwelling place,
And (as the custom was, in mourning case)
He found the Minstrels, and much people there,
With noise of doleful music to the ear:
Those he did will forbear such quoyle to keep,
The maid (quoth he) is only but a sleep,
She is not dead, I Will life to her restore;
But scornfully they laughed at Christ therefore,
Being all thrust out from thence and put away,
He came whereas the breathless body lay,
And took her by the hand, wherewith she rose:
And this great wonder to the people shows,
Who to behold her in amazement stand,
And spread the fame thereof throwout the land.
As Jesus passed from the wondering crow'd.
Two blind men met him, and they cryde alowde,
Oh son of David, some compassion take;
Have mercy on us, for thy mercies sake.
To whom he said, do you believe aright,
That I have power to give you both your sight:
Yea, Lord (they said) besides thee no man can
Give saving health, which art true God and man.
Jesus replied, unto your faithful mind,
As you believe, so cease from being blind.
Then brought they one possessed that was dumb,
(...) But when the people understood the same,
Forth of all Cities unto him they came;
Which when the Lord beheld (as he is ever
A gracious God to all that do endeavor)
He took compassion, and did heal their sick,
Their blind, their lame, their deaf, dumb, lunaticke;
Until days glory did begin decline,
And gave the world no longer cheerful shine;
Evening approaching near with darksome shade,
Then the Disciples to their Master said.
This place is solitary, vnfrequent;
We are belated, and the time far spent,
The multitude of people being great;
Let them depart, and so provide them meat.
Then Jesus said, there is no such cause of need;
Do you provide them whereupon to feed:
They said, our poor provision is but small,
Five loaves, two fishes, only this is all;
Bring them to me said Jesus, then he wil'd
The people all sit down, with eyes vpheld
To heaven, he did bless, then bread he brake,
And that to his Disciples did betake,
Which did deliver it the people there,
Who fed, and all full satisfied were,
Five thousand stomachs had their hungry wishes,
Contented only with five loaves, two fishes,
Besides the quantity that did remain
Of broken meat, twelve baskets to contain:
Then Jesus his Disciples sent away
By ship, while he went privately to pray;
Into a mountain, when at sea betost,
The poor Apostles even well nie lost,
Were all amazed, most distressed sailing,
And grievously their masters want bewailing,
About the fourth watch (while the winds did roar)
They saw one walk on sea, as if on shore,
Which put them all in an amazed fright,
For they supposed it had been a Sprite;
Crying with terror fearfully confounded,
Perplexed in thought, and deeply inward wounded.
Till Jesus with a word their dread allayed;
Be of good cheer, fear not, it is I, he said,
Quoth Peter Lord, if it be thou we see,
Command, and give me power to come to thee.
Jesus said, come, Into the Sea he goes,
And as the mighty wind and tempest rose,
Peter began to sink; Help Lord he cries;
Oh save thy servant, or thy servant dies;
Then Jesus stretched forth his hand and caught him,
And with rebuke more constancy he taught him:
O thou of little faith, blame thee I must,
Why did thou doubt? that I would fail thy trust?
So when they came into the ship together,
Their storm was changed into a fair calm weather:
Then those that were aboard came reverent all
To worship Jesus, and did on him call,
Saying with one consent of soul and heart,
We do beeleue that Gods true Son thou art.
Passing then over to the other side,
Which hight Genezaret, being there discri'd,
Those that about the Coast were resident;
Notice of him through out the Country sent,
How Christ was come; when this was once revealed,
Sick people came from all parts to be healed:
They brought of all diseases various kinds,
And each sick Patient speedy cure there finds:
And therefore pain they desired no more,
But for to touch the garments hem he wore;
Which all that did, were most assured to gain
A true release from every kind of pain,
depiction of Christ performing miracles
The woman of Canaans daughter healed, four thousand fed with seven loaves
and a few fishes, the sick are healed, two blind men receive their sight, the
withered Fig Tree. Math. the 15.19.20.21. Chapters.

FRom conference with Pharisees and Scribes,
And others of their wilful blinded Tribes,
Which of Gods offre'd grace had no desire;
Our Savior goes to Sidon coast and Tire,
And as he went a woman Cananite,
That had her daughter vexed with a Sprite;
Cried after him, saying, Have mercy Lord,
Thou son of David, do thy help afford,
My child is by the Devils power tormented;
By thy far greater power be he prevented,
Hear me and help us, do not turn thy face:
Oh take compassion on our grievous caes,
But notwithstanding all that she could cry,
Our Savior silent made her no reply:
Then the Disciples did entreat him thus,
Send her away from crying after us,
And rid this noise and clamor that she makes,
Said Jesus, I am sent but for their sakes,
That are the lost sheep of the chosen race,
To Israel I must extend my grace.
But she adoring, down before him falls,
And constant in her hope, for mercy calls,
Saying, Lord help me, and incline thine aid.
Woman, it is not meet, our Savior said,
To take the bread that Childrens food should be,
And cast it unto dogs, true Lord, quoth she,
Yet grace and favor, may the whelps afford,
To eat the crummes fall from their masters board.
Oh woman, Jesus said, thy faith is great,
Thou shall obtain that which thou do entreat,
And in the instant that our Savior spoke,
The cursed fiend her daughter did forsake.
Then Jesus passed nie unto the sea,
That is denominate of Gallile,
Where he up to a mountain did ascend,
And there sat down his Graces to extend,
For multitudes of people thither came,
Of blind and dumb, of maimed and of lame,
And many others that in humble wise,
At Jesus feet presented mournful cries,
Which for his help in their extremes did call,
And he miraculous did heal them all,
That the great company assembled there
(Being filde with wonder and admiring fear)
To hear dumb speak, see lame to go upright;
The maimed whole, and blind receive their sight,
With hearts more joyful then their tongus could tell,
Did glorify the God of Israel.
When Jesus calling his Disciples, said,
My pity and compassion does persuade,
(Because this peoples company has lasted
Three days with me, and all that time have fasted,)
That they have somewhat to supply their need,
Least in return, such danger it do breed,
They faint by hunger on the weary way,
But his Disciples unto him did say,
How shall we get in this most desert hill.
The bread that may so many thousands fill?
Quoth Jesus, what provision is your store?
They said seven loaves, a few small fish, no more.
So causing all the people down to sit,
Jesus took bread and fish, gave thanks for it;
And then he brake it, after he had blessed,
And gave the twelve, to give unto the rest,
All being therewith so well satisfied,
That after their necessities supplied,
There was remaining (which they could not eat)
To fill seven baskets full of broken meat:
Yet was the number of the feeders then,
By computation found four thousand men,
Besides of others that repast did find,
Which were of children, and of women kind.
Having with Soul and bodies food fed them,
Our Lord departed toward Jerusalem,
And as he iournyed from Ierico
(With multitudes that onwards with him go)
Two blind-men sitting by the highway side,
That heard of Jesus passage, to him cried;
Oh Lord, thou son of David mercy show,
Merciful Lord, thy grace on us bestow;
So vehement and earnest they did call,
And so importunate they were withal;
Still inuocating on his glorious name,
That people did rebuke them for the same:
But they the more do eleuate their voice,
And make such pitiful complaining noise.
Jesus stood still, and calling of them two,
Did say, what is it you would have me do?
Oh Lord (quoth they) let us behold the light;
He touching them, gave present perfect sight;
Of which desired sense, being now possessed,
They followed Christ, most joyful with the rest.
Then on a borrowed Ass meek Christ did ride,
And all the multitudes about him cried,
Hosanna to the son of David's fame;
Blessed is he, comes in the highest name.
And entering the famous City thus,
The people all admiring wondrous;
Said, this is Jesus, which is known to be
Of Nazareth a Prophet; this is he:
Entering the temple then, which did contain
Buyers and sellers, wicked and profane;
He cast them out, and said, this house of prayer,
Is made by you a den of thieves, a Fair.
Then came into the Temple for his aid,
The blind and lame, and impotent decayed,
And whatsoever their diseases were,
He healed all that came unto him there,
That children cheerful did Hosanna sing;
And with sweet voices made that temple ring.
From thence he did depart to lodge at night
In Bethanie, and with the mornings light,
As he returned at dawning back, next day
Sustaining hunger, found upon the way
A fig tree, unto which for fruit he went,
But the green boughs had nothing to present,
Save only leaves, no more but goodly show.
(Like Hypocrites which do on men bestow,
Fair, sweet enchanting words unto the ear;
But neither heart nor action once comes near)
When Jesus did behold the barrenness,
Sentence against it thus he did express,
Never may fruit upon thee more be found,
And with these words it withered to the ground:
When the Disciples did this wonder see,
The pleasant green a present dying tree:
They said with marvel and great admiration,
How strange and sudden is this alteration?
depiction of Christ performing miracles
A man possessed with a Devil healed, diverse healed, and devils cast out of
many, A blind man healed, that first saw men walk like trees, and after saw
them clearly, The possessed healed, Blind Bartimeus healed, The draught of
fishes, The Widows son restored to life at Naim, Mark. 1.8.9.10. Luke 5.7.
Chap.

TO Capernaum Jesus took his way,
Where being entered on the Sabbath day,
He went into the Synagogue to teach.
And one amongst the rest that heard him preach,
Vexed with a Spirit in most fearful wise,
Delivered forth outrageous hellish cries;
Let us alone, remaining where we be,
Will thou destroy us; we know thou art he,
Of Nazareth, Jesus Gods holy one;
In our possession leave thou us alone:
Be silent Satan, hold thy peace, Christ says,
(Devils are not ordayn'd to give God praise)
Come forth, depart, whereat he loud did roar,
And the possessed, felly rent and tore;
So leaves him then, which such amazement wrought,
That all the people were in terror brought,
Saying, with power, is this of matchless wonder?
That with a word, brings Satan's outrage under*
Come to Bethsaida, there they bring one blind,
Entreating Jesus they might mercy find,
That he would touch him, so his hand he takes,
And leads him forth (for their believing sakes)
From out the town, where only he applies,
Spittle, as medcine to his closed eyes,
And did demand what object then he sees;
Who looking said, men walking like to trees.
Then Jesus touched his eyes, and made them clear,
That every thing did perfect true appear.
That Hill descending, where those blessed three,
John, Peter, James, did Jesus glory see.
(When as his raiment, in bright shining show,
Was seen in whiteness to exceed the snow;
Where Moses and Elias did appear.
And Peter said, Lord it is good being here)
One came to Jesus, and his son did bring;
Saying, oh Master, hear a woeful thing:
This son of mine, a spirit that is dumb,
Has with great torments strangely overcome,
He teareth him with foming fits most fell,
And gnashing teeth as fiends are said in hell,
To use with horror, this poor man I brought
To thy Disciples, and I them besought,
That they in thy all powerful holy name,
Would cast him out, who could not do the same;
Then answered he, O faithless generation,
How long shall I endure your Provocation?
Bring him to me, which done, outragiously
The Spirit did torment him instantly,
Even in unwonted manner, fearful, strange,
With cruel fits, and torments interchange,
For inwardly he did him rent and tear.
And falling on the ground, lay foming there,
And wallowing up and down, said Jesus than
Unto the father of this woeful man;
How long has he bin thus from peace exilde?
Who answered, ever since he was a child,
And like as now he casts him on the ground,
He throws him often in water to be droun'd,
And otherwhiles into the flaming fire;
But if thou can, O Lord, I thee desire,
Help, help, have mercy, dispossess this fiend;
That nothing but destruction does intend:
Then Jesus said, if thou have faith in this,
Of my expected help thou shall not miss.
Whereat Christ's poor petitioner did cry,
With sorrows voice, and tears excessiuely;
O Lord that art the great, the good, the chief,
I do believe, help thou mine unbelief.
Then Jesus said, thou Devil deaf and dumb,
I do command and charge that forth thou come,
And never to reenter any more;
Who crying lowed, and having rent him sore,
Departing, left the man as seeming dead,
And all beholders said, his soul is fled:
But Jesus raised him by the hand from ground,
And no infirmity in him was found.
Then on the way that leads from Ierico,
As he along with multitudes did go,
(That admiration to his wonders gave)
There sat a beggar that for alms did crave,
Called Bartimeus, who when he did hear
That all the people followed Jesus there,
Making amongst them an unwonted noise,
He with a loud and elevated voice,
Cried, Jesus, son of David mercy show;
Jesus of Nazareth thy grace bestow:
His cries were such so vehement and shrill,
The Lord of life was moved to stand still:
And wil'd the people for to call him then,
Who like most kind and charitable men,
Said, be of comfort man (unto the blind)
He calls thee, and thou shall favor find:
Encouraged with that the people spoke;
Hasting to Christ, he cast away his cloak:
Who said, what will thou that I do for thee;
Good Master (quoth the blind) that I might see;
And Jesus said, in peace depart away,
Thy constant faith is thy assured stay.
So he immediately received sight,
And followed Jesus with a joyful Sprite.
As he was teaching near unto the Lake,
That from Genezareth its name does take;
The multitude of people was so great
Of those that came to Christ for heavenly meat;
(Which pressed on him with their throng so sore)
He entered Simons ship and left the shore.
When finishing his speech, an end did make,
To Simon Peter, thus our Savior spoke;
Launch out into the deep, and cast thy net,
That forth the Sea of fishes thou may get:
Then Peter said, Master, last night in vain,
For nothing we have spent our toil and pain;
But yet at thy command, obey we will:
So cast and drew the net, which fish did fill
Until it brake, and they for aid did call
Unto their fellows, wherewith joining all,
They laded both their ships with such a freight,
Both ready were to sink with fishes weight.
Then Peter fell at Jesus feet with fear;
John, James and all the rest amazed were:
But unto them our blessed Savior said,
Let not your hearts with terror be dismayed,
Take constant courage, I will make you then,
From henceforth fishers of the souls of men.
As Christ proceeded to extend his grace,
In seeking out lost sheep from place to place.
He came to Naim, where even at the gate,
He met an object of our mortal state;
A liuelesse body carried to the grave:
A son, whose death sad tears of sorrow gave,
Unto a woeful widow that did bear him:
Who went with weeping, chiefest mourner near him:
Much people followed her dear only son,
To show their love in this last office done
To a dead friend, their latest tooken pain,
In giving mother earth her own again.
Which when the Lord beheld, the sight did move,
And make him willing to express his love.
Weep not he said, but stint thy use of tears,
Then touched the Coffin; wherewith those that bears
The burden of the dead, stood still to see
What the event of this strange stay would be.
Whilst all on Jesus fixed their gazing eyes;
He said, Young man I say to thee arise.
And presently the dead-man sat upright:
And spoke to all that did behold the sight,
Then to his mother, Christ her son did give,
Who seeing now her sorrows cause to live,
Had such a fullness of a joyful heart,
That never woman sharde a greater part.
The wondering multitude of people there,
Strangely possessed with mixed joy and fear,
Gave all the glory that they could express
To Gods dread name, saying with thankfulness,
A Prophet great is risen unto us,
And God has visited his people thus.
(...) Said, is it lawful on the Sabbath day
To heal this man, or send him sick away:
But they replied not a word again:
Then did he take the man and cured his pain,
A cure that was no longer time in hand,
Then fingers touch or breath of tongues command;
His body perfect, absolute was well,
And he no more of ache or grief did tell,
Releast of all the misery he had,
And made to his great comfort healthful glad.
As the most just, meek, holy, innocent.
Toward the sanctified City went,
Which did contain his Fathers house of prayer,
Unto a village as he made repair,
There met him certain sad afflicted men,
Diseased with leprosy, in number ten;
Who when they saw the sovereign cure of grief,
They stood far off, imploring his relief:
Lifting up voices with such woeful cries,
As from constraining sorrow did arise.
Jesus, they said, master, behold and see
The great extremes wherein poor wretches be,
Of thy accustomed clemency and grace.
Have mercy on ten loathsome Leapers case.
Jesus beheld them with compassions eye,
And for their comfort thus he did reply;
Unto the Priest do you forthwith repair,
(As law appoints for such as Leapers are)
And show your selves to him; so as they went,
The grace of Jesus did their griefs prevent:
And all were cured, of which number one
Returned back (poor wretch) himself alone,
Falling most meekely with his face on ground,
Delivering with a thankful voices sound,
Gods glorious worthy and renowned praise,
To whom our blessed Lord and Savior says,
Are there not ten infectious creatures clean,
Of whom this poor Samaria stranger, mean,
Only returns, and thankful does incline:
What is become of these ungrateful nine?
Is there amongst so many cured, no more
But only one, that gives God praise therefore?
Arise, depart, thy self in soul persuade,
By true and lively faith, thou whole art made.
A certain ruler, that of Jews bare sway,
Having a son which very grievous lay,
In extreme sickness, and by common fame,
Hearing that Jesus out of Iewry came,
To Cana, where by miracle divine,
He made of perfect water purest wine;
Went to the Lord, and earnest suit begone,
That he would please to come and heal his son,
At Capernaum, where he then did lie
In all men's judgment at the point to dye:
Jesus replied, except that Signs you see
And wonders wrought, you have not faith in me:
The Ruler answered, si^ afford thine aid,
Ere deaths hard hand upon my child be laid:
My dearest son is breathing out his last,
Oh come and help before his life be past.
Then Jesus to his heart did comfort give:
Do thou depart, thy dying son does live,
Because thou have a faithful constant mind,
At thy return in health thou shall him find,
As with great joy he from our Savior went,
Some of his servants came incontinent,
And met their master cheerful on the way,
With voices full of comfort, thus did say,
Thy son (whose sickness caused us all complain)
Is wonderful restored to health again:
He lives and all his former grief is past,
Which lay most woeful breathing out his last,
Then he demanded at what time and hour,
He was delivered from Deaths fatal power,
And they replied, yesterday at seven
The fever left him, praised be God of heaven.
Then knew the father it was the time direct
That Jesus of his mercies free respect,
Said unto him, thy dying son does sieve,
That instant he restoring life did give,
And hereupon he and his household all
Believed, and faithful did on Jesus call.
At Poole Bethesda where attending lay
Of blind and lame, and withr'ed, that each day
Expected cure, when heavenly Cherubin,
Did touch the waters, then to get them in,
And wash away all griefs they did sustain:
A man that eight and thirty year in pain,
Endeuour'd help, amongst the Lazars there;
Yet woeful wretch, not any whit the near,
For still when he intended to have good,
By entering that same sanctified flood,
Always by others he was thrust aside,
Where every man did for himself provide,
And got before him, so that he put by,
In most perplexed state, distressed did lie.
Christ coming there, and knowing well how long,
He had sustained this preventing wrong;
Said to the sick, will thou have help at all?
Oh sir, (quoth he) I know not how I shall:
I have no friend, that will so much befriend me
As an assisting hand at need to lend me;
When waters move by holy Angels touch,
To get me in, there is none will do so much,
But when I seek with all my best endeavor,
Some one or other does prevent me ever,
Stepping before me; thus am I kept back,
To do me good all help of friends I lack.
Then Christ (whose word to heal him did suffice)
Said but unto him, take thy bed, arise:
Depart away, who cheerfully arose,
Took up his burden, and from thence he goes:
This gracious work upon the Sabbath done,
The Jews would quarrel for it with Gods son;
His sinful creatures which he made of clay,
Would question him, who made both night and day;
Not thinking how his word framed all that's wrought:
And how that word can bring that all to naught.
A man borne blind upon the way did lie,
Asking for alms as Jesus passed by,
And the Disciples to their Master said,
Lord tell us why this punishment is laid,
On that blind creature, what has he misdone,
Is it for Fathers trespass, or for son,
Jesus replied, the cause he wants sight,
(Deprived of the day adorning light)
Is not for any wicked works of sin,
That Parents or himself have lived in;
But that the mighty power of God might be
Made manifestly known in such as he,
I am to work the works of him that sent me,
While it is day, before dark night prevent me,
As long as I within the world abide,
I am the light that unto glory guide,
When thus the Lord had spoke, spittle and clay
He mixed together, and the same did lay
Upon the eyes of him that was borne blind;
Whose hope resolved, with a faithful mind,
That Christ had power to give those eyes true sight,
Which never yet had seen what thing was light.
Then Jesus said unto the blind-man go,
And wash thy self within the Poole Siloe,
Which by interpretation is called sent:
He with more joy, then can be uttered went,
And did according, having sight as clear,
As ever did to glorious light appear:
Whereat great wonder present was in all;
Which saw what to the beggar did befall,
Borne blind they knew (of none to be denide)
And most miraculous, now perfect eyed
Yet questioned him, and fell to great debate,
And wickedly from Christ did derogate,
Denying him his own eternal might;
More blind in soul, then was the man of sight.
depiction of Christ performing miracles
Lazarus raised from death: The Soldiers at Christ's betraying cast to the
ground. Malcus ear cut off by Peter, healed, The temples veil rent, stones
divide, graves open, the dead arise. John. 11. John. 18. Luke 22. Matthew. 27.

Two holy sisters had their brother lying,
In Bethany, even at the point of dying;
One blessed Magdalen (that with her tears
Did wash Christ's feet, and dried them with her hairs)
The other gracious Martha, these sent thus
To Jesus, for their brother Lazarus,
Oh Lord behold he whom thou love dear,
Is grievous sick, affoorde thy presence here,
His danger will admit of no delays,
Yet Jesus tarried where he was two days;
Then said to his Disciples, our kind friend
Lazarus sleeps; but wake him I entend:
Lord they replied, if he but sleep, we know
He shall do well, there will no danger grow:
But then he plainly spoke, his breath is fled,
And soul departed, Lazarus is dead;
And I am glad for your sakes in this case
That I was absent with you from the place,
Because you may believe, now you and I,
Will go and visit him at Bethany.
When they came thither, there they notice have,
That he had lain four days within his grave,
And many of the Jews (whom love did lead)
Were comforting the sisters of the dead.
Martha saw Jesus, and alow'd she cride,
Had thou been here my brother had not dyed,
Yet this I know assured truth to be,
What thou do ask of God heel give it thee.
Then Jesus said, arise again he shall,
I know it Lord (quoth she) and so must all
At that great day of Resurrection, when
All shall arise, both good and wicked men.
I resurrection am, and Life do give,
He that believes in me, though dead shall live,
And he that lives and belieues in me,
Shall never dye. Beleeu'st thou this (quoth he)
Yea Lord, she said, thou art Gods son I know,
Should come into this world, and grace bestow.
Then Mary came, fell down and grievous wept,
Saying, dear Lord, our brother we had kept,
Had thou been here, his life preserved had bin,
And these woe tears we had not bathed in.
Then Jesus groned in the Spirit, and said,
Show me the place, where is the body laid?
They said, come Lord behold, and therewithal,
From his most holy blessed eyes did fall
The tears of pity; quoth the Jews, Oh see
How dear he loved; affection this must be.
Being come unto the deads man's house, the grave,
He bad remove the stone from off the cave:
Quoth Martha Lord, he loathsome will be found,
For lying all this time within the ground.
Did I not say (said Christ) this instant hour,
If thou have faith, thou shall behold Gods power.
Then they remove the stone which on him lies.
While unto heaven Jesus lifts his eyes,
And God the Father thankful glorified,
Then with a loud voice, Lazarus he cried,
Come forth, at which life-giuing breath and sound,
The dead arose, being in grave clothes bound,
His hands and feet, a napkin on his face,
Amazing all with wonder were in place,
To see a man restored to life again,
That did with death four days in grave remain,
Committed to corruptions rotten room,
There to have rested till the day of doom;
This sight put all beholders in great fear,
And many Jews that came with Mary there.
Believed on Jesus, giving God the praise,
Whose only power, the dead to life did raise.
When all those glorious Lamps, adorn the sky,
Were hid with sable clouds from mortal eye,
And every creature having vital sprite,
Mourned at the darkness of black ugly night,
Perditions child (whom Satan did insence,)
Bribed against his Lord with thirty pence.
The way by night, with armed troops he took,
To meet his Master toward Cedron brook;
Where coming to him gives all hayle, and kiss.
To make him known unto the Jews by this;
When Peter saw the villainy intended,
His Lord most traytrous to be apprehended:
He champion-like did think to fight it out,
And drew his sword and valiant laid about,
With such a manly resolution than,
He made a crop-eare of the Highpriests man,
And wounded Malcus; which when Jesus saw,
He thus reprou'd rashness in him to draw.
Put up thy sword into the sheath again,
Who therewith wounds, shall therewith be slain:
By Prayer, down from my Father I could call,
More then twelve Legions, Spirits Angelical,
But how shall then the Scriptures be fulfilde,
As God has in eternal counsel wild:
Then Jesus healed Malcus ear so sound,
That there appeared no sign of any wound;
With Miracle with them preuay'ld no more,
Then striking all unto the ground before,
Which only but demanding whom they sought,
All falling backwards, to the earth were brought.
No flames of lightning to amaze withal,
No bolts of thunder to procure them fall;
But that most powerful word that spoke and made,
Unto this band of armed soldiers said,
Whom look you for, at which as men struck dead,
They fell at once, yet hardened had no dread.
When the most just, unjust was doomed to dye,
Exposed by Pylate, to Jews cruelty,
With whips tormented, and by sinners scorns
Reviled, spit upon, and crowned with thorns,
Buffeted, blinded, and compelled to bear
The Cross, which Christians for their badge do wear
When all his senses suffre'd for the sin
Which Adams senses had offended in:
Whose sight did like the fruit which was forbidden,
For which Christ's sight was blinded and eyes hidden:
And for his touch that to take hold consented,
Christ's feeling was with whips and nails tormented:
His smell, that to the rest did liking lincke,
At Golgotha was choked with loathsome stincke.
His hearing, that did Eues bad counsel choose,
Brought Christ to hear the raylings of the Jews.
His taste, which eating he did sin withal,
Made Jesus taste of vinegar and gall.
When all these great and grievous pains were ended,
And Spirit to his Father recommended;
When that great darkness never seen before,
From six to nine, obscured the earth all ore,
Extinguishing the sun (days golden eye)
Because that day the son of God did dye.
Wonders were wrought that did men's hearts confound
The temples veil from top unto the ground,
Was rent quite through, to beholders fear,
Which saw that Curtain admirable tear,
The sollid hardest flint and marble stones,
Under whose massy burden, groundwork groans,
Dividing, cleave, and into pieces fall;
Which were supporters to the strongest wall.
And monuments that in them did contain,
Flesh made of clay, turning to dust again;
The Sepulchers of Saints (that resting lay
From all their labors) on this nere like day,
Did open, and deliver live, with breath
The bodies were received dead from death,
In such a true perfection found and shown,
As if mortality they nere had known.
Within the holy City they appear,
To manifest Gods mighty power more clear
Unto Beholders eyes, many did see
Their resurrection from the dead to be,
Like that which when the Angels trumpe does call,
Shall cause a rising unto life of all,
That ever in this world (since world began)
Have been the offspring of the first made man.
When the Centurion with his armed guard,
Which were the men for blood and death prepared,
Beheld the fearful wonders that were wrought,
And how against nature, things to pass were brought:
Day turned to ^ight, darkened before their eyes.
The graves to open, and the dead arise,
The veil divide, the (...)mbling earth to quake,
The cleaving stones how they in sunder brake*
Both Captain and his cursed crew confess
With inward terror of souls guiltiness,
That Jesus which by Judas treachery,
Was false betrayed, unjust condemned to dye
By wicked Pylate, and by their misdeed,
His precious wounds were opened wide to bleed;
Was Gods most true, and dear and only son,
And hell was due for what their sins had done.
FINIS.

