THE RUDIMENTS OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE:

Containing short instructions for the most necessary postures with Pike and
Musket, and motions for exercising a company.

Nehem. 4.19.20. etc.

Jude, verse. 3.



EDINBURGH, Printed for James Bryson, 1638.

POSTURES OF THE MUSKET.
1. TAke up your Musket, and your Rest, Recover your Musket, and join it to
your rest.

2. Take out your match, blow your match.

3. Cock your match, try your match, guarde your Pan.

4. Advance three steps, with blowing your match, Present, Open your Pan, and
give fire.

5. Join your Musket to your rest again.

6. Recover your match, blow your Pan and prime it, Put of your louse powlder.

7. Cast about your Musket and your rest.

8. Charge with poulder, chape the Musket a little against the earth.

9. Charge with Bullet, Chape it a little against the earth.

10. Recover your Musket, and Join it again to your rest. Cock your match,
etc. Again as before, making ready for service. When ye have done with
service, weigh your Musket with your right hand, Lay it on your left shoulder,
holding the butt with your left hand, and the rest also.

Nota.

It is to be remembered that the mouth of the Musket be always upward in
exercise, for being low, if a spark of fire should go in the Pan, it might
shoot your neighbor: Also when your Musket is shouldered in marching, hold
the mouth of your Musket high, for the reason foresaid, and for disturbing
your follower.

Postures of the Pike.
TAke up your Pike. Overend, or order your pike. Shoulder your pike. Mount your
pike. Charge to the front. Charge to the right hand. Charge to the left hand.
Right about to the rear. Left about to the rear. March, and charge. Lay down
your pike.
Nota.

All your exercises both of Musket and Pike would be at open order, that is,
six foot distant between every man in the Rank, and between each Rank, and
that for doubling of Ranks. Also when ye come either to be expert; or comes
upon service, the ordinare distance is three foot, which is called order: And
sometime may come to clo^e order; when sidemen close shoulder to shoulder, and
the R^st of the Ranks close up to the sword point, specially Pickemen against
horse.

Motiones.
MOtiones are either in keeping ground, or changeing ground, and are either of
the whole or of a part: Keeping ground, when every one move in his proper
place, as in faceing: Changeing ground, as in Countermarch and wheeling: The
motion of a part is as in doubleing, closeing, and opening files and ranks,
where some move and some stand still, And first of keeping ground and faceing
being standing in order.

Of Faceing.
WHen ye are commanded To face to the right hand, stand firm with the left
leg, and fall back with the right leg, and so ye are faced to the right
hand, As ye were, bring forward again that same right leg, and place it
where it stood first.

When ye are commanded to Face to the left hand, bring forward the right leg,
and so your face will be to the left hand, As you were, bring your right leg to
the former situation.

When you are commanded to face to the right and left hand by division, the
half of the files to the right hand faceth to the right, as is before set
down, and the half of the files to the left hand, as is before set down: As
you were.

When you are commanded to face to the reere by the right hand, hold firm your
left leg, turning upon your left heel: Draw back your right leg, till your
face be to the rear. As you were. Turn upon your left heel, and bring about
your right leg.

When you are commanded to face to the reere by the left hand, turn on your
left heel, and bring forward your right leg, till your face be to the
reere: As you were; Turn on your heel, and bring back your right leg.

The motion of a part is doubling ranks and files, etc. Doubling of ranks
serve to enlarge and strengthen the length of the battle, doubling of files to
strengthen the deep of the battle.

Of doubleing of Ranks.
When you are commanded to double your ranks to the right hand, the second
rank doubleth to the first, the fourth to the third, the sext to the fifth, and
so forth every one of these stepping up to the right side of his leader, with
three steps beginning with the left leg, stepping up on the right hand,
with the right leg, and then bringing up the left leg: As you were,
returning by the left hand; Also with three steps to your own place.

When you are commanded to double your ranks to the left hand, step foreward
as to the right: As you were, but return by the right hand.

Next, ranks are doubled by bringers up, when men are more perfectly trained;
that is, being ten ranks: the left rank doubleth by the right or left hand to
the first rank, the ninth to the second, the eight to the third, etc. Or ranks
are doubled by middle-men, when the last five ranks of ten double up to the
first five through the void that is between the files: And being commanded
again As you were, return again to their own place.

Of doubling files, or strings.
When you are commanded to double your files to the right hand, the right hand
file stands still, and the next file unto it, each man steppeth in behind
his side-man: first, turning about the face to the right hand, setting foreward
the right leg steps foreward, with their left leg behind their sidemen
on the right hand, brings up their leg, placing their body in a right line
behind their leader, As you were, They must turn about their face, moving
first their left leg, and thus with three steps recover their station.

When ye are commanded to double your files to the left hand, the files that
formerly moved, stand, and the other come in behind them, turning your face
about, beginning your motion with their left leg with three steps, and
being commanded, As you were, returns by the right leg.

Of Countermarch.
When ye are commanded Files to the right hand counter march, then all the
file-leaders together at one instant step forward with the right leg, and
bringing about their left leg, turn their body to the right hand, and so
march down through the files, till they come to the place of the bringers up or
last rank, all that follow the file-leader, must not offer to turn, before
they have come up to the place of the file leaders, and every follower must
remarke and keep that distance with his leader which he had before they began
to countermarch: As you were: step forward with the right leg, and cast
about the left leg to the right hand, and so march back to your place.

Files Countermarch to the left hand, step forward with the left leg,
bringing about the right leg, turning your body to the left hand, and march
down as the former. As you were, step forward with your left leg, cast about
the right leg to the left hand, and so march back to your place: Other kinds
of countermarch is not fit.

Closeing, and opening of Ranks.
When ye are commanded to close your ranks; the first rank stands still:
the second comes up, and closes to the distance commanded, either three
foot, or close order: the rest of the ranks move up, and close to the same
distance.

When ye are commanded to open your ranks, the first rank stands still,
the rest fall back toward the reere: the second takes its distance, and
stands still, so the third till all have got their places.

Closeing, and opening of Files.
When ye are commanded to close your files to the right hand, the right hand
file stands, the second file to it faceth about to it, and steppeth forward,
till it have taken the distance commanded, so does the rest in order, each
after other.

If ye be commanded to close your files to the left hand, the left hand file
stands still, and the rest close to it, as they did to the right hand.

If ye be commanded to close your files to the middle, if ye be ten or six in
rank, the two middle files take their distance, the rest face to them, and the
nearest to them take first their distance, and so the rest in order: But this
is little needful; the other two may serve.

When ye are commanded to open your files to the right hand, the left hand
file stands still, the second to it opens, and all the rest in order, till
ye come to the right hand.

When ye are commanded to open your files to the left hand, the right hand
file stands still, and opens as formerly to the left hand.

When ye are commanded to open files to both the hands, the two middle files
open to their just distances, so press on the rest nearest to them, till all
have opened to the distance commanded, and open by stepping sidewayes, pressing
with their shoulder their sideman.

Of wheeling, or the great turn.
When ye are commanded the great turn to the right hand, ye must first close
your files to that hand, whereto ye are to turn, even to closse order, and
close up your ranks to the same order: Then the Corner-file-leader on the
right hand stands still in his place, as the fixed foot of a Compass,
moving with the left leg about, turning on the right foot fixed, his sideman
moves more, and so always the more, the further they are removed from him,
every follower keeping his leader, and in every rank their sideman, The
further they are from the right side, they will make the larger turn, until
the front be where the right flank was: And being commanded the great turn to
the reere by the right hand, having now your front where your right flank was,
may keep the same order as at first, till your faces be at the reere. When ye
would reduce them: As they were, even to the place where they were first, ye
must wheel them just about to the said first place: Then opening their files
and ranks, they are just as they were: ye may do just so when ye are
commanded to make the great turn to the left hand, only they do at the left
hand, as the other did at the right hand before; but this motion is seldom
used, and would be performed when your men are perfect in all their other
motions.

FINIS.

