Look to it: FOR, I Will Stabbe ye.



Imprinted at London by E. Allde for W. Ferbrand, and George Loftes, and are to
be sold in Pope's Head Allie. 1604.

THere is a Humor used of late,
By eue'ry Rascal swagg'ring mate,
To give the Stabbe: I Will Stabbe (says he)
Him that dares take the wall of me.
If you to pledge a health deny,
Out comes his Poniard; there you lie.
If his Tobacco you dispraise,
He swears, a Stabbe shall end your days.
If you demand the Debt he owes,
Into your guts his Dagger goes.
Death seeing this, does take his Dart,
and he performs the Stabbing part.
he spares none, be who it will:
his lisence is the World to kill.
S. R.

Deaths great and general Challenge.
I Do defy the World and all therein,
My challenge at the Scepter does begin:
Down to the Plough Swain, come who dare in place,
Set foot to mine, and look me in the face.
My flesh and fat, does make no burly show,
A raw-b^ne fellow, all the World does know.
To deal at sundry Weapons, J refuse,
As Fencers (when they play their prizes) use:
Of Sword and Dagger I have little skill:
Rapier I never wore, nor never will.
My sight is very bad to have about,
For I Will assure you both mine Eyes be out*
But at the Irish Dart J only deal:
Whose Heart I hit, I nere knew Surgeon heal.
My Horse is pale, well paced; I never shoo-him,
Saint Georges Gelding was a ^ade vnto-him,
I would ride often, when I go on foot,
But there is no Shoo-maker can fit me' a Boot.
Deaths Prologue to his Tragical Stabbe.
TO no degree or faculty, I do intend offense;
Al those I threaten here to stab, and send the wretches hence
Are such, as tremble when they hear, what fatal Stab I give,
For though I kill both good and bad, all creatures that do live,
The good are never terrified with any power I have:
I open the them Door of life, the chiefest thing they crave.
But to the wicked graceless sort, most fearful appear,
Because I send them to a place, does pass all torments here.
To the^ the name of Death seems Death, Oh it is a fearful sound
For of the hope of life to come, they want assured ground,
From this bad World unto a worse, I send them forth to dwell
I am the Iaylor, leading them unto the vault of Hell.
Good news unto the good J bring: but to the wicked, evil:
Because I send the one to God, the other to the Devil.
Such as fear God, they fear not me, but bid me do my worst
If any find himself agreeu'd, i will stabbe that fellow first.
Tyrant Kings.
YOu high Imperious crowne-contending Kings,
Who for Earth's glory (not Religions good)
Turn humane bodies into bloody springs,
And die the ground with slaught'red christians blood
That for the gayning of an earthly Crown,
Will toss a spacious Kingdom vpside down.
You that deuorce the husbands from their wives,
By fatal war, the endless foe to peace:
you that deny poor newborn Babes their lives,
and will not grant sweet life an hours lease:
That care not how, or by what means you reign,
So you the golden Crown and Scepter gain.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Wicked Magistrates.
NObles and Judges, mighty men on Earth,
That careless cast the sword of Justice by*
And let your pleasures surfeit in their mirth,
Not lending poor men's Plaints, ear, hand, nor eye:
Suffering the Just unjustly be oppressed,
When the oppressor lives at ease and rest.
Forgetting God, whom you should represent,
In all the actions of your public place:
Yielding the world your hearts, with full consent,
To gather Mammon, hoording wealth apace.
You that nere think your selves must once appear
To give account how you have Judged here:
I Will Stabbe ye.
Curious Divines.
Divines, that are together by the ears,
Puffed up, high-minded, seeds men of dissension,
Striving until Christ's seame-lesse garments tears,
Making the Scriptures follow your invention,
Neglecting that, whereon the soul should feed:
Imployde in that, whereof souls have no need.
Curious in things you need not stir about,
Such as concern not matter of salvation:
Giving offense to them that are without:
Upon whose weakness you should have compassion,
Causing the good to grieve, the bad rejoice;
Yet you with Martha, make the worser choice.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Covetous Lawyers.
LAwyers that wrest the Law to your affection,
To favor, or disfavor, as you please:
And keep your Clyants purses in subjection,
Till some do get Pierce pennylesse disease:
Nor caring how their cause do stand or fall,
So you your selves get gold to rise withal.
That while you deal with Angels, serve the Devil,
Because you banish Conscience out of town,
Covetousness, you knowe's a damned evil;
And yet you wrap it with you in your Gown.
You that with if's with and's, demurrs, delays,
Bring Causes in consumptions and decays.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Vp-start Courtier.
COurtier, whose heart with pride, so mighty grows,
thou will not to thy Father move thy Hat,
because he wears a pair of ruslet Hose,
Thy Velvet Breeches look awry at that:
Nay, ere he shall disgrace thee, thou will rather
Swear by the Lord, that he is not thy Father.
You that deny the stock from whence you came,
thrusting your self into some Gentle kin,
you that will give your self an other name,
Which must not from an old Thatcht-house begin.
you that will have an Arms shall grace you too,
Though your poor Father cobled many a Shoo.
I Will Stabbe ye.
VVealthye Citizens.
YOu Citizens that are of Dives wealth,
His costly clothing, and his dainty fare,
Regarding nothing but selfe-ease and health:
How ever Lazarus lies poor and bare:
your Dogs are not so kind to lick their sores,
But rather serve to bite them from your doors.
You that do make your Tables Poulters stalles,
Great provocation to the sinful flesh:
And though the famished, hunger-starued calls
For Jesus sake, with Crummes our wantes refresh:
Your Dishes have the food for which they cry:
You play with that, for which they pine and die.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Greedy Usurer.
THou Fur-gown'd slave, exceeding rich and old
Ready to be deuowred of the Grave:
Thou that wilt sell a soul, to purchase Gold,
And gold, still gold, nothing but gold do crave:
Thou most extreme hard-harted cruel wretch,
Whom Hell gapes for; the Devil comes to fetch.
Thou that wilt not forbear an hours time,
But wilt a forfayture severely take:
Thou that by cruelty to wealth do clyme,
And threatnest Dice of poor men's bones to make,
Having that rustie gold upon thy hand,
For which, there is thousands perish in the land.
I Will stabbe ye.
Cursed Swearers.
THou that do take Gods holy name in vain,
Which is of wondrous fear and reverence,
Thou that reprou'd, wilt utter Oaths again,
To grieve him, that admonished thy offense.
Thou that wilt say, He that is agreeu'd with swearing,
May stop his ears or get him out of hearing.
Thou that wilt swear a truth, not to be so,
And swear that which is false, to be most true,
Thou that wilt vow most absolute to know,
That which thy conscience knows thou never knew.
Thou that wilt swear, thou car'est not what thou swearest
because the devil and thy tongue are nearest.
I Will stabbe ye.
Physicians of the Quacksaluers crew.
DOctor, or rather Dunce, that purge with Pill,
Until that silver have a clean Purgation:
You Artlesse Bussard, that abuse the skill,
Of Learned men, deserving reputation.
You that had never Doctorship in Schools,
But got your grace from women or from Fools.
You base. Quacksaluer in a Common wealth.
That practice Physic out of old wives tales,
you that can make them sick which have their health
And learn by Almanackes, to pare your Nails.
You that can tell what sign is best affected
To pick ones Teeth, or have his Beard corrected.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Gentlemen of hase brood.
GAllant that takes the Altitudes on hie,
and like a Fawk'ners Hawke do hood your wife,
Giving those golden Angels leave to fly,
your Father kept close prisoners all his life:
you that are Son to him that held the Plow,
Transformed by Gold, into a Gentle now.
You that are Fashions spy, and Humors Ape,
A silken Ass, a very Velvet Clown:
A perfect Gull, that lets no Fashions escape,
To swagger it in London, up and down.
you that within a suite of Cyuit dwell,
And Garlike was your Fathers only smell.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Counterfayte Captain.
YOu Captine mouse-trap, grown a desperate stabber
You that will put your Poniard in men's guts:
You that last Voyage, were no more but swabber,
Yet you crack Blades as men crack Hasel-nuts,
You that try all your manhood with a Puncke,
And fight most bravely when you are most drunk:
You that protest the Feather in your Hat,
came from a Countess Fan by way of favor:
Your Rapier, why the great Turk gave you that
For mighty monst'rous Marshal-like behavior*
You that wear Scarfs and Gart'rings for your hose,
Made all of Ancients, taken from your foes.
I Will Stab ye.
Dissembling Soldier
YOu Sirrah, that usurp a Soldiers name,
Vaunting your self a Thunderbolt of Wars,
Vowing that every joint you have is lame,
By piercing Bullets, bloody wounds, and scarres:
You that some hundred men at once withstood,
And fought most bravely to the knees in blood.
You that have slain more men by break of day,
Then could have graves dug for them in a week,
You that have made your foes to run away,
Stark naked, when their breeches were to seek:
You that have compassed all the earth's globe round,
Yet never trod a step from English ground,
I Will Stab ye.
Unkind Parents.
Parents, which so unnatural are grown,
That for your Children you will not provide
Becoming so obdurate to your own,
With hardened hearts you can them not abide,
But to a stranger will extend more good,
then to the offspring of your blood.
You that in rage and fury, most unkind,
Will utter Curses where you ought to bless:
For which God often yields to your mind,
and says Amen, to wished ill success.
You that from all humanity have ceast,
Man-like in shape, in manners but a beast.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Disobedient Children.
CHildren that most undutiful do live,
Forgetting what the Law of God commaundes:
You that no reverence to your parents give,
But follow that which with your fancy stands,
That only like the Prodigal, will spend,
But come not home (as he did) to amend.
You that propound your selves unthrifty ways,
And will not unto sound advise consent:
you that do run like Follies witles strayes,
Until some prison teach you to repent
you that live as you please, do what you list,
and admonition utterly resist.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Drunkard.
YOu filthy slaves, whom I do often see,
sleeping in Tauerns on the benches drunk:
That will have full carowses come to thee,
Till with the liquors lading thou art sunk.
Then fill us Boy one quart of Charnico,
To drink a health to Dicke before we go,
You that will drink Reynaldo unto death:
The Dane, that would carowse out of his Boot,
and quaffe an hundred Flemings out of breath,
Laying as many Frenchmen under foot:
you that no other course observe and keep,
But either drinking, drunk, or else a sleep.
I Will Stabbe you.
Periurers.
Villain, that runn'st the ready way to Hell,
and never art at home, till thou come there,
Base slave that for base Bribes thy soul wilt sell,
And any thing wilt undertake to swear.
Thou carest not for God, nor man's law fears,
Until the Pillorie bite off both thine ears.
Thou that do make thy tongue a Serpents sting,
To wound and hurt the Innocent withal:
Thou that confusion to thy self do bring,
And wilful wilt into perdition fall:
Thou that art known amongst the best and most,
and Officer of Hell, Knight of the Post.
I Will Stabbe you
God-lesse Athists.
THou damned Athist, thou incarnate Devil,
That do deny his power which did create thee:
a Villain apt for every kind of evil,
And all the eyes in heaven and earth do hate thee.
That make account when thou shall breathless lie,
Thy soul and body like a beast do die.
That Pharoa like dare ask what fellow's God?
Esteeming sacred Scriptures, to be vain*
And that the dead in earth shall make abode,
and never rise from out their graves again:
That say; eat, drink, be merry, take delight:
Swagger out day, and Revel all the night.
I Will Stabbe thee.
Miserable Merchant
Merchant, that do ende^our all thy days,
To get commodities for private gain:
Caring no whit by what synister ways,
Nor by what hazard, travel, toil, or pain:
Never respecting other men's hard crosses,
So thou may sell decrepen-worths by their losses.
Thou that do covet all in thine own hand,
and for another let him sincke or swim:
Thou that have blessings both by Sea and Land,
Given by God, yet never thankest him:
thou that with careful nights do break thy sleep;
to gather wealth, which long thou can not keep.
I Will Stabbe thee.
Deceitful Artificers.
ARtificers, and Crafts-men of all trades,
That deal by craft in selling and in bying:
You that with falsehood often times persuades
Men to give credit to untruth and lying:
That care not, so your ware content the eye,
Though your own Father be deceived thereby.
You that protest to use a man most kind,
And serve him that, shall well be worth his money,
When he that tryes you, shall be sure to find
The deeds prove Gall, and words contain the Honey.
You that are outside goodly protestations,
But all the inside false dissimulations.
I Will Stabbe ye.
VVretched Husbandman.
YOu Husbandmen that heap and hord up Corn,
And never laugh, but when it waxes dear:
You whom the poor do wish had nere bin borne,
Because you famish and undo them here.
You that an Almanacke still bear about,
To search and find the rainy weather out.
You that at plenty evermore repine,
And hang your selves for grief, to see the same.
You that will weep when as the Sun does shine,
And sigh to hear but of faire-weathers name.
You that for nothing but dear years do pray,
To Gentleman your Sons, another day.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Svvaggring Ruffian.
YOu Swagg'rer, with your Hat without a band,
Your head beshagg'd with nittie lousy locks*
You that upon Tobacco virtue stand,
Your only sovereign Medcine for the Pockes
You that wear Boots, and Ginglers at your heels,
Yet when you ride, your coatch has but two wheels.
You that will meet one by the highway side,
And swear Gods wounds, Deliver me thy purse.
You that for Bawdy houses do provide,
Though many honest true men speed the worse.
You that will cosen, cheat, tobbe, kill, and steal,
Till for your clothes, Hangman and Broker deal.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Proud Gentlewomen
YOu Gentle-puppets of the proudest size,
That are like Horses, troubled with the Fashions,
Not caring how you do your selves disguise,
In sinful shameless, Hels abominations.
You whom the Devil (Prides father) does persuade
To paint your face, and mende the work God made.
You with the Hood, the Falling-band, and Ruff,
The Moncky-wast, the breeching like a Bear:
The Perriwig* the Mask, the Fan, the Muffe,
The Bodkin, and the Bussard in your hear:
You Veluet-cambricke-silken-feather'd toy,
That with your pride, do all the world annoy.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Odious Quarreler.
YOu Sir, that are so quarrelous by nature,
That you scorn all men, be they what they will:
Tearming each one a cowardly base creature,
That will not swear and curse, stab, fight, and kill.
You that will challenge any to the feelde,
Vowing while you can stand, never to yield.
You that without any offense at all,
Will shoulder him you meet upon the way.
You that (by wounds and blood) will have the wall,
Eu'en in despite of him that dare say nay.
You that inhumane, brutish, most vncyuill,
Profess your self a Champion for the Devil.
I Will Stabbe you.
Disloyal Traitor.
FAlse hearted Traitor, bred of Judas kind,
Sent from the Furies, about Helles affairs:
That unto mischief wholly art inclined,
And neither for thy soul nor body cares:
Thou that with Sinon wishest Troy might burn,
To serve and fit the Devil, thy Masters turn.
Thou that do plot and practice against the state,
And Gods Anointed dare with treason touch.
Thou that can to thy Sovereign be ingrate,
Whom thou art dearly bound to honor much:
I Will fyle no hands upon thee; I abhor thee,
But I Will give order to the Hangman for-thee.
Filthy Pander.
YOu scuruie fellow, in the Brokers suite,
A Satin Doublet, faced with Grease and Ale,
That of the art of Bawdry can dispute,
To pick a living from a damned Whores tail.
Thou that within thy Table have set down,
The names of all the Squirils in the town.
Thou that can hold a Fan, and keep a Door,
And offer any Constable the stabbe:
Thou that about the streets can walk a Whore,
And bring her unto him that wantes a Drabbe.
Thou that art outside horned like an Ox,
Thy inside all Tobacco, and the Pox.
I Will Stabbe thee.
Lease-mongers.
REnt-raysing rascals, you that care not how
You do exact upon the needy wretch,
That live even on the poor man's sweating brow,
And from his painful toil, your riches fetch:
Early and late, his labors all are spent,
To pay a churlish dogged Naball rent.
You whom the Prophet curses with a woe,
House-mongers, that on earth would ever dwell:
Grinding the poor, as their distresses shoe:
And at the price of old Shoes do them sell.
You that of Earth enough will never have,
Till soul in Hell, and body in the grave.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Adulterer.
THou filthy fellow of a beastly life,
Poluted both in body, and in mind:
That breakest wedlock with thy lawful wife,
And think all is well, if thou the world can blind.
Tut, Death has work enough with other men,
Heel come when thou art an old man; God knows when.
Tell thee of Judgment, or of Gods displeasure,
Why, thou will answer, He has grace in store:
And for Repentance, thou will find some leisure,
When Age will let thee follow Whores no more.
Thou that wilt serve the Devil with the best,
And turn God to his leauings, and the rest.
I Will Stabbe thee.
Idle-huswife.
FIne, neat, and curious mistress Butter fly,
The Idle-toy to please an Idiots eye
You that wish all Good-huswiues hanged for why,
Your days work's done each morning when you rise
Put on your Gown, your Ruff, your Masske, your Chain
Then dine and sup, and go to bed again.
You that will call your Husband Gull and Clown,
If he refuse to let you have your will:
You that will poute and lowere, and fret and frown
Unless his purse be lavish open still.
You that will have it, get it how he can,
Or he shall wear a Vulcans brow, poor man.
I Will Stabbe thee.
Prodigal Gallant.
YOu Sir that have your purse crammed full of crowns
The lively picture of the Prodigal:
That have your mouth furnished with blood and wounds
And come in Whores, Wine, Fiddlers: you will pay all.
You that are like the Dwarf in Athens, right,
Who in five days, spent's Patrimony quite.
You that are churched once in seven year,
But in a Tavern you could live and die:
You that have your Joy in Belly-cheere,
In Dice, in Dancing, and in Venerie.
You that for penance of your passed sin,
In Woodstreete, or the Poultry, mean to Inn.
I Will Stabbe thee.
Gluttone.
YOu goodman Glutton, bellyed like a Butt,
Faced like the North-windes picture in a Map:
Thou with the never satisfied gutt,
Whose life is eat, and drink, and take a nap.
Thou that if Wolner were alive again,
Would eat more at a meal, then he in twain.
Thou most unhealthy loathsome ravenous beast,
That take delight in nothing but excess:
And have a nose to smell out any Feast:
A brazen face to ceaze on every mess,
That undertake nothing with good will,
Unless it be thy Pudding-house to fill.
I Will Stabbe thee.
Sooth-sayer, or Figure-flinger.
YOu Cunning man, or rather co'sning Knave,
That will tell good man Ninney of his Marc:
Cysley, how many Husbands she shall have,
Tom Carter, when the weather will be fair:
My neighbor Powling, who has found his Purse,
And Ione his w^^^ who did her Chickens curse.
Whether a man shall have a happy life,
Whether a Lover shall his Love enjoy:
Who shall die first, the husband or the wife?
Whether the child unborn, be girl or boy?
You that can fetch home Servants run away,
And find out any Cattle gone astray.
I Will Stabbe ye.
My fine Dauncer.
HEigh, w'on turn more, let us see this Galliard out,
I promise you the fellow does it well:
How nimbly at his trade he turns about,
At hopping up and down he does excel:
Well, let him dance it out, and when it is done,
A dance twixt him and Death must be begun.
You nimble skipiacke, turning on the toe,
As though you had Gun-pouder in your tail:
You that do leap about and caper so,
Esteeming our old Country Daunces stale.
You that do live by shaking of the heel,
By hopping, and by turning like a wheel.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Ieffery Make-shift.
SHifter, that lives without a lawful calling,
And only baseness with your humor fittes,
That cares not in what myschefe you are falling,
But make an occupation of your wits:
You that have always cheating Dice in store,
With, Come sweet Five, I hold ye six to four.
You that can cunningly in Cooks shops brawle,
And show your self in Chollers mighty heat:
while your Consort steals Victuals from the stall,
To find your poor and needy stomach meat.
You that for all your diet with your Host,
Do set your hand in Chalk unto his Poast.
I Will Stabbe you.
Spend-thriftes, and ill Husbands.
YOu careless wretches of the wastfull vain,
That for your Families will not provide:
But live in Idleness, and take no pain,
Spending your own, and other men's beside:
That wife and children utterly neglect,
And to your servants never have respect.
You that do wish them hanged, will purchase lands,
Tearming him that spares Money, worse then mad:
You that commit your Stock to Vitlers hands,
With Tush, a merry Heart outliues a sad.
You that are a good fellow to your friend,
Druncke from the weeks beginning to the end.
I Will Stabbe ye.
Have at you all to stabbe and kill,
There flies my Dart, light where it will.

He that will take no warning, let him choose,
Few words my masters, I intend to use:
My deed and word, together always go,
I love plain dealing, you shall find it so.
The Stabbe I promise, and the Stabbe I Will pay,
Your Hearts shall have it, on their dying day.
But think that day is very long to come,
And you shall live more years then other some:
Think though your friends and kindred daily die,
You shall escape, your turn is nothing nie:
Put my remembrance far out of your mind,
For wicked men no hope in Death can find:
They think upon me with a cruel fear,
They quake, and tremble, when my name they hear.
I bring but heavy news, their souls to grieve,
Yet till I come, they will it not believe.
He that has health and ease, with gould stored still,
And nere in's life did good, nor never will,
Tell him of Death, of Judgment, and the Grave,
And what reward in Hell, the wicked have;
That very shortly he shall not be here,
That with his flesh the Worms shall make good-cheere,
That other men his hoarded goods shall share,
That hence he must depart, poor, naked, bare:
That earth's delights shall be of no esteem,
That all the world cannot a Soul redeem:
That Dives begg's for drops, where torments dwell,
That there is no comfort to be had in Hell.
That they which have done good, to Heaven shall go
That they which have done ill, to endless woe.
His blockish Senses, worlds conceits so smother,
It enters one ear, and goes out at the other.
Therefore let him that will hold on his course,
Go on in evil, and be worse and worse*
It Is nothing unto me, if heel not mende,
I Will Stabbe him for the Devil, there is an end*
Drink and be merry as good fellows do,
And if you please you may be drunken to.
Carouse your drunkardes health's from day to day,
Till I, and Sickness, take your health away.
Swear and blaspheme Gods sacred holy name,
And take delight in doing of the same.
Thunder out Oaths, such as in Hell are bred,
Until I tear thy tongue out of thy head.
Bear thy self proud, as lofty as thou can,
Despise the poor, disdain an humble man,
Boast of thy store of wealth, thy worldly wit,
I Will turn thy flesh and bones to rot for it.
Malice thy neighbor, cause thou see him thrive,
And for to get away his living, strive.
Undo him if thou can, and for that sin,
I Will leave thee but a Clout to wrap thee in.
Raise Rentes apace, build Houses, purchase Lands,
Be always raking with Oppressins hands.
Think all is lawful purchase, thou can catch
from thy distressed friendles needy wretch.
Buy thy poor neighbors House over his head,
Turn him and's children out to beg their bread.
Deal cruelly with those are in thy debt,
And let them at thy hands no favor get.
Send them to Prison; there in all distress,
To taste the mercy of the merciless.
I Will shackle thee, for stirring hands or feet
Within a Coffin and a Winding-sheete.
Say to thy self, as once the Churl did say,
(Whose soul the Devil fetched that night away)
For many years, much goods thou have in store,
Eat, drink, be merry; take delight therefore:
Exclude all Pity, Conscience, and Remorce.
Get Goods it skils not how, by fraud or force.
I Will come upon thee, when thou think least,
And thou shall die, as thou did live, a Beast.
Dissemble cunning, do it with a grace:
Give all kind words before thy neighbors face.
Protest thy kindness he shall never lack:
Yet hang him (if thou can) behind his back.
Flatter, and fawn: with falsehood pray upon him:
Bestow the courtecie of Judas on-him:
Of all thy villainy I keep a score,
Ere long thou shall deceive the world no more.
Be a Time-seruer; live as others do:
With some profane, with some religious too:
Yet howsoever thou have done, or spoke,
Let thy Religion serve but as a cloak.
Think thou art a man from whom much wisdom flows,
If thou can blind the eyes of men with shows.
To get thy self Gods curse, with worldlings praise,
Why, it is a sin most common now adays.
Look to it wretch, as sure as Death; so sure,
An everlasting Hell, thou shall endure.
Strive and contend, revenge the least offense:
Threaten by Law: urge to extreme expense.
Spend many a pound, in quarrel of a penny,
And be it right or wrong, yield not to any.
Let no man have the ending of thy cause,
But only Lawyers; try it by the Laws.
I Will Stabbe thee fool; there is no Atturnyes fee
Can find out Law to be revenged on me.
Build sumtuous Houses, title them thine own:
Make wrong pay-maister for the wood and stone.
Let thy Wives pride, be all thy Tennants woe,
Because the Devil and she, will have it so.
Hood-her, and Mask-her; Fan her with a Feather:
Let Vanity and Lightness, go together.
Upon the pleasure of thy Hawks and Hounds
Waste it away most prodigal, by pounds.
Be bountiful in spending on a Whore,
And miserable to relieve the poor.
Feast every day, as once the Glutton did,
And none but Gluttons to thy Banquets bid.
Receive thy food, as Beasts do feed on Grass.
Sit down like th'Oxe, and rise as does the Ass,
Steal Gods good guiftes, and never use his name,
Unless in swearing, to abuse the same.
Live as thou list: but for thy time so spent,
By me to Judgment, hence thou shall be sent.
And this resolve, howeuer Sin does dlind-thee,
Eu'en as Death leaves thee, so shall Judgment find-thee
FINIS.
Deaths Epitaph, upon every man's Grave.
BEhold the state of all the Son of Men,
That live to die, and die they know not when:
How Flowerlike they wither and decay;
How soon Deaths Since does mow them down like Hay.
How vain a thing of all things else, is Man,
How short his life is measured out a span:
How he is borne with tears, brought up in pain,
And how with sighs, he leaves the world again.
FINIS.
S. R.


