THE EXPERT MIDWIFE, OR An Excellent and most necessary Treatise of the
generation and birth of Man.

Wherein is contained many very notable and necessary particulars requisite to
be known and practiced: With diverse apt and useful figures appropriated to
this work.

Also the causes, signs, and various cures, of the most principal maladies
and infirmities incident to women.

Six Books Compiled in Latin by the industry of James Rueff, a learned and
expert Surgeon: and now translated into English for the general good and
benefit of this Nation.

LONDON. Printed by E G. for S. B. and are to be sold by Thomas Alchorn at the
sign of the Green Dragon in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1637.

Imprimatur

THO. WYKES. R. P. Ep. Land. Cap. Domest.

To all grave and modest Matrons, especially to such as have to do with women
in that great danger of childe-birth, as also, to all young practitioners in
Physic and Surgery, whom these matters may concern, Grace, Peace, and good
success, in their undertakings, heartily wished.
ALbeit the sundry presidents of books in this kind, formerly published,
might free me from Apologizing for myself for this work, yet will I add to
what others have said one reason of maine consequence, not observed by any that
I have read, which will much strengthen these my endeavors. It is observeable
that in all ages of the world and throughout all countries in the world, that
the help of grave and modest women (with us termed Midwives) has ever been
useful for releife and succor of all the daughters of Evah, whom God has
appointed to bear children into this world, which things so being, and women
with all being Universally as all men know (for the most part) unlearned, any
further then to understand their own native language, as a french woman to
understand french, a dutch woman dutch, or an english woman english. And the
business whereunto God has ordained them of so great and dangerous
consequence as concerns the very lives of all such as come into the world, and
withal for preventing of great danger and manifold hazards, both unto the
mother and unto the infant it being necessarily required that the parties
employed thereabout, should understand the business which they take in hand,
which cannot be without the knowledge of many particulars concerning both the
mother and the Infant, which they can never attain unto, but either by the use
of books penned by skilful Physicians and Chirurgions, or by conference with
the learned and skillful (which can hardly, or not at all, in most places be
had, or else by practical and long experience, which though it be the surest
mistress, yet is it the dearest, and has cost the lives of many, both in this
kind and otherwise, before knowledge could be thereby obtained; these things so
being, what reason has any to seek or debar grave and modest women, such as
God has called to that function (or other grave and modest matrons; such as
though not so precisely thereunto called, yet may be assistant and helpefull
unto the midwife in so great dangers, and whose pains and labors also are of
an absolute necessity, in the mid-wives absence) of the use of such means as
may enable them to the undertaking of matters so dangerous, and so full of
peril, with much less hazard to the patients, and pains and turmoylings to
themselves; for the unskilfulnesse and want of knowledge in the midwife in
matters both concerning the mother and the infant, does questionless
oftentimes endanger the lives, both of the one and the other, and procure much
unnecessary trouble to themselves, whenas, perhaps, had a skillful midwife the
matter in hand, there would be neither peril to the one, nor pain to the
other: but will some (nicely precise) perhaps say, It is unfit that such
matters as these should be published in a vulgar tongue, for young heads to
pry into. True, if by other means it might be effected: but the danger being
great and manifold, and the unlearned for their sex for the most part (further
then their own tongue) being in all ages and in all places, (as I have said)
thereunto assigned; whether is it better that millions should perish for want
of help and knowledge, or that such means which though lawful in themselves,
yet may by some be abused, should be had and used? do we not see in many
cases, that those things which otherwise were monstrous, are yet by necessity
made tolerable? Or shall we because some good things are by evil men and
evil minds abused, therefore deprive the good, of the use of good things? If
such slender reasons as these might prevail, then might there perhaps a great
number perish, before ever they saw the light, who otherwise might live and
increase the number of Gods church by their offsprings, and perhaps also a
great deal more work might be made for men-midwives, then yet is, although
there be too too much already, and some perhaps for private profit have too
far already incroached upon women's weaknesses and want of knowledge in these
their peculiar businesses. To conclude, I say only this, my intentions herein
are honest and just, and my labors I bequeath to all grave, modest and
discreet women, as also to such as by profession, practice either Physic or
Surgery. And whose help upon occasion of extreme necessity may be useful
and good, both for mother, child, and midwife. But young and raw heads, Idle
serving-men, profane fiddlers, scoffers, jesters, rogues; avaunt, pack hence; I
neither meant it to you, neither is it fit for you. Thus craving the favorable
construction of the grave and honest, but not respecting the rash censures of
the peevish. I rest at your devotion unto whom in the beginning I have
inscribed these my labors, the particular contents whereof, follow in the next
leaf.

Fare you well.
The Method of the Work, through the Arguments of the Books and Chapters.
THe first Book entreats of the Generation of man and women.
Of the generative, or begetting seed, what it is, how, and in what manner it
has its beginning. Chap. 1 Of the mixture of the seed of both sex: also of the
substance and form of the same. Chap. 2 Of the three coats, with which the
Feature is environed, defended and covered in the womb. Chap. 3 Of the three
faculties disposing and governing the body, and of the spirit it self. Chap. 4
Of the true Generation of the parts, and the increase of the Feature, according
to the days and months. Chap. 5 Of the food of the Feature in the womb, with
what nourishments it is nourished, and when it grows to be an Infant. Chap. 6
The second Book, of the Matrix and parts thereof; also of the condition and
state of the Infant in the womb, and of the care and duty to be observed by
women with child.
How necessary a thing it is, to insert the Anatomy of the Matrix to this
Work. Chap. 1 Of the substance, form, qualities of the Matrix, and the parts
annexed. Chap. 2 Of what great profit it is, to have an exact knowledge of this
Tractat. Chap. 3 Of the condition of the Infant in the womb, also of the care
and duty belonging to women conceived with child. Chap. 4 How the Infant is
conditioned, and in what state he is, the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth
month: And also of the difference of the sex and forms. Chap. 5 Of certain
Precepts very necessary for women conceived with child, even to the hour of
the birth, by reason of diverse chances. Chap. 6
The third Book, of the birth, and of all manner of remedies, which may
concern women in time of childbirth, and also their Infants.
Of the due and lawful time of the birth, and of the form and manner of it,
and also of the pains and dolours of women in time of their travel and
labor. Chap. 1. Of the office of Midwives, and of the apt form and fashion of
their Stool, or Chair. Chap. 2 Of certain natural Precepts and Medicines
furthering and easing the slownesse and difficulty of the birth. Chap. 3 How
the Secundines or after-burden may have an easy passage if it stay behind.
Chap. 4 Of the usage and ordering of the woman in childbed, and of the Infant
being newly borne. Chap. 5 How, and with what Instruments children sticking in
the womb, and being dead, are to be brought forth. Chap. 6
The fourth Book, of the differences and varieties of an unnatuarall birth,
and of the cure and remedies of them.
Of the first form and fashion of a birth not natural, and how it is to be
remedied. Chap. 1 Of the second. Chap. 2 Of the third. Chap. 3 Of the fourth.
Chap 4 Of the fifth. Chap. 5 Of the sixth. Chap. 6 Of the seventh. Chap. 7 Of
the eighth. Chap 8 Of the ninth. Chap. 9 Of the tenth. Chap. 10 Of the
eleventh. Chapter 11 Of the twelfth. Chap. 12 Of the thirteenth. Chapter 13 Of the
fourteenth. Chapter 14 Of the fifteenth. Cha. 15
The fifth Book, of the false conception named Mola, and other false tumors of
the womb: Also of aborcements and certain Monsters, and likewise of the diverse
signs of conception.
Of the deceiving conception Mola, and of other falsely supposed conceptions.
Chap. 1 Of the cure of the false conception Mola, and other false tumors and
swellings of the womb. Chap 2 Of unperfect children, and also of monstrous
births. Chap. 3 Of the causes and signs of aborcement, or untimely births, and
also of all manner of cures of such as suffer abortion. Chap. 4 Of the signs
of Conception. Chap. 5 Whether men and women may engender or conceive children
of Devils and Spirits: and again, whether Devils and Spirits may have
children by men and women. Chap. 6
The sixth Book, of diverse causes of sterility and barrenness, and of the
special maladies of the Matrix; and also of the diverse remedies of all of them.
Of the sterility of men and women: also of the causes and signs of the same.
Chap. 1 Of the cure and remedy of sterility and barrenness, proceeding from
phlegm. Chap. 2 Of the cure of sterility, arising from the choleric
humidities and moistures of the Matrix. Chap. 3 Of the cure of barrenness, if
it proceed from superfluous bloody humors of the Matrix. Chap. 4 Of the cure
of sterility proceeding from a melancholy humor. Chap. 5 Of the remedy of
sterility, proceeding from overmuch heat, dryness, moisture, and coldness.
Chapter 6 Of certain general Precepts, serving for the curing of the barrenness
of men and women. Chap. 7 Of the suffocation or choking of the Mattrix, and of
the causes and cure of the same. Chap. 8 Of the praecipitation or falling down
of the Matrix, and of the causes and cure of it. Chap. 9 Of the superfluities
of the Terms, and of the cure of the same. Chap. 10 Of the causes and cure of
the stopping of the Terms. Chap. 11
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Generation of Man.
CHAP. I. Of the Generative or Begetting Seed, how, and in what manner it has
his beginning.
WE observe the natural Procreation of man, The procreation of man, such as
the generation and beginning of Plants or Herbs.
to be altogether such, as we perceive the Generation and beginning of Plants,
or Herbs, of every kind to be. For as they, every one of them from the seed
of his kind, cast into the womb of the earth, do bud, or increase, and do
naturally grow to the perfect form of his proper Nature: So man also, being a
reasonable creature, according to the quality of his body, does naturally draw
his original and beginning from the Sperme, and Seed of man, projected and
cast forth into the womb of woman, as into a field. But that matter of
Generation, which we call Sperme or Seed, What the begetting seed is.
by his original and nature, is only a superfluous humor, the residue and
remainder, I say, of the nutriment and food, and the superfluity of the third
concoction, or gestion in the body, derived and conveyed along, through the
hidden and secret organs, or instruments, from the chiefest members of the
body, unto the generative parts, and serves for Generation.

From whence it has its beginning.
And it has his beginning and breeding, from the residues and remnants, of all
the meats belonging to the nourishment of man, after they be altered, and
transmuted, even to the third Concoction: of the superfluity of which concocted
food, collected and gathered together, in his proper and due manner, it is
evident that the same is engendered, according to the constitution of the age
and nature: For there is made, a threefold concoction of any meat, Three
Concoctions.
altered and converted into the nourishment of the living creature, even to
generation of Seed, that concoction nevertheless following, which is the
purest of all concoctions: For the food being Meseraicae) carried, as it were,
to one gate, flowing out of innumerable channels, is brought to the Liver.
Where, to the disposition of the former concoction, made in the stomach, there
is forthwith made the second concoction, in the Vasa emulgentia) that it being
strained through the Kidneys, might descend down into the Bladder, then the
remnant and residue refined and cleansed in the Liver by this concoction, that
is to say, blood, is conveyed over to the heart to receive his vital
administration and office. In How seed is it gendred.
which is superfluous in it self, by the secret pores and passages. At length,
here the Spirit changes, and turns the blood conveyed through the
spermaticall, or seede-vessells (being branches of Vena cava) there also
further concocted, into the Nature of Sperme or Seed, by the twined revolutions
and backe-turnings of the smallest vessels for this purpose, and by the
Glandulous, or kernelled substance of the testicles, and the seed passages
(which they call Parastatae) availeable in that behalf. So the blood
exquisitly wrought, and labored, and, for the most part, converted into vital
spirit, is streight-way conveyed by the Artery, named Oborta, and branches
thereof, to all the other members of the whole body. But strengthening life,
which being the purest of all remained lastly with the vital spirit; that
thing in like sort being expelled, in sweat through the pores, if any impure
thing shall be remaining, or engendered.

But that the reason of this generation, The like reason of seeds in Plants.
and beginning may be made more plain, and evident unto us: we will declare by
a brief demonstration hereunto added, that there is the same beginning of
Plants, and herbs, and of other things, which fall under the same
consideration, that Plants and Herbs do. Therefore as in the seeds of every
kind, the grain it self cast into the ground is the food, and, as it were,
the first subject of all the alteration following, whereby it budds and
springs, is augmented, and grows up into a Nature like unto it: so meat being
taken, affords in man's body, the first, matter to variable concoction. And as
there in Plants, we observe a most certain separation of the pure from the
impure, and of the remnant from the superfluous matter; so here we perceive a
natural separation and sequestration of that which is unprofitable from that
which is profitable, by their certain degrees. For, first the seed being
committed to the earth, by and by swelling with moisture of the same, strippeth
it self from that little skin, in which it was enclosed, and springing upward,
casts forth the same being empty, as a dry excrement, the grain in the mean
time budding and sprouting forth, that it may proceed original, from whence it
had his beginning: that in the same it is altogether true. Nature ingenders
things like unto it self.
That Nature does engender things like unto it self: For every thing does
naturally covet, and desire the form and likeness of that, from whence it is
bred: whereby thou can not see apples, to grow from a pear, nor pears from
an apple, unless it be otherwise procured by the means of grafting, and
planting. Wherefore the same thing remains, to be acknowledged in the
Generation of man and woman, which is to be confessed in the growing of Plants
and Herbs, that because we see bodies well distinguished by members, to be
engendered of seed, we may also believe that the same seed does proceed from
the distinct, Whether the ingendring-seed be from the brain.
and several parts of the body; wherefore let them look what and how well
they speak which do affirm, the seed of Generation to be engendered of the
brain only, when as it is not so agreeable to the consideration of the
concoctions, A good part of the seed derived from the brain; but the greatest
part is from the chiefest parts of the whole body.
nor to the constitution of the bodies. Truly, it is certain that some,
neither also a small part, is derived from the brain, but the chiefest part is
collected and gathered together from the chiefest parts of the whole body. For
if we say, that this should be engendered of one, or two parts only: every man
shall perceive that this consequence would follow by an infallible reason, What
the consequence would be, if the seed should be engendered of one or two parts
alone.
to wit, that those same parts only, should be engendered again. Therefore we
say rightly, that besides that beginning, which it draws from the brain, it
is engendered from the whole body, and the most especial parts of the same, the
effect it self manifesting the cause, most especially when we see distinct
members, and perfectly finished, according to the due form of the body, in
things procreated and brought forth. We have on our side, Hippocrates
affirms, the seed to be collected from the whole body.
against the opinion of others, Hippocrates himself, being the Prince of all
Physicians; who also himself does affirm, that the seed is collected from the
whole body, and so truly, that the thing begotten, does answer and agree to
the constitution of the thing begetting, of feeble seed, I say, a weak man
being borne, The infirmities and ill-favored marks in children proceeds from
the corruption of the seed in parents.
but of strong seed, a strong and lusty man being borne. By which things it
happens, that also many times we see the infirmities, and ill-favored marks
of the body in the children, which are remaining in the parents, which we do
constantly believe, to have passed into them, by the corruption of the seed.
Therefore, these things being certainly determined, concerning the beginning and
matter of ingendring seed, let it suffice to have spoken these things in the
first place.

CHAP. II. Of the mixture of the Seed of both sex, also of the substance and
form of them.
But after the womb (which is a generative member of the Female sex) has
conceived the seed of man, it does admix and mingle her seed also to it, so
that of both the seeds of both sex, there may be made one mixture. The first
matter of the Feature. Aristotle's opinion.
But about the first matter of the Feature, all are not of the same judgment.
For Aristotle says, that the Terms of the woman, are a prepared matter, of
the whole Feature, although it be crude and indigested, which is formed and
fashioned by the seed of man, received into it, the same seed being turned into
vital spirit, which like a workman, does proportion and fashion this matter,
like a Smith plating and smoothing his rude piece of Iron upon the Anvill. But
Galen declares, Galens opinion.
that both the seeds confused and mingled together in the Matrix, are the
first matter of the Feature, and so truly, that with out the due mixture of
these, nothing can be conceived, nor engendered. Yet although the mixture of
these may be made equal, notwithstanding it is out of all doubt, that the
quality of them is not alike: The seed of man more hot and thick than woman's.
for the seed of man does exceed woman's seed, in heat and thickness, which
incomparison of man's seed, is more moist and cold, and therefore also it is
manifest that it is more waterish, yea, in respect of the temperature. The
woman's seed affords the like help as man's does in framing the Feature.
But nevertheless, although they differ so much in quality, the woman's seed
does yield and afford the like help and furtherance, in framing the Feature,
that the seed of man does, so that the seeds do mutually grow, and increase
at once together, by the virtue of both of them.

Further, when as menstruous blood, is the matter of woman's seed (that as well
the beginning of this, as of man's seed, may be evident unto us) we must
understand, What the Terms are.
that the Terms (named in Latin Menstruum) are no other thing, (a natural
consideration being had of them) than the excrement of the third concoction, or
digestion, gathered together, and voyded every month (named the monthly
Purgation, of the Latin words, Every woman of a sound constitution ought to
have her natural and monthly purgation.
mensis Lunaris) for every woman being of that age, which may endure this
Purgation, so that her body be of a sound and healthful constitution, ought
naturally to be Purged and cleansed from this superfluous matter every month;
And for the same cause the Germans do name this Purgation, Flowers; because
even as the trees which do not blossom and send forth flowerrs either through
age or corruption of Nature, do not fructify, nor bring forth fruit: Without
natural purgation in due se^ion, women cannot conceive nor engender.
so also every woman deprived of these Flowers, I say, of this purging in her
due season, by the course of Nature, can neither conceive, nor engender, being
like unto an unfruitful and a barren man, destitute and deprived of the same
virtue, and faculty of ingendring, either by some defect or corruption, or
because natural heat is exhausted and wasted, by his over-moist and cold
complexion.

Therefore both seeds mingled, blended together and received into the womb, are
eft soon compassed, The seed congealed and curded together like a tender Egg.
and enclosed about, with a certain little coat or caul, engendered by the
heat of the Matrix, and are congealed and curded together, after the manner of
a tender Egg, which is compassed about with a most thin rind, or little
skin, as the figure annexed does demonstrate and explain.

CHAP. III. Of the three Coats, wherewith the Feature is environed, defended
and covered.
THe little room, or coffin being engendered after the conception; the vital
Spirit enclosed in the same, rouseth and puts forth it self, and then the
defenses or caules are engendered to the Feature conceived. And first, truly,
of the uttermost face and superficies of the seed, because of the waterish
moisture and humidity of women's seed, is engendered a thin and slender
membrane, or caul, which by reason of his moist quality, is extended and
stretched abroad; at the first being so transparent and clear, that we may see
through it, The first coat or caul of the Feature, is named, Chorion.
but after the birth, it is contracted and drawn together into a little heap,
named Chorion, or Secundae. Besides, of the superfluous humidity, and moisture
of this, there are engendered also, two other little coats, or caules, which do
protect and defend the Feature from superfluous and noisome things: as from the
Terms retained, and stopped after conception, Two little coats or caules
engendered, which defend the Feature from hurt.
and also from other superfluities, which neither serve, nor are profitable to
the nourishment, nor increase of the Feature, but do rather hurt and offend,
yet nevertheless they are retained in the Matrix, between the caules, named
Secundae, even until the time of the birth, then they issue forth, a breach
being made by themselves, or they are set at liberty, by the help of the
Midwife.

Therefore the second coat or caul, The second coat or caul is named Biles.
named of the Arabians, Biles, of the Grecians Allantoides, adjacent and lying
near to the connexed and united parts of the Feature, incloseth and infoldeth
all inferior things from the Navell, which caul is wrinckled and somewhat
pleated, not unlike to a pleated garment, into which the urine, and sweats do
distill, and also other sharp, and eager humors, if any do flow, and issue
from the nature and ripe Feature, and are detained there, even until the time
of birth. For now, the Infants grown to greater maturity and ripeness, do
not void and expel urine, by the urine-pipes and conduits, to the privy parts
out of this vault, but by certain passages through the Navell. Therefore the
Feature is fortified and defended from the urine, and other noisome humors, by
that coat or infolder, lest he should be molested, and grieved with the
acrimony and sharpness of them, or else gather some impurity, or uncleanesse
unto him.

The third Coat, The third coat is named Abgas.
or Caul, claspeth and imbraceth the whole Feature, compassing it inwardly
round about, and does defend and protect the tender Feature, both from noisome
humors, and also from the rougher outward coats, being a very soft and slender
Caul; and therefore of the Grecians, is named Amnaea, because it comes near
to the softness and tenderness of a Lamb. But of some it is called the
Armor of the conception, in the Arabian language, it is named, Abgas. But the
Figure adjoined, does lay open the differences of these Coats, or Caules, with
the intermingling of the seed contained in them.

CHAP. IIII. Of the three faculties, disposing and governing the body, and of
the spirit it self.
NOw the Seeds, both of man and woman, being mingled, blended, and enclosed
together, eft-soones the force or faculty, the power and might, I say, of the
soul, essentially attributed to it, to perform and accomplish her actions in
the body, does appear and show forth it self, and begins to work
conveniently almost in a threefold manner.

The first faculty is natural.
The first faculty and virtue is natural, being the mover and foundation of the
other faculties, common both to living Creatures, and to Plants. This, by and
by, from the time of Generation, does work, even until the perfection of that
which is engendered, namely, by augmenting and nourishing. And it has his place
and seat in the Liver, and from thence is dispersed and sent abroad by veins
into the whole body: But the operation of it at first appearance is found to be
threefold. Thy altering, or changing faculty (the which some do call the
immutative faculty) which first generally immuteth, and alters the substance
of the Seed, and also converteth and digesteth it, 1. The altering or changing
faculty.
from that which it was before, into the substance of the several parts, that
every one of them may be distinctly composed and made: and particularly
inclining again into that substance, by those mixed qualities, and elementary
faculties, by heat and moisture effects and frames the softer substance,
such as flesh is in living Creatures, but in Plants, or Herbs, the flowers and
the pith: by heat and dryness it frames the heart is living Creatures; in
Plants, or Herbs, is makes the roots: by cold and moisture, in living
Creatures, it makes and works the hairs; in Plants, or Herbs, the leaves:
also by cold and dryness, in living Creatures, it works and makes sinews
and bones; and in Plants, or Herbs, the rinds, barks, and wood. Afterward, the
forming or fashioning faculty, 2. The forming or fashioning faculty.
or virtue (which others call the Informative faculty) is that which forms
and fashioneth the matter which is changed, to the similitude and likeness of
that from whence it drew his original and beginning, the parts like unto their
first original, being severally disposed and ordered. By this virtue and
faculty, the parts, which ought and should be hollow, as the guts, veins,
arteries, and such like, are made hollow, and those parts which ought to be
massy and solid, are in like manner formed so. And in few words, it forms
all things, yea, the smallest of them particularly, and perfecteth the
superfice, or uttermost face of every little particle, or diminitive portion,
so that nothing remains idle, nothing also superfluous.

The helping, or minstring faculties.
But to these principal faculties, belonging to natural force, in perfecting
the living Creature, other helping, or rather ministering, faculties womb, from
the time that the seed is conceived, that it may suffice for the composing and
ordaining of so many, To the nutritive faculty, four other aiding and helping
faculties.
and so great parts of the living Creature. And to this last faculty and
virtue, four other aiding and helping faculties, are said to approach. The
attractive, which some call the appetitive faculty, which attracteth does
necessarily expel and void superfluous things, neither agreeable or convenient
to the quantity, nor quality of the parts, and therefore by no means to be
assimilated and united to the parts.

The second principal faculty is named Vital.
The second faculty and virtue which works principally in humane seed, is
called Vital, and possesses his seat and mansion in the heart. And that
quickneth and gives life to the heart, from whom the vital Spirit by the
Arteries annexed to it, does proceed to the members, to be quickened and revived
by the disposition of a natural faculty and virtue, by dilating and
contracting the Heart and Arteries. By dilating and enlarging, I say, because
the moving force and power which remains in the heart, does dilate and spread
abroad the motion of the heart it self, from the middle and Center of it, into
all the extreme and outward parts. But by contracting and knitting together,
because the same force and faculty collecteth and contracteth again the motion
of the heart from the extreme and outward parts, to the middle and Center of
it. We see both of them to be done and performed by the benefit of the lungs,
which, like a pair of bellows attracteth and draws air to the heart by an
Artery: The lungs like a pair of Bellows attracts air to the heart.
that is conveied and diffused again from the same by the Arteries to other
parts of the body. The same month the breast with a continual motion, the
nerves and sinews being moved first of all. Air most necessary for the
mitigation of natural heat about the Heart.
Therefore this air is most necessary, both for the mitigation and asswagement
of natural heat about the heart which is attracted from the cold air, to
temperate and moderate immoderate and overmuch heat; especially, seeing it is
manifest, The heart of so hot a constitution, that unless it be mitigated by
air from the lungs, it would be suffocated and perish.
that the heart is of so strong a constitution, that it would quickly be
suffocated and strangled by it self, and so perish, unless it should attract
to it a cold temperament and mitigation every foot from the air by the lungs,
of whose temperature the Animal Spirit is engendered, and is seated in the
brain, as we will streight-way declare, from whence all the nerves and sinews
drawing their beginning, do descend down by the ridgebone of the back, named
in latin, Spina dorsi, and from thence afterward are distributed and divided
into the body, and are also cherrished and preserved of their primary Animal
Spirit, by the help of the vital spirit. Notwithstanding the same air
attracted by breathing, The air attracted by the lungs, is by many means
often corrupted.
by the labor and employment of the lungs, and passing into his vital spirit,
by many means is also corrupted, as has been often observed, I say, by the
evil disposition of the brain, by the infection of the Liver, by the passion
of the heart, by the corruption and rottenness of the Lungs, and such like
infirmities; also by excessive corruption of the air outwardly approaching unto
it: of which to speak much, for the present time, would both be besides the
purpose, and also to no profit.

The third faculty is named Animal, and is threefold.
The third faculty is Animal, which, as the Queen, does possess the highest
place, and obtains a seat in the brain. And the same is certainly found to
be threefold: For, the first virtue of the same, 1. The disposing and ordering
faculty.
is the disposing and ordering faculty, which disposes and orders the whole
brain, and alone does employ and busy it in his order. In what parts of the
brain Imagination, Reason and Memory are seated.
For in the former part of it, it places and seateth Imagination, in the
middle part, it scituateth Reason, and in the hinder part it sets Memory;
For whatsoever Fantasy has conceived in the former little cell, cave, or
ventricle, that it streight-way transferreth and sends to the Senate and
Councel-chamber of Reason, there, as it were, to be examined by judgment and
determined: and whatsoever is here collected, and approved by judgment, that
it sends and commits to Memory, to be reserved (as it were, in a treasury
or storehouse) and to be directed, concerning his acts and effects. 2. The
Sensitive faculty.
The second virtue is the Sensitive faculty, the which although we know, that
it is variable and diverse, in respect of the senses, yet we may understand,
that it is caused and effected in this manner. The Animal spirit (whose place
of late we said to be in the brain) proceeding from the interior and inward
little caves and ventricles of the brain, The Animal Spirit does form and
frame the senses.
by the mediation and assistance of certain subtle and slender sinews, does
form and frame the Senses, and by his virtue through the ministry and
furtherance of the sinews, directs and transposeth sight to the eyes,
smelling to the nostrills, hearing to the ears, and tasting to the palate of
the mouth, which senses we see only to be numbered and nominated of the senses
of the head. The third is the Moving virtue, 3. The Moving faculty.
engendered and bred in the brain; to whom it is said to be proper, to move and
give motion: For as the Animal spirit disposes and directs the orders and
properties of the senses, The Animal spirit directs the motions.
as is before declared, so by the benefit of the same faculty, the motions
also are directed, by which the virtues and faculties of the Spirit are
dilated, opened, and enlarged, and are likewise conveyed and sent abroad to the
other members.

But for the perfection, and complement of all these virtues and faculties,
Spirit is necessarily required, Spirit necessary for the perfection of the
former faculties.
by whose benefit and continual motion, as well the senses, as the faculties,
are instigated and provoked to perform and finish their faculties and actions.
And they say, that the Spirit is a certain airy substance, which continually
exciteth and stirs up the powers and faculties of the body, to fulfill and
accomplish their actions. And indeed, this Spirit is a certain subtle body,
What spirit is.
engendered by the force of heat, because of blood flowing and streaming in the
Liver, attracted and drawn by breathing and the Arteries, and afterward
diffused by the veins to all the members, quickening the bodies, serving to
promote and further motion, by the means and aid of the nerves and Muscles.
But first this is directed and conduced to the Liver in this manner: Heat
remaining in the blood, How natural spirit is engendered.
there is caused a certain boiling in the Liver, from whence a certain fume
or vapor issues and proceeds forth, which eft-soones being purified, by the
veins of the Liver is changed and transmuted into a certain airie substance,
and is called Natural Spirit, which purifieth and clarifieth the blood, and
afterward is sent and distributed to the particular and several members.

Afterward the same Spirit is transferred and carried from the Liver by
certain veins to the Heart, How vital spirit is engendered.
where by the motion of the parts of the Heart, and a mutual coagitation, it
is made more pure, and is converted into a more subtle and finer Nature, and
begins to be Vital and truly Spirit: because is diffuseth and spreads it
self from the Heart by Arteries, to the members of the whole body, and does
augment and further the virtue of Natural Spirit.

And again, How Animal spirit is engendered.
the same Spirit mounting and penetrating upward, from the Heart through
Arteries, to the little caves and ventricles of the brain, is there more
exactly labored and refined, and is transmuted and altered into the essence
and substance of the Animal Spirit, Animal Spirit most pure.
which is most pure of all, from whence streight-way it is sent and conducted
again by the organs and instruments of the senses, to corroborate and
strengthen those senses in some measure. Although therefore it be the
selfsame one Spirit, yet because of his diverse offices and functions in
diverse parts, Why the Spirit is called Natural, Vital, Animal.
it is diversely taken and understood; as in the Liver it is named Natural, in
the Heart Vital, and in the brain Animal.

But we must not believe that this Spirit is the immortal soul infused into
man of God, Whether the Spirit be the Soul.
but it is only the instrument, and, as it were, the Chariot of the same. The
Spirit but the instrument or Chariot of the Soul.
For by the means alone of this Spirit, the soul is conjoined and united to
the body: neither yet also is there any perfect exercise of the soul, without
the ministry and service of this spirit, which thing might easily be proved,
but that already, this discourse, concerning the faculties and Spirit, has
been overlong.

CHAP. V. Of the true Generation of the parts, and the increase of the Feature,
according to the days and months.
AFter the Matrix naturally apt, and proper, for receiving seed of Generation
(like unto a Lodestone attracting Iron, and Amber drawing to it hairs and
feathers) has received the begetting seed, and by heat has enclosed both
seeds together, after the manner of the Runnet or as Egg; From the first day,
unto the sixth and seventh, many subtle slender threads do grow and spring up.
forthwith, from the first day, even unto the sixth and seventh day, very many
most subtle, and slender threads, or hairs, as it were, named in Latin Fibrae,
do grow and spring up, bred by the motion of heat, in which the Liver
incontinently with his most principal organs and instruments is engendered by
natural virtue: For Vital or lively Spirit, Vital spirit does frame and
distinguish the most principal members within the tenth day.
conveyed and sent by his instruments to the conceived seed, does form, frame
and distinguish the most principal members within the tenth day, being
received in, and having enrance by certain veins of the Secundine, to which
the Matrix is affixed and fastened, by which blood is brought and conveyed into
it, and of which also the Navell is engendered, as is manifest by the third
Chapter. And in the same time, three little small white speckes, Three little
white specks arise.
not unlike to curded milk, arise in the congealed seed, in the place of the
Liver, Heart, and Brain, as this Figure does testify.

A little while after also a vein directed by the Navell, A two-forked vein
engendered.
attracteth the grosser blood confused in the seed, fit and convenient for
nourishment, whereby a two-forked vein is engendered according to the form of
this Figure.

In one branch of that vein, The generation of the Liver.
blood is collected and gathered together, of which, first the Liver is
procreated and engendered, in the same manner, as has been spoken before of
natural virtue and faculty. Whereby it easily appears, and is evident, What
the Liver is.
that the Liver is only congealed and clotted blood, I say, a certain sanguine
mass, or bloody lump: and also we may see, how many and diverse veins it has
appropriate and commodious to it in the expulsive and attractive virtue. And in
the other branch, those weavings, interminglings or webs of the veins are
engendered and framed, with the dilation and spreading abroad of other veins,
also of the stomach, spleen, and guts in the lowest part of the belly. From
hence afterward, by and by all the veins are recollected and gathered again
in the superior texture and combination of the Liver-veines, to the notable and
Master vein, named in Latin, Vena cava, as it were, branches to one stock or
body. That stock again forth with brancheth out, and sends from it branches
and slips of veins to frame the Midriffe, named in Latin, Diaphragma, and
also not a few into the superior and higher part of the backe-bone, named in
Latin, Spina dorsi, placed and situated above the Midriffe or Diaphragma,
also it directs and sends them into the inferior or lower part even as
far as the thighs.

Afterward the heart with the veins extended and stretched out from the Navell
into the seed, The generation of the heart.
is engendered and produced, directed and disposed to the ridgebone of the
back, named in Latin, Spina dorsi, by the Vital and lively faculty and
virtue, as this Figure does demonstrate and express.

And these veins do attract, suck, and draw unto them the hottest, the most
subtle and purest blood, of which the heart is engendered in the membrane or
skin of the heart, involving and lapping the same round about, named in Latin
Pericardium, and the heart is fleshie, What the Heart is.
and of a gross substance, by nature, as is necessary for such a hot member.
But the notable and great vein, Vena cava, spreading out himself, and
penetrating into inward concavitie, vault, or privie-chamber of the right side
of the heart, deriveth and carries blood thither, for the nourishment of the
heart. The unmovable and still vein.
Also from the same branch of that vein in the same part of the heart; a
certain other vein does spring up, named of some the unmoving or still vein,
in Latin, Vena immota, vel tranquilia, so named, because it does not beat and
move, as other pulsive moving veins of the heart do, named in Latin, Venae
pulsatiles, but lies hidden, being calm and still, ordained and destinated to
this office, namely, The office of the unmovable and still vein.
that it should conduct and convey blood digested in the Heart, unto the Lungs
and Lights, which vein is environed and lapped about (for which cause it is
named Vena arteriosa, an arteried vein) with two coats, like unto the
Arteries. But in the concavity and hollow of the left part in the heart, a most
great and notable pulsive or beating vein, Aorta.
called Aorta, does spring up, diffusing and sending abroad vital and lively
spirit by the blood of the heart, into all the pulsive and moving veins of the
body. For as Vena cava is the original, fountain and spring of all the veins
by which the body attracteth and draws to it the whole nutriment of blood:
Even so, from this great vein, Aorta, are derived all the pulsive, moving, and
beating-veines, on every side dispersing and pouring forth vital spirit
thorowout the whole body. The heart the fountain of lively heat.
For the heart is the source and fountain of vital and lively heat, without
which no living creature, no member can be cherrished.

Under the great vein Aorta, even now spoken of, The Veyned Artery.
in the left cavity and vault of the heart, another vein as yet springs
forth, called in Latin Arteria venosa, the veined Artery. Although that truly
be a pulsive and moving vein, and convey vital spirit, yet it has only one
coat, as those veins have which convey blood; and that is framed and ordained,
that it may drive and transport cold air from the Lungs to the Heart to
refrigerate, cool, and refresh it, and to temper and allay, the immoderate
heat.

But because veins do break forth from both the concavities and hollow cells
of the Heart, The generation of the lungs.
and are implanted and inserted to the Lungs, the Lungs also formed and framed
by them. For a vein proceeding from the right cavity and hollow of the heart,
proceeds and brings forth most subtle and pure blood, which, the Fibraes,
threads or hairs, being from thence afterward dispersed, is altered, changed
and transmuted into the flesh of the Lungs.

And from the great veins of the Heart and Liver, that is to say, Vena cava
and Aorta, The breast, legs, and arms engendered.
the whole breast is engendered, and also the legs with the arms successively
and in their due order.

Within the before spoken time, The generation of the brain.
the highest and most principal part of this beautiful and admirable frame
and Architecture of Nature, is formed and produced, that is to say, the Brain,
in the third pellicle or little skin of this mass or lump. For the whole mass
or heap of seed being replenished and filled with Animal spirit, the same
spirit contracteth and draws together a great part of the generative humor,
and incloseth and shuts it up in a certain hollow cave, The skull, how it
is made.
in the which the brain is formed and shaped. Moreover outwardly it is covered
and defended with a certain covering round about every where, which scorched
and dried with heat, is brought and reduced into the substance of a bone, and
is made the Scull, called in Latin Cranium, after the form of the precedent
Figure.

And the brain is so formed, that it may be able to conceive, retain, and
alter the natures, and qualities of all the vital, and lively spirits; From
the brain also the beginnings both of Reason, The Original of Reason and the
Senses.
and all the senses do proceed, and have their original: For as the veins
derive their progeny from the Liver, and the Arteries from the Heart: The
Original of the Nerves and Sinews.
So also the Nerves and Sinews being of a softer and milder nature, do spring
and grow from the brain, not being hollow, after the manner of veins, but
solid and massy. For indeed they are the first and principal instruments of
all the senses, by which all the motions of the senses are duly caused and
procured through vital and lively spirit.

After the Nerves and Sinews, the Marrow of the backe-bone, The Marrow of the
backe-bone.
(in Latin Spina dorsi) is engendered from the brain, not unlike to the nature
of the brain, so that it may scant be called and termed Marrow, Not unlike to
the nature of the brain.
both because it has no similitude, nor likeness unto Marrow, and also
because it does not resemble the same in substance. What Marrow is.
For Marrow is a certain superfluity of the nutriment of the members
proceeding from blood ordained and destinated to moisten and cherrish the bones
of the body: but the brain and Marrow of the backe-bone, or Spina dorsi, The
Marrow of the backe-bone derived from the seed.
do draw and derive their original and primacie from the seed, not deputed
or allotted to nourish other members, and to make them prosper in good plight,
but that they should by themselves ordain and constitute private and
particular parts of the body, for the motion, emolument and use of the senses,
that from thence all other nerves and sinews may take their roots and
beginnings. Many nerves do spring from the Marrow of the back bone.
For many nerves do spring from the Marrow of the backbone, or Spina dorsi,
from which the body may have sense and motion, as it is evident, by the Vital
and Animal faculty and virtue by good defense, as has been declared in the
former Chapters.

Further, we must here note and consider, that of the seed are engendered
Cartilages, or gristles, Of the seed a e Cartilages or gristles, bones, etc
engendered.
bones, the coats of the veins of the Liver, and of the Arteries of the heart,
the brain, with the nerves and sinews; again, the coats, and also both the
other pannicles or caules, and wrappers, and coverings of the Feature. But of
the proper and convenient blood of the Feature, Of the blood of the Feature the
flesh is engendered: also the Heart, Liver, and lungs.
the flesh is engendered, and those things which are fleshie, as the Heart,
Liver, and Lungs. And afterward all these things do flourish, prosper, and
are nourished with menstruall blood, a tracted and drawn by the little veins
of the Navell, which veins are observed to attain to the Matrix, from the
orifices or mouths of the veins. All which things are distinctly and orderly
caused and brought to pass from the conception even unto the eighteenth day of
the first Month, at which time it is called seed, but afterward it begins
both to be called and to be a Feature, Feature.
which thing also some ancient Writers have comprehended in these Latin
verses: Sex in lacte dies, ter sunt in sang vine trini;
Bis seni carnem, ter seni membra figurant.


Et aliter.

Injectum semen sex primis certe diebus
Est quasi lac: reliquisque no vem fit sanguis, at inde
Consolidat duodena dies: bis nona deinceps
Effigiat: tempusque sequens producit ad ortum.
Talis enim praedicto tempore figura confit.
Which verses, for the benefit of the unskilful in the Latin tongue, may thus
be Englished.

Six days to milk by proof, thrice three to blood convert the seed.
Twice six soft flesh do form, thrice six do massive members breed.
Or otherwise.

The first six days, like milk, the fruitful seed
Injected in the womb remains still;
Then other nine, of milk red blood do breed,
Twelve days turn blood to flesh by Natures skill;
Twice nine firm parts, the rest ripe birth do make,
And so foregoing time does form such shape.


CHAP. VI. Of the food of the Feature in the womb, with what nourishments it
is nourished, and when it grows to be an Infant.
SO long as the Feature remains in the womb, it is nourished and cherrished
with blood, attracted and drawn to it by the Navell: The Feature in the womb
nourished (...) with blood attracted to it by the Navell.
whereby it comes to pass, that the Terms of women are stayed, and cease to
issue forth, after the conception: For then the Feature begins to covet, and
to attract unto it much blood. Three differences of menstruous blood after
conception.
But the blood is discerned to have a threefold difference after the time of
conception. The first and most pure part of it the Feature attracteth for his
nourishment. The second and not so pure and thin, the Matrix forces, and
drives upward to the breasts by certain veins, The breeding of milk.
where it is converted and changed into milk, and for that cause it is, that
certain passages do bend and incline upward from the Matrix to the breasts, as
in the book following shall appear in the Anatomicall demonstration. The
third, the most gross and impure part of blood remains in the Matrix, and
issues and flows forth with the Secundine, in the birth and after the birth.
Thereby it is, Great affinity between milk and the terms.
that Hippocrates says, that there is great affinity between the milk and
the Terms, when as it happens that the milk is bred and made of them. Galen
also, because of this matter, does elegantly and excellently advertise us, that
the Infant takes and has more from the mother, The Infant receives more from
the mother than from the father.
than from the father; because first that the seeds are augmented and
increased by the Terms, next because the Feature is nourished by them in the
womb by and by; thirdly, because being borne, he is nourished with her milk:
and even as any sprigs or slips have more from the earth than from the Plant,
being, as it were, the Father, So Infants have more from their Mother. Hereby,
he says, it comes to pass, that so much the more is retributed and yielded
back again to the Mother, by how much the more they have given. The Infant
being perfected in the womb the first month sends forth urine by the
passages of the Navell, but the last month by the privy members.
But now the Infant being formed and perfected in the womb, the first Month
it voideth and sends forth urine by the passages of the Navell: but the last
Month, that passage and conveyance being stopped and shut up, he voydeth it by
the privy members, as has bin before declared in the third Chapter, Nothing
expelled by the fundament so long as the Infant is in the womb.
concerning the three coats or caules. But by the Fundament so long as he is
in the womb, he voydeth and expels nothing at all, because he has as yet
attracted no nutriment by the mouth. The time of the life of the Infant.
After the forty and fifth day, by the advertisement of Hippocrates, he takes
life, and with it the Soul infused into him from Heaven, by the judgment of
many, so that then he begins to have sense and feeling. But at this time,
although he be able to have sense and feeling, yet he wants motion, to wit,
being as yet very tender and feeble; The time of moving.
but concerning the time of his moving, Hippocrates does excellently instruct
us in this wise. A rule to know the time of motion, and the time of the birth.
If you double the number of the days from the conception, you shall find out
the time of motion; and the number of the time being tripled and accounted
thrice, will declare the day of the birth: For example sake. An Example.
It the Infant should be formed in forty five days, he will move and stir
himself the nintieth day after, which is the middle day of the Infant lying in
the womb; but in the ninth Month he will proceed, hasten, and come forth to
the birth, although maiden-children, for the most part, are borne the tenth
Month. And let these things suffice concerning the forming, growing, increase,
and perfection of the Infant, in respect of the days and times.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book. Of the Matrix and parts thereof, also of the condition and
state of the Infant in the womb, and of the care and duty to be observed of
women with child.
CHAP. I. How necessary a thing it is to insert and annex the Anatomy of the
Matrix to this work.
ALthough in respect of the matter and work, the handling of this Chapter
might easily be omitted; the circumstances notwithstanding (because the matter
concerns women pregnant and with child) do by good reason seem to require
it. For in any thing, The ignorant attain many things in matters copiously
taught.
to teach the objects, or matter in hand, copiously and largely; and often and
seriously to stir up the senses to perceive and comprehend the certainty of
the matter; every man knows that the simple and ignorant may attain many
things by these means. For as a blind man, which is deprived of the benefit of
the light, will set forth no excellent and artificial work: The Midwife
ignorant of these Precepts cannot discharge her duty.
even so a Midwife, ignorant of these Precepts, shall not be able in doubtful
and dangerous cases to discharge her duty; how shall she comfort other women,
which by reason of ignorance, shall be her self more timorous and fearful
than they? How shall she help and succor the Infant, which shall neither know
the signs of the birth, nor the state nor manner of the lying of the child in
the womb? How shall she help, succor and comfort the laboring woman, to whom
she is not able to give any profitable Precepts because of her ignorance? There
is no good counsel, there is no necessary succor. Wherefore, as in a
Looking-glass any thing is seen and perceived, Most necessary Precepts and
Rules delivered in this Tractate.
so in this tractat or member of this discourse, most necessary Precepts and
Rules are taught and delivered, which most specially appertain and belong to
this business and charge. For that cause we being moved, have been willing to
put forth to view, this Figure of woman's body with the Matrix, and other parts
of the womb, that by this, as with a Looking-glass, they may profitably use
whatsoever do serve, and are convenient for women with child.

But because there is no difference in the bowels of the body of man and
woman: No difference in the bowels of man and woman, but in the privities and
seede-vessells.
except only in the privy parts, and in the Spermaticall or seed-vessells: we
distinguish and divide them severally, as the intent of our Tractate requires,
and do propound to sight the Matrix with the Orifice, or mouth of the neck
thereof, with the annexed Vrine-pipes, or water-conduits, and also the whole
frame of the same to be viewed and seen in this Figure.



But the Figure following does demonstrate and show the womb, mother, or
Matrix, with the neck cut from it, with the mouth or port-passages of the
Matrix being closed and shut up, within the which the conceived seed is
fashioned, formed and detained, even unto the hour of the birth. The same
Figure also does in like sort shadow out the bladder cut from the neck; But we
accounted it a superfluous thing, to mark and point out every several thing
with Letters and Characters, because they are extant, and are to be seen every
where in the books of those which have written of Anatomies.



CHAP. II. Of the substance, form, qualities of the Matrix, and parts annexed.
THe Matrix, mother, or womb, a member proper and peculiar to the Female sex,
is made and framed of Nature, to be the receptacle and receiver of seed, in
which it being conceived, is contained until it grow to the due form and shape
of a body. The form of the Matrix.
The form of this is somewhat square, at length it is also round not unlike
unto a bladder. The parts are two.
The parts of it are two; The first is the receptacle, concavity or hollow
vault, 1. The receptacle.
whose substance is full of sinews, having one coat of sinews, ligaments, and
mixed flesh mingled together, and the substance is endowed with small sense or
feeling, closed together with a strict, straight and narrow passage, greedy and
desirous of receiving, altering and distributing that natural humor. That part
is called the Matrix, Mother, Womb, or the Generative member, in which the
seed is conceived and formed; The passage and gate of this after conception,
The passage of the womb after conception so closed that a needle cannot enter
into it.
is so fast and firmly shut and closed together, that a needle cannot enter
into it without violence and danger, which thing is a most certain argument
and sign of conception: A certain sign of conception.
Also this passage or wombe-port is not opened, but in the conception,
Carnall-copulation, birth, and issuing forth of the Terms. The latter part of
it is called Cervix, or the neck, 2. The Neck, or Cervix.
full of sinews, as it were, consisting of Cartilaginous or gristled flesh,
yet not without fat, having a wrinckle in the upper part, and being of it self
very sensible. That part is called the woman's privity or privie-passage, in the
top of which there are two lips or brims, called the foreskinnes, in Latin
Praeputia, by which the womb and secret parts are covered, fortified and
defended against external air coming underneath. About the sound and bottom
of this part, under the bone, named in Latin Os sacrum, the neck of the
bladder and conduit of the water or urine is discerned to be, under which also
lies the great gut, named Colon. In the middle part of the neck of the
Matrix, The Virgin Pannicle.
is the Virgin-pannicle or skin (not unlike unto a most slender racket)
lincked and woven together with many Fibraes or threads, which is corrupted by
the loss and decay of Virginty. Some call it Eugion, Hymen.
Cento, and Hymen. Further in the same part, on the right and left side, two
horns, as it were, do bosse out, called the Ligaments or binders of the
Matrix with which it is bound, The Horns or Ligaments.
fastened, and basted, and also cleaves, affixed to the backe-bone or Spina
dorsi, on both parts. To those Ligaments, The testicles or stones.
or stay-bands, the testicles or stones are annexed and combined, by their
nature, lesser and harder than those are which belong unto men. Moreover, both
of them are environed and compassed about with white sinews, I say,
seed-vessells, being both also compacted of Arteries. To these also small
veins are united and affixed, derived and springing from the great vein Vena
cava, diffused and dispersed into the Matrix by diverse branches to nourish and
cherrish the Feature in the womb, and to send forth the Flowers or Terms in
their due season. The Kidneys.
The Kidneys do hang near the womb by certain Ligaments or binders behind
the backe-bone, or Spina dorsi, being of a hot and dry temperature, by the
which all the wheyish and watrish humidity is attracted and drawn to be
carried from the veins into the bladder, and also receives his color and
tincture, by them.

The Paps or Dugs of a cold and moist quality, The Paps or Dugs.
intermingled and interlaced with Veins and Arteries, being not unlike unto a
Sponge, consisting and composed of soft flesh, like unto the lungs; have power
and faculty to transmute blood into a white color, and to convert and turn it
into milk. For as the Liver transmuteth the juice of the meat attracted unto
it into blood: so the Dugges or Paps, The Dugs or Paps change the blood into
milk.
alter and change the blood into milk. Further, two veins do descend from
the Paps into the Matrix, which draw blood from thence, to be digested and
turned into milk. Whereby it comes to pass, the Infant being borne, the
Terms due by and by mount and ascend up by these passages, and begin to
change into milk, also the Dugges begin to swell, and are hardened, until they
be made lanke and soft with giving of suck.

Because it does not a little avail, The qualities of the Matrix.
to know the qualities and properties of the Matrix: you shall be able briefly
to observe and perceive them by these marks and signs. It is hot in them,
which have a swift pulse, much thirst, Signs to know when it is hot.
their urine of a very high color, a love and desire to Venus, a speedy
pleasure and delight, store and plenty of seed, the hairs curled, the Terms
inclining to a yellowish color, and not issuing out beyond the third day. It
is cold in them which have a slow pulse, Signs to know when it is cold.
little thirst, their urine thin and white, no love or appetite to Venus,
small store of seed, no pleasure or delight, a lasie sluggishnesse, few store
of hairs, Signs to know when it is dry.
the Terms inclining to whiteness. It is dry in them which have a hard pulse,
thin urine, the lips dry, small pleasure or delight in Venus, few Terms. It
is moist in them which have a soft pulse, Signs to know when it is moist.
the urine thick, the lips moist and slippery, no pleasure. And in this manner
simple qualities are known. Concerning compound and mixed properties, there is
another judgment.

CHAP. III. Of what great profit it is, to have an exact knowledge of this
Tractate.
I Would have the Reader, to be here diligently admonished, rightly to esteem
and regard, of what great utility and profit it is, What more profitable than
this knowledge, for preserving and recovering of health?

What better, than to consider the end of our excellent and wonderful building?


to have What more pleasant than to understand the artificial framing of our
bodies?
What is more pleasant and beautiful, than to have understood the artificial
framing and forming of our proper Nature and body, which we inhabit and
continually abide in? Also the To be mindful of sobriety and temperance.
will command us to be mindful of sobriety and temperance, left that due
concoction be not perfected and accomplished, they being filled more than is
convenient. For when as the first digestion or concoction is diverted from the
course of Nature, The first digestion being hindered, occasion of grievous
diseases is offered.
by and by also the other fail and are frustrated: whereby it comes to
pass, that the humors being corrupted, and the blood infected, the body is
burdened and surcharged, and occasion is offered for breeding of most great
Instructions of temperance to be learned from the condition and situation of
the generative members.
also the condition and situation of the Generative members and seed-vessells
being so secret and hidden, with so many windings and turnings, what other
thing do they yield unto us, than documents and instructions of temperancie?
namely, that they serve only for propagating and increasing mankind, and for
the alleviating and easing their bodies, and for preserving and maintaining
health. Neither is it doubtful, for that same cause, naturally also the forces
of mankind to be weakened and diminished, and further, that they are
exceedingly decayed and debilitated through the immoderate By the admirable
work manship of Nature, we are admonished of our duty.
and by the admirable Art and work-manship of Nature in perfecting man, we are
also always admonished of our duty? that so much as lies in us, we may
carefully preserve those things, which Nature with so much business and labor
has hardly produced and brought forth: and also mindful of charity and love,
we do not mutually rage against those bodies, which we possess, procreated by
Nature the common and general mother, the same compact and uniting together of
one body of diverse members thoroughly pondred and considered, which Nature has
most excellently framed, contrived and joynted together with a strict band of a
sociable law. And that which is The artificial frame of our bodies should make
us acknowledge the profound wisdom of God.
we are put in mind, to acknowledge and learn from such a cunning and
artificial frame of our body, the most profound and deep wisdom of God, and
his admirable goodness: also the end of our state and condition, that is to
say, his glory, and our salvation, and always to utter and express our
greatest gratuity and thankfulness to so great and wonderful a Work-master,
and Creator.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Condition of the Infant in the womb, also of the care and
duty belonging to women conceived with child.
THe seed conceived even unto the forty and fifth day, is changed into the due
and perfect form and shape of the Infant: and then by the judgment of some
learned men, is receives life, and therefore afterward ought not to be called
a Feature, but an Infant, although as yet, When the conception is called an
Infant.
by reason of his tender and feeble condition and state, he wants motion. For
then he is most like to a tender flower and blossom of trees, which is easily
cast down and dejected with any blast of wind and rain; Great heed to be
taken by women with child of affrightments, immoderate joy, sorrow etc.
and for that cause there is need of very great caution and heed to be taken,
that no peril and danger may happen to them which are with child by any
manner of means, either by sudden fear, affrightments, by fire, lightening,
thunder, with monstrous and hideous aspects and sights of men and beasts, by
immoderate joy, sorrow and lamentation: or by untemperate exercise and motion
of running, leaping, riding, or by surfeit or repletion by meat and drink: or
that they being taken with any disease do not use sharp and violent medicines
using the counsel of unskilful Physicians. Again, The wicked Art of old
witches and harlots not to be used.
that they use not the wicked Arts and policies of old Witches and Harlots, for
removing and punishing of whom, the care and charge ought most specially to
belong unto the Magistrates, to wit, being the fathers of the people. For how
many Virgins, how many Widows also ensnared and entangled with these Arts and
divellish practices, Cruel murders committed by the divellish arts of witches.
have committed cruel and more than brutish murders of their tender Babes and
Infants? But of many I will declare a few, which those pestilent and damnable
wretches have used most freely through the whole world, the rest I will leave to
the consideration of others, at least the mischievous practices of these being
somewhat discovered. The arts and acts of Harlots and Witches.
When first being deflowred (and robbed of their best Jewel) they have
perceived some alteration to be caused in them, as variable appetites, a
loathing of their accustomed meat and drink, continual vomiting,
dispositions to parbrake in the morning, passions and pains of the heart,
swoonings, pains of the teeth: by and by instructed with evil Arts, they make
the first experiments by lacing in themselves strait and hard, that they may
extinguish and destroy the Feature conceived in the womb. They lace themselves
very strait.
But when they perceive no help thereby, they assay and attempt greater
matters, going by the instinct of the Devil, to some old Witch very skillful
in curing these diseases, They go to some old Witch.
and famous by long experience, asking and questioning with them about the cure
and remedy of the stopping of their Terms, desiring a medicine and counsel
to procure them to issue: For they say, that they being stopped, do breed and
bring those pains about the Midriffe and thighs, and also to procure many
vomits. The old witch advises them of means.
The old Witch not ignorant of the matter, wills them to enquire for
medicines of Apothecaries, also to gather some herbs in a certain place,
willing and advising them, that they use them in Wine, that they take the
vapor of some, that they put some of them in their shoes, that with some
boiled in water they wash their feet and legs morning and evening: also that
they drink of the docoction of some of them morning and evening. But when this
cure and remedy does not profit, she wills them to open the veins in the
feet, The opening of the veins in the feet destroys that which is conceived
in the womb.
which being done, that perishes by and by which was conceived in the womb.
Sometime Fathers, Masters, and Mistresses of the house observing and marking
this thing, and also some other besides, and conjecturing, as the matter is
indeed, Their precences.
streight-way they pretend and make a show that they are troubled with
wringings and gripings in the belly, with pains of the breast and head, and do
shadow and dissemble the truth of the matter. But the issue of their terms
returning, when they know they are free and delivered from the Feature, These
murdering arts imparted to others.
they impart and communicate likewise those murdering arts and cruel
practices to others, that thereby many murders of silly Infants are
committed. Besides, also many Midwives, and also Chirurgions, and unskilful
Physicians, sometimes over-credulous, do counsel and advise such things to
great evil and mischief. But it is the part and office of a godly and
religious Magistrate both to observe and prevent all these things. Now let us
return to the matter.

The motion of the Infant in the womb.
After the third and fourth month from the conception, the Infant does begin to
move and stir himself in the womb, and somewhat to display and stretch out
himself, and also to enlarge and amplify his narrow little Cottage, whereby
it comes to pass, that the womb begins to swell, and to be amplified and
extended into length, How the Infant about the time of the birth is disposed.
breadth, and profundity. But about or toward the time of the birth, the
Infant inclines and boweth downward, with the face toward the knees, draws
both his legs to him, casts and throws both his hands above his knees,
his nostrils being placed in the midst, being rolled and wrapped together on a
heap, in manner of a Globe, with his former part looking on the back of his
mother, but turning his hinder part to the belly of his mother. And although
some Anatomists do think otherwise, notwithstanding we find it so by often
experience, and set it forth to be viewed in this annexed Figure.



CHAP. V. How the Infant is conditioned and in what state he is, the fifth,
sixth, seventh and eight Month, and also the difference of the Sex and forms.
AFter the third and fourth Month, the Infant uses more plentiful, and
copious nourishment, and does prosper, (...), and increase more and more with
it, until (...) time of birth and deliverance shall come (...) we must know,
The Infant home the sixth month cannot live.
when he shall be born (...) not able to retain life (...) (although he be
distinctly and propound (...) formed) yet he has not attained to his just
perfection. But if he be borne the seventh month, Why the Infant borne the
seventh month may live.
he shall live most easily, because he is perfect enough then. But that they
which are borne in the eight month, are most seldom able to live, when some
borne in the seventh month, do, for the most part, remain alive, does come
to pass, not without good reason. For in the seventh month, the Infant is
always moved to the birth, at which time, if he shall be of that force and
strength, he comes forth to the birth; If he be not, he remains in the
womb, until he shall be able and strong enough, that is to say, the other
two months. If after that motion of the seventh month he proceed not to
birth, he removes himself from thence into another place of the womb, and is
so debilitated and effeeblished by that moving, The Infant borne the eight
month cannot live.
that if he come forth to birth the eight month following, he cannot live at
all, because of that motion. For neither is the Infant weakened with this moving
alone, but with a double motion even unto death. First, Two deadly motions of
Infants.
when he is borne the eight month after his moving in the seventh, as we said
of late. Next, because (in respect of the Planets) every seventh month
brings forth a motion hurtful and dangerous to any Feature. The Sun, I say,
at that time remaining in an opposite Sign, and because the eight month is
proper to Saturn, an enemy of all things which receive life.

Also we must know, The difference of sex, and the cause thereof.
that male-children are conceived in the right side of the Matrix by plentiful
seed, issuing out of the right testicle or stone of the man: but
female-children in the left side, by the seed of the left testicle. For the
right side, because of the Liver, is hotter, but the left side is colder. But
principally the more copious and plentiful heat is a cause of ingendring and
procreating of male-children.

The similitude of form with the parents, is from the power of the seed.
That also children do sometimes answer and agree to their parents in likeness
of form, that thing is caused by the virtue and power of the seed, that the
Infant is most like to him or her in form and shape, whose seed does most
exceed and excel in power and virtue. But in this case, Motion of the stars
supposed a cause.
the motion of the Stars is supposed to prevail some thing, that when the
seed is conceived under good aspects of the Planets, this causes an excellent
shape; but when it is conceived under evil aspects, in like case it procures
an ugly shape. And so much hitherto.

CHAP. VI. Of certain Precepts very necessary for women conceived with child,
even to the hour of the birth, by the reason of diverse chances.
HEreafter we will give some wholesome and necessary Precepts to women
conceived with child, by which, being instructed, they may certainly know how
they may behave and use themselves from their conception, even to the birth and
deliverance, that no danger may happen to them, or they cause a hard and
painful birth to themselves by the neglect of the Precepts. Before all things,
1. To be merry and cheerful, not pined with care.
let them be of a merry heart, let them not be wasted and pined with mourning
and cares, let them give their endeavor to moderat joys and sports; For these
things do both exhilarate and cheer up the Infant, and stir up all the
faculties of the Feature, and do strengthen and comfort him in his parts and
members, as is manifest in the third Chapter.

Further, 2.
let them abstain and forbear from all violent motion and hard and painful
labors, To abstain from violent motion and painful labor, etc.
and let them use moderate exercise, let them not leap, or rise up suddenly,
let them not run also, neither dance nor ride, neither let them lace or gird
in themselves hard or straight, or lift up any heavy burden with their hands.
Sleep especially is convenient.

3. To take heed of sharp and cold winds, great heat, etc.
Again, let them take heed of cold and sharp winds, great heat, anger,
perturbations of the mind, fears and terrors, immoderate Venus, and all
intemperance of eating and drinking. Let the diet and food of women with child,
4. To be moderate in diet.
be frugall and moderate, let them abstain from crude, raw, and gross meats:
to wit, Lentills, Beans, Milium, Beef, salt and fried, fruits, milk,
cheese, and such like. But let them use Chickins, Eggs, diverse sorts of
Pottages, Birds, Mutton and Veale, It will be good sometime to use Cinamome and
Nutmeg, with Sugar. Let reasonable white Wide serve for their drink.

5. Not to let blood the first four months, nor to use boxing-glasses.
The first four months from the conception (by the counsel of Hippocrates)
let them not open any vein, let them also abstain from boxing glasses, or
boxing, let them take no Pills, or purge, without the counsel of an expert and
skillful Physician; for that time the Ligaments and binders of the Feature, are
as yet tender and weak, and therefore the Feature is easily destroyed, and
nourishment is subtracted and drawn from him.

But if it shall happen that they be bound and cannot got orderly to stool, 6.
To make the body soluble being bound.
let them take Spinach seasoned with store of Butter, also Lettuce made tender
with Water, with Salt, Wine, and Vinegar. But if those things will not relaxe
and unloose the belly, let them use Suppositors, confected and made of Honey and
the yolke of an Egg, or with Venice-soape. But if the constipation and binding
shall be so great, that this remedy will not profit, let them by the advice of
a skillful Physician, use a potion of the decoction of the leaves of Sena,
together with Cassia newly extracted and drawn, which the Physician shall
minister, more or less, according to the quality of the constipation or
costivenesse.

And if they shall conceive with grievous Symptoms and accidents, 7. If after
conception there happen swooning and fainting, what to do.
and after the conception shall suffer swoning and fainting continually, let
them drink Sorrell-water, and Rose Water warmed, tempered with Cinnamon and
little Rundells or Cakes, named Manus Christi, or Diamargariton. Or the water
of Roses and Buglosse, being tempered with a litte Cinnamon, Cloves, and Saffron
beaten to powder: shall be laid upon the breast in a cloth once or twice doubled
together, dipped and steeped in that water.

If they think they shall be delivered before their time through some
accident, what to do.
But if they think they shall be delivered before the time, as in the seventh
month, or some other immature and unseasonable time, and shall already feel
the dolours and pains of their labor to be moved and stirred up, either
through some immoderate exercise, or constipation and hard binding of the
belly, or by an Ague, or some other disease; let her receive a Fume or
Suffumigation of Frankincense upon the coals. For the doing of this will
greatly strengthen the Matrix and the Infant. Afterward, let her bathe the
outward parts with Allome, Galls, Comfrey decocted and sodden in Raine-water,
Wine, and Vinegar. And if they shall be weak and feeble by swooning, let them
take Diamargariton, or Manus Christi, after the same manner as we spoke before.

But if a disposition to vomiting shall creep upon them, If there happens a
disposition to vomit, or want of digestion, what to do.
or that they cannot digest the meat which they have taken, let them use this
syrup: Take of the syrup of Pomegranates one ounce and a half, Musk, Lignum
Aloes, of each one scruple, Cinamome one scruple and a half, temper and
commixe them with three ounces of water of Sorrel, and make a draught of it
for them to drink. Let them drink this syrup every day when they are fasting,
being well warmed: Also for the strengthening and comforting of the stomach,
let them use these Roundells or Trochiskes: Take of the confection Diambra,
morning and evening, and also after meat. To strengthen and comfort the
stomach.
Also let them lay this Plaster following upon the mouth of the stomach. Take
Masticke, Cinamome, red Roses, Sage, Mint, Baulaustium, or the flowers of
Pomegranates, of each one ounce and a half, Oil of Quinces, of Turpentine a
sufficient quantity; make a Plaster, of which take so much as may suffice to
spread, upon a piece of Leather, the breadth and form of a stomack-plaister,
termed Seutum, which may be covered with silk: Or let them use this Unguent or
Ointment. Take Masticke, white Frankincense, Mints, of each a little quantity,
let them temper every one of them beaten to powder with common oil, and
therewith anoint well the mouth of the stomach.

10. If they shall have their Terms come down, what to do.
But if in the time of childbearing they shall have the Terms to come down,
they shall prepare sweet milk in which a piece or gad of steel red hot has
been extinguished and quenched, they shall drink of it, they shall eat of it,
they shall make Pottage and Sops with it. Also they may sweat using these
things. Take of the greater Plantane, Inula campana, Cinquefoile, or
Five-finger grass, Culvers or Pigeons dung, the stalks of Beans and Oats, of
each one handful; let them all be let decocted in water together, and let
sweatings be provoked by sitting in a bathe of them.

11. Women that are seldom delivered at the due time, what to do.
There are also many women, which are seldom delivered at the due time, but too
soon, and before the time: let them when the are conceived with child,
prepare and make bathes for their feet and legs, in which let them sit daily
one hour before supper, and again three hours together after supper.

Take Saxifrage, Camomile, Salt, Dill, of each a handful: Also they may use
this Electuary, in the morning, and when they go to bed. Take Electuarium
laetificans mixed and tempered with Been, white and red, beaten to powder. But
especially this thing (which is known by much experience) shall greatly profit.

Take the little skins extracted and drawn out of stomachs of Hens, and let
them take them beaten to fine powder for a few days in the morning fasting
with Wine, the weight of a French-crowne. And these, truly, are general
precepts, fit and convenient for many accidents and changes, that it may be
certainly evident and apparent to every one, how they ought to carry and
demean themselves from the conception even until the time of the birth, the
knowledge of the which is not so profitable, as the use is necessary.

The end of the second Book.
The third Book. Of the birth, and all manner of remedies, which may concern
women in time of childbirth, and also their Infants.
CHAP. I. Of the due and lawful time of the birth, and of the form and manner
of it: and also of the pains and dolours of women in time of their travel and
labor.
NOw the ninth Month being instant, the nourishment of the Infant begins to
fail in the womb, and not to be sufficient, The Infant being great, and
wanting nourishment, moves with great violence in the womb.
because of the greatness of the Infant, to which he is grown unto. For now
being great, he needs much nutriment and food; which, because he cannot
sufficiently attract and draw unto him by the small veins, and likewise by the
Navell, he is moved with great force and violence in the womb: He breaks the
ligaments.
so that he breaks asunder the Ligaments or binders, the small veins with
the coats or caul, in which he is wrapped and infolded, I say, the Secundine
with the other two coats or wrappers, of which it has been spoken before; and
does prepare and unloose himself to the birth, after the manner of this figure.

What the pains of the birth are.
By this declaration and appearance, Midwives and other women which are present
with pregnant and laboring women, may mark and observe the true and proper
pains, passions and throngs of child birth: which indeed are no other thing,
but the violence and strugglings of the Infant being come to perfection, with
which he is driven, tossed and rolled hither and thither, and striveth
downward to the lower parts, that he might have passage to come forth into the
light. For the membranes or caules being broken by his striving and violence,
and the Matrix being disclosed and opened, the humors do begin to flow
abroad, from which the Infant being freed and delivered; by and by feels the
air, and through desire of this life is rolled toward the out-passage of the
Matrix, A natural birth.
his head turned toward the mouth and entrance of the Matrix. And this is the
form and manner of a legitimate and most natural birth, if first the head
proceed forth, the hands stretched downwards by the sides, and laid upon the
hips, as the present Figure adjoined does show and express. But the birth is
said to be unnatural, if any of these conditions and properties shall be
wanting. The Midwife to be provided of convenient things.
Wherefore the Midwife shall have a diligent care, that she be furnished and
provided timely and speedily to receive any birth, with a convenient Stool or
Chair, with a Knife, Sponge, binders, and with oil of Lillies warmed, with
which she may profitably anoint both the womb of the laboring woman, and
her own hands.

CHAP. II. Of the Office of Midwives, and of the apt and fit form and fashion
of their Stool or Chair.
The office of Midwives.
But what the Office of Midwives is, in the time of birth, and how the action
may proceed, we will now declare. First, let the Midwife know the time, and
observe the true pains and dolours, also let her comfort and cheer up the
laboring woman, and let her chearefully exhort her to obey her Precepts and
admonitions. Likewise let her give good exhortations to other women being
present, especially to pour forth devout prayers to God, afterward to do
their duties at once, as well as they are able. Which done, let her bring the
laboring woman to her Stool, which ought to be prepared in this fashion.



Let the Stool be made compasse-wise, The form or fashion of the stool.
underpropped with four feet, the stay of it behind bending backward, hollow
in the midst, covered with a black cloth underneath, hanging down to the
ground, by that means that the laboring woman may be covered, and other women
sometimes apply their hands in any place if necessity require. The Stool to be
furnished with clothes.
Let the Stool be furnished and covered with many cloths and clouts at the
back and other parts, that the laboring woman receive no hurt, or the Infant
any where, strongly kicking and striving because of the ^^^ines, stirrings, and
motions of the mother. And after the laboring woman shall be set in her Chair
about to be delivered, the Midwife shall place one woman behind her back which
may gently hold the laboring woman, taking her by both the arms, and if need
be, the pains waxing grievous, and the woman laboring, may stroke and press
down the womb, and may somewhat drive and depresse the Infant downward. But
let her place other two by her sides, which may both with good words encourage
and comfort the labouring-woman, and also may be ready to help and put to
their hand at any time. This being done, let the Midwife her self sit stooping
forward before the lobouring-woman, and let her anoint her own hands, and the
womb of the labouring-woman, with oil of Lillies, of sweet Almonds, and the
grease of an Hen, mingled and tempered together. For to do this, does profit
and help them very much which are gross and fat, and them, whose secret parts
are strict and narrow, and likewise them which have the mouth of the Matrix
dry, and such women as are in labor of their first child. It will also be
profitable to commixe and temper with those things the white of an Egg.
Lastly, all these things thus prepared, let the Midwife instruct and encourage
the party to her labor, to abide her pains with patience, and then gently
apply her hands to the work as she ought, by feeling and searching with her
fingers how the child lies, and by relaxing and opening the way and passage
conveniently for him, while the mother is in pain, and also where there is
need by enlarging and stretching out the neck of the Matrix warily, and if the
Infant stay from proceeding forth, and be stopped any where, with her fingers
tenderly to direct the Infant to lie and proceed forth directly and naturally,
when he lies crooked and overthwart, and to further him to an easy birth.
Let her conveniently receive the Infant proceeding forth to birth, and let her
presently cut the Navell, The cutting of the Navell.
about the length of four fingers being left, and let her bind it hard with a
double thread, as near to the belly of the child as may be; which being done,
let her have a care of the Secundne or afterbirth; let her move and stir it,
the Matrix as yet being stretched out and open, before being shut it be closed
together again. But that a diligent care may be used in cutting the Navell,
we were willing to set forth all the coats, called by one name the Secundine,
to be viewed in this Figure, how they do cleave together in the womb, and do
mutually draw one another. Secundine.
For the Secundine is a Pannicle or skin of three coats, involving and
wrapping the whole Infant round about, affixed and fastened to the Matrix, with
Veins and Arteries, by which it attracteth and draws blood for the
nourishment of the Feature, and sends and conveyeth it being attracted to the
Infant by his Navell.

The Navell being cut, and the child washed, The Navell to be sprinkled with
powder.
his Navell being dry must be strewed and sprinkled with powder compounded of
Bole-Armeniacke, Sanguis Draconis and Myrrh, and to be pressed down with a
double cloth laid upon it. For this does remedy a Flux of blood, and other
chances.

CHAP. III. Of certain natural Precepts and Medicines, furthering and easing
the flownesse and difficulty of the birth.
BEcause here we will discourse of removing the impediments of the birth: we
must consider first of all, that the birth is hindered two manner of ways, The
birth hindered two ways.
naturally and unnaturally. When it shall happen to be hindered unnaturally, we
must proceed according to the Precepts and Rules delivered in the fourth Book
following. But when it is hindered naturally, we must use the Precepts delivered
and set down in this Chapter. Before all things, let the Midwife be so
skillful of the matter, that so much as lies in her power, she may
conveniently and readily decline and avoid all impediments and hindrances of
the birth. If the birth be hindered by the dryness or straitness of the neck
of the Matrix, what to do.
But if it shall happen that the birth is hindered by siceity, dryness, or
straitness of the neck or privy passages of the Matrix, a little quantity of
sneesing-powder and Pepper is to be blown into the nostrills of the
labourig-woman with a quill; also her mouth is to be kept close, and her breath
to be kept in, and sternutation or sneefing is to be provoked, whereby the
breath being driven downward, may thrust and depresse the Infant to the nether
most parts. Which effect is also caused by these things following: The herb
Bursa pastoris beaten to powder, and taken in Wine or broth of Cicers, will
greatly prevail. Also a spoonful of Honey taken with twice as much warm
water: Also the milk of another woman mixed and tempered with the leaves of
Mugwoort or Mother woort laid warm upon the Navell: Also oil of Bay taken in
warm water, or broth of Cicers: Also two grains of Pepper being taken, do
both force and drive forward the birth, and also the Secundine. Our medicine,
which we most especially use, the birth being hindered, and pains of traveling
failing and slaking, is this: Take of the Trochiskes of Myrrh one ounce,
Saffron ten grains, Cinamome one scruple, mingle them with two ounces of the
water of Mugwoort or Peniroyall, and make one draught of it.

Let the labouring-woman take this draught warm, which being taken, A Potion.
let her return to bed again about the space of an hour, until feeling the
force of this Potion her pangs and pains stirred up again, she rising up
return to her labor and travel. But if this will not profit nor do any
good, and the Infant having put forth his head to the birth first, do as yet
stick and do not proceed forward: by and by seven of these Pills are to be
given her, which being taken, let her rest again a little.

Take of the Gum Bdellium, Myrrh, Pills.
of the seed of Savine, Storax liquida, that is, Stactes, Castoreum, Agaricum,
of each half a scruple, Diagridion six grains, temper them with the pulpe of
Cassia newly extracted as much as may suffice and make Pills of them as big as
a Pease. Both these medicines procuring a speedy birth, are approved almost of
all skillful Physicians, and are in use: A Pessary.
Also we shall use this Pessary, which you shall make the length and breadth of
a finger of pure wool, and shall cover it over with silk, which you shall
orderly use dipped in the juice of Rue, or herb. Grace, in which Scamonie is
dissolved. There are some which hang the Iasper-stone, or the stone called
lapis Aquilinus on the left hip. If these things after trial take no effect,
let the child bearing woman exercise her self by going a little; afterward let
her use this bath or fomentation, A Bathe.
the bath, I say, reaching up so high, that it may come over her belly: Take
Marish-Mallowes, the herb and root, six handfulls of other Mallows,
Camomile, Melilot, Parsley, of each four handfulls, Lineseed, Fenegreke, of
each two pound, Bay Leaves, Lavender-leaves, of each two handfulls; let all
these things be boiled in water, in which let the laboring woman sit, or
sometimes apply Sponges dipped in the same warm to her belly and back. The
which being done sufficiently, let her be cherrished with warm clothes, and
being brought to her bed, let her be anointed with this ointment: Take of the
oil of sweet Almonds, Hens grease, An Unguent.
oil of Lillies, of Muscilage, of Marish-Mallowes, of each half an ounce;
temper them with a sufficient quantity of wax, and make an ointment. These
things will prevail to expel and drive forth the Secundines, as we will
teach in the Chapter following; This being done, you shall give her a sop or
morsel sodden with the yolke of two Eggs in old wine; these sorts of things
commixed and tempered with them. Take Cinamome half an ounce, the rindes of
Cassia (or rather so much the more Cinamome in stead of Cassia, because the
Druggists often sell that which is not good) Saffron half a scruple, Savine,
Betony, Maiden hair, Dittany, Fenegreke, Bay Berries, Mints, of each one
ounce, of the bone found in the heart of a Heart, Pearls prepared, of each
half a scruple, mix them with Sugar, If the Secundine come forth first and
hinder the passage of the Infant, what to do.
and make a powder of them somewhat gross. But if the Secundine or afterbirth
come forth before the child, and hinder and let the passage of the Infant, that
shall be cut off, but the Navell must be bound up, and this Pessary following
must be conveyed into the neck or privy passage of the Matrix. Take of
Marish-Mallowes with the roots two handfuls, of Mother, or Mugwoort on
handful, of Rue, or herb-grace one ounce and a half, Fenegreke, Lineseed, of
each one ounce, ten Figs; temper them together, and make a decoction with a
sufficient quantity of water, to which being thoroughly strained, add these
things: oil of Lillies, oil of Lineseede, of both two ounces, Musk one
grain.

Let the Pessary being moistened in the decoction, be conveyed into the neck of
the Matrix: Let her also by and by use this Electuary: An Electuary.
Take Myrrh, Castoreum, Calamus aromaticus two ounces, Cinamome one ounce, of
Saffron half a scruple, Mace, Savine, of each one scruple, of clarified Honey
half a pound. Confect and make the Electuary with the water of Baulme and
Mugwoort, in which are decocted Fenegreke, Lineseed, Iuniper-berries, of each
one spoonful.

Further, when the laboring woman shall be weakened and effeeblished by these
impediments, you must give her in her broth to comfort and strengthen her, the
Species or sorts of the Electuary, named Laetificans, or Manus Christi Pearled,
or Diamargariton.

CHAP. IIII. How the Secundines, or after-burden may have an easy passage, if
it stay behind.
THe Secundines, or afterbirth, The causes of the secundines being hindered.
the Infant being borne, may be stopped and hindered by many means. First, by
the debility which abundance, the Secundines or afterbirth are easily glewed
and cleave to the Matrix, molested and grieved with these humors. These
Secundines or infolders of the infant, shall be by no other means unloosed and
expulsed, than by the hand of the Midwife, being conveyed shall be gross and
fat, Women gross and fat delivered with more pain.
they are more painfully and hardly delivered of the child and Secundines.
Therefore whenever they shall be stopped, and linger somewhat behind by any
cause whatsoever, the Midwife shall employ all her labor and diligence that
she may procure them to proceed forth, and to have a free passage. Suffocation
of the Matrix.
For the retention of them does cause suffocation and choking of the Matrix,
and ingendreth many evils. For when as the second-birth shall be detained and
kept within, it begins soon to putrefie and rot, whereby an evil,
stinking, pestiferous fume, and vapor, will ascend upward to the stomach,
heart, and Midriffe, and consequently to the brain: by which pains of the
head, and of the parts about the heart, fainting of the spirits, many swoonings
and cold sweats do ensue, so that danger of death, also the two deadly
diseases, named the Apoplexy (which is a sudden benumming of the senses) and
the Epilepsie or Falling sickness, are continually to be feared. The Apoplexy
and Epilepsie to be feared.
For the Matrix cannot corrupt in the body without most dangerous evil. But
the while the Secundine is retained and stopped, the women are to be refreshed
and cherrished with convenient meat and drink, How the Secundines are to be
expelled.
and strength is to be added to them, I say, with sops, decocted with the
yolks only of Eggs and old wine, with Sugar, sprinkled with Saffron and
Cinamome; or with brothes made of Capons, or Hens, in like manner seasoned with
Cinnamon and Saffron. Fumes.
Afterward let there be made fumes to be received into the womb over the
coals, of Saffron not beaten, Castoreum, Myrrh, Cinamome, of every one of them
the weight of one or two Beans. But let the labouring-woman be closely covered
underneath, that the perfume may come only to the Matrix. Let this thing be
done until the fume do fail made of those particulars. Elleborus, or
sneesing powder to be blown into the nostrills,
Afterward a little of Elleborus, or some other powder, causing sneesing, is to
be blown into her nostrills, her mouth is to be kept close, her breath to be
held in, and sneesing and sternutation to be provoked, as we have before
declared. But if neither these things do drive it forth, you shall give her
Cassia (or Cinamome rather) the weight of a nut, Saffron, and the Cinamome, the
bigness of two Beans beaten to powder, to be drunk in broth made of red
Cicers. But this not succeeding, nor taking effect, give to her the draught
warm described before in the third Chapter, after the taking of the which,
Elleborus and Opoponax to be used.
when she has rested a little, let a little of Elleborus and Opoponax wrapped
in pure wool, be conveyed into the neck or prive passage of the Matrix, and
without all doubt she shall be speedily delivered of the afterbirth. It
expels dead children.
For this is of so great virtue and efficacy, that it forcibly expels dead
children also, with the Secundines. In this case also it will not a little
profit to anoint the Matrix, for expelling and driving forth the Secundines,
or second-birth, with the ointment named Vnguentum Basilicum. If none of these
things shall expel it, and there shall be such great danger that it is to be
despaired of the life of the laboring woman, Pills.
her husband or kinsfolks consenting, give her seven Pills of this description
following, which being taken, let her lie down on her bed, until the virtue
of them shall provoke and stir up fresh pains and labors, and shall begin
to expel and send forth the Secundine. For these are of such great power and
virtue, that they are able to expel a dead child and the Secundines also at
once. Nothing to be done without the counsel of a skillful Physician.
Yet for all that, let nothing be done without the counsel of a skillful
Physician. Take Castoreum, Myrrh, Storax liquida, of each one scruple, the
rind of Cassia (or rather Cinamome) Aristolochia rotunda, sent from Lions, of
each half a scruple, Agaricum, half an ounce, Diagridion six grains,
Saffron, Siler montanum, Savine, of each three grains, Opium Thebaicum, Assa
foetida, of each one grain; Commixe and temper them with Cassia extracted, so
much as suffices, and make it into the form of Pills like unto Pease. And let
her take seven of these with the water of Peniroyall or Mugwoort: A Plaster.
Also this plaster, if there shall be need, may be laid upon her Navell, to be
prepared in this manner. Take of Colocynthis decocted in water one part, and as
much of the juice of Rue, or herbe-Grace, to which you shall mingle Myrrh,
Lineseed, Fenegreke, Barley-meale, of each a spoonefull, let them all be sodden
and decocted together. And let the Plaster confected and compounded of these
things, be laid upon the whole belly, from the Navell even to the Secrets. This
has been sometime tried and proved, yet it shall not rashly be used without
the counsel of an expert and skillful Physician; Not to be rashly used.
And let these things be spoken, concerning the bringing forth of the
Secundine, or afterbirth.

CHAP. V. Of the usage and ordering of the woman in childbed, and of the
Infant being newly borne.
THe mother being delivered of her child, The care that ought to be had of the
mother by and by after her deliverance.
and afterbirth, let the Midwife take a clean Sponge dipped in warm water,
and gently bathe and wash her, as yet sitting on her stool, where there is
need, and if any of the Matrix does hang and appear outwardly, let her
anoint it with warm oiles, of Roses, Violets, or Camomile, and let her direct
and reduce it again being cherrished with warm clothes into her proper place,
which being done, let the child-delivered-woman be brought to her bed, where
the place and room may be temperate, there let her lie on her back, let her
stretch out her legs, and hold them wide abroad, so much as shall be
convenient, the other part of her body being so upright, that she may rather
seem to sit, than to lie down, because by that means, if any superfluous
matter does remain, it may more commodiously pass away. But if in the first
days the issuing of her Flowers shall cease oversoone, as it often chances,
The flux of the Flowers to be provoked.
then powder of Elleborus or Peper, shall be blown into her nostrills, every
day once or twice, for to move and provoke the flux of the Flowers, as
necessity shall seem to require. If too abundant to be stayed.
But if the flux be too vehement, and more abundant than it should, and that
the childe-bringing-woman is weakened and feeblished by it, let her rest much,
and use dry meats, to wit, Hens and Capons boiled and roasted, and also any
meats fried in a Drying Pan: Let her abstain from all liquid and moist meats,
for by these the Terms will issue forth more abundantly: Let her also use the
confection named Diatriasandalon, for that does both comfort and bind, a little
morsel of it taken now and then: Or if you think good, let her use this
commixtion of powders, with bread tosted upon the coals, and steeped in sweet
wine. Take of the species Dianthos, Diapliris, Diamargariton, Diacarophylon,
Diagalanga, Diatriasandalon, of each half an ounce, Diamuscum, Diambra, of
each half a scruple, Sugar so much as suffices; mix them and make a powder
(or as the Apothecaries name it) Tragema, and let it be kept in a little box or
pot.

Now many say, that the child being washed and wrapped in his swadling-clothes,
before he suck the breasts, or take any meat, must be laid by his mother,
lying in her bed, The child to be laid on the left side of the mother near
the heart; whereby the diseases of the child may be attracted to the mother.
on the left side, near the heart first of all: For they think (as they are
persuaded) that the mother does attract and draw to her all the diseases from
the child, and that she does expel and void again by the flux and issue of
her womb, what evil soever she has attracted, without any hurt to her self;
for they think this thing does preserve the child from the Falling Sickness
and the Leprosy, through his whole life. They would have this to be done every
day one hour, while he abstaineth from meat and milk. Red Coralls prepared,
to be used.
But at that time oftentimes red Coralls prepared, mixed with Sugar and fresh
Butter are to be put into the mouth of the child, because they also do
preserve the Infant from the aforesaid diseases continually. Red Coral and the
seeds of Piony to be hanged about the neck and arms.
Let also red Coral, and the seeds of Pionie be hanged upon his neck and
arms, for they do strengthen, comfort, and also make the child merry and
lively. And so much also concerning the first care and usage of a woman lately
delivered, and her child after the birth.

CHAP. VI. How, and with what instruments children sticking in the womb, and
being dead, are to be brought forth.
FOrasmuch as the parts of the Matrix are two, of which both do consist of
sinews, wrinckled flesh, and gross thickness (as we have mentioned in the
third Chapter before) we must know, that the inward part of it (whose port or
entrance, is almost unsensible and most straight, neither is opened at any
time, but in the act of Generation, issuing of the Terms, and in the birth) is
able to abide and admit so great a dilatation and enlargement, that it
suffices to afford free passage to an Infant to come forth out of the womb,
if the birth shall be natural, without any detriment or hurt to the child or
mother. But when the Infant of himself can neither find nor open this way (as
at other times by Nature he is wont) because of the restriction and
straitness of the privie-passage, and because the vaults and caves of the same
are stopped: then let the Midwife convey her fingers in, her hands being
anointed, and let her dilate, amplify, and enlarge that strictness and
narrowness, as conveniently as she can, in breadth only, but not in length at
all, lest the ligaments and holders of the Matrix be broken, The precipitation
or falling down of the Matrix.
and the precipitation and sudden falling down of the Matrix do follow, being
a disease uncurable, I say, the perverting and disordering of the same, with
the process and coming forth of the neck of the Matrix. Therefore let the
Midwife in dilating and opening the inward part, move it forward, that the head
of the Infant which is nearest, may put it self forth from thence, and may
proceed and come forth into the utter part, to wit, the neck of the Matrix.
For the dilatation and opening of the inward part, now spoken of, can neither
hurt or indammage the mother nor the babe, because Nature her self, does in an
easy birth amplify and extend the same, and also after the birth shut and
close the same together again. But if the child cannot proceed forth for the
straightness and narrowness of the other part, that is to say, of the neck,
but stick there with his head, the other part of his body remaining as yet in
the inward receptacle, or seede-plot (which thing seldom happens, when he
comes forth rightly) then we must know, that the port-passage, or outward
gate, that is to say, the secrets may be more extended, dilated and enlarged,
and that they may better endure all the difficulties of the birth, than the
inward receptacle or vault, and therefore let the midwife also amplify and
open that gate or entrance again according to the quality of the matter, that
the whole Infant may come forth to the birth.

And if these aforesaid things shall afford no succor, so that the Infant
remains as yet fixed and unmovable, and all the pains and pangs of the birth
shall cease, then the labouring-woman shall be brought to her bed again and be
helped with these medicines following, which are such, Medicines able to expel
dead children, the Secundines, abortives, the false conceptions Molae.
that they are able to expel and drive forth both dead children, the
Secundines retained behind, and also abortives, and the false conceptions,
named Molae. First of all, as soon as she shall be brought to her bed, let her
take this potion warm, and that being taken, let her abstain from all other
meat, and let her rest quietly the space of one or two hours, until she
thoroughly feel the force and efficacy of it. Take figs sliced seven,
Fenegreke, A Potion.
Mugwoort-seed, Rue-seed, of each, two drams, the water of Peniroyall and
Mugwoort, of each six ounces; Make a decoction of them and seethe them till
the half part be wasted and consumed, let the residue be strained, and put to
that which is strained, of the Trochiskes of Myrrh one dram, of Saffron three
grains, of Sugar a sufficient quantity; make one draught of it, and let it be
spiced with Cinamome so much as suffices. After the aforesaid time of rest,
she may be brought again to the travel and labor of the birth,
Suffumigations.
where suffumigations and perfumes shall be made underneath with Trochiskes
composed of these kinds cast by little and little upon the coals, so that all
the fume and vapor may attain only to the Matrix. Take Castoreum, Brimstone,
Galbanum, Opoponacum, Culver-dung, Assa Foetida, of each half a dram; temper
them with the juice of Rue or Herbe-grace, and make Trochiskes like unto a
Filbert-nut. It will profit much to make fumes and vapors with them.

But if she find no help by them, she may use this Emplaister laid upon her
belly. An Emplaister
Take Galbanum one ounce and a half, Colocynthis without the seeds two drams,
the juyces of Rue, Mugwoort, new wax so much as fufficeth; make a Plaster of
them. Let a Linen Cloth be spread with this being decocted, made according to
the breadth of the belly, that it may reach from the Navell to the privy
parts, and to both the sides, which thee may retain and keep on the place,
the space of one or two hours, if there shall be need. A Pessary.
Or a Pessary made of Wool, the bigness and length of a finger, and covered
with Silk, dipped and moistened in the decoction follollowing, is to be
conveyed into the neck or privy passage of the Matrix, and to remain there
two hours. Take Aristolochia rotunda, brought out of France, Savine,
Colocynthis without seeds, Stavesacre, Elleborus niger, of each half a dram.
With these beaten to powder, with the juice of Rue, as much as suffices, make
a Pessary.

But after all these things being used, When and how we must use Instruments.
but especially, if the Midwife shall not be able to make way and passage for
the Infant, the parts of the Matrix being enlarged and amplified as they
should, Instruments wholly fit and profitable for those uses shall be used. And
when as necessity shall require the use of them, the poor and distressed
labouring-woman must be encouraged before hand with comfortable and cheerful
words, then the Instruments are to be prepared, and devout prayer to be poured
forth to God: and that done, let her so sit upon the Stool, that she may
turn her Fundament as much as she can to the back of the Stool, and draw
her legs to her as she may, and spread and separate them as wide as she
can, the other women standing by, helping and furthering her, that the Midwife
may conveniently perform and execute that which is to be done with the
Instruments. But if another way shall please, and seem more commodious to the
Midwife, let her bring the woman to her bed, in which let her lie, her head
declining and bending backward a little, but her buttockes lifted somewhat
higher than all the rest, and her legs drawn unto her so much as may be.
Then with either of these Instruments, which shall please best, being
anointed, let the Midwife begin to work, and to proceed forward. For both
these hereafter described and set forth are prepared to open, enlarge, and
bring forth.

Let the Midwife gently direct and convey one of these Instruments, Apertorium
the opening Instrument.
that is, the Instrument named in Latin, Apertorium, the opening Instrument,
being anointed and closed together by the neck of the Matrix into the inward
port or gate, which being sufficiently done, let her close together the
Instrument with both her hands at the lower end of it, until she have enlarged
the mouth of the Matrix as much as suffices. Or if it please, ^^^culum
Ma^^^^is the look-glasse of Matrix.
let her use the other Instrument, named in Latin, Speculum Matricis, the
Looking-glass of the Matrix after the same manner as was said even now of the
other Instrument called Apertorium. Speculum Matricis.
Apertorium.
But in this Instrument named Speculum Matricis, the turning joint must be
turned so often about, till you shall understand it suffices for dilatation
and enlarging of those parts. And the Orifice or entrance of the Matrix being
enlarged by that means, let the Midwife take hold of the Infant gently with
her hands, and if it be possible, bring him forth with the Secundines. After
let her wash and anoint the womb of the delivered woman, and let her bring her
to her bed, being delivered of the birth, and refresh and comfort her with
sweet spices, and also with convenient meat and drink, as we have counseled
before in the third Chapter. Also we must use the same manner of proceeding with
all dead children, and the false conceptions named Molae, and also with the
Secundines, when they are overmuch entangled and hindered, when as necessity it
self shall require such a proceeding and cure.

How dead children are to be drawn out.
But if it come to pass, that the dead child, because of his bigness cannot be
drawn out by the manner aforesaid, or the Secundines cannot be taken hold of
with the hands, and be brought forth, then must we have a care that it be taken
hold of with the Instruments following whatsoever Rostrum anatis.
Forceps langa and tersa.
it shall be without the hurt of the mother, and be pulled forth with a
discreet and prudent care.

Therefore with one of these Instruments, I mean that which is named in
Latin, Rostrum anatis the Ducke or Drakes bill.
Rostrum anatis, the Ducke or Drakes-bil, let her take hold of the dead child,
and let her draw him out with her right hand, having taken hold of him, but
with her left hand let her drive forward both the ports, or gates, lest the
Ligaments or holders be broken, and the falling down of the Matrix do ensue.
In this case, if necessity shall require, you may add to this instrument, the
pair of Pinsers, with which teeth are pulled out, or else this Instrument here
pictured out, Forceps longa and tersa, the long and smooth Pinsers or tongs.
named in Latin Forceps longa, and tersa, the long and smooth Pinsers or Tongs,
the which let her use so convenient, that if it be possible, she may easily
pull out that which is to be drawn forth.

But if it shall happen that some swelling, or congealed blood do appear in
the fore-skins of the Matrix under the skin, arising from the pains and
difficulty of the birth, the Veins or Fibraes being broken because of overmuch
dilatation, opening and enlargement, as it falls out: or some inward swelling
or tumor of blood shall be bred, by which both the child and Secundines, or
afterbirth are wont to be hindered very much before the birth, let the Midwife
make incision of that tumor, and open it with a clean knife, Incision to be
made of such swelling or tumor which hinders the birth.
when the matter shall be perceived to be digested and ripe, whether it shall
appear before or after the birth, let her squeise out the clotted blood, and
let her press down the swelling, wipe and cleanse those things which are
defiled, and let her bring forth the child as she may, if it shall be unborne
as yet. After let her convey a Pessary into the place, oftentimes let her
anoint it with the oil of Roses, and bind it up daily, until she shall be
whole: For after the same manner we our selves have also oftentimes proceeded
in these accidents and chances.

The end of the third Book.
The fourth Book. Of the differences and varieties of an unnatural birth, and
of the cure and remedies of them.
Seeing that the birthes which show themselves contrary to nature, are many,
and in them variable accidents and chances, we will speak of them in this
Book following, how, and by how many manner of means they may be made against
Nature; also by what means and art every one of them are to be cured; for that
end only, that the dangers of such a birth may be known the sooner, and be
more diligently prevented, so much as may be.

CHAP. I. Of the first-forme and fashion of a birth not Natural, and how it
may be remedied.
IT happens oftentimes, that the Infant comes to the birth as this Figure
annexed does express, with the feet, I say, put forth first, and the hands
stretched downward to the thighs. But in that case the Midwife shall have
care that she be furnished and provided with oil and convenient ointments, The
Midwife to be provided of oil and convenient ointments.
and may so far forth help and further the proceeding of the Infant, by
anointing and stroking gently, that he be not carried back, but may proceed
forth the right way, as he has begun. But especially she shall do her
endeavor, that she may take hold of both the arms of the child stretched out
downward, and hold them hard, nor suffer him to draw them back again, but
compel him to proceed in the same manner. The womb to be anointed with
oil, and Elleborus to be blown into the nostrils.
And if the Infant coming forth in this fashion, both because of his bigness,
and also his arms stretched out by his sides, be so fastened in the narrowness
and straightness of the Matrix, that he cannot break forth wholly to the
birth, then the womb of the labouring-woman, and the child shall be anointed
with oil, and the powder of Elleborus is to be blown into the nostrills of
the labouring-woman for to provoke and hasten the birth, also her womb is to
be pressed down gently with both the hands, that he may not bend upward, but
may incline downward as he ought, till he proceed forth into the light.

CHAP. II. What the second form or figure of an unnatural birth, and how it
may be remedied and cured.
IT chances again, that sometimes, the birth comes forth with the feet
first, yet the hands not stretched downward to the thighs by the sides, as in
the former Figure, This manner of birth not to be received, unless the child
be very slender, and the orifice of the Matrix very wide.
but lifted up above the head. The which thing happening, the Midwife shall by
no means receive such a birth, unless the child be very little and slender,
and the Orifice or entrance of the Matrix very wide, that an easy passage may
be hoped, without the hurt or harm of the mother and child at all, neither
shall she receive it yet, before she have carefully anointed the womb and the
Infant. The birth to be put back into the womb, and brought to a natural
form.
But it shall be more safe and more healthful for both, to put back the birth
into the womb, and to convert it to a natural and lawful form, which may be
done in this manner: The manner how.
The labouring-woman shall lie on her bed, with her face upwards, her head
bended backward, her middle part lying higher than the rest: which thing being
done, the Midwife shall bind down her belly toward the Midriffe in a
reasonable manner, that she may drive and force the Infant into the womb, and
may minister occasion that he proceed forth in another form. But before all
things, she shall have regard that she turn the face of the child toward the
back of the mother; next, that she shall lift up the buttocks and legs of
the infant, toward the Navell of the mother, that he may hasten to a due and
natural birth. In this case there is no experiment more safe, to wit, being
most profitable of all in all births coming contrary to the form of Nature.

CHAP. III. The third form of an unnatural birth, what it is, and how it may
be cured.
But if it shall happen that the child comes forth with one foot only, the
arms hanging downward about his sides, but the other foot turned backward, as
this Figure has it: the labouring-woman must not be urged to proceed in her
labor, but be brought to her bed, or to be laid down some where else, and the
Midwife must proceed in the same manner as we taught before, by the help of
other women, which are present to help her, namely, by turning in again the
foot coming out first. The which being performed, let the labouring-woman move
and roll her self to and fro in her bed, her head being lower than her other
parts, but her thighs and belly higher than the rest, declining backward,
until the Infant shall be perceived to be turned a little, then she is to be
brought again to her labor and travel, and she is to be furthered with all
the help that may be. The same moving, rolling, and stirring, may be done in
all the like births, when the Infant shall appear in an unapt and inconvenient
manner. In the mean while, when there shall be need, she shall likewise be
refreshed and comforted with drinks, and other medicines set down before, and
she is to be urged forward to the birth. But if it shall chance in this case,
that the other foot turned back, do by that moving and stirring of the
mother, or by some other help of the Midwife, come forth directly to the birth,
then the Midwife shall straightway, having taken hold of the arms hanging
down by the sides, bring forth the Infant as conveniently as she can, in the
same manner as we taught in the first Figure.

CHAP. IIII. Of the fourth form of an unnatural birth and of the cure of it.
SOmetimes it happens that the child appears in an overthwart manner, and
that the side comes forth first, which happening, neither is the
labouring-woman to be urged to labor, neither the Infant to be desired in this
manner. Impossible to bring forth the birth in this manner.
For that a child should be borne so, without all controversy, both Nature
and the thing it self do show that it is an impossible thing. Wherefore the
Midwife shall do her endeavor, To be reduced to a natural birth.
that she reduce and bring back to the lawful form of a natural birth, I
say, by removing the buttocks, and by directing and guiding the head to the
out-passage; if it shall not be effected this way, let her assay by often
moving and stirring, until he shall be turned to a right form and manner.

CAHP. V. Of the fifth form of a birth against Nature, and of the cure of the
same.
But if it happen that the Infant hasten to the birth, the feet and arms wide
abroad, let not the Midwife procure the labor of the woman, but let her be
brought from the Stool to the Bed, where let her repress backward her womb,
lying after the manner and fashion oftentimes before mentioned, or let her bid
her sometimes turn and move her self to and fro, until the child shall be
turned to a more apt and convenient form. If this shall seem to profit
nothing at all, let the Midwife join both the feet together, and reduce and
bring down the hands about the sides, if she may by any means, and let her
direct and conduct him to the birth in the safest manner she can.
Notwithstanding, it shall be the surest way, and least dangerous, that the
Infant should be turned and reduced into the womb, and there to be framed to a
right and natural form of proceeding to the birth.

CHAP. VI. Of the sixth form and fashion, and of the help and remedy of it.
But if the Infant shall proceed to the birth with both the knees, the hands
let down about the thighs, then let the Midwife thrust both the knees upward
with her right hand conveyed into the place, until it shall happen that the
feet shall issue forth, and then let her take hold of the feet with her left
hand, but the hands retained about the sides, with her right hand let her
gently move the child to proceed to the birth. If this shall not seem to be
safe enough, the labouring-woman shall be brought to her bed, where lying
backward in the manner before spoken, she shall move and turn her self so
long, until the child shall be turned to a better form and fashion of birth.

CHAP. VII. Of the seventh form, and how it is to be remedied.


But when the Infant shall hasten to the birth with one hand appearing only, the
other arm remaining about the sides, and the feet stretched out straight into
the womb, the Midwife shall in no case receive him, nor suffer him to proceed
any further to the birth, but let her bring the labouring-woman to bed, where
she may lie down again, her middle part high, and her head low. Then her
belly also is gently to be restrained and repressed backward, that the Infant
may fall back again into the womb: likewise let the Midwife, (if there be
need, and that the child will not proceed forth of his own accord) hold and
press down his shoulders with her hand conveied into the place, and bring
down the arm appearing out to his side, that he may be reduced to a natural
form in the womb, and may break forth to an easy birth.

GHAP. VIII. Of the eight form, and the cure of it.
THis birth is very dangerous among those which offer themselves contrary to
nature, A very dangerous birth.
whose form and Figure thou do see here described and set forth; therefore
the Midwife shall employ her labor, that great diligence being used, she may
reduce and bring back all this birth into the womb. Therefore let her first
anoint the hands and the womb of the labouring-woman with oil, because in
this case there is need of great labor and travel. Afterward, if she can,
let her thrust back the shoulders of the child with one of her hands conveyed
in nigh his arms, that he fall wholly back again into the womb. And again,
lest he return to the same form and fashion of birth, let her bring down the
arms of the child slid back again to his sides, and by that means, let her
reduce him to a natural birth. If it fall not out well this way, the
travelling-woman is to be brought to her bed, where, after she has had some
rest, you must proceed in the same manner, as we before delivered. If this
thing be done in vain, neither is he changed into another form; she is to be
brought again to the Stool, and her womb is to be depressed on every part,
and to be kept downward by the help of the women standing by: Moreover, the
Midwife having anointed the Matrix, and both the arms put forward, let her
join them together as well as she can, and let her receive the Infant breaking
forth in that manner. Less danger if the Midwife be not negligent, and the
child be small.
There will be less danger in this birth, if the Midwife shall be nothing
negligent in her duty, and the child shall be slender and small in the birth.

CHAP. IX. Of the ninth form and fashion, and of the cure of the same.
But if the child shall proceed forth to the birth with his buttockes first,
let the Midwife lift up the Fundament with her hand anointed and conveyed in,
and turn the head to the way of passage. She must not make haste in this case,
lest he slide back into a worser form and fashion. Neither also is it
possible that the Infant should be borne so without most great danger of the
mother and child. Therefore if he cannot be turned otherwise with the hand
conveyed in, the labouring-woman is to be brought to her bed, where, if she
shall be faint and feeble, she must be refreshed and comforted with convenient
meats, and now she must proceed in the manner often spoken of before, until
the form of a more convenient birth shall come.

CAHP. X. Of the tenth form and cure of it.


IT comes sometime to pass that the birth appears with the neck turned
awry, the shoulders bending forward to the birth, but the head turned
backward, and the feet with the hands lifted upward. In that case, the
Midwife shall remove the shoulders of the child backward, that the head may
appear first; for this shall easily be brought to pass, because the shoulders
being removed a little, the head of it self will be nearest the Orifice of the
Matrix. And if the matter shall be put in trial otherwise, the labouring-woman
shall be brought to her bed, and laid down again, and let the Midwife use the
Precepts delivered before.

CHAP. XI. Of the eleventh form and remedy of it.
WHen the child bends forward to the birth with both the hands and feet at
once, heed must be taken that no danger happen through the difficulty and
deformed fashion of the birth; therefore let the Midwife have a care, that
being busied in removing the feet of the Infant, she take hold of his head,
and as much as she may first direct and conduct him to proceed forth; also the
arms must be removed, unless they shall fall down to the sides of
themselves. If it succeed not well this way, we must use the former manner of
turning.

CHAP. XII. Of the twelv'th form, and cure of it.


SOmetimes it comes to pass contrary to the form before, The most perilous
birth of all.
that the birth proceeds forth brestward, Precepts to be observed.
the hands and feet cast and turned backward. This is accounted most perilous
of all; wherefore the Midwife in this case must diligently observe these
precepts: First, let the Midwife anoint her own hands, and the womb of the
labouring-woman, which being done let her search for the arms of the child,
with her hand conveyed in, and let her hold them fast when she has hold of
them, until she shall take hold of the head, all her care and diligence being
used that she may first reduce the head to the out passage. After she shall
remove the arms of the child and shall direct and convey them to the sides:
for this being done, both the Birth shall sooner have passage, and there shall
be less danger also. Lastly, if the child shall not be brought forth with
any of these means, it shall be the safest way to bring the labouring-woman
to bed, and to proceed in the manner already often spoken of, if peradventure
by that delay the Infant may frame himself to an apt and commodious form and
manner of birth.

CHAP. XIII. Of the thirteenth form, and the cure of it.
THe same reason also is observed to be in the birth of two or three, Of the
birth of twins.
which is in the birth of one For as the birth of one alone, has only one
natural form, but many unnatural: so has also the birth of twins.
Therefore when it shall happen that the twins appear with their heads
proceeding forth. the Midwife shall have a care, that she do orderly receive
one of them, which shall be perceived to lie most commodiously and fitly in
those privy vaults, but do not let the other slip away, while the o her
comes forth, least sliding back again into the womb, he be turned into
another form and fashion, but one of them being borne, let her likewise also
receive the other straightway as she ought. The second birth more easy than
the first.
This second birth will be more easy without danger, because the former child
has made the way so plain for the latter. In the birth of twins great care
to be used to bring forth the secundines.
There must also diligence and care be used, that in this birth of twins, the
Secundines or second birth may speedily be procured to issue forth, least the
womb being freed of the children do quickly fall down, and deteine them
retained there not without great hurt.

CHAP. XIV. Of the fourteenth form, and the cure of it.
ALso this is the form of an unnatural birth of twins, which we propound
and (...) forth to be viewed in this figure, that is to say, with the feet of
both the Infants turned to the mouth of the Matrix, This birth of twins very
dangerous.
such a birth is very dangerous, but to be remedied and corrected by the
wisdom of the Midwife. Therefore let the Midwife annoint the womb of the
labouring-woman, that by that, the way may be more easy for the birth: which
being done, she shall have a care that she take hold of the arms of one of the
children, and hold them hard brought downward to the sides, and gently procure
the head to proceed forth. He being borne, by and by the other being taken hold
of, let her proceed in like manner. But if she cannot apprehend the arms of
neither, so that there is no hope of a happy birth, she must have recourse to
the first form and fashion of them, if peradventure the children may be sooner
delivered and brought forth into the light by that means and turning which is
performed on the bed.

CHAP. XV. Of the last form and fashion of an unnatural birth, and the cure
of it.
THere is another form of an unnatural birth, which may be viewed here, the
one coming with his head downward, and the other with the feet, which form
truly is framed and composed of a natural and unnatural kind of birth. A
natural and unnatural kind of birth.
But when it shall happen that two children do show themselves in this manner:
let the Midwife first bring forth the former of them being turned into a
natural form, and she shall remove the other coming with his feet first,
and if it shall be possible, she shall reduce and bring him back again into
the womb, that he also may be disposed and framed to the form of a natural
birth; But if he cannot be converted into a better form, his hands straight
way being taken hold of, he must be procured and moved to issue forth. More
safe if it be turned to a natural birth.
Yet it would be more safe that it be turned to a natural form; and to effect
the same, the Midwife shall bend her diligent labor, by anointing, removing,
and turning to and fro, lest that the womb be offended and hurt by such a form
and manner of an unnatural birth, and lest also the fore-skins begin to swell,
whereby the birth cannot come forth without danger, or may be hindered longer.
All which things truly by provident care may either be avoided, or at least in
some sort amended.

The end of the fourth Book.
The fifth Book. Of the false Conception, named Mola, and other false tumors
of the womb: also aborcements and certain monsters, and likewise of the diverse
signs of conception.
CAHP. I. Of the false Conception named Mola, and other falsely supposed
Conceptions.
SO many as have at any time written of the false conception Mola, have called
it a deceivable conception, What the false conception Mola is.
which if at time it comes to the birth, comes forth in the likeness and
similitude of a piece or lump of misshapen flesh. The Name.
Some will have the name of it to be derived of Molon, which among the Greeks
does signify a round thing, because the form and shape of it is round, or
else to be so named of the Persian word Moli, which to them signifies a
certain misshapen thing or a disordered lump. Or rather, as the more learned
do write, beause it is a certain hardened swelling or tumor, which in the
sense of touching seems to be stony, like unto a Millstone, named in Latin
Mola, either in the whole womb, or in the entrance or wicket of it only:
Whereby a heaviness and difficulty of moving happens to women possessed with
this evil, as it were, pressed down with a heavy weight: How the false
conception Mola is engendered.
For the Grecians do name it Mylon, which in Latin, is called Mola. Averrois
and Paulus Aegineta do declare that this deformed lump of flesh is engendered
of the weakness and debility of both the seeds, that is to say, of the man's
and woman's, or else of the corruption of good seeds, which happens about the
first time of conception. But others do say, that it is engendered of the
abundance of the flowers or Terms, because through great heat of the Matrix
they are sometimes congealed and clotted together, and brought into a misshapen
mass or lump of flesh; but they which do more narrowly pay and search into
the Natures of things, do attribute this to the more copious and abundant seed
of the woman, The abundant seed of women causes the conception Mola.
especially in those women which are somewhat more lascivious than others are,
which conceiving little seed from their husbands, dry by nature, by the desire
of the Matrix, do stir up copious seed of their own, which augmented with
the flowers, by heat of the Matrix, is congealed together, and by the defect
and want of man's seed, Man's seed the proper worke-man.
the proper worke-man and contriver of it, does grow together into such a lump:
For nothing can be engendered without the seed of man; as neither any can be
engendered of the seed of women only: For the seed of the woman does only
enclose the seed of man conceived in the womb, whereby the coats or caules,
which afterward do pass into the Secundines, may only be engendered of it:
For, as it is in an Egg, A Simily.
even so is the matter discerned to stand in this case; for as of the white and
yolke of it self, nothing can be engendered, unless the seed of the Cock be
infused into it, although the copiousnesse of them is much greater in
comparison of the seed: so also of woman's seed alone, nothing can be engendered,
unless man's seed be added to it; so that if this be little, and the seed of
the woman copious and abundant, then they being augmented and increased with
the Terms, are wont to breed and engender the false conception Mola, of which
some women are disburdened of, the fifth, sixth, or at last the seventh year,
and some never.

Besides, there are also many other false and corrupt conceptions, False and
corrupt conceptions.
of which not only the false conceptions, named Molae, but also some other
deformed shapes, defective and unperfect in some part, through defect of both
seeds, are in like manner wont to be engendered. It comes also to pass, that
by the corruption, that some hurtful living creatures, or shapes of living
creatures are engendered in the Matrix with children, The reason why some women
swell as if they were with child, yet never delivered of any.
I speak not of strange shapes conceived of beasts, as it has often fallen
out. Oftentimes also we perceive some women to swell, as if they were
conceived with child, and yet never to be delivered of any child: because that
both seeds conceived together, were so liquid and thin, that by the defect of
the heat of the Matrix they cannot be congealed and united together: whereby it
falls out, that of such diverse humors enclosed the Hydropsie does afterward
ensue.

But the generation and breeding of the false conception Mola, Signs of the
conception Mola.
has certain signs and tokens above all other tumors, whereby it may be
known. And first, truly, concerning the constitution and state of the body,
the limbs of her which bears the false conception Mola, are feeble and soft,
there is a certain numnesse in them, her lips and eyes are swollen, the face is
pale, her belly being swollen, appears to be hard when it is touched, she has
prickings and many wringings in her belly; her Terms are stopped, dimnesse of
the eyes does molest and vex her, the beating of her heart is continual, her
limbs tremble, she cannot away with meat, she vomiteth often and much, she
has many spots in her face, the apples of her eyes standing outward, her look
stern and frowning. But because many of these signs are also common to a true
conception, The false conception Mola, and the true conception, differ many
ways.
a certain difference is here to be determined. Therefore we must understand,
that the false conception Mola does differ so many ways from a true
conception, as hereafter follows.

Mola cannot be engendered, because it is only engendered of the Terms being
retained, and the weak and feeble seed of man.

Mola: For there cannot be such speedy motion in a true conception.

Mola, the womb swells sooner and more.

Mola. For the child is moved from side to side, but the conception Mola is
not so.

Mola pressed together with the hand streight-way departs from his place, but
by and by returns into the same place, being removed with the hand. But as a
child does not remove out of his place, so does he not return back again.

Mola, their belly remains harder which are conceived with it, than it is
unto them which bear a child.

going and moving, which is conceived with the false conception Mola, than they
are which have conceived a child.

Mola, as in the conception of a child.

Mola, the limbs and parts do wax feeble and soft, which thing does not
happen in the conception of a child.

Mola is sometimes deferred unto the fifth or sixth year, sometimes also
until the end of the life.

Such a certain and manifest difference, The difference of the false
conception Mola from other tumors of the womb.
set down and determined, between the false conception Mola, and a true
conception: in like manner also the same is to be discerned and known from
other false tumors and swellings of the womb: For it comes to pass, that
many women also begin to swell, either because of air enclosed in the womb
whereby a Tympany is engendered: Tympany engendered.
or through abundance of diverse humors stopped and retained, whereby the
Hydropsie is caused. Hydropsie engendered.
But those women which do swell by reason of air enclosed in the womb, do
exceed with the tumor and hardness of the womb, those women which do swell
and wax big by the humors being stopped and retained. The Tympany removed
from place to place.
Also the tympany sometime falls down, departs away, and is removed from
place to place, The Hydropsie seldom removed.
neither is felt without pain; but the Hydropsie, that is to say, retained
humors, is seldom removed, and those humors do make a noise with a continual
sounding of the belly. And there is a difference also between those tumors,
The conception Mola makes the belly harder than the other tumors do.

In the Hydropsie the legs swell, in the Mola they wax less. In the Tympany
the belly sounds like a drum, in the Mola not so.


and the false conception Mola. For in the bearing of Mola the belly remains
much harder, than in those swellings and tumors. In the Hydropsie, the legs do
swel, but in the false conception Mola, they wax less and feeble. In the
disease named a Tympany the belly is hard, sounding like a tabor or drum: but
in the conception Mola it is not so. And by this means the differences of
these like tumors may be observed, noted and understood, how hardly they may be
cured.

CHAP. II. Of the cure of the false conception Mola, and other false tumors
and swellings of the womb.
IN the cure of the false conception Mola, The diet inclining to heat and
moisture.
such a Diet before all things is to be appointed as may incline to heat and
moisture. Also where there shall be need of blood letting, let the vein of the
anckle be opened, named Saphena, The vein of the ancle to be opened.
thereby the matter shall be purged and voyded in that manner, as you shall see
delivered in the Retention and stopping of the Terms, in the sequel of the
discourse hereafter following. These things going before, those things which
purge and cure inwardly, A Bathe.
also outward remedies may be used. First of al we must use a Bath, in which
she, which is conceived with the false conception Mola, must sit every day
morning and evening, her stomach being empty, the water reaching up so high as
her navell. And the bathe shall be prepared in this manner. Take of Marish
Mallows with the roots six handfuls, of other Mallows, Branca Vrsina, or
bears foot (or if it be not to be had) Violet leaves, Pellitory of the wall,
Camomile, Melilot, of of each two handfuls, Fenegreke, Lin-seed, of each two
pound.

Those things being beaten to powder, which are to be powdered, let them be put
in a bag, and let them boil in the water, in which the sick woman shall sit.
Also it will be very profitable to lay that bag very hot upon the secret
parts and the loins. An Unguent.
After this bathe, let her be cherrished with warm clothes, and lying down
in her bed, let her be anointed with this unguent about the secret parts and
loins. Take of the oil of sweet almonds one ounce and an half: of oil of
Lillies, Hens-grease, Muscilage, of Lin-seed, Fenegreke, of each half an
ounce, White wax, so much as suffices, temper them together, An Electuary.
and make an ointment. Also let her use this Electuary following the quantity
of a Filbert nut every day morning and evening. Take of Cinamome two drams, the
rind or outside of Aristolochia longa, Cassia Fistulae (or in stead thereof let
the quantity of the Cinamome be augmented) of each one Dram: Assarra Baccha,
Lacca, seed of Rue, the fruit of wild Savine, Saffron, of each half an
ounce, Sugar half a pound.

Let the Sugar be dissolved in the juice or water of Rosemary: let the
confection be made in morsels. Also this Electuary may be given her another
way, that is to say, in broth decocted with old wine, the yolks of two eggs,
and Sugar, a reasonable quantity of this Electuary being put into it.

Also these Pills following are wonderful forcible, of which let her take
half a dram, Pills.
or a whole Dram.

Take Nigella Romana, Aristolochia rotunda, Dictamum Creticum, seed of
Garden-cresses, the fruit of wild Savine, Serapinum, seed of Rue, Amoniacum,
Thymiama, Madder of the dyers, Myrrh, Castoreum, of each one dram: make Pills
of them with the juice of the wild Reddisk and Honey, so much as suffices: let
her take the weight of one or two drams.

These things being done, Suppositories.
suppositories also are to be conveyed into the Matrix which may drive forth
the false conception Mola, and remove it from the inward receptacle and cave of
the Matrix into the outward part: take Asphaltum, Borace, Castoreum, great
Centaurie, Ditany, Elleborus albus, Galbanum, Gentian, Opoponax, Savine,
Serapinum, Scamonie, of each half a dram, Saffron one scruple: temper and
incorporate them with the juice of a Leek, and make a suppository. Sometime
she may use trochiskes of Myrrh of which we have spoken in the third chapter
of the third book: for they both drive forth the false conception Mola, and
cause an easy passage. But in tumors or swellings, How tumors proceeding
from a Tympany and Hydropsie are to be cured.
which happen of enclosed air and retained humors, the diet is so to be
prescribed and ordered, that it incline wholly to heat and dryness.
Purgations also, Phlebotomies or bloud-lettings may be used according to the
abundance of the qualities. Which things being performed in the first place, a
bathe or Fomentation shall be prepared in the form before prescribed, A Bathe.
these things following being added unto it besides: take Wild Penny-royall,
Rue, Penny-royall, Bay Leaves, dry Wormwood, Anise, Fennel, Cumine, of each
an equal portion. More things also like unto these of the same Nature may be
taken for mitigation and repressing tumors. And Part also of the Herbs now
spoken of shall be put into a bag, and applied to her loins, while she
sits in the bathe. After the bathe, A Confection.
let her take of this confection the bigness of a Filbert-nut, in old white
wine, in which Alsara Bacca is before infused. Which confection is made thus.
Take of the Species or kinds of Diacurcuma, Diacyminum of each three Drammes,
white Sugar half a pound, let the Sugar be dissolved in the water of
Herbe-grace, and make a confection in little cakes or Morsels. Or if you
please, you may give her this Potion warm, A Potion.
after her bathing, made in this manner. Take twenty Peach-kernels the skin
newly pulled off, to which being pounded with the yolks of two eggs and mixed
together, you shall add the powder following. Take Galanga, Cinamome,
Long-peper, Ginger, Cloves, Saffron, Nutmeg, of each half a Dram, make a
powder of them. Let a Decoction be made of all these with the best wine, Let
them be strayned, and when it is strayned, put sugar to it, and make a very
clear potion of it. Or, which likes us better, let the matter of the simples
still remain in the Decoction and let them be taken altogether in the warm
drink. The Species also of the confection named Hiera Picra does much avail
in this case, taken in some drink or Pills.

But when the Tumor or swelling shall be caused by the retention of diverse
humors, then the matter shall be purged out and voided by such remedies, as
we have been accustomed to use in the stopping of the Terms, and to provoke
urine, such as this is. Take the seeds of Parsley, aniseed, Fennel, Stone
parsley, Cardamomus, and the leaves of Rue. Let all of them being beaten to
powder with equal weight, be drunk with sweet wine. Also in this case the
confection of Diagalanga is approved to be good: and the Electuary de Baccis
lauri, also the oil of Rue, of Henbane, and of White Lillies, A Plaster.
and the Trochiskes of Agaricke. A plaster also of this sort may be confected
and laid upon the swollen belly. Take of the seed of Rue, Cummine,
Garden-cresses, Centaurie the less, Majoram, Anise, wild Penny-royall, of
each one handful, let all of them be shred into pieces and beaten together,
and make an Emplaster of them with wine.

CHAP. III. Of unperfect children, also of monsterous Births.
WE see that it comes to pass in diverse manners, by experience of matters,
and testimony of the times: that many monsters and imperfect or misshapen
children are borne. But when as that thing is specially to be attributed and
ascribed to the Judgments of God, yet afterward also the corruption and fault
of the seed is to be acknowledged, to wit, which was either too much, or too
little, or corrupted, from whence those monsters are engendered. But we will
hereafter give you some Figures of those shapes, not to the intent to handle
all things to the full perfection, but that by a few of them we may propound
some knowledge of the Judgments of God by diverse monsters against Nature, as
it were prognosticating things to come, and that we may see how much the fault
and corruption of seed avayleth in this case.



In the year 1552 in England not far from Oxford a certain deformed birth was
borne; with two heads, four arms, with so many hands, with one belly having
the secret parts of a woman, and one fundament. On the one side, there were two
feet over-thwart: on the other, one only stretched out right of form of two
feet, having ten toes. One of them lived fifteen days, and the other lived
one day more. They wept seldom in this time. One of them was very merry, but
the other drowsy and sad; the length and breadth of them was the breadth of
twenty fingers.

But if it be demanded of the cause of such conceptions and birthes, The causes
of Monsters.
we must know before all things that they come not to pass without the
providence of the Almighty and Omipotent God; but also that they are permitted
oftentimes by his just judgment for to punish and admonish men for their
sins. Likewise we allege the immoderate desire of lust to be a cause, whereby
it comes to pass, Immoderate desire of last a cause.
that the seeds of men and women are caused to be very feeble and imperfect,
whereby of necessity a feeble and imperfect Feature must ensue. The defect of
the seed causes the defect of the Feature.
For the defect of seed going before, the consequence is, that a defect of the
Feature does follow; and contrariewise, if the seed shall be superfluous, it is
easily collected and concluded, that superfluous things are engendered of a
superfluous matter.

But if at any time two Infants do grow together, The causes of two children
growing together.
sometime this thing is caused of thin and corrupt seed: sometime by
terrors and affrightments, and also other evil chances, whereby it falls
out, that the children already conceived before in the womb, are squashed
together, and the seeds being broken, do grow together in some part. Similies.
For as Cream or the fatness of milk, although it be congealed and clotted
together, notwithstanding with some motion is troubled and spoiled, and even as
the flowers and blossoms of the trees are cast down with any wind^ so also the
conceived seeds by an easy and small mischance may be corrupted that they may
flow abroad, and by flowing abroad are altogether commixed and mingled
together, or at least do in some sort grow, and increase together, whereby it
must needs be, that some deformed and misshapen birth must follow, which God
the first Author does permit and suffer to be formed so and shaped, for the
punishment and admonition of men.

The causes of cloven or Hare-lips.
Many also are engendered with cloven lips, after the form and manner of the
mouth of a Hare (and are named Hare-lips) either in one, or in both parts of
the lips, and they grow together, with that evil and deformity, which things
we must understand to be caused by terrors, and sudden sights of Hares, Swine,
or other Cattle, this sudden terror troubling and moving the conceived seed.
Again, through longing and terrors, many are borne, The causes of spots and
marks in children.
which have diverse spots and marks imprinted on the body, to wit, of Hares, of
Mice, of diverse colors, of a bunch or cluster of grapes, of flames of fire,
and other things. Which things because they are common and often, we would not
let them out to view by several Figures.

It happens also that some are engendered, and do grow and increase until
some time, that he that vieweth them cannot determine and be resolved of what
sex or kind they may be of. The more unskilful do supp^^^ ^^em to be of both
kinds, but they are far (...). For it falls out by some chance, that the
seed gathers some corruption about these members: For example sake. An
Example.
It happened that such a child was brought before us, concerning whom, it was
not apparent of what sex or kind he should be. The testicles or stones did
appear outwardly, but no privy member besides, under the testicles there was
a rupture and division from which the water did issue forth. But because by
reason of the defect of the yard, or urine-pipe standing outwardly (for it was
not altogether wanting, but turned inwardly toward the rupture even new spoken
of) Nature had given this way to the urine, it seemed good that it should not
be baptized for a maiden child, nor for such a one as is both Male and Female,
The conjecture of the mother.
but for a man-child. And the mother did confess that she was greatly
affrighted, and terrified, by a certain thing she had seen; so that she did
conjecture, that by that means, that was so contracted, and shrunck unto the
child. But because such things are rather perceived by the understanding, than
the eyes, we would not frame any Figure peculiar to such a birth. But now
(...) return to another Figure.

In the year 1547. at Cracovia, a very strange Monster was borne, which lived
three days; his head did somewhat resemble the shape of a man's, but that his
eyes flamed like fire; his Nose was long and hooked; and stood like the
shin-bone of the leg, or trunck of an Elephant, in the joints of his members,
near the shoulders, upon the elbowes and the knees, there appeared dogs heads;
his hands and feet were like unto the feet of a Goose; he had two eyes above
his Navell; a tail behind like a beasts, having a hook at the end; in sex he
was a male. The cause of this misshapen Monster, we ascribe to God alone; yet
not withstanding through the insight of our reason, we may perceive also the
detestable sin of Sodomie in this Monster.

That of brutes such various shapes are borne, it is less wonder therefore,
when as Pliny reports of living creatures in Africa that have such various
forms and shapes, seeing their coupling and conception is of diverse creatures.

In the year 1512. at Ravenna (a City in Italy) a Monster was borne, which had
a horn on his head, two wings, no arms, a crooked foot with talons, like a
ravenous bird, an eye on his knee, of both sex, in the midst of his breast he
had the form of the Greeke-letter Ypsilon, An interpretation of this monster.
and the Figure of a Cross. Some interpreted this thing after this manner,
That the horn did signify pride, the wings fickleness and inconstancy, the
want of arms to signify a defect of good works, the ravenous foot, rapine,
usury, and all kind of covetousness, the eye on his knee, to portend a
respect and regard alone to earthly things, and that he was of both sex, to
signify filthy Sodomy. Moreover, that at that time Italy was so afflicted with
the ruins and miseries of war, because of these sins. But they interpreted
the Greek Letter Y to be a sign of Virtue, and the to be a sign of
Salvation: Wherefore, if these vices being forsaken they would have recourse to
virtues and the Cross of Christ, that is to say, his only merit, that then
they should find again ease from their warlike broiles, and have calm peace.
These things came to pass, Ludovicus King of France, under Julius the eleventh
Bishop, wasting and spoiling Italy.

Rabbi Moses in his Aphorisms, Particle 25. Rabbi Moses his report.
writes thus: In Sicilie there happened a great Eclipse of the Sun, and in
that year women brought forth very many deformed and double-headed children.
It may be demanded here, whether beasts may conceive by men, Whether beasts may
conceive by men.
or in like sort women of beasts. We affirm this may come to pass for three
reasons: First, by natural appetite. Secondly, by the provocation of Nature by
delight: Thirdly, by the attractive virtue of the Matrix, Histories of some
that have had carnal copulation with beasts.
which in beasts and women is alike. Examples are at hand; For Plutarch in his
lesser Paralells has these words. Aristonymus Ephesius the son of
Demostratus, when he hated women, had carnal company with an Ass, which in
process of time brought forth a most beautiful Maiden-childe, named
Onoscelin, Aristotle being author of it in the second of his Paradoxes. And
again, when as Fulvius Stellus did disdain and hate women, he had carnal
company with a Mare, which, the Months of bearing being passed over, brought
forth a very beautiful Maiden-child, which he named Epona (peradventure
Hippona. A Goddess which takes care of Horses.
) And indeed, there is a goddess of this name, which takes care of Horses,
as Agesilaus writes in his third book of the affairs of Italy. Again, of
one Fulvius and a Mare, the Maiden-child Hippo, is said to be borne as we
read in Plutarch.

And even as Nature does change and alter her self in man: In Helvetia, A Mare
brought forth a colt or rather a Cow.
so experience does teach that it may also happen so in beasts. For among the
Helvetians, a Mare being covered of a Bull, at the due time brought forth a
colt, In France a Mare brought forth a colt, the hinder part like a Heart.
only having horses feet, but in shape, hair and tail, he was like unto a
Cow. And in France, a Mare being covered of a Heart, brought forth a colt, in
the hinder part like unto a Heart, whom no other Horse could equal and match in
running, and Ludovicus the King received him for a gift of the owner.

CHAP. IIII. Of the causes and signs of aborcement, or untimely births, and
also of all manner of cure of such as suffer abortion.
WE must understand, The causes of aborcement are twofold.
that it happens from inward and outward causes, that women suffer
aborcement, that is to say, bring forth an immature Feature, or an untimely
fruit. The inward causes, Inward causes.
are considered from the Feature it self, or from the Matrix; If it happen by
the Feature, it is caused, for that the Cotilidons are over-weake (which are
veins by which the conception is tied and fastened in the Matrix) by whose
feebleness and weakness the mouths, or specks of the veins in the Matrix,
named in Latin Acetabula, are caused to be quickly dissolved and broken, and
aborcement does follow. Again, if the coats, or caules also, wherein the
child is wrapped and infolded in the womb, be loosed, dissolved and broken
through debility and weakness, and the retained and enclosed humors do issue
forth, by which flux, the Matrix is made slippery and feeblish, and the
Feature destitute of moist nourishment, do perish and be destroyed: and also
likewise, if venomous humors flow and issue forth, and stir and prick
forward the expulsive faculty of the Matrix. It chances also sometime, that
abortion is caused, in respect of the Matrix, by an inward cause; that
happens when the woman is weak, and waxing feeble and faint, does substract
and withdraw nourishment from the Feature, that it has no augmentation, nor
sufficient matter to engender and procreate the members. Further, in respect of
the Matrix, the wide and ample largeness of the mouth of the Matrix, and the
immoderate humidity and moistness of the same, the evil disposition and
distemperature of the qualities, also ventosity, or vapors enclosed within the
Matrix, and the ulcers and Apostumations of the same do minister and afford a
cause and occasion of aborcement: And also other maladies and infirmities, as
an immoderat flux of blood, an unkind looseness of the belly, the disease
Tenasmus (which is a desire to go to stool when nothing can be voided) the
cough, Tenasmus.
continual sneesing, and what things soever do shake the body overmuch: yea,
likewise every sharp sickness, which does so molest the body of the woman,
that it disperseth the nutriments of the Feature. Outward causes.
Besides the external or outward causes, which chance outwardly, and hasten
and procure aborcement, are also many: such as are, falls, running, leaping or
dancing, riding, immoderate exercise and blows. Also inconvenient and
intemperate application and use of things, which are without the body, as of
the air too hot, or too cold. For great coldness does destroy the Feature;
but overmuch heat intercepteth and keeps away the air from the Infant, and
stifleth and strangleth him in the womb. Hot bathes also effect the same
thing, if women do use them the first three months after conception: Also
noisome stinckes and savours do provoke and procure abortion, as of Lamps or
Candles newly put out, as Aristotle witnesses. Likewise an intemperate using
of unkind meat and drink; as by the greedy desire of an unnatural appetite,
to eat immoderate store of Salt, to eat coals dirt, or such things, by which
naughty and corrupt humors, or hurtful dryness is caused and procured. Also
great hunger does hurt the Feature very much; and overmuch repletion and
surfeting, the ways and passages of nourishment being soon stopped, does
suffocate and choke him. Further, immoderate exercise, intemperate labors,
immoderate sleep; also unseasonable and overmuch watching, or continual
sluggishnesse and slothfulness, do harm and endamage the Feature. Likewise
other accidents and chances, such as are, sudden fury, great danger, exceeding
great fear, overmuch sorrow, sudden joy, dull appetite, desire of things not
to be gotten, immoderate Venus, unfaciable lust. And these things concerning
the causes.

Moreover, the signs of aborcement to come, Signs of aborcement.
whether they proceed from internal or external causes, are twofold. First,
before conception, do prognosticate and signify that Aborcement shall follow
quickly after.

How it is to be observed, that the child is dead in the womb.
But that the Feature is dead in the womb, hereby it is evident, when no motion
is felt any more in the womb, when the eyes of the impregnant and conceived
woman do wax hollow, when her color is changed into a swartish whiteness,
when great wringings and gripings happen about the Navell and loins, whereby
it comes to pass, that the lower parts are pressed and clunged together: The
Strangury and Tenasmus do happen,
Also the Strangury and Tenasmus do happen (the former being a difficulty to
void the Urine, issuing out by drops, and the latter a desire and motion to
go to stool without any ability to void the excrements) Again, when the
ears, the lips, and the end of the nostrills are stiff with a pale coldness,
and the face begins to swell. Also although the belly does not fall down
flat, yet it waxes soft, so that you may feel by touching in one side of her
lying down, a certain hard lump. If the breath stincke, it is a certain
token that the Feature has begun already to be putrefied and corrupted.

It remains the causes and signs being known, to know also the cure, Of the
cure of aborcements.
and the certain manner either of preventing or correcting Aborcement. And
first, truly, Before conception.
to prevent and avoid the danger of Aborting, we had need to know the
certain way and manner, yea before Conception. 1. Convenient meat and drink
to be used.
For if the woman shall accustom to Abort and to be delivered before due time
through debility and weakness, she shall be comforted and strengthened with
convenient meat and drink, that she may be in better ease, her body being
somewhat fatter, and that is to be done before the time of her conception. If
the amplitude and largeness of the Orifice and entrance of the Matrix shall be
an occasion, 2. The orifice of the Matrix to be restrained and made narrower.
it must be restrained and made more narrow, and the surperfluous humors
evacuated and purged, by some convenient medicine being used orderly. But if it
be found, 3. Ventosities to be diminished and dispersed.
that ventosity or vapors enclosed in the Matrix, are the causes, they are to
be diminished and dispersed in a manner aforespoken, where we handled it
concerning the false conception Mola. Further, although the woman have already
conceived, After conception.
as yet aborcement may be avoided by assured remedy and cure.

1. A temperate air, moderat exercise and sleep.
And first, truly, let her dwell and abide in a temperate air, which has
conceived let the exercise of her body, especially the first three Months, be
moderate, lest the ligaments or stay-bands of the Infant, being as yet tender
and weak be broken. Let her sleep be moderate; The belly to be kept loose.
Let her not suffer her belly to be bound, How the belly is to be made laxative.
but let her keep it reasonable loose and laxative; but if it chance to be
costive and bound, let it sometime be loosened and set at liberty with a
Clyster confected of Cassia extracted, Sugar, and common oil. This has no
danger in it, neither (as it is in the judgment of the unskilful) is death
hastened by Clysters, but the belly constipated and hardened, is by them
loosened, to perform his natural office and function. Not withstanding, if
some cannot abide to use them, they may use other things relaxing and unbinding
the belly, to wit, Cassia extracted, or Manna taken in broth, or prepared to
the form of an Electuary or morsel gilded. But here especially we must take
heed, Strong medicines not to be given the first four months.
that stronger medicines be not given to women with child, the first four
months of her childbearing, lest the ligaments and binders as yet being
feeble and weak, be too slack to stay and hold the Feature. When it shall be
needful to open a vein, Median vein to be opened.
one of the Median veins is to be opened. But this thing is to be done no
more than once, lest by taking away of the blood, nourishment be diminished
and withdrawn from the Feature, but it shall be more safe and less dangerous
to do this, half the time of her childe-bearing being expired. Anger,
excessive joy, terrors and fears to be avoided.
After Conception, also let the conceived-women bridle themselves from all
anger, let them absteyne from overmuch joy, let them take heed of terrors and
fears, and whatsoever may moove the mind suddenly. Also let them forbear from
much carnal society in the first three months, Much carnal society to be
forborne.
the feature as yet being but tender. Gemmes and precious stones to be worn.
It is also profitable to wear about them gemmes and precious-stones, as the
Sapphire, Iacint, Coral, the precious stone Corneola, Adamant, Thurchese. Let
their meat and drink be temperate. Let all sharp and biting things be
avoided, as Leekes, Onyons, Garlic, Mustard, Leekes, Onyons, Garlic, etc.
to be avoided.
and such like things, and with them whatsoeever may procure the Terms to
issue, and such things as bind and harden the belly. What meat soever they
covet, The not inioying of meats desired, causes aborcement.

No speech to be made of meats not to be had before women conceived.


let them enjoy the same, For to let and bar them from satisfying their
appetite and longing, brings and causes a most speedy Aborcement. Therefore
care is to be had, that speech be not made of meat not to be gotten before
women conceived with child, or if they be carried of their own will with a
strange appetite, they are to be reduced and drawn back from that desire, by
any convenient means, as much as may be done.

2. The stomach to be comforted and strengthened.
Further, because it happens, that there is much corrupt matter in women
conceived with child, which if it does distill down into the stomach,
corrupts the appetite, and causes a loathing of meat and vomiting; and
exhaling and fuming from thence, sends up stinking vapors to the head,
whereby the giddiness of the head (named in Latin Vertigo) with very many
other diseases of the brain does follow and ensue; Giddiness of the head.
besides, if they have recourse to the heart, Fainting and swoonings. Swelling
in the legs.
they cause and engender fainting of the spirits, and swoonings: if they
descend and fall down to the legs, they cause them to swell very much.
Therefore to decline and avoid so many and so great dangers, we must have care
and regard above all things for the comforting and strengthening of the
stomach. First of all this ointment will do good.

Take of the oil of Odoriferous Spicke one ounce, oil of Masticke, oil of
Quinces, How the stomach is to be comforted.
of each half an ounce, Pearls, red-Corals prepared, Noble-Mints, Calamus
Aromaticus, Gallia Muscata, of each half a dram, Musk one grain, White Wax
as much as may suffice. Temper them and make a Liniment or soft unguent in a
liquid form: the Stomach shall be anointed every day with this ointment
before dinner, a warm Fomentation laid upon it: the which thing being done,
the Electuary named Diamargariton is always to be taken, or the Electuary
following, prepared in this manner.

Take of conserve of Roses, Borrage, An Electuary.
and Buglosse, of each half an ounce, of the Species of Diamargariton Drams
too, Coral prepared, Pearls prepared, of each half a scruple, the powder of
precious stones half a dram: temper all these together, and with Syrup of
Roses make an Electuary, and let it be gilded with a leave of pure gold.

Because also the first three months, Aborcements are caused through
ventosities and windiness, 3. How ventosities or winds are to be dispersed and
dispelled.
the meat of the woman with child shall be continually seasoned with these
spices: Take Cinamome, Nutmeg, Cardomomus, of each half an ounce, Ginger six
drams, long Peper one dram, Saffron half a scruple; of these shall be a powder
made, which may be used in all meats.

But when the ventosity and windiness shall begin to be augmented and
increased, they must use the confections of Diagalanga, Diatrionpipereon,
Diacyminum, and the like. And it shall be profitable thoroughly to anoint the
belly and flanck with oil of Lillies. But for the repressing of vapors fuming
up into the head, Stiptick fruits to be eaten after meats.
always stiptick and binding fruits are to be taken after meat, that is,
Pears, Quinces, Medlers, Coriandrum Saccharatum, or Diacydonion, which Avicen
approves before all other things for that purpose. Salt meats with vinegar,
water in which gold has been quenched approved.

Roasted flesh and fish better than boiled.


Also salt meats with Vinegar, and water in which gold heat red-hot is
extinguished and quenched, taken with meat are very much approved. Likewise it
shall be more wholesome to eat roasted flesh and fish, than boiled very well
seasoned with spices. Let their wine be clear, wholesome, and a little allaied
with water: After meat it is profitable to take some Filbird-nuts covered over
with Sugar; How the swelling of the legs is to be taken away.
but for the taking away of the swelling of their legs, let the stalks of
Colewoorts or Camomile-flowers be sodden with wine and vinegar, and let a
fomentation or bathing be made upon them with these. Some do mingle clay with
water, wherein red-hot steel has been quenched, a little Vinegar being
sprinkled upon it, and do lay such fomentations upon the legs. But if
abortion is to be feared by reason of the diseases of the Kidneys, and of the
Loins, a great inflammation accompanying those grievances, which may be known
by the urine or water, the loins are to be anointed with this Unguent: Take
oil of Mirtles, of Roses, of Mastick, 4. The cure of the Kidneys and Loins.
of each one ounce and a half, the juice of the greater Plantane, Barba Eovis,
or Housleeke, of each half an ounce; Bole Armenie, parched Barley, Terra
sigillata, red Sanders, red Roses, Succus Acacia, Myrobalans, Hypocisthis, of
each half a dram. Let those things which are to be powdered, be beaten to
powder, and let them be commixed and tempered together with Vinegar, white
Wax, and Turpentine so much as suffices, and make an Unguent of them. After
this ointment has been used a few days, this plaster following shall be
laid afterward upon the Kidneys and Loins. Take Masticke half an ounce,
Ladanum three drams, yellow Wax, Bistort, Cipresse-nuts, Myrobalans,
Hypocisthis, How coldness is to be driven away.
Acacia, Terra sigillata, red Roses, Bole Armenie, of each one dram and a
half; to these add a little quantity of oil of Mirtles, or Turpentine, and
make a Cerot, or Cere-cloth which may be spread upon a piece of Leather.

But if it be suspected that abortion will follow by a cold cause, we must
abstain from this ointment, and we must use the plaster here following. Take
Masticke six drams, Ladanum four drams and a half, yellow Wax, Colophonia,
Ship-pitch, or Stone-pitch, Styrax Calamita, of each one dram and a half,
Cypresse-nuts, Mints, Bistorte, Gallia muscata, Frankincense, Galbanum, Gum,
Arabic, Mirth, of each one dram and a half; Make a plaster of them with
Turpentine. If the woman shall feel an itching under it, this must be taken
away for a few days, then afterward it must be applied to the place again,
neither must it altogether be omitted, because the Kidneys and Loins are very
much strengthened by this. And, if the belly of the woman with child shall be
overlaxative and loose, it shall be restrained with an Electuary confected in
this order: Take the confection Diamarinaton (that is, sower Cherries condite)
Diacydoniton, Electuarium de Cornis, conserve of Roses, of each one ounce, the
cups of Akornes, Terra sigillata, of each one dram. Temper them with the syrup
of Pomegranates, and make an Electuary in a liquid form; this taken morning
and evening, and before meat, is very much approved: Also in this case
Crab-fishes gathered out of brooks and rivers, are commended of Hippocrates.
Likewise all meats sodden in water, wherein iron or steel red hot has been
quenched, or tempered with the juice of Acacia: also wine alaid with that
water; let not her meat be thin and moist, but dry and thick; let Dates, that
is to say, the fruit of the Date-tree, be sodden with her pottage. If these
things shall not bind the belly, it shall be convenient to use a strictive
Clysters; and if she shall be grieved with the disease Tenasmus, and goes
often to the stool, but voideth nothing, so aborcement is to be feared, all
those things are to be used before spoken, with which the belly may be unloosed
and made slippery, and also Clysters and Suppositories. Likewise the Diet is to
be prescribed and ordered according to the form and manner before set down.

8.
If the childbearing woman shall abound with noisome humors, whereby many
diseases may follow, as a Tertian, Quartane, or a continual Fever, the which
as Hippocrates tells us, do easily cause abortion, because by them the
nutriment of the Feature is diminished, or if the fits be great, with great
pains of the head and immoderate heat, then we must resist the heat in this
manner: Take water of Roses, of Betony, of Sage, Vinegar, of Nightshade, of
each one ounce, Bole-Armeniack, one scruple, of all the kinds of Sanders, of
each half a dram, Terra sigillata, Saffron, of each one scruple.

Mix them together with the white of an Egg, and make a soft ointment to be
laid upon the Temples of the head; she may use also in stead of a Cordial
medicine, the confection Diatriasandalon, conserve of Roses, Borage and
Buglosse. But if it shall happen also that the Matrix be inflamed, earth-wormes
are to be pounded in a mortar, of which, Vinegar, the juice of Rue, and common
oil mixed with them, let there be made a soft ointment, or the Emplaster of
Sanders, or the plaster named Coctum Album shallbe laid upon it.

But if the second or third month, the Whites shall begin to issue forth by
reason of Phlegmatic humors abounding, whereby the Cotyledons are grieved
(which are veins to which the Feature is fastened in the womb) and the mouth
of the Matrix becomes slippery, and therefore it is to be feared, that the
woman shall suffer Aborcement, we must proceed altogether in that manner, as
we have declared in the Cure of dispersing Ventositie and windy matter.
Diverse experiments leting Abortion.
Furthermore other experiments also are approved. A little bone (which they
call Saltus, or Astragalus Leporis) to be carried about the woman, and to
drink of it daily, the stomach being empty. Also the stone named
Lapis-stellatus so enchased in gold or silver, that it may touch the naked body.

Some women bear about them a claw taken from the foot of a Bear. Also the
ashes gathered together of a Hedgehog being burnt and tempered with oil,
affords an ointment very commodious and profitable for this affection and
passion. Little worms are found underneath herbs, which if they be hanged
alive on the woman's neck, she shall never Aborte, neither bring forth before
due season, (as some are bold to promise, and let the truth of the matter
depend upon their credit.) For they say they have such great efficacy to hinder
the birth, that the woman cannot be delivered, unless they be removed.
Wherefore they admonish that they must be always removed and taken away in
time. Also the stone named Lapis Aetiles (which some say is found in an Eagles
nest) is proved against Aborcements and over hasty birthes, which in like
manner is reported to further and promote a lingering and overflow birth.

10.
There are likewise some other external things, which chance outwardly, and for
all that do cause aborting to women by a natural cause, as if a
woman-conceived with child do tread upon a serpent, viper, the egg of a Crow
(as some do write) or a dead serpent with two heads named Amphisbaena. Some
also does attribute this property to Castoreum carried in the bosom.

But if it happen that the Terms issue forth after Conception, 11.
they are not straight way to be stopped, unless the woman become weak with
Flowing of them. If they issue forth moderately, this thing is to be
permitted, because they signify that much slyminesse and distempered humors
and abundance of blood is deteyned in the womb. If they flow forth more
copiously they shall be stayed and restreyned with Acacia, Hypocisthis, and
Lin-seed sodden in water, to be used by a bathe or Fomentation; If the legs
shall be swollen, which thing often time happens the three former months,
regard is to be had of the liver and stomach, that they may be lightened and
eased from superfluous humors, and let meats be given them of another quality.
If the liver grow hard to women-conceived with child, it is a hard thing to
remedy it, because as Galen witnesses, in this passion they are not able to
endure strong medicines. Wherefore the most gentlest shall be administered to
them.

But because it falls out, that dead Features sometime do proceed forth more
slowly, and sometimes never, even as the Secundines do, we must understand
that most great dangers do happen to women, and also sicknesses, swooning and
failing of life, especially in sommer-time, by reason of venomous vapors,
fuming and flying upward from the putrefying Feature, and so greatly vexing and
molesting the heart and the brain, that oftentimes they are deprived of the use
of reason and understanding. Therefore all care is to be used and employed,
that dead Features may speedily be expelled, and the poor women freed from so
great dangers, which thing how it may be done, we have taught in the former
books by a large discourse.

CHAP. V. Of the signs of Conception.
ALthough it be a hard thing to know the true conception of women, yet we may
give a conjecture by many signs, and attain unto it by some arguments
confirmed and ratified by experience. It is credited for certain sign of
conception, if the woman, the tenth day or some day sooner, after she had
company carnally with man, shall perceive the Terms to be white or red by
reason of humors, also the stopping and retention of the Terms is accounted
for a sign, yet it deceives, because it happens also often times without
conception. Therefore this being omitted, we will prosecute other notes and
signs taken from the body of the woman herself concerning true conception,
every member and part examined, and first the beginning shall proceed from the
head.

The pains of the head, swimming of the brain, and dymnesse of the eyes, if
they concur and chance together, do signify conception.

The apples of the eyes are lessened.

The eyes swell and are changed into a swartish color.

The little veins do wax red, and begin to swell with blood.

The eyes sink down into the head.

The eyelids become feeble.

Diverse colors are seen in the eyes, and perceived in a looking-glass.

Red pimples do arise in the face.

The little veins placed betwixt the nose and eyes, are swollen with blood, and
are seen more clearly and plainly than they were wont.

The vein under the tongue waxes greenish.

The neck is hot, the backe-bone cold.

The veins and arteries are full, the pulses are easily perceived.

The veins situated in the breast, at first wax black, afterward begin to be
yellow, or to be of a blewish-colour.

The dugs begin to swell and wax hard with pains.

The nipples begin to be reddish.

If cold water be drunk, a coldness is felt in the breasts,

A loathing and refusing of meat and drink creeps upon the woman.

Diverse appetites and longings are engendered.

A destruction and decay of Natural appetite and desire is caused and procured.

A continual casting and parbreaking and weakness of the stomach.

Sower and slow belchings.

A loathing of wine.

A disordered and intemperate beating of the heart.

Sudden joys, and after these sudden sorrows

Wringings and gripings about the Navell.

Pain of the loins.

The lower part of the belly is affected with swellings.

There are inward compunctions and prickings in the body.

The seed is retained seven days after carnal company.

A coldness and chillness of the outward members, after the act of Generation.

The attractive faculty and virtue of the Matrix is increased.

The Matrix is dried by and by.

A great delight and pleasure in the Venerious act, but after conception a
disdayning of Venus.

The Matrix is restreyned and closed.

But because this thing is procured by other causes also, it may be observed
and noted by an infallible and certain difference, when it foresheweth
conception. For then it is slender and soft: but if it be restreyned and closed
for any other cause, as by too much heat, or swelling, then it remains
harder.

The secret parts of the woman are wrinkled even unto the seventh month. The
womb waxes round, and swells. About the beginning of Conception, pains of
the belly and back (...) felt, as it were beating.

The Terms or Flowers are stopped. For the veins, from whence they do flow,
carry and conveigh by the mouths and speckes named Acetabula, blood to
nourish the Feature through the Navel, and some of that matter is drawn upward
to the breasts, where it is transmitted, and changed into milk. For so also
Hippocrates admonishes us, saying; When the Terms are retained and stayed;
and neither Fevers, nor fit of Agues do follow, and also an abhorring and
refusal of meat happens to the woman; we must understand without doubt, that
the woman is conceived with child.

The legs begin to swell with pains and aches.

The body is feeblished, and the face waxes pale.

The Pulse at first beats swiftly, by and by slowly.

The excrements of the belly are voided more hardly and painfully, because the
guts are pressed and thrust together.

The urine or water, is white, a little cloud floting or swimming aloft, and
many motes are seen in it, as in the beams of the Sun: but first of all, in
the first month, when many such like things do sinck down to the bottom, they
are drawn out in length like unto wool, the Vrinall being moved in which they
are in.

In the later months the urine is red or yellow, but at length it becomes
black, a little red cloud swimming above.

Hippocrates teaches us to make trial of conception with water mingled with
Honey, that if the women having taken this, lying down in her bed shall feel
gripings or wringings of the belly, then it is a sign she has conceived, if
she do not, she has not yet conceived with child.

Whereas some would have this experiment to be practiced by a suffumigation
received underneath, that makes little or nothing to the matter. For
Hippocrates teaches, that so the signs and tokens of barrenness and
fruitfulness are to be observed, and not of conception; but they which
attribute to fumes made underneath any thing for the searching out of
conception, do say, that the fume made of the thing put underneath must be
restrained and kept that it ascend not up to the nostrills, they would have
such conjecture to be taken of Garlic put underneath, and Aristolochia used
with it. But by what probable reason, they themselves know best.

It shall be a more certain experiment, to stop close the Urine of the woman
put into a glass for three days, which time being ended, let it be strained
through a clean fine linen cloth, and if she have conceived, there will
appear little living creatures, like unto Lice, if they be red, they say, they
do portend and signify a man child, if they be white, they say a
maiden-childe is conceived.

And some do affirm this thing for a certainty: If a smooth and bright needle
be put into the Urine of a woman, in a brazen Basin, covered close a night, on
the morrow, if the woman have conceved, that needle will be speckled with red
spots, if she have not, it will be black and rusty.

If a woman take the juice of Carduus, and shall cast it up again being taken,
it is supposed to be a certain, sign of conception. And so much concerning
confused signs of conceptions (that is to say, such as concern Male and
Female both alike.)

But whether a man-child or woman-child be conceived, it is delivered and set
down to be marked and observed by these signs following.

If it be a man-child, The signs of a man-child.
the right-eye is moved more often, and is better affected with his natural
color than the left.

The right breast is more plump and harder than the left, the color of the
nipples is changed sooner.

Milk breeds sooner, and if it be drawn out and opposed, and set against the
beams of the Sun in a glass, it cleaves together into a little clear lump,
not unlike unto a clear Pearl.

If the milk of the woman conceived with child be sprinkled into her urine, it
sinketh by and by to the bottom, if Salt be put to it, it does not melt.

The lid of the right eye is redder, and all the color of the face is better
than it was wont, as Hippocrates tells us. Less heaviness is felt.

The first moving, for the most part the fortieth day, is felt more quicker in
the right side. For Hippocrates instructing concerning the lying of children in
the womb, does advertise us that male-children lie on the right side, and
female-children on the left; because men-children have need of more heat, which
they attract and draw unto them from the Liver, situated and seated in the
same side.

If the Flowers issue forth the fortieth day after conception

The belly is more sharp about the Navell.

The woman when she goes a journey, puts forth her right foot first, and in
rising up from her seat, she does sooner stay her self, and lift her self up
upon her right hand, than upon her left.

The pulse is more swift in the right hand, than in the left.

But if they shall conceive maiden-children, The signs of the conception of a
maiden child.
all things happen otherwise, and these signs, for the most part, are observed.

The first moving, for the most part, is made the nintieth day after conception.

The moving is made on the left side.

Women-children are carried in the womb with great pains.

The legs do swell, and also the privy parts.

The color is more pale.

The appetite is more vehement.

On the contrary, a loathing and abhorring of meat more soon and speedy.

The Terms do issue forth about the thirtieth day after conception.

If the powder of Aristolochia be tempered with Honey, and the loins and the
secrets be anointed with it, it is thought to be an easy thing to discern
the sex: that if the spittle of the child-bearing-woman shall be sweet, she
bears a man child, if it shall be bitter, she bears a woman-childe.

The age also of women avails not a little. For women which are young, do
sooner conceive boys, but such as are somewhat aged, do sooner conceive
girls, by reason of the defect of heat in the Matrix caused by old age.

Likewise maiden-children are engendered by parents moist and cold by nature, of
seed more moist, cold, and liquid than suffices.

And it may also be observed by certain signs, whether the child be in good
state in the womb or no. If the Babe be well, the Paps, as Hippocrates
testifies, are hard. If it be not in health, watrish milk does flow forth
from the dugs voluntarily.

Again, if their Terms do issue forth oftentimes which are conceived with
child, as Pliny averreth, they signify that the child is not in health and
lively, but weak and feeble.

Further, fat women commonly do bear feeble children.

If the Hydropsie suddenly invade and take a woman with child, and her
nostrills, ears, and lips begin to be red, they portend and show that the
fruit in the womb is dead.

If a woman bear Twins, of which one is a man-child, the maiden-childe is in
great danger, because they are nourished and prosper in the womb with a
diverse kind of nourishment, as Aristotle witnesses. There is less danger if
they be maiden-children: For under Maximilian the Emperor, a certain woman
brought forth three maiden-children at one birth, all which came unto a perfect
age.

If a woman conceive before, or about the purging of her Flowers, infected and
venomous humors will be mixed to the seed, of which, it is found most
commonly, that Lepers are engendered (otherwise the learned do declare, that
conception is not caused, but the Terms beginning or ceasing to flow.)

If a woman conceive once, A superfaetation, or after-conception.
and a little time after conceive again, the last seed will hardly live in
the womb. For Aristotle declares, that a woman brought forth two men-children
at one birth alive, and that the fifth month after she brought forth another,
but dead before in the womb.

If the Infant do proceed out of the womb after the ninth month, for the
most part he is weak and feeble.

If a young maiden conceive before her first Flowers, she ingendreth an
excellent and perfect Creature.

All these things being declared, this also is to be understood, which Midwives
are wont to observe concerning the issue to come, I mean, whether the woman
shall bring forth more children: For how many knots they shall perceive to be
in the Navell of the child newly borne, so many men-children shall afterward
be engendered, as they say. But let it suffice to have spoken these things,
concerning the signs of conception, many other things being omitted, which are
reported and delivered.

CHAP. VI. Whether men and women may engender or conceive children of Devils,
or Spirits; and again, whether Devils may have children by men and women.
NO man doubts, but that the deceits and sleights of the Devil are infinite:
amongst which he has that, whereby (as the sacred Scripture testifies) he is
able to transform himself into an Angel of Light, and to take unto himself
the shapes of men or women, and to resemble them, the Righteous God permitting
and suffering him; the which thing to be so, variable experience of things does
testify. Wherefore it shall not be needful to call that into question.

But whether he may have carnal company with men and women, but especially,
whether he can cause women to be conceived with child, needs no question.
No man does deny, but that he may have carnal copulation with them, having
taken the shape of man or woman: For, S. Augustine testifies the same thing,
saying, There is a constant report, taken from the testimony of them, to whom
these things hapened, that there be certain Spirits, Devils and savage
people, which sometimes have allured women, and have had their pleasure of
them; but the same thing is not only approved of the ancient, but among us also
is found to be so by many examples.

In a few years past, a certain Harlot, having her body lasciviously abused
of the Devil, in the night, coming in the shape of a man, did straight way
fall into a most great sickness, so that her womb and privity were quickly
consumed with a consumption or rotting Gangraena, so that when no medicine
could repress the hellish fury of the disease, her intralls also and parts
about her secret members did fall out of her body. There was also a certain
Butchers servant, which making a journey, and thinking of Lechery, had a Devil
to meet him in the beautiful shape of a woman, with whom he lay, not knowing
he had any company with a Devil; but by and by, his privy members being
inflamed with a fiery heat, were exulcerated with a speedy putrefaction and
rotting. And indeed, God, who is always just and righteous, is wont to permit
these things by his just Judgment, for the punishment of wickednesses, and
admonition of men.

Cassianus does deny this act, saying, that it is an impossible thing, that a
Spiritual creature should have carnal copulation with men and women, neither
that this thing ought to be believed: because, if the act go before, it is
necessary likewise that sometime also the effect should follow, that is, that
something should be engendered, which thing as yet may not be evident by any
experience. Again, if this act were possible to devils and spirits, he says,
they would rather be mutually turned toward themselves, than to be commixed
with men or women. Therefore concerning the truth of the matter, these things
are to be accounted for the exceeding subtilty and deceit of the Devil, and
wicked persuasion of men, so far forth that we do not believe, that either
the devils can cause women to be with child, nor on the other side, that
devils assuming and taking unto them the form and shape of women may be
conceived with child by men. For that never any man was borne without humane
seed (Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, the only eternal Son of the
only God excepted, conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary)
we affirm as a most true thing. Wherefore concerning that which is rehearsed
of one Merlin, we entertain no otherwise than a Fable and a Tale agreeing with
his name in the Germane tongue. He, which shall desire to know the History of
him, shall find it at large in the one and twentieth Book of Vincentius,
named Historiale Speculum, the thirtieth Chapter. Truly by the law of Nature,
it is certain, that like things are ingendered of their like, therefore a man
could not be borne of the Devil, neither have we known at any time, that the
most righteous and omnipotent God has permitted so much unto spirits and
devils, or granted them so large a license, as that they should be able to
engender and procreate children by men and Women, and as it were, to ordain
and constitute their divellish issue and damnable brood in man created after
the similitude of God. But if a Sorceresse and Witch was his mother, she was
not ashamed to gratify the Devil, to blab abroad so great and monstrous a lie
to pervert the minds of many with this false opinion. She might have her body
abused by the Devil, but she could not conceive a man by him. If he had not
abused her body lasciviously, notwithstanding, he was able to cause her womb
to swell by his divellish and despightfull practices, that she might think her
self to be conceived with child by him. Also so long time being ended, as
women are wont to bear a child in the womb, he is able to stir up grievous
pains and pangs in the womb, and also craftily to put a child underneath her,
brought from another place: also straight way to dissolve and repress those
tumors and swellings stirred and raised up by some Windy vapors. For such a
like thing is manifest in the experience of our times: For at Constantia (a
City in Germany) a certain beautiful maidservant of a certain Citizens,
named Magdalen, being deflowred of the Devil, after she being cast into prison
had utterly renounced him by repentance (moved by the counsel of devout
Ministers of the Word of God, by Divines reasons) from that time she felt so
great torments in her womb, that she did think almost that every hour she
should be delivered of a child. But the help of Midwives being often
employed, she voided iron nails, pieces of wood, broken glasses, hairs, towe,
stones, bones, iron, and innumerable such like things through the Matrix, all
which things verily the wicked Spirit had subtly and maliciously conveyed
underneath, and brought in. The same Vincentius cites some other Histories
serving to this matter and question, in the twenty sixth and twenty seventh
Chapter of his Book, named Natural Speculum. Namely, that a certain
young man caught a woman by the hair of the head bathing her self in the Sea,
about the evening, whom he took to wife, after he had brought her home to his
house, and begot a son by her. But she not speaking a word at all hitherto,
that her husband compelled her to speak, moved by instigation of others, which
said she was a spirit, making a show as if he would murder the child begotten
of her, unless she would declare her offspring, But she having uttered forth
sorrowful things, to have vanished away, and also to have drowned this child,
washing himself in the Sea, being grown to ripeness of age, and that he was
afterward found in no place cast out to the shore side. Therefore that he was
not a true man, although he was borne and brought up in shape of a true man.
Moreover, that many did believe, that this spirit, which, by a false apparition
did seem to be a woman, The Devil named Succubus.
to be a devil, which is named Succubus.

It is not unlike to this, which he brings forth in the aforesaid place,
Namely, that at Colonia Agrippina, many Noble men sat in Council in a
certain Palace, sometime near the shore of the river Rhenus, which while by
chance they did look down into the water, did see a certain soldier carried
in a little boat, a Swanne swimming before, drawing the little boat with a
silver chain put upon his neck, suddenly to leap upon the shore, the Swan
being sent away with the little boat, there to have married a wife, and to have
begotten many children of her. And some years being ended, the empty boat
swimming back again, and the Swanne swimming before it, as he did before
time, that the same soldier did return again into the same boat, and to have
appeared to no man again, and that his children lived there a long time. But
many have believed that he was a Devil, whom they named Incubus, who dwelling
so long with the woman, and so many years in the shape of a man, having used
such great coozenages and deceits, did show forth counterfeited tumors of her
womb, and counterfeited births, children conveyed underneath, taken by stealth
from some other place. Whether the Devil may conceive seed of men, and by the
same seed cast forth into women, engender, or not.
But whereas many do labor by this persuasion, and contend, that the Devil,
named Succubus, may be able to conceive seed from man, and by and by being
changed into a Devil, named Incubus, to cast forth the same seed into the
womb of a woman, and of her to engender a man; as it is most false, so it
ought to deserve no credit at all. For it is most contrary and repugnant both
to Religion, and also to Nature: For if this were possible, with how many
monsters of wild beasts had we seen mankind, so long space of time to have
been tormented and vexed of such a great enemy of mankind, by the change and
alteration of seeds made in brute beasts, men and women.

Wherefore Conciliator in his Book de Medicina, the twenty and fifth
Difference, determines well of these things, saying, We must know, that the
testicles or stones of man, are the principal parts of the generative or
begetting virtues, but not the sole or only parts, because the beginning of
Generation is not caused by them alone, neither are they alone able to perfect
Generation: For the first beginning is from the heart, by reason of vital and
lively faculty and virtue reposed and laid up in the same, so that no living
thing can be ingendered without the help and aid of the power and virtue of
it: For at last the virtue and faculty of the testicles, do consist by vital
virtue, and natural heat. Wherefore, that the Devil, named in Latin,
Succubus, may be able to conceive with men, and being changed into the Devil,
termed Incubus, may cast forth the same seed conceived into women, and beget a
man, is not only a fabulous thing to be spoken, but also impious, wicked, and
odious to be believed.

But whether the Devil has power to steal, to carry, from one place to
another, to convey and change children one for another, is a matter that
needs no great enquiry. For that some such like thing may be brought to pass
some time, we must understand; but that it is not done by his own power, but
by the permission of the most just and omnipotent God for the sins of men,
especially when wicked Parents, having no religious care of their children, do
not strengthen and fortify them with the blessing of God, and overwhelme them
with the curse of the Devil. Therefore let all, because they are the children
of God, learn to bring them up religiously, and to consecrate them to God, and
not to object them to the maledictions of the Devil.

The sixth Book. Of the diverse causes of Sterility and barrenness, and of the
special maladies of the Matrix, and also of the diverse remedies of all of them.
CHAP. I. Of the Sterilitie of men and women, also of the cause and signs of
the same.
We say, that sterility or barrenness, of which we have purposed to speak at
this present, is not only a disability and unaptnesse of bringing forth
children in women, contracted and caused by some cause that may be corrected
and remedied: but in men also of ingendering and sending forth fruitful seed.
Aristotle attributes this disability and impotency principally to fat men and
women, because of the evil proportion, and ill disposition of the generative
members, that is to say, in whom the seed is procured and derived from a more
remote place, and so vital spirit enclosed in it does vanish away sooner by
that delay. But not only that habit and disposition of the body is a cause,
but there are many other causes also besides of this difficulty and infirmity:
For when we see oftentimes man and wife joined together, not to engender and
beget children: but being separated both of them to procreate children: and on
the contrary part, that those, which being coupled together, do beget
children, are not fruitful when they are separated, it must needs be that
without doubt there is some hidden cause. Where we think it will not be an
unprofitable thing to declare and bring forth those things which are best
known: For there are many outward and inward causes, which do concur
together in this case.

But as fertility and fruitfulness has his helps and furtherances by many
outward things, as in a convenient diet, in an accustomed temperature of the
air, by bathes warm by nature, such as are the Helvetian and Vallesian
bathes, with the waters of Embs: so also sterility and difficulty of ingendring
have very great help and succor by them, whereby they are caused and
increased, as by an unconvenient diet, by the permutation and change of
accustomed air, by drinking of the water of Ice, and by bathes. Further,
barrenness may be judged to proceed from the disposition and quality of the
generative members: For it comes to pass, that not a few infirmities and
grievances do happen to them, by reason of which man and wife are not only
made impotent and barren, but are unfit to dwell together; husbands with their
wives, and wives with their husbands. In which place the strictness and
narrowness of the mouth of the Matrix does very much disprofit and annoy, by
which it falls out, that not only the Terms, being stopped, do let and
hinder generation, but moreover, also do breed and bring forth very many other
evils. Again, when the secrets themselves are too wide or too strait, and
therefore are not convenient, neither for conception nor generation. Retention
and staying of the Terms causes the same thing, which does much distemper and
molest the Matrix, and suffocateth and choketh the seed cast forth into the
womb through abundance of evil humors. Among women also, they which are over
man-like, are not so apt for generation: and among men, those which are more
effeminate and woman-like than is requisite; For these women almost
universally, do want the issuing forth of the Terms at their due seasons, and
also the nourishing humors: And such men being intemperatly cold and moist,
cannot send forth seed possessed with a generative virtue. Hitherto pertains
both the weak and feeble attractive power of the Matrix, and also the sudden
alteration of the same. For the attractive and expulsive virtue of the Matrix,
either too strong or weak, do equally cause the difficulty of ingendering.
Likewise the maladies of the Matrix, tumors, inflammations, ulcers, Apostemes,
the mouths of the veins, named, Acetabula, being broken, the Terms issuing
forth immoderately, or stopped, and such like things do afford and minister
great occasion to the same difficulty. Many also say, the veins placed behind
the ears (to wit which give way to the spirits, which the brain communicates
and imparteth to the seed) being cut asunder, to be a cause to the same
difficulty and debility of ingendering, as Hippocrates admonishes. They
affirm, that the incision of the bladder does bring the same, which of it
self it is deadly: There are also many things, which being taken, do properly
procure sterility and barrenness, as Camphire, Hemlocke, and other herbs and
roots like unto these, and all things which offend and hurt the brain,
kidneys, and testicles, being the principal members of generations.

Hitherto also belongs many other things, External causes.
as over much repletion, emptiness, immoderate exercises, intemperate heat,
deadly cold: Likewise Theophrastus does attribute a certain peculiar force to
some waters, to cause sterility. For the most part, diversity of complexions
has the superiority among the causes, when man and wife do want the due
temperature of the qualities. But where they shall be mixed, yea, but little,
they shall be able to engender more easily: Old age also of it self in men and
women, does hinder generation through the defect of humors, although it be
found by experience, as yet, that many men being threescore and ten, or
foure-score years of age, have begotten children. Lastly, there is also a
great cause of sterility, which happens by the witchcraft of Witches. Let it
suffice to have spoken these things concerning the evident and known causes of
barrenness.

Signs of barrenness.
Moreover, there are many signs whereby the difficulty of conceiving or
begetting children may be noted and observed. The first are to be taken from
the constitution and habit of the privy members, as if they be diseased with
any corruption or defect, or be too large, or too strait and narrow, they are
known not to be apt and fit for generation. The seed also is unfit, if it be
too hot, or too cold, which thing they say may not only be observed by the
color of the urine, but also of the substance of the same. Also many judge of
sterility and fruitfulness by the habit and color of the body, that the
women which are of a pale color are supposed to be also more moist than
others. If they be more moist, they are not so apt to retain and cheerish the
seed. This experiment following is put in practice of some: When they go about
to make a trial concerning the unfruitfulnesse or fertility of any one, they
pour the urine of the party on Barley. If this sprout out within ten days,
they acknowledge it for a sign of fruitfulness: if it do not, they
acknowledge it for a certain argument of sterility and barrenness: But others
pouring the urine upon Husks, or Bran, if they see worms to be bred and
ingendered in it, do observe a sign of barrenness from that. Hippocrates
does counsel us to search out this thing by fumes made underneath, so that if
a fume being used underneath, be perceived above by smelling, the woman being
close covered about the lower parts, then, he says, it may be thought to be a
sign of fruitfulness, because the secret members are not strict and narrow:
If it be not perceived by smelling at the nostrills, he says, it is a very
certain note and sign of the strictness and narrowness of the Matrix, and
so consequently of barrenness. Some would have the same thing to be found out
by annoynting the corners of the eyes with liquid ointments, so that if the
ointments of some kinds of colors being laid upon the corners of the eyes do
not change the color of the spittle, then it should be a sign of constipation
and stopping, and therefore of barrenness also, because the eyes are members
communicating with the seed, because they quickly sink down and wax hollow
when it is immoderatly sent forth and dispersed. Some old women likewise have
their signs by which they observe whether the greater sterility or
unfruitfulnesse be in the husband, or in his wife; for they sprinkle two hand
fulls of Sage, laid severally by themselves, with urine, one of them with the
urine of the man, and the other with the urine of the woman, and they say, that
the handful which shall wither first, is a testimony of barrenness of the
party, with whose urine it was sprinkled and watered. They receive the same
experiments also by Beans and Barley, that whose part does sprout first, in
him or her, they think there is most fertility and fruitfulness.

Further, we must consider here also, that fruitful women, and such as are
apt to engender children, do sooner seem to be old in the outward habit of
body, than those which are barren and fruitless, also they wax lean sooner,
and become weak, notwithstanding they live more healthful in their old age,
than they which never ingendered any children, because in these the abundance
of diverse humors retained and stopped, has bred some worse thing, and has
given greater occasion of disturbing the temperate health of the body.

CHAP. II. Of the cure and remedy of sterilitie, and barrenness, proceeding
from Phlegm.
THe causes and signs of the difficulty and hardness of conceiving in women,
in men of causing women to be conceived, and in them both of begetting being
already known; it follows now to speak of the cure of them. And first of
all truly, if that difficulty shall be bred and caused of moist and cold
Phlegm, before all things be used, that superfluous matter shall be prepared
and digested with this syrup following: Take of the roots of Madder the
greater, two ounces, of Ruscus, or Butchers-broome, Sperage, Galangale, of each
one dram. Mugwoort, Savine, wild Penniroyall, Balm, Balsamint or Costmary,
Mints, Harts-tong, Venus-haire, Gallitricum, or Clary, Sambucus, or common
Elder, Origanum, Calamentum montanum, Penniroyall, of the roots of Valerian, of
each half a handful, of the seed of Seselie drams six, Anise, Carui, or
Caruway-seeds, of the seed of Fennel, Ameos, Spikenard, of each two drams,
Xylobalsamum, Carpobalsamum of each one dram, Liquorice, Raisins, of each one
ounce, Rosemary-flowers, Staechados Arabica, of each half an ounce, scrapings
of Ivory, Calamus aromaticus, Redsanders, of each half a dram. Let all these
things be beaten together, and make a decoction of them with running water, as
much as suffices, and with three drammes of Vinegar, and three pound of Sugar,
let them be strained to one half of it, and add to the straining Cinamome one
dram, Musk four grains. The party must drink four ounces every day in the
morning of this Aromaticall syrup very warm. Or you may make this syrup more
thin, with water of Elder, Pimpinel, and Mugwoort, taking one ounce of each of
them, and so to drink three ounces in the morning very warm. Or you may
prepare another syrup in this manner: take Mugwoort, Savine, Mints, Origanum,
Calamint, Hyssop, Pimpinel, Germander, Maiden-haire, flowers of the common
Elder, Staechados, of each one handful, Anise, Fenel, Ameos, Carui, the seeds
of Dill, Sesely, of each half an ounce, of the root of Sperage,
Butchers-broome, the greater Madder, of each half a pound, of red Cicers a
little quantity (termed of the Physicians a Pugill) Spica celtica, Spica nardi,
Galangall, Squinantum, Calamus aromaticus, of each two drammes; mix them and
make a decoction of them with running-water, with Honey and Sugar, of each one
pound and a half, and let it be made aromaticall and sweet, to the sense of
smelling, with Cinamome and Musk, as is declared before. Three draughts of
this syrup, to be taken every day in the morning very warm may be prepared in
this manner: Take Oxymel squiliticum, syrup de radicibus acetosi, syrup of
Mugwoort, of each one ounce and a half, of the waters of Pimpinel, Fenel,
Mugwoort, of each three ounces. Let three draughts be made of this mixture.

Afterward the matter being sufficiently prepared, and digested by these syrups
to be purged out of the body, If the woman shall be of a strong Nature or
Complexion, which is affected with this difficulty of conceiving, she may also
take these pills: Take Pilulae faetidae two scruples, Species Diacastoreum one
scruple, Diagridium six grains; make of them eleven Pills with syrup of
Mugwoort or Honey.

But if she cannot brook the use of Pills, let her use this potion in steed
of the Pills Take Diacassia half an ounce, Electuarie of Diaphaenicon,
Electuarium Indum, of each two drams, syrup de radicibus, made without Vinegar,
temper them with two ounces of Mugwoort, or Bawme water, and make a draught of
them; or else take of the Electuary Diaphaenicon, Electuarium Indum, Diacassia,
of each one dram, of the best Agarick two drams, Ginger one scruple, Sal gemma
six grains: Let all things be infused in the whey of Goats milk, and honey of
Roses one ounce, and when they have been infused twelve hours, let them be
strained and make a drink of them, being mixed with the aforesaid Electuaries.
But if a dry Electuary shall better please the party, let three dry morsells be
made up in this manner. Take Electuarie Diaphaenicon, Electu. Indum, Diacassia,
of each two drams, white Sugar, so much as suffices, and make three morsells
gilded. If this shall not be so well liked, you may make this Confection in
little roundells or Trocoisks: take red Roses, Cinamome, Ginger, of each one
dram, Sanders, white and red, of each half a dram, Hermodactyli, Esula, of
each one dram and a half, Diagridium, Turbit, of each two drams, Mastick one
scruple, white Sugar half a pound. Dissolve all these things with the juice or
water of Mugwoort, and after they have been infused in it some hours, let
them be strained, and let a confection be made in little rundells, or
Trochiskes. Let the Dosis or quantity to be taken, be half an ounce, or five
drams: Or if you please you shall take of the powders, and shall mingle them
with white Sugar in equal weight, and shall make a mixture of them (properly
named Tragaea) of which you shall give one dram and a half in broth of Cicers
very warm. Some do give the leaves of Sena beaten to powder two drams and a
half after this manner. But these purging medicines are to be tempered by the
counsel of skillful Physicians, according to the qualities of those things,
for which they are given.

Now such kind of matter being sufficiently purged, the next thing shall be,
that the use of bathes do follow, and so often as the woman shall come out of
them, let her take one dram of common Triackle or Mithridate, in water of
Mugwoort; Or if it like you better, let her take a little of this confection
following: Take of the Species or kinds of Triphera magna without Opium,
Diapliris, Diambra, Diamuscus, Diasatyrion, of each half a dram; scraping of
Ivory, seed of the herb of Mercury, of each two scruples; the Runnet of a Hare
and Matrix of it, of each half a dram, Sisely half a scruple, white Sugar
half a pound. Let them be dissolved with Bawme-water, and let there be added
to them being orderly boiled; Conserve of the rinds of the Citron one ounce,
and conserve of Rosemary-flowers half an ounce; Let there be a confection made
somewhat thick.

But let her chiefest care be while she does use bathes, that she use a
certain and convenient diet, and moderate feeding, which always must be
prescribed and appointed of a skillful Physician.

But if the woman cannot have such natural bathes, a bathe may be prepared for
her of these herbs following sodden in water.

Take Mugwoort, Betony, Chamaepitis, Germander, Celandine, Clary, Bay Leaves,
Mallows, Feverfew, Bawme, wild Penniroyall, Origanum, Ozimus, Penniroyall,
Rose-mary, Savine, Melilote, St. Iohns-worth, Hissop, Cammomel, of each one
handful; Carui, Cummin, Siler montanum, Anise, Dill, of each three ounces,
Linseed Fenugrec, of each three ounces, roots of Cumfrey, Valerian,
Stone-parsley, of each one pound, Brimstone one ounce and a half, Salt two
ounces, Allome one ounce; Let all of them being mingled together, be put in a
bag, and let them boil in water. And always every fourth day this bathe must
be renewed again. As often as she shall leave bathing, let her take of common
Triacle, or Mithridate, as is spoken before; let her lie down in her bed, and
let her provoke sweating, if she can by any means: Or let her use the
confection before described, morning and evening in the same manner. But when
it shall not seem commodious to use this bathe, some of the aforesaid herbs
may be gathered, and fomentations may be made of them.

But when all these things shall not sufficiently purge the Phlegmatic
humor, it shall be profitable to minister a pessarie to her every night
prepared in this manner: and let her use it until she shall feel her self
freed from those superfluous Phlegmatic humors.

Take Mugwoort, Savine, Marjoram, Dittany, Wormwood, of each half a dram;
Anise, Rue, the rind or outside of Frankincense, of each one scruple, the pulpe
of Colocynthis two scruples. Make a powder of them, and let it be tempered and
incorporated with the juice of the herb Mercury or Germander, and make a
Pessarie.

Further, among all the medicines which bind the Matrix, we think that
nothing can be better approved than this following. Take Acacia, Balaustium, or
the flowers of Pomgranates, Akorne cups, the dross or scales of Iron, Mints,
Lillies, bark of the Mastick-tree or Lentiscus, the outside of Olibanum,
Anthera, Sumach, Tartar, Spike, of each half a dram; mingle them, and make a
powder of them, of which, with the juice of Sorrel, or Fullers teasell, named
in latin Virga Pastoris, or with the juice of Milfoile or Yarrow, let
Pessaries be made.

But because sometimes it comes to pass, that by reason of cold and moist
Phlegm, How the ill-savour of the Matrix is to be cured.
the Matrix cannot only retain and hold the seed, but also does offend with a
noisome stinch and savor, therefore when this chances, we must use this
medicine following. Take Galls, Nutmegs, of each three drams, Cloves one dram,
Musk half a scruple, let them be beaten to powder, and dissolved with one
pound of red Wine. When the woman will use these things, let her wash her
secrets well with them, and lay clothes being dipped therein upon them, but let
her do it especially when she goes to bed.

But if it pleases to use a more forcible medicine to restrain and bind the
Matrix, you may then use this following. Take the root of Comfrey, Allome,
Balaustium, Myrrh, Olibanum, Mastick, Colophony, Bole-Armeny, Cypresse-nuts,
Harts-horne burnt, of each one dram and a half.

Let all things be pounded and reduced into a powder, and let the half part of
it, or all boil in sower red Wine, a little Vinegar being mixed with it. Let
the woman wash and bathe her secrets, with that decoction being very warm.
Likewise she may sprinckle the dry powder upon them, and also lay a cloth
doubled once or twice upon, being dipped and moistened before in that decoction.
But if this shall profit nothing, or little, you must use also this Pessarie
besides prepared after this manner.

Take Allom, named in latin Allumen Scissile, Myrrh, Lignum Aloes, the hairs
of a Hare cut into small pieces, Rue or Herb-grace, Bayberries, Doronicum,
Cypresse-nuts, of each half a dram, Storax Calamita two drams, Amber, one
scruple and a half, Musk, Allome, called Allumen Saccharinum, of each two
drams. Let them be mingled together and brought to a powder, and make a Pessery
of it with Oil of Myrtles.

CHAP. III. Of the Cure of sterility arising from choleric humidities and
moistures of the Matrix.
WHen choler shall be an impediment to conception, before all things a good
diet must be appointed, and a moderate use of all those things which do
necessarily belong to the life of man and woman, to wit, sleep, watching,
moving, resting, meat, drink, and the like things, and that all decline from
that humor, to that which is cold and moist. Next after the convenient use of
these things proved a little time, the anckle-veines of both the feet shall be
opened, but specially when the woman shall abound with blood. But let her not
have overmuch blood taken from her, because blood, as they say, is the bridle
of choler. After the opening of a vein, the choleric humors shall be
prepared with this syrup following: Take of the syrups of Acetosae simplicis,
Oxysaccharum simplex, syrup of Endive, of each one ounce; waters of Succory,
Hops, Buglosse, of each two ounces. Temper them with yellow Sanders, Cinamome,
and Mace, so much as suffices that the drink may be odoriferous. You shall
give a certain quantity of this drink to her in the morning every day when
her stomach is empty, and three hours before supper; or so often as it shall
seem necessary: Or if it please you, for this drink you may give her this
decoction reasonable warm. Take the flowers of Buglosse, Borrage, red Roses,
of each half a handful; Violets, Lettuce, the flowers of white Poppy, Endive,
broad-leaved or garden Endive, of each one handful, Endive and Lettuce-seed,
of each half an ounce, the Four Cold-seeds six drams. Mingle them together,
and let a decoction be made of them in Fountaine-water, so much as may suffice,
or with an ounce and a half of the wine of Pomgranates and four ounces of
Vinegar; and let two pound of Sugar be added to them, and let it be made
aromaticall with yellow Sanders, Cinamome, and Amber, of each one scruple. Let
her use this syrup morning and evening the quantity of three ounces.

Now the superfluous matter of choleric humors being prepared for purgation,
it shall be purged with the draught following. Take of Cassia newly extracted,
or the best Manna one ounce. Let it be tempered with this decoction following:
Take Venus-haire, flowers of Buglosse, Violets, Prunes, Tamarindae, Electuary
de succo Rosarum, of each two drams: make a decoction, and mingle the Cassia or
Manna with three ounces of this aforesaid decoction, and let one draught be
made of it: Or take of choice Rheubarb, two drammes, Spick-Nard six grains;
let them be infused in Goats milk with a little white Wine, and the infusion
being made ten hours, let them be strained; and take three ounces of that
which is strained, and one ounce and a half of the syrup of Peach-flowers, and
of them mixed together, let one draught be made. If this potion do not like
her, you shall give her this morsel following, confected in this manner.

Take of the Electuary de Succo Rosarum, Diamanna, of each three drams, white
Sugar, so much as suffices; let the Bolus or Morsel being gilded, be divided
into three parts.

How Citrine, or yellow choler is to be purged.
But if Citrine or yellow Choler shall breed this difficulty of conceiving to
the Matrix, we must use these solutive medicines mixed together, a certain
weight taken of them, as the counsel of a skilful Physician shall direct you.
Namely, the Electuary Diaphaenicon, Electuarium Indum, Pillulae de
Rhahabarbaro, and Pillulae Agregativae. Afterward superfluous humors being
sufficiently purged, the nature and habit of the Matrix shall be strengthened
with this medicine following: Take of the Species or Simples of the confection
of Diatriasandalon two drams, the scrapings of Ivorie, Viscus Quercinus, the
powder of a Bulls Pissle, of the Matrix of a Hare, of each two drams, white
Sugar half apound.

Let it be dissolved with Rose Water, and let the confection or receipt be made
in morsells.

Or otherwise: Take conserve of Roses half an ounce, of Borrage, of the
flowers of the water-Lilly, of Buglosse, of each three drams; the Species of
Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diatriasandalon, Aromaticum Rosatum, of each one scruple,
Pearls, Powder of precious Stones, scrapings of Ivorie, Viscus Quercinus, of
each half a scruple. Let all these kinds be dissolved with a sufficient
quantity of syrup of Roses, and make a mixture of them, and an Electuary gilded.

All these things orderly performed, let her wash in the bathe following, which
may be prepared in this manner:

Take of the both kinds of Mallows, Matter violarum, or Violet plants, red
Roses, water-Lilly, Quince-leaves, of each one handful, Fenegrek, common Salt,
Roach-Allome, of each two drammes. Let all the herbs be shred in pieces very
small, and being enclosed in a bag, let them boil in the water, in which the
woman must sit. This bathe may be used every year, for there are four weeks
together. But so often as she shall come forth out of the bath, she must take
the weight of a Filberd-nut of the cordial Electuary before prescribed. Also
let her make this Fume underneath for her womb after her bathe. Take of all
the Sanders, of each one dram and a half. Styrax Calamita, two scruples, Amber
six grains, red Roses, Water-lilly-flowers, Violets, of each one dram. Let
them all be beaten together with Rose Water, and let Trochiskes be made with
them. Also it shall not be unprofitable to annoint the loins and Matrix
sometime with the ointment of Gallen, or with the ointment named Vnguentum
Sandalinum. Likewise she may use Pessaries in the night, in this sort
prepared. Take Marrow of the leg of a Calfe, Brain of a Heart, Butter made of
Cowes milk, the Fat of a she Goat, seed of the herb Mercury, of each half
an ounce. Acacia, Hypoquistidos, red Sanders, Styrax liquida, Horn of a Heart,
burned, of each half a dram. Let them be incorporated with oil of Roses, and
clean wool, and let Pessaries be made with them.

CHAP. IV. Of the cure of barrenness, if it proceed from superfluous bloody
humors of the Matrix.
But because sterility and barrenness is not only ingendered of Phlegm and
Choler abounding, but is also bred of overmuch blood, and sometimes also other
superfluous or corrupt humors are mixed with the same; we must first see by
the signs of Urine, which of those humors do abound. If you shall find that
blood alone is abounding, then such a diet shall be appointed, which may
diminish blood, and minister small nourishment unto to it. If you shall
perceive choleric humor to be in it, you shall order your diet to a cold
temperature. If Phlegm shall abound in it, you shall direct the temperature of
your diet to dryness. For it shall come to pass, that that superfluity, of
what humor soever it shall be, may by little and little be prepared for a
convenient purgation. But because the means is not commonly known to purge
blood from those aforesaid humors, when it is mixed with them, it is to be
inquired for of skillful Physicians: we will only prosecute that in this place,
which pertains to the diminishing of the abundance and superfluity of bloody
humors.

Therefore when it is known and evident that abundance of blood does hinder
conception in women, let first the veins of the Anckle be opened in both the
feet, and let a just quantity of blood be taken away. Which done, a bathe
shall be prepared of such herbs as do incline to cooling and refrigeration.
After the bath, the woman ought to use these Lozenges, or little Cakes. Take
Cinamome, seed of Mercury, red Roses, Scrapings, Pearls prepared, of each one
dram: red Corrall prepared, powder of precious Stones, of each two scruples,
all the sorts of Sanders half a dram, Sugar half a pound.

Let the Sugar be dissolved in Rose Water, and let all things be decocted and
boiled, until the Rose Water be wasted away: which being done, let one ounce
of conserve of Roses be added to it, and all things being mixed together, let
gilded Lozenges or little Roundells be made in such sort as they ought to be.

Likewise an Electuary very commodious profitable for this use, may be prepared
in this manner, of which let her take the quantity of a Filberd-nut always
before meat. Take of conserve of Roses one ounce, of Buglosse, Borrage, of each
two drams, of the species or simples of Diatriasandali, of Diarhodon Abbatis,
of each three drams. Let these Ingredients be tempered together with syrup of
Roses, and let them all be incorporated together, and let them be gilded with
the leaves of Gold, so much as may suffice, and let an Electuarie be made of
them. Also it shall be a profitable thing, that she should be bathed with a
decoction made with these Simples following, made in raine-water, or in water
wherein steel has been often quenched. Take red Roses, Galls, Sumach, the
seed of the greater Plantane, with the leaves, Comfrey, of each half a
handful, Terra Sigillata, Bole Armeniacke, Roch Allome, of each half an ounce.

Also a powder may be made of the Simples before prescribed, and may be boiled
in the aforesaid water, in which a cloth sometimes doubled together being
dipped and moistened may be laid very warm upon the loins and privy parts.

Also this Plaster following being warm in the same manner may likewise be
laid upon them.

Take Musk six grains, Citrine, Sanders, red Roses, of each half a dram;
oil of Roses one ounce and a half. Mingle them and make a plaster of them.

CHAP. V. Of the Cure of sterility proceeding from a melancholy humor.
IF a melancholic humor abounding shall be the cause of sterility and
barrenness. First of all, a diet must be appointed declining from the
qualities of this humor, to that which is hot and dry. Care and sadness must
be banished away, and mirth and joy must be procured as much as may be, but
sorrows and pensiveness are to be omitted so much as is possible. Then the
superfluous humor shall be prepared and mollified for purgation with this syrup
following.

Take syrup of Acetosa de radicibus, two ounces, syrup of Fumitary one ounce,
of the waters of Hart's-tongue and Mugwoort, of each two ounces. Let these be
mingled and made Aromaticall with Cinamome, and let there be made a clear
syrup of them: Or else, take of the Waters of Buglosse, Pimpinell, Fumitary,
Mugwoort, Harts-tong, of each three ounces; Vinegar one ounce, white Sugar
four ounces. When these are made odoriferous with Cinamome, let them be made a
Iuleb. Let the Dose or quantity at a time be four ounces: Or otherwise, Take
Calaminth, Origanum, Staechados, Liver-woort, Borrage-flowers, Mugwoort,
Buglosse, Germander, of each half a handful, Harts-tong, half a handful,
the barks of the Broom, and Ash-tree, of each half a handful, Raisins one
ounce, Mix them, and let a decoction be made with one ounce of Epithymie,
Sugar one pound, clarified Honey half a pound, Vinegar two ounces.

Let this decoction be spiced with Cinamome; let the quantity of an ounce and a
half be taken with the aforesaid waters.

The matter being prepared and made solutive for purgation; it follows that
it be purged and expelled with medicine: Take Cassia newly extracted, Manna, of
each half an ounce. Let them be dissolved in this decoction following: Take
Venus-haire, flowers of Buglosse, Borrage, Violets, Germander, Harts-tong, of
each half a handful, Raisins half an ounce. Mix them, and make a decoction
in water, to which add Cinamome a dram, Cassia extracted, Manna, confection of
Hamech, of each two drams, syrup of Violets one ounce. Let all things be
tempered together, and let a purging medicine be made of them; let the quantity
of an ounce and a half be taken at a time: Or else, take of the confection of
Hamech three drams and a half, Sugar a sufficient quantity, and let a gilded
morsel be made, divided into three parts. Also the pills named Pilulae Lazuli,
may be used, a dram taken at a time.

The superfluous matter expelled and voyded, the next thing to be performed, is
to use convenient and fit bathes for this purpose, which shall be prepared in
this manner: Take Camomel, Melilot, Germander, Chamaepithys, Hyssop,
Bay Leaves, Lavander, of each two handfulls, Mugwoort four handfulls,
Marish-Mallowes with the roots, five handfulls, Line-seed, Fenegrec, of each
one pound, roots of Valerian, half a pound. Let them all be cut in pieces, and
being enclosed in a bag, let them boil, in bathe let the woman sit afterward.

But after the Bathe, let her eat every day, morning and evening a certain
little portion of this confection following. Take of the Species of precious
Stones two drams, seed of Mercury, scrapings of Ivorie, of each two drams, the
Pissle of a Bull, the Runnet of a Hare with the Matrix, of each two scruples,
white Sugar half a pound. Dissolve them with water of Buglosse, and put to it
conserves of Buglosse half an ounce, of Borrage three drams, Cinamome one
dram. Let those things be powdered which are to be powdered, and let the
confection be made in Morsells.

But if the use of the bathe prescribed shall not be convenient, yet
Fomentations may be made of the aforesaid recited Simples, this Electuary going
before being always used.

Further after the bathe, or fomentations, it shall not be unprofitable to use
these Pessaries also in the night, and at any other convenient time.

Take Costus powdered, and with oil of Roses and Silk make a Pessary: Or with
Fenegrec, and the Grease of a Ducke, or with Sperage-seedes and fat of a Goose:
Or with oil of Violets, Musk, and the aforesaid seeds.

CHAP. VI. Of the Cure and Remedy of sterility proceeding of overmuch heat,
dryness, moisture and coldness.
AMong other impediments and hindrances of conceiving and ingendring,
immoderate siccity and dryness of the Matrix, is not the least cause. And that
cause being found out, the use of all things is to be directed to a moist
temperature; yet so as the body be not weakened by these things, but
strengthened. Therefore it shall be very profitable to use these little Cakes
often. Take white Sugar, one pound and a half, Amylum three ounces. Let the
Sugar be dissolved with Rose Water, and the Amylum mingled with it, let a
decoction be made with three ounces of sweet Almonds, and a little oil of
sweet Almonds, and little Morsells.

It is also exceeding profitable to drink Goats-milke newly milked with Honey
or Sugar mixed with it. Likewise this bathe is wonderful convenient. Take
Heads of Weathers, and let them be sodden in a Kettle full of water, so long
till the flesh be loosed and part quite from the bones, which being done, Take
moreover the leaves of Vine, named, Vitis Muscatella, of the Willow tree,
Violet-leaves, Camomel, Melilot, of each two handfuls Marish Mallows with the
roots, six handfuls, Fenegrec, Line-seed, of each two pound, roots of Valerian
one pound and a half: let all things be mingled together, and let a bathe be
made of them being sufficiently boiled. And it may be prepared so, that either
the woman may sit in it, or make Fomentations of it. But after the bathe or
Fomentations, she may take a little morsel of this confection the next hours
after meat. Take of the Species of Diarhodon Abbatis, two drams, seed of
Mercury, scrapings of Ivorie, of each two scruples, the Matrix of a Hare two
drams, Cotton-seed, Tragacantha, Gum Arabicke, of each half a dram, white
Sugar half a pound dissolved in water of Buglosse, conserve of Buglosse,
Borrage, of each one ounce; mix them, and let a gilded confection be made.

But especially it shall be needful to moisten the Matrix, which shall partly
be done by Fomentations used underneath in a chair enclosed and covered round
about, and partly by Pessaries being thus prepared. Take Marrow of the leg of a
Cow, Grease of a Hen, of each half an ounce, Styrax liquida two drams. Also
four ounces of oil of sweet Almonds may be added to them, and let Pessaries
be made with clean wool.

But if conception be hindered through intemperate hear, that either the body
is of an over-hot complexion, or the secret parts are molested with intemperate
heat: First of all, this heat shall be diminished by a convenient launcing and
opening of the veins, the Ankle-veines in the left foot, and the Liver-veines
in the right foot. Afterward purgations must be used, so much as reason shall
require; but before them this Potion shall be taken for a preparative of the
hot humors: Take herbs of Plantane the greater, Endive, Venus-haire,
Polipodie, Fumirary, of each half a handful; red Roses, Violet-flowers,
Buglosse, Water Lillies, Borrage, of each a little quantity, named a Pugil,
Raisins half an ounce.

Let all of them mixed together be boiled in running-water, let one half be
consumed and wasted, let them be strained, and to the straining, let there be
added a sufficient quantity of white Sugar, and let it be made aromaticall with
Cinamome, scrapings of Ivory, red Coral prepared, red Sanders, of each half a
dram: Take three ounces of the aforesaid decoction, and let them be tempered
with two scruples of Choice Rhubarb powdered, with syrup of Epithymie half an
ounce, Cassia newly drawn one dram and a half, or Manna one dram: Or
otherwise, Take of the Electuary de Succo Rosarum, three drams, Cassia newly
extracted, Diasena, of each two drams; Temper them with an ounce and a half of
the aforesaid decoction, or of findive-water; let a Potion be made of it: Or
else, Take syrup of Peach-Roses one ounce, syrup of Peach-flowers half an
ounce; Trochiskes of Agaricke one dram, Cassia newly extracted, two drams,
waters of Buglosse and Burrage, of each one ounce; mix them, and make one
draught. Pessaries also may be prepared, and be applied underneath, compounded
with the juice of Mandrake, Mastick, Myrrh, Camphire, and Gum Arabic. But if
the heat do not exceed, but shall be more temperate, then that which abounds,
shall be diminished with Plasters laid upon the Navell and secret members, as
with Vnguentum Santalinum, decocted in a liquid and thick form. In few words,
we may proceed in the same order as we have prescribed concerning choler and
blood.

But if coldness and moistness shall molest and vex the secret parts
overmuch: First the superfluity of them shall be mollified and prepared for
purgation, by remedies declining from them to heat and dryness according to
the prescript of the syrup following: Take of the herbs of Mugwoort, Betony,
Bawme, Penny-royall, Marjoram, of each one handful, roots of Enula Campana,
Galangal, Saytrion, Parsley, Fennel, Asarum, of each two drams, Anis-seed,
Amomum, Liquorice, Madder that Diers do use, wild Carrot, Siler montanum,
Cummine, of each one dram, Raisins one ounce, Fountaine-water so much as
suffices, of Sugar, or clarified Honey a sufficient quantity. Let them all be
commixed, and after the straining made, let them be made odoriferous with
Cinamome, and let Oxymel squilliticum be added to it. Take three ounces at a
time: Or else, take Electuarium Indum one ounce, Catharticum Imperiale half an
ounce, waters of Buglosse and Borrage, of each one ounce; temper them together,
and make a draught; Or dissolve them with three ounces of the aforesaid
decoction, and in like manner make one draught. There may also be use here of
Pilulae Foetidae, and of Pills confected of Rheubarb. Purgation sufficiently
made, let her take Pills prepared in this manner the quantity of a dram, when
she is about to go to bed. Take Lignum Aloes, Xylobalsamum, Siler monnum,
Asarum, or Asara Bacca, Masticke, Nutmegge, Anis-seede, Fennel-seede, of each
one dram, Spicke-Nard, Calamus Aromaticus Galbanum, of each half a dram,
Myrobalani Chebuli, Bellirici, of each six drams, Aloes two ounces; mingle
them with syrup of Peach-Roses, and make a mass of Pills: let the quantity to
be taken be one dram at once. To be brief, you may proceed in the same manner
as we have before advised in the cure of Phlegm.

CHAP. VII. Of certain general Precepts serving for the curing of the
barrenness of men and women.
A Great part of the Cure of the barrenness of men and women, consists in
the use of exeternall things: which by our advice must be moderate, that the
body do not become gross and fat, because fatness does very much hinder
secundity and fruitfulness. Also extreme leanesse cannot be without fault in
this case. Wherefore in both these, they must use temperate nourishments, which
have not the Nature to inflate and to breed windy matter in the body. They must
use Wine but little, and sparing and moderate meat. But principally, let women
observe and consider the complexion and state of the Matrix, and let them
warily mark their Terms, lest in the time when they issue forth, or when they
are cleared from them, they use an inconvenient diet, but that rather they use
most especially such things which are known to have an expulsive virtue and
force to expel out of the body: such as are parsley, Stone-parsley, Fennel,
the herb which the Germans call commonly Pimpinella, with the like herbs and
roots of the same nature and quality. But that every one may be instructed
concerning every case, we will give an Antidote and Medicine contrary to the
complexion of every corrupted Matrix.

And verily first of all, when the Matrix shall be distempered, and troubled
with immoderate coldness, there is caused a stopping of the Flowers, bred and
engendered by reason of an evil diet observed in meat and drink, whereby
continual pains are felt about the loins, kidneys, secrets along the back,
and other members of the body, and ever and anon horrible cold does vex and
molest them. When things are come to this pass, the use of those things is
profitable, whatsoever are of a hot Nature, specially hot baths abounding with
Brimstone, such as are the bathes of the Helvetians or Swissers, especially
named the bathes of Badena (a City in Helvetia in Germany.)

But it shall be very profitable to use this syrup or potion for a preparative
of the mattet to be purged. Take of the syrup of Mugwoort, on ounce, Oxymel
compound, half an ounce, waters of Mugwoort and Bawme, of each one ounce. By
mixing them together, make one draught: But this drink following must be used
for a purgation. Take Benedicta Laxativa, Cassia newly extracted, of each three
drams, water of Penny-royall, and Mugwoort one ounce and a half, mingle them,
and let one draught be made. Also the confection of Diacastoreum is approved
for this use.

Likewise all their meats are to be seasoned with these spices, which have the
Nature to heat, as with Peper, Ginger, and such like. To be short, they must
proceed in the same order as we have taught before in curing sterility coming
from a phlegmatic humor.

Further, if the Matrix shall be grieved with intemperate heat and dryness,
the Terms will issue forth often, but so sharp, that often times the secret
parts are diseased and exulcerated. In this case the diet, medicines, and use
of all outward things is to be reduced, and brought to a cold and moist
temperature, as it is in like manner declared before, in the Cure of
barrenness proceeding from superfluity of choler.

But because oftentimes conception is hindered of wind enclosed within the body,
they must use meat and drink, which does not puff up and breed wind in the
body, but such as does dissipate and disperse the same, and proceed in the same
order, as we have taught before in curing the false windy conception, named
Mola. And let these things be sufficiently spoken, concerning those things
which rectify and remedy barrenness.

Now in this discourse those things are not to be omitted, Helps of
frutfulnesse.
which further and cause fecundity and fruitfulness. In this behalf many
excellent profitable things are delivered of the ancient and latter Physicians,
of which those which are chiefest, we have thought it a profitable thing to
gather together, and to publish abroad to the profit and commodity of many.

Suffumigation.
These Fumes first made upon the coals, and directed to the Matrix do please
very many.

Take Cypresse-nuts, Nutmegge, Masticke, Frankincense, Ladanum, Myrrh,
Galbanum, Bdellium, Bay Berries of each one dram, Styrax-calamita, Styrax
liquida of each two scruples, Cloves, Carui, of each half a dram, Amber two
grains, Saffron one scruple, Musk five grains.

Let all these things be mingled together with oil of odoriferous Spike, and
let Trochiskes be made of them, with the which let the woman in the morning,
being fasting, and in the evening, about to go to bed, receive a fume
underneath.

Also it will be profitable, to anoint the privy parts with this unguentum
following: An Unguent.
Take Styrax Calamita one dram, Saffron, Masticke, Ladanum, Myrrh, of each
one dram, Temper them with oil of Spike and Roses and white Wax so much as
may suffice, and a Liniment be made: Likewise the brains roasted of Hares will
do good in this case. But some do use the grease of Duckes, Geese, Hens,
Hearts, and the like, to which they do mix the sorts of simples before
prescribed, and make Trochiskes convenient to make a Suffumigation. Likewise
you may use these fumes following: Suffumigation.
Take Pure Ladanum one ounce, Styrax Calamita, Olibanum, of each one dram;
Lignum Aloes, dry Savine, of each one dram and a half; Amber three grains,
Musk six grains; Let all these things be mixed and beaten to powder, and let
Trochisks be made with a hot Pestle, of which being cast upon the coals, let a
fume be made underneath through a Tunnell: Likewise Pessaries may be made of the
Mass or Lump of them; Or otherwise, Take Ladanum one dram, Styrax Calamita,
half an ounce, Cloves, Lignum Aloes, red Roses, of each two drams, Amber half
a scruple, Musk six grains; let all these things be pounded, and let
Trochiskes be made of them in the manner aforesaid. Some of these also may be
dissolved with Rose Water, and the mouth of the Matrix may be washed with it.
Of these also Pessaries may be prepared. Here is also another thing very
profitable: Take red Roses half an ounce, Frankincense, Masticke Myrrh,
Sanguis Draconis, Bole-Armeniacke, Myrtles, of each two drams, Styrax Calamita
half an ounce, Ladanum half an ounce, Amber, Musk, Lignum Aloes, Cloves,
Artificial Balsamum, Spick-Nard, of each half a scruple. Those things that
are to be powdered, let them be beaten to powder, and let Trochiskes be made in
the aforesaid manner, and let a Suffumigation be made through a Tunnell with one
dram of it. It has been received for a truth of some acient Writers, that
women, which did often eat the roots of Aristolochia with roasted Veale, should
almost certainly conceive malechidren.

Pessaries.
But many of the later Physicians do counsel to apply these Pessaries
underneath, the seventh day after the issuing forth of the Flowers for to
rectify conception. Take of the root of Gentian, Saffron, Myrtles, Aloes, of
each two drams; Line-seede Oil, so much as suffices. And let a Pessarie be
made with them, which they say, will cause Conception within a few days after
it has been used.

But Galen counsels to drink Castoreum which is new, and any kind of Peper
taken the weight of twelve Barley corns in Malmesey, being mixed with the
juice of Penny-royall. The same Galen reports, that the Matrix of a Hare
being dried and beaten to powder, taken in Malmesey to be approved of some: But
it is certain, that the Fumes or Suffumigations before prescribed, to be most
approved of many later Physicians: Also while we make mention of these things,
we desire that all men should know, that we have nothing to do with the
Sorceries and divellish Arts of some old Witches, concerning this matter. But
let it suffice to have spoken hitherto of those things, by which sterility may
be averted, and fruitfulness furthered.

It remains also to speak a few words of those things which are to be
ministered inwardly. Inward helps of fruitfulness.
For because the fruitfulness of man and wife may be hindered very much for
want of desire to be acquainted with Venus, and by impotency and disability of
ingendring and effecting Conception, and also by infirmity of the seeds, caused
either by the defect of Nature, or by the enchantments of evil arts: We will
declare how all these things are to be amended in the prescript forms of these
medicines following: But first let such a powder be made profitable and
commodious for this matter.

A powder.
Take the stones of a Fox, Castoreum, the Matrix of a Hare, dried, of each two
drams: Galangal, Long-peper, of each two drams; Sugar equal to all in weight.
Mix them, and make a powder, of which one spoonefull is to be taken every day,
morning and evening with Malmesey.

An Electuary.
Also an Electuary very much approved, is very profitable for men and women, to
be taken every day in the morning fasting, and in the evening when they are
about to go to bed, the weight of a Filberd-nut, shall be prepared in this
manner: Take the Testicles or stones of a Fox cleansed six ounces, red Cicers,
Mints, Satyrion, wild Rocket, the root of Acorus, wild Carrot, the root of
Gladiolus, or Swordgrasse, Bawme, Cresses, Ozimus, Penny-royall, Vrtica,
Fennel, of each two ounces.

Let all things be made very clean, and being sodden in Sheeps-milke, let them
be very well pounded in a Mortar, and let them be reserved for the preparation
of this Electuary following. Next, take the Brains of Pigeons, Hens, Cocks,
Sparrowes, Drakes, Phesans, Stones of a Ball, of a lecherous Goat, of Bores
stones, of each three ounces: Let these likewise be boiled in Sheeps-milke, and
being decocted, let them be incorporated with a little fresh Butter, with the
yolks of Eggs, and let them be successively dried on the fire in Pans.

Which being done, Take sweet Almonds, Filberd-nuts, kernells of common Nuts,
Pineapple-kernells, all of them being made very clean, and dried a little on
the fire, of each one ounce; the pith of the Indian Nut, fat Dates, of each one
ounce and a half. Let all these things be cut into small pieces, and beaten to
as fine powder as may be; at last, take the dry Pissle of a Bull, Rocket-seed,
of each half an ounce, the seeds of Anise, Baucia, Sperage, of the Ash-tree,
Parsley, Stone-parsley, Radish, of each two drams, Long-peper, Ginger, of each
three drams, the roots of both kinds of Satyrion, of each half a dram, the
tail of the Fishes named Scinci, five drams; the tail of the Fish named
Lacertus, one dram and a half, Let all these things be beaten to a most fine
powder; And all things being prepared, confect and form the Electuary with
six pound of Sugar, mixed with two pound of the Paste of the aforesaid things,
or with four pound of clarfied Honey, and two pound and a half of the
aforesaid Paste.

Such an Unguent also may be prepared for the same use, with which the secrets
and loins may be anointed: Take Oil made of the Eggs of Pismires or Ants, of
the Oil of Castoreum, of a Fox, Costus, Galangal, Elder, of each half an
ounce; Petroleon, Oil of odoriferous Spike, of each two drams; the roots of
Peper, Pellitory, Euphorbium, Castoreum, of each half a dram; seed of Rocket,
of an Onion, of each one dram; decoct all these things mixed with white Wax
and Hens grease, so much as is sufficient, and make an ointment of them. Let
such a water be made for the same purpose: A Water.
Take An^s figs five ounces, Indian-nuts, the Fishes named Scinci, brought
from beyond the Seas, the tail of the Fish named Lacertus, sweet Almonds,
Pine-apple-kernells, Rocket-seed, of each one ounce, Vrtica, the roots of both
the kinds of Satyrion, Hermodactili, Peper, long and black, of each two
ounces; Musk one scruple, the best white Wine, wine sublimated, of each one
equal Measure; Let them all be mixed and infused, and haxing been set out to
the Sune fouretene days, let them be distilled. If you will use this water,
take half an ounce, with one ounce of the Electuary Diassatyrion, and drink
them mixed together morning and evening very hot.

Also these Pills are approved taken in the evening.

Take of the seed of Rocket, Radish, stone-Parsley, Pills.
Vrtica, Satyrion, of each one dram, stones of a Fox, pissle of a Bull, of each
two drams, the tail of the Fishes named Scinci, and the Fish Lacertus, of
each one dram, brains of Cock Sparrowes, Drakes, Cocks, Pigeons, of each
half an ounce, Peper, Galangal, long-peper, of each a dram and a half, roots
of both kinds of Satyrion, half an ounce, Euphorbium, Castoreum, of each one
scruple.

Let all be beaten to powder, let them be incorporated with Honey, and let
Pillls be made of them; Take the quantity of two or one dram.

Another Electuary for the same purpose to be taken morning and evening,
Another Electuary.
the quantity of a Chesse-nut shall be prepared in this manner.

Take Satyrion-rootes half a pound, Dates four ounces, Mints, Ginger candi'd,
or green-Ginger, Iujubae, of each three drams. Let all things be mingled
together, and sodden in Sheeps-milke, and pounded in a Mortar as is accustomed;
which being done, afterward take Cock-stones, stones of a Weather, or of a
Bull, or of a Goat.

Let those things be decocted in Sheeps-milk, with a little fresh Butter, and
the yolks of two Eggs, let them be dried in a Pipkin on the fire orderly.
After which things, take clarified Honey, two pound and a half, of the Sugar
named Tabarzeth as much as suffices. Let all these things be decocted in due
order, and these powders following be mingled with them being boiled, take the
Pissle of a Bull, of a Goat, Rocket-seed, of each one dram and a half;
Galangal, Zedoaria, of each one ounce; Cinamome, Ginger, long-peper, seed of
the Ash-tree, of each six drams; seed of Mercury, seed of Mallows, of each
half an ounce, the pith of the Indian Nut, Pine-apple-kernells cleansed, sweet
Almonds, of each one dram. Let all these things be brought to a powder, and let
them be mixed to the decoction before prescribed, and let an Electuary be made
of them. And now also let these things be sufficient to have been spoken
concerning medicines to be received inwardly for the cure of barrenness and
sterility.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Suffocation and choking of the Matrix, and of the causes
and cure of the same.
IT remains also to speak a few things hereafter concerning the most
especial diseases of the Matrix, which have greatest force to procure and
cause sterility, and also to hinder conception and generation, such as are
principally the Suffocation and Precipitation or falling down of the Matrix,
the immoderate issuing of the Terms, and the stopping of the same: But we will
speak first of the first.

What the suffocation of the Matrix is.
We say, that the Suffocation of the Matrix is not natural, but that it is a
forced and constrained ascending and rising up of the Matrix, or Mother toward
Diaphragma, or the Midriffe, whereby it comes to pass, that the passages of
the air are stopped, the Lungs and Arteries of the heart being pressed and
thrust together, and the Lungs is prohibited and barred from amplifying and
enlarging it self as it should; which passion proceeds from windy and diverse
vapors, arising from corrupt matter. And by this sickness, the breathing is
hindered, the brain is molested, the Heart is restrained of his free liberty,
the Lungs is crowded together, the senses and motions do cease, the Spirits
are intercepted, the members of the body do deny to do their office, whereby
it falls out, that faintings of the faculties of life do happen, sudden
swoonings do overwhelme the diseased, and sometime do deprive them of life,
the Heart being suffocated; for which effect it is supposed, that it is
therefore called in Latin, Suffocatio.

The Causes.
We cannot say, that there are any other causes of this Malady, but the stopping
of the Terms, contrary to the course of Nature, or corrupted seed, or else
other depraved and evil humors enclosed in the Matrix, being dissolved into
winds and vapors, and so forcing the Matrix to be heaved and lifted upward.

The signs of this disease are twofold, The Signs.
one of the sickness present, by the fit which is present, the other of the
disease to come, taken from the tokens of the fit to come. But the tokens of
the present sickness, taken by the Present fit, are these signs:

The women do hardly fetch their breath, Signs of the present fit.
the Pulse of the Arteries is seldom, their hands are continually laid upon
their belly above the Navell, for to depresse and keep down the Matrix rising
upward, the habit and form of the body is bending downward, the color is
pale, when you speak they make no answer, the understanding is quick and
lively without any voice at all, there is no motion of the body, and indeed
nothing else but a similitude of present death.

But whether life does remain still in the body or not, in this extreme
passion of the present fit, we may find out by these experiments and trialls.
Let feathers, or clean wool be put to the mouth of her which is afflicted
with this grievous fit, the which, if they be blown away, or at least be
moved, it shall be certain that there is life remaining in the body: Moreover,
it shall be a more certain thing to place a glass full of water upon her
breast, for life remaining as yet, must needs thrust and extend it self out,
and so moving of the water must follow: Or else, a clean and smooth
looking-glass is to be put to her mouth and nostrills, and if life be not
departed, you shall see the glass stained by the hot breath: Which experiment
seems to be most probable of all. Some do declare, that a certain woman was
afflicted with this fit three whole days and nights, and at last to have
returned to her self, being supposed to have been dead. We have seen the
same thing to have happened in some women, for one natural day, that is, four
and twenty hours together, through suffocation of the Matrix.

Signs of a future fit.
But these signs go before a fit which shall follow, that is to say, pain of
the head, dimnesse of the eyes, a continual panting of the heart, shortness
of breath, distemperature of reason, because of vapors mixed with the spirits,
a debility and weakness of all the members, cold sweates, continual pain in
the womb. And indeed evil humors retained and increased in the womb, do
cause and breed all these things, partly, near unto it, partly, removed
farther from it, which distemper and molest the brain, and other members of
the body, by stopping and intercepting natural heat proceeding from the heart,
until they suffocate and destroy all the senses at once, and also the strength
and forces of the body.

But in the cure of the present fit of this sickness, first, you shall mingle
Salt with Vinegar, The cure of the present fit in the suffocation of the Matrix.
and shall rub the uttermost parts of the members of the body, I mean the
soles of the feet, and palms of the hands, and pulses of the arms; afterward
binders being tied near unto the secrets, the hips and hammes, you shall apply
cupping-glasses near unto the place without Scarification. Afterward you shall
apply to her nostrills all things which being burnt have a strong and stinking
savor, as Castoreum, Assa Foetida, Feathers, Hair, Leather, Horn, Hooses of
Horses or Kine, or such like things: For these things stir up, and move the
Animal spirit, being, as it were asleep, which by and by enforced with such a
stinking favor, making haste to come to the brain by the nerves and
instruments for the purpose, does stir up the motive faculty in the same.

Moreover, this motion by the great force of this strong savor, comes to the
heart with the Animal Spirit, where both of them together do repair vital
spirit in the same, being oppressed, and, as it were, laid asleep. At last,
all of them joined together, do oppose themselves against the Matrix, rising
up toward the Midriffe, and stir up the expulsive force of it, so that the
corrupt humors being expelled which are in it, the Matrix may fall down, and
give more room and space unto the superior vital Organs or Instruments. In
this case, the dung of a Horse fed with Oats, boiled in the best Wine, drunk
very hot is very much approved. Also half a dram of the confection
Diacastoreum, taken in broth made of a Hen.

An Unguent.
Likewise such an Unguent may be prepared wherewith her secrets may be anointed
inwardly which suffers this swooning: Take Musk one scruple, Gallia Muscata
one dram, Oil of Lillies two ounces, Temper them and make an Unguent.

Suffumigations also being thus prepared, Suffumigations.
from which a fume may ascend up to the nostrills, will profit in this case.

Take Castoreum, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, of each half an ounce;
Brimstone one ounce, Assa Foetida one dram. If you prepare these Fumes or
Trochiskes, you shall confect them with Oil of Castoreum: But if you would use
them with Vinegar, you shall put pure and clean wool into her nostrills,
dipped in Vinegar, in which these powders are dissolved, or you shall apply it,
outwardly to them. But if this deadly malady shall proceed from the Terms
being retained in the Matrix, or from corrupt seed, it may be cured in the
same manner as we will declare in the Chapters following.

But if the cause of this disease shall come from cold, it will be the wisest
course to use hot bathes when due purgation has been performed, such as are
the bathes in that part of Germany which is named Helvetia, (A certain diet,
and order of bathing being prescribed and set down of a skillful Physician)
because that water does consist of much Brimstone, and some Allome, it sooner
resolves, dispelleth and drives away cold, heateth the Matrix, and comfort
all other Members and parts of the body of a woman.

CHAP. IX. Of the Precipitation or falling down of the Matrix, of the causes
and cure of the same.
THe Precipitation of the Matrix, is the departure and digression of the Matrix
from her natural place into some other place, or the coming forth and outward
appearing of it through the privities.

This happens either by a fall, blow, or some other vehement hurt, or through
wind enclosed in the Matrix, or corrupt humors, or by the intemperate
moistness putrefying the ligaments and binders of the same, or else through
difficulty and painfulnesse of Aborcement, or the birth and negligence of
Midwives, or by violent extraction and pulling forth of the Secundine, whereby
it falls out, that the ligaments and stay-bands of it are broken, and the
Matrix is thrown down suddenly to issue forth. This removing of the Matrix is
caused in a diverse manner, that is to say, toward the right or left side, or
lower, and into the forepart and hinder part of the body.

But although the causes of these diseases may easily be judged and discerned
by these things going before, yet they may as yet be divided into outward and
inward. Outward causes are, Outward Causes.
falling, blows or strokes, some hurt, lifting of some thing which is of great
weight, swift running, leaping, dancing, unseasonable riding, all immoderate
exercise, and such things as are like unto them. Also long sitting upon the
cold earth or cold pavement, long-tarrying in cold water, overmuch and often
drinking of cold water: Also the violent breaking forth of the child, the hard
and painful birth, the rashness of the Midwives, the violent extraction of
the Secundine, often coughing, great crying out, vehement sneesing. The disease
Tenasmus, binding the body, and all these things do minister occasions to the
Matrix to fall down. Inward Causes.
The inward causes are, long stopping of the Flowers, with whose weight the
Matrix being pressed downward, does suddenly descend and fall down, the
ligaments and binders thereof being oftentimes broken in sunder: Also humors
enclosed in the same, wind enforcing it, and removing it from her place.
Likewise, overmuch humidity and moisture putrefying and corrupting the
ligaments, or tying-bands, and by that infection enforcing it to issue forth.
The signs of this disease are not unlike to the causes: Signs.
The party will easily rehearse the signs of the outward causes, Whosoever is
grieved with this disease; But the inward signs are to be considered according
unto the removing of the Matrix: For if it bend toward Diaphragma, or the
Midriffe, without any strangling or choking, we may perceive that the woman
does feel pains, and heaving above the Navell, to feel a round lump like a
Globe in her belly, to fetch her breath and wind very short and quick, as
though her bowels were swiftly crushed together with the hand, a dimnesse of
the eyes, pain of the head, loathing of meat, and often belchings going before
and accompanying it: sometimes also a sound of the belly being heard,
especially when as the removing from her place shall arise from wind enclosed
in the same. But if it shall fall down to the lower parts, then many pains
shall be about the kidneys, loins and secret members, and a round lump is
felt in the neck of the Matrix, with which the Bladder and Intestinum rectum,
or the Fundament gut are so pressed together, that it is a hard and difficult
thing for her to void her urine and other excrements, her urine also will be
white and thick, bluish or black dregs gathered together in the bottom,
almost no pulse at all, soft, slender, thick and disordered. But if by
intemperate moisture of the Matrix, the ligaments and stay-bands of it are
putrefied and rotted, so that for that cause it falls down to issue forth,
we must understand that this is caused without any pain; and when the case
stands so, stinking and filthy corrupt matter does issue out of the Matrix
continually. If it happen by difficulty and hardness of the birth, it will at
all times appear out of the privities, but it will come forth being forced and
constrained by great labors and exercises, and will stir up great pains
between the lips or brimes of the same, being pressed together. Therefore all
the qualities and conditions of this sickness and malady are diligently to be
marked and observed, that all things may go forward the better in the
administration of the cure.

The cure of the suffocation of the Matrix.
It remains now to give diligent admonion and counsel also concerning the
cure, so much as we have been able to know, and profitably to gather out of
others. Wherefore if the Matrix shall be removed upward, without any
suffocation, it shall be able easily to be reduced and brought into her place
again with Fumes, Fomentations, or other things which have force to repel and
drive back, as it has been made evident and manifest in the Tractat of the
former Chapter, concerning the suffocation of the Matrix. But if it shall
remove toward the right side, Cupping-glasses are to be fixed on the contrary
side without Scarification. Also let there be binding-bands made of cloth
folded together, a little bundle compounded by the advice of some Physician of
such things, as have force to move the Matrix, being put between those bands.
When those things are enclosed with the bindingbands, let them be tied to that
side into which the Matrix is removed, and let the woman that suffers this
infirmity, lie down upon them, and let her make a trial to repel it back.
And those things bundled together, shall be Bawme, Camomile, Mugwoort, Melilot,
Rue or herbe-Grace, and such like things.

Moreover, A Powder.
she must take one spoonful of this powder following with wine very hot, her
stomach being as yet empty, every day in the morning. Take Flowers and Berries
of the Bay Tree, Harts-horne burnt, of each two drams, Myrtles two scruples,
Aristolochia rotunda one dram, Mingle them, and make a powder: Or otherwise,
take Peach-kernells in number twelve, Dissolve them with the yolks of three
Eggs. Afterward take Cinamome, Bayberries, Aristolochia rotunda, of each one
dram, Dittany half a dram, Nutmegge one scruple, Saffron half a scruple,
mingle them with Wine and Sugar, so much as suffices, let a broth or meat be
decocted of this, and let the woman eat it very hot next her heart, having
eaten nothing before in the morning. For it serves wonderfully for restoring
the Matrix into her place, and does mitigate the pains of the same.

But if it fall downward, and appear outwardly by the secrets, first, the
excrements of the belly are to be moved to issue forth with a Clyster
conveniently, and likewise the Bladder is to be dis-burdened, also the womb is
to be mollified with this bathe following, A Bathe.
that the Matrix may have the more easy regresse and return into her place:
Take Mugwoort, Camomile, both kinds of Mallows, with the roots, Fenegrec,
Bay Berries, of each one handful, mingle them together, and let a bathe be
made of them.

So often as she shall come forth of the bathe, let the Matrix be cherrished
with warm cloths, and let it be anointed with the Muscilage made of the
Kernells of Quinces, mollified with the water of Acacia, that it may be
slippery in her return back. Afterward this powder following being sprinkled
on it, being cherrished with a warm cloth, let it be put again into the
womb: Take of the juice of Acacia, Myrtles, Pomegranat-flowers, red Roses, of
each one dram and a half, mix them, and make a powder; And in the cure of
this disease, let the woman lie in her bed upon her back, her middle part or
hips lifted up in a reasonable manner, higher than the rest of her body, that
the Matrix fallen down, may be repelled and sent back into the womb. And
when it is reduced into her proper place, let her lie with her legs stretched
out abroad, and let a large glass, or more glasses be fastened to her belly as
she lies, and let such things as are of good and pleasant smell and savor be
applied unto her nostrills, as Amber, and such like things, that the Matrix may
be drawn upward by the sweetness of the savor which it feels: A Fume.
Also you shall make a Fume for her as she lies, which may only attain to
her Matrix, but may in no wise come unto her nostrills: Take of the juice of
Acacia, the bone of the Cuttle-fish, Pomegranat-flowers, roots of Bistort,
Galls, Cypresse-nuts, myrtles, or the leaves of each half an ounce, Masticke,
Olibanum, of each three drams, Assa Foetida, one ounce, mingle them, and make a
powder of them. After this Suffumigation, or Fume, let the Matrix be Fomented
and comforted with hot Spunges, dipped in this decoction following, and applied
one after another: Take Myrtles one handful, red Roses, Acornes,
Pomgranat-flowers, Acacia, of each half a handful, mingle them together and
make a decoction of them with red Wine until the half part be consumed and
wasted away.

A Pessary.
Afterward it will be profitable to use this Pessarie: Take Assa Foetida one
dram, Mastick two drams, Myrtles, Frankincense, Galls, Cypresse-nuts, of each
one dram and a half; temper them with oil of Myrtles, and let a Pessary be
made of them, the length and thickness of one finger covered over with silk.

Also this experiment is proved to be very profitable. Dissolve Garlic bruised
in a Mortar so in water, that it have no thickness left in it, let the Matrix
be washed with that water, and being sprinkled with this powder following, let
it be put into the womb again: Take Pine-apple-kernels burned, Harts-horne
burned, Frankincense, Masticke, of each one dram, mix them and make a
powder. How the Matrix is to be retained being brought into the womb.


Now the Matrix being reduced into the womb, and settled again into her
proper place, we must use Ventoses or Cupping-glasses, and what things soever
have retentive force to draw the same. Some do acknowledge this thing for a
certain experiment, to lay Nettles being well bruised, upon the belly, like a
plaster, and not to be removed from thence for a good while, for by that means
the Matrix will both be drawn back, and also retained and held still being
reduced into her proper place.

But that the Matrix being reduced and brought into the womb, may remain and
continue there, nor suddenly fall down again, it must be strengthened
according to these precepts and rules following: First, let the woman lie a
whole day upon her back, after the reducing of the Matrix into her proper
place. But the next day, let her sit in a bathe boiled with these herbs, about
the space of one hour.

Take red Roses, Myrtles, seed of Sumach, A Bathe.
leaves of the Medler-tree, of a Service-tree, the bark of an Oak, Acornes,
Origanum, Sage, Rue, Comfrey, of each a handful; let them all be mixed and
beaten together, and let a decoction or bathe be made with them in rain water,
or in water in which burning-iron has been quenched.

When she comes out of the bathe, let her drink this powder boiled in Wine,
very hot: Take Rue, Mugwoort, of each half a handful, Castofeum two drams,
mingle them and make a powder of them; Then take the best white Wine, so much
as suffices, strain it, and to the straining add two drams of Mithridate:
And let a hot Potion be made of it.

Afterward the secrets are to be Fomented and bathed nine days together, and
likewise Pessaries are to be used.

A Plaster.
And the tenth day this Plaster following spread upon white Leather shall be
laid to the lowest part of the belly, and to remain there for some weeks
together. But let the Cerot or Plaster be made in this manner: Take
Frankincense, Masticke, Opopanax, Turpentine, Galbanum, Serapium, Rosine of the
Pine Tree, Styrax liquida, Colophonie, of each two drams, yellow wax three
drams, temper them together, and let a Cerot be made with them: Or else, Take
Galbanum half a dram, Gallia Muscata one dram, Cloves half a dram, Rosine of
the Pine Tree and Colophonie, so much as suffices, mix them, and let a Cerot
or Cerecloth be made of them.

We let pass here of set purpose, nor without great cause, something in this
Cure, which is only known to the learned and skillful, which may be demanded
of them so often as need shall require.

Further, you shall consider, that when the aforesaid sickness shall arise
from cold, wind, or overmuch moistness of the Matrix, that you must proceed
altogether in the same manner, which we have prescribed and set down before,
discoursing of the windy and waterish false conception, named Mola, I say,
concerning a Tympany and Hydropsie.

CHAP. X. Of the superfluities of the Terms, and of the Cure of the same.
EVen as the Terms may be stopped contrary to the course of Nature: so they
may issue forth too immoderately, contrary to the custom of Nature: and as by
them being stopped, so by them flowing abundantly, many diseases are caused
unto women, as Hippocrates does advise us. But as the natural issue of the
Terms, which otherwise we call the Menstruall, The unnatural issuing forth of
the Terms.
or monthly purgation, should issue forth every Moon naturally, in women being
well disposed in body and age, I say, from the third or fourth day after the
new-Moone, until the eighth day (although in this case there be many
differences of ages, complexions, and disposition of body) so we say, that
issuing forth of the Terms not to be natural which passes beyond that time.
And we say, that this does happen two ways, that is, outward and inward Causes.

The outward causes are these, External Causes.
as if some little vein be broken in the mouth or neck of the Matrix, through
immoderate exercise, or some hurt chancing unto it, as over-lifting, stroke,
fall, violence, or exulceration: Also some such like thing, may be caused by
aborcement and hard birth, and also by the ulcers or fores of the Matrix.
Notwithstanding, it happens sometime that Fluxes and issues are found to be
in women conceived with child every month, yet they are never the weaker by
them, neither do they substract or withdraw any nourishment from the Infant.

Inward causes are to be judged and discerned from Nature it self, or from the
blood. Internal Causes.
From Nature, when she being strong does expel the blood, or being feeble and
weak cannot hold or retain it: For the blood, when it is too hot or sharp, or
over cold and thin; again, when by idleness, immoderate meat and drink,
too much nourishment is afforded to the blood.

Moreover, certain signs do happen, Signs of the Causes.
by which it may certainly be found out, whether they come from an outward or
inward cause. If the Flux happen from an outward cause, as from a vein being
broken through some immoderate exercise, by some hurt or fall, then the color
of the blood will be red at the first, but by and by blackish, or black. If it
issue forth straightway it will appear in his natural color, but being
retained sometime in the Matrix, it will issue forth with an ugly and thick
color; if it shall remain there long, it will be altogether full of corrupt
matter. But if the blood shall issue forth because of ulcers and sores of the
Matrix; First, it will be clear and thin, but by and by it will be full of
filthy matter without all color. If the strong and mighty force of Nature do
expel it, then it will be done without pain, that also the body is alleviated
and eased by it, because Nature voideth no more of that which is engendered, but
that which is superfluous either in quality or quantity. If it shall happen by
defect of retentive virtue, it will issue forth by drops, by little and little,
and disorderly, without any intermission, and the woman which shall be affected
and afflicted with this issue, shall wax pale, lean and very feeble in all
her members, but the blood does retain still his natural color, and flowing
abroad, it does not burn, bite, or molest with any pains: But the cause of
this Flux for the most part, does happen to women, having passed beyond the
fiftieth year, when as their Terms do generally depart away. When it
chances to young women, oftentimes it h ppeneth by vehement and grievous fits
of a Tertian, Quartan Ague, and pains of the head: For these things do
dissipate and drive away Natural virtue and power, and do easily bring upon
them such a Flux and immoderate issue. If it proceed, and be caused by
intemperate heat or acrimony and egernesse of the blood, the issue does burn,
bite, inflame, and corrode the entrance and mouth of the Matrix. The woman
pained with this passion, does endure intolerable thirst, and her lips are
grieved with chaps, bred and caused by most sharp and hot vapors of the blood
fuming and steaming upward. Most grievous dolours and pains are felt in the
niples of the Dugs, by reason of the affinity and fellowship that they have
with the Matrix. The blood resembles the color of Saffron, and is black;
neither does it issue forth copiously, although it be constrained. If it arise
through subtility and thinness of the blood, then the blood is pure and
clear, and the Flux is small: If heat be mixed with it, it shall easily be
discerned in the Matrix, and by other tokens and signs: If cold be mixed with
it, it shall in like manner be observed and found out: If the blood shall issue
forth, because it is liquid and thin, the cause of this, is the evil
disposition and state of the body, and the debility of the concoctions, caused
and engendered by abundance of many moistures and winds, or vapors enclosed and
imprisoned in the Matrix. But if you will have certain knowledge of the humor
constraining this unnatural issue, look upon a linen cloth slightly
colored, and dipped in the menstruous blood; If the color of it does incline
to redness, you may know that the cause of the Flux does proceed from blood:
If it bend toward Citrine, or yellow color, from Choler; if it incline to
whiteness, from Phlegm: But if it incline to a black color, you may know the
cause of the Flux to arise from Melancholy.

What Fluxes are to be stopped.
Further, you shall consider, when as the Flux: shall be tolerable, and easy to
be endured, which does not make the body lean, nor weaken it, but does
dis-burden it, and make the same more light and nimble, that such a Flux is
enforced and moved by natural virtue and power, only expelling and voyding
that, which is superfluous in the blood, and therefore such Flux and issue
ought not to be restrained or stopped. But if the contrary thing happen, it is
to be restrained and stayed altogether, lest it bring the Patient to choleric
Fevers, because that blood being evacuated and exhausted, Choler does bear the
whole sway, and play the Tyrant, and being freed from his bridle does furiously
vex and torment the Patient: For blood, as it is commonly said, is the bridle
of Choler; But because also natural color is nourished and cherrished with
blood, that flowing away, it is necessary that a defect and decay of heat must
follow and ensue, and by that all the members and parts of the body to wax
cold, the whole body to be debilitated and weakened, the whole appetite to be
taken away, the concoctions to be hindered, the Consumption and Hydropsie, and
also other most miserable diseases at the last to hasten after the same

But because it is not sufficient to know the diversities of the diseases
only, unless we be resolved likewise of the fit and convenient cure of
repelling them: we will hereafter also declare a few things of many, which
shall seem to be the choicest and most special, concerning the cure and
remedy of these evils. And as the Causes of these Fluxes and issues are inward
and outward: so the cure shall be inward and outward also.

The inward cure of unnatural Fluxes.
And truly first of all, if this unmeasurable or unnatural Flux shall happen
by some inward cause: before all things, the diet and use of all outward things
shall be ordered and directed to a cold and dry temperature, that blood may
decrease and be diminished. Therefore it will greatly profit to decoct and
seethe all convenient and agreeable meats in Milk, or Water, in which Steel
red-hot has been quenched, and to eat Colewoorts boiled with Lentills or
Beans: Or if it please you, such a decoction shall first be prepared; wherein
other meats afterward shall be boiled.

Take Plantane-leaves, flowers of Wool-blade or Lungwoort with the leaves of
each one handful, the roots of Symphytum or comfrey one ounce, mingle them
together, and boil them with water or Milk in which burning Iron has been
quenched, strain it, and squeise it out hard: With this decoction all other
meats may be prepared, as Almonds, Lentills, Beans, the grain Milium, Rice,
Amylum, and the like things: roasted flesh is to be preferred before sodden:
Also sauces may be prepared of the juice of Goose-berries, Sorrel, and
Barberries, to be mingled with other meats. Let her abstain from Spices, and
all things which are of a hot nature, but specially from Saffron: Let her
drink thick red Wine, allaied with water wherein Steel has been quenched.
It will likewise be profitable, that Gold should oftentimes be extinguished and
quenched in that Wine, after it has been made red-hot in the fire. Let her
use no exercise, but as much rest as may be; Let her use much sleep, let her
wholly shake hands with Venus, and fly from her as from a deadly poison. Her
belly being constipated and bound by reason of this continual Flux, shall be
relaxed and unloosed with a gentle Clyster; but thou shall not by any means
restrain and stop the Flux, unless it shall induce and bring debility and
feebleness, lest thou oppose thy self against Nature, of her own accord
expelling and voiding out superfluous things, when thy resistance shall procure
great evil.

When, and how Fluxes are to be restrained.
But when necessity shall require, then at last it will be convenient and
profitable to bind and stop this Flux. And first of all, you shall use this
powder, of which you shall give one dram to be drunk at a time, in water, in
which Gold heat red-hot has bin quenched. And the powder shall be thus
prepared. Take Terra Sigillata, Carabe or Amber, Succus Acacia, of each half
an ounce; Hypocistis or Hypoquistidos, Harts-horne washed and burnt, the Runnet
of a Kid or Hare, of each two drams, red Corrall prepared and beaten to powder,
one dram; Gum Arabicke, Costus, Sanguis Draconis, Bole-Armeniacke prepared,
of each one dram and a half, Comfrey, flowers of Quinces, the pills or rindes
of Pomgranates, of each one dram, Pearls prepared, one scruple, Mumia half a
dram, Myrtles, Olibanum, of each one dram, Lapis Haematites or the Boodstone;
roots of the water-Lilly, of each one dram and a half; Mix them all together,
and let a powder be made of them. Also you shall not unprofitably give this
powder following to be eaten in an Egg: Take Bole-Armenie prepared, Terra
Sigillata, red Sanders, Anthera, of each one scruple and a half, Rindes of
Pomegranates, Acorne-cups, Nut-meg, of each half a dram. Mix them, and make a
Powder: Or let her use this Electuary, morning and evening: Take of the
Antidote Athanasia, Micleta, of each one ounce; old conserve of Roses one ounce
and a half, Rindes of Pomegranates, Acorne-cups, Nut-meg, Coral prepared, of
each one scruple and a half, Pearls prepared half a scruple, Terra Sigillata
half a dram; Sanguis Draconis, Bole-Armenie prepared, Lapis Hematites, of
each one scruple; Temper them with syrup of Pomegranates as much as suffices,
and let an Electuary be made of it. Add to it, if need be, Philonium Persicum
one dram. Moreover, against Thirst, Water wherein red-hot Steel has been
quenched, mingled with the syrup of Quinces and Pomegranates, and with the
juice of Gooseberries, and Acetosa simplex, shall be prepared for her drink.

Compound Medicines.
But because the ancient Physicians have many times been accustomed to use
compound medicines, not without praise, in restraining and stopping this
unnatural Flux, we will hereafter also bring forth some of them.

An Electuary.
First of all, you shall prepare an Electuary, of which you shall give half a
dram every day in the morning when the stomach is empty, to the woman which is
grieved with this Flux, dissolved in red Wine, wherein Steel has been
quenched. Take roots of Comfrey and Plantane, as much as suffices; Let them,
being boiled well, be brayed in a Mortar, and let them be straind a through
strainer made of horse-haires.

Take of the Paste of Comfrey two drams; of the roots of Plantane one dram and
a half, Sugar one pound; dissolve the Sugar in raine-water, or water wherein
Iron red-hot has been quenched, or temper them together in Plantan-water, in
which Lapis Haematites has been dissolved, until it be red, and boil all,
being mixed together, with a little and easy fire, and when they are are
boiled and cooled a little, put to them these simples following: Take Sanguis
Draconis, Succus Acaciae, seed of Sumach, Terra Sigillata, Amber, Harts-horne
burned and washed, of each one dram, Pearls prepared four scruples, red
Coral prepared one dram and a half, Spodium, Lapis Haematites, Parsley-seed,
of each two scruples; mix them, being beaten to powder, and make an Electuary
in a dry Form, to be divided into Morsells* Another Electuary.
Or prepare another Electuary in this manner. Take old conserve of Roses one
ounce, Diacydonion cum saccharo sine speciebus three ounces, Diarrhodon
specierum Abbatis, Coralls red, prepared and powdered, four scruples, Pearls
prepared one dram, Trochiskes de Carabe, de Terra Sigillata, of each two
scruples, Spodium, Lapis Haematites, Mumia, of each of them half a dram.
Temper them with syrup of Pomegranates, and make a gilded Electuary, of which
let the quantity of a Chesse-nut be taken every day, morning and evening, and
let it be drunk, being dissolved in red-Wine, wherein Steel red-hot, has
been quenched. Also the Party may take these Pills following, seven of them
taken every morning when the stomach is empty as yet fasting. Take Mumia,
Frankincense, Masticke, Harts-horne burned and washed, of each half a dram,
the Runnet of a Hare or Kid, four scruples. Temper them with Plantane-water,
in which Gum Arabic may be dissolved, and let Pills be formed of it. Also
Mesue does commend in this case Pilulae de Bdellio, Majores and Minores to be
taken, one dram at a time. Notwithstanding also these Pills following do
profit. Take Terra Sigillata, Bole-Armeniacke prepared, Galls, Sanguis
Draconis, Runner of a Kid, of each one dram, Camphire two scruples; mix them,
and let Pills be made with syrup of Myrtles; a dram to be taken at a time.

There is also no less consideration, and respect, to be had of the cure to to
be used outwardly than of the inward hitherto handled and entreated of: for
there are many things, which applied outwardly do wonderfully profit for the
curing of these Fluxes; But first of all, such a bath or fomentation is to be
prepared. A Bathe or Fomentation.


Take Cauda Equina or Horse-taile, leaves of the Mulberry-tree, of the
Peare-tree, of Sloes, of Services, of the Medler-tree, the inward barks of the
Oak, red Roses, Virga Pastoris, or Fullers Teasell, of each two handfulls,
Galls, Myrtles, of each one pound, Medlers, Services, Acorne-cups, of each two
pound; mix them together, and let a bathe or fomentation be made of all of
them in water wherein Iron red-hot has been quenched. If it be not convenient
to use this bathe or fomentation, you shall prepare such a Fume to be received
by a Tunnell. A Fume.
Take Colophonie half an ounce, Spodium, Bole-Armeniacke, Blatta, Byzantina,
black Poppie, Henbane, of each two drams, mix them, and make a gross powder:
Or else you must use this experiment very well approved: Take the barks of the
Pitch-tree, used of the Curriers already in their work, one pound, the inward
parts or inward kernells of Galls, bunches of Grapes dried, let these being
mixed together boil in water wherein red-hot Steel has been quenched, and
let the woman convey that fomentation into the Matrix by a Tunnel: and that
being done, let her eat a Morsel for to comfort her of the Electuary before
prescribed.

Also Vnguentum Comitissae is approved, the which because it is known unto the
Apothecaries; It was not needful to set it down. But if that cannot be
gotten, you may profitably use this Unguent following prepared in this manner:
Take oil of Myrtles, four ounces, juice of the greater Plantane two ounces,
powder of Masticke, two drams, Sumach-seed, Succus Acaciae, Hypocistidos,
Myrtles, Terra Sigillata, Bole-Armeniack, of each two ounces and a half,
Spodium, Barley burned, red Roses, of each one dram, Mingle them with Wax so
much as suffices, and let an Unguent be made of it.

A soft oynment.
Also, such a soft ointment very profitable may be made: Take the juice of
Comfrey, of both the kinds of Plantane, Cinquefolie, or five-finger-grasse, of
each a like, a little Vinegar, mix all things together, and lay Linnen-clothes
moistened in them upon the belly and loins: Or you shall prepare another in
this form: Take Succus Acaciae, Hypocistidos, Psidia, Another soft oynment.
Terra Sigillata Trochiskes de Carabe, Colophonie, of each half an ounce,
mingle them together, and let a powder be made of them, which you shall use in
manner of a Cataplasme tempered with the juice of Plantane, applied to the
fore-parts and hinder-parts.

Also such a Plaster not unprofitable may be made: Take the powder of
Harts-horne burnt, A Plaster.
Paper burned, the dross of Iron, of each one ounce. Acorne-cups two ounces,
mix them, and make a powder, with which tempered with the white of an Egg, a
little Vinegar and Plantane-water, let a plaster be made. A certain other
plaster shall be prepared in this manner: Take Masticke, Olibanum, Mumia,
Sanguis Draconis, of each one ounce, Flea-beane burnt, Allome, roots of
Wal-woort or Asse-eare, Psidia, Pomegranate-flowers, of each equal parts, of
all of them, being beaten to powder, half an ounce, Earth-wormes pounded,
Frankincense, of each, two drams, Mix them together and make a Plaster of
them with the white of an Egg, a little Vinegar and Plantane-water.

Again, let another Plaster be thus made, to be used after the manner of a
soft ointment. Take the juice of Plantane mixed with Vinegar, steep leather of
a Cowes hide in that M^^ture, Afterward boil it, and dip a cloth sometimes
folded together in that decoction, and apply it in manner of a soft ointment.
But if you shall use all these things in vain, at last you shall use these
Pessaries, Pessaries.
having wonderful power to bind. Take Triphera Magna, Micleta, Athanasia, of
each one dram, Hypocisthidos, Succus Acaciae, Bole Armeny, Sanguis Draconis,
roots of Comfrey, Plantane the lesser, or Ribwoort, Galls, Psidia, of each one
dram. Let all of them be mixed and incorporated with juice of Plantane and Rue,
and let Pessaries be made of them: Or else, take unripe Galls burned quenched
with Vinegar, two drams, Gum Arabic half a dram, Sanguis Draconis, powder
of the roots of Walwoort or Asse-eare, Sumach, Masticke, Acorn-cups,
Hypocisthidos, Acacia, Harts-horne burnt, Colophony, Myrrh, dross of Iron, of
each one dram, Camphire, one scruple, mingle and incorporate all together with
the juice of Knot-grasse, Housleeke, Nightshade, Wormegrasse, or Stonegrasse,
and of Plantane as much as suffices, and let a Pessary be made of it: Or
otherwise, Take the ashes of Egs-shels burned, the shells of Crab-fish, Sanguis
Draconis, Bole Armenie, Oxe-dung dried, of each two drams, leaves of Silver or
Gold most diligently beaten, one dram, Hair of Goats, of Hares, Cotton, all
burned, of each half a dram, temper them with the juice of Rue and Plantane,
so much as may suffice, and let a Pessary be made of it.

But if intemperate heat of the blood shall enforce the Flux, If the Flux do
arise from the heat of the blood, how it is to be cured.
and shall engender great thirst, the diet shall be directed to a cold and dry
temperature, and the use of all outward things to be ordained and disposed of
as they may strengthen and make the body prosper. Let her drink Water, wherein
red-hot Steel has been quenched, mingled with syrup of Pomegranates: And
such an Electuary may first be prepared, of which let her eat morning and
evening, and after meat a little morsel, the bigness of a Chesse-nut; Take
old conserve of Roses one ounce, Diaolibanum two ounces, red Coral prepared
one dram, Pearls prepared one scruple, Cummin-seed, infused the space of a day
in Vinegar, one dram and a half, dry Mints four scruples, Olibanum two
scruples, Mastick, Cypress-nuts, roots of Bistort, of each half a dram, Spica
Indica one scruple. Let al things that are to be beaten to powder, be powdered,
and let an Electuary gilded be made of them, being tempered with syrup of
Pomegranates, so much as suffices: Also she shall use these pills following,
five of them taken in the morning, or three hours before supper, the weight of
a dram. Take Frankincense, Mastick, Mumia, Allom, Harts-horne burned and
washed, Cypresse-nuts, Runnet of a Hare or Kid, of each a dram, Gum Arabicke
one dram, mix them, and let a mass or lump be made wherewith pills may be
formed, with the juice of the Thistle named Carduus Mariae, our Ladies Thistle,
or white Thistle. Here also Pilulae de Bdellio prepared with the juice of a
Leeke.

This Plaster prepared either in a hard, or liquid form, after the manner of
an Unguent, shall have great efficacy by anointing the woman with it, before
and behind. Take oil of Masticke two ounces, oil of Myrtles, juice of Mints,
red Roses, of each one ounce, powder of Mastick two ounces, Cypressenuts,
Mumia, Bistort, Olibanum, Myrtles, red Roses, of each two drams, Chalk burnt,
Allom, Galls, Acorne-cups, of each one dram, Bole Armeniack, Terra Sigillata,
of each half a dram, white Wax, so much as suffices and let a Plaster be
made of them.

After she has been anointed with this Unguent, she shall wear this
Cere-cloth following continually, laid before and behind upon her.

Take Masticke one dram and a half, Ladanum, Olibanum, of each two drams,
Galls, Cypresse-nuts, Bistort, Mumia, of each one dram, Myrrh, Galbanum, Terra
sigillata, of each two scruples, temper them with Oil of Masticke and Wax, so
much as suffices, and let a Cere-cloth be made of it, which being spread over
white Leather must be laid upon the woman before and behind, afflicted with
this unnatural flux. Hot Bathes do profit and avail in this case, not such as
consist of Brimstone, but of Copper and Allome. But if the flux of blood shall
arise only from a cold cause, then you must proceed altogether in the same
manner, as we have prescribed before in curing barrenness engendered of a
phlegmatic humor,

CHAP. XI. Of the the Causes and Cure of the stopping of the Terms.
But because in the former Chapter we have given instructions concerning the
immoderate Fluxes and issuings of the Terms and of the Cure of the same. The
next thing is, that we should also speak a little concerning the retention
and stopping of them: For thereby many sicknesses and diseases are bred and
engendered, if they be detained contrary to Nature, nor do not issue forth in
such a quantity as they should every Moon, in women well disposed, in respect
of age and constitution of body. And we must understand that this happens by
outward and inward Causes.

Outward causes of the stopping of the Terms.
External causes are, the air intemperately hot, cold and dry, meats over hot
and binding, whereby the humors are burned, the body dried, and concoctions
are hindered; also meats which are too cold congealing and freezing (as it were)
the rest of the humors of the body by their coldness, and letting them from
issuing forth by restraining and binding them. To these causes also these
following do pertain, too much watching, immoderat fasting, every
unseasonable and sudden commotion or perturbation of the body, as great anger,
sudden fury, great sadness, great lamentation, overmuch solitariness, great
labor, any great diseases, sharp fits, a Quartane Fever, pain of the Head,
the Fever Hecticke, too much fatness, issuing forth of the blood of the
nostrils, or any other member, Ulcers and great Apostems.

Inward causes, Inward causes.
are partly bred by the corruption of some humor, and partly without the
corruption of any humor: Causes without the corruption of the humor, are
overmuch heat, coldness, and dryness: For to those, which are choleric,
the humors are exsiccated and dried up through immoderate heat, and therefore
the Terms are stopped: But to the melancholicke, The corruption of the
qualities.
the same thing happens by immoderate coldness and dryness. But when they
happen without the corruption of the humor, we must allege the qualities to be
the cause, and we may observe certain signs from what quality they do
proceed, and again, whether from a simple or a compound quality. If they
happen from coldness and dryness, the issue of the Terms is little, the
color will be pale, no desire of Venus, the urine thin, white, and without any
convenient subsidence or grounds in the bottom. If they chance from hotnesse
and dryness, the Terms will be few, the color redder, the greater desire of
Venus, the urine thin, reddish, but almost no subsidence or dregs in the
bottom of it. But for the most part this retention and stopping of the Terms,
The corruption of the humors.
does happen by the corruption and fault of some humor, as of Phlegm, Choler
and Melancholy, but not of blood at all, because they are only retained and
stopped through the other humors bearing sway in the blood.

Moreover common signs, by which it is observed that the retention of the
Terms is caused by the corruption of some humor, are these, namely, most
great pains from the Navil, even to the privities, and about the Kidneys,
loins, and hips continual pains, but most often pains of the head, and also
cold sweats, many infirmities and griefs of the eyes, because of their
affinity and fellowship with the Matrix, a painful heaviness of the eyelids,
the color pale, much sadness, often refusing of meat, appetite slow,
weakness of the members, and heaviness of the whole body: But here also
concerning the quality of the humors very great differences are noted and
observed, as shall be made manifest in the discourse following.

If the cause be from Phlegm, If the cause of the stopping of the Terms come
from phlegm, what be the signs, and what be the cures.
the woman wax pale, the eyes do become bluish, the eyebrows do swell,
cold is felt in the bottom of the Matrix, thick and stinking humors do issue
from it, white Terms do drop from them, the urine is plae, like unto Milk,
thick, and gross substance is found in the bottom. But where this cause
shall be observed and found, first, the diet shall be directed and ordered to a
hot and dry temperature: Next that cold matter shall be mollified and prepared
for purgation, with this syrup following: Take Chamaepitis, Germander,
Origanum, Rosemary, Penny-royall, Savine, water-Mints, Calamint, wild Mints,
Thyme, of each one handful, leaves of Sena one ounce, roots of Ruscus, or
Butchers Broom, Sperage, Parsley, stone-Parsley, wild Radish, Madder,
Valerian, of each one ounce and a half, Iuniper-berries four ounces, Agarick
two drams, seed of the Nettle, of the wild Carrot, Ameos, Anise, Fennel,
Costus, of each half an ounce, and a half. Let all things be mixed and beaten
together, and sodden in three pound of running-water, to the wasting away of
half of it, let them be strained, and to the straining add Sugar so much as
suffices, let it be spiced with two drams of Cinamome, and let a syrup be
made, and let three ounces be taken at a time: Or let another such digestive be
made: Take Oximel compound, three ounces, water of Mugwoort and Bawme, of each
four ounces and a half, let it be spiced with one dram of Cinamome; let a
Potion be made of them to be taken at three draughts; Then the matter being
prepared for purgation, shall be purged with this potion following: A Potion.
Take fat Cassia and extracted with the decoction of Germander one ounce and a
half, Dodder, Liquorice, Polipodium, Raisins, Venus Hair, of each half a
handful, Cassia extracted, Electuarium Indum, of each three drams, syrup de
radicibus sine Aceto one ounce, temper them, and with the broth of red Cicers
let a potion be made, and let the quantity of it, to be taken, be two ounces.
If they had rather use Pills, than this Potion, they shall use these Pills:
take of Masses or Lumps of Pilulae foetidae, Agregativae, of each half a dram,
Pills.
Diagridion three grains, mingle them with syrup of Mugwoort, and let pills be
made of them, of which nine shall be taken at a time: Or else this Powder to be
taken in the broth of Cicers, or in Whey, shall be prepared in this manner.

Take of the best Turbit one dram, A Powder.
or four scruples, Ginger half a dram, Sal gemma six grains, Saffron two
grains, Cinamome three grains, Sugar two drams, mix them, and let a powder
be made of them: Or they may use this potion following. Take Benedicta
Laxativa, Electuarium Indum, of each two drams, Diacassia three drammes, temper
them with Bawme-water, and Mugwoort-water, so much as suffices: Morsells.
Or let such purging morsells be made: Take red Roses, Ginger, Cinamome, of
each three drams, Sanders white and red, of each one dram, Hermodactyli, Esula,
of each three drams, Turbit four drams, Diagridion two drams, Masticke one
scruple, white Sugar one pound: Let all these things be dissolved in water of
Mugwoort, and let a confection be made in morsells, and give four drams at a
time: Or they may use this infusion following: An Infusion.
Take Agarick half an ounce, Ginger two scruples, Sal gemma half a scruple,
let them be infused in three ounces. Add to them Oximel Squiliticum one ounce,
let all these things be infused twelve hours, afterward let them be strained
and squeised out, and also spiced and made sweet with Cinamome and Sugar, so
much as suffices, and let a potion be made of it; the superfluous matter being
sufficiently purged, the next thing is, that such a bathe be prepared, in which
the woman which is purged may sit: A Bath.
Take Savine, Calamint, Origanum, Bawme, Feverfew, wild-Mints, Penny-royall,
Melilot, Camomile, of each two handfulls, Celandine, Pucedanum, Horehound,
worme-Wood, of each one handful, Bay Leaves, Lavander, Mercury, Rosemary,
Ozymus, flowers of the Elder-tree, of each three handfulls, Marish-Mallowes
with the roots four handfulls, Mugwoort six handfulls, roots of Valerian two
pound, let all these things except the Mugwoort be beaten together, and being
put in a bag, let them boil in water, and let a bathe be made of them.

And when she comes out of the bathe, let her be anointed with this
ointment following, under the Navell, and about the loins: take oil of
Lillies, of sweet Almonds, Marrow of the leg of a Calfe one ounce, Muscilage,
Marish-Mallowes, Fenegrek, Line-seed, of each one ounce, Wax so much as is
sufficient, mingle them, being beaten, and let an Unguent be made of them. This
being done, let her drink one spoonful of this powder following with a
convenient portion of the former decoction, and afterward lying down in her
bed, let her take her rest. Take the best Cinamome, rindes of Cassia Fistula,
of each half an ounce, Cassia lignea three drams, Saffron one dram and a
half, Aristolochia rotunda, Asarum, Calamus Aromaticus, rinds of the roots of
Capparis, Costus, Dittany, roots Tormentill, of Eringus, Lacca, of each four
scruples, Chamaepitis, Germander, Bay Leaves, Origanum, Penny-royall, Ginger,
Calamint, Thyme, seeds of Broom, of wild Rue, of Daucus, wild Cresses, Hyssop,
Nigella or Gith, Ameos, Anise, Fennel, Bay Berries, Serapinum, of each half a
dram, Sugar equal to all in weight, mix them together, and let a powder be
made of them. If she cannot well away with this powder, in this manner, then
let a confection be made in morsells after this manner following, of which let
her always eat after the bathe: Take of the aforesaid powder without Sugar,
one ounce, and half a pound of white Sugar: Let the Sugar be dissolved in the
former decoction, or in Mugwoort-water, so much as suffices, and let a
confection be made in morsells. In this cause proceeding from Phlegm, all hot
bathes consisting of much Brimstone, are approved, such as are bathes of
Badina, a City in Germany.

But if the woman shall not be able to use the bathe prescribed, let her take
four handfulls of the aforesaid sorts of herbs, let her boil them with the
best wine, and let her receive the Fume of them underneathe through a Tunnell.
And if she shall also be unable to endure this, notwithstanding let her have a
Fumigation with this fume following.

Take Amomum, Galbanum, of each three drams, Assa Foetida, Castoreum, Spodium,
of each one dram; mix them, and and let a powder be made of them, of which,
one dram at a time cast upon the coals, let a Fume be made to be received
only into the Matrix. After the Fume being done, let her use these Pills,
seven of them taken at a time. Pills.
Take the fruit of Savine two drams, Rue dried one dram, seed of wild Rue half
a dram, Assa Foetida, Lachryma Ammoniaca, Diers Madder, of each one scruple,
Myrrh, Castoreum, of each two scruples, Cinamome, black Peper, of each half a
dram; let all things be mixed together, and let them be made a powder, and
tempered with water of Mugwoort, and let pills be formed as big as Pease; all
these things being finished, both the veins, named Saphenae, shall be opened
in both feet, the Moon going down. Afterward she may use these Pessaries:
Take Triacle, Mithridate, Pessaries.
of each half a dram, Castoreum, Lachryma Ammoniaca, of each one dram, mix
them with Cotton dipped in the juice of the herb Mercury, and make a Pessary:
Or otherwise, Take of the juice of Rue, Wormwood, of each equal parts, Myrrh,
Euphorbium, seed of Savine, of each one dram and a half, mix them, and let a
Pessary be made: Another may be made in this manner for women which are
stronger by Nature: Take Elleborus albus, Pyretrum, of each three drams,
Nigella, Diagridium, of each one dram, mingle them with the juice of Mercury,
and let a Pessarie be made; Let such another be made which is of more efficacy
and force: Take Nigella, Staves-acre, Centaury the less, of each two drams,
Elleborus albus, Vitrum, Sal gemma, black Peper, Diagridium, of each two
scruples, Aloes, Ladanum, clear Turpentine, Styrax Calamita, of each three
drams, Amber one scruple; let all things be mixed together, and incorporated
with a hot Pessell because of the Gummes, and being enclosed in a cloth
moistened in the juice of Mercury, let Pessaries be made of them: Or otherwise,
Take Gentian, Savine, Staves-acre, Colocynthis, Nigella or Gith, of each one
dram and a half; let all these things be incorporated with the juice of the
wild Cowcumber, named Elaterium, or with the juice of Mercury, and let
Pessaries be made of it. If these former seem to profit little, other
Pessaries shall be prepared in this manner: Take juice of Mercury, Wormwood,
Feverfew, Mugwoort, of each three ounces, Myrrh, Euphorbium, Castoreum, of
each two drams, Savine-seede, Gith-seed, of each one dram, Ladanum, Galbanum,
of each one dram and a half; those things which are to be beaten to powder,
let them be powdered, but let the juyces be decocted to a thickness, let
Pessaries be made of them, the length and thickenesse of a finger. If retention
of the Terms be from Choler, how it is to be Cured.
But if retention and straining of the Terms do proceed from Choler, heat
shall be felt in the sound and botome of the Matrix, dryness, coarctation and
straightness, and a certain hardness, not without pains and prickings;
desire of Venus, a yellow color of the eyelids, the urine red, small store of
Terms, always of a Citrine or yellow color, does follow and accompany these
signs and tokens of Choler. And that cause being known, the universal diet
shall decline to a cold and dry temperature: Afterward the supefluous matter
shall be prepared for to be purged with this decoction following: take leaves
of Sena one ounce, Mugwoort two handfuls, Venus-haire, Sorrel, Endive,
Harts-tong, Betony, Liverwoort, Bawme, Mercury, of each one handful, the four
cold seeds, Agnus Castus, Daucus, or wild Carrot, Pyonie, Sperage, Sothernwood,
Basil, Milium Solis, or Gromell, of each half an ounce, red Roses,
Borrage-flowers, Violets, of each a small quantity called a Pugil, roots of the
best Rheubarb one dram, Valerian, Butchers-broome, stone Parsley, Smallage of
each an ounce, Cyperus, Spike, of each one dram and a half, Cicers, red
Beans, Iuniper-berries, Fenegrek of each one Pugil. Let all these things be
mingled together and beaten, and boiled in three pound of running-water until
half be wasted, let them be strained, and to the straining, let Sugar be added
so much as suffices, and let it be spiced with a dram and a half of Cinamome:
You shall give 3 ounces of this decoction four days together in the morning
when the stomach is empty, or in the evening three hours before supper very
warm, to be drunk of the Patient.

But if she shall loath this decoction, let her use this syrup following: A
Syrup.
Take syrup Acetosae simplicis one ounce, Oximel simple half an ounce, mingle
them with the water of Succory and Endive, of each one ounce, and let a draught
be made of it. Or else, take one ounce of the syrup of Peach-Roses, syrup of
Endive half an ounce, commixe them with two ounces of the afore-spoken
decoction, or water of Endive, and let a draught be made: Or you may prepare
such solutive medicines: Take Manna half an ounce, Electuarium de Succo
Rosarum, confection of Hamech, Diacassia, of each one dram, syrup of Violets
half an ounce, waters of Succory and Endive, of each one ounce, mix them, and
let one draught be made; or otherwise, take of the best Rheubarbe two drams,
Spike Nard six grains, sprinkled with the best Wine, infuse them in Whey
twelve hours, then strain them, and to the straining, add Manna, Cassia
newly drawn, of each one ounce and a half, syrup of Violets one ounce, let it
be spiced with Cinamome as much as suffices, and let a potion be made to the
quantity of three ounces.

The superfluous matter being sufficiently purged and voided by these solutive
medicines, such a bathe is to be decocted in which the woman may sit; Bathe.
Take Marish-Mallowes with the roots, three handfulls, Motherwoort or Mugwoort
two handfulls, Elder-flowers, Willow-flowers, Violet-Plants, or Matter violarum,
Maiden-haire, of each one handfulll, Valerian half a pound, Fenegrek,
Line-seed, of each three ounces, common Salt two drams, Roche Allome half an
ounce, Brimstone one dram; let all things be beaten together, mingled and put
in a bag, and let a bathe be made by boiling of them, in which the woman may
sit. In this case all temperate waters with Allome and Copper do profit and
do good: when she comes out of the bathe, let her be anointed with this
ointment about the Loins, and under the Navell: Take oil of Roses, of sweet
Almonds, of Violets, of each one ounce, Marrow of the leg of a calfe half an
ounce and two drams, fresh Butter, Hens-grease, Muscilage of Fenegrek,
Muscilage of Line-seed, of each half an ounce, Wax so much as suffices, and
let an Unguent be made of them, in a liquid form.

After the Unction being performed, A Decoction.
let her take one sponefull of this powder following in a little potion of the
decoction hereunto adjoined, and lying down in her bed, let her take rest:
Take of the Herbs of Sorrel, Bawme, Mercury, Motherwoort, red Cicers, red
Beans, Fenegrek, roots of Imperatoria, Valerian, of each half a handful,
mingle them with wine, so much as suffices, and let a decoction be made, let
it be strained, and let there be added to the straining two ounces of the
powder following, and let them be drunk together very hot: A powder.
Take of the rindes or barks of Cassia Fistula, Cyperus, of each one dram,
roots of Tormentill, of Pionie cleared from uttermost rind, Cinamome, of each
two drams, Saffron, seed of Daucus, grains of Pionie, of each one dram and a
half, seeds of Agnus castus, of Parsley, Basil, Stone-Persley, Mercury,
Sperage, Milum solis, or Gramill, Venus-haire, Maiden-haire, Camomile, Betony,
Liverwoort, Spike-Nard, Squinanthum, Hops, Endive, of each one scruple, Sugar
so much, mix them, and let a powder be made.

If she will not use this powder in the aforesaid manner; let a confection be
made in little rundells, or cakes, which she may eat alone coming out of the
bathe; or may take them dissolved in the before prescribed decoction. And let
the confection be such; Cakes ^sells.
Take one ounce of the prescribed powder, without Sugar, white Sugar half a
pound, let the Sugar be dissolved in Rose Water, let the powder be tempered
together with it, and let little cakes be made in morsels.

If it do not please her to use this bathe, yet let her use this Fomentation:
Take Sothernwood, ^enta^
Dill, Motherwoort, Camomile, Clarie, Bawme, Mercury, Elder-flowers, red Roses,
of each one handful, Fenegrek, Line-seed, of each half a pound; mingle all
things together, and make a decoction with Wine, so much as suffices, with
which let the woman be fomented. Or let her receive this fume following
underneath by a Tunnell or Pipe for the purpose: Take seed of Agnus castus one
ounce, Dill one handful, Carui, Costus, of each one ounce, commixe them, and
let a decoction be made with wine so much as suffices.

All these things being performed, the veins of the Ancle or Saphenae shall be
opened, after the fifth or sixth day, in both feeet, or in one day one only, and
in another day the other. It will also be profitable to sweat in a bathe; also
to scarifie the skin with cupping-glasses, about the hips.

Afterward, she may use these Pessaries: Take Borace, Amomum, Myrrh,
Aristolochia rotunda, Calamus Aromaticus, Cloves, Pessaries.
Majorame, of each one dram and a half, Diagridium ten grains, temper them
with the juyces of Motherwoort, Wormwood, and wild Mint, and let a Pessery be
made, which she shall use continually: Or else take Triphera magna sine Opio
half an ounce, Myrrh, Mountain calamint, of each two drams, fresh Rue, three
drams, Savine, roots of Sothernwood, of each four drams, Ladanum, Galbanum,
Serapinum, Assa Foetida, of each one dram and a half, roots of Madder the
greater, of Cyperus, of each one dram, mix them, and let a powder be made of
them, but let the Pessary be made with the Gall of a Bull, and Oil of Lillies:
Or she must use the Pessary following: Take juice of Mercury, Wormwood,
Majoram, Mugwoort, Clary, wild Mint, of each half an ounce, mingle the
aforesaid prescribed powders, with these juyces, and make a Pessary of such
form and quantity as it ought to be.

(...) the re^^n shall ^ed of me^^^^^oly, how (...) be (...).
But when retention of the Terms shall proceed from melancholy, there are found
pains and a sound or noise in the bottom of the Matrix, by reason of vapors
and winds mixed and shut up together in the same, the Urine will be thin,
black and bluish, and loose; a cloth stained with that flux, will appear
with a black color. Moreover, this cause being known, before all things, the
diet must be directed to a hot and moist temperature; afterward the superfluous
matter shall be mollified with this decoction or digestive following, and
prepared for to be purged: Take leaves of Sena one ounce, herbs of Calamint,
Origanum, Motherwoort, Staechados, Harts-tong, Liverwoort, of each half a
handful, Borrage-flowers, Buglosse-flowers, Violets, Venus-haire, Germander, of
each one Pugil, Parsley-roots, roots of Sperage, Fennel, rindes of
Cappar-roots, of each two drams, Liquorice, Raisins, of each half an ounce,
the best Rheubarb, Agarick, of each one dram, mingle them with running-water,
and let it be boiled until one half be consumed: afterward strain, and to
the straining add so much white Sugar as suffices, and let it be aromatized
and spiced with one dram of Cinamome. You must give so often of this decoction
to the sick woman, until the superfluous matter shall seem to be sufficiently
prepared: Or you shall prepare another digestive in this manner: Take Oximel
simplex one ounce, Syrup de radicibus half an ounce, waters of Sperage and
Elder of each one ounce; Let it be spiced with Cinamome so much as suffices,
and let one draught be made of it; but the matter being sufficiently prepared,
shall be expelled and purged with this potion following: Take Maiden-haire,
flowers of Borrage, Buglosse, Violets, Hops, Staechados, Germander, of each
half a handful, Polypodie three drams, Liquorice, Raisins, of each one ounce;
let all things be mingled and stamped together, and let a decoction be made
with running-water, so much as suffices, till half of it be wasted, afterward
strain it, and to the straining, put syrup de Epithymo, of Violets, Cassia
newly extracted, Manna, of each three drams, Electuary Hamech, Diaphaenicon, of
each one dram and a half, commixe them, and let a minorative, or purging
medicine be made of it: Or if it please you, let it be made in this manner:
Take Myrobalani Indi half an ounce, Citrini two drams, let them be infused in
Whey the space of eleven hours, afterward let them be strained out, and let
there be added to the straining, Cassia extracted, Manna, of each half an
ounce, powder of Epithymie two scruples, Ginger six grains, Sugar so much as
suffices, temper them, and let a potion be made of it. In this case also
Pilulae Indae are most specially allowed. Moreover, the superfluous matter
being sufficiently purged, bathes also, fomentations, suffumigations, unguents,
powders, pessaries, may be prepared in the same manner, as we have spoken, of
late, concerning Phlegm and choler: but not without the counsel of skillful
Physicians: For now we will make an end to say any more concerning the
retention and stopping of the Terms by some certain and manifest cause.

These are those things (courteous Reader) which that most learned and expert
Surgeon, James Rueff, compiled in Latin, concerning the Original of
Humane-seed and Generation, etc.

FINIS.

