Prologue,
AN odd days work Diogenes once made,
And it was to seek an honest man he said,
Through Athens with a Candle he did go,
When People saw no cause he should do so.
For it was daylight, and the Sunn did shine,
Yet he unto an Humor did incline:
To check men's manners with some od-crost i^st,
Whereof he was continually possessed.
Full of reproves, where he abuses found,
And bold to speak his mind, who ever sound,
He spoke as free to ALEXANDERS Face:
As if the meanest Plowman were in place,
It Was not men's persons that he did respect,
Nor any calling: Vice he durst detect*
Immagin, you do see him walks estr^etes,
And every ones a knave, with whom he meets.
Note their Description; which good censure craves
Then Judge i^ he have cause, to count them knaves.
SAMVEL ROVVLANDS.

FINIS
DIOCENES In his Lantern Humor.
NOW fie upon seeking honest men in knaves Skins: I am even as weary as ever
was PLATOES Dog. Not a Street Lane, or Alley in all the City of Athens, but
I have trod it, and cannot meet a man worthy the giving of the good morrow
too: Why? What Rascals be these? Have they banished honest men out of the town
puite? Alas poor Virtue, What have thou done to deserve this contempt? base is
thy attire, as ^hridbare in thy Apparel as my Gown: thy Company out of
request, for thou have walked so long alone: that thou art even walked away
with thy self: there is no goodness to be found, All Is set upon villainy. Younder
walks Briberie, taken for an honest substanciall grave Cittyzen, I marie is
he, pray, make him one of your common Counsel.

There goes Cruelty and Extortion, put off your Hattes all to him: it is well
done, he is one of the principal and best in the Parish, he has borne all
offices and never did good: a most abominable rich fellow, But how the Devil
came he by his wealth? Widows, Widows, three or four old rusty Gold
begetting Widows have crowned him with their wealths, and that wicked Mamnion
is deerer v^^^ him then his own soul: Nay, if he had Five Thousand Souls,
he would sell them all for five thousand ducats of gold.

Stay let me see, what is he? Oh it is Prodigality and his whore, a Gentleman
and a Gentlewoman, they are walking towordes the Suburbs of a Baudie house for
their recreation, Yonder rides the Bawd in her Coach before, and they two come
leysurely with the pox) behind but will all meet together anon to make work
for the Surgeon, who will answer their loose body with the Squirt.

Now I Will assure you though I laugh but sildome, I must needs: make merry with
yonder Ass, why he is trapt for all the world like Alexanders Horse, such a
feather in's head, so begarded, and the very same Trot: I have known his
Father well, he was a most grave Senator (in regard of his gray beard) and did
much little good in the City, got wealth. and pild up gold even as they pile
up Stock Fish in Island, and now his Son (the second part of a ^oole) has all
all: marry what does he with it? stay, (let me snuff my Candle and I Will tell
you) even like one of Signeour Scatter-goods politicians he deuides it into
parts: A great portion for Dicing: a good some for Drinking, a parceil for
whoring, a moitie for pride, a third for dancing six shares and a half for
swaggering, and all the remainder for begger^e. Walk along knave, walk along.

Who have we next comes creeping with the palsy in his joints, a great leather
pouch by his side as large as a Gammon of Bacon, long stockings and a side
coat crosse-bard with velvet to his knees? stay (light, light) let me see: oh
I know the damned ^la^e it is Mounsiur Usury, what a lea^e lanke thin gut it
is: he looks maruailous like a long omtie Cats-skinn purs^e, I would I had
his skin to make me a summer pair o^ Buskins.

O what a blessedness is it to me, that I never came into such villains
clutches what does he, pray, as he goes his Chaps walk so? fast No, the
Rogue is ruminating upon his pawnes, he chawes the Cud in contemplation of
Bands and Bills, I dare be sworn he never champs so much upon his dinner or
Supper, for his panch cries out on him, and all the gutts in his Pudding-house,
rumple. and grumble at their slender allowance, He obiectes the old proverb to
his belly, Many a sack is tied up before it be full. I would I had the dyeting
of him some month with my Roots, I would send him deeper under Ground then ere
they grew: the Caniball should never feed more upon poor men, and play the
D^ce-maker with their bones hang him rogue, hang him

how now thou drunken knave, Can not see but reele upon me? I would I had
been ware of thee, thou should have borne me a good bange with my Staff:
what slaue's this? as I live I was almost down

Look how his cloak hangs, one side to his ankles and the other side to his
elbow: his steps take the Longitude and the latitude, hoise, hoise: This
fellow is now (in his own conceit) mightily strong, for he dares fight with
any men: he is exceeding rich, scorns money, and ca^es not for twenty
thousand pound: he is maruailous wise, and ^ut, tell not him, for he knows
more then any man whatsoever. What Is he that dares refuss to pledge him ^ as
sure as death if he could feel or find his dagger, stabbes would be dealt:
hark how the villain swear, there is all his hostess has in pawde for his
score, Yet he is a passing good Customer for vttrance, about a barrel aday
goes down his gutter, So take him in there at the red ^attice. he has cast
anchor at the blewe Anchor for this day. Fill him of the best, for he is even
one of the best Ghuestes that ever took up sodden water with Chaulke-credit on
a Post. Out upon him, out upon him, I Will read his destiny: Dye in a Ditch
knave, or end in an Hospital Rascal choose whether thou will.

How looks yonder fellow? what is the matter with him trow? has a eaten
Bull-biefe? there is a lofty slave indeed he is in the alitudes: Oh, is it you
Master Ambition? I would be glad to see you hang'de a while for an old
acquaintance^ a great man with the Emperor: i will assure you, a great man with yt
Emperor: his voice is heard in the Court now, and his Fathers voice was wo^nt
to be heard in the City: For I have heard him many a time and often, cry
Brpomes in Athens: a good plain honestman, and dealt much with old Shoes: I
hear him once tell this proud knave being then a boy) a good discourse of
Justice out of a Broom: Sir (said he) here is byrch to correct you in
Childhood, and when you grow to be a great Lubber, here is a staff for to be
labor you with all: If that will not serve to a-mend you, why then hecres even a
good With to hang you up: Amen said I he is growing toward it apace ^aspiring
to rise hie plotting to be mighty: and what tools has he out of the Dwells
shop for his work? Treason, Treason he will ascend by Treason though he climb
the gallows for it and cruck his neck in coming down again. I^ I salute him
and put off my cappe I would my Lantern were in my Belly. Virtue scorns him,
I know him not: strout a-long Sir, for thou have not long to strout it.

More knaves abroad yet? Yonder Is Boasting and Presumption I hold my life as
old as I am i will take his Kapiet from him with my walking staff, he is all
sound and breath tongue and talk; fears no man, cares for no man beholding to
no man: but try his valor put him to it, see what is in him, dare him to the
proof and there is mine emtie fellow like a water bubble flyling in the air
till a puff crack him: I never knew (since I knew reason) a wordie fellow
prove a worthy fellow: a man must set his hand to his manhood, and finger
it, twill not be had with wounds and blood, heart and nails, as every
rascally knave makes account: when two curres meet, all the while they bark
they have no leisure to byte: Alexander had a bragging Soldier that swore he
had killed five hundred men with fillips, yet this fellow swear the peace against
a woman that had broken his head with his own dagger: and the other day, I
followed a couple of notorious braggarrs into the field, one swear he would
imbrew his Kapies hilts in the bowels of his foe, the other vowed to make him
eat iron and steel like an Estridge: when they came to the place ap^inted,
both drew their weapons, laid them presently down and went to bussels for a
bloody nose, which I seeing ran to the town and cried murder, murder and so
brought three hundred people together to laugh at them. I could tell many like
examples of S^ignior Feather cappe and his fellow, but that I spy another
knave coming, that puts me out

It Is Contention (nay, i will go l^w enough to the ^ennell, thou shall not iustle
me for the wall) loo^e how he stares: see how a frowns, he has had a poor
man in Law this three year, for bidding his Dog Come out Cuckolds curre, yet
if the Dog could speak, he would bear witness against his Master for Horn
work that he had seen wrought by his M^stris in her Chamber to make her
husband night-caps of.

Oh, striffe is the sum of his (...), ^is the ^^lace of his soul he is
never well at hearts (...) he be not wran^ling with one or other: i will try it
by the law says he) the law shall judge it: i will come to no agreement but
law: i will pinch him by the law: I have a hundred pound to spend at law: and
all law, law: yet he himself is altogether void of equity: heel neither
take wrong nor do right: bites his poor neighbors doggedly by the back,
scorns his superior, tramples upon his inferior, and so he may be
wrangling, cares not with whom it be, to keep his hand in ure. He never went
to bed in charity in his life, nor never wakes without meditating shrewde
turns. Oh he loves wonderfully to be feeding on the bread of s^rife and
imitates the Camels which del^ght to dr^^^e in^^^ubled pooles. well he shall
^o^ne no neighborhood with me for it: my Tunn stands far enough off from
his house: I had rather have a Bear to my next neighbor, then such a brabling
rascal: go walk a knave in the horse fair, I have nothing to say to thee
but farewell and behang'd and when thou art going that journey, take all thy
fellows with thee.

Well met, or rather ill met Hypocrisy: Ah thou smooth face villain with the
fawning tongue art thou b^come a citizen too, then look about you plain
fellows, you shall be sure to want no deceit: he hats swearing so do I: it is
well done to hate it, but he loves lying and will ouer-reach you in a bad
bargain, or with ^alse weight and measure: Yes indeed: I truly will he Heel
sigh and say there is no conscience now adays, and then makes his own actions
bear witness to it' by yea and nay, if he can he will deceive you.

Look to his hands hearken not to his tongue, and say I have given you fair
warning, for a Philosopher has been co^sned by him. I had rather have it
said, Diogines was deceived, then so hear it reported he is a deceiuer. I
paid for a better cappe then I wear, and my gown is scarce worth half the
money it cost me marry what remedy? nothing: I have ^earned by it only, A
knacke to know a kna^e: and while I live, i will look better to Yes truly, and
I indeed: Hypocrisy shall never fell me good words again while he liu^s:
i will never ^ell me good words again while hte lives: i will never buy breath more
for money. If a thief should meet me going home, and taking away my purse, I
would say I met with an honester man, then he that cusned me in the buying of
my gown, for the thief would prove a man of his word, and tell me what I
should trust to in the peremptory terms of Stand, Deliver your purse.

But my Gowne-brother, he promised me good stuff, truly, a great penni-worth
indeed, and verily did gu^l me. But let me take my leave of my purse, hees's a
villain, an arrant villain, and I could even find in my heart to eat his
liver fride with par^ley to morrow morning to breakefast.

How now, what is the matter; whether goes all this hurly burley? here is a
clutter indeed. Now I see, now I see, Coson^ge the Swaggerer is carried to
Prison. I hear the people say he has stabbed the Constable, beat the watch,
broke the Tapsters head, and layn with his Hostess.

Here is no villain: pray search his pockets: I ^ol^e you as much, false
heart, false hand and false dice: what crooked tools are those in's the other
Pocket: Pick-lockes pick-lockes: This fellow lives by his wits, but yet
belongs not to Wits Common wealth* he swires he is a Gentleman, but of what
house? Marry Cheters Ordinary: an ingenious flaue, that works a living out of
hard bones, and has it at his fingers ends: every man with him is a very Roh^e
and a base Gull: he threatens stabs and death, with heart wounds and blood, yet
a bloody nose has made him call for a Chir^rgion, He scorns to dwell in a
suit of appahell a week: this day in Satin, to morrow in Sackloth, one day
all new, the next day all seam-rent: now on his back, anon at the brokers, and
this by his reckoning is a gentleman's humor Sure I cannot deny but if it may
be so, but I pray then what humor is the geltleman in? he is never (in my
opinion) like to prove gentlemen be the humor.

Away with him, away with him, make sure work, chain and kennell him up in
tatle, make him a Knight of the douiorous Castle.

He will do better far tied up then loose at liberty, let him not play the
wandering Pilgrim in any case, there is no remedy for such wild fellows, but
to tame them in the d^nger^ of (...) follow him close watchman with your
Ha^^erts, least he show you a new dance called runne-awaies galliard So, s^, by
this time he lies where he is like to prove lousy if the^e be not some speedy
remedy vser, with a medicine made of Hempseed to kill his itch.

Who have we next pray? I should know him by his vilanous scuruie looks, a
makes a wry mouth, and has a grinning countenance, for all the world like
Detaction: why it is he indeed, a rope stretch him, has not the Crows picked out
his eyes yet: See how he laughs to himself, at yonder piaine Gentlewoman in
the old fashion, because she has not the trash and trumperie of Mistress
Loose-legges about her.

Do thou deride Civility, Knave? is decency become rediculous? look upon
thy self the^ Rascal, look upon thy self, whom all the wisemen in the
world may laugh to scorn indeed.

Thou hasse nothing in thee, (if thy inside were turned outward worthy of the
least (...) ^nta^^en, and yet such villains will ever be scoffing (deriding
and detracting, from those of the best spirits and worthiest endeavors) learned
men's works, industrious men's travails, gr^^t men's counsels, (...) men's
virtues, and wise men's arts, Detraction will spit ^enome at: nothing is well
done that flows not from his durtie invention: he has scoffs for them he
knows not, and iestes for them he never saw, what a worlds this, when a fool
shall censure a Philosopher? a doult an ^deot, one that has wit in's hcele and
head alike, to condemn and deprave natures miracles for wit and wisdom.

This is he that can mend every thing that is ready made to his hand
detracting from the wortinesse of every man's work: it is a villain, a right
villain bred and borne, he came not long since along my Tub-house, and
scoffing at me, asked me why I made it not a tap-house? marry (quoth I) I have
determined so to do but I want such arogue as thou art to make a sign (...):
with that called he me Dagge, Said I, thou did never hear me bark, but thou
shall seele mre bite, and so thrust my Pike-st^^^e through his chockes, that I
made his teeth chatter in his head, like a Uiper as he is.

Nay then we shall never hau^ done, look where Ielosie is as, yellow as if he
had the yellowe Iaund^ce: his wife's an honest woman (in my conscience) loyal
and true in we^locke: but because he like a fornicating rascal uses common
Cur^ozuns, he thinks her cartesies and theirs are all alike to every man come
who will: his eyes follow her feet wheresoever she goes: if any friend
salute her, she dares not reply, but must pass stranger-like without any
show of Courtesy: he swears thee is a^^^hore, and himself alarge horned
Cuckolde, able to run But with all Cuckoldes in the Town.

Nay, he is grown to such outrage, that he is even fr^nticke with ^ealosie,
sometimes offering to lay wagers that no Bu^l dare^ encoun^er with his head,
and that his horns are more preti^^s then any U^icorne. the ha^erda^her cannot
^it him with a hate wide enough: The Barbor cannot t^^me his fore-heade close
enough, and yet the pore has made his be^rd th^^ enough* he says he thinks
there is ^ot an honest woman (...) to his knowledge, and the reason is, he is
(...) (...) with none but whor^s. A Bawdie-house is for his bodily ex^ercise,
and he can not live without his lechery, be has whores of all complexions,
whores of all fizes, and whores of all diseases: and this is the cause that the
villainous fellow deemes all to be whores. But masters mark the end of him
that has been laid f^iue times of the Pox, if he be not thoroughly French
fide and well prepared for his venerie, then will I for seven years eat Hay
with a Horse: well, i will cross the way to the other side the street, be fore he
come too nigh me, I dare not endure him, it is good sleeping in a sound Skin? I
would not be in his coat for Alexanders ri^h gown, out stinking Knave out
Houlde off thy cart Knave, wilt ouer-runn me? thy horse has more honesty in
him then thou, for he auoides ^^e, and thou drawest upon me. So villain so,
curse the creature that gets thy living, and see how thou will thrive by it
Thou blind Knave, Porter, do rush upon me with thy basket, and then say,
by your leave? belike thou meanest to^iustle me again, for thou did ask no
leave the first time before hand, what brutish slaves do I meet with? my
staff shall meet with some of you a none: Take thou that knave, for crying,
broomes so loud in mine ears, heeres a quoile indeed, your City shuflings
rumling, and tumling, is not for my humor. What a filthy throat has that Oyster
wife, I think twill echo in my brave pan this hour. This is the raging
street of our cries, i will out walk is with all the speed I can.

Hitherto have I met with never an honest man, well i will burn out my
candles-end, and then make an end and get me home. So, that is good to begin
with all: Had your street never a Knave to encounter my first entrance but
Discord? Malum Omen, Mulcum Omen, This is he that sets Countries and Kingdoms
together by the ears, breeds Cities mutunes, and domestical contetions,
Prince against Prince, Nation against Notion, Kindred, Neighbor, Friend all at
variance. This is he that calls Peace with her palm free, idle huswife, and
soundes defiance throughout the whole world: you are wronged (says he) put
not up such a vile indignity: this disgrace no manhood can endure, your
valor and reputation is in state of prejudice, it is wounded by such a one, and
you cannot in any wise put it up for the whole world takes notice of it, and
all men will censure you

This is the rascal that made me fall out with Plato, call him proud fellow,
and trample upon his bed, because it was somewhat handsomer and better decked
then mine. In all his lifetime, (and i will assure you it is an old, gray, lean,
dry, rotten-bon'd villain) did he never show cheerful countenance but at
the sight of some mischief: he would rather bite his tongue through, then bid
any man good morrow. So, so, now it works, he is got amongst a crew of
scoldling Fishwiues, off goes her head-tyre, have at tothers throat, to her
green Waste-coate: why now it works like wax.

Thrust in Cutpurse for there is good peniworths to be had amongst them, the
Trade is like to be quick by and by, customers come apace, make a priiue
s^arch without a Constable, i will stay no longer with you, a rope tid you all.
Now fie upon thee s^ouenly Knave, when did thou wash thy face? Here Is Sloth
right in his kind: the hat he wears all day, at evening becom^h his nightcap
his frieze gown sconse, wherein he in trenches himself is at least thirty
thousand strong: garter thy hose beast, garter thy hose, or will the Pox
endure no Garters?

This fellow I remember coming to a sig-tree being so extreme lasie that be
could not stretch his arm out to gather any, laid himself down upon his
back and gaping, cried: Sweet ^igs drop down in yielding wise
For Lazy will not let me rise.


This is he that rises late, and goes early to bed, up to eat and down to
sleep, scorns to labor, for he is as sti^^e iointed as the Elephant, and
rather then he would endure half an hours labor, he would willingly choose
a whole hours hanging. I know no use in the world for him, except to keep the
city bread from moulding, and the town liquor from sowring.

This is he, that lying at ease upon his back, where: a Cart was to pass,
entreated the Carman to draw easy over him, for he could not rise yet, till
his lasie fit was past this is he that could rather be lousy then endure to
have his shirt washed, and had rather go to bed in hoose and shoes, then
stoop to pull them off. He is fitted with a wife even pat of his own humor,
for the other day heating broth for her husbands breakfast, the Cat cried new in
the porridge pot: Wife (said he) take out poor Puise alas how came she there?
With that she took out the Cat by the ear, and stroking off the Porredge
from her into the pot, they two wen lovingly to breakfast with it.

A shame take them both for filthy companions. for their broth is abominable:
who, then we shall never have done: heeres hell broke loose, swarming
together. Derision, he goes before and scoffs every man he meets do laugh
at my Lantern, knave, because I use Candlelight by day? Why villain it is to
seek such as ^on'le never be: Honest men.

Violence he walks with him, heel'e do injury to his own Father (if he can)
all that he wears on his back and all that he puts in his belly, is got by
oporesion, wrong and cruelty: he cares not how he gets it, so he gets it,
nor from whence he take it, so he have it.

Ingratitude makes one in their Consort, and inhueman and uncivil savage, if a
man should do him a thousand good turns in a day, he would neuers give a
thousand good words in a year for them.

Impatience is a another of their sraternitie: a raging knave, an unquiet
turbulent rogue, he will allow time for nothing, all is at a minnits warning that
he calls for, or he will rage, rail, curse and swear, that a wiseman would not
for ten pound be within ten miles of him.

Who Is the other hold up thy head knave: O it is Dulnes, the most notorious
blook-head that ever p^st: instruct him till your tongue ache he has no ears
for you: there is nothing in him but the ^sses virtue, that's dull melancholy: how
l^mpish a looks* out rascalles out: Now a murraine take you all, I did never
make a worse days work in my life then I have done to day: here is a City
well blessed, is well provided I warrant you If a man should need a honest-mans
help, where should he ^ind him? Well, farewell Athens I and my Tubbe scorns
thee and thy Citizens.

Diogenes lost labor.
PHilosopher, thy labor is in vain,
Put out thy candle get thee home again,
I^ company of honest men thou lack,
They are so scarce thou must alone go back,
But if thou please to take some knaves along,
Give but a beck and store will stock and throng.
He that did vomit out hie house and land,
Even with a wincke will ready come to hand.
And he of whom thou did ten shillings crave
As thinking ne^e again his alms to have,
Because he was prodigal in waste,
And to undo himself made wondrous haste.
If thou have room to stoe him in thy Tun,
He will be ready both to go and run,
Or those same drunken fiddlers, thou did find
A tunening wood, when they themselves were blind
Whom thou did with thy staff belabour well:
Thei'l sing about the Tub where thou do dwell.
All those that were presented to thy sight,
When thou sought'st honest men by Candlelight,
Make a step back, they in the City be
With many hundreds which thou did not see.
Houses of Rascals* shops even full of knaves,
Tauarne and Alehouse filled with druken slaves.
Your Ordinaries and your common Innes.
Are whole sale war-houses of common sins.
Into a baudie house thou did not look,
Nor any notice of their capering took.
Bawds with their puncks, and Panders with their straps,
Whores with their feathers in their velvet caps,
Those Sallamanders that do bathe in fire.
And make a trade of burning lusts desire.
That do salute them whom they entertain,
With A pox take you till we meet again
Nor those which daily Nouices entice,
To lend them money upon on cheating dice.
And in the bowling-allies r^^ke with betting.
By three, and four to one most basely getting
All these unseen appear not to thy face,
With many a Cutpurse in the market place,
That searches pockets being silver linde,
If Countersets about men he can find.
And has Commission for it so to deal
Under the hang-mans warrant, hand and seal
Innumerable such I could repeat,
That use the craft of Coney*catch and cheat,
The Cities vermin, worse then Rats and Mice:
But leave the Actors, to reward of vice:
He that reproues it, shows a destation,
He that corrects it, works a reformation,
Who do more wrongs and injuries abide,
Then honest men that best are qualified?
They that do offer least abuse to any,
Must be prepared for enduring many.
But here is the comfort that the virtuous find
Their Hell is first, their heaven is behind.
Diogenes Morrall
A Cock stood crowing proud,
Fast by a River side,
A Goose in water hist at him
And did him much deride:
The Cock in choler grew,
Uowing by him that made him,
That he would fiight with that base goose,
Though all his Hens dissuade him,
Come but a shore quoth he,
White liuerif thou dare,
And thou shall see a bloody day,
Thy throat shall soon be bare,
Base crauen said the goose,
I scorn to bear the mind,
To come a shore amongst a crew
Of scraping dunghill kind?
Thy Hens will back thee there,
Come hither chaunting slave,
And in the water hand to hand,
A combat we will have
Here Is none to interrupt,
I challenge thee come here.
If there be valor in thy comb,
Why let it now appear.
Enter the watery field,
I Will spoil thy crowing quight:
Why do not come? oh now I see
Thou have no heart to sight.
With that the Cock replide,
There was no want in him:
But sure the wa^er was so bad,
It would not ^et him ^wi^.
Morrall
IThappens always thus,
When cowards do contend:
With wrangling words they do begin,
And with those weapons end.
Nothing but vau^ts are vsd'd,
Till trial should be made:
And when they come to action,
Each of other are afraid.
Then for to keep Skines whole,
It is a common use:
To enter in some dranken league,
Or make a cowards scuse.
A Great assembly met of Mice,
Who with themselves did take advice,
What plot by policy to shape,
Now they the bloody Cats might escape
At length, a grave and ancient mouse,
(Be like the wisest in the house)
Gave counsel (which they all liked well)
That every Cat should wear a Bell:
For so (quoth he) we shall them hear,
And fly the danger which we fear,
If we but hear a Bell to ting,
At eating cheese, or any thing,
When we are busy with the nippe,
Into a hole we straight may skippe
This above all they liked best:
But quoth one mouse unto the rest,
Which of us all dares be so stout,
To hang the Bell Cats Necks about,
If here be any let him speak:
Then all replide we are to weak.
The stoutest Mouse, and tallest Rat,
Do tremble at a grim-fac'st Cat.
Morrall
THus fares it with the weak,
Whom mighty men do wrong
They by complaint may wish redress.
But none of force so strong,
To work their own content:
For every one does fear,
Where cru^ltie does make abode,
To come in presence there.
THe Owl being weary of the night,
would progress in the Sunn
To see the little birds delight,
And what by them was done.
But coming to a stately grove.
A dornd with gallant green
where years proud Summer season strove,
Most beauteous to be seen
He lights no sooner on a tree,
That Summers liuerie wears:
But all the little birds that be
Were flocked about his ears.
Such wondering and such noise they kept,
Such chirping and such peeping:
The Owl for anger could have wept,
Had not shame hindered weeping
At lengh he made a solemn vow.
And thus unto them speak:
You have your time of pleasure now,
An Owl of me to make.
But ere to morrow light appear,
In dawning of the East,
Five hundred of you that are here,
I will dispatch at least.
If that I crush you not most rare,
Why then Jove let me die:
A Titimouse I will not spare,
Nor the least Wren does fly.
And so at night when all was hash,
The Owl with furious mind:
Did search and prye in every bush.
With sight when they were blind.
He rent their flesh and bones did break
Their Feathers flew in they are:
And cruelly with bloody beak
Those little creatures tear.
Now am I well reuengd (quoth he)
For that which you have done:
And quitted all my wrongs by Moon
Were offered in the Sun.
Morrall
GAiust mighty ones, the weak of strength
May not themselves oppose:
For if they do, it will prove at length,
To wall the weakest goes
The little shrubs must not contend,
Against the taller trees:
Nor meaner sort seek to offend,
Their betters in degrees
For though amongst their own consorts
Superiors they deride:
And wrong them much by false reports,
At length, Time turns the Tide.
There comes a change, the wills they wrought
In self conceit thought good:
May be in the'nd too dearly bought,
Even with the price of blood.
ACobler kept a scuruie Crow,
A Bird of basest kind,
And pains enough he did bestow,
To work her to his mind.
At length he taught her very well,
To speak out very loud:
God save the King and troth to tell,
The Cobbler then grew proud.
She was to good to hop about
Upon his ould-shooe stall;
But he unto the Court would stout,
His bird should put down all
Their painted parrats: So he went
To Caesar with lack-daw,
And said to him, he did present
Best bird that ere he saw.
The Monarch gracious mind did show
For Cobblers poor good will:
And made a Courtier of the Crow,
Where he remained, until
He standing in a window, spide
His fellows fly along:
And knew the language which they cried,
Was his one Mother song.
Away goes he the way they went,
And altogether fly,
A poor dead Horse to tear and rent
That in a ditch did lie.
When they had shared him to the bone
Not a crows mouthfull left:
To a Corne-field they fly each one
And there they fall to theft.
This life the Cobblers Crow did choose,
Pick's living out of straw:
And courtly diet did refuse
Even like a foolish Dawe
Morrall
HE that from baseness does derive,
The root of his descent:
And by preferment chance to thrive,
The way that Iack-dawe went
Where in Court or Common-wealthe
In City and in town
How ere he pledge good f^rtunes health,
Heel live and die a clown.
Dawes will be dawes, though graced in Court,
Crows will to carraine still,
Like ever unto like resort
The bad embrace the ill,
And though even from a Cobblers wall,
He purchase land what then,
With Cobblers heel'e converse with all
Rather then better men.
The Lion in an humor once
as with his pleasure stood,
Commanded that on pain of death,
Horn beasts should void the wood.
Not any one to tarry there,
That had an armed head,
This was no sooner published
But many hundreds fled,
The Heart the Bucke the Unicorn,
Ram, Bull, and Goat consent,
With haste post-hast to run away,
The ^^ngers to prevent.
With this same crew of Horned kind
That were perplexed so,
A beast consorts, upon whose head,
Only a Wen did grow.
The Fox met him, and said thou fool,
Why whether do thou run?
Marry (quoth he) to save my life,
Hear'st thou not what is done?
Horn creatures all have banishment,
And must avoid the place,
For they are charged upon their lives,
Even by the Lions grace.
True (said the Fox) I know it well,
But what is that to thee^
Thou have no Horn thy wen is flesh,
It Is evident to see
I grant quoth he) ^is so indeed,
Yet nere the less I Will fly
For if it be taken for a horn,
Pray in what case am I?
Sure (said the Fox) it'stwisely done,
I blame thee not in this,
For many wrongs are daily wrought
By taking things a miss.
Morrall
Wise men will ever doubt the worst,
in that they take in hand,
And seek that free from all suspect,
Then may securely stand,
Remoouing every least offense,
That may a danger b^eede
For when a man is in the pit,
It is to late, take heed.
If mighty men do censure wrong,
How should the weak resist?
It is in vain to contend with him,
That can do what he list:
The bell and most reposed life,
That any man can find,
Is this; to keep a conscience free,
From spot^ed guilty mind
A Savage creature chaunc'd to come*
Where (...) people dwelt,
Whom they did kindly entertain,
And courteous with him dealt:
They fed him with their choicest fare,
To make his we^come known,
And diverse ways their human love
Was to the wilde-man shown:
At length (the weather being cold)
One of them blew his nails,
The Savage asked why he did so?
And what hi^ fingers ailes:
Marry (quath he) I make them warm
That are both cold and numme,
And so they set them down to boorde
For supper time was come,
The man that blew his nails before,
Upon his broth did blow:
Friend, says ye Savage what means this,
I preethee let me know?
My broth (said he is over hot,
And I do cool it thus
Farewell (quoth he) this deed of thine,
For ever parts us.
Have thou a breath blows hot and cold,
Even at thy wish and will?
I am not for thy company,
Pray keep thy Supper still.
And heat thy hands, and cool thy broth,
As I have seen thee do,
Such double dealers as thy self,
I have no mind unto,
But will retire unto the woods,
Where I to-fore have bin,
Resolving every double tongue
Has hollow heart within.
Morrall
A Heedefull care we ought to have
When we do friends elect,
The pleasing ^est^ure and good words
We are not to respect,
For courteous carriage oftentimes,
May have an ill intent:
And gracious words may graceless prove,
Without the hearts consent*
Let all a void a double tongue,
For in i^ there is no trust,
And banish such the company,
Of honest men mean just:
A counter^ei^s society,
Is never free from danger,
And that man lives most happy life,
Can live to such a stranger.
When winters rage and cruel storms,
Of every pleasant tree,
Had made the bows sta^ke naken all,
As bare as bare might be,
And not a slower left in field,
Nor green on bush or bryer:
But all was robbed in piteous plight,
Of Summers rich a tire,
The Grass hopper in great distress,
Unto the Ant did come
And said dear friend I pine for food,
I prithee give me some.
Thou art not in extremes with me,
I know thine euer-care
For winters want, hard and distrsse,
In summer does prepare,
Know thou my care replied the Ant?
And do thou like it well?
Wherefore prouidest not thou the like?
Pray thee Grass hopper tell?
Marty (said he) the Summer time,
I pleasantly do pass,
And sing out most merrily,
In the delightful grass:
I take no care for time to come,
My mind is on my song,
I think the glorious Sunn-shine days,
Are everlasting long.
When thou a^t hording up thy foods,
Against these hungry days,
Inclined unto providence,
Pleasure I only praise,
This is the cause I come to thee
To help me with thy store:
Thou art deceived friend said the Ant,
I labourd not therefore.
Twa's not for you I did provide:
With tedious toile-some pai^es:
But that my self of labors past
Migh have the future gains.
Such idle ones must buy their wit,
It Is best when dearly bought:
And note this lesson to your shame:
Which by the Ant is taught.
If Summer he your winning time,
When you do merry make:
Let winter be your weeping time,
When you must penance take.
Morrall
Neglect not time, for precious time,
Is not at thy comaund.
But in thy youth and able streng^^,
Give proidence thy hand.
Repose not trust in others help,
For when misfortun's fall,
Thou may complain in want
But friends will vanish all,
They Will heap reproof upon thy head,
And tell thy follies past:
And all thy acts of negligence,
Even in thy teeth will cast.
Thou might have got, thou might have gained
And liueed like a man:
Thus will they speak, filling thy soul,
With ^x ^^ame p^ssion th^n:
Prevent this foolish after-wit,
That comes when it is to late:
And trust not over much to friends,
To help thy hard estate.
Make youth the summer of thy life,
And therein loyter not:
And think the Winter of old age
Will spend what summer got
A Lusty beggar that was blind.
But very strong of lime:
Agreed with one was lame of legges'
That he would carry him.
An other was to guide the way,
(For he had perfect sight:)
Upon condition, all they got,
Should still be shared at night.
So as they chaunc'd to pass along.
The Cripple that had eyes,
Sitting upon the blind man's back,
On ground an Oyster spies.
Stoop take that Oyster up (quoth he)
Which at thy feet lies there:
And so he did and put it in,
The scrip which he did wear.
But going on a little way,
Says Cripple, to the blind:
Give me the Oyster thou tookst up,
I have thereto a mind
Not so said the other by your leave.
In vain you do entreat it:
For sure I keep it for my self,
And do intend to eat it.
I Will have it sir the Cripple swore,
Who spide it, thou or I?
If that I had not seen, and spok,
Thou would have passed by.
It is no matter said the blind,
Thou know it might have lain,
Had I not stoopt and took it up,
Therefore it shall be mine.
And so they hotly fell at words,
And out in choler brake,
With thou lame rogue, and thou blind knave
Not caring what they spoke,
At lengh it happened one came by,
And heard them thus contend,
And did entreat them both, that he,
Might this their discord end.
They yield and say it shall be so,
Then he inquiring all,
Did hear their league, and how about
An Oister they did brall.
Said he, my masters let me s^e,
This Oyster makes such strife,
The blindeman forth with gave it him,
UUho present drew his knife,
And opening it, eat up the same,
Giving them each a shell
And said good fellows now be friends,
I have your fish farewell
The beggars both deluded thus,
At their own folly smilde
And said one subtle crafty knave,
Had two poor fools beguilde,
Morrall
When men for trifles will contend,
And vainly disagret,
That o^t for nothing friend and friend
At Daggers drawing be.
When no discretion there is vsce,
To qualify offense:
But reason is by will abused,
And anger does incense.
When some in fury seek there wi^h,
And some in malice swelles,
Perhaps some Lawyer takes the fish,
And leaves his chence shell,
Then when their folly once appears,
They ouerlate complain:
And wish the wit of fore-gon years
Were now to buy a gain.
WIthin a grove a gallant grove,
That wore green Summers suite,
An Ox an Ass an Ape, a Fox
Each other kind s^lute.
And lovingly like friends embrace,
And much good manners use:
At length says the Ox unto the Ass,
I pray thee friend what news?
The Ass looked sad and thus replied,
No news at all (quoth he)
But I grow ever discontent.
When I do meet with thee,
The Dxe looked strange, and stepping back:
Quoth he dear neighbor Ass.
Have I wronged thee in all my life,
Mouthfull of Hay or grass?
Assure thy self if that I had,
It Would grieve me very much:
No kind bedfellow sai^e the Ass,
My meaning is not such.
On Jupiter I do complain,
It Is he wrongs me alone:
In arming thee with those large horns:
And I poor wretch have none.
Thou wearst two weahons on thy head,
Thy body to defend,
Against the stoutest dog that barks,
Thou bouldly dare contend.
When I have nothing but my skin,
With two long foolish ears.
And not the basest goose that lives,
My hate or fury fears,
This makes me sad, and dull, and slow,
And of a heavy pace?
When every scuruie shephards curre,
Does brave me to my face,
Sure quoth the ape, as then art grieved,
So I hard dealing find;
Look on the Fox, and look one me,
Pray view us well behind.
And thou will swe^re, I know thou wilf,
Except thy eyesight fails:
That nature lacked a pair of eyes,
When she made both our tails,
I wonder what her reason was,
To alter thus our shapes?
There Is not a Fox but has a tail,
Would serve a dozen apes,
Yet we thou see go bare-arst all,
For each man to deride:
I tell thee brother Ass I blush,
To see my own backside,
I must endure a thousand iestes,
A thousand scoffs and scorns,
Nature deals bad with me for tail,
And hard with thee for horns.
With this the ground began to stir,
And forth a little hole.
A creeping ^orleg'd creature came,
A thing is ca^d a Mole,
Quoth he my master I have hard:
What faults you two do sinde:
But Tails and Horns pray look on me
By nature formed blind:
You have no cause thus to comeplaine,
Of your, and your defect,
Nor use dame Nature hard with words,
If me you do respect,
The thing for which you both comeplaine,
Are unto me denide:
And that with patience I endure,
And more am blind beside.
Morrall
WE ought complain, repine and g^udg,
at our dissikt estate:
and deem our selves (our selves not pleased)
^ obe unfortunate
None marked with more extreme then we,
None plunged in sorrow so:
When not by thousand parts of want,
Our neighbors griefe^ we know.
M^st men that have sufficiency,
To serve for natu^^s need:
Do^ wrong the god of nature,
And vn^a^ful^y pr^ceede,
(...)
(...)
When thousand^ wanting what they have*
Contented do remain.
TH'A^tr^ no more by night did walk,
(He and his globe together)
(...) business with the star^es,
About the next years wheather.
He did examine all the ^k^e,
For ^e^pests wind and rain:
And what deseases were to come,
The p^anets told him plame,
The disposition of the Sprlng,
The state of Summer tide*
The Naruest fruit and Winter fr^st,
Most p^am^ly he espide,
He did confer with Jupiter,
Satu^ne and all the Seau^n;
And grew exceeding buisie with
Twelve houses of the heaven.
But while with sta^ing eyes he looks,
What news the star^es could tell:
Upon the sudden down he comes
Headlong into a well.
Help, help, he calls, or else I drown,
Oh help, he still did cry:
Until it chaunc'd some passengers,
Came very early by.
And hearing him, did help him out,
In a drowned mouses case:
Then questioned with him how he come,
In that same cold wet place?
Marry (quoth he) I looked on hie,
Not thinking of the ground:
And tumbled in this scuruy Well,
Where I had like bin drowned.
Which when they hard and knew his art
They smyling said. Friend stranger:
Willt thou foretell things are to come,
And know not present danger?
Have thou an eye for heaven, and
For earth so little wit^
That while thou gazest after stars,
To tumble in a pit?
Will thou tell looking ore thy head)
What weather it will be?
And deadly danger at thy foot,
Thou have no eyes to see:
We give no credit to thy Art,
Nor do esteem thee wise?
To tumble headlong in a well,
With gazing in the skies.
Morrall
Many with this Astronomer,
Great knowledge will pretend:
Those gifts they have, their haughty pride
Will to the skies commend.
Their looks must be a spiring,
For ampition aims on hie,
Fortunes aduancements makes them dream,
Of Castles in the sky:
But while bewitching vanity,
Deludes them with renown:
(...) sudden altera^i^n, with
A vengance pulles them down.
And when the meanest sort of men,
Whom they do abject call:
Will stand in scorn; and point them out.
And censure of there fall.
GReat Alexander came to see,
My Mansian being a tun:
And stood directly opposite,
Between me, and the Sun
Morrow (quoth he) Philosopher,
I yield thee time of day:
Marry (said I then Emperor,
I prithee stand away,
For thou depriuest me of that,
Thy power has not to give:
Nor all thy mighty fellow kings,
That on earths foote-ball live:
Stand back I say and rob me not
To wrong me in my right
The Sun would shine upon me,
But thou take away his light.
With this he stepped aside from me,
And (...) did (...):
That I would be a Courtier,
For he like'd my conceit,
I Will have thy house brought ^ie my court,
I like thy ^aine so well:
A neighbor very near to me,
I mean to have thee dwell
If thou bestow that pain (quoth I)
Pray when the work is done,
Re^^ooue thy Court and carry that
A good way from my Tun.
I care not for thy neighborhood,
Thy Teasure, trash I hold:
I do esteem my ^anterne horn,
As much as all thy gold.
The costlyest cheer that earth affords,
(Take Sea and a^re to boot)
I make far^e less account theereof,
Then of a carret root,
For all the robes upon thy back.
So costly, rich, and strange:
This pla^^e poor Gown, thou see me wear,
Thread bare I will not change
For all the pearl and precious stones,
That is at thy command:
I will not give this little Book,
That here is in my hand,
For all the c^ttles, countries, Towns,
And kingdoms tho^ have got:
I will not give th^s e^^tie Tunn,
For I regard them not:
Nay ^^ thou would^t exchange thy crown^,
For this some cap I wear:
Or give thy ^^epter for my Saffe,
I would do it I ^weare.
Do see this t^b? I tell thee man,
It is my comman wealth:
Do see you water? it is the Wine,
Does keep me sound in health.
Do see these roots that grow about,
The place of my abode?
These are the dainties which I eat,
My backed, my roste my sod,
Do see my simple three-foote stool?
It is my chair of state*
Do see my poor plain wooden dish;
It is my silver plate,
Do see my wardrope then behold,
This patched seame-rent gown:
Do see you mat and bull rushes?
Why they are my bed of down.
Thou count'st me poor and beggarly,
Alas good careful King,
When thou art often sighing sad,
I cheerful sit and sing.
Content dwelles not in palaces,
And Courts of mighty men,
For if it did, assure thy self,
I would turn Courtier then.
No Alexander the' are deceiu^d,
To cencure of me so:
That I my sweet contented life,
(For troubles) will forgo:
Of a reposed life it is I,
Can make a just report:
That have more virtues in my Tun,
Then is in all thy Court.
For what yields that but vanities
Ambition, Envy, Pride
Oppression, wrongs and cruelty.
Nay every thing beside.
These are not for my company,
I Will rather dwell thus odds.
Who ever walks amongst sharp thorns,
Had need to go well shode.
On mighty men I cannot fawn,
Let ^latterie crouch and ereepe:
The world is naught, and that man's wise,
Least league with it does keep.
A crown is heavy wearing, King,
It makes thy head to ache,
Great Alexander, great accounts
Thy greatness has to make.
Who seeks, rest and for the same
Does to thy court repair:
Is wise like him that in an Egg
Does seek to find a Hare.
If thou had all the world thine own,
That world would not suffice:
Thou art an Egle (mighty man)
And Egles catch no flies.
I like thee for thy patience well,
Which thou do show, to bear me:
Ilk teach thee somewhat for thy pains,
Draws but a little near me:
Some honest proverbs that I have,
Upon thee i will bestow:
Thou did not come so wise to me,
As thou art like to go.
HE that performs not what the ought,
But does the same neglect
Let him be sure not to receive,
The thing he does expect.
When once the tall and l^ftie Tree,
Unto the ground does fall:
Why every peassont has an Axe
To hew his b^ughes withal.
He that for virtue merrits well
And yet does nothing claim:
A double kind of recompense
Deserves for the same.
Acquaint me but with whom thou go,
And thy companions tell,
I will resolve thee what thou do*
Whether ill done or well.
He knows enough that knows naught,
If he can silence keep:
The tongue often makes the heart to sigh,
The ^yes to wail and weep.
He takes the best and choy^-est course,
Of any man does live:
That takes good counsel, when his friend*
Does that rich Jewel give.
Good horse and bad, the Rider says,
Must both of them have Spu^re^:
And he is sure to rise with Fleaes,
That lies to sleep with cur^es.
He that more kindness shows the^
Then thou art used unto,
Either already has deceived,
Or shortly means to do.
Birds of a feather and a kind,
Will still together flock:
He'dneede be very straight himself,
That does the crooked mock.
I have observed diverse times,
Of all sorts old and young*
That he which has the leslet heart:
Has still the bigger tongue.
He that is a bad and wicked man,
Appearing good to the' eye:
May do thee many thou and wrongs,
Which thou can never spy,
In present want, defer not him,
Which does thy help requi^e:
The water that is far off fetched
Quenches not neighbors sire.
He that has money at his will,
Meat, Drink, and leisure takes:
But he that lackes, must mend his pace
Need a good Foote-man make^
He that the Office of a friend,
Uprightly does respect:
Must firmly love his friend professed,
With fault and with defect.
He that inioyes a white Horse, and
A fair and dainty wife:
Must needs find often cause, by each
Of discontent and strife.
Choose thy companions of the good.
Or else converse with none:
Rather th^n ill accompained,
Far^ better be alone,
Watch over words, for from the mouth,
There has much evil spring,
It Is better stumble with thy feet,
Then stumble with thy tongue.
Not outward habit, virtue it is
That does advance thy fame:
The golden brinle betters not,
A lade that wears the same,
The greatest joys that ever were,
At lengh with sorrow meets?
Taste honey with thy fingers end.
And surfeit not on sweetes.
A Liar can do more then much,
Work wonders by his lies:
Turn^ mountains into mole-hills,
And Elephants to flies.
Children that were unfortunate,
Their parents always praise:
And attribute all unthriftiness,
Unto their foregone days.
When sickness enters healths strong hold,
And life begins to yield.
Man's forte of flesh to parley comes,
And death must win the field.
The flaterer before thy face,
With smiling looks will stand:
Presenting honey in his mouth.
A Rasor in his hand.
The truly noble minded loves.
The base and servile, fears:
Who ever tells a fool a tale,
Had need to find him ears.
To meddle much with idle things,
Would vex a wise man's head:
It Is labor and a weary work,
To make a dog his bed.
The worst wheel ever of the Cart,
Does yield the greatest noise,
Three women make a market, for
Tehy have sufficient voice.
First leaf all fools desire to learn
With steadfast fixed eyes:
In this, All other Idiots are,
And they exceeding wise.
When once the Lion breathless lies,
Whom all the forest feared,
The very Hares presumpu^usly,
Will pull him by the beard.
Cease not to do the good thou oughst,
Though inconvenience grow:
A wiseman will not Seede-time loose,
For sear of every Crow.
One man can never do so well,
But some man will him blame:
It Is vain to seek, please every man,
^oue cannot do the some.
To him that is in misery,
Do not affliction add:
With sorrow to ^oade sorrows back,
Is most extremely bad.
Show me good fruit on evil tree.
Or Rose that grows on Thistle,
I Will undertake at sight thereof.
To drink to thee and whistle.
Censure what conscience restes in him,
That swear he Justice loves:
And yet does pardon hurtful Crows,
To punish simple Doves.
Th-re's many that to ask might have,
By their own silence crossed:
What charge is speech unto thy tongue,
By asking pray what is lost;
He serves for nothing tha is just,
And faithful in his place:
Yet for his duty well performed,
Is not a whit in grace.
He makes himself another slau^
And fears does under go:
That unto one being ignorant,
Does his own secrets show
^
And yet though years be so,
For one wiseman with hoary heirs,
Three dozen fools I know.
FINIS

