HELL'S BROKE LOOSE.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by W. W. and are to be sold by G. Lostus in Pope's Head Allie
near the Exchange. 1605.

An Advertisement to the wise and discreet
REader; he that in description of a wicked man, does personate him, is to
speak as that wicked man, no^ beseeming a good man; or else he cannot aptly
deliver him in his kind, so odious as he is: In respect whereof, let not any
speech herein be misconstrued, which is only set down as spoken by the
rebellious Heretics, the more truly to explain them as notorious as they
were. Vale.

TO THE READER.
IN this vn-weeded Garden of the World, has sprung up through al ages of the
same, most innumerable even of all sorted kinds, that have been opposite to
Virtue, and pursuers of Vice; Such as have with great travel and labor taken
pains to go to Hell, and run the broad way path with Hindes feet, in all
poasting speed that the Devil could employ them. Amongst the rest of this
fearful race runners (of their variable qualities) here is a description of
the most notorious Rebels and Heretics of Europe, certain Germane
Anabaptists, such as would have all things common, and all men at freewill and
liberty to do what they list, without controwle of any Authority: every man's
Will Law* and every ones Dream Doctrine.

Before the coming of our Savior Christ; Theudas, and Judas Galilaeus, two
seditious fellows of factious spirit, seduced the Jews: The first of them
saying, that he was a Prophet sent from God for man's g^od; and that by his
own powerful word, he could divide the waters of Jordan in as admirable
sort, as Joshua the servant of the Lord had done. The other, did earnestly
promise to enlarge the Jews from the servitude and yoke of the Romans: both of
them by these means, drawing after them great multitudes of people; and both
of them coming unto deserved destruction: For Fatus the Governor of Jury
ouertooke Theudas, and sent his head as a monument to Jerusalem: and Judas
likewise perished, and all his following confederates were dispersed.

After our Savior Christ, in the time of his blessed Apostles, Elimas the
Sorcerer mightily withstood the proceeding of Paul and Barnabas, sowing the
seed of Heresy in the mind of Sergius Paulus Deputy: but the judgment of
God ouertooke him, and he was stricken with blindness. Not long after him, in
the reign of Adrian the Emperor, arose an other called Bencocha^, that
professed himself to be the Messiah, and to have descended from Heaven in the
likeness of a Star, for the safety and redemption of the people: by which
fallacy, he drew after him a world of seditious people; but at last, he and
many of his credulous route were slain, and was called by the Jews (in
contempt) Bencozha (that is) the Son of a lie.

Manes, of whom the Maniches took their name and first original, forged in
his foolish brain a fiction of two Gods, and two beginners; and rejecting the
old Testament, and the true God, which is revealed in the same; published a
fifth Gospel of his own forgerie, reporting himself to be the Holy Ghost:
When he had thus with diuulging his devilish Heresies and Blasphemies infected
the world, being pursued by Gods just judgment, he was for other wicked
practizes taken, and his skin pulled over his ears alive.

Montanus that notorious blasphemous wretch, of whom the Montanists took their
offspring, denied Christ our Savior to be GOD, saying: He was but Man only,
like other men, without any participation of Divine essence: He called
himself the Comforter, and Holy spirit, which was promised to come into the
world; and his two Wives Priscilla and Maximilla, he named his Prophetesses,
and their writings Prophesies: yet all their cunning could not prevent nor
foretell a wretched and desperate end which befell him; for after he had of
long time deluded the world, in imitation of Judas, he hanged himself.

Infinite are the examples that may be collected out of the registers of
foregone ages, touching the lamentable euilles, slaughters, blood, and death,
that have ensued from the damnable heriticall Instruments of the Diuel^; and
how the people (affecting Novelties, and Innouations) have concurred from time
to time, with the pl^tters endeavors, Histories are full of their memories.
Most Rebellions (...) pretend Religion for them selves: No Villain but dare
turn a good outside to the eye, though the inside be as bad, as heart can
imagine.

These infamous Rebels and Heretics in Germany, pretended Religion; they
would be reformer^ of the Church, and State: new Doctrine of their own
frantick^ conceits: no Childred should be Baptized: all things should be
common, and no Magistrate to govern, but every man at his own liberty to do^
what he list; take whatsoever he stood in need of, without pa^: plurality of
Wives: no recovery of wrongful d^tayned Goods, and such like villainous
roguish stuff, that never a The^fe in the world would refuse to subscribe unto
it.

This was no sooner taught by John Leyden, alias Yoncker Hans a Dutch Tailor,
Tom Mynter a parish Clarke, Knipp^^^ulling a Smyth, and Crafteing a Ioyner; but
it was embraced by thousands of the Boores, and vulgar illiterate Clownes, who
in great companies daily resorted unto them fo^^th o^ all Towns and Villages:
A most rude rascal company that regarded neither Gods fear, nor man's favor,
even HELL BROKE LOOSE.

In their outrageous madness, they attempted much villainy, omitting to put
nothing in practice that stood with their humors lyking; as good Commons
Wealths men, as Jack Straw, Watt Tyler, Tom Myller, John Ball, etc. in the
reign of Richard the 2. and as sound Divines for Doctrine, as Hackets
Disciples, that preached in Cheapeside in a Pease-cart: Yet they found of their
own fraternity to manage the Devils affairs; and mustering themselves
together, all composed of the scumbe and waste worser-sort could be raken up,
they proceeded so far, that they took the Town of Munster, and there for a
time, domineerd as if they had been Electors apeece to the Emperor; until
being beleagerd by the Duke of Saxon, they were taught to taste how Extremity
did savor, finding the bitterness of their rash and graceless attemptes, to
punish them most severely in the end: For when Cattes, Dogs, Rattes and
Myce, grew scarce and dainty, (No common dish, but choice diet for John
Leyden, and the Lords of his counsel Knipperdulling the Smyth, Crafteing the
Ioyner, and Tom Mynter the Clarke;) They were constrained to fry old greasy
Busse leather Ierkins, and Parchments, Coouers of Books, Boots in Steakes,
and Stew-pottes of old Shoes, till in the end being famished as leave as dried
Stock Fish, they were subdued: and Leyden (who had termed himself King of
Munster) with his Nobles, made of Smyth, Ioyner, and Parish Clarke, were
according to the just reward of all Rebels, put to death, with great torture:
and being dead, their bodies were hanged in Iron Cages upon the top of the
high Steeple in Munster, called S. Lamberts Steeple, for an example to all of
Rebel race: Their Confederates in great multitudes having perished with the
Sword and famine, may together with all Traitors witness to the world
throughout all ensuing ages, how GOD with vengeance rewards all such
State-disturbers, and factious Rebels.

THE GHOST OF JACK STRAW. Prologue.
I That did act on Smythfeildes bloody Stage,
In second Richards young and tender age:
And there received from Walworths fatal hand,
The stabb of Death, which life did countermand:
Am made a Prulogue to the Tragedy,
Of LEYDEN, a Dutch Tailors villainy.
Not that I ere consorted with that slave,
My rascal rout in Hollenshed you have:
But that in name, and nature we agree,
An English Traitor I, Dutch Rebel he.
In my Consort, I had the Priest John Ball;
Mynter the Clarke, unto his share did fall.
He, to have all things common did intend:
And my Rebellion, was to such an end.
Even in a word, we both were like appointed,
To take the Sword away from Gods Anointed:
And for examples to the worlds last day,
Our Traitors names shall never wear away:
The fearful Path's that he and I have trod,
Have bin accursed in the sight of God.
Here in this Register, who ere does look,
(Which may be rightly called The bloody Book)
Shall see how base and rude those Villains be,
That do attempt like LEYDEN; plot like me.
And how the Diu'll in whose name they begone,
Pays them Hells wages, when their work is don:
" Treason is bloody; blood thereon attends:
" Traitors are bloody, and have bloody ends.
FINIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
FRom dark Damnations vault, where Horrors dwell,
Infernal Furies, forth the lake of Hell
Ariu'd on earth, and with their damned evils
Filled the whole world full of Incarnat Devils:
For all the sins that Hells vast gulf contains,
In every age, and every kingdom reigns:
Murder, and Treason, False disloyal plots,
Sedition, Heresy, and roguish knots:
Of trayt'rous Rebels; Some of highest place,
And some of meanest sort, most rascal bace:
Of which degree, behold a cursed crew,
Such as Hells-mouth into the World did spue:
JOHN LEYDEN, but a Tailor by his trade,
Of Munster town a King would needs be made:
A Parrish Clarke, a Ioyner, and a Smyth,
His Nobles were, whom he took counsel with:
To these adjoined thousands, Boores and Clownes,
Out of the Villages, and Germane Towns:
Whereof great loss of blood grievous ensew'd,
Before that Camp of Hell could be subdew'd.
S. R.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JOHN LEYDEN.
WHen nights black mantle over the earth was laid,
And Cinthias face all curtaine-drawne with clouds:
When visions do appear in darksome shade,
And nights sweet rest, days care in quiet shrowds;
About the hour of twelve in dead of night,
A mangled Corse appeared to my sight.
Skin torn, Flesh wounded, ugly to behold:
A totterd Body peece-meale pulled in sunder:
Harken (quoth he) to that which shall be told,
And look not thus amazed with fear and wonder:
Though I am all be stabbed, flashed, and torn,
I am not Caesar, him, an's ghost I scorn.
Icke bin Hans Leyden; vnderstandst thou Dutch?
JOHN LEYDEN King of Munster, I am he,
That have in Germany bin feared as much,
As any Caesar in the world could be:
From the first hour that I arms did take,
I made the German Gallants fear and quake.
By faculty at first, I was a Taylour,
But all my mind was Kingly eue'ry thought:
For even with Cerberus, Hels dogged Iaylour,
A combat hand to hand I durst have fought:
Then with my trade, what is he that has to doot
Old Father Adam was a Taylour too:
He made him Fig leave Breeches at his fall,
And of that stuff his Wife a Kirtle wore:
Then let both Needle, Thread, my Sheares and all,
Keep with the trade; a Noble mind I bore:
And let this Title witness my renown,
JOHN LEYDEN Taylour, King of Munster town.
My Councellers were these, a valiant Smyth,
As tall a man as ever struck a heat,
Called Knipperdulling; wondrous full of pith:
Crafting the Ioyner, one of courage great:
Tom Mynter, a madd Rogue, our Parrish Clarke,
Whose doctrine we with diligence did mark.
He taught on topp of Molehill, Bush, and Tree,
The Traitors text in England; Parson Ball
Affirming we ought Kings apeece to be,
And every thing be common unto all:
For when old Adam delu'd, and Euah span,
Where was my silken velvet Gentleman?
We Adams Sons; He Monarch of the Earth,
How can we choose but be of Royal blood?
Being all descended from so high a birth?
Why should not we share wealth, and worldly good?
Tush Masters (quoth Tom Mynter) reason binds it,
He that lacks Money, take it where he finds it.
Why, is not every thing Gods gift, we have?
Do Beasts and Cattle buy the Grass they eat?
Shall that be sold, which Nature freely gave?
Why should a Man pay Money for his Meat,
Or buy his Drink, that parboyld Beer and Ale,
The Fyshes broth, which Brewers do retayle?
Pray who is Landlord to the Lions den?
Or who pays House-rent for the Foxes hole?
Shall Beasts enjoy more privilege then Men?
May they feed daily upon that is stole,
Eating and drinking freely Natur's store,
Yet pay for naught they take, nor go on score?
Do not the Fowls share fellow like together,
And freely take their food eu'en where they please,
A whole years diet costs them not a Fether?
And likewise all the Fyshes in the Seas,
Do they not franckly feed on that they get,
And for their victu'als are in no man's debt?
And shall Man, being Lord of all the rest,
(Unto whose service these were all ordained)
Of meat, nor drink, nor clothing, be possessed,
Unless the same by Money be obtained?
Pay House-rent, buy his food, and all his clothing,
When other Creatures have good cheer for nothing?
We Will none of that (quoth I, to my consorts.)
No (quoth Tom Mynter) friends, it ought not be:
Come Liberty, and Wealth, and Princely sports:
Why, Kings are made of Clay; and so are we:
We Will aim our thoughts on high, at Honors mark:
All rowly, powly; Tailor, Smyth, and Clarke.
We are the men will make our Valors known,
To teach this doting world new reformation:
New Laws, and new Religion of our own,
To bring our selves in wondrous admiration:
Let Us turn the world clean vpside down, (mad slaves)
So to be talked of, when we are in our Graves.
Brave Knipperdulling, set thy Forge on fire.
It shall be done this present night (quoth he,)
Tom Mynter, leave Amen unto the Quier.
Quoth Tom, I scorn henceforth a Clarke to be,
Cornellis, hang thy wooden Ioyners trade,
For Noblemen apeece you shall be made.
And fellow mates; Nobles and Gallants all,
To Majesty you must your minds dispose:
My Lord Hans Hogg, forsake your Butchers stall.
Hendrick the Botcher, cease from heeling Hose.
Class^ Chaundler, let your Weick and Tallow lie,
And Peeter Cobbler, cast your old Shoes by.
For you my valiant Lords, are men of wit,
And far too good for base and servile trades,
Your Martial power may be compared fit,
Unto the strength of our strong Germane Iades:
Who if they had but knowledge to their force,
What whistling Car-man could command his Horse?
Your gifts are rare, and singular to find,
Being full of courage, resolute, and wise:
Yet to behold these parts you have bin blind.
Oh could you see your Valor with mine eyes,
You would exclame that Ignorance so long,
Has done so worthy Men, such open wrong.
But now my Lyon-harted Caualiers,
Let us march after warlike Mars his Drome,
Your Prentiships are out of subject years;
Now let us show the Houses whence we come:
For wondrous matters there are to be done,
Crowns must be conquered, Kingdoms must be won.
Tom Mynter, go and preach unto the Boots
All Liberty, all Freedom, Ease, and Wealth:
And if they will, allow them Queanes and Whores:
Bid them Drink free, and pledge Good-fellows health:
Say Goods are common, each man to suffize,
The Rich-mans purse, is Poore-mans lawful prize.
Tell them, they need not stand on honest dealing,
To borrow Money, and to pay again:
And those that have occasion to be stealing,
May take a Purse, if need do so constrain:
Poor Men must have it: Gentlemen must live:
Good-fellowes cannot stay till Misers give.
There Is none of us (my Masters) but may want,
Our Purses may have empty stomachs all,
But he shall find his diet to be scant,
Whose credit's scord upon an Alehouse wall,
I owe a debt my self only for Beer,
Amounts to more then I have earnd this year.
And let me come to a base Tapsters house,
Where I but owe some twenty doosen of Beer,
The rascal will not give me one carowse,
But tells me straight how eu'ery thing is dear:
It Is a hard wo^ld, the Brewer must be paid:
Thus on my empty Purse the Villain played.
This is his state, whose Purse is lyned thin,
And goes on trust, b^holding for his shot,
With, By your leave, he must come creeping in:
I pray you Brother, let us have a Pot,
How does all here? pray is mine Hosts well?
Curse not your debtors: How do honest Nell.
This shaking humor, I do much detest,
Which empty Purses do inflict on some:
I can not be beholden, I protest,
Money must make me welcome where I come:
If Silver in my Pockets do not ring,
All Is out of tune with me in every thing.
What extreme grief does Monyes want procure?
How madd and frantic does it make the mind?
Again, how chearefully can Money cure?
When Physic comes in Gold, and Siluer's kind,
To think on this, what is he, that would not crave it,
And fight himself out of his skin to have it?
Thus my brave Caualiers, you plainly see,
Upon what golden ground we set our foot,
Courage Dutch bloods, I say courageous be,
We will have Wealth, and Liberty to boot:
Let us go forward as we have begone.
And we will make bloody sport before it is done.
JOHN LEYDEN, TOM MINTER, KNIPPERDVLLING, and their consortes; the first
inuentors of the Dreams and Dotages of the heriticall Anabaptists in Germany.

THere never was so odious a pretense,
Not any Act so wicked and so vile,
But some would take upon them a defense
To color it; the easier to beguile
The simple sort, which have unstayed minds,
Whose hasty Judgment Error easly blindes.
So these leawd wretches, sprung from Villain race,
That had all Piety in detestation:
A Rascal sort, that were eu'en spent of Grace,
Would take on them Religions reformation:
And in the forefront of their villainy,
Tom Mynter vtters new fond Herezie.
Dear Friends (quoth he) that we may have success,
In this our honorable enterprise:
Which you shall see the very heau'ens will bless,
I^ from a Christian zeal it do arise,
Let Us mende the Church in matters are amiss,
Especially in one thing; which is this,
Christ gave commission to the twelve, saying: Go
Into all Nations; Preach, and there Baptize.
So that you see the very words do show,
And from the substance of them does arise,
We first must be of years to understand,
Before we take that Sacrament in hand.
Therefore we will have no Babes to be Baptized,
Until thy come to years of ripe discretion,
That of the Faith they may be first advised,
And yield the world account of their profession:
For you may see, unless your sight be blind,
Belief is first, and Baptism comes behind.
And yet (my Maistars) you may daily see,
In any Country where so ere you come,
Such store of little Children christened be:
It Is infinite for one to count the sum:
But let us take another course, I pray;
Those forward Sucklings shall hereafter stay.
What say you to it? are you all agreed,
That this same doctrine shall be our chief ground?
It shall (said Leyden) and I have decreed,
That it be held for wholesome, good, and sound:
And for example I have thought it best,
To be new Christened here, before the rest.
Let Us have a Basin, and some Water straight,
With all the present speed it may be brought:
For I perceive this matter is of weight,
My Christ'ning when I was a Child, is naught:
Surely I think I am no Christian yet,
A Book good honest Mynter quickly get.
Well said, ar't ready? Shall we need Godfather*
Yes: take you Harman Cromme, or any other:
I have a mind to Knipperdulling rather:
And Tannekin may serve to be God-mother,
Or Knipperdulling joined with Harmon Cromme:
Let it be so: some water; quickly come.
Thus on they go, with errors foul defiled,
In rude profaning Holy ordinance:
And Mynter a^keth, Who does name the Child?
Call him (quoth Knipperdulling) Yoncker Hans,
His noble mind, and nature do agree,
And therefore he a Yoncker Hans shall be.
Now (quoth Tom Mynter) let me make a motion,
To which I do beseech you all incline:
Let every man that is here, with one devotion,
Come follow me to drink some Rennish wine;
^u^ inward love, let outward deeds reveal it,
And to the Tavern let us go and s^ale it.
The Rebels daily increasing in great multitudes of the rude Boores, and
illiterate Clownes, propounded unto themselves diverse monstrous absurdities,
confirmed by their Captains Yoncker, Hans, and Knipperdulling: which by them
are Entitled Twelve Articles of Christian Liberty.

WHat is it from the Cocatrice does pass,
But such a natured Serpent as him self?
What sees an Ape within a Looking glass,
But a deformed, and ill favored else?
What Good fruit comes from an evil tree?
Or how should Villains ought but Villains be?
Like desper'at madmen, void of Reasons use,
They run to any outrage can be thought:
And Liberty is ma^e the Rebels scuse,
Which now by Dreams and Fancies so has wrought,
That Yoncker Hans unto his rabble rout,
Twelve Articles of Liberty gives out.
And first sets down: They need not stand in fear
Of Magistrate or Ruler, for offense:
But they themselves might causes freely hear,
And so end matters; saving much expense
Of Coin in Fees, which unto Lawyers fall:
For we will (quoth Yoncker Hans) be Lawyers all.
If that a wrong to any man be done,
Let him repair to me, and my two Lords,
We Will end the strife so soon as it is begone:
For half a doozen of Beer, in quiet words,
And make them drink together, and be friends,
Shake hands, and like good fellows make amends*
Next, if a man's disposed for to ride,
And has no Horse, nor does intend to hire,
He may take one upon the highway side,
To serve, as his occasion does require,
All-wayes provided, when his Iournye's don,
H(...) to turn him loose, and let him run.
Also, if any Woman chance to marry,
And that her Husband prove not to her mind,
She shall be at her choice with him to tarry,
Or take an other whom she knows more kind:
We think it meet no Woman should be bound,
To him in whom no kindness can be found.
For if she match for Wit, and he turn Clown,
Or any way her bargain proves ill,
She may stay with him till her wedding Gown
Be worn, and then be at her own free will,
To take another, and exchange the Lout:
This Law of our's, shall serve to bear her out.
Yea, further (which should have bin said before)
That man which has not Wife enough of one,
Why, let him (if he please) take half a score:
We Will be his warrant, or to build upon:
We in our wisdoms do allow it so,
For good ^ound reasons that we have to show.
For say, you meet with such, as most men do,
Of this same proud, and i^le huswife brood,
Shrewish and toyish; foolish, queanish ^o:
^ull of (...) f^ults, (...) that is good:
What should me^ do wi^h such v(...)ous wives?
Turn them to gr^ss^, and so the (...)ues.
Besides, Tenants shall need to pay (...)nt,
The Earth's the Lords, and all that (...) therein:
Landlords may hang themselves with one consent;
And if they please, next Quarter day begin:
We will not be indebted unto any,
But be Freeholders, paying not a penny.
All B^nds and Bills, shall be of no effect:
And he that will not pay his Debt, may choose:
This Hand, and Seal, no man shall need respect:
Day of the month; and toys that Scriueners use:
Sheepe-skins, and Wax, shall now no more prevail,
To bring a man into the doleful Iayle.
All Prisons shall be presently pulled down,
For we will have good Fellows walk at large:
A pair of Stocks shall not appear in Town:
This in our names, we very straightly charge:
What reason is it when the hands have stole,
To put the Legs into a wodden hole?
No man shall need obey any Arest,
Let th'action be what it will, trespass or debt:
All Surety-ship, shall be an idle jest:
No Creditor thereby shall vantage get:
All Beasts and Cattle, Oxen, Sheep, and Kine,
Shall be his that will have them: yours, and mine.
All Forests, Parks, and Chases, shall be free
For each man that delights in the game:
Orchards and Gardens likewise common be:
A^l Fruits and Herbs, let him that will come claim:
And every thing that any man shall need,
According to his will, let him proceed.
Who will not draw his weapon in this cause,
And fight it out, as long as he can stand?
Which of you all will disalow these Laws,
And will deny our Articles his hand?
Then all cried out, This Doctrine we will defend,
And lives a piece about it we will spend.
Our Will's our Law; our Swords the same shall pen,
What we decree, let us see who dare resist?
We care not for the Laws of other men,
But will without control do what we list:
We are grown strong; and we are very wise,
My honest Gentlemen, let this suffize.
With courage now let us our selves address,
Attempting on the sudden Munster Town:
Let every one be in a readiness,
Kind Fortune smyles: regard not who does frown:
At every Church we will hang a Tavern sign,
And wash our Horses feet in Rennish-wine.
The Rebels in a furious resolution, enter the Town of Munster: wherewith
insolent proud audatiou^ Spirits, they inflict most injurious wrongs upon the
inhabitants, taking greatest glory in acting villainy.

WIth desp'rat Resolution, mad-braine heat,
Munster they enter like to savage Bears:
The Citizens no favor could entreat,
For all their goods are common, Leyden swears
Catch that catch may; he bids his Soldiers share,
Divide the spoil, and take no further care.
Freely supply your wants, who ever lackes:
Chearely my hearts; cate* drink, and domineere,
Ryfell the rich and wealthy Merchants packes:
Make all things cheap that heretofore were dear:
And where you find an Usurer, be bold
To cut his throat, and take away his gold.
Adorn yourselues in princely brave attire,
Put down with State the Emperors of Room:
And give the foolish world cause to admire,
And say, we pass, each base and common Groom:
Though some of you (my Lords) came from the Plow,
We Will make them stoop, that have disdaind to bow.
Have you not heard that Scythian Tamberlaine
Was erst a Shepherd ere he played the King?
First over Cattle he began his reign,
Then Countries in subjection he did bring:
And Fortunes favors so mayntain'd his side,
Kings were his Coach-horse, when he pleased to ride.
Do you not see our valorous success,
How easily we have attayn'd this Town?
What think you then (...) time we shall possess,
When Greatness comes to back us with renown?
Why sure I think our shares will so increase,
That we shall let ou^ Kingdoms by the lease.
Fill Bowls of Wine, and let us drink a health:
Carowse in Glasses that are five foot deep:
You worthy members of the Commonwealth,
Munster is ours, and Munster we will keep:
Boone-fier the streets; set Bells a work to ring
For joy a Taylour is become a King.
Bring forth all Prisoners presently to me,
And let the Magistrates supply their place;
Prisons for true-men now shall only be:
Brave Thieves, with many favors we will grace,
Such men as they, with courage do proceed,
And of their service we shall stand in need.
For Thieves (you know) of fear make no account,
They Will hazard hanging, for a little gain:
And though unto the Gallows top they mount,
Both Halter and the Hangman they disdain,
How many die at Tyburne in a year?
Would make us gallant Soldiers, were they here.
I Will tell ye Masters, I have known men die,
That have out-brau'd the Hangman to his face:
Such as would give an Emperor the lie,
And valiant take a Purse in any place,
Bid a man stand upon the hige-way side,
When he has had exceeding haste to ride.
As full of courage as their skins could hold,
Spending as franckly as they freely got:
Scowring the rust from Silver and from Gold,
That Misers hoorded up and used not:
As honest men as we, in all their dealing,
And yet are hanged for nothing but for stealing.
Example to you of a friend I Will make,
And I beseech you all, to note the thing:
Who being to be married, went and spoke
Unto a Goldsmith for a wedding Ring,
And coming for it when he should be wed,
The doors were shut, and c'ry one abed:
He had no reason stand and knock all day,
But brake the wind^wes open, in a jest,
Taking all Rings he found, with him away,
To choose his own the better, from the rest:
Meaning to put the Goldsmiths but in fear,
In making him suppose some Thief were there.
Well, this poor fellow he was apprehended,
Brought to the Bar, and as a Fellon tried,
And yet you see he ^estingly offended,
Having good reason for it on h^s side:
But all his protestations were in vain,
For he was hanged in earnest for his pain.
Another honest fellow as he went,
Did draw a Halter after him along,
Thinking no hurt, nor having an intent
To off^r any kind of creature wrong:
One comes behind him was the Hang-mans friend,
And tide a Horse unto the Halters end.
The owner met him leading of his beast,
And charged him with felony (poor man)
Although in this same matter he knew least,
There is no remedy, say what he can
To prison, hang him for an arrant thief.
How say my masters is not this a grief?
But we will take order for such matters now,
For thieves and Gentlemen shall be all one,
To take a purse, or horse, we will allow,
And let him boldly do it that has none:
Take any thing that any man shall lack,
To fill the belly and to cloth the back.
If any find himself here with agreeued,
Let him be whipped and banished forth the town,
With rich men's goods we mean to have relieved
The very poorest mean and basest clown,
We Will have it so my Lords, it shall be thus,
Lets see who dare but stand on terms with us.
Tom Mynter, prithee search the town with speed,
Choose out the fairest of the female kind,
Some lusty wenches of the Germane breed,
For to the flesh I feel my self inclinde:
Some half a dosen wives for me provide,
And stock me with some Concubines beside.
Go to the Goldsmithes in my princely name,
Will and command them presently forthwith
They send such chains and Jewels as I claim
By Knipperdullings mouth, my Lord the Smith,
Without demanding any thing therefore,
I neither mean to pay, nor go on score.
Let others to the Mercers shops repair,
And tell them we do silk and velvet lack,
Our seame-rent Soldiers are exceeding bare,
Scant any tatters hanging on their back.
Rich Taffata and Velvet of three pile,
Must serve our use to swagger in a while.
Command the Merchants to supply our Court
With all abundance of the choy^est Wine:
Unto the Butchers likewise make resort,
Bid them p^ouid us Oxen, Sheep, and Swine:
Charge Brewers to present us with their trade,
And that their Beer be somewhat stronger made.
The Baker in his office to appear,
His Mealy-worship we do greatly want:
And store of Cooks let us have likewise here,
To dress our dishes, that they be not scant:
All things in plenty, and abundant store,
Be merry, eat, and drink, and call for more.
This for a Resolution we set down,
And do ordain that it continue still:
All is our own that is within the Town,
And we are men that have the world at will:
Fill Bowls of Wine, carowse a ^igh-Dutch round,
For Cares lie conquered, and our Joys are croun'd,
Munster being beseiged by the Duke of Saxony, the Rebels endure great
myserie, and extremity by famishment; but constrained in the end to yield:
their principal Captains Leyden, Knipperdulling, and Mynter, are tortured and
put to death, for example to all of Rebellious damned disposition, ending as
desperate, as their lives were devilish.

AMbitions wheel, which Traitors do aspire,
Has brought the Rebels to their altitude:
And now declining, downe-ward they retire,
By just Re^enge a downe-fall to conclude,
From top o^ Treason, thus they turn about:
For now behold, their cursed date run out.
The Martial Duke laid seige unto them now,
Preventing them of needful wants supply,
With dungers sharpest sword, to make them bow*
No expectation but resolve to dye,
Their length of life was measured by their store,
Which could not be enlarged acrum the more.
Yet most extreme hard cruel shift they made,
Holding the town besieged above a year,
In which sharp time their paunches were betraide
Of all their former feasts and belly cheer,
For each man's stomach deemed his throat was cut,
There was such emptiness in ery gut.
When wholesome food was all consumde and gone,
After a hard allowance they had past,
Horses and Dogs they lickt their lips upon,
Then Rats and Mise grew dainty meat at last,
Old shoes they boyld, which made good broth beside,
Buffe-lether Ierkins cut in Steakes they fride.
Not an old pair of Boots did walk the street,
Their bellies could not spare their legs the lether,
But stewed they were, and hunger made them sweet,
For with that sauce they shared alike together.
Couers of Books were in like manner dressed,
And happy he was such a dishes ghest.
The Chaundlers crawling tallow vtt'red well,
It served Hans Leyden and his Lords own table,
There was no fault found with the taste nor smell,
Their only grief was this, they were not able
To maintain that good cheer, which grew so scant,
O^ filthy kitchen stuff they found great want.
When they had eaten up the Chaundlers trade,
As likewise all the ware Shoomakers had,
The Scriueners shops for parchment they invade,
And seize upon it even hunger mad,
Cancelling with their teeth both bond and bill,
Look after debts and pay them he that will.
In these extremes (quoth Leyden to the rest)
What shall we do in this accursed case?
Advise me now Tom Mynter what were best,
What Is to be done in this same hungry place?
Speak Knipperdulling lets have thy advice,
There Is no provision left of Rats and Mice.
Why, fire the Town, as late I did my Forge,
(Quoth Knipperdulling) I do think it meet,
Least Saxon imitate English Saint George,
And trample us like Dragons under feet:
Like Troy, let flame and smoke ascend the skies*
We burn like Phoenix, that in fire dies.
Or let us on a sudden issue out,
And rush upon those rascals keep us in:
Most desperate in that we go about,
As not respecting if we lose or win:
Be as it will, we have but lives to spend,
A puff of breath, and therewithal an end.
In this estate despayring of their lives,
John Leyden plots in his fantastique head,
To send out of the Town one of his Wives
Unto the Duke, to tell him she is fled
From those accursed Rebels, to his grace,
To signify the Cities weakest place.
Thou must (quoth he) play Iudiths part for all,
And free us from this same Assirian host:
Bring Holefernes head unto the wall,
That thus against Bethulia does bost:
I had a Vision did appear to me,
Which signified thou should our Judith be.
And by thy means deliverance procure,
Saving out l^ues, to thy immortal praise:
Then holy woman put this work in ure,
Thou see^^ we die, if we endure delays:
Thou have rare beauty, on with rich attire,
And good success incline to thy desire.
This silly Woman easily deluded,
Prepares her self unto the enterprise:
Departs the Town as Leyden had concluded,
Unto the Duke, attyred in disguise,
As if she had by secret made escape,
Taking on her an Hipocrites true shape.
Delivers all the cunning she was taught,
To gain her credit, and to free suspect.
The Duke misdoubts her practice to be naught,
And by examination finds direct
The plot, and all the drift why she was sent,
And thus to work with this false Judith went.
A Scaffold was erected in the fight
Of all the Rebels, that they might perceive
Their Gentlewoman played not Judith right:
Because her h^ad behind her she did leave:
"For Treason never is so well contrived,
"But still the plotter is the shortest lived.
Then did the Duke assault them very strong,
Who being weak, unable to resist,
Tired out with Famine they endured long,
And did subdue them even as he h^^:
Such lean Anotamies they seemed all,
Like those dry bones in the Surgeons hall.
And here ends LEYDENS kingdom and his reign,
His counterfayted tytle's out of date,
He is John Leyden Tailor now again:
And those that were his Noblemen of late,
Are eu'en restored to their first degree,
Smyth, Clarke, and Ioyner, arrant Knaves all three.
To their deserved deaths they are appointed,
For all their villainies, and extreme wrongs:
Drawn through the City streets, and then disioynted,
Their flesh torn from the bones with fiery tongs:
And as then lives did to all mischeife tend,
So did the desp'rat unrepentant end.
Being dead* there were three Iron Cages made
For strength and substance to endure and last,
And into them their bodies were conveyed,
And on the Cities highest Steeple plast,
Leyden (...)ing highest, ^^o express his pride,
Mynter, and Knipperdulling, on each side.
The like reward, be like offenders due.
Let T^aytors ends be violent, and evil:
And as these past, so all that shall ensue,
Let them receive their wages from the Devil:
He sets a work, and stirs them to aspire,
And is to pay them veng^aunce for their hire.
FINIS.

