HVMORS ORDINARY.

Where a man may be very merry, and exceeding well used for his Sixe-Pence

AT LONDON, Printed for William Firebrand, and are to be sold at his shop in
Popeshead Palace, right over against the Tavern door.

TO THE GENTLEmen Readers.
HVmours, is late crowned king of Caueeleres,
Fantastique-follies, graced common favor:
Civility, has served out his years,
And scorneth now to wait on good-behauiour.
Gallants, like Richard the Usurper swagger.
That had his hand continual on his dagger.
Fashions is still consort with new ^ound shapes,
And feeds daily upon strange disguise:
We show our selves imitating Apes
Of all the toys that Strangers heads* devise;
For there is no habit of hell-hatched sin,
That we delight not to be clothed in.
Some swear, as though they Stares from heaven could pu^^
And all their speech is pointed with the stabbe,
When all men know it is some coward gull,
That is but Champion to a Shordich drabbe.
Whose feather is his heads lightnes-proclaimer,
Although he seem some mighty monster-tamer.
Epicurisme, cares not how he lives,
But still pursues brutish Appetite:
Disdain, regardes not what abuse he gives,
Careless of wrongs, and vnregarding right,
Self-love, (they say) to self-conceit is wed,
By which base match are ugly vices bred.
Pride, reuells like the roysting Prodigal,
Stretching his credit that his purse strings crack,
Until in some distresfull gaile he fall,
Which wore of late a Lordship on his back:
Where he till death must lie in pawn for debt:
" Griefs night is near, when pleasures sun is set.
Vaunting, has got a mighty thundering voice,
Looking that all men should applaude his sound,
His deeds are singular, his words be choice;
On earth his equal is not to be found,
Thus Vertu's hid with Follies iugling mist,
And he is no man that is no humorist.
Samuel Rovvlands.

TO POETS.
GOod honest Poets let me crave a boon,
That you would write, I do not care how soon
Against the bastard humors howrely bred,
In every mad, braind wit-worne, giddy head:
At such gross follies do not sit and wink,
Belabour these same Gulls with pen and ink:
You see some strive for fair handwriting fame,
As Peter Bales, his sign can prove the same,
Gracing his credit with a golden Pen:
I would have Poets prove more taller men:
In perfect letters rested his contention,
But yours consists in Wits choice rare invention.
Will you stand spending your inventions treasure,
To teach Stage Parrets speak for penny pleasure?
Whlle you your selves like musick-sou^ding Lutes
Fretted and strung, gain them their silken suits.
Leave Cupids cut, women's face-flattring praise,
Loves subject grows too threed-bare now adais.
Change Venus Swans, to write of Vulcans Geese,
And you shall merit golden Pens a piece.
MIrth pleases some, to others it is offense,
Some wish ^'haue follies told; seem dislike that:
Some commend plain conceits, some profound sense:
And most would have, themselves they know not what.
Then he that would please all, and himself too,
Takes more in hand then he is like to do.
SATIR.
EVen like the chalking Vintners at the bar,
That bids all welcome, what so e're they are:
So they pass quiet, in and out a door,
And make no swaggering to discharge their score
I Satir, stand at entrance of this book,
And each kind guest may for my welcome look:
All pleasant humors I inuit come here,
And with these Epigrams make the^ good cheer:
Let Melancholy walk most dogged by,
All sprightly Poets do the same defy,
To feast with wit he never had good taste,
I scorn to have him at our Table plast.
Let him go plod for leases, buy and sell,
And day by day his bags of money tell,
And grudge to give himself a pint of Wine,
Out arrant Ass, he is no guest of mine.
But all mirths friends, I do embrace most kind,
Better I wish, pray take such as you find.
EPIGRAMES.
EPIG. 1.
MOnsieur Domingo, is a skillfull man,
For much experience he has lately got,
Proving more Phisike in an Alehouse Can
Then may be found in any vintners pot,
Beer he protests is sodden and refined,
But this he speaks, being single penny lined.
For when his purse is swollen but sixpence big,
Why then he swears; now by the Lord I think
All Beer in Europe is not worth afigge:
A cup of Claret is the only drink,
And thus his praise from Beer to Wine does go,
Even as his Purse in pence does ebb and flow.
EPIG. 2.
Who seeks to please all men each way,
And not himself offend:
He may begin his work to day,
But God knows when he will end.
EPIG. 3. BOREAS.
HAng him base Gul, I Will stab him by the Lord,
If he presume to speak but half a word:
I Will paunch the villain with my Rapiers point,
Or hew him with my Fauchon joint by joint,
Through both his checkes my Ponniard he shall have,
Or mincepie-like I Will mangle out the slave.
Ask who I am, you whoreson fries-gown patch?
Call me before the Constable, or watch?
Cannot a Captain walk in the Kings highway?
Swouns, who de speak to? know ye villains, ha?
You dru^ken pesants, runs your tongs on wheels?
Long you to see your guts about your heels?
Do love me Tom? let go my Rapier then,
Persuade me not from killing nine or ten:
I care no more to kill them in brauado,
Then for to drink a pipe of Trinidado:
My mind to patience never will restore me,
Until their blood do gush in streams before me.
Thus does Sir Lancelot in his drunken stagger,
Swear, curse and rail, threate^, protest, and swagger:
But being next day to sober answer brought,
He Is not the man can breed so base a thought.
EPIG. 4.
WHen Thraso meets his friend, he swears by God,
Unto his chamber he shall welcome be:
Not that he will cloy him there with roast or sod,
Such vulgar diet with Cooks shops agree:
But he will present most kind, exceeding frank,
The best Tobacco that he ever drank.
Such as himself did make a voyage for,
And with his own hands gathered from the ground:
All that which others fetch he does abhor,
His grew upon an Island never found.
Oh rare compound, a dying horse to choke,
Of English fire, and of India smoke.
EPIG. 5.
DIogenes one day through Athens went,
With burning Torch in Sunshine: his intent
Was (as he said) some honest man to find:
For such were rare to meet; or he was blind.
One late, might have don well like light to have got,
That sought his wife, met her, and knew her not:
But stay, cry mercy, she had on her mask,
How could his eyes perform that spying task?
It Is very true, it was hard for him to do
By Sun and Torch, let him take Lant-horne too.
EPIG. 6.
ALas Delfridus keeps his bed God knows;
Which is a sign his worship's very ill:
His grief beyond the grounds of physic goes,
No Doctor that comes near it with his skill:
Yet does he eat drink, talk, and sleep profound,
Seeming to all men's judgments healthful sound.
Then ges^e the cause he thus to bed is drawn,
What, think you so; may such a hap procure it?
Well, faith it is true, his hose is out at pawn,
A breechlesse chance is come he must endure it:
His Hose to Brokers Iayle committed are,
His singular and only velvet pair.
EPIG. 7.
Speak Gentlemen, what shall we do to day*
Drink some brave health upon the dutch carous,
Or shall we to the Globe and see a play,
Or visit Shore-ditch for a bawdy house?
Let Us call for Cards or Dice, and have a game;
To sit thus idle, is both sin and shame.
This speaks sir Reuill, furnished out with fashion,
From dish-crownd hat, unto the shoes square toe,
That haunts a whore-house but for recreation,
Plays but at dice to cunny-catch, or so;
Drinks drunk in kindness, for good fellowship:
Or to the play goes but some purse to nip.
EPIG. 8.
SIr Gall-Iade is a Horseman every day,
His Boots, and Spurs, and legs do never part:
He rides a horse as passing clean away,
As any that goes Tiburne-ward by Cart:
Yet honestly he pays for Hackneys hire:
But hang them Iades, he sells them when they tire.
He lives not like Diogenes on roots,
But proves a mince-pie guest unto his Host:
He scorns to walk in Paul's without his boots;
And scores his diet on the Vitlers post:
And when he knows not where to have his dinner,
He fasts, and swears, a glutton is a sinner.
EPIG. 9. Drude.
THis Gentleman has served long in France,
And is returned filthy* full of French,
In single combat being hurt by chance,
As he was closely foyling at a Wench:
Yet hot alarm's he has endured good store,
But never in like pockie heat before.
He had no sooner drawn and ventred nie her,
Intending only but to have a bout,
When she his ^laske and touch box set on fire;
And till this hour the burning is not out.
Judge* was not valor in this mortal wight,
That with a spit-fire Serpent thus durst fight:
EPIG. 10. In Meritricem.
FAith Gentlemen you move me to offense,
In coming to me with unchaste pretense.
Have I the looks of a lascivious Dame,
That you should deem me fit for wantons game?
I am not she will take lusts sin upon her;
I Will rather die, then dim chaste glorious honor.
Tempt not mine ears, an grace of Christ I mean
To keep my honest reputation clean.
My hearing lets no such lewd sound come in,
My senses loath to surfeit on sweet sin.
Reuerse your mind, that goes from grace astray,
And God forgive you, with my heart I pray.
The gallant notes her words, observes her frowns
Then draws his purse, and lets her view his crowns,
Vowing, that if her kindness grant him pleasure,
She shall be Mistress to command his treasure.
The storms are calmed, the gust is ouer-blowne,
And she replies with; Yours, or not her own.
Desiring him to censure for the best,
It Was but her trick to try if men do jest:
Her love is locked where he may pick the truncke.
Let Singer judge, if this be not a puncke.
EPIG. 11.
GAllus will have no Barber prune his beard,
Yet is his chin clean shaven and vnhear'd:
How comes he trimmed, you may ask me than:
His wenches do it with their warming-pan.
EPIG. 12.
Politic Peter meets his friend a shore,
That came from seas but newly the other day:
And gives him French embracements by the score;
Then follows: Dicke, have made good voyage, say?
But hearing Richards shares be poor and sick:
Peter has haste, and cannot drink with Dicke.
Well, then he meets an other Caueleere,
Whom he salutes about the knees and thighs,
Welcome sweet James, now by the Lord what cheer?
N'ere better Peter, we have got rich prize.
Come, come (says Peter) even a welcome quart,
For by my faith we will drink before we part. Or thus,
Faith we must drink, that is flat, before we part.
EPIG. 13.
SOme do account it golden luck,
They may be widdow-sped, for mucke:
Boys on whose chinnes no down appears,
Marry old Croanes of threescore years:
But they are fools to widows cleave,
Let them take that which Maids do leave.
EPIG. 14.
FIne Phillip comes into the Barbers shop,
Where Is nitty locks must suffer reformation:
The chair and cushion entertain his slop:
The Barber craves to know his worships fashion:
His will is, shaven, for his beard is thin,
It was so lately banished from his chin.
But shauing often will help it, he does hope,
And therefore for the smooth-face cut he calls:
Then fie, these clothes are washed with common soap,
Why do thou use such ordinary balls?
I scorn this common trimming like a Boore:
Yet with his heart he loves a common whore.
EPIG. 15. Signieur Fantastic.
I Scorn to meet an enemy in field,
Except he be a soldier (by this light)
I likewise scorn my reason for to yield;
Yea further, I do well nigh scorn to fight.
Moreover, I do scorn to be so vain,
To draw my Rapier, and put up again.
I ^^ke do scorn to walk without my man,
Yea, and I scorn good morrow and good den:
I also scorn to touch an Alehouse Can;
Thereto I scorn an ordinary queen.
Thus does he scorn, disdainful, proud and grim,
All but the Fool, only he scorns not him.
EPIG. 16.
AMorous Austin spends much balletting,
In riming Letters, and love Sonnetting.
She that loves him, his Ink-horn shall bepaint her,
And with all Venus titles he will acquaint her:
Vowing she is a perfect Angel right,
When she by weight is many grains too light:
Nay, all that do but touch her with the stone,
Will be deposed, that Angel she is none.
How can he prove her for an Angel then,
That proves her self a devil, tempting men,
And draws many to the fiery pit,
Where they are burned for their entering it?
I know no cause wherefore he terms her so,
Unless he means, she is one of them below,
Where Lucifer chief Prince does domineere:
If she be such, then (good my hearts) stand clear,
Come not within the compass of her flight,
For such as do, are haunted with a spright.
This Angel is not noted by her wings,
But by her tail, all full of pricks and stings.
And know this lust-blind Louer's vain is led,
To praise his devil in an Angels sted.
EPIG. 17.
WHen Ca^alero Rake hell is to rise
Out of his bed, he capers light and heddy:
Then wounds he swears, you arant whore he cries,
Why what is the cause that breakfast is not reddy?
Can men feed like Camelions on the air?
This is the manner of his morning prayer.
Well, he swears on until his breakfast comes;
And then with teeth he falls to work apace,
Leaving his boy a banquet all of crummes.
Dispatch you Rogue: my Rapier: that is his grace.
So forth he walks, his stomach must go shift,
To dine and sup abroad, by deed of gift.
EPIG. 18.
AWofull exclamation late I heard,
Wherewith Tobacco takers may be feared.
One at the point with pipe and leaf to part,
Did vow Tobacco worse then Deaths black dart:
And proved it thus: you know (quoth he) my frinds
Death only stabbes the heart, and so life ends:
But this same poison, steeped India weed,
In head, heart, lungs, does soote and cobwebs breed.
With that he gasp'd, and breathed out such a smoke.
That all the standers by were like to choke.
EPIG. 19.
CA^^s would gladly drink, but wants his purse,
Nay, wants money, which is ten times worse
For as he vows himself, he has not seen
In three days space the picture of the Queen.
Yet if he meet a friend near Tavern sign,
Straight he entreats him take a pint of wine:
For he will give it, that he will; no nay.
What will he give? the other leave to pay.
He calls: Boy, fill us the the other quart;
I will bestow it even with all my heart.
Then does he diue into his slops profound,
Where not a poor Port cullice can be found.
Mean while his friend discharges all the wine:
Stay, stay (quoth he) or well, next shall be mine.
EPIG. 20.
FRancke in name, and Francke by nature,
Francis is a most kind creature:
Her self has suffered many a fall,
In striving how to pleasure all.
EPIG. 21.
SOto can prove, such as are drunk by noone,
Are long lived men: the pox he can as soon.
Nay, hear his reason ere you do condemn,
And if you find it foolish, hiss and hem.
He says; Good blood is even the life of man:
I grant him that (say you) well, go-to than:
More drink, the more good blood. O that's a lie:
The more you drink, the sooner drunk, say I.
Now he protests, you do him mighty wrong;
Swearing a man in drink, is three men strong:
And he will pawn his head against a penny,
One right mad-drunk, will brawle and fight with any.
Well, you reply; that argument is weak,
How can a drunkard brawle, that cannot speak?
Or how can he use weapon in his hand,
Which cannot guide his feet to go or stand?
Hark what an oath the drunken slave does swear
He is a man by that, a man may hear:
And when you see him stagger, reele, and wink,
He is a man and more; I by this drink.
EPIG. 22.
WHen signieur Sack and Sugar drink-drown'd reeles,
He vows to hew the spurs from's fellows heels;
When calling for a quart of Charnico,
Into a loving league they present grow:
Then instantly upon a cup or twain,
Out Poniards goes, and to the stab again.
Friends upon that, they drink, and so embrace:
Straight bandy daggers at each others face.
This is the humor of a mad-drunke fool,
In Tavern pots that keeps his Fencing-schoole.
EPIG. 23.
COrnutus was exceeding sick and ill,
Paind as it seemed chiefly in his head:
He called his friends, meaning to make his will;
Who found him drunk, with hose and shoes abed.
To whom he said. Oh good my Masters see,
Drink with his darthath all bestabbed me.
I here bequeath, if I do chance to die,
To you kind friends, and boon companions all,
A pound of good Tobacco, sweet and drio,
To drink amongst you at my E^^erall:
Besides, a barrel of the best strong Beer,
And Pickle-herrings, for to domineere.
EPIG. 24.
WE men, in many faults abound;
But two in women can be found:
The worst that from their sex proceeds,
Is naught in words, and naught in deeds.
EPIG. 25.
BIdme go sleep? I scorn it with my heels,
I know my self as good a man as thee.
Let go mine arm I say, lead him that reeles;
I am a right good fellow: do thou see?
I know what longs to drinking; and I can
Abuse my self as well as any man.
I care no more for twenty hundred pound;
(Before the Lord) then for a very straw:
I Will fight with any he above the ground;
Tut, tell not me what is what, I know the law.
Rapier and dagger: hey, a kingly fight;
I Will now try falls with any, by this light.
EPIG. 26.
BE hold, a most accomplished Caualeere,
That the worlds Ape of fashions does appear,
Walking (...) his humors to disclose,
In the French Doublet, and the Germane hose:
The Muffes, Cloak, Spanish Hat, Tolledo blade
Italian russe, a Shoe right Flemish made.
Like Lord of mis-rule, where he comes heel revel
And ^^ for w^g^is, with the lying'st devil.
EPIG. 27.
Ask Humors what a Feather he does wear.
It is his humor (by the Lord) heel swear.
Or what he does with such a horse-taile lock:
Or why upon a whore he spends his stock.
He has a (...) does determine so
Why in the stop-thro^^ fashion does he go,
With scarf about his neck, ^at without band?
It is his humor^ sweet Sir understand.
What cause his p^^s^ is so extreme distressed,
That often times ^^ scarcely pe^^^y blessed?
Only a humor. If you question why?
His tongue is nere unfurnished with a lie.
It is his humor too he does protest.
Or why with Sergants he is so oppressed,
That like to ghosts they haunt him e'rie day?
A rascal humor does not love to pay.
Object, why boots and spurs are still in season?
His humor answers; Humor is his reason.
If you perceive his wits in wetting shrunk.
It comes of a humor to be drunk.
When you be hold his looks pale, thin, and poor,
The Occasion is, his humor, and a whore.
And every thing that he does undertake,
It is a vain, for senseless Humors sake.
EPIG. 28.
THree highway standers having cros-lesse curse,
did greet my frind with, Sir give us your purse
Though he were true man, they agreed in one,
For purse and coin betwixt them four was none.
EPIG. 29.
A Gentlewoman of the dealing trade,
Procured her own sweet picture to be made:
Which being done, she from her word did slip,
And would not pay full due for workmanship.
The Painter swore, she nere should have it so:
She bad him keep it, and away did go.
He chollcricke, and mighty discontent,
Straight took his Pensill, and to work he went:
Making the dog she held, a grim cats face,
And hung it in his shop, to her disgrace.
some of her friends that saw it, to her went,
In jesting manner, asking what she meant
To have her picture hang where gazers swarm,
Holding a filthy cat within her arm?
She in a shameful heat in haste did hie,
The Painter to content and satisfy:
Right glad to give a French Crown for his pain,
To turn her Cat into a Dog again.
EPIG. 30.
When Tarlton clown'd it in a pleasant vain,
And with conceits did good opinions gain slop:
Upon the stage, his merry humors shop,
Clownes knew the Clown by his great clownish
But now they are gulld; for present fashion says,
Dicke Tarletons part, Gentlemen's breeches plays:
In every street where any Gallant goes,
The swagg'ring slop, is Tarltons clownish hose.
EPIG. 31. To Lutius.
ONe newly practiced in Astronomy,
That never dealt in weather-wit before;
Would scrape (for sooth) acquaintance of the sky,
And by his Art, go knock at heaven door.
Mean while a scholar in his study slips,
And taught his wife skill in the Moons eclips.
Next night that friend persuades him walk alone
Into the field, to gather stars that fell,
To mix them with Philosophers rare stone,
That begets gold: he likt the motion well:
And went to watch, where stars dropped very thin,
But rain so showered, it wet his foole-case skin.
EPIG. 32.
What gallant's that whose oaths fly through mine ears?
How like a lord of Plutoes court he swears:
How brave in such a bawdy house he fought;
How rich his empty purse is outside wrought;
How dutchman-like he swallows down his drink,
How sweet he takes Tobacco till he stink:
How lofty sprited he disdaines a Boore,
How faithful hearted he is to a ()
How cock: tail proud he does himself advance,
How rare his spurs doering the morris-dance.
Now I protest by Mistress Susans fan.
He and his boy, will make a propper man.
EPIG. 33.
LAugh good my Masters if you can intend it;
For yonder comes a fool that will defend it.
Saw you a verier Ass in all your life,
That makes himself a pack-horse to his wife?
I would his nose where I could with were warm*
For carrying Pearl so pretty vnder's arm,
Pearl, his wives dog, a pretty sweet-fac'd curre,
That barks a nights at the least fart does stir;
Is now not well, his cold is scarcely broke,
Therefore good husband wrap him in your cloak:
And sweet-hart, prithee help me to my mask;
Hold Peatle but tender, for he Has the saske:
Here, take muffe, and do you here good man,
Now give me Pearl, and carry you my fan.
Alack poor Pearl, the wretch is full of pain,
Husband take Pearl, give me my fan again:
See how he quakes; faith I am like to weep:
Come to me pearl, my scarf good husband keep
To be with me I know my Puppy loves;
Why Pearl I say: Husband, take up my gloves.
Thus goodman Idiot thinks himself an Earl,
That he can please his wife, and carry Pearl:
But others judge his state to be no higher:
Then a dogs yeoman, or some pippin squier.
EPIG. 34.
What Is he that sits and takes a nap,
Faced like the North wind of a map:
And sleeping, to the wind does nod?
It Is Bacchus coosen, belly-god.
EPIG. 35.
SEuerus is extreme in eloquence,
In perfumed words, plunged over head and ears,
He does create rare phrase, but rarer sense,
Fragments of Latin all about he bears.
Unto his Seruing-man, alias his boy,
He vtters speech exceeding quaint and coy.
Deminitiue, and my defective slave,
Reach my corpse couerture immediately:
My pleasures pleasure is the same to have,
TO insconce my person from frigiditie.
His man believes all is Welsh his Master spoke,
Till he railes English; Rogue, go fetch my cloak.
EPIG. 36.
WHy should the Mercers trade a satin suit,
With Cooks grease be so wickedly polute?
The reason is, the scandal and defame
Grew, that a greasy slouen wore the same.
EPIG. 37.
AN honest Vicker, and a kind consort,
That to the Alehouse friendly would resort,
To have a game at Tables now and than,
Or drink his pot as soon as any man:
As fair a gamster, and as free from braull,
As cuer man shall need to play withal:
Because his Hostess pledged him not carouse,
Rashly in choler did for swear her house.
Taking the glass, this was the oath he swore,
Now by this drink, I Will nere come hither more*
But mightily his Hostess did repent,
For all her guests to the next Alehouse went,
Following their Vickers steps in every thing.
He led the parish even in a string.
At length his ancient Hostess did complain
She was undone, unless he came again:
Desiring certain friends others and his,
To use a policy, which should be this:
Because with coming he should not for swear him;
To save his oath, they on their backs might bear ^him.
Of this good course the Vicker well did think,
And so they always carried him to drink.
FINIS.
Your Scene is done, depart you Epigrammes:
Enter Goat-footed Satyrs, but like Rams:
Come ^^^bly forth; Why stand you on delay?
O-ho, the Music taning makes you stay.
Well, friske it out nimbly: you slaves begin,
For now me thinks the Fiddlers bands are in.
SATYRS.
SATYR. 1.
Who have we here? be hold him and be mute;
Some mighty man I Will warrant by his suit.
If all the Mercers in Cheap Side show such,
I Will give them leave to give me twice as much.
I think the stuff is namelesse he does wear:
But what so ere it be, it is huge gear:
Mark but his gate, and give him then his due.
Some swaggering fellow I may say to you.
It seems Ambition in his big looks shroudes;
Some Centaure sure, begotten of the clouds.
Now a shame take the buzard; is it he?
I know the ruffian, now his face I see:
On a more gull the Sun did never shine:
How with a vengeance comes the fool so fine:
Some Noblemans cast suit is fallen unto him;
For buying Hose and Doublet would undo him.
But wot you now whither the buzard walks?
I, into Paul's forsooth, and there he talks
Of foreign tumults, vttring his advice,
And proving wars even like a game at dice:
For this (says he) as every gamster knows,
Where one side winnes, the other side must lose.
Next speech he vttors, is his stomachs care,
Which ordinaric yields the cheapest fare:
Or if his purse be out of tune to pay,
Then he remembers it is a fasting day:
And then he talks much against excess,
Swearing all other Nations eat far less
Then Englishmen: experience you may get
In France and Spain: where he was never yet.
With a score of figs, and half a pint of wine,
Some four or five will very hugely dine.
Me thinks this tale is very huge in sound,
That half a pint should serve five to drink round,
And twenty figs could feed them full and fat:
But travelers may lie? who knows not that?
Then why not he that trauells in conceit
From east to west, when he can get no meat?
His journey is in Paul's in the back Isles,
where is stomach counts each pace a hundred miles
A tedious thing, though chance will have it such*
To travel so long baitlesse, sure it is much.
Some other time, stumbling on wealthy chu^^es
Worthy gulling: then he swaggers all in hu^^es,
And tells them of a prize he was at taking,
will be the ship-boyes childrens children making:
And that a mouse could find no room in hold,
It was so pestered all with pearl and gold:
Vowing to pawn his head, if it were tried,
They had more Rubies then would paue Cheapside
A thousand other gross and odious lies
He dares auou^h, to blind dull Judgments eyes:
Not caring what he speak, or what he swear,
So he gain credit at his hearers care.
Sometimes into the Royal Exchange he will drop,
Clad in the ruins of a Brokers shop:
And there his tongue runs byas on affairs,
No talk but of commodities and wares*
And what great wealth he looks for ^rie wind,
From God knows where, the place is hard to find.
If news be harkened for, then he preuailes,
Setting his min^ a work to coin false tales.
His tongs-end is be^ipt with forged chat,
Vt^ing rare lies to be admired at:
Heel tell you of a tree that he does know,
Upon the which Rapiers and Daggers grow,
As good as Fleetstreet has in any shop,
Which being ripe, down into scabbards drop.
He has a very piece of that same chair,
In which Caesar was stabbed: Is it not rare?
He with his feet upon the stones did tread,
That Satan brought, and bad Christ make the^ bread.
His wondrous trauells challenge such renown,
That Sir John Maundiuell is quite put down.
Men without heads, and Pigmies hand-bredth hie,
Those with one leg that on their backs do lie,
And do the weathers injury disdain,
Making their legs a penthouse for the rain,
Are tut, and tush: not any thing et all.
His knowledge knows, what no man's notice shall
This is a mate unmeet for every groom,
And where he comes, peace, give his lying room.
He saw a Hollander* in Middleborow,
As he was s^ashing of a brown laofe through,
Whereto the have of hunger had inclined him,
Cut himself through, and two that stood behind him.
Besides, he saw a fellow put to death,
Could drink a whole Beer barrel at a breath.
Oh this is he that will say any thing,
That to himself will any profit bring.
Against whosoere he does speak he cares not:
For what is it that such a villain dares not?
And though in conscience he does not deny,
The All-commander says, Thou shall not lie.
Yet he will answer, (careless of souls state)
Truth-telling is a thing obtains hate.
SATYR. 2.
A Man may tell his friend his fault in kindness:
To wink at folly, is a foolish blindness.
God save you Sir; saluteth with a grace,
One he could wish never to see his face.
But does not he use mere dissimulation,
That Is inside hate, and outside salutation?
Yes as I take it, yet his answer says,
Fashions and customs use it now adays.
A Gentleman perhaps may chance to meet
His Liuing-griper face to face in street:
And though his looks are odious unto sight,
Yet will he do him the French conges right,
And in his heart wish him as low as hell,
When in his words he is glad to see him well.
Then being thus, a man may soon suppose,
There is, God save you Sir, sometimes twixt foes.
Oh sir* why that is as true as you are here,
With one example I will make it clear:
And far to fetch the same I will not go,
But into Houns-ditch to the Brokers row:
Or any place where that trade does remain,
Whether at Holborne Conduit, or Long lane:
If thither you vouchsafe to turn your eye,
And see the pawnes that under forfaitlye,
Which are forth coming sir, and safe enough,
Says goodman Broker, in his new print russe:
He will notstand too strictly on a day,
Encouraging the party to delay,
With all good words the kindest may be spoke,
He turns the Gentleman out of his cloak:
And yet between them both at every meeting,
God save you Sir, is their familiar greeting.
This is much kindness sure, I pray commend him,
With great good words he highly does defend him:
It is a favor at a pinch indeed,
A pinching friendship, and a pinching deed.
The slave may wear his suites of satin so,
And like a man of reputation go,
When all he has in house, or on his back,
It is his own by forfaitures shipwreck.
See you the brooch that long in's hat has bin?
It may be there, it cost him not a pin:
His sundry sorts of diverse men's attire,
He wears them cheap, even at his own desire.
Shame overtake the pessant for his pain,
That he should pray on losses, to his gain:
In drawing wardrops under his subjection,
Being a knave in manners and complexion:
Iumpe like to Usury, his nearest kin,
That wears a money bag under his chin:
A bunch that does resemble such a shape,
And haired like a Parris-garden Ape,
Foaming about the chaps like some wild Boore*
As swart and tawnie as an Indian Moore:
With narrow brow, and Squirrill eyes, he showe^*
His faces chiefest ornament is nose,
Full furnished with many a Clarret stain,
As large as any Codpiece of a Dane.
Embossed curious, every eye does judge:
His Iacket faced with Moath-eaten Budge:
To which a pair of satin sleeves he wears,
Wherein two pound of grease about he bears.
His spectacles do in a copper case,
Hang dangling about his pissing place:
His breeches and his hose, and all the rest,
Are suitable: his gown (I mean his hest)
Is full of threeds, intitl'd right thread bare;
But wool thereon is wondrous scant and rare:
The welting has him in no charges stood,
Being the ruins of a cast French-hood.
Excess is sinful, and he does defy it,
A sparing wherson in attire and diet,
Only excess is lawful in his chest,
For there he makes a golden Angels nest;
And vows no farther to be found a lender,
Then that most precious metal does engender:
Begetting daily more and more increase:
His moneys slave till wretched life surcease.
This is the Jew alyed very near
Unto the Broker: for they both do bear
Undoubted testimonies of their kin:
A brace of Rascals in a league of sin.
Two filthy Curres that will on no man fawn,
Before they taste the sweetness of his pawn.
And then the slaves will be as kind forsooth,
Not as Kind-hart, in drawing out a tooth:
For he does ease the patient of his pain,
But they disease the borrower of his gain.
Yet neither of them use extremity,
They can be villains even of charity.
To lend our Brother it is meet and fit,
Give him rostmeate and beat him with the spit
Usury sure is requisite and good,
And so is Brokeage, rightly understood:
But soft a little, what is he says so?
One of the twain (upon my life) I know.
SATYR. 3.
OH, let the Gentlewoman have the wall,
I know her well, it is Mistress, what do you call.
It would be she both by her Mask and Fan:
And yet it should not, by her seruing-man;
For if mine eyes do not mistake the fool,
He is the Usher of some Dancing Schole:
The reason why I do him such suppose,
Is this; Me thinks he daunceth as he goes.
An active fellow, though he be but pore,
Either to vault upon a horse, or etc.
See you the huge bum Dagger at his back,
To which no Hilt nor Iron he does lack,
Oh with that blade he kepees the queanes in awe
Bravely be hacked, like a two-hand Saw,
Stamps on the ground, and by teth both his thoms
Unless he be comaunder where he comes
You damned where is, where are you? quick come here,
Dry this Tobacco, Fill a dosen of beer:
Will you be brife? or long you to be banged?
Hold take this Match, go ligh it and be hanged.
Where stay these whores when Gent. do call?
Here Is no attendaunce (by the Lord) at all.
Then down the stairs the pots in rage he throws
And in a damned vain of swearing grows:
For he will challinge any under heaven,
To swear with him, and give him six at seven.
Oh, he is an accomplished Gentleman,
And many rare conceited knackes he can:
Which yield to him a greater store of gain,
Then iuggling Kings, hey Pass ledger demaine:
His witt's his living: one of quaint device,
For Bowling-allies. Cockpits, Cards, or Dice,
To those exployts he ever stands prepared:
A Villain excellent at a Bum card.
The Knave of Clubbes he any time can burn,
And find him in his bosom, for his turn.
Tut, he has Cards for any kind of game,
Primero, Saunt, or what soever name:
Make him but dealer, all his fellows swears
If you do find good dealing, take his ears.
But come to Dice: why that's his only trade,
Michell Mum-chaunce his own invention made.
He has a stock whereon his living stays,
And they are ^ullams and Bardquarter-trayes:
His Langrets, with his Hie men, and his low,
Are ready what his pleasure is to throw.
His stopped Dice with Quicksilver never miss.
He calls for come on five, and there it is:
Or else heel have it with five and a reach,
Although it cost his neck the Halter streach.
Besides all this same kind of cheating art,
The Gentleman has some good other part,
well seen in Magic and Astrology,
Flinging a figuer woundrous handsomely:
Which if it does not miss, it sure does hit.
Of troth the man has great store of small wit:
And note him whethersoeuer he goes,
His book of Characters is in his hose.
His dinner he will not persume to take,
Ere he ask counsel of Almanacke.
Heel find if one prove false unto his wife,
Only with Ox blood and a rustie knife.
He can transform himself unto an Ass,
Show you the Devil in a Crystal glass:
The Devil say you? why I, is that such wonder:
Being consortes, they will not be a sunder.
Alcumie in his brains so sure does settle,
He can make gold of any copper ket'le;
With in a three weeks space, or such a thing,
Riches upon the whole world he could bring,
But in his one purse one shall hardly spy it,
Witness his Hostess, for a twelue-months diet:
Who would be glad of gold or silver neither.
But swears by chalk, and post, she can get neither.
More, he will teach any to gain there love,
As thus (says he) Take me a turtle Dove,
And in an Oven let her lie and bake
So dry that you may powder of her make:
Which being put into a cup of wine,
The wench that drinks it will to love inclinee
And shall not sleep in quiet in her bed
Till she be eased of her maidenhead.
This is p^obatum, and it has bin tried,
Or else the Cunning-man cunningly lide:
It may be so, a lie is not so strange,
Perhaps he spoke it when the Moon did change?
And thereupon no doubt the occasion sprung,
Unconstant Luna ouer-rul'd his tongue.
Astronomers that traffic with the sky,
By common censure sometime meet the lie:
Although indeed their blame is not so much.
When Stars and Planets fail, and keep not tutch,
And so this fellow with his large profession,
That ends his trial in a fair digression:
Philosophers be queathed him their stone,
To make gold with, yet can his purse hold none.
SATYR. 4.
MEllfluuius sweet Rose-watred eloquence,
Thou that have hunted Barbarism hence,
And taught the Goodman C^bbin at his Plow,
To be as eloquent as Tullie now:
Who nominates his bread and cheese a name,
(That does untruss the nature of the same)
His stomach stayer. How dee like the phrase?
Are Plough-men simple fellows nowadaies?
Not so my Masters: what means Singer then
And Pope the Clown, to speak so Boorish, when
They counterfeit the Clownes upon the Stage?
Since Country fellows grow in this same age
To be so quaint in their new printed speech,
That cloth will now compare with Velvet breech
Let him discourse even where and when he dare,
Talk nere so Inkhorne, learnedly, and rare,
Swear, Cloth breech is a pessant (by the Lord)
Threaten to draw his (wrath-venger) his sword:
Tush, Cloth-breech does deride him with a laugh,
And lets him see Bone-baster, that's his staff:
Then tells him, brother, friend, or so forth, hear ye,
It Is not your Knitting-needle makes me fear ye.
If to ascension you are so declinde,
I have a restitution in my mind:
For though your beard do stand so fine mustated,
Perhaps your nose may be transfisticated.
Man, I dare challenge thee to throw the sledge,
To iumpe or leap over a ditch or hedge,
To wrestle, play at stool ball, or to run,
To pitch the bar, or to shoot off a gunne.
To play at loggets, nine-holes, or ten pinnes,
To try it out at foote-ball by the shinnes:
At tichtacke, Irish, noddy, maw, and ruff,
At hot-cockles, leap-frog, or blindman-buffe,
To drink half pots, or deal at the whole can,
To play at base, or pen and ink-horne, sir Than:
To dance the morris, play at barley break,
At all exploits a man can think or speak,
At shoue-groat, venture point, or cross and pile,
At beshrew him that's last at yonder style,
At leaping ore a midsommer bone-fier,
Or at the drawing Dun out of the myer:
At any of these, or all these presently,
Wag but your finger, I am for you, I.
I scorn (that am a youngster of our town)
To let a Bow-bell cockney put me down.
This is a gallant far beyond a gull,
For very valor fills his pockets full.
wit showers upon him wisdoms rain in plenty,
For heel be hanged, if any man find twenty
In all their parish, whatsoere they be,
Can show a head so pollitike as he.
It was his fathers luck of late to die
Vntestate; he about the Legacy
To London came, inquiring all about,
How he might find a Ciuil-villaine out:
Being unto a Ciuill-lawyer sent,
Pray sit (quoth he) ase you the man I meant,
That have a certain kind of occupation,
About dead men that leave things out of fashion:
Death has done that which t'answer he is not able
My father he is dyed destable:
I being his eldest heir, he did prefer
Me sir, to be his executioner:
And very briefly my request to finish,
Pray how may I by law, his goods diminish:
Was this a Clown? tell true, or was a none?
You make fat Clownes, if such as he be one:
A man may swear, if he were urged to it,
Foolisher fellows, have not so much wit.
Oh such as he, are even the only men,
Loue-letters in a Milke-maides praise to pen:
Lines that will work the curftest sullen shrow,
To love a man whether she will or no.
Being most wondrous patheticall,
To make Sisse out a cry in love withal:
He scorns that master schoolmaister should think
He wants his aid in half a pen of incke:
All that he does, it comes every whit.
From Natures dry-fat, his own mother wit. Or thus:
Thou honey suckle of the hawthorne hedge,
Vouchsafe in Cupids cup my heart to pledge:
My hearts dear blood sweet Sisse, is thy carouse
Worth all the Ale in gammer Gubbins house:
I say no more, affairs call me away,
My fathers horse for prouender does stay.
Be thou the Lady Cressit-light to me,
Sir Trollololle I will prove to thee.
Written in haste: farewell my Cowslippe sweet,
Pray lets a Sunday at the Alehouse meet.
SATYR. 5.
It Is a bad world, the common speech does go,
And he complains that helps to make it so:
Yet every man th'imputed crime would shun,
Hypocrisy with a fine thread is spunne.
Each strives to show the very best in seeming,
Honest enough, if honest in esteeming,
Praise waits upon him now with much renown,
That wraps up vices under Virtues gown:
Commending with good words religious deeds,
To help the poor, supply our neighbors needs:
Do no man wrong, give every man his own,
Be friend to all, and enemy to none,
Have charity, avoid contentious strife.
Often he speaks thus, that ^ere did good in's life.
Division has an ore in every boat,
In's neighbors eye he quickly spies a ^oate:
But the great beam that's noted in his own,
He lets remain, and never thinks thereon.
Some do report he bears about a sack,
Half hanging forwards, half behind at's back,
And* his own faults, (quite out of sight and mind)
He casts into the part that hangs behind:
But other men's he puts in before,
And into them he looks evermore.
Contempt comes very near to the others vain,
He hates all good deserts with proud disdain.
Rashness is his continual walking mate,
Costly appareld, lofty in his gate:
Up to the ears in double ruffes and starch,
God bless your ^y^ight when you see him march
Statutes and laws, he dare presume to break,
Against superiors cares not what he speak.
It is his humors recreation fits,
To beat Constables, and resist all writs:
Swearing, the ripest wits are childish young,
Unless they gain instructions from his tongue.
There Is nothing done amongst the very best,
But he will deride it with some bitter jest.
It Is meat and drink unto him always, when
He may be censuring of other men.
If a man do but toward a Tavern look,
He is a drunkard he will swear on a book:
Or if one part a fray of good intention,
He is a quarreller, and loves dissension.
Those that with silence vain discourses break*
Are proud fantastickes, that disdain to speak.
Such as speak soberly with wisdoms leisure,
Are fools, that in affected speech take pleasure.
If he hear any that reproves vice,
He says, there is none but hypocrites so nice.
No honest woman that can pass along,
But must endure some scandal from his tongue.
She deals cross blows her husband never feels,
This Gentlewoman wears capering heels.
There minces Mall, to see what youth will like her,
Her eyes do bear her witness she is a striker.
Wonders, a wench new dipped in beauties blaze*
She is a maid, as maids go nowadaies.
And thus Contempt makes choysest recreation,
In holding every one in detestation:
His common gate is of the ietting size,
He has a pair ofeuer-staring eyes,
And looks a man so hungry in the face,
As he would eat him up, and nere say grace.
A little low, crowned hat he always wears,
And fore-horse like therein a feather bears:
Goodly curld locks, but surely it is great pity,
For want of kembing* they are beastly nitty.
His doublet is a cut cast satin one,
He scorns to buy new now, that nere bought none
Spotted in diverse places with pure fat:
Known for a right tall trencher-man by that.
His breeches that came to him by befrending,
Are desperate like himself, and quite past mending
He takes a common course to go untrust,
Except his shirt's a washing; then he must
Go woollward for the time: he scorns it he,
That worth two shirts his Laundresse should him see.
The weapons that his humors do afford,
Is bum-dagger, and basket-hilted swoard:
And these in every Bawdy house are drawn
Twice in a day, unless they be at pawn.
If any fall together by the ears,
To field cries he, why zownes (to field) he swears
Show your selves men: hey, slash it out with blows
Let one make tothers gut garter his hose:
Make steel and iron vmpires to the fray,
You shall have me go with, to see fair play*
Let me alone, for I will have a care
To see that one do kill the other fair,
This is Contempt, that's every ones disdainer,
The strife pursuer, and the peace refrainer:
Hates thunderbolt, damned: Murders larum-bell,
A near dear kinsman to the devil of hell:
And he whom Satan to his humor brings,
Is the only man for all detested things.
SATYR. 6.
TOm's no good fellow, nor no honest man:
Hang him, he would not pledge Raph half a can:
But if a friend may speak as he does think,
Will is a right good fellow by this drink.
Oh William, William, thou art as kind a youth
As ever I was drunk with, that's the truth.
Tom is no more like thee then chalk's like cheese,
To pledge a health, o^ to drink vp-se freese:
Fill him his beaker, he will never flinch,
To give a full quart pot the empty pinch.
He Will look unto your water well enough,
And has an eye that no man leaves a snuff:
A pox of peece-meale drinking (William says)
Play it away, we will have no stops and stays:
Blown drink is odious, what man can digest it?
No faithful drunkard but he does detest it.
I hate half this; out with it, and an end,
He is a buzard will notpledge his friend,
But stands as though his drinks malt-sacke were closed
With, Here'st'yee Sir Against you are disposed?
How say my friend, and may I be so bold?
Blowing on's beer like broth, to make it cold,
Keeping the full glass till it stand and sower
Drinking but half a mile an hour:
Unworthy to make one, or gain a place,
Where boon companions gage the pots apace.
A man's a man, and therewithal an end,
Good fellowship was bred and borne to spend:
No man ere saw a pound of sorrow yet,
Could be alowd to pay an ounce of debt.
We may be here to day, and gone to morrow,
Call me for six pots more, come on, hang sorrow,
Tut, lack an other day, why it is all one,
When we are dead, then all the world is gone.
Begin to me good Ned, what, have gone right?
Is it the same that tickled me last night?
We gave the Brewers diet-drinke a wipe,
Brave Malt-Tobacco in a quart pot pipe:
It netled me, and did my brains inspire:
I have forsworn your drinking smoke and fire:
Out upon Cane and leaf Tobacco smell,
Devils take home your drink, keep it in hell.
Carowse in Canon Trinidado smoke,
Drink healths to one an other till you choke,
And let the Indians pledge you till they sweat,
Give me the element that drowneth heat:
Strong sodden water is a virtuous thing,
It makes one swear and swagger like a King,
And has more hidden virtue then you think:
For I Will maintain, good liquor's meat and drink:
Nay, I Will go further with you, for in troth
It is as good as meat, and drink, and cloth:
For he that is in Malt-mans Hall inrolde,
Cares not a point for hunger nor for cold.
If he be cold, he drinks till he sweat,
If he be hot, he drinks to lay the heat:
So that how ere it be, cold or hot,
To precious use he does apply the pot:
And will approve it phisically sound,
If it be drunk upon the Danish round,
Or taken with a pickle-herring or two,
As Flemmings at Saint Katherines use to do:
Which fish has virtue, eaten salt and raw,
To pull drink to it, even as leate does straw,
Oh it is a very whetstone to the brain,
A March beer shewer puts down A prill rain;
It makes a man active to leap and spring,
To dance and vault, to carowle and to sing.
For all exploits it does a man enable,
T'outleape men's heads, and caper ore the table:
To burn sack with a candle till he reeles,
And then to trip up his companions heels:
To sing like the great Organ-pipe in Poules,
And censure all men under his controules:
Against all comers ready to maintain,
That deepest wit is in a drunken brain.
I marry is it, that it is he knows it,
And by this drink, at all times will depose it.
He says, that day is to a minute shrunk,
In which he makes not some good fellow drunk:
As for nine worthies on his Hosts wall,
He knows three worthy drunkards pass them all
The first of them in many a Tavern tried,
At last subdued by Aquauitae, did.
His second Worthiness date was brought to fine,
Feasting with Oysters and brave Renish wine.
The third, whom diverse Dutch men held full dear
Was stabbed by pickeld herrings and strong beer:
Well, happy is the man does rightly know,
The virtue of three cups of Charnico,
Being taken fasting, the only cure for fleam,
It works wonders on the brain, extreme
A pottle of wine at morning, or at night,
Drunk with an apple, is employed right,
To rince the Liner, and to purify
A dead sick heart from all infirmity.
SATYR. 7
Lived the Philosopher Heraclitus
In Troynouant, as once in Ephesus.
Were not Democrites live, s-date full done,
But he with us an's glass some sand to run?
How would the first, dry-weepe his watery eyes?
And the others laughter echo through the skies?
For while they in this world were resident,
Heraclitus for virtues banishment,
Performed a pensive tear complaining part:
Democrites, he laughed even from his heart,
Spending his time in a continual jest,
To see base Vice so highly in request.
Weep Virtues want, and give sad sighs to boot:
Vice rides on horsedacke, Virtue goes on foot:
Yet laugh again as fast on the others side,
To see so vile a scumme preferred to ride.
But what wilt help to figh on flinty sin?
It Will not be mollifide as it has bin:
It Is far more highly favored ^hen before,
Sin's no beggar standing at the door,
That by his patches does his want dispute,
But a right welcome Sir, for's costly suit:
And mask about with such an ostentation:
World says; Vice-haters loves no recreation.
You shall have smooth-faced neat dissimulation,
A true What lack ye? by his occupation:
Will (I in truth, yes truly) show you ware,
All London cannot with his stuff compare:
Nay, if you match it (go from him to any)
Take his for nothing, pay him not a penny.
At this, my simple honest Countryman
Takes Truth and Truly for a Puritan;
And dares in's conscience swear he loves no lying
But that they deal for, he gives him the buying.
To let him have a pe^^worth he is willing,
Yet for a groates worth makes him pay a shilling;
Gives goodman Trollop one thing for an other,
And says, he will use him as he were his brother:
But while his ears with brothers terms he feeds,
He proves but a Coosen in his deeds:
Brotherhood once in kindred bore the sway,
But that dates out, and Coosnage has the day.
The foregone ages that are spent and done,
The old time past, that calls time present, Son;
^aw better years, and more plain meaning hours
Then presently, or future following ours.
The world is naught, and now upon the ending,
Grows worse and worse, and fardest off from mending
Seven grand devils bred and borne in hell,
Are graced like Monarchs on the earth to dwell:
where they command the worlds whole globy round
Leaving poor Virtuous life no dwelling ground.
Pride is the first, and he began with Eve,
Whose cognizance still's worn on women's sleeue
He fits the humors of them in their kind,
With every month, new liueries to their mind:
A buske, a mask, a fan, a monstrous ruff,
A boulster for their buttockes, and such stuff:
More light and toyish then the wind blown chafe
As though they meant to make the devil laffe.
The next that marches is the root of evil,
Called Covetousness, a greedy rascal devil:
To fill old iron barred chests, he rakes,
great rents for little Cottages he takes:
Hordeth up corn, in hope to have a year,
Fit for hit cut-thro at humor to sell desre.
Then is there a notorious hawdy feend,
Named Lech^rie, who all his time does spend,
In two wheeld Coach, and basin occupation
Making a vaulting house his recreation,
Unto his door in summer howerly marches,
And every Term look for him in the Arches.
Enuie's the fourth, a Devil dogged sprighted;
In others harms he chiefly is delighted:
His heart against all charity is steeld,
His frowns are all challenges to the field:
Though nothing cross him, yet he murmers ever
He langhes at somemans loss, or else laughs never.
Wrath is the next, that swaggers, fights, and swears,
In Fleetstreete bravely at if by the ears:
Parboild in rage, pepperd in heat ofire,
Hot liuerd, and as chollericke as fire.
Vitlers and Sergants are beholden to him,
Till halter destenie, of life undo him.
Six lubberly got belled devil great,
Is Gluttony, swollen with excess of meat:
His belliship contains the insatiate gut,
Paunch'd liquor proof, an'twere a Malmsie-but,
Dulled with drink: this is his usual phraise,
Yet one quart, and a morsel more, he says.
The last is Sloth, a lazy devilish cur,
So trust in Idleness, he scarce can stur:
Lumpish and heavy thoughts, of Satan's giving,
That rather begs, then labors for his living.
These seven are feends come forth of Hells dark
On earth seducing souls, misguiding men.
FINIS.

