A PRESIDENT for a Prince. Wherein is to be seen by the testimony of ancient
Writers, the duty of Kings, Princes, and Governors. Collected and gathered
by Anthony Russhe, Doctor of Divinity.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed.

Sapient. 6. Ad vos nunc (O Reges) sunt hij sermones mei, vt discatis
sapientiam, and non excidatis.

Unto you now (O ye Kings) do I speak, that ye may learn wisdom, and not go
amysse.

Quae breuiter paruo docuit pia Musa libello,
Consilio formant Principis ingenium.
Non tamen idcirco tibi sunt dicata, quod illis
Indigeas, sed quod Principe digna sient.
TO THE MOST excellent and virtuous Princess Elyzabeth, by the Grace of God
Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the Christian faith. etc.
IFPTOLOME King of Egypt, being exhorted by Demetrius Phalareus a pleasant
Orator, to buy Books endyted of Princely prowess: for that he might read
therein those lessons, of the which his friends or subjects durst not put him
in remembrance: took that his counsel in very good part, rendering thanks
for that his gentle admonition, promising to follow his request in that
behalf: the one sufficientlye aunswering his function in exhorting: the other
in obeying and yelding to the same. I trust your grace (being both wise and
politic of your self, and therefore the less lacking others mean and weak
Aduertisementes through the manifold gifts of your mirrored mind) will not
mislyke, if I of bound duty, and pressed loyalty, being your humble and
obedient Subject (most puissaunt Princess) shall with bowed breast crave at
your Majesty's hands, not the buying, or reading of all, or the most part of
books written of government, as Demetrius did of Ptolome: which were an
endless and an infinite work, (although not a very chargeable to a Kings or
Princes cofers) but only the acceptment and shielding of this brief Diarie
and small Manuell, and that with humble heart freely offered and behyghted
(although grossly and rudely pende: being altogether unworthy of sale, much
less of gift) to such a Portly and puissant personage. In the which your
Majesty may read such lessons, not only to civil, but also to heavenly
policy and practice directed, as I (being a very blunt and unskillful Orator)
either for want of audacitie, shall not be able before your dreadful
countenance to utter and set forth, or your grace through magnanimity and
loftynesse of mind, shall of them in good part, after my meaning, not
vouchesafe to conceive: Dumb and dead letters standing in no awe or note of
bashfulnesse, presenting themselves freely and frankly, without any copy, or
change of color: pressed persons and humble subjects through weakness of mind,
and boldning courage, at the presence of the Prince trembling and quaking, and
in discharging their tale stumbling and staying. For when as to mean persons
some treatise and tenure of learning is dedicated, a present palm of unfeigned
friendship is openly testified, a shielder and succourer of studious travels is
obtained, the renowned fame of the Patron to immortality is commended: then
most chiefly does the humble hostage of loving loyalty in subjects appear,
when as to a Prince the like is presented (who is instead of an holy Anchor
to all learned and skilful enterprises) when as partly they witness them
selves to be greatly indebted to his royal estate, partly also by such
occasion he is allured to the study of wisdom. By which mean that takes
place, which Plato pronounced of all commonweals, even then they obteyning
most blessed estate, when as either Princes were occupied in wisdom, or the
Professors thereof were exercised in civil government. For if a wise Prince be
called in the Scripture, Sap. 6.
the strenthning of the people, and the ordinary cause and mean why Cities
without any despeirment of ruin, be plenteouslye inhabited, and farced with
Citizens: it shall by them most plainly appear, how well and wisely Plato
wrote, placing wisdom, the study of Princes. Which travel all way
blessedness does prosecute, as the shadow unseparably pursues the body: I
mean not the study of worldly wiliness, but of the wisdom of God, unto the
which the holy Scriptures direct all redoubted Magistrates and Rulers of
Kingdoms, even by the voice of the Prophet David, soundyng in their ears:
Erudimini qui iudicatu^ terra^. Sernite Domino in timore. Psalm. 2.
Be ye learned you which judge the earth. Serve the Lord with trembling fear.
And not by his sole and only motion, but by the direction also of Solomon his
son, a most perfect mirror of heavenly knowledge. If you delight in seats
and scepters, Sap. 6.
(O ye Kings and Princes) love you wisdom. For unto you (says he) O Kings, my
words be wholly tendered, that you with meeting arms, embrace Gods truth and
wisdom, never going back or reuolting from the same. Eccles. 10.
I need not further press the preachers learned lesson: Diligite lumen
sapientiae, omnes qui praeestis populis. Love ye the large light of wisdom,
which govern and ouersee the populous multitude. Psalm. 119.
This light King David called the word of God, being a Lantern to Princes
feet, and a candle to their pathwayes. This light, Psalm. 104.
Prince Joseph plenteously published, instructing the Nobles of Egypt with
doctrine, teaching her Senators the wisdom of God. May it therefore please
your Majesty, to appoint him as a pattern before your eyes, that through your
heavenly wisdom and zeal of Christian profession, your Grace may be cleaped
a Mother of Religion, as he was, a Father of the King of Egypt, Gene. 38.
a Nursse of Gods territory and Church, as he was a fosterer, a shield to your
subjects, as he was called a Savior of the world. Vouchsafe, O gracious
Princess, Gene. 26.
in natural affection ad godly piety to follow Abimelech, who was daily
saluted of the Palestines, our Father the King: that your grace also may so be
renowned and accounted of us your most loving and obedient children, our Mother
the Queen: In defending your subjects to aemulate Pharao, who was named of
the Egyptians, a revenger of their injuries: In Justice to imitate Samuel or
Aristides, In lofty courage to exceed Choelia and Portia, In liberality to
answer Vespasian, In meekness to intercept Moses and Adrian, In patience,
to forerunne David or Ariston. Then shall we judge of your grace, as Italy did
of Saturn, he purchasing golden worlds unto that fatal land. Then must we
(as no less we can, through your blessed and peaceable government) conceive of
your Majesty, as the Romans did of their Emperor Augustus, vaunting of him
in this sort: Romam inuenit Lateritiam, reliquil Marmoream. He found Rome
builded with tyle and sherd, he left it to us made of Marble. Then shall we
esteem this Insule, most happy, when as on your grace all eyes shall be
fixed, as on a mirror or motion of wisdom. Whereunto (most dreadful and
Souueraigne Queen) I have addressed the Method of this book, which I have
dedicated unto your Majesty, and that under the title of, A President for a
Prince, for that most lively (although succinctly) it displayeth the whole race
and course of Princely life, the order of his actions, the suppressement of
lose life, the repulse of foreign enemies, a retinuing of common peace, a
natural love toward his subjects, an earnest zeal of Gods house, and to
conclude, a true, faithful, and lively usage of Christ's Sacraments, which S.
Augustine calls the visible word, with all other good gifts incident to a
Princely rule and province. Raise therefore (O most virtuous Princess)
according to your accustomed courtesy, at this my humble and lowly suit, the
sitting sails of your noble heart, rechase the beawtifull balle of your
thronging thoughts, enhaunce the earnest allectiues of your stayed
understanding, unto the reading and perusing hereof at your Graces lawful
leisure. And to God alone, give the praise, who sow in your most virtuous, and
best meaning mind, such immortal seed of his heavenly grace now in your
young and flouryshing age, that many years this your Realm may enjoy the
plenteous fruit of this his blessing in your royal personage, to the daily
edification of his Catholic Church, and the continual comfort of your
Subjects.

Your most humble Subject and bounden Orator, Anthony Rushe.

Haec tibi quae dabimus tenui consuta libello,
Aspicienda oculis (casta Diana) tuis:
Non te, quid deceat (cui sunt sua iura) docebunt,
Sed dedit hoc oneris, officiosus amor.

A President for a Prince.
IT was an ancient custom among the Kings of Persia, that very early every
morning, of his Chamberlain coming to his bed side, he should be wakened out
of sleep, and saluted on this manner: Arise, O King, and look to thy charge.
Wherein may be wayed the comlynesse of their custom, the diligence of the
Chamberlain, and the lowly obeisance of the King to them both: To the custom,
for that it did set forth the nature of their law, with the equal power and
strength of civil government: To the Chamberlain, for that he was made the
Minister of this Message, and ye lively voice of a dumb constitution prepared
to intercept and preoccupate idleness with the otcasions of public
calamities, strayghtly intimating mean rest to be sufficient for a Prince. No
sleep permitted him in the day, Lib. 5.
as Strabo writes, and great exployt and travail not to satisfy a common
weal, yelding full relaxation to the body and mind, which are contented with
moderate intermission, by the night season, prescribing unto the Citizens the
whole course of the day, and that from the early morning, whereby they the
better might be governed, and by due execution of laws, might be deteyned and
kept in order. By the which advertisement and sage semblant, the Persian Prince
was put in mind (and in him all others) not only of daily travail, but also
of diligent expedition, incident to the office and Province of a Prince.
Whereunto nothing can be more prejudicial, than slothfulness, and more
noyfull than careless security (it being, as Themistocles says Sepultura
hominis viuentis, the grave of a living man) and by the testimony of Marcus
Portius, a just purchase of the immortal Gods wrathful reuengement, being
hurtful to the body, unprofitable to the mind, and appaireful to public
policies, as both Plato writing de Legib, and Plutarch of Agesilaus, do most
plainly approve. Iliad. 2.
Wherefore Homere sets forth sleep under the shape of Naestor communing and
talking with Agamemnon son of Atreus chief Prince of Greece, wrapped in
slothful slumber, sharply rebuking him on this sort: It becomes not a
Princely personage (to whose government the people be credited, in whose
hands so weighty affairs of Domestical and foreign pollices be settled) to
enjoy one whole nights rest, Sillius Italicus lib. 3.
according to this short Poesy: Turpe duci somno tota^ co^sumere nocte^.
Neither does it lack just cause, that Virgil in his books of Martial
prowess, and the fearful feats of chasing chivalry, describes Eneas always to
be accompanied with faithful Achates. And Homere dysplaying Pryamus famous
factes, records him to be attended upon with old Vcalegon, and ancient
Antenor, who bear the seemly shadows of Kingly cares. The which King
Antigonus verified in himself (and that with a vehement voice) in this wise
aunswering an old woman which extolled his royal and blessed estate: If thou
knew (said he) O ancient Matrone, how full of misfortunes and thronging
thoughts this my Kingly Crowned and Diadem is farced, thou would scarce
vouchsafe to take up the same from the ground. Wherefore well may a Prince with
Seneca say, and with Euripides confess: Non curarum somnus domitor pectora
soluit, In Hecuba Trag. 8. Se.
semper namque mihi vigilant curae. Sleep ye tamer of toiles builds not in my
breast, cares do every night watch and await on me. Wherefore, Chrysippus
demanded why he would not govern the common weal, answered: If I govern
it well, I shall be hated of ye Citizens, if I govern it evil, I shall
displease the Gods. Dioclesian was wont to say, that nothing was more hard and
difficult, than to govern well. Otho oftentimes answered his friends: Believe
ye me, I had rather die than rule. Also Antigonus confessed unto his son (and
that even of his careful Kingdom) cleping it nothing else, quam seruitutem
gloriosam, than a glorious boasting kind of bondage. Solon describing Princes,
notes them to be nothing else quam Ministros Seruosque multorum, than the
Servants and Ministers of many. Saturninus answered his Accomplices entreating
him to take Princely place: Nescitis, amici, quantum mali sit imperare. You
know not, my friends, what a huge hurt it is to govern. With the which
perpetual hatred is incorporated, In Thebaid. Oedipo.
as Seneca writes: Simul ista mundi Conditor posuit Deus: Odium atque Regnum.
Odium qui nimium timet, regnare nescit. Regna custodit metus. God has coupled
government and hatred together. He that fears hatred is not mete to rule.
Hieron therefore of Sicilie (as Xenophon writes) said, that pleasures were
more sensibly felt in a private life, than in the public person of a Prince.
Whereunto Adrian and Domitian (as Tranquillus writes) agree, confessing the
estate of Kings to be most miserable. Seneca clepeth ye same Poenam grauem, a
grievous punishment. Demosthenes affirmed that two ways being proposed, the
one leading to a Kingly throne, the other co^ducting to Hell: a wise man would
prefer ye path, which leads to Pluto, before that which brings to
Princely place. Of this Province did Tiberius write in this sort unto the
Senate: Quid scribam vobis P. C.? Quomodo scribam? aut quid omnino non scribam?
Dijme Deaeque omnes perdant, quam quotidie me perire sentio. What shall I write
unto you, O you written fathers? How shall I write? Or what shall I not write at
this present? All the Gods and Goddesses so deal with me, as I feel my self
through cares daily dying. Wherefore, I can not better resemble a Princely
estate, than to the rolling and restless stone of Sisyphus, the staylesse
whele of Ixion, and continual gnawing and dismembring of Tityus, In Apolog.
it being (as Gregory Nazianzene writes) Ars artium, and disciplina
disciplinarum, hominem regere, qui certe inter omnes animantes maxim est and
moribus varius, and voluntate diuersus. The art of arts, and the discipline
of disciplines, to govern man, who among all living creatures is most variable
in manners, and unconstant in will. Furthermore, the person of a King (his
combring cares set apart) is nothing else than a myrrour for all others to
behold (as Pindarus says.) And as he behaueth himself, so are all others
likewise affected. So that well may the Poet say: Claud.
Regis ad exemplar totus componitur orbis. And the common Proverb justly may
be applied: Qualis Rex, talis grex. As the King is, so semblable are the people
humored: De Lege.
who (as Tullie notes) plus exemplo nocent, quam peccato, by example tha^ by
offense do more languish and annoy. Least therefore Kings should be
unmindful of their careful charge: the Ancient Paynims excited thereto their
Kings by outward ensigns and framed figures of unreasonable creatures, having
in ye tops of their Scepters a Storke painted and polished, in the end thereof a
sea Horse limned and arrayed, to the end that by ye Storke they might remember
to settle in their minds piety and godly love (for the Storkes do foster the
old years of their Parents) by the sea Horse, fierceness and pride was
shadowed, which Princes ought always to subdue, and press under their fete.
And (as Pericles says) not only to have chaste hands, but continent eyes. I
leave to the field of forgetfulness the people of Theba, Lib. de Isid.
who (as Plutarch writes) had the pictures of their Princes and Judges drawn
and delineated without hands, and their eyes closed up, for that Princes ought
not to be allured with gifts, neither persuaded or counterpoysed with men's
countenances: I might here speak of the monument of King Simandius, in which
the Prince and chief Judge did sit in the midst accompanied with.xxx. of the
Nobles assisting both his sides: from whose neck the picture of truth did hang
down, having her eyes shut, bending the same toward the breast, for that a
Prince should be daily exercised in the practice of truth. I conceal last of
all the Egyptians: they of custom putting about their Princes neck a Tablet
embrowded with diverse precious pearls, the which they called and cleaped,
truth. What should I speak of famous Philip King of Macedone? who accustomably
was wont to say, that it behooved a King to remember, that he being a man, had
achieved heavenly power, and must put in ure honest and godly exploytes, and
use softness of speech toward his subjects. I pass over Agathon, who wills
a Prince to call to memory three things: First, that he has government over
men: Secondly, that he ought to rule according to laws: Thirdly, that he must
not always govern. For the Prince (as Tullie writes) is a speaking law: Lib.
3. de leg.
and the law is a dumb master. The end thereof is justice and right, as
Plutarch teaches. Ad imper. ducem.
The work of the Prince is the law, and the Prince is the Image of God
administering al things as Homere notes: Odyss. 8.
(...). Imago autem Rex est animata Dei. Who^ Calliope the most bewtiful of the
nine Muses does always prosequute and accompany, as Hesiodus witnesses, In
Theo.
filling him with all heavenly wisdom, and pleasant speech. Whom all the
people have in admiracion. In whose bulked breast Homere places fortitude and
justice: Tullie, abstinence and continency: Suetonius, lowlynesse in hearing,
pleasantness in answering, cunning artificiousnesse in persuading his
subjects: whose royal estate Alexander Seuerus sets not in outward pomp,
but in inward virtues: Agesilaus descriueth so to be affected, that with mercy
he shall provoke offenders to repentance, and a full reuoltment from
lothsomnesse of life. To whom Plato gives two precepts: first, that he
address his study to the profit of his subjects, having an everlasting
forgetfulness of private profit and gain: secondly, that be so care for the
whole common wealth, that in providing for one part, he seem not to forsake
and leave succourlesse the other. 1. Offic.
Whose proper Province is to weigh that he bears and susteyneth the person of
the whole Realm, even as he were an Athlas, holding the high heavens up with
his shoulders, and stayed strength. Whose laws he must keep, whose rites and
customs he must descriue, always mindful of his portly place. Unto the which
well serves ye sentence of Menander: (...). Principatum assequutus, sis hoc
dignus. In whom both utterance an wisdom is required: utterance, by the which
he may praise famous and worthy men, he may exhort to noble prowess, he may
call back from heinous wickedness, he may comfort the weak minded, and the
noble enterprises of valiant warrefares, he may commend to immortalitye:
Wisdom, by the which he may guide and govern his people, he may establyshe
laws, he may punish and correct offenders, and may defend and save
harmless just and innocent persons. Whom, Syrus prescribes not to be
inferior in understanding those things which be needful, than to govern as
time and opportunity requires, whose personage and travail in business,
courage in peril, diligence in working celeritie in accomplishing, providence
in foreheeding, singulerly sets forth. Of whom anger is to be kept under,
riot to be restrained, the suspicion of covetousness far to be sequestered,
and all other deformities of mind utterly to be exiled, being so necessary an
Organ, as without whom no City can be setteled, showing himself stout,
just, severe, valiant, liberal, bountiful and meek, withstanding the
fierceness and inconstancy of the monstrous multitude, providing not only in
his own life for safe soueraignitie, but in theirs also who shall succeed and
govern after him, In Lelio de Regno.
whom (as Dion writes) simplicitye and truth does commend, and bring reverence
of all estates. Wherefore the Egyptians had their Kings in great honor,
judging their government to descend from the Gods. And for this cause Nestor
in ye Iliade of Homere warns Achilles, that he make no countermaund with
Agamemnon (cui principatus a Jove datus sit) to whom Princely power was
behighted of Jupiter. And Mynos King of Crete, the Poet calls the familiar of
Jupiter, who must have no less care of governing others, than of himself. To
who^ nothing more Princelike can happen, Cicero in Para.
than utterly to foreclose all loathsome lusts, and rather to bridle his own
immoderate affections, than to deteyn and press his civil subjects. For (as
Plutarch writes) Non est cadentis currere, aut incompositi componere, Ad
imperit. Ducem.
aut parere nescij imperare. It is not incident to him to run which falls, or
is disordered to set in order, or void of obeisance to govern and rule.
Wherefore Seneca says: Si vis omnia tibi subijcere, subijce te rationi. Multos
reges, si te ratio rexerit. Epistola. 38.
If thou will subdue all things under thee, subdue thy self. So shall thou rule
many, if reason rule thee. Whose honor is, not to be feared outwardlye of the
people: but rather, when they with themselves have in admiration his mirrored
mind, than his infatuating and fickle fortune. Wherefore all men (as Isocrates
writes) judged Euagoras Prince in Greece not so bounteously blessed for his
government sake, as his Subjects obeying the Princely power of so worthy a
King. For he so spent the whole race of his life, Iso. in Eua.
that he hurt no man, and yet honorrd all good men: ruling diligently over
all, and lawfullye punishing malefactors. Whom wisdom maruelously adorneth,
as Stenida teaches: Li. de regne.
for thereof reverence issues, and an emulation of the high God, who by nature
is the first King, and most Princely personage, but by creation and imitation,
the Prince on earth. God is in all, as well in heaven as earth: and the Prince
on the earth only, who truly treads in his steps, if he show him self
courageous, wise, unworthy of wicked worldlings, bearing in his breast a
fatherly mind toward his subjects. And (as Themistius writes) a Prince in
deed, Xenophon lib. 8. de Paedia Cyri.
in truth being inexpugnable, subduing his capacity to reason, exercising
liberty, praising magnanimity, suppressing and aba^doning all stately
stubbornness. And therefore Ecphanta descriuing a King, says, that he is the
excellent work of God, his lively image, familiar to his framer, gazed on of
his Subjects as it were an amasing mirror. For his worthiness is approved no
otherwise, Stenidae ex lib. de reg.
than the Eagle is tried to be the Prince of birds, his eyes openly displayed
against the sun. Whereunto most like is a Princely government, for that it
is heavenly: through the surpassing clearenesse whereof, the eyes of those who
unjustly aspire to Princely preferment, are daseled and blinded. Wherefore it
behooves a Prince to make his government appear by his manners. For so eftsoon
the same does glitter and shine, vaunting it self with fluttering wings, whose
portlie place, humanity greatly enhaunceth, power pacifieth, knowledge
confirms. For by knowledge he may judge righteouslie, by power he may
punish, by humanity he may largelye behight gifts, and according to reason
administer all things. In whom Diotog. coucheth three comely qualities, Lib. de
reg.
and mirroring motions: the worshipping of the Gods: the governing of his
Subjects: the judging hurtlesse and innocent persons. Unto the worshipping of
the Gods he shall be able, if he weigh with himself the nature and power of
God. To govern well, he shall be fit, if he understand the feats of
Chiualry. To judge and decise controversies, he shall be cunning, if he have
diligently learned the nature and course of Civil Laws. Plato also in
Protagora places in a Prince these three, not Portingale, but Precious
pearls: Scientiam, opinionem, ac loquendi libertate^. Knowledge, good report,
and swiftness of tongue. Who (of Ecphanta a Sectarie of Pithagoras) is called
(...). properly a Prince, of governing and ruling himself. And therefore
Socrates calls him the best Prince, which could best subdue and conquer his
own affections, and mustering motions. And Cato Mayor counted him the worst
Prince: Qui imperare sibi ipsi nequiret. Who could not rule and govern
himself. Lib. 4. de cons. Honor.
For (as Claudianus writes) Tunc omnia iura tenebis, cum poteris Rex esse tui.
Then shall thou best govern and prescribe laws, when thou can best rule and
subdue thine own self. Neither Isocrates discenteth from the same, setting
forth the modesty of a Prince instead of a mirror or glass to all other,
knowing the manners of ye whole Realm to grow like to the manners and conditions
of the King. Wherefore Seneca says: In Thyeste.
Rex velit honesta: nemo non eadem velit. The King exercising honesty, all men
will pursue the same. But contrariwise, Grauissimus est morbus qui a capite
diffunditur. In Epistolis
It is the most dangerous disease, which distilleth from the head. Who must
take heed, whom he seems to love or defend. For he shall be judged like unto
the^. Demosth. co^tra And.
Whom also it behooves to take dilligent respect of flatterers, and
cacoglotting Corisoes, by whose painted Poesies Princes are abused, and they
forced to wicked enterprises. As well it appeared in Alexander the great, who
harkening to their flattering fables killed his true friends Philota,
Clisthines, and Parmenio. Thus read we of Hieron through Epicharmus his
Parasite: The like testifies Tranquillus of Domitian, and Amianus of
Constantine ye great. Whom Homere calls: (...). Ore benigna loquentes,
pectore praua struentes. Fair speakers with their toungs, but workers of
wickedness in their hearts. And therefore Tullie calls this seasoned
sentence of Epicharmus: Memento diffidere. be mindeful to mistrust: the very
sinews and marrow of wisdom. Wherefore King Antigonus in mirth was wont to
say, that he daily desired of God, Vt ab eo etia^ aduersus amicos
protegeretur. That he might be safegarded of him, even against his friends.
These did Assuerus taste of, even by his own confession in the public appearance
of al his people: Ex historijs quotidie gestis videmus, Hester. 16.
quo modo malis quibusdam suggestionibus Regum studia depraue^tur. Out of daily
Histories and Annuals (says he) we may learn how that ye godly endeavors of
Kings, by the wicked motions of flatterers be hindered and disturbed. Neither
must he admit all men into his familiarity, which covet and affectate the
same, but such only as are worthy for his wit and disposition: not those with
whom he may wa^tonly wast his flourishing years, but rather such, by whose
aduertisme^t and cunning counsel, he may best govern and rule his Realm.
Neither must he count those faithful friends, which do prosecute with praise
al his travails and talks (as do Gnathonical and snockfeasting Parasites,
with men pleasers, scrape sleues, and trim time slaves, of the which great
surplusage there is in all Realms:) but rather those, Isocrates.
which with modest manner rebuke and restrain their inscient errors. Unto
such ought frankenesse of tongue to be permitted, that of what matters he stand
in doubt, by the^ he may be resolved and discharged from all suspense and
scruple of mind. Applying his government to the nature of his subjects. With
good men dealing moderatly, with sluggardes vehemently, with fool hardy
folks, sharply, with wary and provident men, wisely and gently, according to
the counsel of Seneca, who says: In Thebaid.
Qui vult regnare, languida regnet manu: who so will govern, let him rule with
humble hand. For like memory and fame shall he receive, whether it be good or
ill. Which thing well weighed, he has free choice to enter which way he will,
either that which leads to infamy, or which conducted and piloceth to
dishonor, and that which seems better to follow and pursue. For this is the
peculiar profit of a Prince, and equivalent with infinite others, Eusebius.
in such sort to end and finishe all things, that not only in his life
time, but ever after, through his uprightness and godly government, he may
receive immortal praise with the eternal testimony and witness of his
subjects. The which Ovid opened in this sort: 2. de Ponto.
Regia (creed mihi) res est succurrere lapsis. And sage Seneca seems to
confirm the same: In Medea.
Hoc Reges habe^t magnificum and ingens: Nulla quod rapit dies prodesse
miseris. It is a Princely virtue to help them who be fallen into adversity.
For this fortunate fact, immortality does always prosecute. And therefore
Eusebius resembles the rule of a King, unto a man that has taken the charge
of a precious Jewel. For even as he receives not the same to retain it to
his own private use, but to save it, and also to deliver it whole to his
hands, who has left the same in his credit, when he shall demand it: so
also ought a Prince, not to his private gain, but to ye wealth and commodity
of his subjects, to apply his sovereignty, so that harmless and in happy
estate (as much as lies in him) he may both leave and restore the people unto
God who first commended the^ to his charge. Li. An. senex.
The which (as Plutarch writes) Pulcherrimu^ funus conciliat, does purchase a
most blessed burial, and by the sentence of Symonides, does stretch it self
to all posterities and ages. So that (as Bion says) he leaving his Kingdom,
must rather seek to dye gloriously than furnished richelye. Which is (as
Martialis writes) to care and know his subjects: Principis est virtus maxima
nosse suos: And Claudianus in this dainty Distichon, Tu ciuem patremque geris,
tu consule cunctis: Nec tibi, nec tua te moueant, sed publica vota. It is a
Princelye virtue to know his subjects, and to provide as a citizen and as a
father for them all, his own private gain set a part. To whom most loyalty
subjects do give, when as he not living wickedly, and yet ruling
Imperiouslye, but diligently doing those things which appertain to his office,
offers himself an example unto them. For (as ye Poet teaches) Non sic
inflectere sensus humanos Edicta valent, quam vita regentis. Claudianus
Laws are not so able to allure me^ unto goodness, as is the life of the
Prince. Wherefore with the immortal style of Plutarch is Agesilaus behighted,
who in all present enterprises and painful exigents to al his surly soldiers,
gave the first assault and outset. Whereby they were animated and made bold to
battle. In Lacon.
Pythagoras, also wills Princes to stand in awe no more of others than of
them selves, and to sin never the more, Democritus
if no man should know it, as if it should be open to all men, but that he
should most chiefly fear himself and establish the law, not only of
nature, but also of God in his mind. For his secret faults God himself will
discover, both to his great appalment, and to ye dreadful example of others,
who is not authorized to hurt, Thucydi. ad Hemet.
but rather to help, being worthy of his government, not through the gorgious
estate of the common weal, but by the excellency of virtue, Epistola Sopa.
and mildness of mind. And those of whom before he made no account, now
preferred to Princelye place, he ought to reverence and esteem, and beholding
all men his loyal lovers, with a fatherly friendship ought to embrace them. For
unto the Moenian Poet, it was not sufficient to have called a Prince, simply a
Father (although no more notable a name amongst men could be found out) but
unto the title of a Father he adds his Epithete GENTLE: judging this name to
Fathers and Kings most mete, sitting and convenient. To whom also it belongs
with moderate chastisement to punish offenders, dissembling small and common
faults, and increasing to subdue them by laws, and (as Archita says) to do
all things for his subjects, and nothing for himself. For the law also was not
made for it self, but for the behoof of the Citizens, whom he ought to
promote to honest studies, and to give to every one competent preferrement,
and to fill his Cities with all liberal learning, deserving well of his nobles
and peers, being bountiful in gifts, not with equal weight changing like
for like, but plenteously pouring them out of vessels, and liberally
dispensing the^ as the Poets write. This manner of thankfulness (says
Iamblicus) merito coronam Imperij appellauerim, Iamblicus ad Dyscoliu^
I may worthily cleape the crown of Kingly government. If therefore a King
would consecrate any noble and famous monument unto his Realm: let him deck
and adorn himself with the most precious and beawtifull ornament of
meekness, justice, and beneficence. So that in gorgious building, Princely
honor is not settled, but in courage of mind. For much more better it is, that
hauty hearts should dwell in pore and course Cotages, than that slauelike pages
should lurk in lofty lodgings, and bountiful buildings, as it were savage
beasts in a den. For neither with stones fette out of Euboea, Epict.
nor with timber out of Sparta, is the Realm raised to honor, but with
skillful sciences and loving liberality: Animis enim hommum, non lapidibus and
linguis been habitantur Civitates. For by the policies and minds of men not
with stones and tounges are Cities peopled and inhabited. And as he is no good
Horse courser, which only fostereth the young and meke Colts, and leaves the
wild hungry, and in peril of pining, when as he should alike nouryshe the^
both, and should make the one match to the other: So ought a Prince well
experienced, to belinke with benefits his good subjects, and yet not to cast
away the evil, Epictetus.
but to provide indifferently for them both: loselye reigning the good, and
sharplye bitting the evil and savage subject: And as ye sun looks not for
prayers and incantacions, that he may run his accustomed course, but
straightwaye shines with bright beams, and is saluted of all men through the
whole world: so ought Princes not to look for the uncomely clapping of the
rude rables hands, and popular praises when they bestow benefits, but frankly
and freely to offer them. And so shall they be beloved as the Sun. Who must
associate unto him self reason, borowyng the same of the study of wisdom,
which having custody of his mind, whatsoever is perilous in power (as it
were in an incumbating habit) he may withdraw, in safety leaving and
yelding the same. Who by others must use compulsion and violence, delivering
offenders to be punished by inferiors. But when rewards be tendered to such
as have well deserved them, he must then by his own person deliver and
behight the same. Nevertheless, they be not always true Princes, which do
bear swords and Scepters, to use outward force and violence, but those (as
Xenophon teaches) do we truly account Kings, Qui regere sciu^t, and iubere
quid oporteat fieri. Which know how to rule, and to command what is expedient
to be done. For these two can not agree together, as Lucanus writes, the
Prince bound to execute Justice, Scepters only regarding unrighteousness.
Whose whole strength is utterly languished, Si pendere iusta incipit, if he wey
in his kingdom righteous dealing: to wit, the punishing of malefactors,
defending, and rewarding faithful subjects. Whereunto of bound duty he is
belincked and pressed. For which cause Aristotle cleapeth him Custodem legis, the
keeper of the law: Euripides descriueth him to be bountiful rewards men and a
great friend. (...). Sit beneficus erga homines, and magnus amicus. Ecphanta
cleapeth a Prince Viuam legem, a living law, which Demosthenes calls
Ciuitatis animam, the soul or life of the City, (...). And strayte way he
adds the Aetiologie thereof. For as ye body spoiled of the soul, does faulter
and fall, so the City is overthrown, laws being removed. The like similitude
uses Tullie writing of laws: Vt corpora nostra sine mente, sic Ciuitas sine
lege, suis partibus, vt neruis, sanguine, and membris, vti non potest. As our
bodies without minds, so a City without laws can not use her parts, as the
sinews, blood, with the other members. Anaxilaus oftentimes said, that he was
the happyest Prince, who would never be overcome with benefits or gifts.
Micipsa confesses in the Historye of Salust, that neither the army of
Iugurth, neither his treasure, were the munitions of his kingdom, Sed amici:
who neither with Artillerye can be compelled, or with gold are to be
purchased: but with office and faites are achieved and won. In like sort
Cyrus by his own example instructed Croesus, as Xenophon writes: While I make
my friends rich, I judge these, my Jewels and treasures, yea more faithful
preseruers of my body, and Realm, than a great guard and front of marching
soldiers. Therefore was Vespasian wont to say, that it was not lawful for
any faithful subject, to depart with sad countenance from the presence of
the Prince. Wherewith, or the like, Artaxerxes moved, gave in reward unto a
poor man bringing but a little water in the palm of his hand, and with much
mildness of speech and countenance receiving it: a thousand pieces of
Persian coin, with a great standing goblet of gold. And unto an other
presenting him with a Pomegranate, he gave the government of a mighty City.
Alexander Seuerus still was angry, for that his Subjects asked nothing of
him. Alexander of Macedon was more displeased with them which refused rewards,
than with those which craved gifts at his hands. And therefore writing to
Photion of Athens, says, that he would not account him his friend, if he
did refuse his presents and gifts, which he had sent to Athens for his
behoof. I might here blase out Caesar's passing praise, who was liberal to al
his soldiers as well footmen as horsemen, and in fine to all the whole people
of Rome, enriching them with the abundance of money, corn, and oil, but
especially to Seruius Galba, who sued in the Senate before him said: O Caie
Iuli Caesar, pro Pompeio magno, quondam genero tuo, spospondi. O Caius Julius
Caesar, for Pompey the great, sometime thy son in law, I became suertie: To
whom Caesar with gentle greting answered: Ego te hoc aere liberabo. I will
out of hand discharge thy debt. Whose clemency was equal and like to his
liberality: so that Marius Geminus not without cause said: Caesar, those that
dare speak before thee, Magnitudinem tuam ignorant, are ignorant of thy
valiant courage: Qui non audent, humanitatem. and they which dare not, are
inscient of thy humanity. Scipio likewise was wont to say, that it is better
to overthrow the enemies with gentleness, than with spear and shield. Ariston
praised two things in a Prince: Amicis benefacere: Inimicos vero sibi
reconciliare. To wit, the gratifying of his friends, and the reconcilement of
his enemies unto himself. Antigonus daily confessed, that the good will of his
Subjects, was the best foundation of his kingdom, and the most surest stay
thereof. For (as Seneca says) Ferrum tuetur Principem, melius fides. Octauia.
And again: Decet timeri Caesarem, aut plus diligi. Sword does defend the
Prince: but better, faith. Whom it behooves to be feared, but better to be
loved. Friendship therefore, and not flatterye is to be intertayned of a
Prince. Than the which (as Aratus writes) nothing is more stronger, it being
better by the opinion of Periander and Cyrus to be fortified with friendship,
than with harnessed horsemen. Therefore al servile and fawnyng flatterers were
banished among the Egiptians, and only twenty of the noble Priests sons well
learned, having passed the.xx. year of their age, stood always before the
King: Through whose continual presence he might be withdrawn from all wicked
enterprises, and by their passing policies and cunning knowledge he might be
instructed in all Princelye prowess. So that (as Seneca teaches) he might
diligently be busied in providing for his Country, In Octauia.
sparing afflicted persons, absteyning from Teutonical tyranny and bold
bloudeshed, gyuing place to wrath and anger, purchasing peace and quietness
to the world. Haec summa virtus: petitur hac coelu^ via. This is a Princelye
Province, by this pathe is heaven perced, and (as Virgil writes) in sparing
subjects, Ene. 6.
and surprising proud persons. So that by the assertions of the Heathen it may
appear that the office of a King is no paynelesse Province, but altogether
obnoxious to the travails of body, and the troubles of mind. And therefore
accustomablye the Scripture calls Kings the Cedars of Libanus, Psalm. 20.
Esaias. 2. Psalm. 109. Esaias. 14. Psalm. 70. Esaias. 41. Exodus 24. Psalm. 47. Oseae. 4.
the heads of the people, the foundations of hills, wagons, Gods, the
bucklers of the earth, for that they from their subjects award al injuries,
even as with bucklers and targets, darts, and deadely blows be removed from
the bodies of encombaters. The Hebrews do call them the Goats of the earth:
for as the Goats go before the heardes of Kids: so do Kings and Princes
before the people. The Egyptians do name them Patres Religionis, or by some
translations, Saluatores mundi, Fathers of religion or Saviors of the world.
Gene. 38.
The Romans called their hye Officer Consul, a Counsailer to his Country, and
also a Father of his Country. The Palestines called their King Abimelech, that
is to say, Gene. 26.
our Father the King. The Egyptians cleaped their King Pharao, a revenger of
the languyshmentes of his subjects. Christ called the^ (...), beneficos, that
is to say, gracious Lords. Luc. 22. Romans 13. 1. Peter. 2.
Paul terms the^ the Deacons or Ministers of God: Peter cleapeth them the
chief heads or messaged rulers of the people. Whose duty as hitherto it has
been arrayed with the peerlesse Poesies of Profane Paynims and Heathen writers,
well exercised in Politic prowess: So most daintely is it delineated in the
holy and sacred Scriptures, they requyring in him most especially the fervent
fear and dread of God. So that he called to that function, must not multiply
unto him self horses, neither bring back again the people unto strange
religion, either puff up him self in the number of Chariottes, and mighty
masses of silver and gold: but sittyng on his saet, Deuteronomy. 17.
shall write or cause to be written for his instruction in a book, the precise
President of the Law of God, receiving it of the high Priests, which he shall
diligently defray, and reverently read al his life long, continuallye carrying
the same with him, wherein he may learn to fear the Lord his God, his word
and Ceremonies he may observe, estranging from his heart all presumpteous
pride above his brethren. And neither leaning to the right or left hand, may
live long with all his line. Exodus 18.
Wherefore Moses to this effect and purpose chose out wise men from the
Elders of Israel, even such as feared God, in whom the truth with an
immortal hatred of covetousness was planted. Whose polity and experience was
openly known.

Whose godly conversation was allowed of all the people: according to this short
verse: Iudex esto pius, sapiens, verax, misodorus. Wherein first of all,
godliness causes all judging Princes to respect God in all their doings, and
to take diligent head, that they commit no such thing, wherewith he may take
just offense. Wisdom governs all their affections, so that by error they may
not wander out of the way. Truth burieth all false interpretations, and puts
to silence al Sicophantes of laws. The hatred of covetousness continues
always sincerity in judgment. And as these things be incident to a Princely
government: so most chiefly ought he to provide, that religiously, and godly,
and (as the Greek text is) (...), in omni pietate, 1. Tim. 2.
and vero cultu Dei viuere possint, in all piety and true worshipping of God
his subjects may lead their lives. This was commended in Abraham by the
Angel, Gene. 18.
he practicing the same in the Fatherlye government of his sons: being much
more laudable in a Prince. Who by authority, care, primacie, and power, is
the common father to al his subjects. So that, as Abraham gave commandment
to his sons: so ought a Prince unto his subjects De custodienda via Domini,
of the keeping of the way of the Lord, as the Scripture says, showing him
self a Nursse of Gods Church, a setter up of Colleges and schools, in the
which a true and lively knowledge and invocation of God with all other necessary
discipline may be preserved and kept. Whereunto not only the example of
Abraham, of Jacob, Gene. 18. Gene. 28. Gene. 39.
but most especially of Joseph, that noble Patriarch and Prince of Egypt, may
as a most worthy mirror, induce al Christian Princes, of whom the Prophet
David writes in this sort: Deus misit ante eos virum: In seruum venundatus est
Joseph. Misit Rex, and soluit eum, Psalm. 104.
co^stituit eu^ dominum domus suae, vt erudiret Principes doctrina sua, and
senes eius prudentiam doceret. God sent before ye Patriarchs Joseph, who was
sold into Egypt as a bond servant. For whom the king of Egypt sent, setting
him at freedom and liberty. Gene. 41. Gene. 38.
He made him Prince over his house and kingdom cleaping him the Savior of the
world, and a Father of Religion, that he might instruct with his doctrine his
Nobles and Peers, and might teach his Senators the wisdom of God, to wit, the
fall of the first fathers, preaching unto them of the sanctified feed to come
of the ingraffed humors of all natural things, to wete, of the heavenly
influences, of the celestial signs and Planets, with the virtues and powers of
plants, and might also prepare all necessary food for the^ throughout all
Egypt, as well for body as mind, visiting all Regions and Cities throughoute al
Pharaos Kingdom, showing him self both a Prince and Bishop. This appeared in
Moses that mighty Magistrate, Exodus 32.
who settled in the people of Israel all true Religion and worshypping of God,
which he had immediatlye received of him, prescribing unto Aaron and all the
Levites, what was to be followed, and also what was to be eschued, sharply
rebuking Aaron for his idolatry, and the defiling of the Religion of the God of
Israel. The like may they behold in Iosue the son of Nun, Iosuae. 8. and
vltimo. Gene. 17.
who received a commandment from God to restore his Religion first delivered
unto Abraham, to wete, that he might the second time circumcyse the children
of Israel (for Circumcision was a pledge of Gods covenant.) altogether
respecting Gods Religion, at whose commandment the Ark of God was carried of
the Priests, aultars were builded, the people were sanctified, strange Gods
were abandoned, a truce between God and the people renewed, the word of the
League in the Law of God indicted, and a title as a witness thereof was by him
erected. And who knows not, that King David brought home again the Ark of God, whyth was negligently suffered to remain amongst the Heathen by the
Judges, 1. Paral. 13.
and King Saul, restoring the Religion of God, appointyng Priests and Levites
the singyng of Psalms and Hymns by course. Who is ignorant of Salomons zeal
in building the Temple of GOD? 2. Paral. 6. 3. Reg. 8
at whose dedication he made an excellent Oration of his worshipping unto the
people, removing Abiathar from his Bishopric, and placing Sadoch in his
rowme. Whose ears has not the fame of King Asa pierced, King of Judah, who
destroyed all Idolles in the land of Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim, building an
Aultare unto the Lord? What Country does not reverence the Religion of
Iosaphat, who destroyed the hill aultars and groves in Judah, and sent the
Princeliest persons of his Kingdom with Priests and Levites to teach all the
Cities in Judah: Habentesque librum legis Domini, 2. Para. 17
circuibant, atque erudiebant populum. And having the book of the Law of God,
travailed round about, and taught the people both in Judah and Jerusalem. To
whom is Ezechias earnesty unknown, 2. Para. 29.
who purged the Temple of all Idolatrous Relics, burning lights therein, 4.
Reg. 18. 4. Reg 23. 4. Reg. 12. 4. Reg. 20.
making sweet perfumes, breaking the brazen serpent, and puttinp it to powder.
I need not make mention of Josias, Iehu, and Ioas, who still warned the Priests
of their duty, restrained their riot and insolency, and last of all delivered
to death the false and perverse Prophets. But what do I (as the Latin
proverb says) light a Candle to help the most glorious beams of the
shinyng Sun? This not only in the time of shadows, but also in the time of
grace and truth, has most plainly appeared. As of Constantine we read,
Eusebius. li. 1. Cap. 5.
in promoting the Religion of God in the Counsel of Nice: of Theodosius the
first, at the Counsel of Constantinople: Theodosius the second, at the
Counsel of Ephesus: and to be short, of Martianus, at the Counsel of
Calcedon. Who showed them selves the true and natural Nursses of Gods Church,
and the fostering fathers of Christ his Religion, according to the saying of
the Prophet Esaias: Esaias. 44.
Reges erunt Nutritij tui. Kings shall be thy feeders and fosterers. Making this
the chief care among the musters of their thoughts, (...), to conform their
will to the will of God, to set forth his holy word, to direct all things to
his honor and glory, and to make him in all things both their beginning and
ending, fullye aunswering the definition of S. Paul: Romans 13.
(...). Dei enim Minister est tibi in bonum. For he is the Minister of God for
thy wealth. Which is not only extended to the body, but also to the soul.
Forasmuch as man is composed of these two principal parts, who lives not
only by bread a bodily life, but also a spiritual life, Deuteronomy. 8. Math. 4.
John. 6. Romans 2. Cant. 2. Io. 15. Romans 13.
even by every word proceeding out of the mouth of God, which is spirit and
life, which is the power of God, working salvation in the beleuers, mollifying
their hearts, and perfectly cleansing them. For the which Princes continually
ought to care, as the Greek text teaches, (...), in hoc ipsum constanter ac
perseueranter incumbentes ac immorantes. they incessantly pressed to be occupied
and busied in propaling the pure Religion and true worshipping of God:
according to yt saying of S. Augustine: In hoc Reges seruiunt Deo, Lib. 3. ad
Chrysostom.
si in regno suo bona iubeant, mala prohibeant: non solum quae pertinent ad
societate^ humanam, sed quae ad Religionem diuinam. In this Kings do service
unto God, if they in their Kingdoms command good things, and forbid evil,
not only appertaining to human society, but also to the Religion of God.
Authorizing Godly and learned personages to the superintendment and Ministry
of the Church, estranging from thence Drones and time slaves, Almon eaters, 3.
Reg 13. Io. 6.
Ieroboams Priests, and Barley bread Gospellers, foreclosing lose livers and
seducers by leauened doctrine, maintayning peace and concord among them,
keeping a continual watch, that the word of life and salvation may be
faithfully and purelye preached without ye miserable mixture of human
traditions, Matthew. 5. Luc. 16.
which make of no force ye commandment of God, they being abomination unto
the Lord, although (greatly esteemed of men,) utterly deceiving them, who are
the first finders out thereof, according to the testimony of ye Prophet Esaias:
Esaias. 47.
Sapientia tua and scientia tua, ea ipsa decepit te. Defecisti in multitudine
adinuentionum tuarum. Thy wisdom, and thy skill, even the self same has
deceived thee. Thou haste soultred in the multitude of thine own inventions,
wherein God takes no delight. For he regards not flesh and blood. He weyeth
not outward signs and silly ceremonies, neither will he be worshipped in the^,
but in the spirit of truth by Christ Jesus. For he is a busy beholder of
faith, John. 4.
considering the inward intent, being a subtle searcher of hid hearts.
These things not promoting us to God, with whom nothing is attentively accepted
beside a firm faith in Christ: these did Plato remove from the worshippyng of
the high God, for the which he was called, Diuinus Plato. These did Christ
utterly put to flight, when as he declared all things to be fully ended, which
were necessary for man's salvation, not fastening his Church to the bondage of
figures, but to ye freedom of the spirit. A Christian Prince therefore must
(all trifeling traditions set a part, and the idle inventions of mortal men)
direct his subjects unto the Law and testimonies of God, Esaias. 8.34.
to make diligent search in the book of ye law, and to read therein, to show
unto them that which is expressed in the Scripture of truth, to cause them to
hear Moses, Dan. 11. Luc. 16. John. 5. Act. 3. Act. 5.13.
and ye Prophets, earnestly to exhort them to read the Scriptures, which bear
witness of Christ and of his power, which fittingly show forth his days, and
that eternal life and health settled in him. Which thing if it had been
practiced in all ages of all Christian Princes, poison had never been shed in
the Church. De praescrip. Haeret.
Then the blessed Church (as Tertullian witnesses, and the most simpliest, as
Damascius writes to Ierom) had never received any man's doctrine against the
doctrine and institution of Christ. Then had not Religion brought and chylded
forth that Cocatrice egg (Riches) neither should the daughter have devoured ye
mother. Then had never the Kings of the earth willingly drunk the cup of
sorcering Circes, and wittingly have been empoisoned therewith. The discipline
of the Apostles (as Cyprian writes) had never by idleness, De lapsis.
and the want of Christ's Cross, been corrupted, and by heaping of Patrimony,
generally forgotten. Then palpable darkness had never been received in the
place of clear and large light: Ierem. 5.
when as (as the Scripture witnesses) the Prophets preached lies, and the
Priests allowed the same by clappyng their hands, and the people loved such
service. Then should never Gods silver have been turned into dross. Esaias. 1.
Then should the City which in times paste was faithful, not have been
prostituted and defiled, to wit, the chaste Church of God, under the mask of a
haunted harlot. Then should never the house of God, which by institution is,
Math. 21. Luc. 19. Math. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Pet. 2. 2. Tim. 2.
(...), the house of true worship and religion, have been made a house of
foolish fables. Then desolatio^ (as Christ says) should never have stood in
holy place, nor Antichrist have pitched his pauilion in the Temple of God,
lying Legendes and Masters of leasings, had never taken place in the Church of
Christ. Math. 21. Luc. 21. 3. lib. Ep. 3. ad Ce.
Then had not the Sun nor Moon lost their light, and the stars have fallen
from heaven. But (as Cyprian says) Vbique lex Euangelica, and traditio
dominica seruata fuisset. The law of the Gospel, and the tradition of the Lord
had still been retinued every where and from it which Christ taught, there had
been no departure nor reuoltment, and al other doctrines (as Ambrose writes)
had been judged detestable, and to be defied, Offic. 1. de vir. vel. 4. super.
1. ad Co. Super vlt. Cap. ad To.
yea (as Theophilactus witnesses) had been accounted heresy, stumbling blocks
and dissentions. To be short, then never such calamities had happened, and
confusion of truth whereby the very elect of God (if it had been possible)
should have been allured to ignorance the mother of error, Math. 24.
even of the Scriptures, as Ierom writes, Prolog. sup. Isaiam.
which is the ignorance of Christ. And I would to God that Princes in these
days would consider the necessity hereof, especially those, who boaste most
of the reformation of Religion. Then would they not be afraid boldly to enter
into the Church, and whyp buyers and sellers out of the Temple of God, not
suffering the Lords Pigeons to be sold therein: pulling up by the roots every
plant which the heavenly Father has not planted. Matthew. 15.
Then would they burst out into these semblants of words: Holiness, Psalm.
103.
O Lord, becomes thine house for ever and ever. The zeal of thy house has
devoured me up. Psalm. 68.
Then would they command superstitious Ceremonies even with the earnestie and
zealous affection of Christ to be done away: Auferte ista hinc, Luc. 19.
and nolite facere domum patris mei domum negotiationis. Away with bag and
baggage, with all your trashe and trumpery, and make not my fathers house a
house of traffike: least that plague follow which the Prophet threateneth:
Esaias. 6.
Regnum quod non seruierit Christo, peribit. That Kingdom which shall not
serve Christ, shall come to deadly downfall. So that as first the Prince ought
to cast his chief care upon doctrine: so secondly, with the like consideration
ought he to regard the Sacraments instituted by Christ, and the
administration thereof according to his institution. Wherein he may follow
Justinian, with diverse others, appointing unto them by a generalitye of fact,
comely ryghtes: but in specialitie of circumstance leauyng them indifferent,
cutting of noyfull and superfluous Ceremonies, sequestring them which evidently
struggle with the word of God, even such, whose work and use are not free.
But these things put in ure of a Prince, he must not so cease, nay to the
fulfilling of all righteousness, he must retain the severity of Laws,
chastening by them, as it were the rod of discipline. For then (as Gregory
writes) Summus locus been regitur, 3. Lib. Moralium.
cum Principes vitiis potius quam subditis dominantur. The Princelye place is
well furnyshed, when as rather vices than Subjects be kept under, and tamed:
The which place (as Chrisostom teaches) No^ sanguini debetur, In Policrat.
sed meritis. Et inutiliter regnat, qui rex nascitur, and non meretur. Is not
due to birth, but to merits. And he unprofitably rules which is borne a King,
and by noble prowess deserves not the same. So that they may under him lead
an honest and godly life, consideration had, that they be not the children of
the night, but of the day: not of darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Ephesians. 50.13. Romans
but of the light, and therefore accordingly preast to walk. Yea he must cut
of all corruption of manners, all lasciviousness, all unchaste songs, all
unfitting attire, al surfeiting and drunkenness, all whoredom and
wantonness, all feigned profession of chastity without a continual
continency both of mind and body, he being first of all, a myrrour to his
subjects in ye temperature and moderation of diet, for the^ most chiefly
Kingdoms be blessed, Proverb. 29. Eccles. 10.
Cum Principes vescuntur in tempore suo ad reficiendum, and non ad luxuriam.
When Princes do feed in due season to refresh and sustain their weak
bodies, and not pamper up to loathsome lusts. And as Socrates says: In suis
exhor.
Illud Regnum in gradu aeterno facile steterit, vbi minimu^ virium Veneris
cupido sibi vendicauerit. That Kingdom shall stand in steadfast estate, where
as Venus retinue shall have least access. Wherefore the Kings of Egipte used
very precyse diet, drinking a small quantity of Wine, feeding only upon Heal
and Goose, to the end that by their example their Subjects likewise might be
allured thereunto. For vainlie do Princes redress manners, when as first of all
the saturitie of bread, gluttony, surfeiting, is not surprysed and laid in
water. Of which and like enormious crimes, all Princes shall give a straight
account unto the dreadful Judge both of the quick and the dead, when as no
privileges nor charters shall be able to excuse them, Eccle. 24. Sop. 1. Sap.
6. Job. 7.15.12.34. Amos. 9.
who shall search both their words and their works. Et potentes potenter
tormenta patientur. And pourable persons shall suffer passing punishments, yea
the Lords eyes be upon such, and conteret illos a facie terrae. And he shall
root the^ from the face of ye earth. For they be as S. Paul calls the^
vltores ad ira^, wrathful reuengers of malefactors, Romans 13.
they bearing not a sword in vain. Holding one to be awarded against his
Subjects, and an other to be commenced against the foreign enemy. The first is
called the sword of judgment, wherewith the evil members are cut of. The
second is called the sword of war, tendered against the forrener, whereby
public peace, equity, and quietness may be by him obtained for his subjects,
he being ye minister of God unto their behouf and wealth, for the which S.
Paul teaches that they do pay tribute, whereof there are three especial
respects and laudable ends, to wit, that they should be ornaments of peace,
Cicero pro leg. Manili.
ye subsidies of war, and ye knitting sinnowes of ye whole public weal. But
here especially let Princes take heed, that no such talenges be levied on ye
people, to serve, as instruments, their private lusts and ryotous life. Let them
also further understand, as Xenophon warned renoumed King Cyrus, that (...):
Regula Regis non affectus, sed lex esse debet. Not the will or affection of the
Prince, but the law ought to be a rule unto him in government, yt which
gives them no interest or right in the occupying and possession of their
subjects goods, but as they may be applied for defense and munition sake,
wherewith under them quietly they may be governed, for the atchieuement
whereof, as subjects ought to pray, 1. Tim. 2.
so Princes ought to use great policy and care: not only in a continual
furnishing of their Realms with certain ordinary bands and frontires of
men, but also in maintayning Navigations and Ships unto the Sea, strengthening
Forts and Blockhouses, repayring ruinous Rodes, Havens and landing places, both
for traffic and safegarde sake, raising up ye walls of decayed Cities,
marching toward the enemy, fortifying the same with artillery, providing for
war in time of peace, weighing in the balance of reason, that be there never
so great a calm, as great a flaw and storm does follow: yea never so high a
hill, but there is as low a dale and valley. Wherefore Solomon is commended in
holy writ, and so also is King Asa in the Scriptures. Whose examples all other
Princes ought to imitate and follow such exploits and trauelles, being worthy
for their personages, Esaias. 32.
according to the testimony of the Prophet Esaias: Princeps ea quae sunt digna
Principe cogitabit, and ipse super duces stabit. A Prince shall respect those
things which be sitting for his estate, and he shall guide and order the
enterprises of his captains. Whose majesty and authority is the only gift of
God, whose lucky success in battle comes from the Lord of Hosts, whose
reverence, love, and loyalty in ye people, issues from Gods spirit,
according to the saying of Solomon: Pro. 20.
Vt oculus videat, and auris audiat, Dominus facit vtrumque. That the eye
should see, and the ear hear, the Lord brings both to pass. Which we may
behold in the Patriarch Joseph. Whom God made to excel in wisdom, to foresee
that famine to come, to remedy that present mischief: to be short, that the
ear of Pharao with all the Egyptians should hear this young man being a
prisoner, and should also obey his motions, it was the only benefit of God.
The like is to be said of Themistocles, in whom God maruellously brought to
pass, that he should through counsel prevail, weighing how war was to be
te^dered against Xerxes, commending his policies unto the Grecians, who
willingly should obey and receive the same. Unto these must a Prince wyshe good
success, according to the desire of Aeschylus: (...). Post Consilium sequatur
obedientia and successus. After aduisement let obedience consequently follow
in the Subjects, and in the feats of chivalry good success, so that the
common Aphorism may take place: Par sit fortuna labori. Let Fortune answer
travail and toil. So shall his Kingdom prosper and flourish, his wisdom
shall be spread throughout ye whole world, his noble conquestes to immortality
shall be commended, his Princely offspring shall never fail, he shall be
blessed in the length of days, Pro. 14. Psalm. 60.62.
the multitude of people, with obedient and loyal subjects, and in the
abundance of all good and profitable things. Da. 9.
So should all plagues and famines be far estraunged from him, the confusion
of face and family arrefte, the fear of foreign enemy far foreclosed,
having always before his eyes this short verse, writing the same in the
supplied table of his heart. (...): Principium and finem in omnibus facito
Deum. 2. Para. 16.
In all things make God thy beginning and ending, in him only put thou thy
trust, and not in other Princes, who places Princes in their Soueraygne
seats, Da. 2. and. 4. Pro. 8. Esaias. 32. Job. 36.41.
and there confirms them for ever, by whom Kings do rule, and Lawegiuers
yield just sentence, having dominion in all Kingdoms, and on whom he will, he
bestows them. To whom even God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost, three distinct persons, and one immortal and everlasting God, be all
honor, glory, and praise world without end. Amen.

JMPRINTED AT London by H. Denham. Anno. 1566.


