DIACATHOLICON AVREVM: Or A general powder of Gold, purging all offensive
humors in man's BODY: Good in general for all diseases, where there needs
any Purgation: As also for any sickness yearly incident, or which is feared
to approach by the increase of any evil humor, distemperature of diet, or
otherwise how so ever growing toward any disease, to prevent the same, and
keep the body in health.

It may safely be taken of all manner of people, of what age soever, sucking
Children, old men and women, in the quantity of two, three, or four Grains,
according to the age, strength, and disease of the party.

Whosoever stand in need of this powder, may have it at the sign of the Hand
and Pistall, near unto Iuie Bridge, for two shillinge six pence the Grain.

Hordea cui cordi demum serit hordea, ne tu
Nunc aliunde pares auri primordia, in auro
Semina sunt auri: quamuis abstrusa recedant
Longius, and nobis multo quaerenda labor.
LONDON Printed for John Flasket. 1602.

To the right worshipful Doctors and professors of Physic of the College in
London, authorized by ancient Charter: and the rest of the Doctors, professors
and Students of the same learned faculty, either resident in the Universities
of Cambridge and Oxford: Or elsewhere dispersiuely placed, and authorized in
any cities or towns through this Realm of England: Increase of knowledge, and
prosperous success in your several affairs and cures, to the glory of God,
good of his people, and advancement of your profession.
EVery Art and faculty (Right worshipful Doctors, professors and Students in
the necessary and honorable faculty of Physic) whose foundation is not laid
on demonstration, but only on probable and physical conjectures, is in it
self so hidden and intricate, that even about the principles, elements and
grounds thereof, there are diverse and almost contrary opinions: from whence in
every such faculty spring up diverse heads of sects, which in time infinitely
multiply, and as this proposition we see by experience true in all
generalities, so in this faculty of Physic it is daily verified. Hence in
Galens time (as he witnesses in his book Desectis) there were three sorts of
Phisicians: the first which were called Emperici and Memores: the second,
Dogmatici and Rationales: the third, Methodici and Abbreuiatores: to these
three, this age has added a fourth, called Paracelsians, but they themselves
would be called the ancient Phisicians, the true Philosophers, the Chimists,
and the Spagerists, to set down the grounds of either of their professions,
the opinions on either sides: their arguments to maintain those opinions,
would be to enter into a large field of discourse, which at this time is not
mine intent to do, left I might say with the Poet, Ante diem clauso componet
vesper Olympo: this only has here moved me to mention them, thus to show mine
opinion of them in brief, that whereas some do attribute so much to
distillations and preparations of Minerals, Animales, and Vegetables, that they
firmly hold both the parts of Physic as well Hygeinen as Therapeyticen to
be completely performed only by them, and others so much wilfully bent or
ignorantly seduced against the true intended perfection of Physic, do
contrarily hold, that it is only desperate and dangerous Physic which is
attempted by minerals, prepared by the Spagiricall art, and that it had been
far better, that it had slept in silence and never been known to the world.
Betwixt these two extremes I think it best to hold a mean, so that I neither
allow the extremity of the one, nor embrace the defects of the other: but mine
opinion is, that both the sorts of medicinable preparation of simples, as well
that which is done by the Apothecaries craft, as also by the Spagiricall art, I
say, both of them have their proper place and necessary uses in Physic,
(amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles, sed magis amica veritas) so that I judge
this latter age of the world much bound to the careful searchers out of those
hidden secrets of nature, which are so bound up in minerals and vegetables, and
outwardly do not appear but by extraction and magisterie, and great folly it
were utterly to reject them as many wilfully do. Let them but attentively
read Hippocrates book De art, and see how he there deciphereth out a wise
man, and a mad malicious fool, the wisdom of the one consisting in the
finding out in arts, those things which are not yet found out, and in the
bringing imperfect things to a perfect end, but the malicious foolishness of
the other being seen in railing on those things which are already found out,
controlling, but not correcting any thing amiss. The words of Hippocrates are
these, Eorum aliquid quae nondum inuenta sunt inuenire, quodque inuenisse quam
non inuenisse praestiterit, similiterque imperfecta ad finem deducere id mihi
videtur illius esse munus, qui intelligens exiflimari expetit: qui vero ea quae
ab aliis sunt inuenta inhonestorum verborum artificio contaminare contendit,
neque quicquam corrigit, sed a peruis inuenta apud imperitos traducit, is sane
prudentiae existimationem tueri velle non videtur, sed potius naturam suam at
ignorantiam malitiose prodere. By which words it is manifest, that Hippocrates
did not so ambitiously presume upon his own knowledge and absolute perfection
in this faculty of Physic: but that he did confess, and as it were
intimate, that the time would be, when as it would be bettered by far, and
brought to more perfection, which Hippocrates himself did prophecy of in his
book De prisca medicina, acknowledging there, that only an entrance was found
out to Physic, but more excellenter things by far in process of time
should be: the words are these: In medicina principium and via inuenta est,
per quam praeclara multa longo temporis spatio sunt inuenta, and reliqua
deinceps inuenientur si quis probe comparatus fuerit, vt ex inuentorum
cognitione ad ipsorum inuestigationem feratur. Which Galen also affirms in
the conclusion of his book entitled, Quod optimus medicus idem sit and
philosophus, affirming there, that if we diligently apply our selves to the
study of Philosophy, and seek to be true emulators of Hippocrates, so doing
we may become not only like to him, but far excelling, truly understanding
those things which are delivered by him, and finding out by our own industry,
those things which remain in the faculty of Physic, unknown by the words:
therefore both of Hippocrates and Galen, there were many things in Physic
which were unknown to them, and in their time not found out, Galen himself
witnessing in the ninth book De simplicium medicamentorum facultate, that he
had never tried whether Quicksiluer, being applied outwardly or taken inwardly,
would kill or no. So by both their judgments those were worthy of praise and
not discredit, which by the true grounds of natural philosophy, and by the
help of those things truly delivered and set down by those two pillars of
Physic, did by all labor endeavor to find out more excellent things for the
curing of diseases. Yea, which is more, we are enforced (lest open scandal and
reproach should redound to the art) to seek out new remedies for some diseases
which were unknown both to Hippocrates and Galen, as the French Pox, the
Measils, and the English sweat, and others of the like kind, otherwise
Physic would hardly be deemed an art.

These two grave and reverend fathers of Physic I have therefore alleged
(though necessity and common good had been a sufficient shield for this mine
enterprise) that under the couerture of their wings, tanquam sub Palladis
aegide, I might be shadowed from reproach and blame, and having two such strong
Atlasses, I might the better bear the burden of that province which I have
undertaken, namely, to publish to the world, and present to your Worships good
considerations, trial and equal censures, an universal purging powder made
of gold, silver, and mineral water by art and sire to that perfection
decocted, whose operation and virtues I have briefly set down in the small
Treatise following, referring the particular use of it to the judgment of
every Phisician, to specificate it at his own discretion with any other purging
simple, that it may work the effect speedier, and be more properly directed
to any humor afflicting, or peculiar member afflicted: and although in the
publishing of a true secret, I neither use dialecticall arguments to enforce,
rhetorical persuasions to allure, Lawyers il-loquence to urge, Poets fictions
to delight, Painters colors to deceive, all which may make that seem to be
which is not, and that which is, seem not to be: yet this I humbly entreat,
that as I nakedly deliver an approved truth, so it may courteously be
censured, as it shall be found by perfect trial: for Trueths ancient
Hierogliphicke, is a virgin bare and naked, and having no deformity, being
from top to toe pure, unspotted and beautiful, needs no borrowed or
counterfeit colors. This powder I present unto your Worships, and make known
unto the world, for the love and increase of the desired perfection of
Physic, and the general good of the diseased, and withal for mine own
commodity, being thereunto animated by the granted authority of Hippocrates,
and Galen, and diverse other of our neotericke classicke Phisicians, lest such a
secret in Physic should be buried in his own ashes, the publishing whereof,
I hope, shall not give any offense to the learned, but will rather be allowed
and gladly accepted: which done, I rest humbly at your Worships pleasures and
command, deuoting unto you the fruits of all my hopes and studies.

Thomas Russel.

G. N. Gentleman.
LEt Antioch keep their raging Scammonie,
And send that cancred bane to Barbary.
Let deadly Colocinthis bitter gall,
On great Armenia's craggie mountains fall.
Let Tithimal make Persian widows weep,
And India still their harmeful Turbith keep:
Since Englands happy I Will small stand's in need,
Of any such farre-set outlandish weed.
For here the Sunn's fair beams do shine so bright,
As lesser Stars are like to lose their light.
G. P. Philosophiae chimisticae Studiosus.
TIme lay's in dust the Monarkes of each age,
When al their pomp does cease, and princely grace.
Time made strong Milon weep, and Helen rage,
He for weak arm's, she for her wrinckled face.
Time caused Pyramides in Memphis plain,
Lowly to kiss their mother earth again.
The Heart, long'st-liu'd of every beast in field,
The oak, the flint, the steel by sturdie strength,
And each thing else under the Moon, does yield
To dint of death, and change of time at length.
Only this glorious shining Sun on earth,
At whose celestial frame, and wondrous birth,
Nature did equalize, fire, water, air,
With purest yellow earth, most duly mixed:
No time, nor means, can utterly impair,
But still remains uniform, and fixed.
Then since no time the subject can deface,
How then can any time thy name outrace?
G. K. in Artibus magister.
EAch wit for wished health makes best invention:
Some post a ship to fetch home Indian weed's.
Some heap a mass of drugges, whose silly mixion
May blindly hap to cure, yet often the grief it feed's.
But all that love to try some certain remedy,
Apply and taste this true, much labored mystery,
Extracting health from Gold, in whose center,
Of all four element's, there is perfect temper.
In Zoilum.
TO praise the Authors worth, that craves his trial,
Were of his own intent a flat denial.
The Sophies of the world do claim the Art,
The matters influence rules every heart.
Therefore to praise his skill or matter done,
Were but to light a candle in the Sun.
And if some Momus be so mad to chide,
He has his due, to rest vnsatisfide.
So for advantage, and for trials fame,
I cease, till he give cause himself to shame.
And if by him in secret it be hist,
Who but a Cow does shun the open list?
S. W. Medicus.

DIACATHOLICON AVREVM: Or A general powder of Gold, purging all offensive
humors in man's BODY.
Chap. I. Whereof the powder is made, and of the Philosophical preparation of
it.
Whatsoever the Almighty disposer of universal nature, has dispersiuely
infused in the generality of natural things, either celestial or
terrestrial, the same is collectiuely found in one particular of the same
kind; as for example, what virtue, quality, or influence is dispersiuely
placed in every Star, Orb, or body celestial under the first mouer, the
same is found united in one Sun. What animal faculties are dispersed in all
several living creatures, are gathered together in one man. What hidden virtue
soever, is dispersiuely infused in minerals, is collectiuely united in one
metal, which is Gold, and this is the principal material whereof this powder
consists. But for abbreuiation of time and labor, since it is hard to make a
perfect calcination of Gold by it self, I have therefore, following the opinion
of Auicen, and won with his reasons, added a due proportion of the other
perfect metal, that thereby their agent might make a better subtiliation of
them, which agent in the composition, is the third ingredient, being a
spiritualized metal in the form of mineral water. These three ingredients
only enter this powder and no more: which I term by the name of Diacatholicon
Aureum, because that the chiefest thing, and most in quantity in the
composition is Gold, being brought to that wondrous active quality by the true
mineral fire, which is the agent and long continual decoction: neither do I
use either in my preparation or decoction, any thing but those three
ingredients; that this is true, I can make manifest to any man by demonstratiue
practice before his eyes, on which I will engage goods, life, and credit, that
there never came either common Quicksiluer prepared or unprepared, Antimonie,
Stibium, mean mineral, vttriall, salts, powder, strong water, imperfect
metal, or any other such like thing whatsoever, but only those three
ingredients before named. How I came by this powder, what time I spent in the
speculatiue part of the Magisterie, what labor and cost in the experimental
performance of it, how often I missed in the practice before I could attain to
the perfection of it, if I should here declare, would but weary the reader,
trouble the Printer, wast much paper, seem to sharp censurers, affected and
self conceited discourses, in mine own censure needless circumstances, and
in the end little to the purpose. Omitting therefore all such vain and
needless discourses, I will proceed to show the virtues and operation of it.

CHAP. 2. Of the nature and quality of this Catholicon Aureum.
HIppocrates in the second Apho. of his first book, and the 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. and
9. Aphor. of the fourth book, makes mention of two sorts of purging
medicines, the one by vomit, the other by siege: Of purging medicines by vomit,
Mesue in his first book, De simplicibus medicamentis Purgantibus, the first
Theorem, makes a threefold difference, taken from their faculty more or
less. The first he terms vehement, which extremely disturb nature, as
white Hellebor, and Tithimal, etc. The second mean, as Nux vomica and Nitrum.
The third mild, as Onion seed and Radish. But of simple medicines which purge
by siege, he makes a fourefold difference. The first, are such as purge by
dissolution of the humors, and being dissolved by attraction of them from the
upper parts, or eradication from the lower parts, not that the medicine being
received into the stomach, does penetrate the veins or the solid parts of the
body to euacuate the humor, but by a certain attractiue quality, does draw
his choice and familiar humor through the veins and passages of the body,
into the stomach and bowels, even as we see Iet or Amber draw little strawes,
or the Loadstone Iron, though they touch them not: of this kind, are Scammonie,
Colocinthis and Turbith. The second kind of purging simples, are such as do
not draw, but only purge by driving and pressing out, drying and consuming the
putrid excrements, and afterward binding the body as Mirabolanes, and
Tamaryndes. The third sort purge by mollifying the humors within the stomach
and bowels, as Cassia fistula and Manna. The fourth and last, by making them
slipperie, as the Muscilage of Psillium and Mallows: these three latter kinds
of purgers have a weak faculty, and therefore scarce perspicuous, euacuating
only those humors within the stomach and bowels, which there they meet
withal, not passing the liver or working any thing by attraction. The first
kind of purging medicines which work by attraction, Galen in his book
entitled, Quos purgare oportet, does pronounce that they are all of a hot
quality. Omnia medicamenta purgantia facultate sunt calida, which in natural
Phylosophie must needs be granted, for there are but two active qualities,
heat and cold, as Aristotle witnesses in his fourth book of his
Meteorologickes, the first Chapter.

Now it is manifest, that it is the nature of heat alone to draw, for cold
cannot do it: therefore whatsoever purges by attraction, must needs be of a
hot temperature. This being well known and considered, let us see how all
these kind of purgers work, and the reason why, and then come to show the
nature and operation of this Catholicon Aureum. Galen in the fifth book of the
faculty of simple medicines, affirms, that whatsoever purges, has a
faculty to work on his peculiar and proper humor, some on one, some on two,
and some on more; and that which is proper to any one humor, never works on
another, unless the malignitie of the medicine, or the quantity of the dose
do too much exceed, which Galen also witnesses in his book, De purgantium
Medicamentoru^ facultate. Hippocrates also confirms it in his book, De
natura humana, saying there, That if a medicine be administered to bring forth
fleame, it only brings out fleame: if to purge choler, it only purges
choler: if to euacuate melancholy, it only euacuateth that humor: to whom
Mesue consents in his first book, De simp. medi. purg. the first Theorem,
affirming more plainly, that if a medicine be given to purge melancholy, though
choler and fleame abound much more in the body, yet it leaves them, and
purges melancholy, his own peculiar and destinate humor: whence, they have
this strange faculty, the same Authors opinion is, that it proceeds not from
the temperature of the medicine (meaning the first qualities) nor from one
contrary working on another, nor from like drawing his like, nor as a light
medicine upward, a heavy downward, stirring the matter to be purged: but Quia
talem coelitus est sortitum facultatem: That the faculty of every purging
medicine, proceeds from an heavenly quality and hidden influence.

Now having showed the nature and differences of purging simples, after what
sort they work, and by what means out of their Theoricke, it remains after
perfect inuestigation both by cause and effect, to set down the nature and
operation of this Catholicon Aureum, or general purging powder of Gold. Then,
whereas I said before in the beginning, that all purges work either by vomit
it or siege, this powder of Gold works both up vomit and siege: yet let not
this derogate any thing from the excellency of it, that it works by vomit:
for although I must needs confess, that every action of any part made
against the first ordinance of nature, is improsperous and unfit, and so seeing
nature did at first ordain the Gula for attraction, and the Pilorum for
expulsion: therefore by consequent, all vomits made by contrary motion to
nature, are improsperous and hurtful: although I say, this be simply true and
cannot be denied, yet respectively and by accident, vomits are not only not
hurtful, but very commodious, and necessary as well for the curing of
diseases, as for the regiment of health. For when there is abundance of light
Choler, thin water, and fleame swimming on the top of the stomach, the
expulsive faculty cannot drive them downward, by reason of their lightness,
neither is nature able to digest them, so they must of necessity be euacuated
by vomit, and so of two evils the less must be chosen, this way of purging
being allowed and commended by Galen and Hippocrates, and mightily confirmed by
the Academie of Salerne, prescribing for the regiment of health to vomit once a
month. To which of the four differences of purging medicines to refer this
powder, is a matter very difficult, seeing it was never yet truly and
Philosophically determined by any Paracelsian, whether Mercury or any mineral
purge did work Attrahendo humores, by drawing the humors together into the
stomach. But my assertion is, that this powder of Gold does not work
Attrahendo, or Comprimendo, and Exprimendo, but Leniendo, and Lubricando, which
I prove thus.

There is no cold medicine which does purge by Attraction; but the outward
quality in the superficies of this powder, from whence the purging faculty
proceeds (as is plainly showed in the end of the sixth Chapter) is cold,
therefore per conclude, that it cannot draw any humors into the stomach. My
proposition was proved before by the natural effects of heat and cold, and
by the authority of Galen before cited, in his book entitled: Quos purgere
oportete and in his fifth book, De simp. medi. facul. the sixteen Chapter. My
assumption I prove thus: as is the effect, so is the cause: but the effect
which Mercury works is cold, and therefore Mercury it self is cold: My
proposition in the Philosophers maxim, the assumption is proved by instance in
the disease called the Palsy, and relaxation of the Sinews, which we see
daily happen to those that deals much with Quicksiluer, as our Gilders with
rich Gold, being caused by the sin of the Quicksiluer. Now that the Palsy is
a cold disease, Galen witnesses in his fourth book De causis pulsuum. My
second instance is taken from another effect of Mercury, which is this, When
any has taken a great quantity, as much as will poison a body, during all
the time of the working of it, the party shall never thirst, which if it were
hot, it would inflame the blood and vital spirits, and cause intolerable
thirst, as it happens after the taking of all hot poisons, for the party
will thirst even to the death, which is proved by an example cited of
Conciliator, in his book De venenis, of an Apothecarie, who thirsting in the
extreme heat of Summer, in the night time took a Pitchard of Quicksiluer in
stead of some drink or other, and drank of it, forthwith it cooled his
thirst, congealed the blood, and destroyed the vital spirits, and being found
dead in his bed in the morning, his body by the advice of a Physician was cut
up, and there was found in his stomach one pound of Quicksiluer, the blood in
his heart being congealed: by which the same Author concluded, that it was of
a cold quality.

To these instances may be added, that it is in the form of water altogether
without taste, not bitter, sharp, sour, salt, sweet, or having any
stiplicitie or corrosiuenesse. Besides these probable inductions, the
authority of diverse of our modern Authors may be added, who have diligently
both by speculation and proof inuestigated the nature of it, whatsoever
Paracelsus through vain subtilties and trifling arguments, goes about to
persuade the world that it is of a hot quality: then since the superficial
purging quality of this powder is cold, it manifestly proves that it does not
purge by attraction. The second reason which proves that this powder does not
purge by attraction, is taken from a sure demonstration by certain experience,
which is this. The first time that it is administered unto any body, it will
work his effect duly as it ought to do, euacuating the humors, but if it
be administered again the next day, it will then very little work by siege
or vomit, or nothing at all, by reason the first day it did euacuate all the
humors within the stomach and bowels, which it then met withal: now all
other purges attractiue being taken again the second day, will work afresh,
because they still draw mo humors out of the veins and fleshie parts of the
body, and if there be none to draw, they dissolve and melt the flesh it
self, draw blood out of the veins, and spirits out of the arteries, and so by
consequent life it self: which vice would also be incident to this powder of
Gold, if it did work any whit by attraction, which seeing it does not, it
cannot hold with the natural possibility of this powder, to produce any such
fatal event: and as it works not Attrahendo, so neither does it work
Comprimendo, because it leaves the body after always soluble, sometimes a
week, a month, yea, a quarter of a year: by which may be noted the
excellency and pre-eminence that this purge has above all other purging
medicines in the world: for this must needs be granted, which Galen himself
confesses in his book entitled, Quos purgare oportet, That al purging
medicines which work by attraction, are very offensive to the stomach, and
noisome to all parts of the body, diverse symptoms and great inconveniences
following them, by reason when there is such a sudden violent and unnatural
pulling, and riuing the humors from blood wherein life consists, nature can
hardly endure, this separation being before so firmly united together, without
her great detriment and loss of many spirits, the inconveniences and vices
whereof, I will show at large in the sixth Chapter.

Now this purge of Gold, seeing it works not by attraction, cannot be
scandalized with any of those blots, neither can any such symptoms follow it.
But happily some may here object, that if it only purge Leniendo and
Lubricando, and not Attrahendo; how can it remove and purge stubborn and
rebellious humors, out of the veins and solid remote parts of the body, and
then not being able to remove them, how can it be good almost for any disease:
and to conclude, it were as good to take a glister, or eat a little Cassia,
Manna, or stued Pruines, as to take this golden purge. To this I answer, that
though it purge not the humors within the veins and fleshie parts by
attraction: yet it does either help nature to digest them, or expel them by
sweat and Urine, which is a direct course according to natures own
proceedings: so you see that it does work by vomit, siege, sweat, and urine,
according as nature is burdened and ouerladed: for if the stomach be
oppressed with light choler, water, and phlegm, it purges them by vomit: if
the intestines and lower parts be ouercharged with choler, water, or phlegm,
it works by siege: if either stomach or bowels be ouerladen with melancholy,
it euacuateth always that humor by siege: if the blood and the solid parts of
the body be oppressed with any of those humors, it dissolueth them and
opens their passage, and purges them by sweat and insensible expiration. If
the Emulgent veins or reins of the back be burdened with choler, phlegm, or
melancholy, or have any obstructions, it opens the passages, dissolueth the
humors, and brings them out by Urine; for it purges all the vicious and
offensive humors alike, not having any humor destinate to it, but as the body
is most ouercharged, on that it works first. In the answering this objection,
a greater may arise among the learned, and that is this: Whereas I say that
this powder of Gold does purge by sweat and Urine, how can that agree with
natural Philosophy and experience, that a cold quality (which I affirmed
before this powder had) can open, dissolve, sweat, and expel by Urine. To
this I answer, that though the outward superficial quality of this powder of
Gold be cold, from the Mercurialitie, yet inwardly there is a subtle acrious
heat, from the Aureitie, which is stirred up and animated by the natural
heats of our bodies, and brought in Energian.

Nature being always wise in her working, making separation of the cold
quality in the superficies of the medicine, to work by vomit and siege: and
selecting the subtle inward medicinable virtue, drawing it into the veins to
help her self to work away all that offends her, she being always prone
to her emendation and perfection. And thus I have showed in general the nature
and working of this powder of Gold; but fearing lest I have exceeded those
strait limits I allotted my self, I am enforced to omit many things that were
expedient to be spoken of this matter: only touching these things, as brief
as I could, which are necessary; but if there be any that rests not contented
with that which here is said, I will by conference fully satisfy him at any
occasion.

CHAP. 3. How and in what quantity this powder is to be taken.
COmmonly for a sucking child two grains will suffice, for youth three
grains, for middle age and most sort of people four grains, for strong
folks and stubborn diseases five grains. It may be taken in a spoonefull of
drink, Aqua-vitae, or spirit of Wine, in the pappe of an Apple, or a Quince,
in the pulpe of Raysens or Pruines, in a little broth, in conserve of Roses or
Barberies, or in any such like thing: Or if it please the Physician in any
sirupe, powder, electuarie or potion, proper to that disease, or especial
humor which he does intend to purge, which I leave to the learned discretion
of every Physician, who may well determine of every particular patient, which
in generality it is impossible for me to do: but particularly I can direct
any that shall require it for what intent so ever, either in Pill, Potion,
Lezenge or Electuarie, according as shall best fit the disease, and the
Patients content.

CHAP. 4. Of the preparation of the body, and time when this powder is to be
taken, to the intent that any man may use it, that has not the Phisician
always at hand.
SInce there are diverse that inhabit in the Country far from any Phisician,
which cannot easily resort to one when they stand in need: and diverse of the
poorer sort of people, that are not of sufficient ability to pay the Phisician
for his counsel, and the Apothecarie for his drugs, therefore I thought it
convenient to signify thus much unto them, or to any other that are determined
to take it, how they shall take it, and how to prepare their body and make it
fit, for what purpose so ever they would have it. If there be any therefore
which to the intent to keep their bodies in health, or to prevent any usual
sickness incident unto them, or having already any Ague, weakness of the
stomach, or molested with superfluity of humors, or any disease mentioned in
the Chapter following, by the opinion of the Phisician; I say, if any of these
be determined to take of this powder, let them first consider, whether they do
intend to sweat much or little, at the time of the working of it: if much, let
them keep them warm in their bed; if little, let them sit up by a fire in
their Chamber: Then let them consider whether they would have it work more by
vomit then siege, or more by siege then by vomit. If they would have it work
more by vomit; first, let them eat a great meals meat ouernight: but if they
would have it work more by siege, let them eat ouernight very little or fast
altogether. Secondly, if they would it work more by vomit then by siege, let
them a little after they have taken it, drink five or six spoonefuls of warm
water, and saliet Oil, or warm water alone. But if they would have it work by
more siege, let the^ presently after they have taken it, drink five or six
spoonefuls of cold water: but whether they would have it work by vomit or
siege, let them ouernight take before supper, if they sup at all, or in stead
of their supper, as many of these Pruines as they please. Take water, or
Rhenish wine, or both together, and dissolve pure English Honey in it, or
Sugar, as much as will make Mead, or Sirup of it, and in this Sirup, let the
best damask Pruines be stued.

Take ouernight of these Pruines and the Sirup, as much as you will; or take
Sirup of the infusion of Roses, or Sirup of Vinegar, or any such gentle soluble
thing to prepare the body before: but after they have taken the powder, during
all the time of the working of it, drink the whereof Posset drink, made with
clarified Mace, and Ale. And at dinner, eat some breath made with light meat
at supper, and afterward use your ordinary diet, but sparingly at first.

CHAP. 5. For what diseases this powder is good.
SEeing that this powder does purge all offensive humors to man's nature, as
well simple as mixed: therefore I conclude, that this Catholicon is good for all
diseases, when as there needs any Purgation of any humor, either upward,
downward, by sweat, or Urine; for the cause removed, the effect must needs
cease, and in this kind it may have the pre-eminence above all other purging
medicines, which ever Art or invention till this day found out: and although it
may justly challenge this pre-eminence both by art and nature, namely by the
matter whereof and the means whereby it is made, yet are other simples and
confections never the worse, nor less to be regarded, for even they in their
due place and time may be mixed with this, to make a more peculiar purging
medicine, more specificate to any member affected or humor exceeding. Moreover
it far excels them all in these properties, namely in the smalnes of the
quantity, the aptness of the receite, the not offensiuenesse in taste; soon,
safe and pleasantly working his effect, and in the wholesomnesse of it to man's
body, even by the testimony of Mesue himself, affirming those to be the
wholesomest purges which are sweet or without taste: For this being
administered in the quantity of two, three, four, or five grains at the most,
may as well be taken as a piece of bread, or spoonefull of drink, and having
no taste, never offends the Patient, as shall be showed hereafter; for here
with brevity, I intend to set down the chief diseases for which this powder
is specially good, and leave the rest to the good censtoeration of the
Phisician.

1 Headache proceeds from choler, phlegm, or melancholy, or mixed humor. 2
Headache from an evil stomach. 3 Megrim. 4 Vertigo or Turnabout. 5 Dead
sleep. 6 Apoplexy. 7 Frenzy. 8 Loss of memory. 9 Noli me tangere, Cancer.
10 Erisipelas. 11 Carbuncle. 12 Elephantiasis. 13 Pustles. 14 Scabs and Itch.
15 Leprosy, or any tumors against nature. 16 Cough. 17 Asthma, or difficulty
of breathing. 18 Inflammation of the Lungs. 19 Spitting of matter. 20 Ptisicke.
21 Pleuresie. 22 Spitting of blood. 23 Swounding. 24 Weakness of the stomach.
25 Vomiting. 26 Great thirst. 27 Loss of appetite. 28 Doglike appetite. 29
Surfeting. 30 Sighing. 31 The night Mare. 32 The Cholicke. 33 Iliaca passio. 34
Windiness in the body. 35 All sorts of Worms. 36 Fluxes, Lienteria,
Dissenteria, and Diarrhaea, because in the beginning it is good to purge away
the vicious humor. 37 The Emmorrhoids or Piles. 38 Obstructions and
distemperature of the Liver. 39 Iaundise, yellow and black. 40 The Green
sickness. 41 The Dropsy, Anasarcha, Vposarcha, and Timpanites. 42 The
obstructions of the Spleen. 43 Flatus melancholicus hypoc. 44 Vlceration of the
Reins. 45 The Stone or gravel in the Reins. 46 Strangurie. 47 Difficulty of
pissing. 48 Pissing of blood. 49 For bringing down women's Flowers. 50
Sterilitie or barrenness. 51 The quotidian Ague. 52 The Tertian. 53 The
burning Fever. 54 The Quartane. 55 The Pestilence.
In all these diseases it is good to take of this powder, yet imagine not that
this of it self will cure them perfectly, yet many of them it will, as most
sort of Headaches, and weakness of the stomach, all sorts of worms, the three
Fluxes with an other simple after the body is purged, the Stone in the reins,
women's terms, and all manner of Agues (the Fever Hecticke, and Marasmus
excepted) whether the humors be enflamed within the veins or without, in all
manner of people, sucking children and other, commonly at once taking, but for
the Quartan it will ask longer time. Also I presume it will cure yt Pestilence
if it be taken in any time, and not past al help.

Finally, for the French Pox* or any simptome thereof beginning, it is the most
singular medicine that ever was found out, for without hot-houses, loathsome
diet drinks, bathing in Cornelius Tub, any other Purgations, annoyntments,
fumes, or Suffumigations with Quicksiluer, making most loathsome Excoriations
and painful Exulcerations, eating the teeth out of the head, and dissoluing
the Sinews, and other simptomes, this only of it self, if it be taken before
the desperate symptoms do appear, will cure them, and doubtless excels
all other that art or nature can this day afford.

In like manner it may be probably coniectured, by the authority of diverse
Authors, and reasoning from the materials whereof it is made, that it may cure
the Gout, if it be not already grown to a desperate period. Now that I have
showed for what diseases this powder is good, some may expect that I should set
down the particular experiences that I have made of it, to wit, the Cures
which it has performed, with the names of the parties, the time when, and the
place of their abode, to the intent it might the better persuade the hard
believing world, of the good effects of it, and give greater credit to my
words. But for these causes I have wittingly and willingly omitted the^: first,
in regard that many of ye parties are not willing to have their names come in
print, nor the diseases known of which they have been cured. Secondly, the
rehearsal of these cures performed by my self and my friends which have
administered it, would ask a longer discourse then all my treatise besides.
Lastly, I might happily be condemned of too much arrogance and vainglory, seeming
to incline for the most part to ye emperical sect. To avoid therefore imagined
arroga^cie, tediousness in discourses, and displeasure to my friends, I have
purposely neglected that which might well here have been spoken of this large
subject.

CHAP. 6. What symptoms and accidences happen after the taking of this powder.
I Think it not impertine^t to this purpose, first to show what symptoms and
inconveniences follow and happen to the body after usual purgations, that
thereby the difference between them and this powder of gold may be plainly
perceived.

Galen in his book entitled, Quos oportet purgare, gives a general and true
proposition of all purging medicines: Omnia purgantia medicamenta ventriculum
vitiant, praecipueque os ipsius, etc. which Mesue largely confirms in his
first book De simp. medic. purga. the first theorem, whereto all other
Phisicions with one consent agree, and by experience we see it daily verified:
and they do not only hurt the stomach in particular, but are also grievous
to nature itself, offending the principal parts of the body, so that the
diligent searchers out of their faculties and operations have noted these
symptoms which usually follow the taking of the^. The first is, Agues, because
they do inflame the humors. The second, Cephalalgia, by reason of their
vapors fuming up into the head. The third, Vertigo, caused by the circumaction
of vapors raised up into the brain within his ventricles and arteries. The 4.
imbecility of sight, by reason of too much dryness of the parts of the eyes,
which follow superfluous euacuation, or of the humor within the nerve optic,
which those purges dissolve and cannot euacuate. The 5. weakness of the
stomach, caused diverse ways by the distemperature which the medicine bred.
The 6. immoderate thirst, caused by the saltness, sharpness, heat and
bitterness of the medicine. The 7. sighing, caused either of immoderate heat
and acrimony of the medicine gnawing the stomach, or by his dryness drawing
it together. The 8. pain of the stomach, caused of the unequal
distemperature or exulceration which the purge made. The 9. excoriation of the
bowels, through the corrosiue and fretting quality of the medicine. The 10.
inflammation of the reins, proceeding from the heat of the medicine. 11. The
stone of the reins, by reason of abundance of slimy matter brought to that
place, and by heat baked into a stone. 12. Voyding of blood, provoked by the
vlceration of the bowels. 13. Tenasmus, or a vain desire to go to stool, by
reason the spincter or muscle of the fundame^t is vlcerated through the
acrimony of the medicine or humor voyded. 14. The Emmorrhoids or Plies caused
by such medicines as open the veins. 15. Imbecility or weakness of the whole
body, by reason of the general disturbance of nature, caused by the violence
of the medicine. 16. Convulsion, caused of much matter stirred up and drawn
together, but not euacuated, which after having recourse to the sinews and
muscles, causes convulsion. 17. Costiuenesse, the body being left hot and dry
after the purge, and then baketh the excrements, which does happen in sundry
purgations, and most Patients complain of it. All which diseases do happen to
them that take purgations for three especial causes, being three maine vices
incident to most of usual medicines that purge. The first, when they do move,
dissolve, and draw together offensive humors, and nature not able to euacuate
the^. The second, when humors are euacuate illegitmately and with molestation
of the Patient, which happens when they are ministered for those humors which
they ought not. The third, when they do too much euacuate, working too
violently, making excoriation of the stomach and bowels, and drawing the blood
out of the veins. For the correction of these symptoms, the learned Phisicions
in all ages, having especial care of their Patients health, labored by all
means possible to find out Antidotes and correctors to withstand their
inconveniences, and break their malice: and in regard each purging medicine
had some manifest vice or other, they did not only invent general correctors
to avoid such capital vices, but also particular for every such medicine.
Hence Aloes had Mastick, Bdellium, and Tragagant, to keep it from opening of
the veins and drawing blood out of them, and causing the Emmorrhoids.
Mirabolanes were prepared with oil of sweet Almonds, and administered with
juice of Fumitary, Wormwood, Agarick, and Spikenard, and Diuretics, to hinder
them from causing obstructions. Scammony was corrected with juice of Quinces
and vinegar, to break his malice, and given with Aromaticks and comforters of
the principal parts, to overcome his enmity to the whole body. Turbith was
corrected with Ginger, to avoid windiness: and so in like manner every one had
his particular correcter, directer, and helper to work duly, and qualify
their vices. This known and well considered, it rests to show whether there
be any such vice in this Catholicon Aureum or no; and herein is the difference
seen between this and all other purges, that whereas all of them need
correctors to break their malice, Aromatickes to take away their lothsomnesse
and help their working, admixture of contraries to stay their violent and
immoderate operation, and Cordials to comfort and defend the principal parts:
So that if the ill effects they work, be weighed in an equal balance with
their good, the good will scarce counterpoyse it. This powder only has this
grace, that it never offends any of the principal parts, never draws blood
out of the veins, never works too violently, euacuating more the^ is
burdensome to nature, never inflameth the blood, or any part of the body, never
makes exulceration of the stomach and bowels, never violently draws humors,
but after a direct course helps nature to digest them or expel them by
sweat, urine, and expiration, never needs any corrector, nor has any such
inconvenience: therefore by consequent, never raises any such symptoms which
usually follow the taking of the other purges, but contrariwise I affirm that
it strengthens the heart, the liver, the brain, and the whole body,
purifieth the blood, reuiueth the spirits, making them fit and apt to do all
their functions natural. That this is true, I give the learned thus much to
consider. The materials whereof this powder consists in general are two, for
in it are two corporeal substances mixed and united together, not as Elementa
in composito mixta inseperabilia, but as salt dissolved and mixed with water,
or sugar in wine per minima as far as that mixion and vnicion may be, yet
with more fixation and very hard (yet possible) separation. One of the
substances is Metalline fixed, the other Mercuriall fixed agent and patient. Of
these two united together is this powder made; from these two in one, proceed
two several qualities, the one purging by siege Leniendo and Lubricando; by
vomit Os stomachi aperiendo, and Naturam fortiter mouendo. The other comforting
from the Aureity, and helping natural heat to dissolve open, and expel
whatsoever is offensive either within the vessels, or without, by sweat and
expiration: and as neither Mercury it self without his incorruptible patient
can safely purge or work any good effect, so neither Gold without his
Mercuriall agent the true mineral fire, can be so subtiliate as to comfort
nature and expel offensive humors, but both Philosophically circulate
together make this perfect purge. From these reasons it may be gathered, why it
both purges and comfort, from the one quality leaving the body long after
soluble, from the other quality strengthening the vital spirits and animal
faculties, restoring also natural heat and radical moisture to the
temperature thereof.

CHAP. 7. The conclusion.
CVrteous Reader, I have thus breefely and truly showed the materials whereof
this powder consists, the preparation of it, the qualities and operation, the
differences between this and all other purges, and in what diseases it is good
to take it; yet imagine not that it will cure them of it self alone, but only
serving for a preparation to their cures, wheresoever there needs any purging
in stead of all other, yet many of those diseases as I noted before, it will of
it self cure, with diverse others which time and experience shall make
manifest, and the ingenious Reader may easily gather from the instance of
those, and that with more effectual, safe, pleasant, and speedice working,
then any other at this day known and invented: and if any hereafter require
farther satisfaction of the natural possibility hereof, either by authority,
reason, or experience, I shall be ready at any occasion to do it, either by
word or writing; in the mean time commending these first fruits of my labors
to his indifferent and equal censure, Et hic me Plato sistere iubet.

FINIS.

