THE LETTING OF HVMOVRS BLOOD IN THE HEAD-VAINE.

With a new Morissco, daunced by seven Satyrs, upon the bottom of Diogines
Tubbe.



AT LONDON, Printed by W. White for W. F. 1600.

TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS.
HVmours, is late crowned king of Caualeeres.
Fantastique-follies, graced with common favor:
Civility, has served out his years,
And scorreth now to weight on Good be hauour.
Gallants, like Richard the usurper, swagger,
That had his hand continual on his dagger.
Fashions is still consort with new fond shapes,
And feeds daily upon strange disguise:
We show our selves the imitating Apes
Of all the toys that Strangers heads devise:
For there is no habit of hell-hatched sin,
That we delight not to be clothed in.
Some swear, as though they Stars from heaven could pull*
And all their speech is poynted with the stabbe,
When all men know it is some coward gull,
That is but champion to a Shorditch drabbe:
Whose feather is his heads lightnes-proclaymer,
Although he seem some mighty monster tamer.
Epicurisme cares not how he lives,
But still pursues brutish Appetite.
Disdain, regardes not what abuse he gives;
Careless of wrongs, and vnregarding right.
Self-love, (they say) to selfe-conceite is wed,
By which base match are ugly vices bred.
Pride, revels like the roysting Prodigal;
Stretching his credit that his pursse strin^^ crack,
Until in some distresfull Iayle he fall,
Which wore of late a Lordship on his back:
Where he till death must he for debt,
"Griefs night is near, when pleasures sun is set,
Vaunting, has got a mighty thundering voice,
Looking that all men should applaude his sound:
His deeds are singular, his words be choice;
On earth his equal is not to be found.
Thus Vertu's hid with Follies iuggling mist,
And he is no man, that is no Humourist.
S. R.

TO POETS.
GOod honest Poets, let me crave a boon,
That you would write, I do not are how soon,
Against the bastard humors howerly bred,
In every mad brained wit-worne giddie head:
At such gross follies do not sit and wincke,
Belabour these same Gulles with pen and incke.
You see some strive for fair handwriting fame,
As Peeter Bales his sign can prove the same, P. B. by writing won a golden
Pen.

Gracing his credit with a golden Pen:
I would have Poets prove more taller men:
In perfect Letters rested his contention,
But yours consist's in Wits choice rare invention.
Will you stand spending your inventions treasure,
To teach Stage parrats speak for penny pleasure,
While you your selves like music sounding Lutes
fretted and strunge, gain them their silken suits.
Leave Cupids cut, Women's face flattering praise,
Loves subject grows too thredbare now adays.
Change Venus Swannes, to write of Vulcans Geese,
And you shall merit Golden Pens a piece.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Mirth pleases some; to others it is offense:
Some wish to have follies told; some dislike that:
Some commend plain conceits, some profound sense
And most would have, themselves know not what.
Then he that would please all, and him self too,
Takes more in hand, then he is like to do.
EPIG. 1.
MOnsieur Domingo is a skillful man,
For much experience he has lately got,
Proving more Physic in an Alehouse ca^
Then may be found in any Vinthers pot.
Beer he protestes is sodden and refined,
But this he speaks being single penny lyn'd.
For when his purse is swollen dut sixpence bigg
Why then he swears; now by the Lord I think
All Beer in Furope is not worth a fig.
A cup of Claret is the only drink.
And thus his praise from Beer to Wine does go
Even as his Purse in pence does ebb and flow.
EPIG. 2. BOREAS.
HAng him base gull; I Will stabbe him by the Lord,
If he presume to speak but half a word:
^e paunch the villain with my Rapiers point,
^r heaw him with my Fauchion joint by joint.
Through both his cheeks my Poniard he shall have
^r Mince-pie-like I Will mangle out the slave.
^ske who I am, you whoreson frise-gowne patch?
^all me before the Counstable, or Watch?
cannot a Captain walk the Queens highway?
^vones, who de speak to? know ye villains, ha?
^ou drunken pessants, run's your tongs on wheels?
^ong you to see your guts about your heels*
^oest love me Tym? let go my Rapier then,
^erswade me not from killing nine or ten:
^are no more to kill them in braueado,
^hen for to drink a pipe of Trinedado.
^ly mind to patience never will restore-me,
^ntill their blood do gush in streams before-me,
^hus does Sir Lancelot in his drunken stagger,
^^eare, curse and rail, threaten, protest, and swagger
^ut being next day to sober answer brought,
^e's not the man can breed so base a thought.
EPIG. 3.
When Thraso meets his friend, he swears by God,
Unto his Chamber he shall welcome be:
Not that he will cloy him there with roast or sod,
Such vulgar diet with Cooks shops agree:
But he will present most kind, exceeding frank,
The best Tobacco, that he ever drank.
Such as himself did make a voyage for,
And with his own hands gatherd from the ground
All that which other fetch he does abhor,
His, grew upon an Island never found,
Oh rare compound, a dying horse to choke,
Of English fire, and of India smoke.
EPIG. 4.
Who seeks to please all men each way,
And not himself offend,
He may begin his work to day,
But God knows when he will end.
EPIG. 5.
Alas Delfridus keeps his bed God knows,
Which is a sign his worship's very ill;
His grief beyond the grounds of Physic goes,
No Doctor that comes near it with his skill,
Yet does he eat, drink, talk, and sleep profoun^
Seeming to all men's Judgments healthful sound.
Then guess the cause he thus to bed is drawn,
What? think you so; may such a hap procure it?
Well; faith it is true, his hose are out at pawn,
A Breetchlesse chance is come, he must endure it
His hose to Brokers Iayle committed are,
His singular, and only, Velvet pair.
EPIG. 6.
Diogines oneday through Athens went,
With burning Torch in Sunshine: his intent
Was (as he said) some honest man to find:
^or such were rare to meet, or he was blind.
^ne late, might have done well like light to have got
that sought his wife; met her, and knew her not:
^ut stay, cry mercy, she had on her mask,
^ow could his eyes perform their spying task?
^is very true, it was hard for him to do,
^y Sun, and Torch; let him take Lant-horne too.
EPIG. 7.
Speak Gentlemen, what shall we do to day?
Drink some brave health upon the Dutch carous
Or shall we to the Globe and see a Play?
Or visit Shorditch for a bawdie house?
Lets call for Cards or Dice, and have a Game,
To sit thus idle, is both sin and shame.
This speaks Sir Revel, furnished out with fashion,
From dish-crownd Hat, unto the Shoo's square to
That haunts a Whore-house but for recreation,
Plays but at Dice to conny catch or so.
Drinks drunk in kindness, for good fellowship.
Or to Play goes but some Purse to nip.
EPIG. 8.
Sir gall-Iade, is a Horse man every day,
His Boots and Spurs and Legs do never part;
He rides a horse as passing clean away,
As any that goes Tyburne-warde by cart.
Yet honestly he pays for hacknyes hyer,
But hang them Iades, he sell's them when they tire.
He lives not like Diogines on Roots,
But proves a Mince-pie guest unto his Host.
He scorns to walk in Paul's without his Boots,
And scores his diet on the Vitlers post:
And when he knows not where to have his dinner
He fastes, and swears, A glutton is a sinner.
EPIG. 9. Drudo.
This Gentleman has served long in France,
And is returned filthy full of French,
In single combat, being hurt by chance,
As he was closely foyling at a Wench:
Yet hot alarmes he has endured good store,
But never in like pockie heat before.
He had no sooner drawn and ventred ny-her,
Intending only but to have about,
When she his Flaske and Touch-boxe set on fire,
And till this hour the burning is not out.
Judge, was not valor in this Martial wight,
That with a spit-fir Serpent so durst fight.
EPIG. 10. In Meritricem.
Faith Gentleman, you move me to offense.
In coming to me with unchaste pretense.
Have I the looks of a lascivious Dame?
That you should deem me fit for wantons game?
I am not she will take lusts sin upon her,
He rather die, then dim chaste glorious honor.
Tempt not mine ears; an grace of Christ I mean
To keep my honest reputation clean:
My hearing lets no such lewd sound come in,
My senses loath to surfeit on sweet sin,
Reuerse your mind, that goes from grace astray,
And God forgive you, with my heart I pray.
The Gallant notes her words, observes her frowns
Then draws his purse, and lets her view his crowns
Vowing that if her kindness grant him pleasure,
She shall be Mistress to command his treasure.
The storms are calmed, the gust is ouer-blowne,
And she replies with: Yours or not her own.
Desiring him to censure for the best,
Twa's but her trick to try if men do jest:
Her love is locked where he may pick the trunck
Let Singer judge if this be not a puncke.
EPIG. 11.
Pollitique Peeter meets his friend a shore,
That came from Seas but newly the other day:
And gives him French embracements by the score
Then folowes: Dicke, Have made good voyage, say?
But hearing Richards shares be poor and sick,
Peeter has haste, and cannot drink with Dicke.
Well, then he meets an other Caualeere,
Whom he salutes about the Knees and Thighs:
welcome sweet James, now by the Lord what cheer
Never better Peeter, We have got rich prize.
Come, come (says Peeter) eu'en a welcome quart,
For by my faith, we will drink before we part:
Or thus:

Fayth-we must drink, that is flat, before we part.
EPIG. 12.
Fine Phillip comes unto the Barbers shopp,
Wheer's nittie locks must suffer reformation.
The Chair and Cushion entertain his sloppe:
The Barber craves to know his worships fashion.
His will is shaven; for his beard is thin,
It was so lately banished from his chinne.
But shauing often will help it, he does hope,
And therefore for the smooth-face cut he calls:
Then, fie; these clothes are washed with common soap.
Why do thou use such ordinary balls?
I scorn this common trimming like a Boore,
Yet with his heart he loves a common whore.
EPIG. 13. Signieur Fantastic.
I scorn to meet an enemy in field,
Except he be a Soldier: (by this light)
I likewise scorn, my reason for to yield:
Yea further, I do well nigh scorn to fight.
Moreover, I do scorn to be so vain,
To draw my Rapier, and put up again.
I eke do scorn to walk without my man,
Yea, and I scorn good morrow and good deane:
I also scorn to touch an Alehouse cann,
Thereto I scorn an ordinary Queen.
Thus does he scorn, disdainful, proud, and grim,
All but the Fool only, he scorns not him,
EPIG. 14.
Some do account it golden luck,
They may be Widdow-sped for mucke,
Boys on whose chinnes no down appears,
Marry old Croanes of threescore years:
But they are fools to Widows cleave,
Let them take that which Maids do leave.
EPIG. 15.
Amorous Austin spendes much Balletting,
In rimeing Letters, and love Sonnetting.
She that loves him, his Ynckehorne shall be paint her,
And with all Uenus tytles he will acquaint her:
Vowing she is a perfect Angel right,
When she by weight is many grains too light:
Nay all that do but touch her with the stone,
Will be deposed that Angel she is none.
How can he prove her for an Angel them?
That proves her self a Devil, tempting men,
And draws many to the fiery pit,
Where they are burned for their en'tring it.
I know no cause wherefore he terms her so,
Unless he means she is one of them below,
Where Lucifer, chief Prince does domineere:
If she be such, then good my hearts stand clear,
Come not within the compass of her flight,
For such as do, are haunted with a spright.
This Angel is not noted by her wings,
But by her tail, as full of pricks and stinges.
And know this lustblind Louer's vain is led,
To praise his Devil, in an Angels sted.
EPIG. 16.
Gallus will haus no Harbor prune his beard,
Yet is his chin clean shaven and vnh'ear'd.
How comes he trimmed, you may ask me than?
His Wenches do it with their warming-pan.
EPIG. 17.
When Caualero Rake-hell is to rise
Out of his bed, he capers light and heddy.
Then wounds he swears: you arant whore he cries
Why what is the cause that breakfast is not reddy?
Can men feed like Camelions, on the air?
This is the manner of his morning prayer.
Well, he swears on, until his breakfast comes,
And then with teeth he falls to work a pace:
Leaving his boy a banquet all of crummes.
Dispatch you Rogue: my Rapier, that's his grace.
So forth he walks, his stomach must go shift,
To dine and suppe abroad, by deed of gift.
EPIG. 18.
A woeful exclamation late I heard,
Wherewith Tobacco takers may be feared:
One at the point with pipe and leaf to part,
Did vow Tobacco worse then death's black dart:
And proved it thus You know (quoth he) my friends
Death only stabbes the heart, and so life ends:
But this same poison, steeped India weed,
In head, heart, lunges, does soote and copwebs breed.
With that he gasp'd, and breathed out such a smoke
That all the standers by were like to choke.
EPIG. 19.
Cacus would gladly drink, but wants his purse,
Nay wants money, which is ten times worse:
For as he vows himself, he has not seen
In three days space the picture of the Queen.
Yet if he meet a friend near Tavern sign,
Straight he intreates him take a pint of Wine:
For he will give it, that he will, no nay.
What will he give? the other leave to pay.
He calls: Boy, fill us the the other quart,
I will bestow it even with all my heart.
Then does he diue into his sloppes profound,
Where not a poor Port-cullice can be found.
Mean while his frind discharges all the Wine:
Stay, stay (quoth he) or well, next shall be mine.
EPIG. 02.
Francke in name, and Francke by nature,
Frauncis is a most kind creature:
Her self has suffered many a fall,
^n striving how to pleasurs all.
EPIG. 21.
Soto can prove, such as are drunk by noone,
Are long-liu'd men; the pox he can as soon.
Nay, hear his reason ere you do condemn,
And if you find it foolish, hiss and hemme.
He says, Good blood is even the life of man;
I grant him that: (say you) well go-to than.
More drink, the more good blood* O that's a lie;
The more you drink, the sooner drunk, say I.
Now he protestes you do him mighty wrong,
Swearing a man in drink, is three men strong:
And he will pawn his head against a penny,
One right madd drunk, will brawle and fight with any.
Well, you reply* that argument is weak,
How can a drunkard brawle, that cannot speak?
Or how can he use weapon in his hand.
Which can not guide his feet to go or stand?
Hark what an oath the drunken slave does swear
He is a man by that, a man may hear.
And when you see him stagger, reele, and wink,
He is a man and more; I by this drink.
EPIG. 22.
When signeur Sack and Sugar drink droun'd reeles,
He vows to heaw the spur's from's fellows heels
When calling for a quart of Charnico,
unto a loving league they present grow:
Then instantly upon a cup or twain,
Out Poniards go, and to the stabbe again.
^rendes upon that, they drink and so embrace:
Straight bandy Daggers at each others face.
This is the humor of a madd drunk fool,
^n Tavern pots that keeps his Fenceing-schole.
EPIG. 23.
Cornutus was exceeding sick and ill,
Pained as it seemed chiefly in his head:
He called his friends, meaning to make his will,
Who found him drunk, with hose and shoes a bed
To whom he said: Oh good my Masters see,
Drink with his dart has all be stabbed me.
I here bequeath, if I do chance to die,
To you kind friends, and bon companions all,
A pound of good Tobacco, sweet and dry,
To drink amongst you, at my funeral:
Besides, a barrel of the best strong Beer,
And Pickle-herrings, for to domineere.
EPIG. 24.
We men, in many faults abound,
But two in women can be found:
The worst that from their sex proceeds,
Is naught in words, and naught in deeds.
EPIG. 25.
Bid me go sleep? I scorn it with my heels,
I know my self as good a man as thee.
Let go mine Arm I say, lead him that reeles,
I am a right good fellow; do thou see?
I know what longes to drinking, and I can
Abuse my self as well as any man.
I care no more for twenty hundred pound,
(Before the Lord) then for a very straw.
I Will fight with any he above the ground.
Tut, tell not me what is what; I know the law.
Rapier and Dagger: hey, a kingly fight.
I Will now try falls with any, by this light.
EPIG. 26.
Behold, a most accomplished Caualeere,
That the world's Ape of fashions does appear,
VValking the streets, his humors to disclose,
In the French Doublet, and the Germane hose:
The Muffes cloak, Spanish Hat, Toledo blade.
Italian ruff, a Shoe right Flemish made,
Like Lord of Misrule, where he comes he will reuel^
And lie for wagers with the lying'st devil.
Epig. 27.
Ask Humors why a Feather he does wear?
It is his humor (by the Lord) heel swear.
Or what he does with such a Horse-taile lock?
Or why upon a Whore he spendes his stock?
He has a Humor does determine so.
Why in the stop-throate fashion does he go,
With Scarf about his neck? Hat without band?
It is his humor, sweet sir understand.
What cause his Purse is so extreme distressed,
That often times it is scarcely penny blessed?
Only a Humor: If you question why?
His tongue is nere vnfurnish'd with a lie:
It is his Humor too he does protest.
Or why with Serjants he is so oppressed,
That like to Ghostes they haunt him erie day?
A rascal Humor, does not love to pay.
Object, why Boots and Spurs are still in season?
His Humor answers; Humor is his reason.
If you perceive his wits in wetting shrunk,
It comes of a humor, to be drunk.
When you behold his looks pale, thin, and poor,
The Occasion is, his Humor, and a Whore:
And every thing that he does undertake,
It is a vain, for senseless Humors sake.
EPIG. 28.
Three highway standers, having cros-lesse curse,
Did greet my friend with, Sir give us your pursse,
Though he were true-man, they agreed in one:
For pursse and coin betwixt them four was none.
EPIG. 29.
A Gentlewoman of the dealing trade,
Procured her own sweet Picture to be made:
Which being done, she from her word did slip,
And would not pay full due (...) manshippe.
The Painter swore she ne^^ (...) have it so,
She bade him keep it, and (...) go.
He chollericke, and might (...) content,
Straight took his Pencell and to work he went:
Making the Dog she held, a grim Cattes face,
And hung it in his shop to her disgrace,
Some of her friends that saw it to her went,
In jesting manner, as king what she meant,
To have her picture hang where gazers swarm,
Holding a filthy Catte within her arm?
She in a shameful heat in haste did hie,
The Painter to content and satisfy:
Right glad to give a French Crown for his pain
To turn her Catte into a Dog again.
EPIG. 30.
When Tarlton clown'd it in a pleasant vain
With conceits did good opinions gain
Upon the stage, his merry humors shop.
Clownes knew the Clown, by his great clownish slop
But now they are gulled, for present fashion says,
Dicke Tarltons part, Gentlemen's breeches plays:
In every street where any Gallant goes,
The swagg'ring Sloppe, is Tarltons clownish hose.
EPIG. 31. To Lutius.
One newly practiced in Astronomy,
That never dealt in weather wit before:
Would scrape (forsooth) acquaintance of the sky.
And by his art, go knock at heaven door,
Mean while a Scholar in his study slippes,
And taught his Wife skill in the Moons eclippes.
Next night that friend persuades him walk alone
Into the field, to gather stars that fell:
To mix them with Philosophers rare stone
That begets gold: he likt the motion well,
And went to watch, where stars dropped very thin,
But rain so shour'd, it wet his foole-case skin.
EPIG. 32.
What gallant's that whose oaths fly through mine ears?
How like a lord of Plut^es court he swears
How brave in such a baudie house he fought,
How rich his empty purse is outside wrought,
How Duchman-like he swallows down his drink
How sweet he takes Tobacco till he stink:
How lofty sprited he disdaines a Boore,
How faithful hearted he is to a ()
How cocke-taile proud he does his head a duance
How rare his spurs do ring the morris-daunce.
Now I protest, by Mistress Susans fan,
He and his boy, will make a proper man.
Epig. 33.
Laugh good my Masters, if you can intend it,
For yonder comes a Fool that will defend it:
Saw you a verier Ass in all your life,
That makes himself a pack-horse to his wife?
I would his nose where I could wish, were warm,
For carrying Pearl, so pretty vnder's arm.
Pearl his wives dog, a pretty sweete-fac'd curre,
That barks a nights at the least fart does stir,
Is now not well, his cold is scarcely brook,
Therefore good Hisband wrap him in thy cloak:
And sweet heart, preethee help me to my Mask,
Hold Pearl but tender, for he has the laske.
Here, take my Muffe: and do you hear good man?
Now give me Pearl, and carry you my Fan.
Alack poor Pearl, the wretch is full of pain,
Hisband take Pearl, give me my Fan again:
See how he quakes; faith I am like to weep:
Come to me Pearl; my Scarf good hisband keep
To be with me I know my Puppie loves.
Why Pearl, I say: Hisband take up my Gloves.
Thus goodman Idiot thinks himself an Earl,
That he can please his wife, and carry Pearl:
But other judge his state to be no higher,
Then a Dogs yeoman, or some pippin Squier.
EPIG. 34.
What Is he that fits and takes a nappe,
Faced like the North wind of a map:
And sleeping, to the wind does nod?
It Is Bacchus coosen, Bellie-god.
EPIG. 35.
Seuerus is extreme in elloquence,
In perfumed words, plunged over head and ears,
He does create rare phrase, but rarer sense,
Fragments of Latin, all about he bears.
Unto his Seruingman, alias his Boy,
He vtters speech exceeding quaint and coy.
Deminitiue, and my defective slave,
Reach my corpse couerture immediately:
My pleasures pleasure is, the same to have,
T'insconce my person from frigiditie.
His man believes all is Welsh, his Master spoke,
Till he railes English: Roage go fetch my cloak,
EPIG. 36.
Why should the Mercers trade, a Satin suit,
With Cooks grease be so wickedly polute?
The reason is, the scandal and defame
Grew, that a greasy slouen wears the same.
EPIG. 37.
An honest Vicker and a kind consort,
That to the Alehouse friendly would resort,
To have a game at Tables now and than,
Or drink his pot as soon as any man.
As fair a gamster, and as free from braull,
As ever man should need to play withal:
Because his hostess pldg'd him not carouse,
Rashly in choler did forswear her house.
Taking the glass, this was the oath he swore,
Now by this drink, I Will nere come hither more
But mightily his Hostess did repent,
For all her guestes to the next Alehouse went,
Following their Vickers steps in every thing,
He led the parrish even by a string.
At length his ancient Hostess did complain,
She was undone, unless he came again,
Desiring certain friends of hers and his,
To use a pollecie, which should be this:
Because with coming he should not forswear him,
To save his oath, they on their backs might bear him
Of this good course the Vicket well did think,
And so they allwaies carried him to drink.
FINIS.
SATYRS.
Your Scene is done, depart you Epigrammes:
Enter Goat-footed Satyrs, butt like Rams:
Come nimbly forth, Why stand you on delay?
O-ho, the Musique-tuning makes you stay.
Well, friske it out nimbly: you slaves begin,
For now me thinks the Fiddlers hands are in.
1.
WHo have we here? Behold him and be mute,
Some mighty man I Will warrant by his suit.
If all the Mercers in Cheapside show such,
I Will give them leave to give me twice as much:
I think the stuff is namelesse he does wear,
But what so ere it be, it is huge gear.
Mark but his gate, and give him then his due,
Some swaggring fellow, I may say to you:
It seems Ambition in his big looks shroudes,
Some Centaure sure, begotten of the Clouds,
Now a shame take the buzard, is it he:
I know the ruffaine, now his face I see.
On a more gull the Sun did never shine,
How with a vengance comes the soole so fine?
Some Noble man's cast Suit is fallen unto him,
For buying Hose and Doblet would undo him.
But wot you now, whither the buzard walks?
I, into Paul's for sooth, and there he talks
Of foreign tumults, vttring his advice,
And proving Wars even like a game at dice:
For this (says he) as every gamster knows,
Where one side winnes, the other side must loose
Next speech he vtters, is his stomachs care,
Which ordinary yeeldes the cheapest fare:
Or if his pursse be out of tune to pay,
Then he remembers it is a fasting day:
And then he talks much against excess,
Swearing all other Nations eat far less
Then Englishmen; experience you may get
In France and Spain; where he was never yet.
With a score of Figs and half a pint of Wine,
Some four or fine will very hugely dine.
Me thinks this tale is very huge in sound,
That half a pint should serve five to drink round
And twenty Figs could feed them full and fat:
But travelers may lie; who knows not that,
Then why not he, that travels in conceit,
From East to West, when he can get no meat?
His Journey is in Paul's in the back Isles,
Where Is stomach counts each pace a hundred miles.
A tedious thing, though chance will have it such,
To travail so long baytlesle, sure it is much.
Some other time stumbling on wealthy Chuffes,
Worth gulling: then he swaggers all in huffes,
And tells them of a prize he was at taking
Will be the ship-boyes childrens childrens making:
And that a Mouse could find no room in hold,
It was so pesterd all with pearl and gold:
Vowing to pawn his head if it were tried,
They had more Rubies then would paue Cheapsid
A thousand other grosle and odious ^ies,
He dares avouch to blind dull Judgments eyes,
Not caring what he speak or what he swear,
So he gain credit at his hearers care.
Sometimes into the Royal Exchange he will drop
Clad in the ruins of a Brokers shop:
And there his tongue runs by as on affairs,
No talk but of commodities and wares:
And what great wealth he looks for ery wind,
From God knows where, the place is hard to find.
If news be harkend for, then he preuailes,
Setting his mynt a work to coin false tales.
His tongues-end is betipt with forged chat,
Vttring rare lies to be admired at,
Heel tell you of a tree that he does know,
Upon the which Rapiers and Daggers grow,
As good as Fleetstreete has in any shop,
which being ripe, down into scabbards drop.
He has a very piece of that same Chair.
In which Caesar was stabbed: Is it not rare?
He with his feet upon the stoones did tread,
That Satan brought, and bad Christ make the^ bread
His wondrous travels challenge such renown,
That Sir John Maundiuell is quite put down.
Men without heads, and Pigmies hand-bredth hie
Those with one leg that on their backs do lie,
And do the weathers injury disdaie,
Making their legs a penthouse for the rain:
Are tut, and tush: not any thing at all.
His knowledge knows, what no man's notice shall
This is a mate unmeet for every groom,
And where he comes, peace, give his lying room
He saw a Hollander in Middleborow,
As he was flashing of a brown Loaf through,
Where-to the haste of hunger had inclyn'd him.
Cut himself through, and two that stood behind him
Besides, he saw a fellow put to death,
Could drink a whole Beer barrel at a breath.
Oh this is he that will say any thing,
That to himself may any profit bring.
Against whosoever he does speak he cares not,
For what is it that such a villain dares not?
And though in conscience he cannot deny,
The All-commaunder says, Thou shall not lie,
Yet will he answer (careless of souls state)
Truth telling, is a thing obtains hate.
FINIS.
2. SATYR.
A Man may tell his friend his fault in kindness:
To wink at folly, is a foolish blindness.
God save you sir, saluteth with a grace,
One he could wish never to see his face.
But does not he use mere dissimulation,
That Is inside hate, and outside salutation?
Yes as I take it; yet his answer says,
Fashions, and Customs, use it now a days.
A Gentleman perhaps may chance to meet
His liuing-griper face to face in street:
And though his looks are odious unto sight;
Yet will he do him the French conges right,
And in his heart wish him as low as hell,
When in his words, he is glad to see him well:
Then being thus, a man may soon suppose
There is, God save you sir, sometimes twixt foes.
Oh sir, why that's as true as you are here,
With one example I will make it clear,
And far to fetch the same I will not go,
But into Heunds-ditch, to the Brokers row:
Or any place where that trade does remain,
Whether at Holborne Conduit, or Long-lane:
If thither you vouchsafe to turn your eye,
And see the Pawnes that under forfayte lie,
Which are forth coming sir, and safe enough
Says good man Broker, in his new print ruff:
He will not stand too strictly on a day,
Encouraging the party to delay;
With all good words, the kindest may be spoke,
He turns the Gentleman out of his Cloak.
And yet between them both, at every meeting,
God save you sir, is their familiar greeting,
This is much kindness sure, I pray commend him,
With great good words, he highly does befrend him
It is a favor at a pinch in need:
A pinching friendship, and a pinching deed.
The slave may wear his suites of Satin so,
And like a man of reputation go,
When all he has in house, or on his back,
It is his own, by forfaytures shipwreck.
See you the Brooch that long ins Hat has bin?
It may be there, it cost him not a pin:
His sundry sorts of diverse men's attire,
He wears them cheap, even at his own desire.
Shame over take the pessant for his pain,
That he should pray on losses, to his gain,
In drawing Wardrobes under his subjection,
Being a knave in manners and complexion,
Iumpe like to Usury, his nearest kin;
That wears a money bag under his chinne:
A bunch that does resemble such a shape,
And hayred like to Paris garden Ape,
Foaming about the chaps like some wild Boore,
As swart and tawnie as an India Moore:
With narrow brow, and Squirrell eyes, he shows,
His faces chiefest ornament, is nose,
Full furnished with many a Clarret stain,
As large as any Codpice of a Dane,
Embossed curious; every eye does judge,
His lacket faced with motheaten Budge:
To which a pair of Satin sleeves he wears,
Wherein two pound of grease about he bears.
His Spectacles do in a copper case,
Hang dangling about his pissing place.
His breeches and his hose, and all the rest
Are suitable: His gown (I mean his best)
Is full of threeds, Intitul'd right threed-bare:
But wool there on is wondrous scant and rare.
The welting has him in no charges stood,
Being the ruins of a cast French hood.
Excess is sinful, and he does defy it,
A sparing whoreson in attire and diet.
Only excess is lawful in his Chest,
For there he makes a golden Angels nest:
And vows no farther to be found a lender,
Then that most precious metal does engender:
Begetting daily more and more increase,
His monyes slave, till wretched life surcease.
This is the Jew alied very near,
unto the Broker, for they both do bear
Undoubted testimony of their kin:
A brace of Rascals in a league of sin.
Two filthy Curres that will on no man fawn,
Before they taste the sweetness of his pawn.
And then the slaves will be as kind forsooth,
Not as Kind-hart, in drawing out a tooth:
For he does ease the Patient of his pain,
But they disease the Borrower of his gain.
Yet neither of them use extremity,
They can be villains even of charity.
To lend our brother it is meet and fit:
Give him roast meat and beat him with the spit.
Usury sure is requisite and good,
And so is Brokeage, rightly understood:
But soft a little, what is he says so?
One of the twain (upon my life) I know.
FINIS.
3. SATIRE.
OH, let the Gentlewoman have the wall,
I know her well; it is Mistress, What do you call.
It should be she, both by her Mask and Fan:
And yet it should not, by her Seruing-man;
For if mine eyes do not mistake the fool,
He is the Usher of some dancing Schole,
The reason why I do him such suppose,
Is this, Me thinks he daunceth as he goes.
An active fellow, though he be but poor,
Either to vault upon a Horse, or etc.
See you the huge bum Dagger at his back,
To which no Hilt nor Iron he does lack.
Oh with that blade he keeps the queanes in awe,
Bravely behacked, like a two-hand Saw.
Stampes on the ground, and byteth both his thumbs
Unless he be commander where he coms.
You damned whores, where are you? quick come here,
Dry this Tobacco. Fill a dosen of Beer:
Will you be brief? or long you to be banged?
Hold, take this Match, go light it and be hanged.
Where stay these whores when Gent. do call?
Here Is no attendaunce (by the Lord) at all.
Then down the stairs the pots in rage he throws
And in a damned vain of swearing grows,
For he will challenge any under heaven,
To swear with him, and give him six at seven.
Oh, he is an accomplished Gentleman,
And many rare conceited knackes he can;
Which yield to him a greater store of gain,
Then iuggling Kings, hey Pass, ledgerdemaine.
His witt's his living: one of quaint device,
For Bowling-allies, Cockpits, Cards, or Dice,
To those exploytes he ever stands prepared:
A Villain excellent at a Bum card.
The Knave of Clubbes he any time can burn,
And find him in his boosome, for his turn.
Tut, he has Cards for any kind of game,
Primero, Saunt, or whatsoever name:
Make him but dealer, all his fellows swears,
If you do find good dealing, take his ears.
But come to Dice, why that is his only trade,
Michell Mum-chaunce, his own invention made.
He has a stock, whereon his living stays,
And they are Fullams, and Bard quarter-trayes:
His Langrets, with his Hie men, and his low,
Are ready what his pleasure is to throw:
His stopped Dice with Quicksilver never miss.
He calls for, Come on five; and there it is:
Or else heel have it with five and a reach,
Although it cost his neck the Halter stretch.
Besides all this same kind of cheating art,
The Gentleman has some good other part,
Well seen in Magic and Astrology,
Flinging a Figure wondrous handsomely,
Which if it do not miss, it sure does hit:
Of troth the man has great store of small wit.
And note him wheresoever that he goes,
His Book of Characters is in his hose.
His dinner he will not presume to take,
Ere he ask counsel of an Almanacke.
Heel find if one prove false unto his wife,
Only with Ox blood, and a rustic knife.
He can transform himself unto an Ass,
Show you the Devil in a Crystal glass:
The Devil say you? why I, is that such wonder?
Being consortes, they will not be a sunder.
Alcumie in his brains so sure does settle,
He can make gold of any copper kettle;
Within a three weeks space or such a thing,
Riches upon the whole world he could bring.
But in his own purse one shall hardly spy it,
Witness his Hostess, for a twelue-moneths diet:
Who would be glad of gold or silver either,
But swears by chalk, and post, she can get neither.
More, he will teach any to gain their love,
^s thus (says he) take me a Turtle Dove,
And in an Oven let her lie and bake
^o dry, that you may poulder of her make;
Which being put into a cup of wine,
The wenche that drinks it will to love incline:
and shall not sleep in quiet in her bed,
Till she be eased of her mayden-head.
This is probatum, and it has bin tried,
Or else the cunning man cunningly lide.
^ may be so, a lie is not so strange,
Perhaps he spoke it when the Moon did change
And thereupon (no doubt) the occasion sprunge,
Unconstant Luna, over ruled his tongue.
Astronomers that traffic with the Sky,
By common censure sometimes meet the lie:
Although in deed their blame is not so much,
When Stars and Plannets fail, and keep not tutch.
And so this fellow with his large profession,
That ends his trial in a far digression:
Philosophers be queathed him their stone,
To make gold with, yet can his purse hold none.
FINIS.
4. SATIRE.
Melflunious, sweet Rose-watred elloquence,
Thou that have hunted Barbarism hence,
And taught the goodman Cobbin at his plow,
To be as elloquent as Tullie now:
Who nominic ates his Bread and Cheese a name,
(That does vntrusle the nature of the same)
His stomach stayer. How dee like the phrase?
Are Plowmen simple fellows now a days?
Not so my Masters: What means Singer then?
And Pope the Clown, to speak so Boorish, when
They counterfaite the clownes upon the Stage?
Since Country fellows grow in this same age,
To be so quaint in their new printed speech,
That cloth will now compare with Velvet breech
Let him discourse even where, and when he dare,
Talk nere so Ynk-horne learnedly and rare,
Swear Cloth breech is a pessant (by the Lord)
Threaten to draw his wrath-venger, his sword:
Tush, Cloth-breech does deride him with a laugh,
And lets him see Bone-baster, that's his staff:
Then tells him brother, friend, or so forth, hear ye
It Is not your knitting-needle makes me fear ye.
If to ascension you are so declinde,
I have a restitution in my mind:
For though your beard do stand so fine mustated,
Perhaps your nose may be transfistic ated.
Man, I dare challenge thee to throw the sledge,
To iumpe or leap over a ditch or hedge,
To wrestle, play a stooleball, or to run,
To pitch the bar, or to shoot off a gunne,
To play at loggets, nine holes, or ten pinnes,
To try it out at football by the shinnes;
At Ticktacke, Irish, Noddie, Maw, and Ruff:
At hot-cockles, leape-frogge, or blindman-buffe.
To drink half pots, or deal at the whole can:
To play at base, or pen-and Ynk-horne sir Ihan:
To dance the Morris, play at barly-breake:
At all exploytes a man can think or speak:
At shoue-groate, venter-poynt, or cross and pile.
Atbeshrow him that is last at yonder style,
At leaping ore a Midsommer bon-fier,
Or at the drawing Dun out of the myer:
At any of these, or all these presently,
Wagge but your finger, I am for you, I.
I scorn (that am a youngster of our town)
To let a Bow-bell Cockney put me down.
This is a Gallant far beyond a Gull,
For very valor filles his pockets full.
Wit showers upon him Wisdoms rain in plent
For heel be hanged, if any man find twenty
In all their parish, whatsoere they be,
Can show a head so polleticke as he.
It was his fathers luck of late to die
Untestate; he about the Legacy
To London came, inquiring all about,
How he might find a Ciuill-villin out,
Being unto a Civil Lawyer sent,
Pray Sir (quoth he) are you the man I meant:
That have a certain kind of occupation,
About dead men, that leave things out of fashion
Death ^ath done that which t'answere he is not ab
My father he is dyed detestable:
I being his eldest heir, he did prefer
Me Sir, to be his Executioner:
And very briefly my request to finnish,
Pray how may I by law, his goods diminnish?
Was this a Clown? tell true, or was a none?
You make fat Clownes, if such as he be one:
A man may swear, if he were urged to it.
Foolisher fellows, have not so much wit.
Oh such as he, are even the only men,
Love letters in a Milke-maydes praise to pen:
Lines that will work the curstest sullen shrow,
To love a man whether she will or no.
Being most wondrous patheticall,
To make Cisse out a cry in love withal:
He scorns that master Scholemaister should think
He wants his aid in half a pen of ynke:
All that he does it comes every whit,
From natures dry-fat, his own mother wit.
As thus:

Thou Honnysuckle of the Hawthorne hedge,
Vouchsafe in Cupids cup my heart to pledge,
My hearts dear blood sweet Cis, is thy carouse,
Worth all the Ale in Gammer Gubbins house:
I say no more, affairs call me away,
My Fathers horse for prouender does stay,
Be thou the Lady Cressit-light to me,
Sir Trollelolle I will prove to thee.
Written in haste: farewell my Cowslippe sweet,
Pray lets a Sunday at the Alehouse meet.
FINIS.
5. SATYR.
It Is a bad world, the common speech does go,
And he complains, that helps to make it so:
Yet every man th'imputed crime would shun,
Hypocrisy with a fine thread is spunne.
Each strives to show the very best in seeming,
Honest enough, if honest in esteeming.
Praise waits upon him now with much renown
That wrappes up Uices under Uertues gown:
Commending with good words, religious deed
To help the poor, supply our neighbors need
Do no man wrong, give every man his own,
Be friend to all, and enemy to none;
Have charity, avoid contentious strife,
Often he speaks thus, that nere did good in's life.
Derision has an ore in every Boat,
In's Neighbors eye he quickly spies a moate,
But the great beam that is noted in his own,
He lets remain, and never thinks thereon.
Some do report he bears about a sack,
Half hanging forwards, half behind at's backet
And his own faults (quight out of sight and mind)
He castes into the part that hanges behind:
But other men's, he puts in before,
And into them, he looks evermore.
Contempt comes very near to the others vain,
He hates all good deserts with proud disdain:
Rashness is his continual walking mate,
Costly apparreld, lofty in his gate:
Up to the ears in double ruffes and startch,
God bless your eiesight when you see him march:
^atutes, and laws, he dare presume to break,
Against superiors cares not what he speak.
^^^ his humors recreation fittes,
To bear Counstables, and resist all writtes,
^wearing the ripest wits are childish young;
(...) less they gain instructions from his tongue.
(...) hers nothing done amongst the very best,
^ut he will ^eri^e it with some bitter jest.
^'s meat and drink unto him always, when*
He may be censuring of other men.
If a man do but toward a Tavern look,
He is a drunkard heel swear on a Book:
Or if one part a fray of good intention,
He is a quarreller, and loves dissension.
Those that with silence vain discourses break,
Are proud fantasticks, that disdain to speak.
Such as speak soberly with wisdoms leisure,
Are fools, that in affected speech take pleasure,
If he hear any that reproves vice,
He says, there is none but hipocrites so nice.
No honest woman that can pass along,
But must endure some scandal from his tongue.
She, deals cross blows her husband never feels:
This Gentle woman, wears capering heels.
There minces Mall, to see what youth will like her,
Her eyes do bear her witness she is a striker.
Yonder Is a wench, new dipped in beauties blaze,
She, is a Maid as Maids go now adays.
And thus Contempt makes choicest recreation,
In holding every one in detestation:
His common gate is of the ietting size,
He has a pair of euer-staring eyes.
And looks a man so hungry in the face,
As he would eat him up, and near say grace.
A little low cround Hatte he always wears,
And Fore-horse-like therein a Feather bears.
Goodly curld locks; but surely it is great pity,
For want of kembing, they are beastly nitty.
Hi^ (...) is a cut cast Satin one,
He scorns to buy new now, that nere bought none
Spotted in diverse places with pure fat,
Known for a right tall trencher man by that.
His Breeches that came to him by befrending,
Are desperate like himself, and quite past mending
He takes a common course to go untrust,
Except his Shirt's a washing; then he must
Go woollward for the time: he scorns it he,
That worth two Shirts his Laundresse should him see
The weapons that his humors do efford,
Is Bum-dagger, and basket hilted Sword.
And these in every Bawdie house are drawn
Twice in a day, unless they be at pawn.
If any fall together by the ears,
To field cries he; why? zownes (to field) he swears
Show your selves men: hey, slash it out with blows
Let won make tothers guts garter his hose,
Make Steel and Iron vmpiers to the Fray,
You shall have me go with, to see fair play:
Let me alone, for I will have a care
To see that one do kill the the other fair.
This is Contempt, that is every ones disdayner
The strife pursuer, and the peace refrayner
Hates thunderbolt, damned Murders larum-bell,
A near dear Kinsman to the Devil of hell:
And he whom Satan to this humor bringes,
Istn only man for all detested things.
FINIS.
6. SATYR.
TOm's no good fellow, nor no honest man:
Hang him, he would not pledge Ralfe half a can
But if a friend may speak as he does think,
Will is a right good fellow by this drink:
Oh William, William, thou art as kind a youth,
As ever I was drunk with, that's the truth.
Tom is no more like thee, then Chalks like Cheese.
To pledge a health, or to drink vp-se freese:
Fill him his Beaker, he will never flinch,
To give a full quart pot the empty pinch.
Heel look unto your water well enough.
And has an eye that no man leaves a snuff.
A pox of peecemeale drinking (William says)
Play it away, we will have no stoppes and stays,
Blown drink is odious, what man can disiest it,
No faithful drunkard, but he does detest it.
I hate half this, out with it, and an end,
He is a buzard will not pledge his friend,
But stands as though his drinks mast-sacke were closed
with, Here Is to ye Sir, against you are disposed?
How say my friend, an may I be so bold,
Blowing on's Beer like broth to make it cold,
Keeping the full glass till it stand and sower,
Drinking but after half a mile an hour,
Unworthy to make one, or gain a place,
Where boon companions gage the pots apace.
A man's a man* and therewithal an end,
Goodfellowship was bred and borne to spend,
No man ere saw a pound of sorrow yet,
Could be allowd to pay an ounce of debt.
We may be here to day, and gone to morrow.
Call me for six pots more come on, hang sorrow
Tut, lack another day? Why, it is all one,
When we are dead, then all the world is gone.
Begin to me good Ned: What? have gone right?
Is it the same that tickeld me last night?
We gave the Brewers Diet-drinke a wipe:
Brave Malt-Tabacco in a quart pot-pipe,
It nettld me, and did my brains inspire,
I have forsworn your drinking smoke and fire:
Out upon Cane and leaf Tobacco smell:
Devils take home your drink keep it in hell.
Carow^e in Cannons Trinidado smoke,
Drink healths to one another till you choke,
And let the Indians pledge you till they sweat,
Give me the element that drowneth heat:
Strong sodden Water is a virtuous thing,
It makes one swear, and swagger like a King,
And has more hidden Virtue then you think,
For I Will maintain, good liquor's meat and drink:
Nay, I Will go further with you, for in troth,
It is as good as meat, and drink, and cloth;
For he that is in Malt-mans Hall inrolde,
Cares not a point for hunger nor for cold.
If it be cold, he drinks till he sweat,
If it be hot, he drinks to lay the heat:
So that how ere it be cold or hot,
To precious use he does apply the pot:
And will approve it Phisically sound,
If it be drunk upon the Danish round:
Or taken with a Pickle-herring or two,
As Flemmings at Saint Katherines use to do:
Which fish has virtue, eaten salt and raw,
To pull drink to it, even as Ieate does straw.
Oh it is a very Whetstone to the brain,
A march-beere shewer that puts down April rain
It makes a man active to leap and spring,
To dance and vault, to carrowle and to sing:
For all exploytes it does a man enable,
T'out leap men's heads, and caper ore the table,
To burn Sack with a candle till he reeles,
And then to trip-vp his companions heels.
To sing like the great Organ pipe in Poules,
And censure all men under his controules.
Against all comers ready to maintain,
That deepest wit is in a drunken brain.
I marry is it; that it is he knows it,
And by this drink, at all times will depose it,
He says, that day is to a minute shrunk,
In which he makes not some good fellow drunk:
As for nine worthies on his Hosts wall,
He knows three worthy drunkards pass them all
The first of them in many a Tavern tried,
At last subdued by Aquauitae, did.
His second Worthies date was brought to fine,
Feasting with Oysters and brave Rennish wine,
The third, whom diverse Dutchmen held full dear,
Was stabbed by pickeld Hearings and strong Beer.
Well, happy is the man does rightly know,
The virtue of three cups of Charnico:
Being taken fasting, the only cure for Phlegm,
It works wonders on the brain, extreme.
A pottle of wine at morning, or at night,
Drunk with an Apple, is employed right,
To rince the Liuet, and to purify
A dead sick Heart from all infirmity.
FINIS.

