HEAVENS GLORY, SEEK IT. EARTS VANITY, FLY IT. HELLS HORROR, FERE IT.


LONDON, printed for Michaell Spark. Ao. 1638.

A Most Excellent TREATISE Containing the way To seek Heavens Glory. To fly
Earths Vanity To fear Hells Horror. With Godly Prayers And The Bell-Mans
Summons.

The third Edition by S. R.

LONDON, Printed by G M. for Michael Spark Junior at the blew Bible in
Greene-Arbour, 1639.

To the Reader.
THE present careless security of all men in general, is like unto our first
Parents neglect of Gods sacred commandment in Paradise, when the seducing
Serpent no sooner persuaded evil, but it was instantly put in practice: You
shall die (said God) was heard, but you shall not die (said the Devil) was
believed. Our ears are daily acquainted with the threatenings of Gods denounced
against sinners, and yet that sin, that broad way path and highway to hell,
is attempted with a delectation and pleasure, so crafty and subtle are the
baits and lures of the deceiver, and so void of spiritual wisdom is the
soule-murdering sinner. But if due consideration were had of the wages of
sin, and the reward of unrighteousness, and to what bitterness it will
turn in the end, it would make us less bold to sin, and more fearful to
offend, if we would take into our company for a daily consort, the pale memory
of death, and whereto he summeth us after this life. Death it self is very
fearful, but much more terrible, in regard of the judgment it warns us
unto. Imagine to see a sinner lie on his departing bed, burdened and tired with
the grievous and heavy load of all his former trespasses, goared with the
sting and prick of a festered conscience, feeling the crampe of death wresting
at his heart strings, ready to make the ruthful divorce between soul and
body, panting for breath, and swimming in a cold and fatal sweat, wearied with
struggling against the deadly pangs: Oh how much would he give for an hour of
repentance! at what rate would he value a days contrition! Then worlds would
be worthless, in respect of a little respite, a short truce would seem more
precious than the treasures of Empires, nothing would be so much esteemed as a
moment of time, which now by months and years is lavishly spent.

How inconsolable were his case, his friends being fled, his senses frighted,
his thoughts amazed, his memory decayed, his whole mind aghast, and no part
able to perform that it should, but only his guilty conscience pestered with
sin, continually upbraiding him with bitter accusations? what would he
think then (stripped out of this mortal weed, and turned both out of the
service and houseroome of this world) he must pass before a most severe
Judge, carrying in his own conscience his enditement written, and a perfect
register of all his misdeeds: when he should see the Judge prepared to pass
the sentence against him, and the same to be his Vmpire, whom by so many
offenses he has made his enemy: When not only the devils, but even the
Angels, should plead against him, and himself maugre his will, be his own
sharpest appeacher: What were to be done in these dreadful exigents?

When he saw that ghastly dungeon and huge gulf of hell, breaking out with
fearful flames, the weeping, hou^ing, and gnashing of teeth, the rage of all
those hellish monsters, the horror of the place, the rigor of the pain, the
terror of the company, and the eternity of all those punishments. Would you
think them wise that would daily in so weighty matters, and idly play away
the time allotted them to prevent these intolerable calamities? Would you then
account it secure, to nurse in your bosom so many ougly Serpents as sins
are, or to foster in your soul so many malicious accusers, as mortal faults
are?

Would you not then think one life too little to repent for so many
iniquities, every one whereof were enough to cast you into those everlasting
and unspeakeable torments? Why then do we not (at the least) devote that
small remnant of these our latter days, to the making an atonement with God,
that our consciences may be free from this eternal danger? Who would rely the
everlasting affairs of the life to come upon the gliding slipperinesse, and
running stream of our uncertain life?

It is a preposterous policy (in any wise conceit) to fight against God till
our weapons be blunted, our forces consumed, our limbs impotent, and our
breath spent; and then when we fall for faintness, and have fought our selves
almost dead, to presume on his mercy. It were a strange piece of Art, and a
very exorbitant course, while the Ship is sound, the Pylot well, the Mariners
strong, the gale favorable, and the Sea calm, to lie idle at rode: and when
the Ship leakes, the Pylot were sick, the Mariners faint, the storms
boisterous, and the Sea turmoyled with surges, to launch forth for a voyage
into a far Country: yet such is the skill of our evening repenters, who
though in the soundness of health, and in the perfect use of reason, they
cannot resolve to weigh the ankers that withhold them from God, nevertheless,
feed themselves with a strong persuasion, that when their senses are astonished,
their wits distracted, their understanding dusked, and both body and mind
racked and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortal sickness, then
will they think of the weightiest matters, ad become Saints, when they are
scarce able to behave themselves like reasonable creatures? being then presumed
to be less then men: for how can he that is assaulted with an unsettled
conscience, distrained with the wringing fits of his dying flesh, maimed in all
his abilities, and circled in with so many encombrances, be thought of due
discretion to dispose of his chiefest jewel, which is his soul? No, no, they
that will loyter in seed time, and begin then to sow when others begin to
reap: they that will riot out their health, and cast their accounts when they
can scarsely speak: they that will slumber out the day, and enter their
journey when the light does fail them, let them blame their own folly, if
they die in debt, and eternal beggerie, and fall headlong into the lapse of
endless perdition.

Great cause have we then to have an hourly watchful care over our soul,
being so dangerous assaulted and environed: most instantly entreating the
divine Majesty to be our assured defense, and let us pass the day in mourning,
the night in watching and weeping, and our whole time in plainefull lamenting,
falling down upon the ground humbled in sackcloth and ashes, having lost the
garment of Christ, that he may receive what the persecuting enemy would have
spoiled every short sigh will not be sufficient satisfaction, nor every knock
a warrant to getin. Many shall cry Lord, Lord, and shall not be accepted: the
foolish Virgins did knock, but were not admitted: Judas had some sorrow, and
yet died desperate. Foreslow not (says the Holy Ghost) to be converted unto
God, and make not a daily lingering of thy repair unto him: for thou shall
find the suddenness of his wrath and revenge not slack to destroy sinners.
For which cause, let no man sojourne long in sinful security, or post over his
repentance until fear enforce him to it, but let us frame our premises as we
would find our conclusion, endeavoring to live as we are desirous to die: let
us not offer the maine crop to the Devil, and set God to gleane the reproof
of his harvest: let us not gorge the Devil with our fairest fruits, and turn
God to the filthy scraps of his leavings: but let us truly dedicate both soul
and body to his service, whose right they are, and whose service they owe; that
so in the evening of our life we may retire to a Christian rest, closing up the
day of our life with a clear sunne-set, that leaving all darkness behind us,
we may carry in our consciences the light of grace: and so escaping the horror
of an eternal night, pass from a mortal day, to an everlasting morrow.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Samuel Rowland.

STrike sail, poor soul, in sins tempestuous tide,
That runst to ruin and eternal wrack:
Thy course from heaven is exceeding wide,
Hels gulf thou ent'rest, if grace guide not back:
Satan is Pilot in this navigation,
The Ocean, Vanity, The Rock, damnation.
War with the Dragon, and his whole alliance,
Renounce his league, intends thy utter loss;
Take in sins flag of truce, set out defiance,
Display Christ's ensign with the bloody cross:
Against a Faith-proofe armed Christian Knight,
The hellish coward dares not manage fight.
Resist him then, if thou will victor be,
For so he flies, and is disanimate;
His fiery darts can have no force at thee,
The shield of faith does all their points rebate:
He conquers none to his infernal den,
But yielding slaves, that wage not fight like men.
Those in the dungeon of eternal dark,
He has enthralled everlasting date,
Branded with Reprobations cole-blacke mark,
Within the never-opening ramd up gate:
Where Dives rates one drop of water more
Than any crown that ever Monarch wore.
Where furies haunt the hearttorne wretch, despair,
Where clamours cease not, teeth are ever gnashing,
Where wrath and vengeance sit in horrors chair,
Where quenchlesse flames of sulphur fire be flashing,
Where damned souls blaspheme God in despite,
Where utter darkness stands removed from light.
Where plagues inviron, torments compass round,
Where anguish rores in never stinted sorrow,
Where woe, woe, woe, is every voices sound,
Where night eternal never yields tomorrow:
Where damned tortures dreadful shall persever,
So long as God is God, So long is ever.
Heavens Glory.
WHo loves this life, from love his love does err,
And choosing dross, rich treasure does deny,
Leaving the pearl, Christ's counsels to prefer,
With selling all we have, the same to buy:
O happy soul. that does disburse a sum,
To gain a kingdom in the life to come.
Such traffic may be termed heavenly thrift,
Such venture has no hazard to dissuade
Immortal purchase, with a mortal gift,
The greatest gain that ever Merchant made:
To get a crown where Saints and Angels sing,
For laying out a base and earthly thing.
To taste the joys no humane knowledge knows,
To hear the tunes of the celestial quires,
T'attaine heavens sweet and mildest calm repose,
To see Gods face the sum of good desires.
Which by his glorious Saints is howerly eyde,
Let sight with seeing, never satisfide.
Sod as he is, sight beyond estimate,
Which Angel tongues are unt aught to discover,
Whose splendour does The heavens illustrate,
Unto which sight each sight becomes a lover:
Whom all the glorious court of heaven laud,
With praises of eternities applaud.
There where no tears are to interpret griefs,
For any sighs, heart dolours to expound,
There where no treasure is surprised by thieves,
Nor any voice that speaks with sorrows sound.
No use of passions, no distempered thought,
No spot of sin, no deed of error wrought.
The native home of pilgrim souls abode,
Rest's habitation, joys true residence,
Ierusalem's new City built by God,
Formed by the hands of his own excellence;
With gold paved streets, the walls of precious stone,
Where all sound praise to him sits on the throne.
HEAVENS Glory, EARTHS Vanity, and HELLS Torments. Of the Glory of the blessed
Saints in Heaven.
TO the end there might want nothing to stir up our minds to ver^e, after
the pains which Almighty God threatens to the wicked, he does also set before
us the reward of the good: which is, that glory and everlasting life which the
blessed Saints do enjoy in Heaven, whereby he does very mightily allure us to
the love of the same. But what manner of thing this reward; and what this life
is, there is no tongue, neither of Angels nor of men, that is sufficient to
express it. Howbeit, that we may have some kind of savor and knowledge
thereof, I intend here to rehearse even word for word what S. Augustine says
in one of his meditations, speaking o^ the life everlasting (ensuing thi^
transitory time) and of the joys of the blessed Saints in Heaven. O life
(says he) prepared by Almighty God for his friends, a blessed life, a secure
life, a quiet life, a beautiful life, a clean life, a chaste life, a holy
life; a life that knows no death, a life without sadness, without labor,
without grief, without trouble, without corruption, without fear, without
variety, without alteration; a life replenished with all beauty and dignity;
where there is neither enemy that can offend, nor delight that can annoy, where
love is perfect, and no fear at all, where the day is everlasting, and the
spirit of all is one; where Almighty God is seen face to face, who is the
only meat whereupon they feed without loathsomenesse: it delights me to
consider thy brightness, and thy treasures do rejoice my longing heart. The
more I consider thee, the more I am stricken in love with thee. The great desire
I have of thee, does wonderfully delight me, and no less pleasure is it to me,
to keep thee in my remembrance. O life most happy, O kingdom truly blessed,
wherein there is no death nor end, neither yet succession of time, where the
day continuing evermore without night, knows not any mutation; where the
victorious Conqueror being joined with those everlasting quires of Angels, and
having his head crowned with a garland of glory, sings unto Almighty God one
of the songs of Sion. Oh happy, yea, and most happy should my soul be, if when
the race of this my pilgrimage is ended, I might be worthy to see thy glory,
thy blessedness, thy beauty, the walls and gates of thy City, thy streets, thy
lodgings, thy noble Citizens, and thine omnipotent King in his most glorious
Majesty. The stones of thy walls are precious, thy gates are adorned with
bright pearls, thy streets are of very fine excellent gold, in which there
never fail perpetual praises; thy houses are paved with rich stones, wrought
throughout with Saphirs, and covered about with massy gold, where no unclean
thing may enter, neither does any abide there that is defiled. Fair and
beautiful in thy delights art thou O Jerusalem our mother, none of those
things are suffered in thee, that are suffered here. There is great diversity
between thy things and the things that we do continually see in this life.
In thee is never seen neither darkness nor night, neither yet any change of
time. The light that shines in thee, comes neither of lamps, nor of Sun
or Moon, nor yet of bright glittering Stars, but God that proceeds of God,
and the light that comes of light, is he that gives clearenes unto thee.
Even the very King of Kings himself keeps continual residence in the
midst of thee, compassed about with his officers and servants. There do the
Angels in their orders and Quires sing a most sweere and melodious harmony.
There is celebrated a perpetual solemnity and feast with every one of them
that comes thither, after his departure out of this pilgrimage. There be the
orders of Prophets; there is the famous company of the Apostles; there is the
invincible army of Martyrs; there is the most reverentassembly of confessors;
there are the true and perfect religious persons; there are the holy Virgins,
which have overcome both the pleasures of the world, and the frailty of their
own nature; there are the young men and young women, more ancient in virtue
than in years; there are the sheep and little lambs that have escaped from
the Wolves, and from the deceitful snares of this life, and therefore do now
keep a perpetual feast, each one in his place, all alike in joy, though
different in degree. There Charity reigns in her full perfection, for unto
them God is all in all, whom they behold without end, in whose love they be
all continually inflamed, whom they do always love, and in loving do praise,
and in praising, do love, and all their exercises consist in praises, without
weariness, and without travel. O happy were I, yea, and very happy indeed,
if at what time I shall be loosed out of the prison of this wretched body, I
might be thought worthy to hear those songs of that heavenly melody, sung in
the praise of the everlasting King, by all the Citizens of that so noble City.
Happy were I, and very happy, if I might obtain a room among the Chaplains
of that Chapel, and wait for my turn also to sing my Hallelujah. If I might
be near to my King, my God, my Lord, and see him in his glory, even as he
has promised me, when he said: O Father, this is my last determinate will,
that all those that thou have given unto me, may be with me, and see the glory
which I had with thee before the world was created. Hitherto are the words of
S. Augustine. Now tell me (Christian brother) what a day of glorious shine
shall that be unto thee (if thou lead thy life in Gods fear) when after the
course of this pilgrimage, thou shall pass from death to immortality; and in
that passage, when others shall begin to fear, thou shall begin to
rejoice, and lift up thy head, because the day of thy deliverance is at hand.
Come forth a little (says S. Jerome unto the Virgin Eustochia) out of the
prison of this body, and when thou art before the gate of this Tabernacle, set
before thy eyes the reward that thou hopest to have for thy present labors.
Tell me, what a day shall that be, when our Lord himself with all his Saints,
shall come and meet thee in the way, saying unto thee: Arise and make have O
my beloved, my delight, and my Turtle dove, for now the VVinter is past, and
the tempestuous waters are ceased, the flowers do begin to appear in our
land. Cant. 2. How great joy shall thy soul then receive, when it shall be at
that time presented before the Throne of the most blessed Trinity, by the hands
of the holy Angels, and when shall be declared thy good works, and what
crosses, tribulations, and injuries thou have suffered for Gods sake. Acts 9.
S. Luke writes, That when holy Tabitha, the great alms giver was dead, all
the Widows and poor folk came about the Apostle S. Peter, showing unto him
the garments which she had given them: wherewith the Apostle being moved, made
his prayer unto Almighty God for that so merciful a woman, and by his prayers
he raised her again to life. Now what a gladness will it be to thy soul,
when in the midst of those blessed spirits thou shall be placed, with
remembrance of thy almesdeeds, thy prayers and fastings, the innocence of thy
life, thy suffering of wrongs and injuries, thy patience in afflictions, thy
temperance in diet, with all other virtues and good works that thou have done
in all thy life. O how great joy shall thou receive at that time for all the
good deeds that thou have wrought; how clearly then shall thou understand the
value and the excellency of virtue. There the obedient man shall talk of
victories; there virtue shall receive her reward, and the good honored
according to their merit. Moreover, what a pleasure will it be unto thee,
when thou shall see thy self to be in that sure haven, and shall look back
upon the course of thy navigation which thou have sailed here in this life:
when thou shall remember the tempests wherein thou have been tossed, the
straits through which thou have passed, and the dangers of thieves and pirates,
from whom thou have escaped. There is the place where they shall sing the song
of the Prophet, which says, Had it not been that our Lord had been mine
helper, it could not be but my soul had gone into hell. Especially, when from
thence thou shall behold so many sins as are committed every hour in the
world, so many souls as do descend every day into hell, and how it has
pleased Almighty God, that among such a multitude of damned persons, thou
should be of the number of his elect, and one of those to whom he would grant
such exceeding great felicity and glory. Besides all this, what a goodly sight
will it be to see those seats filled up, and the City builded, and the walls
of that noble Jerusalem repaired again? With what cheerful embracings shall
the whole court of Heaven entertain them, beholding them when they come laden
with the spoils of their vanquished enemies? There shall those valiant men and
women enter with triumph, which have together with the world conquered the
weakness of their own frail nature. There shall they enter which have
suffered martyrdom for Christ's sake, with double triumph over the flesh and
the world, adorned with all celestial glory. There shall also daily enter
many young men and children, which have vanquished the tenderness of their
young years with discretion and virtue. Oh, how sweet and savorie shall the
fruit of virtue then be, although for a time before her roots seemed very
bitter: sweet is the cold evening after the hot sunnie day; sweet is the
fountain to the weary thirsty travailer; sweet is rest and sleep to the
tired servant: but much more sweet is it to the Saints in Heaven to enjoy peace
after war, security after peril, eternal rest after their pains and
travels: for then are the wars at an end, then need they no more to go all
armed, both on the right side and on the left. The children of Israel went
forth armed toward the land of Promise, but after that the land was conquered,
they laid down their spears, and cast away their armor, and forgetting all
fear and turmoile of war, each one under the shadow of his pavillion and
harbor enjoyed the fruit of their sweet peace. Now may the watching Prophet
come down from his standing, that did watch and fix his feet upon the place
of the Sentinel: There is no more fear of invasion by the terrible armies of
the bloody enemies: there is no place for the subtle crafts of the lurking
viper: there cannot arive the deadly sight of the venomous Basseliske, nor yet
shall the hissing of the ancient Serpent be heard there, but only the soft
breathing air of the Holy Ghost; wherein is beholden the glory of Almighty
God. This is the region of all peace, the place of security, situated above all
the Elements, whether the clouds and stormy winds of the dark air cannot
come. O what glorious things have been spoken of thee, O City of God. Blessed
are they (says holy Tobias) that love thee, and enjoy thy peace. O my soul
praise our Lord, for he has delivered Jerusalem his City from all her
troubles. Happy shall I be, if the remnant of my posterity might come to see
the clearenesse of Jerusalem: her gates shall be wrought with Saphirs and
Emeraulds, and all the circuit of her walls shall be built with precious
stones, her streets shall be paved with white and polished marble, and in all
parts of her territories shall be sung Hallelujah. O joyful country! O
sweet glory! O blessed company! who shall be those so fortunate and happy that
are elected for thee? It seems a presumption to desire thee, and yet I will
not live without the desire of thee. O ye sons of Adam, a race of men,
miserably blinded and deceived. O ye scattered sheep, wandering out of your
right way, if this be your sheep-coat, whether go you backward? What mean
you? Why suffer you such an excellent benefit to be wilfully lost for not
taking so little pains? What wise man would not desire, that all labor and
pain of the world were imposed unto him? that all sorrows, afflictions, and
diseases were even powered upon him as thick as hail; that persecutions,
tribulations, and griefs, with one to molest him, another to disquiet him,
yea, that all creatures in the world did conspire against him, being scorned
and made a laughing stock of all men; and that his whole life were converted
into weepings and lamentations; so that in the next life he might find repose
in the heavenly harbor of eternal consolation, and be thought meet to have a
place among that blessed people, which are adorned and beautified with such
inestimable glory. And thou, O foolish lover of this miserable world, go thy
way, seek as long as thou will for honors and promotions, build sumptuous
houses and palaces, purchase lands and possessions, enlarge thy territories
and dominions, yea, command if thou will the whole world, yet shall thou never
be so great as the least of all the servants of Almighty God, who shall receive
that treasure which this world cannot give, and shall enjoy that felicity,
which shall endure for evermore, when thou with thy pomp and riches, shall
bear the rich glutton company, whose burial is in the deep vault of hell:
but the devout spiritual man shall be carried by the holy Angels with poor
Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, a place of perpetual rest, joy, solace, and
eternal happiness.

Of the benefits which our Lord promises to give in this present life; to such
as live a just and godly life.
PEradventure thou will now say, that all these things before rehearsed, be
rewards and punishments only for the life to come: and that thou desire to
see something in this present life, because our minds are wont to be moved
very much with the sight of things present. To satisfy thee herein, I will
also explain unto thee what may answer thy desire. For although our Lord do
reserve the best wine, and the delicate dishes of most delight, until the end
of the banquet, yet he suffers not his friends to be utterly destitute of
meat and drink in this tedious voyage: for he knows very well, that they
could not otherwise hold out in their journey. And therefore when he said unto
Abraham, Fear not Abraham, for I am thy defender, and thy reward shall be
exceeding great: By these words he promised two things, the one for the time
present, that was, to be his safeguard and defense in all such things as may
happen in this life, and the other for the time to come, and that is, the
reward of glory which is reserved for the next life. But how great the first
promise is, and how many kinds of benefits and favors are therein included, no
man is able to understand, but only he, that has with great diligence read
the holy Scriptures, wherein no one thing is more often repeated and set forth,
than the greatness of the favors, benefits, and privileges, which Almighty
God promises unto his friends in this life. Hearken what Solomon says in the
third Chapter of his Proverbs, as touching this matter. Blessed is that man
that finds wisdom, for it is better to have it, than all the treasures of
Silver and Gold, be they never so excellent and precious: and it is more worth
than all the riches of the world, and whatsoever man's heart is able to desire,
is not comparable unto it. The length of days are at her right hand, and
riches and glory at her left. Her ways be pleasant, and all her passages be
quiet; she is a tree of life to all those that have obtained her; and he that
shall have her in continual possession, shall be blessed. Keep therefore (O
my son) the laws of Almighty God, and his counsel, for they shall be as
life to thy soul, and sweetness to thy taste* Then shall theu walk safely in
thy ways, and thy feet shall no find any stumbling blocks. If thou sleep,
thou shall have no cause to fear: and if thou take thy rest, thy sleep shall
be quiet. This is the sweetness and quietness of the way of the godly, but
the ways of the wicked are far different, as the holy Scripture does declare
unto us. The paths and ways of the wicked (says Ecclesiasticus) are full of
brambles, and at the end of their journey are prepared for them hell,
darkness, and pains. Do thou think it then a good exchange, to forsake
the ways of Almighty God, for the ways of the world, since there is so great
difference between the one and the other, not only in the end of the way, but
also in all the steps of the same? What madness can be greater, than to choose
one torment to gain another by; rather than with one rest to gain another
rest? And that thou may more clearly perceive the excellency of this rest,
and what a number of benefits are presently incident thereunto, I beseech thee
hearken attentively even what Almighty God himself has promised by his
Prophet Esaias, to the observers of his law, in a manner with these words, as
diverse interpreters do expound them. When thou shall do (says he) such and
such things, which I have commanded thee to do, there shall forthwith appear
unto thee the dawning of the clear day (that is, the son of justice) which
shall drive away all the darkness of thy errors and miseries, and then shall
thou begin to enjoy true and perfect salvation. Now these are the benefits
which Almighty God has promised to his servants. And albeit some of them be
for the time to come, yet are some of them to be presently received in this
life: as, that new light and shining from heaven; that safety and abundance of
all good things; that assured confidence and trust in the Almighty God; that
divine assistance in all our Prayers and Petitions made unto him; that peace
and tranquillity of conscience; that protection and providence of Almighty God.
All these are the gracious gifts and favors which Almighty God has promised
to his servants in this life. They all are the works of his mercy, effects of
his grace, testimonies of his love, and blessings, which he of his fatherly
providence extends.

To be short, all these benefits do the godly enjoy both in this present life,
and in the life to come: and of all these are the ungodly deprived, both in the
one life, and in the other. Whereby thou may easily perceive, what difference
there is between the one sort and the other, seeing the one is so rich in
graces, and the other so poor and needy: For if thou ponder well Gods promised
blessings, and consider the state and condition of the good and the wicked,
thou shall find, that the one sort is highly in the favor of Almighty God, and
the other deeply in his displeasure: the one be his friends, and the other his
enemies: the one be in light, and the other in darkness: the one do enjoy
the company of Angels, and the other the filthy pleasures and delights of
Swine: the one are truly free, and Lords over themselves, and the other are
become bondslaves unto Satan, and unto their own lusts and appetites. The one
are joyful with the witness of a good conscience, and the other (except they
be utterly blinded) are continually bitten with the worm of conscience,
evermore gnawing on them: the one in tribulation, stand steadfastly in their
proper place; and the other, like light chafe, are carried up and down with
every blast of wind: the one stand secure and firm with the anchor of hope,
and the other are unstable, and evermore yielding unto the assaults of fortune:
the prayers of the one are acceptable and liking unto God, and the prayers of
the other are abhorred and accursed: the death of the one is quiet, peaceable
and precious in the sight of God, and the death of the other, is unquiet,
painful, and troubled with a thousand frights and terrors: To conclude, the
one live like children under the protection and defense of Almighty God, and
sleep sweetly under the shadow of his pastoral providence; and the other
being excluded from this kind of providence, wander abroad as straied sheep,
without their shepherd and Master, lying wide open to all the perils,
dangers, and assaults of the world. Seeing then, that a virtuous life is
accompanied with all these benefits, what is the cause that should withdraw
thee, and persuade thee not to embrace such a precious treasure? what art thou
able to allege for excuse of thy great negligence? To say that this is not
true, it cannot be admitted, for so much as Gods word does avouch the
certainty hereof. To say that these are but small benefits, thou can not,
for so much as they do exceed all that man's heart can desire. To say that
thou art an enemy unto thy self, and that thou do not desire these
benefits, cannot be, considering that a man is even naturally a friend to
himself, and the will of man has ever an eye to his own benefit, which is
the very object or mark that his desire shoots at. To say that thou have no
understanding, nor taste of these benefits, it will not serve to discharge
thine offense, for so much as thou have the faith and belief thereof, though
thou have not the taste, for the taste is lost through sin, but not the
faith: and the faith is a witness more certain, more secure, and better to be
trusted, than all other experiences and witnesses in the world. Why do thou
not then discredit all other witnesses with this one assured testimony? Why
do thou not rather give credit unto faith, than to thine own opinion and
judgment? O that thou would make a resolute determination, to submit thy
self into the hands of Almighty God, and to put thy whole trust assuredly in
him How soon should thou then see all these Prophesies fulfilled in thee:
then should thou see the excellency of these divine treasures: then
should thou see how stark blind the lovers of this world are, that seek
not after this high treasure: then should thou see upon what good ground our
Savior inviteth us to this kind of life, saying; Come unto me all ye that
travel, and are laden, and I will refresh you; take my yoke upon you, and
you shall find rest for your souls: for my yoke is sweet, and my burden is
light. Almighty God is no deceiver, nor false promiser, neither yet is he a
great boaster of such things as he promises. Why do thou then shrink back?
why do thou refuse peace and true quietness? why do thou refuse the gentle
offers and sweet callings of thy Pastor? how dare thou despise and banish
away virtue from thee, which has such prerogatives and privileges as these
be: and withal, confirmed and signed even with the hand of Almighty God? The
Queen of Sheba heard far less things than these of Solomon, and yet she
traveled from the uttermost parts of the world, to try the truth of those
things that she had heard. And why do not thou then (hearing such notable,
yea, and so certain news of virtue) adventure to take a little pains to try
the truth and sequel thereof? O dear Christian brother, put thy trust in
Almighty God and in his Word, and commit thy self most boldly without all
fear into his arms, and unloose from thy hands those trifling knots that have
hitherto deceived thee, and thou shall find, that the merits of virtue do
far excel her fame: and that all which is spoken in praise of her, is
nothing in comparison of that which she is indeed.

That a man ought not to defer his Repentance and Conversion unto God, from
day to day; considering he has so many debts to discharge, by reason of the
offenses committed in his sinful life already past.
NOw then, if on the one side there be so many and so great respects, that do
bind us to change our sinful life; and on the other side, we have not any
sufficient excuse why we should not make this exchange. How long will thou
tarry, until thou fully resolve to do it? Turn thine eyes a little, and look
back upon thy life past, and consider, that at this present (of what age soever
thou be) it is high time, or rather, the time well nigh past to begin to
discharge some part of thy old debts. Consider, that thou which art a Christian
regenerated in the water of holy Baptism, which do acknowledge Almighty God
for thy Father, and the Catholic Church for thy Mother, whom she has
nourished with the milk of the Gospel, to wit, with the doctrine of the
Apostles and Evangelists: consider (I say) that all this notwithstanding, thou
have lived even as loosely and dissolutely, as if thou had been a mere
Infidel, that had never any knowledge of Almighty God. And if thou do deny
this, then tell me what kind of sin is there which thou have not committed?
What tree is there forbidden that thou have not beholden with thine eyes? What
green meddow is there, in which thou have not (at the least in desire) feasted
thy letcherous lust? what thing has been set before thine eyes, that thou
have not wantonly desired? What appetite have thou left unexecuted,
notwithstanding that thou did believe in Almighty God, and that thou were a
Christian? What would thou have done more, if thou had not had any faith at
all? If thou had not looked for any other life? If thou had not feared the
dreadful day of judgment? What has all thy former life been, but a web of
sins, a sink of vices, a way full of brambles and thorns, and a froward
disobedience of God? with whom have thou hitherto lived, but only with thine
appetite, with thy flesh, with thy pride, and with the goods and riches of this
transitory world? These have been thy gods, these have been thine idols whom
thou have served, and whose laws thou have diligently obeyed. Make thine
account with the Almighty God, with his laws, and with his obedience, and
peradventure thou shall find, that thou have esteemed him no more, than if he
had been a god of wood, or stone. For it is certain, that there be many
Christians, which believing that there is a God, are induced to sin with such
facility, as though they believed, that there were no God at all: and do
offend no whit the less, though they believe that there is a God, then they
would do, if they believed there were none at all. What greater injury, what
greater despite can be done, than so to contemn his divine majesty?
Finally, thou believing all such things as Christ's Church does believe, have
notwithstanding so led thy life, as if thou were persuaded, that the belief of
Christians were the greatest fables or lies in the world. And if the multitude
of thy sins past, and the faculty thou have used in committing of them, do
not make thee afraid, why do thou not fear at the least the Majesty and
omnipotency of him, against whom thou have sinned? Lift up thine eyes, and
consider the infinite greatness and omnipotency of the Lord, whom the powers
of Heaven do adore, before whose Majesty the whole compass of the wide world
lies prostrate; in whose presence, all things created, are no more than chafe
carried away with the wind. Consider also with thy self how unseemely it is,
that such a vile worm as thou art, should have audacity so many times to
offend and provoke the wrath of so great a Majesty. Consider the wonderful and
most terrible severity of his justice, and what horrible punishments he has
used from time to time in the world against sin; and that not only upon
particular persons, but also upon Cities, Nations, Kingdoms and Provinces,
yea, upon the universal World: And not only in earth, but also in Heaven; and
not only upon strangers sinners, but even upon his own most innocent son,
our sweet Savior Jesus Christ, when he took upon him to satisfy for the debt
that we owed. And if this severity was used upon green and innocent wood, and
that for the sins of others; what then will he do upon dry and withered
wood, and against those that are laden with their own sins? Now, what thing
can be thought more unreasonable, then that such a frail wretch as thou art,
should be so saucie and malapert, as to mock with so mighty a Lord, whose
hand is so heavy, that in case he should strike but one stroke upon thee, he
would at one blow drive thee down headlong into the deep bottomless pit of
hell, without remedy. Consider likewise the great patience of this our
merciful Lord, who has expected thy repentance so long, even from the time
that thou did first offend him: and think, that if after so long patience and
tarrying for thee, thou shall still continue thy leaud and sinful life,
abusing thus his mercy, and provoking him to further indignation and wrath, he
will then bend his bow, and shake his sword, and rain down upon thee even
sharp arrows of everlasting wrath and death. Consider also the profoundnesse
of his deep judgments, whereof we read, and see daily so great wonders. We see
how Solomon himself, after his so great wisdom, and after those three
thousand parables and most profound mysteries uttered by him, was forsaken by
Almighty God, and suffered to fall down and adore Idols. We see how one of
those seven first Deacons of the Primitive Church, which were full of the Holy
Ghost, became not only an heretic, but also an archhereticke and a father of
heresies. We see daily many stars fall down from Heaven unto earth, with
miserable falls, and to wallow themselves in the dirt, and to eat the meat of
swine, which sat before at Gods own table, and were fed with the very bread
of Angels. If then the just and righteous for some secret pride or negligence,
or else for some ingratitude of theirs) be thus justly forsaken of Almighty
God, after they have bestowed so many years in his service. What may thou
look for, that have done in a manner nothing else in all thy life time, but
only heaped sins upon sins, and have thereby offended Almighty God most
grievously?

Now, if thou have lived after this sort, were it not reason that thou should
now at the length give over, and cease heaping sin upon sin, and debt upon
debt, and begin to pacify the wrath of Almighty God, and to disburden thy
sinful soul? Were it not meet, that that time which thou have hitherto
given to the world, to thy flesh, and to the Devil, should suffice? and that
thou should bestow some little time of that which remains, to serve him,
who has given thee all that thou have? Were it not a point of wisdom, after
so long time, and so many great injuries, to fear the most terrible justice of
Almighty God, who the more patiently he suffers sinners, the more he does
afterward punish them with severity and justice? Were it not meet for thee to
fear thy long continuance so many years in sin, and in the displeasure of
Almighty God, procuring thereby against thee such a mighty adversary as he is,
and provoking him of a merciful loving Father to become thy severe terrible
judge and enemy? Were it not meet to fear, least that the force of evil
custom may in continuance of time be turned into nature; and that thy long
vicious usual manner of committing sin, may make of a vice, a necessity, or
little less? Why art thou not afraid, least by little and little thou may
cast thy self down headlong into the deep pit of a reprobate sense,
whereinto after that a man is once fallen, he never makes account of any
sin, be it never so great.

The Patriarch Jacob said unto Laban his father in law: These fourteen years
have I served thee, and looking to thine affairs, now it is time that I should
look to mine own, and begin to attend unto the affairs of mine own
household. Wherefore if thou have likewise bestowed so many years in the
service of this world, and of this frail transitory life, were it not good
reason, that thou should now begin to make some provision for the salvation
of thy soul, and for the everlasting life to come? There is nothing more
short, nor more transitory then the life of man; and therefore providing so
carefully as thou do for all such things as be necessary for this life,
which is so short, why do thou not provide likewise somewhat for the life
that is to come? which life shall endure for ever and ever.

Earths Vanity.
A Sigh.
HEnce lazy sleep, thou son of sullen night,
That with soft-breathing Spells keeps sorrows under
Thy charms; cheares up the spirits with delight,
And laps the Senses in Lethaean slumber;
Pack and be gone: for my sad soul knows well,
Care best accords with a gloomic Cell.
And what more dark then my sin-clouded Soul?
Where yet the Sun of Sapience never shone;
But still in Errors ougly cave did roll,
Where naught keeps concord but discordant moan:
Leave me I say, and give me leave to tell,
That to my Soul, my self has not done well.
Good man! (if good there lives one) Thou that art
So far thrust from the worlds imperious eyes;
Help me to a^t this penitential part:
I mean, No coyner of new Niceties,
Nor wodden Worshipper: Give me him than
That Is a God loving, and good living man,
To be my partner in this Tragedy;
Whose scenes run bleeding through the wounded Acts,
Heart-strucke by Sin and Satan's fallacy,
And poisoned by my selfe-committed facts:
Send me thy prayers, if not thy presence found,
To stop the Ore-face of this streaming wound.
Steer me (sweet Savior) while I safe have past
The stormy Euroclydons of Despair,
Till happily I have arrived at last,
To touch at Thee, my Souls sole-saving stayre:
Tow up my sin-frought Soul, sunk down below,
And long lien weltring midst the waves of woe.
New rig me up, lest wallowing Iorewhelme;
Thy Mercy be my Mainmast; And for Sails
My Sighs; thy Truth, my tackling; Faith, my Helm:
My ballast, Love; Hope, Anchor that never fails:
Then in Heavens haven calm Peace me arrive,
Where once enharbor'd, I shall richly thrive.
Woes me! how long has Pride besotted me?
Proposing to dim Reason my good parts,
My nimble Wit, my quick proclivitie
To Apprehension; and in high deserts
How many stood beneath me: I (vain fool)
Thus fob'd by Satan's sleights, ore-slipt my Soul:
Who in dark Error down embodied lies,
Black as the Star-lesse Night; and hideously
Impuritie with rustie wings cross flies
Betwixt the Sun of Righteousness and me;
Whilst (Bat-like) beats my Soul her leather sails
Against the soft Air; and rising, falls and fails.
Must I for each unsyllabled close Thought
Render account? O wit-fi'lde Conference!
Called in is thy protection then, dear bought:
How was my brow o'rehatcht with Impudence?
To let whole worlds of words my cheeks up-swell,
The least of whom would ding me down to Hell.
O wretched Impes then of man's impious race!
Who Will breath out Blasphemies to make a Jest;
And call wit flashing the sole punctual grace
Of genuine knowledge: But amongst the rest,
Judge in what case are those wit-hucsters in,
That hourly practice this soul sinking sin?
O may my tongue be ever rivetted
Fast to my roof, but when it speaks Gods praise:
May not one vocal sound by breath be fed,
But when it carols out celestial Lays;
Let not one tone through my tongues hatches fly,
But what bears with it heavens glories harmony.
Help (Lord of power) my feeble joynted prayers
To clamber th'azure Mountains thrown above me;
And keep a seat for me there among those hairs,
Apportion'd out to such as truly love thee:
Admit them in thine ears a resting room,
Until to thee and them, my soul shall come.
Mean while, moist eyed Repentance here below
Shall Inmate wise be Tenant to my mind:
For Prayers, without true Penitence, do show,
"Like meats unseason'd, or like Bills unsign'd;
"Or corn on tops of Cottages that grows,
"Which (useless) no man either reapes or sowes.
O how my Soul's surpised with shallow fears?
When, thinking to lean on Life's broken staff;
And counting to mine age large sums of years,
I hear the sweet and sacred Psalmograph,
Compare Life to a Flower, a Puff, a Span;
Who Is Monarch now, next minute's not a Man.
Must I needs dye? why surfeit I on Pleasure?
Must I needs dye? why swim I in Delight?
Must I needs dye? why squint I after Treasure?
Must I needs dye? why live I not aright?
Must I needs dye? why live I then in sin?
Thrice better for me I had never bin.
Feuntaine of breathing Dust? such grace me give,
That I in life, prepare in dust to lie;
Let me be dying still whiles I do live;
That I may blisfull live, when I shall dye:
For in Christ's School this Paradox learn I;
Who dies before he dies, shall never die.
If I must die, then after must begin
The life of Joy or Torment without end;
The life of Torment purchased is by sin;
The life of Joy, by life that learnest' amend:
Why should I then profane, swear, curse, lust, lie,
If I but think on this; That I must die?
Why should I quaffe to more then Nature can?
Since more drink I gain more loss is mine:
For may I not be termed a b^stiall man,
To drown my Reason in a cup of wine?
Yea tenfold worse: Thus monster made at least:
God made me Man, I make my self a Beast.
How swelt I with hard travel through the Dale
That leads to Prophanations irksome cell?
But freeze, by softly pacing up the skale,
Where burning zeal, and her bright sisters dwell:
Thus sweat I in the shadow, shake in the shine,
And by free choice, from good to ill decline.
Sweet Savior cleanse my leprous loathsome soul
In that depurpled Fount, which forth thy side
Gurgling, did twixt two Lilly-mountaines roll,
To rinse Man's tainted Race, Sin soylifide:
Wash it more white than the triumphant Swan,
That rides o'th silver breast of Eridan.
Suffer my prayers harmony to rise
Into thine ears, while the Angels bear a part:
Accept my Sighs, as smelling Sacrifice,
Sent from the Altar of my bleeding heart;
Up to thy nostrils, sweet as the Oil of Aaron,
Or the odoriferous Rose of flowrie Sharon.
The Heart never longed more for the purling brooks;
Nor did the lustful Goat with more pursuit,
After the blossomed Tritisolie look,
Then does my panting Soul, to enjoy the fruit
Of thy Life-wa^er; which if I attain
To taste of once, I never shall thirst again,
Even as the chapped ground in Summers heat,
Calls to the clouds, and gapes at every shower:
Whose thirsty Casma's greedily entreat,
As tho they would the whole house of heaven devour;
So does my riven Soul, be parcht with sin,
Yawne wide, to let moist drops of Mercy in.
Earths Vanity.
Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity, says the wisest Preacher that
ever wrote: One generation passes and another comes, and all is but vexation
of spirit. Which divine theorem, that we may the better perceive, let us set
our selves to the serious meditation of it: for the more we search, the more we
shall see all things to be vanity, nothing constant, nothing for our eternal
good, but our souls salvation. Man's life on earth does no sooner begin, but
his end approaches, his death hasteneth. Some come upon the stage of this
world but to have a breathing, and are presently gone: others stay a while
longer, it may be a day, perhaps a week, perhaps a month, peradventure a
year, or it may be some few years: but alas! the longer they stay, the
greater their grief, care, fear, and anxietie of mind. Even in the infancy
of age man is often times left as Moses sometime was, in the floods of misery;
but as age increases, sorrow increases, because sin increases: when youth
runs most at random, and thinks it self most safe, it is then hemmed in
with greatest dangers; then the rashfoole-hardy mind of man hurrieth him
headlong to hell, except the irresistible power of Gods preventing grace does
speedily stay him; then his wits are even intoxicated with a frenzy of
iniquity, and wholly bent upon riotousnesse, rashness, luxury, jollitie,
superfluity and excess in carnal pleasures. He then devoteth his time and
addicteth himself to all manner of evil, drinking, dancing, revelling,
swaggering, swearing, whoring, gaming, quarreling, fighting; and in the mean
while never thinks on Heaven, nor fears hell. His head is frought with
vanities his heart with fallacies, where by his soul is brought into ^
labyrinth of inextricable miseries. So great is the temerity o^ his unadvised
mind, that n^ consideration of Gods judgments, either past, or present, or to
come, can set a stop to his wickedness. His youthfullnesse damps at no bogges,
quagmires, hills, or mountains; but wingeth him over all impediments, mounts
him over all motives that might way-lay his sins. He sticks not to offen^ his
maker, to recrucifie his Redeemer, to resist (shall I say his Sanctifier, no,
but) the Spirit whom God has given to be his sanctifier: and if he so carry
himself toward these, no mervaile that he derideth his Tutor, scorns the
Minister (like the little children that mocked Elisha) oppresses his poor
brother (as Pharaoh did the Israelites:) spares not Infants (no more then
Herod did) regards not parents, (no more then Hophni and Phinias did.) Let
the mother direct him; the father correct him, his ancients instruct him, alas!
all is in vain: youth makes men headstrong, selfe-conceited and proud, so
that they swell with an overweening opinion of their own worth; they think
themselves the only wits of the time, the only men of the world, more fit to
teach others then to learn themselves, more able to give then to take advice.
If they go on a while in their lewd courses without the restraining and
renewing Grace of God, they get a habit of evil, are hardened through the
custom of sin, none may resist them, none compare with them, no law of God
or man can restrain them; They take counsel together against Psalm. 2. 2, 3.
the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Whereupon oftentimes (the ripeness
of sinn^ being hastened by outragiousnesse Nequities vitae non sini^ esse senem.
of sinning) God suddenly cuts them off, in their intemperancy, luxury,
quarrels, and disorders; which shows the^ vainenesse to be mere vanity.
Suppose they grow as great as Tamberlaine, yet a Gunne, Pike, Arrow; nay, a
Fly, Flea, or Gnat, a dram, nay, a drop of poison, proves them to be vain
men: one of these silly creatures may send him presently to his Creator to
receive his final doom. Yet alas! what do these most mind? The bum-basted
silken Gallants of our time, that come forth like a May morning, decked with
all the glory of Art; the Epicurean Cormerants, the gus^ing and tippling
tosse-pots, the dainty painting Dames, the dedicate mincing Ladies, the
sweet-singing Sirens, the dancing Damsels, the finicall youths, the couzening
Shopkeeper, the crafty Crafts-man: I say, what do all these, but set their
minds upon vanity, upon glory, honor, pride, dross, and such like trash,
which weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary prove lighter then vanity? Do
we not sometime see more spent upon one suite in Law then would keep a poor
Country town with the inhabitants for a whole year? See we not more spent
upon one suite of apparel, for one proud carcass, then would build
Free-schoole? So that the clothes on many a Gallant back exceeds his Rent-day
See we not more spent upon Feast to satisfy the curiosity o^ a few, then
would satisfy the necessity of a hundred poor wretches almost famished to
death? See we not more drunk in a Tavern at one sitting by a small company,
then would serve a troop of sturdy Soldiers in the field? Many go daily to
the Tavern, where they stick not to spend their twelve pence, who would grudge
to give one penny, nay, one farthing to a hungry beggar. Again, is there not
now more spent upon a Ladies feather, then would pay a mean man's tithes? Is
there not more spent upon one pair of sleeves, then would cloth six bodies?
and more spent at a Whitsunale, then would keep the poor of the Parish for a
year? Have we not amongst our Gentry, some of the female sex, who will spend
more upon a Glass and a pot of complexion, then they will give a whole year
at their gate? they must be menders of that which God makes, makers of that
which God marres, turning themselves (like the Camelion) into all shapes,
though never so grisly and ougly; and being never well till they be most ill,
never (as they conceit) in fashion, till indeed they be out of all fashion. If
this be not a vanity of vanities, who can tell what is vanity? Every man is an
eyewitness of this vanity, the more is the pity that it should be so
common: your Lady, the Merchants wife, the trades man's wife, nay, all of all
sorts are a degree above their estate. Your Gallant is no man, unless his
hair be of the woman's fashion, dangling and waving over his shoulders; your
woman no body, except (contrary to the modesty of her sex) she be half (at
least) of the man's fashion: she jets, she cuts, she rides, she swears, she
games, she smoakes, she drinks, and what not that is evil? She is in the
universal portraiture of her behavior, as well as in her accoutrements, more
then half a man; the man on the other side, no less womanish. We may well
admire and exclaim with the Poet, O tempora! O mores! O the times! O the
manners of these times! O quantum est in rebus mane! O how great a nothing is
there in all things! What a vanity of vanity has overspread the age we live
in? Were our forefathers now alive to be spectators of this vanity, it would
strike them into amazement. In their days the Pike, the Spear, the Sword, the
Bow, the Arrow, Musket and Caliever, with the warlike Horse, were the object
of exercise and recreation: Now the Pot, the Pipe, Dice and Cards, and such
like vanities, indeed worse then the quintessence of the extremest vanity. We
are now all for ease, we must lie soft, fare deliciously, go sumptuously,
drink Wine in bowls, carowse healths, till health be quite drunk away; nay,
we must kneel to our drink, when we will not kneel to him that gave us our
drink; we do homage to that which takes away the use of our legs, nay, of
our brains, our hearts, wits, sense, reason, when we refuse homage to him that
gave us all these. O vain man that do thus forget thy God, and abuse thy
self! why do thou thus suffer thy self to be swallowed up in the gulf of
vanity, which has no bottom but misery? Why suffer thou the Devil thus to
take thee on the hip, that he may cast thee down into the Abisse of hell? Art
thou so bewitched with that which will have an end, a sudden end, a wretched
end? Thy honey will prove Gall in the end, and thy Wine, Vinegar. In these
fair roses of vanity the Devil hides his pins, that shall prick thee, when
thou look to be refreshed with their sweet smells. These vanities we purchase
at no easy rate; it is with the procurement of punishment, and loss of
happiness: As the bird that accepts of the Fowlers meat, buys it full
dearly, with the loss of her own life: so when we accept these vanities from
the Devil, it is with the loss of better things, in price above the whole
world. In these contracts with Satan, we make Esau's penniworth, sell Heaven
for a mess of pottage; Glaucus exchange, Gold for Copper. Now thou art
pompering thy corruptible flesh; but let pale death step in, and clap thee on
the shoulder, where is thy mirth, where is thy felicity? thy voluptuous vanity does
presently expire. There is a banquet set before thee, in which are all
varieties of delicacies, but alas! every one poisoned: dare thou touch or
taste any one of them? by sin thou poysonest all those outward blessings of
God, which in themselves are wholesome and good: and will thou ingurgitate that
which is poison to thy soul? Tell me, when all is done, two or three hundred
years hence, what thou will be the better for all thy dainties, more then the
poor man that never tasted them? Nay, how much better in the day of trial,
and at the hour of death? Then all thy pride, pomp, and pleasure shall be
turned into squaled deformity, and irrecoverable calamity; then vanity shows
it self in the proper colors, then death, and knell, and hell do all
conspire to aggravate thy sorrow; yea, then hell begins to come to thee before
thou come to it; thy eyes sleep not, thy senses rest not, thy perplexed heart
burns within thee, thy wounded conscience bleeds within thee; thou see
nothing but terror, thou feel nothing but horror; thou think thy self to
be haunted with sprights, ghosts, and hellish furies, stinging thee with
Adders, pursuing thee with Torches and firebrand. That saying of the Heathen
man is then, if not before, verified: Suae quemque exagitant furiae; every man
is tormented with his own fury, which is his conscience. Besides thy wife,
children, or other friends (to the exasperating of thy grief) do stand about
thee weeping, as loath to part from thee: whereas thy sins follow thee, and
will follow thee, do what thou can; hell gapes before thee with a wide mouth
as ready to devour thee, destruction on both sides attends thee: back thou
can not go, for a dead corpse follows thee so near that thou can not part
from it, it is tied unto thee with an indissolveable knot; besides, conscience
follows thee, and cries out against thee, and will not leave thee; continually
it presents thee with the dreadful spectacle of thy doleful and woeful
sins. If this were now seriously considered, how would it make thy heart to
ache with grieving, thy eyes to swell with weeping, thy hands to be always
lifted up, thy knees ever bended? How would thou strive to subdue thy flesh
to the spirit, sensuality to reason, reason to faith, and faith to the service
of God? But thou do not now consider this, that thy sin is so fast linkt to
thy conscience, that at the last (albeit not before) it will pull and hale
thee, and rack and prick thy conscience, which will accuse, convict, and
condemn thee: all thy vanities, all thy iniquities, will then pursue thee like
so many furious ghosts. Then ex ore tuo, out of thy own mouth shall thou be
judged, thou evil servant: thy own mouth shall confess that thou have
followed nothing but vanity: What a vanity was it for me to make earth my
heaven, and so to admire and even adore this earth, that it is a hell to
forsake it? What a woeful bargain have I made to sell my soul for vanity? I
was borne in vanity, I have lived in vanity, and it is my fear that I shall
dye in vanity. Oh how grief follows grief? my heart is terrified, my
thoughts hurried, my conscience tortured, I fry in anguish, I freeze in pain,
I stand aghast and know not which way to turn me: my friends must forsake me,
my foes will deride me, my earthly joys and comforts (I should call them
vanities) have betrayed me. Indeed my friends may go with me to the grave, but
there they must leave me; my riches, pleasures, and such like vanities vanish
before; but my sins and conscience will never leave me; the devil will still
pursue me: he that tempts me now to sin, will then torment me for sinning,
until I cry out with Caine, My punishment is greater then I can bear. A horse
is but a vain thing to save a man, said the sweet singer of Israel: so say I,
all earthly things are too vain to save a man, to make him blessed, I appeal
to the conscience of every man, if thou have tried the pleasures of vanity (and
who has not?) whether thou may not take up the words of Saint Paul, What
fruit have I of those Romans 6. 12.
things, whereof I am now ashamed? Shame, and grief, and guilt, and punishment
are the fruit of vanity: enough I think to rend our hearts from affecting of
it. Think upon this thou that art in the trace of vanity, that thou may make
a retreat; loose no more time herein (for thou have already lost too much)
redeem the time, because the days are evil; and why are they evil, but
because they are vain? Whatsoever is without the circumference of evil, is
above the sphere of vanity. Resolve therefore with thy self that all things
earthly, worldly, carnal, sinful, are vain: the fashion of this world
passes away, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 3. The fashion, (...), a word very
emphaticall: it signifies first an accidental and external figure without
substance; secondly, the habit, vesture or clothing of a thing. Saint Paul
uses this word to debase the world, by intimating unto us, that the world is
clothed with a vesture, that is, wearing and wasting, the fashion of it
lasts but for a time, it is ready every hour to put on a new fashion:
again, by intimating unto us that the world is without any substantial form,
like unto shows and shadows, that vanish in the representation. Saint Luke
calls all Agrippa's pomp but a fancy: David calls the years of a man but a
tale, Psalm. 90. 9. We spend our years as a tale that is told. As a tale, nay,
as a thought (for so much the original word does import) and how many thoughts
may a man have in an hour? Nothing is more changable then a vesture, nothing
more fugitive then a shadow, nothing more fickle then a fancy, nothing more
swift then thought. What a disproportion therefore is it for the immortal
soul of a man to be fastened unto things which are of such a variable nature?
What a folly for us to prefer those which are but momentary (for so I may
more truly call them then temporal) unto those things which are indeed
eternal? Glasses are in great use amongst us, yet because of their
brittlenesse who esteems them precious? We smell to flowers, because they are
sweet; but because they are fading, we regard them thereafter. It were well if
we would deal thus with all other vanities, viz. regard them as they are: use
the creatures we may, but not abuse them; serve our selves of them, but not
serve them; enjoy them, but not overjoy in them.

Now because examples are very effectual, whether we use them by way of
dehortation, or whether by way of exhortation, let me propound one or two in
this matter whereof I am treating, that by them thou may be beaten off from
the vanities and iniquities of this present evil world. When Alexander in the
height of his glory kept Conventum terrario^ orbis.
a Parliament of the whole world, himself was summoned by death to appear in
another world. It was a wonderful president of the vanity and variety of
humane condition (says the Historian) to see mighty Justin. l. 2.
Zerxes flote and fly away in a small vessel, who before wanted Sea-roome for
his Ships. When Belshazzar was laughing and Dan. 5.
quaffing with his Princes and Concubines, carowsing healths in the sacred
Vessels; deaths secretary, the handwriting on the wall, told him he was
weighed in the balance, and his Kingdom was finished. And before him his
father Nebuchadnezzar (at that time the greatest Monarch in the world) as he
was strouting in his Galleries, and boasting of his own power and honor, a
voice from Heaven told him that his Kingdom was departed from him, that he
Dan. 4.
should be driven from amongst men, that he should have his dwelling with the
Beasts of the field, etc. And the sentence was fulfilled on him the same hour.
So Zedekiah was a lively spectacle 2 King. 25.
of this worlds vanity and misery, who of a potent King became a miserable
captive, saw his children slain before his face, after that had his eyes put
out, and died miserably in prison. I had almost forgotten Solomon, the wisest
King that ever Eccl. ^.
was, having given himself to take pleasure in pleasant things, having made
great works, built goodly Houses, planted Vineyards, Gardens, and Orchards,
and planted in them trees of all fruit, and having gathered silver and gold,
and the chief treasures of Kings and Provinces, being now full of wisdom,
and schooled with experience, he is licensed to give his sentence of the whole
world, and every man knows what his censure was: Vanity of vanities, Eccl 1. 2.
vanity of vanities, all is vanity. This wise King traveled all the world
over, and the further he went the more vanity he did see, and the nearer he
looked, the greater it seemed, till at last he could see nothing but vanity.
Would thou know what is to be seen, or heard, or had in this vast Universe?
Vanity says Solomon, yea vanity of vanities; and what else? Vanity of
vanities. And what else? All is vanity. Nothing beneath the Moon that has not
a tincture of vanity. Nay, the Moon it self, the Sun, all the Planets, all
the Stars, the whole body of the Heavens, is become subject to Vanity. The
creature is subject unto Vanity, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 20. that is, the
whole frame of the world, consisting of the celestial and elementary region,
the visible heavens with all their goodly furniture of Stars and of
celestial bodies, and the earth with her ornaments, and the other elements.
The Heavens shall perish, Ps. 102* 26.
and they shall wax old as does a garment, and the Lord shall change them as a
vesture, and they shall be changed. As a garment the older it waxes, the
less comely it is, the less able to warm him that wears it: so the
material heavens by continuance of years decrease in beauty and veitue. The
nearer the Sun draws to the end of his daily course, the less is his
strength; in the evening we feel the Sun to decay in his heat, and he
waxes always the weaker. Now if those superior bodies, then much more things
inferior and sublunary are included within the compass of vanity.

But it was my purpose when I first set upon this subject, so ample and large,
to be so much the more short: even understanding can of it self scourse, where
such plenty of ^atter is offered. I have there^^re (according to the model ^f
that gift which God has ^^en me) contrived a great picture in a little ring,
set forth the ^eat vanity of this world in a ^^tle Map.

Let us now learn the lesson ^f Saint John, the beloved Dis^^ple of Christ,
who wrote so ^uch of love, does yet dehort ^ from loving the world, 1 John ^
15. Love not the world, neither ^e things that are in the world. Why not the
world? for three ^asons: 1. If any man love the ^orld, the love of the Father
is not ^ him. 2. All that is in the world, ^e lust of the flesh, the lust of
the ^^s, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world 3.
The World passes away, and the lust thereof: that is, it is vain and
vanishing, yea in the abstract Vanity. For these reason we must not suffer our
hearts t^ cleave to the best things in the world, as if happiness were t^ be
found in them. Follow the counsel of the Holy Ghos^ 1 Cor. 7. 31. Use this
world (...) though thou used it not, for the fashion of this world goes (...)
way. Use the things of the world as helps to thee in the travel to
heavenward, but (...) them not steal away thy hea^^ from better things, from
Go^ and Christ, and Heaven, an^ peace of conscience, and joy the Holy Ghost:
these must d^light the heart of a Christian, who was redeemed, not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1 19.
but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, in comparison of whom all the
things of the world must seem loss and dross, and dung, and whatsoever is
most despicable in the eyes of man. If riches increase, set not thy heart upon
them: no ^reasure, no pleasure, no honor, nor gold, nor plate, nor jewels, Ps.
26. 10.
nor house, nor land, nor apparel, nor friends, must steal away thy heart. We
must be ^ffected to these things, as Theodoricke the good King of A^^taine In
(...) i^ctib^^ tacet, in ma^^ rides, in utrisque Philosophatur
was with his play; * In good casts he was silent, in ill merry, in neither
angry, in both a Philosopher, or a wise man. We must not make these a rival
unto God, we must not leave upon these by our confidence: for they are a reed
that shall quickly break, and the shivers will run into our hand.

Death is the most terrible of all things that are terrible, said the
Philosopher Aristotle: it is terrible both to man and beast, but most terrible
to a wicked man that is worse then a beast, when he remembers his sinful life
past, the complexion of his flesh, the palenesse of his face, the dissolution
of his members, the rottenness of his bones, the obscurenesse of his grave,
the solitariness of his sepulcher, the gnawing of worms, and the like. But
alas (albeit these are terrible, yet) these are nothing without the
consideration of sin, which is the sting of death, the strength and victory of
the grave. Think upon thy sins, whereof thou art guilty, and for which thou
must dye, as the condemned malefactor that after sentence pronounced, is
hurried to the fatal place of execution, to suffer deserved punishment.
Remember, yea again and again. I say, remember, how miserably, how violently,
how suddenly, others have suffered death, that were guilty of those sins
which are more predominant in thee then they were in them. Art thou a thief?
which thou may be, though thou were never attached for theft by the laws of
men; for covetousness is a Pick-purse before God: read and remember how Achan
dyed, Josh. 7. Art thou a whoremaster? which thou may be as well in thy
mind as in thy body: then read and remember how Hophni 2 Samuel 3. Numb. 25. 8.
and Phineas dyed, how Zimri and Cesbi were slain in the very act of their
uncleanness. And Iezabel an impudent strumpet dyed a sudden and shameful
death. Art thou a blasphemous swearer that do rend and grind the sacred name
of God between thy teeth? Remember him under the Law that was stoned to death
for his blasphemy. Art thou an Idolatrous impe of the Popish Church, that do
leave our Lord to worship our Lady, and give that honor to Saints, nay, to
stocks and stones, which is proper to God alone? call to mind how Sennacherib
was slain in the midst Isa. 37. ult.
of his Idolatry. Art thou an intemperate drunkard, that do sacrifice thy
time and state, nay, soul and body unto Bacchus, rising early to drink strong
drink, and sitting up late till Wine inflame thee? think upon Belshazzar that
was slain in the midst of his cups, whilst Dan. ^* ult.
he was drinking in that Wine, which the swords of his insulting enemies drew
out of him together with his latest blood. Art thou a covetous Usurer, that
do let out thy money to men, thy time to Mammon, and thy soul to Satan, that
like a common Hackney jade wilt not bear thy debtors one hour past thy day?
or art thou a griping oppressor, that do rack thy poor tenants, and exact
upon thy neighbor, to gain a little transitory trash? Remember Nabal, and
remember that Miser in the Gospel, who being Lut. 12
asleep in security, and dreaming of enlarged barns and plentiful harvests,
was suddenly bereft of all, and being awaked upon the hearing of his
Soule-knell perceived himself to be forever wrerched. Consider whether these
and the like sinners, that have made their souls the slaves of vanity, have not
in the end made themselves the slaves of misery. Have they prospered, or have
they perished? if they have prospered, then follow them; if perished (as indeed
they have) then in the fear of God retire out of their paths, left thou be
speedily cut off, having no information of the danger, till thine own eyes
amazed with the sodainnesse behold it in the shape of inevitable damnation. Be
thou warned by their examples; for God has punished sin in them, to prevent
sin in thee: Vt exempla Cyprian ser. 5. de Laps.
sint omnium, torment a paucorum; that the torments of some few may be terrors
unto all: like as thunderbolts fall (Paucorum periculo, sed omnium metu) to the
hurt but of few, though not without the horror of all. That ship which sees
another ship sink before her, looks about her, pulls down her sail, turns
her course, and escapes the sands, which else would swallow her up as they did
the other. When the earth swallowed up Corah and his confederates, all Israel
that were round about them, fled at the cry of them, for they said, Lest the
earth swallow us up also, Number. 16. 34. The Bird will not light on the
lime-bush, nor into the net, if she see another ensnared before her; the Horse
will not follow another, whom he sees to stick fast in the mire: oh be not
less wise then bird or beast, nor more brutish then Horse and Mule that has
no understanding. If thou see another fall into the fire, thou will not
willingly follow him; then follow not sinners to the fire of hell, lest thou be
constrained at last, when it shall be too late, to bewail thy folly: to cry
out with those that have misspent their time in vanity, Oh that now I might die
Thus Franci^ Spira cried out, after he had renounced the profession of true
piety, for the possession of earths vanity.
the death of the righteous! Oh that I might not die at all! Oh that I might
feel in my conscience the least hope of pardon, which is as unpossible as to
un^ade all the water in the vast Ocean with aspoone! Oh that God would give me
the least dram of grace, which is as impossible as for the least grain of
Mustardseed to fill the whole earth! prevent this betimes, which thou may
do, by abandoning the vanity of the world; and so live, that wheresoever or
howsoever thou dyest, whether abroad or at home, by day or by night, sleeping
or waking, whether a sudden death or a deliberate death, thou may willingly
commend thy spirit unto the hands of God as unto the hands of a faithful
Creator; and may say with the Bride, Come Lord Jesus, even so, come Lord Jesus,
come quickly: my heart is prepared Rev. 2^
to enter into thy rest, receive me into the arms of thy mercy, entertain me
into thy own kingdom, that leaving the vanity of this world, I may with thy
glorified Angels and blessed Saints, enjoy that everlasting felicity of a
better world, which never shall have an end.

Adieu therefore vain world, with all worldly delights whatsoever: and now
solitary soul begin to take thy solace in better things. And to prove the
world vain, and consequently thy self vain, behold these shapes, read these
Verses, and in order open the leaves that are folded up. Herein, as in a
mirror, behold thy own estate, read, and consider what thou read, that
thou may know and see thy own vanity. Here thou shall see what thou were,
what thou art, and what thou shall be. Dust thou were, dust thou art, and unto
dust thou shall return: dust in thy creation, dust in thy constitution, dust
in thy dissolution.

Hels Torments.
I.
THough long it were since Adam was,
Yet seems he here to be;
A blessed creature once he was,
Now naked as you see:
Whose wife was cause of all my care,
To say I may be bold:
Turn back the leaves, and then you may
My picture there behold.
II.
To think upon the works of God,
All worldly men may wonder:
But thinking on thy sins O man,
Thy heart may burst asunder:
The sinner sits and sweetly sings,
And so his heart beguiles.
Till I come with my bitter stings,
And turn to grief his smiles.
III.
Muse not to gaze upon my shape,
Whose nakedness you see;
By flattering and deceitful words,
The Devil deceived me:
Let me example be to all,
That once from God do range:
Turn back the leaves, and then behold
Another sight as strange.
IV.
Had Adam and Eve never been
As there you saw their shape,
I never had deceived them,
Nor they ere made debate:
But turn, behold where both do stand
And lay the fault on me:
Turn back the upper and nether crests,
There each of them you see.
I. III.
Here we do standin perfect state,
All formed as we were;
But what the Serpent did by hate,
Shall suddenly appear:
Then here behold how both do stand,
And where the fault did lie:
The almighty power did so command,
That once we all must dye.
II. IV.
See what comes of wicked deed,
As all men well do know;
And for the same God has decreed
That we should live in woe:
The dust it was my daily food,
Unto it we must turn;
And darkness is my chief abode,
In sorrow so we mourn.
Of the punishments which the Lord threatens unto such as live a sinful life.
ONe of the principal means that our Lord has used oftentimes to bridle the
hearts of men, and to draw them unto the obedience of his commandments, has
been, to set before their eyes the horrible plagues and punishments that are
prepared for such persons as be rebels and transgressors of his Law. For
although the hope of the rewards that are promised unto the good in the life to
come, may move us very much hereunto: yet are we commonly more moved with
things that be irksome unto us, than with such as be pleasant: even as we see
by daily experience, that we are vexed more with an injury done unto us, than
delighted with any honor; and we are more troubled with sickness, than
comforted with health: and so by the discommodity of sickness, we come to
understand the commodity of health, as by a thing so much the better perceived,
by how much more it is sensibly felt. Now for this cause did our Lord in times
past use this mean more than any other, as it appears most clearly by the
writings of the Prophets, which are every where full of dreadful sayings and
threatenings, wherewith our Lord pretends to put a terror into the hearts of
men, and so to bridle and subdue them under the obedience of his Law. And for
this end he commanded the Prophet Jeremy, That he should take a white book,
and write in the same all the threatenings and calamities which he had revealed
unto him, even from the first day he began to mlke with him, until that
present hour, and that he should read the same in the presence of all the
people, to see if peradventure they would be moved therewith unto repentance,
and to change their former life, to the end, that he might also change the
determination of his wrath, which he had purposed to execute upon them. And the
holy Scripture says, That when the Prophet had done according as he was
commanded by almighty God, and had read all those threatenings in the presence
of the people, and of the Rulers; there arose such a fear and terror amongst
them, that they were all astonished, and as it were bestraughted of their wits,
looking one in another face, for the exceeding great fear which they had
conceived of those words. This was one of the principal means which Almighty
God used with men in the time of the written Law, and so he did also in the
time of the Law of graces in which, the holy Apostle says, That as there is
revealed a justice, whereby God makes men just, so is there also revealed an
indignation and wrath, whereby he punishes the unjust: for which cause, S.
John Baptist (the glorious forerunner of our Savior Christ) was sent with
this commission and embassage, to preach unto the world, That the axe was now
put to the rooot of the tree, and that every tree that brought not forth good
fruit, should be cut down and cast into the fire. He said moreover, That
there was another come into the world, more mighty than he, that carried in
his hand a fan to winnow and cleanse therewith his floor, and that he would
put up the corn into his garner, but the chafe he will burn in a fire that
should never be quenched. This was the preaching and embassage which ^he holy
forerunner of our Savior Jesus Christ brought unto the world. And so great
was the thunder of these words, and the terror which entered unto men's hearts
so dreadful, that there ran unto him of all ^sates and conditions of men, ^ven
of the very Pharisees and Publicans, yea, and Soldiers also (which of all
others are wont to be most dissolute, and to have the least care of their
consciences) and each of them demanded for himself particularly of that holy
man, what he should do to attain unto salvation, and to escape those terrible
threatenings which he had denounced unto them, so great was the fear they had
conceived of them.

And this is that (dear Christian brother) which I do a this present (in the
behalf o^ Almighty God) deliver unto thee, although not with such fervency of
spirit and like holiness of life, yet that which imports more in this case,
with the same truth and certainty; for so much as the faith and Gospel which
Saint John Baptist then preached, is even the same now taught.

Now, if thou be desirous to understand in few words, how great the punishment
is, that Almighty God has threatened in his holy Scriptures to the wicked, that
which may most briefly and most to the purpose be spoken in this matter, is
this: That ^^ke as the reward of the good is ^^ universal good thing, even ^o
the punishment of the wicked is an universal evil, which comprehends in it
all the evils ^^at are. For the better understanding whereof it is to be no^^d,
That all the evils of this life are particular evils, and therefore do not
torment all our senses generally, but only one or some of them. As taking an
example of the diseases of our body; we see, that one has a disease in his
eyes, another i^ his ears: one is sick in the heart, another in the stomach
some other in his head. And so diverse men are diseased in diver parts of the
body, howbeit, ^ such wise, that none of all the diseases be generally through
out all the members of the body, but particular to some on of them. And yet for
all thi^ we see what grief only one ^ these diseases may put us unt^ and how
painful a night t^ sick man has in any one these infirmities, yea, although
^t be nothing else but a little ach ^n one tooth. Now let us put the case, that
there were some one man sick of such an universal disease, that he had no
part of his body, neither any one joint or sense free from his proper pain,
but that at one ^ime and instant he suffered most exceeding sharp torment ^n
his head, in his eyes, and ^ares, in his teeth, and stomach, ^n his liver and
heart: and to be ^hort, in all the rest of his members and joints of his body,
and that he lay after this sort stret^hing himself in his bed, being ^ained
with these greeses and ^orments, every member of his ^ody having his particular
torment and grief: He (I say that should lie thus pained and afflicted, how
great torment and grief of mind and body (think ye) should he sustain: Oh,
what thing could any man imagine more miserable, and more worthy of compassion*
Surely, if thou should see bu^ a dog to be so tormented and grieved in the
street, his very pains would move thy hear to take pity upon him. Now this is
that (my dear Christian brother, if any comparison may be made between them)
which is suffered in that most curse^ and horrible place of hell, and not only
during for the spac^ of one night, but everlastingly for ever and ever. For
like the wicked men have offended Almighty God with all their members and
senses, and have made armor of them all to serve sin, even so will he
ordain, that they shall be there tormented every one of them with his
propertorment.

There shall the wanton unchaste eyes be tormented with the terrible sight of
Devils: the cares with the confusion of such horrible cries and lamentations
which shall there be heard: the nose with the intolerable stink of that
ougly, filthy, and loathsome place: the taste, with a most ravenous hunger and
thirst: the touching, and all the members of the body with extreme burning
fire. The imagination shall be tormented by the conceiving of griefs present:
the memory, by calling to mind the pleasures past: the understanding, by
considering what benefits are lost, and what endless miseries are to come.

This multitude of punishments the holy Scripture signifies unto us, when it
says, Mat. 15. Psalm. 10. That in hell there shall be hunger, thirst, weeping,
wailing, gnashing of teeth, swords double edged, spirits created for
revengement, serpents, worms, scorpions, hammers, wormwood, water of gall,
the spirit of tempest, and other things of like sort. Whereby are signified
unto us (as in a figure) the multitude and dreadful terrous of the most
horrible torments and pains that be in that cursed place. There shall be
likewise darkness inward and outward, both of body and soul, far more
obscure than the darkness of Egypt, which was to be felt even with hands,
Exodus 20. There shall be fire also, not as this fire here, that tormenteth a
little, and shortly ends, but such a fire as that place requires, which
tormenteth exceedingly, and shall never make an end of that tormenting. This
being true, what greater wonder can there be, than that they which believe and
confess this for truth, should live with such most strange negligence and
carelessness as they do? What travel and pains would not a man willingly
take to escape even one only day, yea, one hour, the very least of these
torments? and wherefore do they not then, to escape the everlastingnesse of so
great pains and horrible torments, endure so little a travel, as to follow
the exercise of virtue. Surely, the consideration of this matter were able to
make any sinful soul to fear and tremble, in case it were deeply regarded.

And if amongst so great number of pains, there were any manner hope of end or
release, it would be some kind of comfort: but alas it is not so, for there
the gates are fast shut up from all expectation of any manner of ease or hope.
In all kind of pains and calamities that be in this world, there is always
some gap lying open, whereby the patient may receive some kind of comfort:
sometimes reason, sometimes the weather, sometimes his friends, sometimes the
hearing that others are troubled with the very same disease, and sometimes (at
the least) the hope of an end may cheer him: only in these most horrible
pains and miseries that be in hell, all the ways are shut up in such sort,
and all the havens of comfort so embarred, that the miserable sinner cannot
hope for remedy on any side, neither of heaven, nor of earth, neither of the
time past, or present, or of the time to come, or of any other means. The
damned souls think, that all men are shooting darts at them, and that all
creatures have conspired against them, and that even they themselves are cruel
against themselves. This is that distress whereof the sinners do lament by
the Prophet, saying: The sorrows of hell have compassed me round about, and
the snares of death have besieged me: For on which side soever they look or
turn their eyes, they do continually behold occasions of sorrow and grief,
and none at all of any ease or comfort. The wise Virgins (says the Evangelist)
that stood ready prepared at the gate of the Bridegroom, entered in, and the
gate was forthwith locked fast. O locking everlasting, O enclosure immortal, O
gate of all goodness, which shall never any more be opened again. As if he had
said more plainly, the gate of pardon, of mercy, of comfort, of grace, of
intercession, of hope, and of all other goodness, is shut up for ever and
ever. Six days and no more was Manna to be gathered, but the seventh day,
which was the Sabbath day, was there none to be found: and therefore shall he
fast for ever, that has not in due time made his provision aforehand. The
sluggard (says the Wise man) will not till his ground for fear of cold, and
therefore shall he beg his bread in summer, and no man shall give him to eat.
And in another place he says: He that gathers in summer, is a wise son,
but he that gives himself to sleeping at that season, is the son of
confusion. For what confusion can be greater then that which that miserable
covetous rich man suffers, who with a few crumbs of bread that fell from his
table, might have purchased to himself abundance of everlasting felicity, and
glory in the kingdom of Heaven? But because he would not give so small a
thing, he came to such an extreme necessity that he begged (yea, and shall for
ever beg in vain) only one drop of water, and shall never obtain it. Who is
not moved with that request of that unfortunate damned person, who cried, O
father Abraham have compassion on me, and send down Lazarus unto me, that he
may dip the tip of his finger in water, and touch my tongue, for these horrible
flames do torment me exceedingly. What smaller request could there be desired
than this? He durst not request so much as one cup of water, neither that
Lazarus should put his whole hand into the water, nor yet (which is more to be
wondered at) did he request so much as the whole finger, but only the tip of
it, that it might but touch his tongue; and yet even this alone would not be
granted unto him. Whereby thou may perceive, how fast the gate of all
consolation is shut up, and how universal that interdict and excommunication
is that is there laid upon the damned, since this rich Glutton could not obtain
so much as this small request. So that wheresoever the damned persons do turn
their eyes, and on which side soever they stretch their hands, they shall not
find any manner of comfort, be it never so small. And as he that is in the Sea
choked, and almost drowned under the water, not finding any stay whereupon to
set his foot, stretches forth his hands oftentimes on every side in vain
(because all that he graspeth after, is thin and liquid water, which deceives
him) even so shall it fare with the damned persons, when they shall be drowned
in that deep Sea of so many miseries, where they shall strive and struggle
always with death, without finding any succor or place of stay, whereupon
they may rest themselves. Now this is one of the greatest pains wherewith they
be tormented in that cursed place: for if these torments should have their
continuance limited but for a certain time, though it were for a thousand,
yea, a hundred thousand millions of years, yet even this would be some little
comfort unto them, for nothing is perfectly great, in case it have an end: But
alas, they have not so much as this poor and miserable comfort: but
contrariwise, their pains are equal in continuance with the eternity of
Almighty God, and the lasting of their misery with the eternity of Gods glory.
As long as Almighty God shall live, so long shall they die: and when Almighty
God shall cease to be God, then shall they also cease to be as they are. O
deadly life, O immortal death! I know not whether I may truly term thee,
either life or death: for if thou be life, why do thou kill? And if thou be
death, why do thou endure? Wherefore I will call thee neither the one, nor
the other, for so much as in both of them there is contained something that is
good: as in life there is rest, and in death there is an end (which is a great
comfort to the afflicted) but thou have neither rest nor end. What art thou
then? Marry, thou art the worst of life, and the worst of death; for of death
thou have the torment, without any end, and of life thou have the continuance
without any rest. O bitter composition, O unsavory purgation of our Lords cup!
of the which, all the sinners of the earth shall drink their part.

Now in this continuance in this eternity, I would wish that thou (my dear
Christian brother) would fix the eyes of thy consideration a little while:
and that as the clean beast cheweth the cud, even so thou would weigh this
point within thy self with great deliberation. And to the intent thou may
do it the better, consider a little the pains that a sick man abides in one
evil night, especially if he be vexed with any vehement grief, or sharp
disease. Mark how often he tumbleth and tosseth in his bed, what disquietnesse
he has, how long and tedious one night seems unto him, how duly he counts
all the hours of the clock, and how long he deemeth each hour of them to
be, how he passes the time in wishing for the dawning of the day, which
notwithstanding, is like to help him little toward the curing of his disease.
If this then be accounted so great a torment, what torment shall that be
(think you) in that everlasting night in hell, which has no morning, nor so
much as any hope of any dawning of the day: O darkness most obscure! O night
everlasting! O night accursed even by the mouth of Almighty God and all his
Saints! That one shall wish for light, and shall never see it, neither shall
the brightness of the morning arise any more. Consider then what a kind of
torment shall that be, to live everlastingly in such a night as this is, lying
not in a soft bed (as the sick man does) but in a hot burning furnace, foming
out such terrible raging flames. What shoulders shall be able to abide those
horrible heats. If it seem to us as a thing intolerable to have only some
part of our feet standing upon a pan of burning coals, for the space of
repeating the Lords prayer. What shall it be (think you) to stand body and
soul burning in the midst of those everlasting hot raging fires in hell, in
comparison of which, the fires of this world are but painted fires. Is there
any wit or judgment in this world? Have men their right senses? do they
understand what these words import? or are they peradventure persuaded, that
these are only the fables of Poets? or do they think, that this appertains
not to them, or else that it was only meant for others? None of all this can
they say, for so much as our faith assures us most certainly herein. And our
Savior Christ himself, who is everlasting truth, cries out in his Gospel,
saying, Heaven and earth shall fail, but my word shall not fail.

Of this misery there follows another as great as it, which is, that the
pains are always continuing in one like degree, without any manner of
intermission, or decreasing. All manner of things that are under the cope of
heaven, do move and turn round about with the same heaven, and do never stand
still at one state or being, but are continually either ascending or
descending. The sea and the rivers have their ebbing and flowing, the times,
the ages, and the mutable fortune of men, and of kingdoms, are evermore in
continual motion. There is no fever so fervent, that does not decline,
neither grief so sharp, but that after it is much augmented, it does forthwith
decrease. To be short, all the tribulations and miseries are by little and
little worn away with time, and as the common saying is, Nothing is sooner
dried up than tears. Only that pain ^n hell is always green, only that
fever never decreaseth, only that extremity of heat knows not what is
either evening or morning. In the time of Noah's flood, Almighty God ^ained
forty days and forty ^ights, continually without ^easing upon the earth, and
this ^^fficed to drown the whole world. But in that place of torment in hell,
there shall rain everlasting vengeance, and darts ^f fury upon that cursed
land, without ever ceasing so much as ^e only minute or moment. ^ow what
torment can be ^eater and more to be abhor^d, than continually to suffer ^^r
one like manner, without any kind of alteration or change? Though a meat be
never so delicate, yet in case we feed continually thereupon, it will in very
short time be very loathsome unto us: for no meat can be more precious and
delicate than that Manna was, which almighty God sent down unto the children of
Israel in the Desert, and yet because they did eat continually thereof, i^ made
them to loath it, yea, and provoked them to vomit it up again. The way that is
all plain (they say) wearieth more than any other, because always the variety
(yea, even in punishment) is a kind of comfort* Tell me then, if things that
be pleasant and savoury, when the^ be always after one manner, are an occasion
of loathsomenesse and pain: what kind of loathsomenesse will that be which
shall be caused by those most horrible pains and torments in hell, which do
continue everlastingly after one like sort? What will the damned and cursed
creatures think, when they shall there see themselves so utterly obhorred and
forsaken of Almighty God, that he will not so much as with the remission of any
one sin, mitigate somewhat their torments. And so great shall the fury and
rage be which they shall there conceive against him, that they shall never
cease continually to curse and blaspheme his holy name. Unto all these pains,
there is also added the pain of that everlasting consumer, to wit, the worm
of conscience, whereof the holy Scripture makes so oftentimes mention, saying,
Their worm shall never die, and their fire shall never be quenched. This
worm is a furious raging despite and bitter repentance, without any fruit,
which the wicked shall always have in hell, by calling to their remembrance
the opportunity and time they had whiles they were in this world, to escape
those most grievous and horrible torments, and how they would not use the
benefit thereof. And therefore when the miserable sinner sees himself thus to
be tormented and vexed on every side, and does call to mind how many days and
years he has spent idely in vanities, pastimes, and pleasures; and how
oftentimes he was advertised of this peril, and how little regard he took
thereof: What shall he think? What anguish and sorrow shall there be in his
heart? Have thou not read in the Gospel, that there shall be weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth? The famine of Egypt endured only seven
years, but that in hell shall endure everlastingly. In Egypt they found a
remedy, though with great difficulty and charge; out for this, there shall
never a^y remedy be found. Theirs was redeemed with money and cattle, but
this can never be redeemed with any manner of exchange. This punishment cannot
be pardoned, this pain cannot be exchanged, this sentence cannot be revoked.
Oh, if thou knew and would consider, how every one condemned to hell,
shall there remain tormenting and renting himself, weeping and wailing, and
saying, O miserable and unfortunate wretch that I am, what times and
opportunities have I suffered to pass in vain? A time there was, when with
one cup of cold water I might have purchased to my self a crown of glory, and
when also with such necessary works of mercy in relieving the poor, I might
have gained life everlasting. Wherefore did I not look before me? How was I
blinded with things present? How did J let pass the fruitful years of
abundance, and did not enrich my self? If J had been brought up amongst
Infidels and Pagans, and had believed that there had been nothing else but
only to be borne, and to die, then might I have had some kind of excuse, and
might have said. I knew not what was commanded or prohibited me: but for so
much as I have lived amongst Christians, and was my self one of them
professed, and held it for an article of my belief, that the hour should come
when I should give up an account after what order I had spent my life:
for so much also as it was daily cried out unto me by the continual preaching
and teaching of Gods Ambassadors (whose advertisements many following, made
preparation in time, and labored earnestly for the provision of good works:)
forasmuch I say as I made light of all these examples, and persuaded my self
very fondly, that Heaven was prepared for me, though I took no pains for it
at all: what deserve I that have thus led my life? O ye infernal furies, come
and rent me in pieces, and devour these my bowels, for so have I justly
deserved, I have deserved eternal famishment, seeing I would not provide for
my self while I had time. I deserve not to reap, because I have not sown; I
am worthy to be destitute, because I have not laid up in store; I deserve that
my request should now be denied me, since when the poor made request unto me, I
refused to releeve them: I have deserved to sigh and lament so long as God
shall be God; I have deserved, that this worm of conscience shall gnaw ^ine
entrails for ever and ever, by representing unto me the ^ittle pleasure that I
have en^oyed, and the great felicity which I have lost, and how far greater
that was which I might have gained, by forgoing that little which J would not
forgo. This is that immortal worm that shall never dye, but shall lie there
everlastingly gnawing at the entrails of the wicked, which is one of the most
terrible pains that can possibly be imagined.

Peradventure thou art now persuaded (good Reader) that there can be added no
more unto this, than has been said: But surely the mighty arm of God wants
not force to chastise his enemies more and more: for all these pains that are
hitherto rehearsed, are such as do appertain generally to all the damned: but
besides these general pains, there are also other particular pains, which
each one of the damned shall there suffer in diverse sorts, according to the
quality of his sin. And so according to this proportion, the haughty and
proud shall there be abased and brought low to their great confusion. The
covetous shall be driven to great necessity. The glutton shall rage with
continual hunger and thirst. The lecherous shall burn in the very same flames
which they themselves have enkindled. And those that have al their life time
hunted after their pleasures and pastimes, shall live there in continual
lamentation and sorrow. But because examples are of very great force to move
our hearts, I will bring only one for this purpose, whereby somewhat of this
matter may the better be perceived. It is written of a certain holy man, that
he saw the pains (in spirit) of a licentious and worldly man in this sort.
First, he saw how the devils that were present at the hour of his death, when
he yielded up his ghost, snatched away his soul with great rejoicing, and
made a present thereof to the Prince of darkness, who was then sitting in a
chair of fire, expecting the coming of this present. Immediately after that
it was presented before him, he arose up out of his seat, and said unto the
damned soul, that he would give him the pre-eminence of that honorable seat,
because he had been a man of honor, and was always very much affected to the
same. Incontinently after that he was placed therein, crying and lamenting in
that honorable torment, there appeared before him two other most ougly devils,
and offered him a cup full of most bitter and stinking liquor, and made him to
drink and carouse it up all perforce; saying, It is meet, sithence thou have
been a lover of precious wines and bankets, that thou should likewise prove
of this our wine, whereof all we do use to drink in these parts.

Immediately after this there came other two, with two fiery trumpets, and
setting them at his ears, began to blow into them flames of fire, saying, This
melody have we reserved for thee, understanding that in the world thou wast
very much delighted with minstrelcie and wanton songs: and suddenly he espied
other devils, laden with vipers and serpents, the which they threw upon the
breast and bellies of that miserable sinner, saying unto him, that for so much
as he had been greatly delighted with the wanton embracings and lecherous
lusts of women, he should now solace himself with these refreshings, instead
of those licentious delights and pleasures, which he had enjoyed in the world.
After this sort (as the Prophet Esaias says in the 47. Chapter) when the sinner
is punished, there is given measure for measure, to the end, that in such a
great variety and proportion of punishments, the order and wisdom of Gods
justice, might the more manifestly appear.

This vision has Almighty God showed in spirit to this holy man for
advertisement and instruction, not that in hell these things are altogether so
materially done, but that by them we might understand in some manner the
variety and multitude of the pains which be there appointed for the damned.
Whereof, I know not how some of the Pagans have had a certain knowledge: for a
Poet speaking of this multitude of pains, affirmed, That although he had a
hundred mouths, and as many tongues, with a voice as strong as Iron, yet were
they not able only to express the names of them. A Poet he was that spoke
this, but truly therein he spoke more like a Prophet or an Evangelist than a
Poet. Now then, if all this evil shall most assuredly come to pass, what man
is he, that seeing all this so certainly with the eyes of his faith, will not
turn over the leaf, and begin to provide for himself against that time?
Where is the judgment of men now become? Where is their wits? yea, where is at
least their self-love, which seeks evermore for his own profit, and is much
afraid of any loss? May it be thought that men are become beasts, that provide
only for the time present? Or have they peradventure so dimmed their
eyesight, that they cannot look before them? Hearken (says Esaias) O ye deaf
and ye blind, open your eyes that you may see; Who is blind but my servant?
And who is deaf but we, unto whom I have sent my messengers? And who is
blind, but he that suffers himself to be sold for a slave? Thou that see
so many things, will thou not suffer thy self to see this? Thou that have
thine ears open, will thou not give ear hereunto? If thou believe not this,
how art thou then a Christian? If thou believe it, and do not provide for
it, how can thou be thought a reasonable man? Aristotle says, That this is
the difference between opinion and imagination, that an imagination alone is
not sufficient to cause a fear, but an opinion is a for if I do imagine that
a house may fall upon me, it is no^ enough to make me afraid, unless J
believe or have an opinion it will be so indeed: for then it is sufficient to
make me afraid. And hereof comes the fear that murderers always have, by
reason of the suspicion they conceive, that their enemies do lie in wai^ for
them. If then the opinion and only suspicion of danger is able to cause the
greatest courage to fear, how is it that the certainty and belief of so many
and so great terrible miseries which are far more sure than any opinion) does
not make thee to fear? If thou perceivest, that for these many years past
thou have led a licentious and sinful life, and that at the last, according to
present justice, thou art condemned to these horrible torments in hell: if also
there appear by probable conjecture, that there is no more likelihood of thy
amendment for ensuing years to come, than there was in those already past, how
happens it, that running head long into so manifest a danger, thou art not at
all afraid? Especially, considering the sinful state wherein thou live, and
the horrible pains and torments which do attend for thee, and the time which
thou have lost, and the endless repentance which thou shall have therefore in
the most horrible torments of hell. Assuredly, it goes beyond the compass of
all common sense and conceit of humane reason, to consider, That there should
be such negligent, wilful, gross, and careless blindness, able to enter and
take such deep rooting in the soul of man.

The Conclusion of all the Premises.
IF now all this be so, I beseech thee even for the bitter passion of our sweet
^viour Jesus Christ, to remember thy self, and consider that thou art a
Christian, ^^d that thou beleevest assu^dly for a most undoubted ^^th,
whatsoever the true faith ^^sructeth thee. This faith tells thee, that thou
have a judge above that sees all the steps and motions of thy life and that
certainly there shall a day come, when he will require an account of thee,
even for every idle word. This faith teaches thee, That a man is no^
altogether at an end when he dies, but that after this temporal life, there
remains another everlasting life; and tha^ the souls die not with the
bodies, but that whiles the body remains in the grave until the general day
of judgment, the soul shall enter into another new country, and into a new
world, where it shall have such habitation and company as the faith and works
we which it had in this life. This faith tells thee also, that both the
reward of virtue, and the punishment of vice, is athing so wonderful, that
although the whole world were full of books, and all creatures were writers,
yet should they all be wearied, and the world come to an end, before they
should end their description, and make a perfect declaration what is
comprehended in each one of these points. This faith informs thee also, that
the debts and duties which we owe to Almighty God, are so great, that albeit a
man had so many lives ^s there be sands in the Sea, yet would they not suffice,
if they were al employed in his service. And this faith likewise tells thee,
that virtue is such an excellent treasure, that all the treasures of the world,
and all that man's heart can desire, are in no sort comparable unto it.

Wherefore, if there be so many and so great respects that do invite us unto
virtue, how comes it to pass, that there be so few lovers and followers of
the same? If men be moved with gain and commodity, what greater commodity can
there be than to attain life everlasting? I they be moved with fear of
punishment, what greater punishment can be found, than the mo^^ horrible
everlasting dreadful torments in the lake of fire and brimstone, to continue
eve^ world without end? If that bonds of debts and benefits; what debts are
greater than ^hese which we owe unto almighty God, as well for that he ^s what
he is, as also for that which we have received of him? ^f the fear of perils
do moove ^s, what greater peril can there be than death, the hour thereof
being so uncertain, and the ^ccount so strait? If thou be moved with peace,
liberty, quitnesse of mind, and with a ^leasant life, (which are things that
all the world desires) it is ^ertaine, that all these are found ^uch better in
the life that is ^overned by virtue and reason, ^han in that life which is
ruled ^y the affections and passions of the mind, for so much as man is a
reasonable creature, and n^ beast. Howbeit, in case tho^ account all this as
not sufficient to move thee thereunto, yet l^^ it suffice thee to consider
further, that even almighty God ^ abased himself for thy sak^ that he
descended from heave unto the earth, and became man, and whereas he create the
whole world in six day he bestowed three and thi^ years about thy
redemption yea, and was also contented ^^ the same to loose his life. Almighty
God dyed, that sin^ should dye; and yet for all the do we endeavor, that sin^
might live in our hearts, n^^ withstanding that our Lo^^ purposed to take away
the life of sin with his own death. If this matter were to be discussed with
reason, surely this already spoken might suffice to prevail with any
reasonable creature: for not only in beholding almighty God upon the cross,
but whethersoever we do turn our eyes, we shall find, that every thing
cries out to us, and calls upon us to receive this so excellent a benefit:
for there is not a thing created in the world (if we duly consider it) but
does invite us to the love and service of our Savior Jesus Christ, insomuch,
that look how many creatures there be in the world, so many preachers there
are, so many books, so many voices, and so many reasons, which do all call us
unto almighty God.

And how is it possible then, that so many callings as these are, so many
promises, so many threatenings, and so many provocations, should not suffice to
bring us unto him? What might almighty God have done more than he has done, or
promised more greater blessings than he has promised, or threatened more
grievous and horrible torments than he has threatened, to draw us unto him, and
to pluck us away from sin? And yet all this notwithstanding, how comes it
to pass, that there is so great (I will not say arrogance, but) bewitching of
men, that do believe these things to be certainly true, and yet be not afraid
to continue all the days of their life in the committing of deadly sins?
Yea, to go to bed in deadly sin, and to rise up again in deadly sin, and
to embrue themselves in every kind of loathsome, detestable, and odious sin,
even as though all their whole endeavors intended by the practice of sin, to
resist all grace and favor in the sight of God? And this is done in such sort,
so without fear, so without scruple of mind, so without breaking of one
hours sleep, and without the refraining of any one delicate morsel of meat
for the same, as if all that they believed were dreams, and old wives tales,
and as if all that the holy Evangelists have written, were mere fiction and
fables. But tell me thou that art such a desperate wilful rebel against thy
Creator and Redeemer, which by thy detestable life and dissolute conversation,
do evidence thy self to be a firebrand, prepared to burn in those
everlasting and revenging horrible fires of hell. What would thou have done
more than thou have done, in case thou had been persuaded, that all were
mere lies which thou have believed? For although that for fear of incurring
the danger of the princes laws, and the execution of their force upon thee,
thou have somewhat brideled thine appetites; yet does it not appear, that for
any fear of Almighty God, thou have refrained thy will in any one thing,
neither from carnal pleasures, not from backebiting and slandering thy
neighbors, nor yet from fulfilling thine inordinate lusts and desires, in case
thine ability served thee thereunto. Oh, what does the worm of thy conscience
say unto thee, whiles thou art in such a fond security and confidence,
continuing in such a dissolute and wicked life as thou do? Where is now
become the understanding, judgment and reason, which thou have of a man? Why
art thou not afraid of so horrible, so certain, and so assured perils and
dangers? if there were a dish o^ meat set before thee, and some man (albeit
he were a liar) should say unto thee, refrain to touch and eat thereof for it
is poisoned; durst thou once adventure to stretch out thy hand, to take a taste
thereof, though the meat were never so savoury and delicate, and he never so
great a liar that should bear thee thus in hand? If then the Prophets, if the
Apostles, if the Evangelists, yea, if Almighty God himself do cry out unto
thee, and say, Take heed thou miserable man, for death is in that kind of
meat, and death does lie lurking in that glutto^ous morsel, which the devil
has set before thee? How da^est thou reach for everlasting death with thine
own hands, and drink thine own damna^ion? Where is the applying of ^hy wits,
thy judgment, and the discourse and reason which ^hou have of a spiritual
man? Where is their light, where is their force? Since that none of them do
bridle thee any whit from thy common usual vices? Oh thou wretched and
careless creature, be witched by the ^ommon enemy Satan, adjudg^d to
everlasting darkness, both inward and outward, and so ^oest go from one
darkness ^o the other. Thou art blind to see thine own misery, in sensible
to understand thine own perdition, and harde^ than any Adamant, to feel the
hammer of Gods word. Oh, a thousand times most miserable thou art, worthy to be
lamented with none other tears, than with those wherewith thy damnation was
lamented, when i^ was said, Luke 19. Oh that thou knew this day the peace,
quietness, and treasures, which Almighty God has offered unto thee, that do
now lie hidden from thine eyes. Oh miserable is the day of thy nativity, and
much more miserable the day of thy death: for so much, as that shall be the
beginning of thine everlasting damnation. Oh, how much better had it been for
thee, never to have been borne, if thou shall be damned in the horrible pit of
hell for ever, where the torments are perpetually durable. How much better had
it been for thee never to have been baptized, not yet to have received the
Christian Faith, if through the abusing thereof by thy wicked life, thy
damnation shallt hereby be the greater? For if the light of reason only
suffices to make the Heathen Philosophers inexcusable, because they knowing
God in some degree, did not glorify him nor serve him (as the Apostle says in
the first to the Romans) how much less shall he be excused, that has
received the light of faith, and the water of Baptism, yea, and the holy
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, hearing
daily the doctrine of the Gospel, if he do nothing more than those Pagan
Philosophers have done.

Now, what other thing may we infer of the premises, but briefly to conclude,
That there is none other understanding, none other wisdom, none other
counsel in the world, but that setting aside all the impediments and
combersome dangerous ways of this life, we follow that only true and
certain way, whereby true peace and everlasting life is obtained. Hereunto are
we called by reason, by wisdom, by law, by heaven, by earth, by hell, and by
the life, death, justice, and mercy of Almighty God. Hereunto are we also very
notably invited by the Holy Word, spoken by the mouth of Ecclesiasticus in the
sixth Chapter, in this wise: My son hearken to instruction even from the first
years of thy youth, and in thy latter days thou shall enjoy the sweet fruit
of wisdom: Approach unto it, as one that ploweth and sows, and with
patience expect the fruitful increase which it shall yield unto thee. The
pains that thou shall take, shall be but little, and the benefits that thou
shall speedily enjoy, shall be great. My son hearken to my words, and neglect
not this my counsel which I shall give thee, put thy feet willingly into her
fetters, and thy neck into her chains: bow down thy shoulders, and carry her
upon thee, and be not displeased with her bonds: approach near unto her with
all thy heart, and follow her ways with all thy strength, seek for her with
all thy diligence, and she will make her self known unto thee, and after that
thou have found her, never forsake her: for by her shall thou find rest in thy
latter days, and that which before did seem so painful unto thee, will
afterward become very pleasant. Her fetters shall be a defense of thy
strength, and a foundation of virtue, and her chain shall be a ^obe of glory:
for in her is the beauty of life, and her bonds ^re the bonds of health.
Hitherto Ecclesiasticus. Whereby thou may understand in some degree, how
great the beauty, the delights, the liberty, and riches of true wisdom are,
which is virtue it self, and the knowledge of Almighty God, whereof we do
entreat. But if all this be insufficient to mollify our stony hearts, lift up
thine eyes, and fix thy thoughts constantly to behold our omnipotent God in his
mercy and love toward sinners upon his dying cross, where he made full
satisfaction for thy sins. There shall thou behold him in this form: his
feet nailed fast, looking for thee; his arms spread abroad to receive thee,
and his head bowing down, to give thee, as to another prodigal son, new
kisses of peace and atonement. From thence he calls thee (if thou would
hear) with so many callings and cries as there be wounds in his whole body.
Hearken thou therefore unto these voices, and consider well with thy self,
that if his prayer be not heard that hearkeneth not unto the cries of the
poor, how much less shall he be heard, that makes himself deaf to such
cries as these, being the most merciful cryings of our loving Savior, and
intended for our souls salvation. Who is he that has not cause to resolve
himself wholly into tears to weep and bewail his manifold offenses? Who is
he that can lament, and will not lament at this? unless he be such a one as
sees not, nor cares what great shipwreck, waste, and havocke he makes of all the riches and treasures of his soul.

FINIS.
GODLY PRAYERS NECESSARY AND VSEFVLL for Christian Families upon several
occasions.

Therefore I say unto you, What things ever ye desire when ye pray, believe
^^at ye receive them, and ye shall ^^ve them. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for M.
S. 1629.

Godly CHRISTIAN Prayers.
A household Prayer for private Families in the Morning.
MOst mighty and glorious God, the only Creator and Governor of Heaven and
^arth; and all things therein ^ontained, we miserable sinners here met together
by thy gra^^ do in thy fear prostrate selves before thy throne of Majesty and
glory, desiring in so measure to show our unfain thankfulness, for thy
innurable mercies multiplied up us from the first hour of birth, yea before
our birth, a before time was. Before foundations of the world w^ laid, thou out
of thy free (...) and mere mercy, did elect to eternal life, when thou di^
reject others. Thou did ^ate us after thine own ima^^ engraving upon us the
cha^^cters of spiritual wisdom righteousness, and true ho^^nesse; when it
was in thy pow^^ to have made us like unto beasts that perish; yea, to have
^qualled us to the basest of thy ^^eatures. And when through ^ur own default
we lost that ^^ignity, thou did so pity us as ^^ send from thine own
bo^ome thine only begotten Son ^^ recover it for us, and to re^tore it to us,
and that with no ^esse price then his own heart^loud. Besides, it has pleased
^hee continually to spread the wings of thy gracious protection over us, to
ward and guard ^s by thy providence, to open ^^y hand and to replenish us with
good things, to continue our life, health, strength, food, ^aiment, peace, and
liberty, to his very hour. Thou have even loaded us with thy benefits, if we
had hearts rightly to consider it; thou renewest thy mercy toward us every
morning; and the night past have given us a testimony of thy love: For whereas,
for the sins committed the day before, thou might even in the dead of
sleep have given us a sudden call out of this world, and so presently have
brought us to that great account which we must make before thee, thou
vouchsafest yet to spare us, yea (which is more) to refresh us with comfortable
rest, to preserve us from all dangers that might have befallen our souls or
bodies, and to bring us in safety to the beginning of this day. Heavenly
Father, grant that we may not be unmindfull of thy manifold mercies, but that
we may often think of them, and speak of them to thy glory; and that the
consideration thereof may stir us up to devote all the powers of our souls,
and members of our bodies to thy service. Forgive us our former
unthankefulnesse for thy mercies, and our several abuses of them, yea pardon
all our sins past, we most humbly beseech thee, for thy own mercies sake,
and for thy Sons merits. Our sins are great and grievous, for in sin we
were borne, and ever since have we gone on in a course of sin and rebellion
against thee, we do daily break thy holy precepts, and that against the light
of our own knowledge, albeit we know that thou art our Creator, who have made
us; ou^ Redeemer, who have bought us with the precious blood of thy only
begotten son; and ou^ Comforter, who bestowes^ upon us all things needful
for our being and well-being, for this life and for a better life Yea even
thee, thee (O Lord have we presumed to offend that have been thus abundantly
merciful unto us. For this ou^ unthankefulnesse and wicked nesse, enter not
into judgment with us, we most humbly beseech thee from the bottom of our
hearts; but have merc^ upon us, have mercy upon u^ most merciful Father, and
in mercy wash away all our sins with the blood of Jesus Christ, that so they
may never be laid ^o our charge, nor have power ^rise up in judgment against
^s. Pierce our hearts with a ^eeling of our sins, that we ^ay mourn for
them, as we ^ught to do; make us to loath and abhor them, that we may ^ave
and avoid them, that we may be watchful against all occasions of sin, and
circum^ect over our own ways. ^owre thy Spirit and put thy ^ace into our
hearts, that thereby we may be enabled for thy ^^vice, and both in body and
^ule may glorify thee here, ^^at we may be glorified of thee and with thee
hereafter. And as a special means to keep us in subjection before thee, work
in us, holy Father, a continual and effectual remembrance of this earths
vanity, of our own mortality, o^ that great and terrible judgment to come; of
the pains o^ hell, and joys of heaven which follow after; O let the
remembrance of these things be a spu^ to provoke us unto virtue, and a bridle
to hold us in from galloping after vice and wickedness. We know not how soon
thou will set a period to ou^ lives, and call for our souls to appear before
thee, whether this day or not before the evening; O prepare us therefore for
the hour of death, that we may then neither fear nor faint, but may with joy
yield up our souls into thy merciful hands, and do thou, O Father of mercy,
receive them. Let thy merciful eye look upon us this day, shield us from the
temptations of the devil, and grant us ^he custody of thy holy Angels, to
defend us in all our ways: ^nable us with diligence and ^onscience to
discharge the du^^es of our callings, and crown all our endeavors with thy
blessing: without thy blessing all man's labor is but vain, ^oe thou therefore
bless us in ^ur several places; O prosper ^hou our handiwork. Provide ^or us
all things which thou know to be needful for every one of us this day.
Give us a sanctified use of thy creatures agodly jealousy over ourselves a
continual remembrance of thy omniscience, and omnipresence that we may labor
to approve our very thoughts unto thee weane us from the love of thi^ world,
and ravish our soul with the love of our home and thine everlasting Kingdom
Defend the universal Church the Churches of this Land especially, our gracious
King Charles, our illustrious Queen Mary, together with the Princess
Elizabeth, and her Princely issue; crown them with thy graces here, and with
thy glory hereafter. Be with the Magistracy and Ministry of the Realm,
make thy Gospel to flourish amongst us by the labors of those whom thou have
appointed to this great service. Comfort thine afflicted servants, in what
place or case soever they be; give us a fellow feeling of their miseries, and
wisdom to prepare our selves against the evil day. Hear us in these things,
and grant what else thou know needful for us, not for our worthiness, but
for thy Sons sake, our alone Savior, in whose name and words, we conclude
our imperfect prayers, saying: Our Father, etc.

A household Prayer for private Families in the Evening.
O Glorious God, in Jesus Christ our gracious Father, we wretched creatures by
nature, but by thy grace thy servants and children do here make bold to
appear before thee in the humility of our souls, to perform some part of
that duty which we owe unto thee. And first we offer unto thy divine Majesty
the calves of our lips, the sacrifice ^f praise and thanksgiving for ^ine
infinite mercies which ^hou have been pleased to con^erre upon us out of thy
boundnesse and endless goodness. What thou have done for us this ^hy, is
beyond all that we are ^ble to express or conceive: ^hou have preserved us
from all ^erils and dangers, so that none ^f those judgments (which our ^^nes
have deserved) have bin ^flicted upon us; thou have ^nlarged our time and
opportu^ity to repent; thou have pro^^ded for our souls and bodies; ^^ou have
bin no way wanting unto us if we had hearts to acknowledge it. Forgive us that
^e cannot acknowledge thy goodness as we ought to do and more and more
quicken u^ in this duty, that we may with heart and voice acknowledg^ thee to
be that Father of lights from whom we do receiv^ every good and perfect gift^
ascribing unto thee the whole glory of all that we enjoy, both now and
evermore. And gran^ we pray thee, that our thankfulness may not be only ver^
ball, but real, we laboring i^ deed and in truth to be dutiful^ unto thee
that have bin so bountiful unto us. Pardon us for the sins of this day,
wherein we^ have offended thee, whether open or secret, of ignorance o^ of
knowledge, of infirmity o^ presumption, of omission o^ commission, in thought,
word or deed. The sins of this day are enough to plunge us, soul and body,
into the bottomless gulf of perdition. If thou should straightly mark
them, what answer shall we be able to make thee, how shall we dare to appear
in thy presence, before whom all thy creatures fear and tremble? But thy mercy
is above all thy works; much more above all our works of sin. In the
confidence of thy mercy we come unto thee, beseeching thee in thy son Christ
to be reconciled with us, and to assure us hereof by the certificate of thine
own blessed spirit. Break the strength of sin that would subdue us more and
more; and rear in us clean hearts, and renew a right spirit within us,
Increase our faith in the sweet promises of the Gospel, and our repentance
from dead works, our hope of eternal life, our fear of thy name, our zeal
for thy glory, our hatred of sin, our love of righteousness, our contentment
in all estates, our patience in adversity, our prudence in prosperity: that so
being furnished with the endowments of grace here, we may be fitted for the
enjoyment of glory hereafter. And because the night is now upon us, and our
bodies desirous of quiet rest, we pray thee to take us into thy blessed
tuition, and to refresh our wearied bodies with comfortable sleep. Protect us
and all that do belong unto us under the shadow of thy vings, defend us from
all evil, both of sin and punishment: keep us from security and
carelessness, from dullness and drowsinesse of spirit, from fire and robbery,
from the malice of Satan and all his adherents, from all perils into which for
our sins we might justly fall. Let the sight of the bed mind us of that
last bed, the grave, wherein we are shortly to take up our lodging, we know
not how soon. None of us here present can certainly tell, whether these eyes
of ours once closed up, shall ever any more open again in this world: therefore
receive us, good Lord, receive us into the arms of thy mercy, unto thine
Almighty protection we bequeath our selves, souls and bodies, and all that we
have: upon thy mercy alone we cast our selves both this present night and for
evermore. Be merciful to thy whole Church, continue the flourishing state of
the Kingdoms wherein we live. Decrease in it the number of superstitious
Papists and profane Atheists, and increase in it the number of such as
unfainedly fear thee. Preserve from all dangers and conspiracies our religious
King Charles, our gracious Queen Mary, the Lady Elizabeth, and her children.
Give them all such a measure of thy Spirit and grace, that they may seek to
advance thy kingdom on earth, and at last be advanced to thine everlasting
Kingdom in Heaven. Endow the right Honorable of our Privy Counsel with all
such graces as may make them fit for so high a place. Stir up Magistrates and
men in authority, to endeavor after the furthering of thine honor, and the
benefiting of thy people. Make the Ministers able and willing to discharge the
duties of their weighty calling with diligence and conscience; water their
endeavors with the dew of heaven, that daily such as belong unto life eternal
may be added unto the Church. Comfort, O comfort thine afflicted servants,
wheresoever or howsoever troubled: sweeten their afflictions and season their
sorrows with the comforts of thy Spirit. Give them all needful assistance,
and in thy own time a joyful deliverance. And make us ready for afflictions,
that they may not come upon us as a snare, but that we may in good measure,
like wise Virgins be prepared for the coming of Christ Jesus, the sweet
Bridegroom of our souls. Finally, we pray thee bear with the weakness,
and coldness, and imperfection of our prayers, and to grant our requests, not
for our merits, but for thine own mercies, and for the sake of thy dearly
beloved Son Jesus Christ, who died to make satisfaction for us, and lives to
make intercession for us, in whose words we shut up our imperfect prayers,
saying, as himself has taught us, Our Father, etc.

O Lord bless and save us, make thy face to shine upon us, thy Word to
instruct us, thy grace to direct us, thy Angels to protect us, thy Spirit to
comfort and support us, unto the end, and in the end, Amen.

Amen.
A Prayer in time of War.
O LORD GOD of Hoasts, in power invincible, in wisdom unsearchable, in mercy
incomprehensible; that give deliverance in the time of trouble, and
assistance in the day of battle; we most humbly and heartily beseech thee to
save us from all those extremities, and in special from our enemies, which our
sins do threaten to bring upon us. Hitherto thou have pleased to make our
Nation a spectacle of thy ineffable goodness, but we deserve to be made a
spectacle of thy unsupportable wrath. Our contempt of thy threatenings, our
abuse of thy mercies, our neglect of thy judgments, with infinite other
innormities, do menace the taking away of thy old mercies, and the bringing in
of some judgment. We have just cause to fear, O Lord, that our loud and
crying sins do call in our enemies upon us, and arm them against us; yea,
that they are already pressed and prepared to execute thy vengeance. Then open
our eyes, we pray thee, that we may see thy Ensign set up, thy Banner
displayed, and the evidence of thy approaching sword: open our ears that we
may hear thee blowing of thy trumpet, and giving the alarm to war: open our
hearts that we may not be secure in so great danger, but may quake and tremble
to see thy hand of vengeance before us. And howsoever by our sins we are set
in the midst of this danger, yet let the hand of thy mercy (which is as
omnipotent as that of thy justice) rescue us; let thy out stretched arm
deliver us. Put up thy sword into the scabbard; O bid it rest and be still. Be
favorable and gracious unto this thy Syon, crown her with plenty, prosperity,
and victory. Let not her enemies rejoice in her subversion, nor triumph in her
destruction. Hide not thy face from her in the day of trouble; stop not thine
ears at our prayers. Be unto us all a horn of salvation, a rock of safety, a
wall of brass, a strong tower and fortress against the face and force of our
enemies: divert their designs, frustrate their envy, abate their fury,
assuage their pride, restrain their power, and in thy name let us tread them
under, that maliciously and mischievously rise up against us. Suffer not the
light of thy Gospel to be ec^lipsed, nor the splendour of thy glory to be
obscured; let not thy name be dishonored, nor thy Sanctuary defiled, nor thy
truth slandered: but now and ever defend and deliver (as thou have formerly
done) this Church and State, from Plague, Pestilence, and above all, that most
terrible vengeance, the devouring sword: and that for his sake who has led
captivity captive and like a victorious Conqueror has triumphed over all his
enemies, even Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory,

Amen.
A Prayer for them that are about the Sick.
Hear us, Almighty and most merciful God and Savior, extend thine accustomed
good^esse to this thy servant, which ^s grieved with sickness; visit him (O
Lord) as thou did Peter's wives mother, and the Captains ^ervant, restore unto
this sick ^ody his former health (if it be ^hy will) or else give him grace ^o
take this thy visitation patiently, that after this painful life ended he may
dwell with thee in everlasting life: O Lord, behold we bend our knees, yea the
knees of our hearts with unfeigned prayers, and lift up our eyes to the throne
of thy mercy seat, to hearken to these our petitions, according to thy
promises, therefore, O Lord, grant our requests, we are gathered here together
in thy name, in the behalf of this thy servant; deliver him we humbly beseech
thee, from these his languishing pains and miseries of sickness, and as it
has pleased thee to lay thine hand upon him; so, O Lord, restore him to his
former health; keep him O Lord, from fearful and terrible assaults, and
despightfull ^^mptations of the Devil, sin ^^d hell: deliver him, O Lord,
(...) thou deliveredst Noah from ^e raging waves of the floods; (...) from the
destruction of So^me; Abraham from the fear ^^ the Caldeans; the children of
^^rael from the tyranny of Pha^^oh; David from the hands of ^^liah; the three
men from the ^lence of the fiery furnace in ^^bylon; Daniell from the mouth
(...) the Lions; Jonas from the ^^lly of the Whale, and Peter ^m the prison of
Herod: Even ^ O gracious Lord, deliver the ^^le of this person, both now, (...)
whenever he shall depart ^^ce from all peril and dan^^r, open unto him at
the hour of death the door of Paradise, the gates of heaven, and the entry of
everlasting life, O Lord Jesus Christ forgive him all his sins, and lead him
with joy into the kingdom of thy heavenly Father, even unto the bosom of
Abraham, and appoint him his everlasting rest that he may rejoice with thee,
and all the elect children of God, to whom be all honor, glory, power, and
dominion,

Amen.
The sick persons Prayer.
LOrd hearken to my prayer, and give ear to my humble request, Lord be
merciful unto me, and give me grace patiently to bear the cross, and in
the midst of this my sickness always to say; thy will O heavenly Father be
done, and not mine; forgive and forget, most gracious Father all (...) quities,
blo^ them out of thy remembrance and cast them from thy sight, O Lord, as far
as the East is from the West, the North from the South: they are many and
innumerable, let them not rise up in judgment against me: neither enter thou
into thy narrow judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous
before thee, handle me not according to my deserts, deal not with me after my
wickedness, neither reward me after mine iniquities; O Lord my God look not
into my enormious nor incestious life: I am ashamed of my sins, and ask
pardon for my faults, even with a repenting heart and sorrowful mind, a
bleeding soul, with hidden tears of a true and unfeigned repentance for my
misdeeds; yea, my wounded breast surcharged with oppressing griefs, does sigh,
groan, and lament under the burden of my heinous crimes: wherefore, O Lord,
wash them away with thy blood which thou have shed for my sins, and I shall
be clean and pure without spot, purge me, O Lord, with those precious drops
that distilled from thy tormented heart, and I shall be whiter then the snow,
bury mine offenses in the sepulcher of thy death, and cloth me with the
garment of righteousness, O Lord, for thine infinite goodness and mercy sake
receive me into thy tuition and favor; pardon, O Lord, and remit my sins, as
thou forgavest David his murder and adultery with Barsheba; Saul his
persecutions of thy people; Peter his denial; Mary Magdalen her lascivious
life, and the Publican in the Temple with striking his breast craved thy
gracious pardon: saying, Lord have mercy upon me a sinner, and although my
sins and offenses are far greater, and more grievous then these, yet, O
Lord, thy mercies exceed and are far more compassionate then our sins
manifold; I justify not my self, O my God, by the offenses of these, but
declare thy righteousness and merciful clemencies in forgetting and forgiving
our abominable trespasses and transgressions of thy will, which though we are
froward, yet thou art gentle, though we are stubborn, yet thou art meek, and
though we run headlong to the pits brinke, and to the gates of hell; yet thou
of thy goodness call us back, and remittest all that we have done amiss,
O Lord, I have acknowledged my faults that they are best known unto thee:
wherefore, O Lord, I ask forgivenes for the same, send me the comfort of thy
holy Spirit, that if thou give me my former health and strength of body, I may
amend my life according to thy sacred will, and walk worthily in thy Laws and
Commandments: if it be thy pleasure to take me hence out of this transitory
life, O Lord, grant that I may rest and live with thee forever, world without
end. O Lord, hearken unto these my petitions for Jesus Christ his sake, I ask
them and all other things which thou shall think meet both for my soul and
body in the same form of prayer as he himself has taught me, saying: Our
Father, etc.

A Prayer at the hour of death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them which dye in thy faith; I wretched sinner give and
submit my self wholly to thy most blessed will, being sure that the thing
cannot perish which is committed unto thy mercy, I most humbly beseech thee, O
Lord, to give me grace that I may now willingly leave this frail and wicked
flesh in hope of the resurrection, which in better manner shall restore it to
me again, grant me, O Lord God, that thou will by thy grace make strong my
soul against all temptations, and that thou will cover and defend me with the
buckler of thy mercy against the assaults of Satan; I acknowledge, that there
is in my self no hope of salvation; but all my hope and trust is in thy most
merciful goodness, I have no merits nor good works, which I may allege
before thee; of sins and evil works, alas! I see a great heap, but through
thy mercy I trust to be of the number of them to whom thou will not impute
their sins, but take and impute me for righteous and just, and to be the
inheritor of everlasting glory. Thou, O most merciful Lord, were borne for my
sake, thou did suffer both hunger and thirst, thou did preach, teach, pray,
and fast for my sake, thou did all good works, and sufferedst most grievous
pangs and torments for my sake: and finally, thou gave thy most precious body
to dye, and thy blessed blood to be shed on the Cross for my sake: wherefore
most merciful Savior, let all these things profit me, which thou have freely
given me, which have given thy self for me, let thy blood cleanse and wash
away the spots and foulness of my sins, let thy righteousness hide and
cover my unrighteousness, let the merits of thy bitter sufferings be a
sufficient and propitiatory sacrifice, and satisfaction for my sins: give me,
O Lord, thy grace, that my faith and belief of thy true and grievous death
waver not in me, but ever be firm and constant, that the hope of thy mercy and
life everlasting never decay in me, that charity wax not cold in me: and
finally, that the weakness of my flesh be not overcome with the fear of
death; grant me also, O most merciful Savior that when death has shut up the
eyes of my body, yet the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee,
and that when death has taken away the use of my tongue and speech; yet my
heart may cry, and say unto thee, O Lord, into thy hands I give and commit my
soul, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and take me to thy mercies,

Amen.
A Prayer for a Woman in time of her travail.
RIghteous and holy Lord God, I do now find by experience the fruit of my
sin, that I must travail in sorrow, and bring forth in pain: and I
unfainedly adore the truth of thy sacred Word, as certifying unto me, that
sorrow must be in the Evening: so comforting me also against the Morning, that
a Child shall be borne. Willingly I do desire to submit my self in hope unto
this thy chastisement; and to learn the desert of my sins, horrible in
themselves, that these temporal pains are forerunners of eternal: and yet by
thy mercy may be so sanctified unto me, as not only to prevent eternal
vengeance, but also prepare for eternal comforts, even to be saved by bearing
of Children.

Grant me therefore (gracious Father) true repentance and pardon for my sins
past, that they may not stand at this time in this my need between me and thy
mercy. Give me a comfortable feeling of thy love in Christ, which may sweeten
all other pangs, though never so violent or extreme: make me still to lift up
my soul unto thee, in my greatest agonies, knowing that thou alone must give a
blessing to the ordinary means for my safe deliverance. Lay no more upon me
then I am able to endure; and strengthen my weak body to the bearing of what
sorrowsoever, by which it shall seem good unto thee to make trial of me.

Grant me to consider that howsoever it be with me, yet I am always at thine
hand, whose mercies fail not, who wilt be found in the Mount and greatest
extremity, and to whom belong the issues of death: so prepare me therefore to
death, that I may be fit for life, even to yield fruit alive unto the world,
and to be renewed and enabled to nourish the same. And when thou have safely
given me the expected fruit of my womb, make me with a thankful heart to
consecrate both it and my self wholly to thy service all the days of my life,
through Jesus Christ mine only Savior and Redeemer,

Amen.
A Thankesgiving after safe deliverance.
O Blessed for ever be thy great and glorious Name (most dear and loving
Father) for thy great mercy to me most weak and sinful woman.

Wonderful art thou in all thy works (O Lord) the riches of thy mercies are
past finding out: thou have plunged me with great afflictions, and yet thou
have returned and refreshed me again: thou have brought me to the fear of
the grave, and yet thou have raised me up again to life. O how have thou showed
thy power in my weakness? How has thy loving kindness prevailed against my
unworthiness? Thou might for my sins have left me to perish in mine
extremities, but thou have compassed me about with joyful deliverance: thou
might have made my womb a grave to bury the dead: or in affoording life to
another, thou might have procured my death, but yet thou have not only made
my womb a wellspring of life, but restored life unto me also, for the
cherishing thereof. Marveilous (O Lord) are thy works, infinite are thy
mercies, my soul by present experience knows it well. O my soul praise thou
the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name. My soul praise thou
the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Thou have heard my prayers, and
looked upon my sorrow, thou have redeemed my life from death, and healed mine
infirmities, and crowned me with thine everlasting compassions.

O give me, I humbly pray thee, a thankful heart, not only now while the
memory and sense of thy favor is fresh before me, but continually even so long
as I have any being.

Grant that I may learn by his lively evidence of thy power and mercy, for
ever hereafter ^o depend only on thee. Quic^en me also to all holy duties, that
my thankfulness may appear in my pure and Christian ^arriage.

Make me a kind and careful another, willing to undergo the ^aine and trouble
of education. ^et no niceness or curiosity ^inder me from those services, ^o
whom both nature and reli^ion has appointed me: let me ^^so be careful when
time re^uireth, to season the fruit thou ^ast given me, with the saving
^nowledge of thee, and thy dear on, that my desire may manifestly appear to
be set for the ^ncrease of thy Kingdom. Vouchsafe so to order my affections
and to bring them in obedience unto thee, that if it should be thy pleasure
either now o^ hereafter to take this infant from me, I may as willingly part
with it, as thou freely gave it me.

And now (O God) perfect in me that strength which thou have begun, make me to
grow in care to serve thee faithfully both in the duties of piety, and in other
business of my place and calling, that I may be a comfort to my husband, a^
example to my neighbors, ^ grace to my profession, and ^ means of glory to
thy Name through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior,

Amen.
FINIS.
THE COMMON CALLS, CRIES and Sounds of the BEL-MAN. OR, Diverse verses to put
us in mind of our mortality.

Which serve as warnings to be prepared at all times for the day of death.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for M. S. Junior, at the Blew Bible in Green-Arbour.
1639.

THE BEL-MANS SOVNDS.
For Christmas day
REmember all that on this Morn,
Our blesseds aviour Christ was borne;
Who issued from a Virgin pure,
Our souls from Satan to secure;
And patronise our feeble spirit,
That we through him may heaven inherit.
For Saint Stephens day.
THis blessed time bear in your mind,
How that blessed Martyr Stephen died;
In whom was all that good confinde,
That might with flesh and blood abide;
In Doctrine and example he
Taught what to do and what to flee;
Full of the Spirit he would preach,
Against opinions false and naught,
Confute them to, and bouldly teach;
What Christ himself to him had taught;
For which at last he lost his breath,
Stoned by the stony hearts to death;
Let us then learn by this blessed Martyrs end
To see our follies and our lives amend.
For Saint John's day.
THis man the Word did bouldly teach
Saw Christ transformed, and did preach
The glory in that Mount he saw,
And by that glory strove to draw;
The soul of man from sinful thrall
To heaven, to which God send us all.
For Innocents day.
THe swords of Herod's servants took
Such sweet young things, as with a look
Might make a heart of Marble melt.
But they no grace, nor pity felt;
Some from the cradle, some awake,
Some sweetly sleeping, some they take
Dandled upon their mothers lap,
Some from their arms, some from the pap.
For New-yeares day.
ALL you that do the Bell-man here,
The first day of this hopeful year;
^oe in love admonish you,
So bid your old sins all adue,
And walk as Gods just Law requires,
In holy deeds and good desires,
Which if to do you will do your best,
God will in Christ forgive the rest.
For Saint David's day.
I Am no Welchman, but yet to show
The love I to the Country owe,
I call this morning and be seek
Each man prepare him for his Leeke;
For as I hear some men say,
The first of March is Saint David's day
That worthy Britain, valiant, wise,
Withstood his countries enemies,
And caused his Soldiers there to choose
Leekes for to know them from his foes;
Who bravely fought, and conquest wone,
And so the custom first begun.
Then wear your Lecks and do not shame
To memorize your worthies name:
So noble Britains all adieu,
Love still King Charles, for he loves you.
For the 5. of November.
AWake Britains subjects with one accord,
Extol and praise, and magnify the Lord,
Humble your hearts, and with devotion sing
Praises of thanks to God for our most gracious King;
This was the night when in a darkesome Cell,
Treason was found in earth it hatched in hell;
And had it took effect, what would availed our sorrow,
The train being laid to have blown us up of the morrow?
Yet God our guide revealed the damned plot,
And they themselves destroyed, and we were not.
Then let us not forget him thanks to render,
That has preserved and kept our faiths Defender.
For Good Friday.
ALL you that now in bed do lie,
Know Jesus Christ this night did die.
^^r souls most sinful for to save,
That we eternal life might have;
His whips, his groans, his crown of thorns,
Would make us weep, lament, and mourn.
For Sunday.
LEt labor pass, let prayer be
This day the chiefest work for thee,
Thy self and servants more and less,
This day must let all labor pass.
ALL hale to you that sleep and rest;
Repent, awake, your sins detest,
Call to your mind the day of doom,
For then our Savior Christ will come.
Account to have he has decreed,
Of every thought, word, work, and deed
And as we have our times here past,
So shall our judgments be at last.
AS dark some night unto thy thoughts present,
What it is to want the days bright Element,
So let thy soul descend through contemplation,
Where utter darkness keeps her habitation,
Where endless, easelesse pains remediless
Attend to torture sins cursed wilfulness:
O then remember whilst thou yet have time
To call for mercy for each forepast crime;
And with good David wash thy bed with tears,
That so repentance may subdue hels fears:
Then shall thy sovle more purer then the Sun,
Joy as a Giant her best race to run,
And in unspotted robes her self address
To meet her Lord that Son of righteousness,
To whom with God the Father and the Spirit
Be all due praise, where all true joys inherit.
THe Belman like tho wakefull morning Cock,
Does warn you to be vigilant and wise:
Look to your fire, your candle and your lock,
Prevent what may through negligence arise;
So may you sleep with peace and wake with joy,
And no mischances shall your state annoy.
YOur beds compare unto the grave,
Then think what sepulcher you have.
For though you lay you down to sleep,
The Bell-man wakes your peace to keep,
Andnightly walks the round about,
To see if fire and light be out;
But when the morn (days light) appears
Be you as ready for your prayers:
So shall your labors thrive each day,
That you the Bel-man well may pay.
LIke to the Seaman is our life,
Tossed by the waves of sinful strife,
Finding no ground whereon to stand,
Uncertain death is still at hand:
If that our lives so vainelesse be,
Then all the world is vanity.
THose that live in wrathful ire,
And go to rest in any sin,
They are worse unto their house then fire
Or violent thieves that would break in
Then seek to shun with all your might,
That Hidras head, that monstrous sin;
That God may bless your goods abroad,
And eke also your selves within.
Sleep on in peace, yet waking be,
And dread his powerful Majesty,
Who can translate the irksome night,
rom darkness to that glorious light,
Whose radient beams when once they rise,
With winged speed the darkness flies.
THou God that art our help at hand,
Preserve and keep our King and land
from foreign and domesticke foes,
^uch as the word and truth depose;
And ever prosper those of pity,
That love the peace of this our City.
AWake from sleep, awake from sin,
With voice and heart to call on him,
Who from above pleased to descend,
From Satan's malice to defend
Our forfeit souls, to that rich grace
Where we may still behold his face.
LEt us repare and God implore,
That henceforth we transgres no more
And that our joy be at this tide,
That we in him be satisfide;
Then shall we all for his dear sake,
Be blessed a sleep, be blessed awake.
Since neither men nor Angels know,
When as the dreadful trump shall blow,
Nor when our Savior Christ shall come
To give the world a woeful doom;
Think then but what a case you're in,
That sleep in unrepented sin:
O wake, O wake, O watch and pray,
And think upon this dreadful day.
Sleep not so sound, rest not secure,
Mark well my words of this be sure
The waking Virgins past the gate,
When those that slept came al too late:
Wherefore be watchful in your center.
That you may with the bridegroom enter.
IF wicked impes wake day and night,
And keep their candle always light,
And all their skill and practice bend,
To bring their damned plots to end;
Let us not sleep, but laud his skill,
That frustrates all their projects still.
THe night well spent, the day draws night,
Awake from sleep and sin defy,
All sluggish sloth expel away,
Have still in mind the judgment day,
When dead shall rise at trumpets call,
The graves shall open wide with all.
ARise from sin, awake from sleep,
The earth does mourn The Heavens weep;
The winds and Seas distempered bin,
And all by reason of man's sin:
Wherefore arise, lay sleep aside,
And call on God to be your guide,
From raging sword and arrows flight,
And from the terrors of the night;
From fires flame, from sin and sorrow,
God bless you all, and so good morrow.
ALL you which in your beds do lie,
Unto the Lord ye ought to cry,
that he would pardon all your sins;
And thus the Bel^mans prayer begins;
Lord give us grace our sinful life to mend,
And at the last to send a joyful end:
^aving put out your fire and your light,
^or to conclude, I bid you all good night.
Man's life is like a warfare on the earth,
Whose time is spent with troubles, toils and cares,
Subject to all temptations from his birth:
In woe he lives and dies at unnawares.
The surest sign true fortitude to show,
Is in his life all vice to overthrow.
O Hark, O hark my Masters all,
To your poor servants cry and call:
And know all you that lie at ease,
That our great God may if he please,
Deprive you of your vital breath:
Then sleeping, think your sleep is death.
LEt true repentance cleanse your sin,
And then your souls commend to him,
That by his death has raised and cured
The dead, the blind, and them assured
To give to them eternal rest,
To live in Heaven among the blessed.
Confess thy sins to God on hie,
Who pardons sinners when they cry;
Bewray thy faults to him in time,
Who will in Christ forgive thy crime.
HE that on the Cross has died
And for our sins was crucified,
Be you ever blessed in him.
And clean remitted from your sin:
Be it granted as I have praid,
And so the Bel-man rests paid.
ALL you that in bed do lie,
Harken well to what I cry,
Leave off your sins, repentance crave,
It is the only way your souls to save.
REpent in time while ye have breath,
Repentance comes not after death:
He therefore that will live for aye,
Must leave his sins, and to God pray.
O Gracious God and blessed,
Preserve all ye that be in bed,
So that your quiet rest may take,
Until the morning that ye wake:
Then may ye all with praises sing,
To thee O God our heavenly King.
REmember man thou art but dust,
There is none alive but dye he must,
To day a man, to morrow none,
So soon our life is past and gone.
Man's life is like a withered flower,
Alive and dead all in an hour,
Leave of thy sins therefore in time,
And Christ will rid thee from thy crime.
O Mortal man that is made of dust,
In worldly riches put not thy trust,
Remember how thy time does pass,
Even like the sand that from the Glass,
^ath spent the time and there remains,
^ever can thou call that time again.
Sick men complain they cannot sleep,
The Bel-man such a noise does keep;
Others that do win at play,
Says he too soon proclaims the day:
Yet to the sick that draws short breath,
It puts them in the mind of death;
And says the gamster makes good stake,
If he for Heaven so long would wake;
And all this while like silly worm,
He does his office but perform:
Then if his duty breed disease,
Heel go to bed and none displease.
FINIS.

