THE Melancholy Knight. By S. R.



Imprinted at London by R. B. and are to be sold by George Loftus, in
Bishops-gate street, near the Angel. 1615.

To Respective Readers.
GAllants expect no idle news,
For carrying tales I scorn to use,
Employ their tongues that way who will,
Men's heads with strange reports to fill,
Of what is done in foreign lands
I clear from those things wash my hands,
I meddle not like light-brain'd men,
With this and that, and where and when,
And how and which and what and why,
And thus, and so, I scorn it I,
I have a melancholy Scull
Is almost fractur'd it is so full
To ease the same these lines I write,
Tobacco boy a pipe, some light.
Introduction.
When Phoebus Chariot (flaming living fire)
Was drawn with winged horses to the West,
And obscure darkness clad in black attire,
Had summoned every sleeping eye to rest,
The cloudie curtains of the heavens were spread,
And glorious day from fair Aurora fled.
The winds were all locked up and nothing spoke,
The dribling waters murmur was not heard,
No fire was seen, yet all the air seemed smoke:
The starry lamps were from their shining barred
Fower-footed tramplers, all had drowsy heads;
Bush-breeders wrapped up in their feather-beds.
An universal slumber ceased on all,
To bury cares in sleeps forgetfulness,
While dreams and visions did in question call,
Charging the mind with much unquietness,
And did present an object to my sight,
That made next day to wonder at last night.
I saw, (or seemed to see a well shaped man,
His body formed comely as I thought;
Yet not describe him perfectly I can,
Because his outside was so ouer-wrought,
With Tailors art, new fashioned from the stall,
What I be held was but man's making all.
His face being masked with his hat pulled down,
And in french doublet without gown or cloak,
His hose the largest ever came to town,
And from his nostrels came much stinking smoke;
Garters would make two ensigns for a need,
And shoo-ties that for circle did exceed.
His head hung down, his arms were held a cross,
And in his hat a cole-blacke feather stuck,
His melancholy argued some great loss,
He stood so like the picture of ill luck:
I longed much his humor for to find
Until at length he thus revealed his mind.
THE MELANCHOLY KNIGHT.
LIke discontented Tymon in his Cell,
My brains with melancholy humers swell,
I cross mine arms at crosses that arise,
And scoff blind Fortune, with hat ore mine eyes:
I bid the world take notice I abhor it,
Having great melancholy reason for it.
I Will put my case (and if the world do please)
To four men's censures, and they shall be these;
For my part I Will have Riot ioin'd with Pride,
Take Covetousness and Fraud, on the other side,
And all I have shall thereupon be laid,
Which is not much, if all my debts were paid:
That when these honest men give up awarde,
They will confess the world does use me hard,
When my agreeuances do once appear,
Which I in brief will only point at here.
The cause from whence my melancholy grows,
To the iudious will it self disclose:
Oh wicked age, of wretched days and times,
Wherein I write these melancholy rimes!
Ungrateful world, false and unconstant found
To those brave minds, to whom thou most art bound:
I have red over (while youths glass did run)
Sir Lancelot of the Lake, the Knight of th'Sun,
Sir Triamour, Sir Beuis, and sir Guy,
Four sons of Amon, horsed so gallantly,
And all the old worlds worthy men at arms,
That did revenge fair Ladies wrongs and harms,
The Monster slayers, and the Giant killers,
With all the rest of Mars his brave well-willers,
Which to rehearse I never shall be able,
The Worthis Arthur had at his round Table;
And how in Chronicles those dead ones live,
By breath that Fame does from the Trumpet give.
But what an age is this my fellow Knights?
(I mean all you whom melancholy bites)
As it does me, the Iouiall sort I leave
That have their hundreds yearly to receive;
For they and I, I know shall never meet
In Golding lane, nor yet in Silver street;
My melancholy walks find spacious room
With pensive pace, about Duke Humfreys Toome,
Where many thoughts above the Steeple climb,
That humbly walk away their dinner time:
Yet in despite of Fortunes turning wheel,
In scorn of gold I wear it at my heel;
Even in contempt of wealth my spurs are guilt,
And siluer's common in my Rapiers hilt;
I hate the Idol misers dote upon,
Being as big in heart as Prester John,
Disdaining Pezants, Rusticks, Boores and Clownes,
My mind is full of Castles, Towers, and Towns,
Woods, wildernesses, stately fields and groves,
With cattle, most innumerable drove,
Corn, precious odours, spice, heart cheering wine
The Ocean full of ships me thinks is mine,
And who can have a richer mind then this?
Only possession is a thing I miss,
And want of that same powerful point in Law,
Makes me remember late a piece I saw,
An artificial feast which rare did look:
But yet because the Painter played the Cook,
To make the gazer to his praise a debtor,
The eye was pleased but stomach nere the better.
Even so my mind, which is an empire to-me,
Yields hautie swelling thoughts, and they undo me,
Leaving me only an old song to sing
The ballet of the Beggar and the King;
But that I can abide no music now,
My melancholy will no mirth allow,
Therefore take warning resolute set down,
To all the fidling fellows in the town,
That they approach not near my tavern room,
On pain of stabs to be their fatal doom.
If but their sight my presence do annoy,
I Will finish all their days from man to boy,
The like for th'Talor for his scrawling bill,
I take his Items most distasteful ill:
If he presn me to ask my worship chinke,
With poniard point his doublet I Will bepinke.
The Mercers man that plyes me so of late,
Before I cross his book I Will cross his pate.
A Gallants mind beyond all reason frets,
To pay for worn suits, out of fashion debts,
To come for money due in eighty nine,
Will make a man that is out of cashe repine:
Yet there is Hungarians that on terms do stand,
As if one still should have his purse in's hand.
But letall such take notice what Isay;
My humor's to receive, not now to pay,
It is an easy case to understand;
Tenants will shrink, when Landlords sell their land:
For it is not now as in the days of old,
When men were willing to depart with gold,
Give longer time, friend Creditor to debtor,
Angels grow proud because they are twelve pence better
And very scarce withal I will be sworn,
When to keep Knighthood company they scorn,
For I that know their absence may be bold,
To clear my hand from this corrupting gold,
Look to it Lawyers unto you they fly,
And you must answer for them more then I,
You can transfor me their case from good to evil,
Turning an angel often into a Devil;
But let the Devil have a golden clawe,
You will defend him any suit in law.
Physicians, likewise, must be offered too,
Or else both pill and potion will not do:
He that into their purging hands does fall,
Must bring a sacrifice Angelical,
But both may sterue sor what they get of me,
If with my Creditors I once agree.
I Will leave friend Lawyer to his Littleton,
For little good with me there will be done,
And so for Doctor-purge an's glister pipe,
His diet should be worse then sowce and tripe,
If I his Pat^ents Physic might persuade,
We would undo him quite and spoil his trade.
Take the rare herb that grows on India ground,
(In Tavern and in Alehouse so renowned)
Smoke noses with the same from one to the other,
As though your faces were all sea-cole smother,
Make fogges and mistes ascend in hot degrees,
Snuff some into your nostrils till you neese,
And spit and spawle until your throats be choking,
But above all things keep your noses smoking,
For that is most Blacke-amore and Inaian like,
And fume the brauer in your brain will strike;
Then rhume it out, and do no spitting spare,
For absolute Tobacchonist you are:
This is brave physic for brave Caueleers,
This at both ends, upward and down ward cleeres:
Twill make one sober that was drunk before,
Fill a pipe boy before I write line more;
So, here is a health unto the good estates,
Of all our Poets that have smoking pates:
The Muses bless their brains with store of wit,
I near knew Usurer amongst them yet,
That puts out hundreds to engender tennes,
Their stock consists of paper, ink, and pens,
And a sew books, their value proving small,
When sometime rated on a Brokers stall.
But what have I to do with what they pawn,
Or sell, or give, or dedicate by fawn;
Let me suruay mine own house well within,
Where no excess this many a day has been;
I scorn both silver cups and gilded plate,
Common with basest tradesmen grown of late.
Tinkers and Cobblers and such vulgar asses,
I love to drink Gentleman-like in glasses,
The rare french fashion is preferred thereby
Which graceth out good wine unto the eye.
Or be it our own native English beer,
A glass presents it to you comely clear
If it be thick, or thin in watery plight,
The Brewers fault will that way come to light:
Besides, you know by fire great losses grows,
Which to prevent (as all my neighbors knows)
I seldom times have any chimney smoke,
Except great cold extremely do provoke;
Yet often then, for fear of doing harm,
I lie a bed till noone, and keep me warm.
Likewise, I do not wastfull spend my store,
In drawing idle Beggars to my door:
For if I should, the Country would come down,
And bring a charge of poor upon the Town;
No, there is none shall frame by me excuses
And tax or charge me with these great abuses:
And as for gluttons feasting at my Table,
Let them that are more willing or more able.
For I protest, who surfets on my cheer,
Within the compass of these seven year,
I Will pay for's physic on my knightly word,
If he will be sworn he took it at my board:
I keep a table hanging in my hall,
The Poetry is my invention all;
And though I say it, (wanting others praise)
The Morals sit most rarely for our days,
A frugall house, it does instruct to keep
Matter in this age to be weighed deep,
Although the lines are written but with ink,
A man may call them golden Rules I think,
Because this does advise to save his purse,
The empty plague whereof there is nothing worse.
I Will be no miser of them to my friends
Because, good counsel, no wise man offends,
Thus they begin, they are plain, but to good ends.
Into my spacious Hall who enters here,
Must not expect to meet with belly-cheere,
No Dives dinings, nor yet Nabals feasts
Our diet does distinguish men from beasts:
In steed of fat beef breake-fasts when we rise,
Apipe of good Tobacco will suffice,
Which both discharges all the rhume we have,
And does the charge of other drinking save.
Bal't, roste, sod, at noone is vulgar feeding,
But dainty sallets they are most exceeding.
Strong drink make strong dissentions this is sure,
Your smallest beer, small quarrels does procure;
At night, light suppers if you light upon,
Digestion easy will be quickly gone:
An egg new laid is physical rare roasted,
And so is cheese of the welsh fashion toasted;
Beef, Mutton, Porke, Veale, Lamb, (gross dyets folly)
Are breeders of expense and melancholy,
Small birds, small fish, small reasons and small beer,
May save a knight, a hundred pound a year.
Let such as will shun prodigal expense,
Learn to observe good wholesome rules from hence;
Those that are of another humor, so
Each man his own purse credit best does know;
So I do mine, for as before I said,
The Golden-age and Silver is decayed:
Oh now comes on a melancholy sit,
To write of Gold and not possess a whit;
Once more Tobacco boy, I Will smother grief,
I tarry for it sir, quick be brief.
What says the knave that keeps the smoking shop?
Will he have money ere I drink a drop?
Does he deny to trust me one pipe more?
Tell him, I Will nere pay penny off my score
Unless he send me presently his best.
And furthermore, thus much I do protest,
Choler does stir my fury up so grim,
If he deny to smoke me, I Will smoke him:
Shall I be held for such a younger brother,
As not be trusted for a little smother?
Is ready-money so upon the spur
That debts like Lawyers may not use demurre,
Why then the ancient speech most true does chance
Heers yours, there is mine, no longer pipe then dance:
Well, leave that knave because he deals so base,
Fetch me Tobacco at another place,
Bid him send good, and set it on the score,
He shall have all my custom for great store:
If these same foolish knaves had any wit,
My custom would afford much use of it:
For to all Guls that come why they might vow,
A Knight had of this very roll but now,
Who daily sends and likes it passing well:
And thus my name their bad for good might sell,
And utterance thereby would not be small,
So I deserve the best, and trust withal:
But fools there are cannot occasion see,
A very Cobbler shall as welcome be
That pays his ready money at the stub,
As I that come a trust to worships dub,
This makes me melancholy as a Cat,
And in mine eyes does cause me pull my hat,
To think how all men carefully provide
To join with money on the stronger side.
Let it be fool; or ass, or dolt, or gull,
More sheepish then the Sheep that wears the wool,
No language, but the Countries that did breed him,
Taught by the parting Nurse which did spoon-feed him,
Got up to London with a stick in's hand,
And there seven year at some stall talking stand;
His travels, Islington, Hacney, or Hyegate.
Yet this smoth fellow with his cunning sly pate,
Will scrape, and scratch, and spare, and pinch and save,
Beyond my wealth for all the wit I have:
And note the spiteful case twixt him and I
Let me on credit any where go buy,
And he in's purse have ready money plenty,
Where I have one Sir they le afford him twenty:
Yes sir, and I sir, welcome sir, indeed sir,
When I shall have it is money that we need sir,
This Gentleman, (then have a hat he must)
Pays present quoyne, intruth we cannot trust.
Here be the fellows with the nimble hammes,
And they have learned to live without their dammes;
Such as have skill to sell a piece of stuff,
And having wealth, why they have wit enough.
Admit a man should bravely undertake,
To travel further then sir Francis Drake,
And with more languages his tongue were cloyed,
Then there was used when Babell was destroyed:
What of all this, when trial shall be found,
It Would never serve to take up twenty pound:
Let Scholar bring his Hebrew and his Greek,
And with the same a hundred pound go seek,
The Usurer in English will reply,
Sir I must have some good security:
Come Traueler from Turkey, Room, or Spain,
And take a suit of trust in Burchin-lane,
Let him bring news to furnish all The Exchange,
And make himself admired at most strange:
Some Citizen must pass his bond or bill,
Or else the Gallant rests non-suted still.
Let Soldier come with scarre-becarued skin,
And talk of Newport battle he was in:
Seige of Ostend, and brave exploits in France,
To golden credit twill him not advance:
Who Will take his word for lodging, or for diet?
He might have stayed at home and kept him quiet:
Perhaps will some say, and have saved an arm,
Or Musket shot had done his legs no harm;
And this has made me never venture far.
I once was ouer-Sea to see the war,
Where soldiers spent both blood and life most free
But I protest not one the less for me:
No, killing men? I ever did abhor it;
Yet do not hold me to be Coward for it:
For if I were constrained to do my best,
My sword should be as naked as the rest,
There Is certain rules which I intend to use;
First I Will not fight until I cannot choose:
And all my Creditors, while I do live,
Shall have good words, though nothing else I give;
Give me the lie my patience mild receives it,
Knowing I often lie, when none perceiues it.
And therefore that same term does never perplexe me;
But if I used not lying, sure it would vex me:
Good company does very much delight me,
I never think scorn who ever do inuit me;
The poorest man that keeps the meanest house,
I Will taste his pudding, or his piece of souce,
His housh oldloafe, his butter and his cheese,
Such curtisie by pride I will not leese,
If it be offered me, I will not fail
To take my neighbor Cobblers pot of ale.
With mean good-fellowes I can well agree,
And leave rich Kninghts as well as they leave me:
Yet shall my Lady have her own desire,
To match their Ladies in their brave attire:
For she is a Gentlewoman (though I say-it)
That does deserve to domineere and sway it,
To Lady it, she served a Lady taught her,
Well bred and borne a good rich Graziers daughter;
One that if once he bid the world good night,
His death would cure the Melancholy knight;
And make him mighty with excessive wealth,
But I am sick to think upon his health;
A lusty man and yet above threescore:
If I should die and go to heaven before,
Which I think not; but if I so were crossed,
All that estate were every penny lost:
With him I play the Politician so,
I have his love most absolute I know,
Rundlets of Sack, with suger-loaues and spice,
I send as tokens that may love entice,
Which if I did not hope to find at large,
He should be hanged ere I would bear the charge.
For now adays I hold he gross does err,
That spends his money for I thank you sir,
I am beholden to you for this kindness,
Count me a bussard if I show such blindness:
No, I have one gift proves not amiss
To take all comes, be whatsoere it is.
As for example, when I let a lease,
And raise my rent unto the most increase;
When the utmost penny I have brought it to,
Before I seal the same, why thus I do,
I add a Capon, Turkey, Goose, or so,
At quarter day my Tenants love to show,
And no man is so simple and absurd,
That he will loose his bargain for a bird:
Thus do I fetch my subtle hob-nailes in,
More craftier grown by ods then they have bin;
But let them grow as cunning as they may,
There Is tricks to fetch them in and make them pay.
It Is not amiss to keep such fello was under,
That they and riches may be held asunder:
For if their wealth come to a little height,
They think the mselues their Landlords fellows straight;
This is a thing that ought not be allowed,
But I Will keep mine for being over proud,
They shall not boast of pen-worths at my hand,
In any thing they hold of house or land:
What charge have they but homely country fare,
Or what discredit if their clothes be bare,
When I must maintain show of gallant life;
Especially upon my Lady wife,
Who (I protest unto my very friends)
More in apparel then my rent is, spends:
My tent, poor rent, like to a garment rent,
As that's past wearing that is almost spent,
If one fat kinsman or another dye-not,
And that unlucky handed Death supply-not,
Ere long the wandering Knight I will go play,
And put out venters at return to pay:
As, who will undertake give three for one,
When I do that which has bin done by none,
Namely, return from Salsbury to London
And number just those stones (to this hour undone)
The Devils bastard Merlin placed there,
Which admirable do each other bear:
Or when I cross the Ocion into France,
And bring from thenceking Pippin's warlike lance,
Mounsieur Malignants armor of gold plate,
(Which would prove very wholesome to my state)
And hundred proiects which I keep obscure,
Until the practice I do put in ure.
Another help I have at a dead list,
As I could turn Ascumist for a shift,
Shift said I, that same word I will convert,
Least some conclude it for a shifting art:
Yet for the rhyme sake, (cause I am in haste)
I Will let it pass, how ever it distaste,
And such as make a question, let them trie-it,
For on my credit there is profit by it,
But how? note that, not out of brass and copper
To turn that gold in quality just propper,
But turning off again to the professor,
That of a wealthy Nouice is possessor,
It Is a deep Art to try conclusions by,
And may be called Craft, or Myst-er-y:
There is no Science that a man can name,
Makes all professors rich that use the same.
Some man has gotten much by Alcumie,
And many men have lost, I Will not deny:
And on my credit I dare boldly say,
I know the getting and the loosing way.
Why then may some object unto me sir:
What is the cause your self you not prefer?
I Will show them reason for it by and by,
And thus conceive it in a Simily.
An Angler goes to take himself some fish,
Having bait, line, and hook unto his wish,
He patient waits with a fixed sight;
Yet takes none because they will not bite:
Few words will serve to satisfy the wise,
Pick English out of this, let that suffice.
Tobacco boy, and a clean pipe withal,
Sir a candell, it is in haste I call,
I once kept men, (whose liueries being worn)
For saving charge, a boy now serves my turn:
Amongst the rest I had a beetle-head,
Of vulgar education Clownish bred,
Whom I called to me as alone I sat,
And took Tobacco, which he gazing at:
Sir (quoth I) unto the staring owl,
Give a clean pipe, and burn this same, it is foul,
So he supplied my use s^ill with a new,
And those which I returned away he threw,
When none was left, have burned those pipes I said?
(Quoth he) sir I as good a hand have made,
With them you bad me burn, our fire is small,
And so to make short work I broke them all:
The Clownish villain, thinking I did burn them,
As out of use, I did intend to turn them;
Quick, dry Tobacco, fill a pipe complete,
And then my pen goes forward in a heat,
There Is news rare news, new news come to my hand,
The like nere since the conquest in this land;
Called True and Wonderful the story says,
A Serpent newly whelped in our days:
Nay more, a Dragon is title fitter,
Because he is a very poison spitter:
Some he has killed, but eat them he refuses,
And near to Horsham, worse then horse play uses*
For he has slain (they say) I know not who,
Nay, is beside a Cony-catcher too,
Supposed to live by theeuing in the warren;
Which if he do it will make the burrowes barren:
But if according to the Books direction,
The Carrier tell us of his strange infection,
It shall be seen the Melancholy Knight
Like valiant George will with the dragon fight.
Let him wrap up his body in a bundle,
And with his poison up to London Trundell,
I Will arm my self directly at all points,
And on the Dragon venture limbs and joints,
He or she Serpent, I will set vpon-her,
To raise my worship to degrce of honor,
I hope it is note qually so fierce,
As that same Monster Chronicles rehearse,
Which came out of the Irish seas a shore,
The like whereof was never seen before,
With whom the king Meruidius would go fight,
Forbidding combat to each other Wight;
For which brave resolution which he held,
He was past hope and help most cruel killed;
If he be such I will vnsay't again,
I long not to be desperately slain,
And set upon a poyson-spitting thing:
Has teeth and claws, and venom, tail and sting,
That were foole-hardy to expose my life,
And make a mourner of my Lady wife:
And therefore for a time I will forbear,
Till of a second part in print I hear;
Which shall no sooner (I protest) come out,
But I Will take horse to Horsham for a bout,
And so I leave this filthy scuruie Dragon,
That never yet did soil a Knight to brag on.
I chaunc'd of late an ancient book to view,
As good as Beuis, and as strange and true,
Of Lions Leopards. Tigers, Bears and Bores,
And such ill faces as in Forests rores:
Amongst the rest was one that had a den,
Pil'd like a wood-wharfe with the bones of men,
He had a head most fearful to behold,
Wherein, two eyes like globes of fire rol'd,
Teeth terrible to bite through flesh and bone;
A forked tongue the like was never known,
Claws past compaire to scratch down trees withal
A sting in's tail would enter through a wall,
I do protest, I was almost afraid
To read the strange description that was made,
Of this den-diuell, (sure he was no less)
As by the story any man would guess:
Yet by a valiant Knight, this same hot shot
Was hewed as small as flesh unto the pot.
Then in that book a Dragon I do find
The like is not among the Dragons kind,
Th'inchaunted Dragon of the darkesome shade,
Of seven metals all composed and made:
And that the world shall witness I am red
(Against melancholy vexings in my head)
In ancient stories courage to provoke,
Not spending all my time in taking smoke,
Although my worship's scandal'd now and then
Amongst the ruder sort of vulgar men,
But that I turn and ouerturne again
Old books, wherein the worm-holes do remain,
Containing acts of ancient Knights and Squires,
That fought with Dragons, spitting forth wild fires
The history unto you shall appear,
Even by my self verbatim set down here:
As thus,
Sir Eglamour that worthy Knight
He took his sword and went to fight,
And as he rode both hill and dale
Armed upon his shirt of male.
A Dragon came out of his den
Had slain, (God knows how many men:)
When he espied sir Eglamore,
Oh if you had but heard him rore,
And seen how all the trees did shake,
The Knight did tremble, horse did quake;
The Birds betake them all to peeping,
It would have made you fall a weeping:
But now it is in vain to fear,
Being come unto, fight dog fight bear.
To it they go, and fiercely fight
A liue-long day from morn till night:
The Dragon had a plaguey hide,
And could the sharpest steel abide,
No sword will enter him with cuts
Which vexed the Knight unto the guts;
But as in choler he did burn
He watched the Dragon a good turn,
And as a yawningh did fall,
He thrust his sword in hilts and all.
Then like a Coward he to fly
Unto his den that was hard by,
And there he lay all night and roared;
The Knight was sorry for his sword:
But riding thence said, I forsake it,
He that will fetch it let him take it.
And so I hope to the Iuditious wise,
Thus much of this rare story shall suffice,
To prove how I in worthy works am read,
How ere illitterate censures are misled:
But as I will not vaunt of my deserts,
So will I not in toome mine own good parts,
I have a Muse has been at Helicon,
And brain some-time that versed do th flow upon
The world shall know though Melancholy bite.
The discontented Money-scorning Knight,
I have interior excellence that shines
Beyond your earthlings gold and silver mines:
Once more Tobbacco to perfume my brain,
I Will smoke amongst you in my Poets vain.
Melancholy Conceits.
RApier lie there, and there my hat and feather,
Draw my silk curtain to obscure the light,
Goose-quilland I must join a while together:
Lady forbear I pray, keep out of sight,
Call pearl away, let one remove him hence,
Your skreeking Parrot will distract my sense.
Would I were near the rogue that cries black,
Buy a new Almanacke, does vex me to:
Forbid the maid she wind not up the jack,
Take hence my watch it makes too much a do,
Let none come at me dearest friend or kin,
Who ere it be, I am not now within.
To Fortune.
THou pur-blinde puppet for a Trads-mans staule,
Thou limping Lady of the Hospital;
Empress of Epicures and belly-gods,
With whom I vow to live and die at ods;
Thou mole-ey'd, owle-ey'd, Countess for a spittle,
That gives to some too much, to me too little,
Thou whirly-gigge, and rats-bane of my life,
Which by thy wheel do seem some wheel-wrights wife
Thou makebate to a discontented mind,
Thou water-bubble, wastfull puff of wind,
Thou flying-feather of a wood-cocks wing,
Thou Heathenish and very Pagan thing,
Thou Misers friend, thou worthy Gallants foe,
Thou scuruie Ballat of* I wale in woe,
Thou that all coffeehouse do provoke,
Thou worse to me then this Tobacco smoke,
Thou that sage, Fury, Envy do importune,
I Will tickle thee, thou scuruy minded Fortune.
To Lady Pecunia.
A Pin for them that care apoint for me,
And that is the love between my self and thee,
Proud Lady of the gold and silver mine,
Thou scorn'st my company, I banish thine:
What stamp soever thou about do bear,
And causest many for to stamp and swear;
Or runnest current quoine, from man to man,
I am not current thou have made me wan.
And therefore since thou give me unrest,
In being stranger to my purse and chest,
Not looking on me with thy golden face,
Nor yielding me angelical embrace:
Expressing love by pounds most kind and willing,
But come to me by sixe-pence, and by shilling;
To be thy Treasurer I do abhor it,
I Will neither purse nor chest, nor bag thee for it,
But use thee even in all disgrace I may,
To eat and drink, and dice thee still away.
To Patience.
LOng have I waited at thy woeful gate,
With expectation to augment my state,
And sought for her which cannot yet be found,
The Lady that makes crazie credits sound;
She that I think will nere be friends with me,
Because a sunder we so often be:
But Patience I protest thou art to blame,
And I have cause upon thee to exclame,
Thou do neglect, defer, protract, delay,
And puts me empty off from day to day;
When I expect to have my wants supplied,
Says, helpelesse friends, Patience good sir provide:
Who can take up an hundred pound, I pray,
And pawn some patience till he come and pay:
Or trade with Tradesman be for what it will,
That will take Patience hand unto his bill.
No masters no, all gripe to get their own,
And I from Patience am impatient grown.
To Fame.
THou art the Lady that I seek to please,
Before Pecunia, Fortune, Patience; these
Are all inferior in renowned name,
To this eternal honour-giuer Fame;
Say I had Fortunes gifts in large degree,
Why fools have fortune we do daily see.
If moneys Lady would for me provide
More quoine and plate, then is in all Cheape-side:
Let Solons saying in this case suffice,
There are more wealthy fools then wealthy wise;
If I take Patience physic for my sore,
And wate with her at expectations door,
What Is the reward will follow? even this;
Patience and poverty in the end will kiss:
Therefore I Will set wit working like a watch,
Some rare unknown invention to dispatch
That all the world could not have brought about,
If I had not been borne to find it out:
And when I have it (being yet unbegotten,
I shall have Fame alive, and dead and rotten.
To Time.
THou Register of old Antiquities,
Obseruer of the worlds iniquities,
Suruaying life from birth till Death in toombe,
From Adam's making, to the day of doom:
That in thy restless cunning do admit
Of actions lawful, or of things unfit,
And have thy head behind of purpose ball'd,
Because thou never wilt be back recalled;
But wear'st a lock before I understand,
On which I never yet could lay my hand.
I have expected (thou grave ancient father)
Thy helping hand, and I protest the rather,
Because they say that Time by turns does go,
And hitherto I have not found it so:
Therefore for some good turn, one of these days
I challenge thee, or I Will disprooue thy praise,
And I write of thee according as I find,
That through age thou art both ball'd and blind;
Find out a time, good Time for to relieve me,
For at this time, Time very bad does grieve me.
To all miserable Misers.
YOu careless raking, greedy getting slaves,
That never have enough till in your graves,
Until Death have you prisners in his hold,
As you in chests lock up your bags of gold,
You that have that excessive wealth lies by,
Would furnish twenty such poor Knights as I,
I do detest you all as dunghill swains,
You dogged Nabals with your cursed gains,
That love base lucre so entirely well,
You'leventer souls, as Dives did to hell;
And here I vow, promise, and firm protest
I scorn this hoording money in a chest,
That golden sin on me shall never light,
As clear as is the child was borne last night;
From keeping money lying on my hand,
So much kind gentle Reader understand,
With Bias I do give the world this flout,
All that is mine I bear with me about.
The Conclusion.
THe Friar that his brains did break,
To make a brazen head to speak,
And spent his study seven year,
Ere that perfection would appear;
Then fell a sleep when he should watch,
Trusting his man a foolish patch,
That to it gave no heed at all,
But heard the voice and would not call:
What was the gain he got at last?
Three words, Time is, Time was, Times past,
And those for this time I have took
To end my melancholy book:
Especially, last of the three,
Which is Tim's past: farewell to thee:
FINIS.

