A SERMON PREACHED AT RICHMOND BEfore Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, upon
the 28. of March, 1596.

By the reverend father in God ANTHONY RVDD, Doctor in Divinity, and Lord
Bishop of S. David's.



Printed for Thomas Man. 1603.

To all that fear God.
THIS Sermon bred much speech long ago, and the sight of it was greatly desired
by many. But it has been concealed these seven years and more, by him that
had the copy thereof. Howbeit, now at the last it is published, upon hope that
it may with as good meaning be construed by the Reader, as it was formerly
uttered by the Author.

R. S.

PSALM. 90. 12. Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.
THIS Psalm was endited by Moses the man of Number. 13. and 14.
God: the occasion of the making of it grew thus. After that those which were
sent to search the land of Canaan, were returned from the viewing or surueying
of it: upon the report of some of them that the inhabitants were Giants in
respect of the Israelites, who in comparison of them seemed but grasshoppers,
and that their cities were walled up to heaven, and Deuteronomy. 9. 1.
so judged impregnable; the people murmured. Whereupon God sententiated, Number.
14. 29.
that their carcasses should fall in the wilderness, so many as were twenty
years old and upward. Then, Moses penned this Psalm, that it might be a
monument of their repentance, and a form of prayer for the obtaining of mercy.

This text, I say, is a prayer. And whereas there be four sorts of prayer 1 Timothy 2. 1.
mentioned by the Apostle: namely, first a petition for the obtaining of that
good which we want and desire. Secondly deprecation, whereby we request the
turning away of that evil from us, which we fear and have deserved. Thirdly
intercession, when we entreat for others. Fourthly, thanksgiving for benefits
received. Now this prayer is a petition: first for instruction, in these words,
Teach us: secondly in this particular, to number our days: thirdly to this
end, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

The request of teaching implies ignorance in the petitioner, and the
acknowledging thereof by consequence. For the sluggard which is Pro. 26. 16.
wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a reason; and al
they that be wise in their own Isa. 5. 21.
eyes and prudent in their own sight, contemn all doctrine and admonition,
hating to be taught and reformed. Therefore woe unto them, for there is more
hope of fools then of Pro. 26. 12.
them: for fools sin of ignorance, but these sin of malice.

I have learned of Zophar the Naamathite, that vain man would Job. 11. 12.
be counted wise, though (indeed) man newborn, is like a wild Assecolt; that
is, without understanding. So that whatsoever good gifts he has afterward,
they come of God, and not of nature. Verily ignorance is the mother not only
of admiration, while we wonder at those things whereof we know not the cause or
reason: but also of error. Mat. 22. 29.
For by it men speak good of evil, and evil of good; putting darkness Esai.
5. 20.
for light, and light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for sower:
being like the children of Nineueh, Jonas 4. 11.
who could not discern between their right hand and their left.

Seeing then the natural man understands not the things that are of 1. Cor.
2. 14.
the spirit of God (for they are foolishness unto him:) therefore Nicodemus
though a master in Israel, John. 3. 1. 2. and.
must be Catechized before he be regenerated, and see the kingdom of God. If
Saul hear not Ananias, the Act. 9. 17. 18. and.
scales will not fall from the eyes of his mind any more then from the eyes of
his body. Cornelius the Captain of the Italian band, must hear Peter Act. 10.
preach unto him, and his family, and his friends, before that he and they
receive the holy Ghost. And how should the Eunuch of Aethiopia understand what
he reads in Esai, except Act. 8. 26. vsque ad finem.
Philip the Evangelist be joined to his chariot, and coming up to sit with him
expound the Scriptures unto him? Assuredly the kingly Prophet himself, cannot
see how the Psalm. 73. 17.
prosperity of the wicked may stand with Gods providence, until he go into the
sanctuary of God, there to learn by his word and holy spirit, that he
orders all things most wisely and justly. And it is put down in the foot of
one of the Psalms, that Psalm. 49. 20.
if man be in honor, and understand not, he is like to beasts that perish.

Wherefore to prevent this danger, David had need to have Nathan 2. Sam. 12.
and 24.
and Gad to admonish and advise him. And if Ahab had not wanted grace, and
abandoned the fear of God from before his eyes; yea and 1. Reg. 21. 20.
sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord: he might have
received great benefit by the godly lessons of Elias and Micheas. 1. Reg. 18.
and 21 and 22. 2. Reg. 12. 2.
King Iehoash did that which was good in the sight of the Lord, all the time
that Iehoiada the Priest taught him. If the Nineuites had not heard Jonas 3.
and believed Jonas, they had undoubtedly been destroyed in their sins. And
to be short, where prophesying Pro. 29. 18.
fails, there both the Prince and the people must needs perish in the end.

Wherefore Almighty God for the singular love which he bears to mankind, has
furnished al ages with skillful and sound teachers. For example, before the
flood, after Adam the monarch of the whole earth (by Genesis 4. 3. 4.
whose instructions his sons sacrificed to the king of heaven) was Sheth:
Ibid. 26.
who taught the men of his time to call upon the name of God, restoring
religion (which by the wicked had a long time been suppressed.) Henoch Genesis 5.
22.
likewise, that walked with God. Noe also, whom the Apostle entituleth a 2.
Pet. 2. 5:
Preacher of righteousness. After the flood, till the giving of the law in
mount Sinai, for the space of 857 years, the Patriarks were the worlds
instructors: whom in their perambulations from nation to nation, Psalm. 105. 13.
14. 15.
from one kingdom to another people, God suffered not to be wronged, but even
reproved kings for their sakes, saying: Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm. At the giving of the law it was ordained, that the Priests
lips Mal. 2. 7.
should preserve knowledge, and that men should seek the law at their
mouths, because they are the messengers of the Lord of hosts. And when they
failed in their ordinary duty, then God stirred up extraordinary 1. Sam. 9. 8
9 10.
teachers called Seers, men of God, and Prophets. So that at sundry times and
in diverse manners God Heb. 1. 1. 2.
spoke in the old time to our fathers by the Prophets: but in these last days
he has spoken unto us by his son, whom he has made heir of all things. And
when he ascended up on high, leading captivity captive, Ephesians 4. 8. 11. 12. 13.
he gave gifts unto men; even some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some pastors and teachers: for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of faith, and the knowledge of
the son of God unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. And out of this number, are we to expect from time to time,
some to teach us rightly to number our days.

Eliphaz the Temanite by long experience Job. 4. 20. 21.
discreetly noted, that me^ are destroyed from the morning to the evening
without regard, and that men of dignity go to death without wisdom: meaning,
that we do not commonly mark our own frailty pictured in other men's
funerals, and that death seazeth upon many of us, before we do so much as
think of it. And therefore we have need of faithful instructors to teach us to
number our days.

The ever living God (the number Job. 36. 26.
of whose years cannot be sought out) who does great things and unsearchable
Job. 5. 9. and 9. 10.
: yea marvelous things without number: who counts the Psalm. 147. 4.
number of the stars, and calls them all by their names: neither is there any
Job. 25. 3.
number to be found in his armies: who likewise in his just judgment Esai. 65.
12
numbered idolaters to the sword in Esaies time: and numbered the kingdom of
Belshazzar, and finished it Dan. 5. 26.
in the days of Daniel: with whom Job. 14. 5.
the number of our months and days is determined, so that we cannot pass the
bounds which he has appointed: who also has the just number of all the hairs
of our head: and Mat. 10. 30.
does hide the number of years from Job. 15. 20.
tyrants: who (I say) seals in the forhead the full number of all that shall
Apoc. 7. 4. Wis. 11. 17
be saved: and has ordered all things in measure, number and weight: even he
it is, of whom we desire to be taught to number our days.

There is to be observed in reading of the Scriptures and ecclesiastical
Histories, a divine Arithmeticke, or arithmeticall Divinity: whereby we may be
the better armed in all encounters against the Romanist, the Jew, the Atheist,
and the tentations of the devil.

Against the Romanist: because the man of sin is manifestly discovered, by
the true understanding of the three numerall Characters mentioned in the book
of of the Revelation. Apoc. 13. 18
For the number of the beast is the number of a man, and his number is chx:
that is, 666. which number is contained in the six Hebrew Characters, whereby
the Latin word Romanus is expressed:

To 200 M 40 A 70 N 50 V 6 S 300
And thereby it is employed, that Romanus, or a man of Rome, should be the name
of Antichrist.

Against the Jew denying the Messiah to be come as yet, we may be fortified by
the right understanding of Daniels 70. weeks: that is, 490. years Dan. 9. 24.
25.
determined to seal up sins, to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
anoint the most holy; reckoning from the second year of Darius No-thus the
king of Persia, unto the destruction of Jerusalem, made by Titus in the second
year of his father Vespasian.

Against the Atheist we are the better prepared, if we have at our fingers end
an exact and perfect supputation of the number of the years of the world, from
the beginning thereof until this present time. Namely, from the Creation to
Noes flood, 1656. years: from the flood till Abraham's departure out of Haran a
city in Mesopotamia, 427. From thence to the giving of the Law in mount
Sinai, 430. From that time to the building of Salomons temple, 480. thenceforth
to the captivity of Babylon, 408. then to their return home again, 70. and
from their return to the birth of Christ, 457. From the Nativity of our
Savior Christ until this present day, 1595. complete and upward. But that
branch of Arithmeticke, whereby we should make supputation of the years to come
to the end of the world, is closed up in the breast or secret of the
all-sufficient, and al-knowing God. For, of that day and hour knows no man,
no not the Angels Mar. 13. 32.
which are in heaven, neither the Son of man himself, save the Father.

And we shall be the better able to stand upright against the tentations of the
devil, when we are painefully exercised in numbering of our days: I mean, not
the bare numbering of the years of our life after the account of the Church
book, be they 20, 40, 60, 70, more or less: but in deeply 1. Cor. 7. 29. 30.
31. 1. Pet. 2. 11. 1. Ioh. 2. 15. 16. 17. Ec. 7. 36.
considering the shortness, frailty and uncertainty of this life which is
lent unto us for the setting forth of Gods glory in it; and withal, in daily
meditating how and which way we may in every part of our life best profit the
Church and Commonwealth wherein we live, showing our selves throughout most
zealous for the advancing of Religion and Justice.

Assuredly when I look back to the seven liberal sciences, and consider in
them as in all other things else Eccl. 1. 14.
under the Sun, vanity and vexation of the Spirit: then I conclude in my
private meditation, that he is the best Grammarian, who commits no
incongruitie in his life, against faith, and good manners, but frames himself
to serve God without fear all Luc. 1. 74. 75.
the days of his life, in holiness and righteousness before him: imitating
the example of Zachary and Elizabet Ib. verse. 6.
who were just before God, and walked in all the commandments and ordinances
of the Lord without reproof.

I esteem him the best Logician, which bends the fist against impiety and
iniquity: making strong Syllogismes against all tentations or assaults of the
world with the pomp thereof, of the flesh with all her allurements, and of
Satan with all his sleights; being armed with the shield Ephesians. 6. 16. 17
of faith, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, whereby
Satan may be both repelled and wounded, as appears by the conflict between
him and our Savior Mat. 4. 1. to the 12.
Christ in the Gospel of Matthew.

He is in mine opinion, the best Rhetorician, who if he be eloquent, is
therewithal mighty in the Scriptures as Apollos was: spending his eloquence
Act. 18. 24.
in Sermons of repentance as did Isay, and in penning of heavenly ditties as
David did: employing all his elocution in uttering such words as be good to
the use of edifying, that Ephesians. 4. 29.
they may minister grace unto the hearers, because he desires to profit 1.
Cor. 2. 1. 4. 5.
them rather then to delight them.

Him do I judge the best Geometrician, who orders all his doings in measure,
number and weight, by Wis. 11. 17
the example of God above: who makes the word of God the rule Psalm. 119. 9 105.
and the squire, the line and the level of all his actions: who being rooted
and grounded in love, is able to comprehend with all Saints what is the Ephesians. 3.
18.
breadth and length, depth and height (that is, the excellency and perfection)
of the love of Christ, which passes knowledge: being fully persuaded, that
neither height nor Romans 8. 38. 39.
depth, nor far distance, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

I count him the best Astronomer, who by the view of the host of heaven, can
(Gods spirit directing him) Romans 1. 20.
pick out the eternal power and Godhead of the Creator, or his majesty and
glory, which resulteth of his power, wisdom and goodness; thereby taking
occasion to glorify him accordingly. Who when he looks up to the sky, not
only acknowledges Psalm. 19. 1.
that the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handiworke: but also concludes in a good conscience, that as high as the Psalm.
103. 11
heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.
And casting in his mind the sundry Clymates of the world, resolves by
assurance of faith, that as far as the East is from the West, so far has
God removed our sins Ib. verse. 12.
from us.

I reckon them the best Musicians, which speak to themselves in Psalms Ephesians.
5. 19.
and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making a melody to the Lord in
their hearts: whose thoughts words and deeds are in tune with Gods holy
Scriptures, making a consort or harmony among themselves without any jar or
discord, from Gammuth to Ela, that is, from the cradle to the grave.

And undoubtedly they are the best Arithmeticia^s, whom God has taught to
number their days in such sort, that they may apply their hearts unto wisdom.

The mind of man is the dwelling place of understanding: and the heart of man
is the seat of the affections. Now it suffices not that the knowledge of
goodness be swimming or floating in the brain, unless the affection of
godliness be settled in the heart. For of the abundance of the Mat. 12. 34.
heart the mouth speaks, either words of edification, whereby thou may be
justified: or evil words Ib. ver. 37. 1. Cor. 15. 33
corrupting good manners, whereby thou shall deserve to be condemned. Out of
the heart (I mean the corrupt Mat. 15. 19
affection of the heart) proceed those things which defile the man; as evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies,
slanders: and therefore no marvel if the flood drowned them of Genesis 6. 5.
the old world, because all the imaginations of their hearts were only evil
continually. Yea let Simon Magus Act. 8. 20. 21.
with his money perish, having neither part nor fellowship in the Apostolical
business, because his heart was not right in the sight of God.

But on the other side, the end of the commandment is love out of 1. Tim. 1.
5.
a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. Therefore
blessed are the pure in heart, for they Mat. 5. 8.
shall see God. The seed which fell in good ground, are they which with Luke
8. 15. Act. 15. 9.
an honest and good heart, purifyed by faith, hear the word and keep it, and
bring forth fruit with patience. Be glad then ye righteous, and rejoice Psalm.
32. 11
in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are upright in heart, applying it
wholly unto wisdom.

Now if it be demanded what true wisdom is, it may out of Moses be briefly
defined, The understanding and observing of Gods commandments. For these be
the words of Moses in his exhortation Deu. 4. 5. 6.
to the people: Behold I have taught you ordinances and laws, as the Lord my
God commanded me. Keep them therefore and do them: for that is your wisdom,
and your understanding in the sight of the people, which shall hear all these
ordinances, and shall say: Only this people is wise, and of understanding: yea
God himself utters in Job, words of the same meaning, saying unto man:
Behold, the fear of the Job. 28. 28.
Lord is wisdom; and to depart from evil, is understanding.

Wherefore, though a man were as well experienced and worldly politic as
Achitophel, whose advice 2. Sam. 16. 23.
was like as one had asked counsel at the oracle of God; in civil policy
matchable with the children of the East, the Priests of Egypt, the Philosophers
of Greece; wiser then Ethan, 1. Reg. 4. 30. 31.
Heman, Chalcol and Darda, the sons of Mahol; excelling also in wisdom them of
Tyrus, which deemed them Ezck. 28 3.
selves wiser then Daniel: briefly, though a man were as wise as Salomo, to
whom God gave prudence and knowledge exceeding much, and a large heart, even
as the sand that is on the sea shore; so that he could speak of beasts,
fowls, creeping things, fishes, 1. Reg. 4. 29. etc.
and of trees, from the Cedar in Lebanon, even unto the hyssope that springs
out of the wall, with the admiration of all that heard him, or heard of him
uttering his Proverbs and Songs by thousands: Yet shall he be counted but
unwise in the sight of God, if against the rule of piety he admit in his heart
a plurality of gods: Exodus 20. 1. to the 18.
or bow down his body to the worship of Imagerie: or take the name of the
lord his God in vain: or profane the Lords day: or if contrary to the rule of
charity contained in the second Table of the Decalogue, he dishonor the
parents of his life by procreation, or the parents of his country by office,
against the first Commandment: or if he do wrong to his neighbor in his own
person, breaking the sixth Commandment; Thou shall not kill: or in the persons
of those of his family, transgressing the seventh Commandment; Thou shall not
commit adultery: or in his goods, violating the eighth Commandment; Thou
shall not steal: or in his good name, preiudicing the ninth Commandment; Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor: or if he have in his mind
any lewd cogitation or wandering conceit, offending against the tenth
Commandment; Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou
covet thy neighbors wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

Saul may think himself politic and wise in making supplication to the
Lord, by offering a burnt offering in Gilgal, when he sees the people
scattered from him before the battle against the Philistims: but the^ he must
hear Samuel to take him up 1. Sam. 13. 13.
roundly, saying: Thou have done foolishly, thou have not kept the
commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee. And although the
Galathians ween well of their own wisdom, yet Saint Paul tells them
flatly, that they Gal. 3. 1. 3.
are foolish, for that after they had begun in the Spirit (or the doctrine
of the Gospel) they would now be made perfect in the flesh (or the ceremonies
of the Law.)

But David being a man after Gods 1. Sa. 13. 14.
own heart, was heavenly wise, who could truly make this protestation by an
Apostrophe to God, saying: Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage Psalm.
119. 111. 112.
for ever: for they are the very joy of mine heart. I have applied my heart to
fulfill thy statutes always even unto the end. The law of thy Ib. verse. 72.
mouth is better unto me, then thousands of gold and silver. Thy statutes Ib.
verse. 54.
have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. I have seen an end Ib. ver.
96. to the 107.
of all perfection, but thy commandment is exceeding large: oh, how love I
thy law? it is my meditation continually. By thy commandments thou have made
me wiser then mine enemies: for they are ever with me. I have had more
understanding then all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. I
understood more then the ancient, because I kept thy precepts. I have
refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word. I have
not declined from thy judgments: for thou did teach me. How sweet are thy
promises unto my mouth? yea more then honey unto my mouth. By thy precepts I
have gotten understanding, therefore I hate all the ways of falsehood. Thy word
is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path. I have sworn and will
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. Thus we ought by
David's example to apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Howbeit harkening what is done abroad in the world, I hear of many which
badly number their years that they may apply their hearts unto folly, as they
did in Esaies time. For when the Prophets put men in mind of their mortality,
threatening them with hasty destruction, except they would bring forth speedy
repentance, then the sensual and licentious Esa. 22. 13. and 1. Cor. 15. 32.
persons of that age encouraged one another in wickedness, saying: Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Tell me ye whose eyes be open to see and
mark, how many men do fashion themselves and walk Ephesians. 2. 2.
according to the course of this world, and after the Prince that rules in the
air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience;
whether there be any difference at all between the manner of this age, and his
time who penned the book of Wisdom, wherein the ungodly reason thus: Our
life is Wis. 2.
short and tedious, the breath is a smoke in our nosthrils: our time is as the
trace of a cloud driven away with the whirling wind, as a mist dried up with
the heat of the day, and as a vanishing shadow; neither is there in death any
recovery, nor does any return from the grave. Come therefore and let us enjoy
the pleasures that are present: let not the flower of our youth pass by us;
let us crown our selves with Rose-buds before they be withered: let us leave
some toke^ of our pleasure in every place, for that is our portion, and this
is our lot: Let us oppress the poor which is just, especially if he check us
for transgressing the law of God: let us examine him with rebukes and
torments, that we may know his meekness and prove his patience: In a word, let
our strength be the law of unrighteousness. Such things do the ungodly
imagine, and go astray: for their own wickedness has blinded them, and they
do not understand the mysteries of God, neither hope for the reward of
righteousness, nor can discern the honor of the souls that are faultlesse. Of
the crew of such ill numberers of their years was the rich Glutton, who
applied Luke 16. 19.
his heart wholly to intemperancy, laboring all for the back and the belly:
and Potiphars wife, who applied Genesis 39. 7.
her heart only to incontinency, for the satisfying of her lusts: and churlish
Nabal, who applied his heart 1. Sam. 25. 3. 10. 11.
to naught saving avarice, for the filling of his coffers: and vainglorious
Absalom, who applied his heart continually to ambition by seeking honor 2.
Sam. 15. 1. to the 13.
through unlawful means; so that though Absaloms body stand at the lower end
of the presence, yet his heart sits just under the cloth of estate. And
likewise malicious Haman, who applied his heart day and Esther 3. 6.
night to be cruelly revenged of the whole nation of the Jews, for the hatred
which he bare to one only good man, namely Mordecai. Yea, even Job, though
otherwise an upright Job. 1. 1.
and just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil, in his imperfection
numbered his years naughtily, while in regard of the shortness, infirmities,
uncertainty, Job. 7. and 10. and 14.
and miseries of his life he proved impatient, expostulating with God, and
grudging at the greatness of the afflictions which were laid upon him. And I
observe that David also upon the like accident, was overtaken with Psalm. 39. 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
the same infirmity, in the 39 Psalm. For perceiving the wicked advanced, and
himself with other godly persons suppressed (happily during the conspiracy of
Absalom and his adherents) he grudged against God, considering the greatness
of his sorrows, and the shortness of his life, rashly reasoning with God as
though he were too severe toward his weak creature. And somewhat the like
observation Psalm. 119. 84.
may be drawn out of the 119 Psalm, the 84 verse.

But the same Princely Prophet upon sounder advise, at another time played the
part of a better Arithmetitian in this point of numbering his days. For
considering that he and 1. Chro. 29. 12. 14. 15.
his Princes were strangers before God, and soiourners like their fathers, and
that their days were like the shadow upon the earth, where there is no long
abiding: hereupon he concludes in his confession before the people, that
whatsoever he and his Princes had offered toward the future building of the
temple, it was but a portion restored to God of that which was his own: and
that whatsoever riches or honor they enjoyed, they had but the use and
occupation thereof for a time as tenants at will; for the which they ought to
be thankful during life, and should be answerable for the present stewardship
or disposing thereof, after their death.

Jacob also rightly numbered the Genesis 47. 9. 4. 6.
days of his pilgrimage to be few and evil, while he sequestered himself and
his offspring in the land of Goshen from the company and customs of the
superstitious Egyptians.

Samuel likewise cast a right account 1. Sam. 8. 1.
of his years, who when he was become old, made his sons Judges of Israel,
because he was not able to bear the charge. Semblably, Eleazarus one of the
principal 2. Match. 6. 23. 24. 25.
Scribes in Jury, would not under the persecution of Antiochus for the safety
of his life, dissemble in a point of Religion, to the hazard of others by his
bad example, because it became not his age, and the excellency of his ancient
years, and the honor of his gray hairs being ninety years old.

Moreover Polycarpus the Bishop Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15.
of Smirna, being persecuted under the Emperor Verus about the year of our
Lord 170, made a good audite of his years to move himself to constancy. For
when the Proconsull of Asia said unto him, Spare thine age, I will let thee go
if thou will swear by the fortune of Caesar, and rail upon Christ: he made
answer thus, These 86 years have I served him, and he never did me any hurt at
all; how then can I revile, or speak ill of my Savior? And the golden mouthed
Doctor advised the flock committed to his charge, to Chrysostom. tom. 3. in
sermon. de Euchar.
reckon how many hours they found in a week, namely 168, that they might out
of that number take some few at the least to be employed in public prayer, and
hearing the word preached.

Beside this, in civil policy the Lacedaemonians Plut. in Lacon. institut.
renowned for martial me^, were accustomed to decline themselves through three
tenses of the Indicative mood. For in their solemn assemblies, the first
Chorus was of old men, saying: We were once (...).
renowned in the wars. In the second rank marched their lusty gallants,
brauing it, and saying: We are such men, make trial if you dare. And in the
third Pageant came the boys with great sign of military towardnes, saying:
We shall be one day far more strong and valiant. And surely considering the
terms wherein we stand at this time, it is meet for every man to fall a
numbering his years, that he may exactly know what place of service is assigned
unto him for the defense of the Realm, according to the Greek verse:

(...). Aristoph. Gram.


Which by some has been Latined backward thus: Vota senum, consulta virorum,
and facta iuuentae. As if I should say in plain English, Let young men be
valiant in action, let men of middle age be wise in consultation, and let old
men be devout in prayer, for the good success of the wars either defensive
or offensive against the common enemies of this Church, and common wealth.

But commending the war-causes to Gods providence, the wisdom of the Council
board, and the valor of them that profess Arms, and to speak of manners
meet to be exercised in the times both of war and peace; regarding as well
the number of our years past, as also the brevity, frailty, and uncertainty
of the years to come: let us consider one Heb. 10. 24.
another to provoke unto love, and to good works. We must do the works of God,
while it is day (that is, while Ioh. 9. 4.
opportunity and the season serves:) the night comes when no man can work.
And till the long night of sleep do come, from the which there shall be no
awaking of the body before the trumpet shall sound at the day of judgment; in
the mean while (dearly beloved) I beseech you 1. Pet. 2. 11.
as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against
the soul. Yea whiles we have time, let us do good to all men, but especially
Gal. 6. 10.
unto them which are of the household of faith. And this I say (brethren)
because the time is short hereafter, that both they which have wives, be as
though they had none: 1. Cor 7. 29. 30. 31.
and they that weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not: and they
that use this world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of this world
goes away. Wherefore love not the world, neither 1. Ioh. 2. 15. 16. 17.
the things that are in the world: as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, which are not of the father, but of the world. And
surely the world passes away together with the lusts thereof. Also considering
the season, it is now time that we should arise from sleep: for Romans 13. 11.
12.
now is our salvation nearer, then when we first began to believe. The night
(of ignorance) is past, and the day (of the knowledge of God) is come: let us
therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of
light (that is, godly and honest manners.) God hears men in a 2. Cor. 6. 2.
time accepted, in the day of salvation does he succor them: behold now the
accepted time, behold now the day of salvation. The holy Ghost says: To day if
you will hear his Heb. 3. 7. 8.
voice harden not your hearts as in the provocation, according to the day of
tentation in the wilderness. Exhort one another while it is called Ib. verse.
13.
to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceiptfulnesse of sin.
Boast not thy self of to morrow: for Pro. 27. 1.
thou know not what a day may bring forth. Remember that the rich Luke 16.
Glutton once might and would not hear Moses and the Prophets: afterward he
would and could not. The foolish virgins which wanted oil in Mat. 25. 1: to
the 14.
their lamps at the entrance of the bridegroom into the wedding room, could
never after that obtain favor to have the doors opened unto them. And when
as Esau Genesis 25. 29. to the end.
had once sold his birthright for a mess of red pottage, and a morsel of
bread; ye know how that afterward also when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected: For he found no place to repentance, though Heb. 12.
16. 17.
he sought the blessing with tears. Wherefore o Lord, who art the ordainer and
governor of all times and seasons, vouchsafe to teach us in fit and due time to
number our days, so that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

Children upon this point of numbering their years, may enter into meditation
thus: This age of ours is meetest to be Catechized: that which is now taught,
is soonest received and longest kept. We know what we are to learn by that
which is enjoined others to teach us: for Moses requires the Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
Israelites, to whet the commandments of the Lord upon their children (that
they might imprint the^ more deeply in memory.) And Saint Paul commands
parents to bring Ephesians. 6. 4.
up their children in the instruction and information of the Lord. Daniel made
show in his childhood what Dan. 1.
he was like to prove in his age, for zeal in religion, honesty of life, and
wisdom in government. As John the Baptist being a child, grew Luke 1. 80.
in body, so he waxed strong in spirit. Timothy knew the holy Scriptures of 2.
Tim. 3. 15.
a child, and was thereby made wise unto salvation. We must be dedicated to the
Lord from our tender age, 1. Sam. 1. 28.
as Samuel was. If our sanctification went before our birth, as in Jeremy: Ier.
1. 5.
our duty is to serve God, from the first breath to the last gasp. Yea we are
the Seminary and nurserie of the Church and common wealth, even the hope of
the future stay of them both in time to come. Wherefore (good Lord) teach us so
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

The young man which is in the prime of his age, and the vigor of his
strength, may (in the numbering of his days) discourse thus with himself:
Though I be now young and lively, fresh and gallant; yet I have often heard it
uttered out of the pulpit, and I believe it to be true, That al Isa. 40. 6. 7.
flesh is grass which withers, and all the grace thereof is as the flower of
the field which fades. This life of mine what is it but an hand breadth, Psalm.
39. 5. Job. 7. 7. 9. 6.
or a spanne long? or like the puffed of a wind, that passes and comes not
again? or as a cloud that vanishes and goes away? My days are swifter
Psalm. 73. 20.
then a weauers shittle: they are as a tale that is told: as a dream when one
awaketh. We are but of yesterday, Job 8. 9.
and therefore ignorant in many things: howbeit, for certainty knowing this,
that our days upon earth are but a shadow, or rather as the dream of a
shadow. Though looking in the glass, I see much that delights (...). Pind.
Pyt. Od. 8.
me, yet I consider that favor is deceiptfull, and beauty is vanity. I think
my self now quick witted: but I may live till the years of dotage, Pro 31.
30. 2. Sam. 19. 35.
wherein I shall not be able to discern between good and evil. Though I were
deemed now as valorous as any of David's Worthies, yet 2. Sam. 23.
the time will come (if I live to it) that fear shall be in the way. Be it I
were Eccl. 12. 5. Iud. 15. 15.
as strong as Sampson, who slew a thousand men with the iaw bone of an ass;
and carried away the gates of Azzah upon his shoulders, with the Iud. 16. 3.
posts and bars thereof; and by main strength pulled down a great and
strongly built house standing upon Ib. verse. 29. 30.
pillars, in the overthrow whereof there perished the Princes of the
Philistims, and others of that uncircumcised race to the number of three
thousand: yet the brawne of these my puissant arms will one day fall away, and
the keepers of the house Eccl. 12. 3.
(that is, the hands which keep the body) shall tremble: and more then that,
it must cost me my life; or else, at length (ere I die) the grassehopper Ib.
verse. ^.
shall be a burden. What if I be now sharp sighted as an eagle? certainly
hereafter they that look out by the windows (that is, the eyes) will wax
dark, and call for help of the spectacles. And if I were as speedy on foot as
Asahel, who was as swift as 2. Sa. 2. 18.
a wild Roe, yet in the end the strong Eccl. 12. 3.
men (that is, the legs) will bow, and either leave to execute their function
at all, or else be able to perform but a snailes pace. Though I now eat and
drink with delight, yet in time to come, the grinders (that is, the teeth)
shall cease: and the door (that is, the Ib. verse. 4.
lips or mouth) shall be shut without by the base sound of the grinding, when
the jaws shall scarce open, and not be able to chew any more. The use of
music seems now very pleasant, but one day shall all the daughters of
singing be abased: that is, the wind-pipes shall not be able to do their
office, nor the ears be apt to hear the sound either of voice or of
instrument: witness the example of Barzillai the Gileadite, who 2. Sam. 19.
32. 33. 34. 35.
being very aged, did for these defects refuse to feed with king David at the
Court in Jerusalem. Be it far from me to let mine heart cheer me in Eccl.
11. 9. 10.
the days of my youth, and to walk in the ways of mine heart, and in the
sight of mine eyes, seeing that childhood and youth are vanity: neither ought I
to be ignorant, that for all these things God will bring me to judgment.
Suppose I do now excel in the well proportioned lineaments of the body, and
rare qualities of the mind: even therefore I must bestow these excellencies on
him who gave them, glorifying God in my body and my spirit, because they 1.
Cor. 6. 20.
are Gods by a triple right, of Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification.
Assuredly, if I know not God in my youth, he will not acknowledge me in mine
age. If I do not consecrate to God the flower of my young years, he will
scorn the dregs of mine elder years. How should I think to bestow upon
Satan the beauty, strength and nimblenesse of my youth, in hope that God will
be pleased with the wrinkles, infirmities and feebleness of my latter age?
Wherefore I will now remember my Creator in the days of my youth, Eccl. 12. 1.
while the evil days come not, nor the years approach wherein I shall say: I
have no pleasure in them.

And I am not the first that shall begin this course: for many have trodden the
same path before me: namely, Moses, who from his youth (after Heb. 11. 25. 26.
that he came to the years of discretion) abandoned the moment any pleasures
of sin, because he had respect to the recompense of an eternal reward.
Joseph also was in his flourishing Genesis 39. 12.
years when he left his upper garment in the hands of his masters wife, who
labored to allure him unto lewdness. Likewise Josiah entering into the
kingdom in the eighth 2. Chr. 34. 1. 3. 8. 14. 31. 33.
year of his reign, began at 16. years old to seek after the God of his
fathers, and in the twentieh year of his age he reformed Religion, and in the
26. thereof he repaired the temple: by which occasion, the book of the law,
even the copy that Moses left, was found in the ruins of it. Whereupon
followed a general repentance, and a covenant with the Lord of all hands, and
the celebrating of a Passover with such solemnity, as the like had not been
kept in Israel from the 2. Chr. 35. 18
days of Samuel the Prophet. Moreover, Daniel and his companions Dan. 1. 4. 5.
8.
were both young and passing wel-fauoured without all blemish, when they would
not defile themselves with the diet which the Babylonian Emperor had assigned
unto them; fearing lest by that large and dainty fare (as by a sweet poison)
they might have been drawn to forget their religion, the misery of their
native country, and their accustomed temperance. In like sort Timothy kept 1.
Tim. 6. 20
that which was committed unto him, and stirred up the gift of God that 2. Tim.
1. 6.
was in him, in such sort, that no man could despise his youth, because he 1.
Tim. 4. 12
was unto them that believed, an ensample in word, in conversation, in love, in
spirit, in faith, in pureness. Now if I get nothing in my youth Eccl. 25. 3.
(be it in matters spiritual or temporal) what shall I find in mine age? Some
tell me I am termed Iuuenis a iuuando, because I should help the Church and
weale-publike to the uttermost of my power: therefore good Lord, to enable me
hereunto, teach me to number my days, so that I may apply my heart unto
wisdom.

They that are past their full growth and are come to the standing state of
their age, may in numbering their years which be spent, and considering their
condition present, reason thus if it please them: Howsoever we forgot our
selves in the ignorance of our childhood, and the vanity of our youth; yet
this age of ours requires other manners. It is sufficient that we have
bestowed the time passed of the 1. Pet 4. 3.
life, after the fashion of this world: now it is high time for us to be
changed by the renewing of our minds, Romans 12. 2.
that we may prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable and perfect. It
was a shame for the Corinthians, that Paul could not speak 1. Cor. 3. 1.
unto them as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in
Christ. It was in like manner, a great reproach unto the Hebrews, for that when
as concerning the time they ought to have been teachers, yet had they need
again that the author of that Epistle should teach them the Heb. 5. 1^. 13. 14.
first principles of the word of God: and were become such, as had need of
milk, and not of strong meat belonging to the^ that are of age, which through
long custom have their wits exercised to discern both good and evil. When
Paul was a child, 1. Cor. 13. 11.
he spoke as a child, he understood as a child, he thought as a child: but when
he became a man, he put away childish things. Of us chiefly it is expected,
that we be already grown up into him which is the head (that Ephesians. 4. 15. 13
is, Christ) unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. Of us I say it is required, that aiming at perfection, we
should forget that which is behind, Phil. 3. 13. 14.
and endeavor our selves unto that which is before, following hard toward the
mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. It is looked
for at our hands, that we be deservedly termed Viri a virtute. So that we
should be manfull (when need is) for the defense of our country, wise in
consulting, virtuous in example of life, and every way the men of God, being
absolute and 2. Tim. 3. 17.
made perfect unto all good works which God has ordained, that we Ephesians. 2. 10.
should walk in them: not only denying ungodliness and worldly lusts; but also
living soberly and righteously, Tit. 2. 12. 13
and godly in this present world; looking for the blessed hope and appearing of
the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. And in the
mean time it appertains unto us, as well as unto others, or rather above
others, to watch, to 1. Cor. 16. 13.
stand fast in the faith, to quite us like men, and to be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might: having long since put on the whole armor Ephesians. 6
10. 11. etc.
of God, that we may be able to stand fast against all the assaults of the
devil; having our loins girded about with verity, and having on the
breast plate of righteousness; and our feet being shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace, etc. praying unto God for grace, that we may always put
our trust in him, being strong and constant in our vocation; and that he will
vouchsafe to stablish Psalm. 31. 24
our hearts, and confirm us with heavenly strength unto the end. Thus good
Lord, teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Let me now come to the most reverend age of my most dear and dread Soueraign,
who has (I doubt not) learned to number her years, that she may apply her
heart unto wisdom. And therefore I conceive in mind, that in her soliloquia or
private meditations, she frames her speech in this wise:

Remember not the sins of my Psalm. 25. 7.
youth, nor my transgressions: but according to thy kindness remember me, even
for thy goodness sake, o Lord. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, Psalm. 51. 5.
and in sin has my mother conceived me. I know mine iniquity, and my sins
are ever before me. Ib. ver. 3.
Wherefore lest the Zion and Jerusalem, 18.
that is, the Church and Commonwealth of England, should be in danger of thy
wrath, through my former sins: Wash me thoroughly 2.
from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin: purge me, and I shall be
clean: wash me, and I shall be 7.
whiter then snow.

Lord I know and confess, that in my predecessors days, and in the 37 years
past of my reign, thou have delivered me as wonderfully from all my malicious
and dangerous enemies, as thou did deliver thy servant David from the
tyranny of Saul 1. Sam. 18. etc.
and his adherents: from the invasion of foreign adversaries, as the
Philistims, 2. Sam. 8. and 10. and 11.
Ammonites, Moabites, Idumaeans, Syrians, etc. and from the inward
insurrections, first of Absalom, Ib. 15. etc.
and then of Sheba the son of Bichri; Ib. 20.
besides many other traiterours complots and treacherous conspiracies. Therefore
I will always give Psalm. 34. 1.
thanks unto thee o Lord; thy praise shall be in my mouth continually. My Psalm.
103. 1. 2.
soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name: my
soul praise thou the Lord and forget not all his benefits.

O Lord, I am now entered a good way into the Climactericall year of mine age,
which mine enemies wish and hope to be fatal unto me. But thou Lord, which by
thy Prophet Jeremy Ier. 10. 2.
commandedst the house of Israel not to learn the way of the heathen, nor to
be afraid of the signs of heaven; and who by thy mighty hand and outstretched
arm made the year of the greatest expectation, even 88. marvelous by the
overthrow of thine and mine enemies: Now for thy Gospels sake, which has long
had a sanctuary in this Island, make likewise 96. as prosperous unto me and my
loyal subjects: that by the happy bringing about of this year, I may still
set up the banner in thy Psalm. 20. 5.
name, which art my strength, my Psalm. 18. 1. 2
rock, my fortress, my deliverer, the lifter up of mine head, my shield, the
horn also of my salvation, and my refuge. Thou art my hope, o Lord God, Psalm.
71. 5. 6.
even my trust from my youth: upon thee have I been stayed from the womb: thou
art he that took me Ib. 9.
out of my mothers bowels: cast me not off in the time of age, forsake me not
when my strength fails. O forsake Psalm. 138. 8.
not me the work of thine hands, until I have declared thine arm to Psalm.
71. 18.
this generation, and thy power to all them that shall come.

Lord, I have now put foot within the doors of that age, in the which the
Almond tree flourishes: wherein Eccles. 12. 1
men begin to carry a Calender in their bones, the senses begin to fail, the
strength to diminish, yea all the powers of the body daily to decay: Now
therefore grant grace, that though mine outward man thus perish: 2. Cor. 4. 16.
yet mine inward man may be renewed daily. So direct me with thine holy
spirit, that I may daily wax elder in godliness; wisdom Wis. 4. 9.
being my gray hairs, and an undefiled life mine old age. Let thy statutes
Psalm. 119. 54.
be my songs in the house of my pilgrimage: Sweeter unto me the^ honey Psalm. 19.
10.
and the hony-combe unto my mouth; and more desired by me then thousands Psalm.
1 19. 22.
of silver, or the gold of Ophir, yea the^ the pearl or precious stones. Pro.
8. 11. 19.
For though I have out-liued almost all the Nobles of this Realm whom I found
possessed of Dukedom, Marquisats, Earledoms and Barronries at mine entering
into the Kingdom: and likewise all the Judges of the land, and all the Bishops
set up by me after my coming to the Crown: And although I have seen an end
of sundry of these once or twice over: yet what avails this my long temporal
life in suruiuing others, unless I my self lead always a spiritual life
while I continue upon earth, in hope to enjoy an eternal life when I am dead?

And though (Lord) I have lived in respect of my self long enough in this
valley of misery; so that in regard of troubles past, and dangers future, I
see some reason to say with Elias: It is 1. Reg. 19. 4
enough, o Lord, take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers; and with
Paul: I desire to be loosed, and Phil. 1. 23.
to be with Christ: yet because this people reckon of me, as David's subjects
did of him, whom they termed 2. Sam. 21. 17.
the light of Israel; and for that they esteem of me, as the Jews did of
Josias, whom they called the breath of Lam. 4. 20.
their nosthrils: Therefore for their sakes (if it be thy pleasure in thine
heavenly providence) let me their candle burn yet a while longer; and let me
breathe still among them, until I have met with dangers present, or immine^t,
and established the state for the time to come: so that not only peace and 2.
Reg. 20. 19.
truth may be in my days; but also that after my departure out of this life,
they may in the future age, live in peace and plenty in every quarter and
corner of the Realm, from Barwicke to Porchmouth, and from the Margets to the
Mount; like as Israel and Judah dwelt without fear, every 1. Reg. 4. 25.
man under his vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan to Beer-sheba, all the
days of Solomon.

And if Lord, for the effecting thereof thou meanest to deal with me as with
Hezekiah, by adding to the former 2. Reg. 20. 6
part of my life the term of 15. years more (or rather two fifteenes if it be
thy will:) then assist me ever with thy grace, that during all that time I may
know how to go out and 1. Reg. 3. 7.
in: feeding this people according to the simplicity of mine heart, and guiding
Psalm. 78. 72.
them by the discretion of my hands: That so at length I may go to the
sepulchers of my fathers in a good time, as a ricke of corn that is ripe Job.
5. 26.
carried into the barn; yielding the spirit like David in a good age full of
1. Chro. 29. 28.
days, riches and honor. And so the dust of this body returning to the
Eccles. 12. 7.
earth as it was, my spirit may return to thee that gave it: to enjoy always
Psalm. 16. 11.
thy presence, in the which there is fullness of joy, and to be always at thy
right hand, where be pleasures for ever more; purchased and prepared for all
them that fear thee, by the mediation of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. To
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, both now and for
ever.

FINIS.
Erratum.
Page 21. lin. 23. for first read fifth.


