A NEW WONDER, A WOMAN NEVER VEXED.

A PLEASANT CONCEITED Comedy: sundry times Acted: never before printed.

Written by WILLIAM ROWLEY, one of his Majesty's Servants.

LONDON, Imprinted by G. P. for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Crane in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1632.

A NEW VVONDER, A WOMAN NEVER VEXED.
Actus Primus.
Enter Old Foster, Alderman Bruy^e and two Fact^^ (...) chard, and (...) Old
Foster. THis air has a sweet a breath Master Bruy^

Br. Your partner Sir.

O. Fost. (...), and in good I hope, this hal^
Plays the lewd wanton with our (...) sails,

And makes 'm big with vaporous envy.

Br. It Is no more yet, but then our fraught is full
When she returns laden with merchandise
And safe delivered with our customage.

O. Fost. Such a delivery heaven send us,
But time must ripen it? are our accounts made even?

Geor. To the quantity of a penny, if his agree with mines
What Is yours Richard?

Ric. Five hundred sixty pounds;
Read the gross sum of your broad clothes.

Geor. 68. pieces at B, ss, and l; 57. at l, ss, and o.

Ric. Just; lead, xix tun.

O. Fost. As evenly we will lay our bosoms as our bottome^
With love as merchandise, and may they both increase
^o Infinites.

Br. Especially at home; that golden traffic love
Is scantier far than gold; and one mine of that
More worth than twenty Argoseyes
Of the worlds richest treasure.

O. Fost. Here you shall dig, and find your lading.

Br. Here^s your exchange; and as in love
So we will participate in merchandise.

O. Fost. The merchants casualty:
We always venture on uncertain ods,
Although we bear hopes Emblem the anchor with us.
The wind brought it, let the wind blow't away again;
Should not the Sea sometimes be partner with us
Our wealth would swallow us.

^r. A good resolve: but now I must be bold
To touch you with somewhat that concerns you.

O. Fost. I could prevent you; is it not my unthrifty brother?

(...). Nay, leave out the adjective (unthrifty,)
(...) brother Sir, it is he that I would speak of.

(...). He cannot be named without unthrifty S^^,
(...) his p^oper Epithet, would you conceit
^ut what my love has done for him
(...), so chargeable, and so expensive,
(...) would not urge another addition.

(...). Nay Sir, you must not stay acquantity
(...) the name of brother
Which is inseparable, he is now in Ludgate Sir,
And part of your treasure lies buried with him.

O. ^^st. I, by vulgar blemish; but not by any good account;
There let him howl, ^s the best stay he has;
For nothing but a prison can contain him
So boundless is his riot; twice have I raysde
His decayed fortunes to a fair estate
But with as fruitless charity, as if I had thrown
My safe landed substance back into the Sea,
Or dress in pity some corrupted Jade,
And he should kick me for my courtesy.
I am sure you cannot but hear, what quick.
Sands he finds out, as Dice, Cards, Pigeon-holes,
And which is more, should I not restrain it,
He Would make my state his prodigality.

Br. All this may be Sir, yet examples daily show
To our eyes, that Prodigalls return at last
And the lowdest roarer, (as our City phrase is)
Will speak calm and smooth; you must help with hope Sir,
Had I such a brother, I should think that heaven had
Made him as an instrument for my best charity
To work upon; This is a Maxim sure, Some
Are made poor, that rich men by giving may
Increase their store. Nor think Sir, that I do
Tax your labors and mean my self for to (...)
Idly by, for I have vowed if heaven bu^ bless
This voyage now abroad, to leave some
Memorable relic after me, that shall
Preserve my name alive till Doomesday.

O. Fost. I Sir, that work is good, and therein could I
Join with your good intents, but to releeve
A wast-good, a spendthrift. --

Br. O no more, no more good Sir.

O. Fost. Sir, when saw you my son Robert*

Ric. This morning Sir, he said he would go visit his Uncle

O. Fost. I pay for their meetings I Am s^e; that boy
Makes prize of all his fingers light on
To releeve his unthrifty Uncle.

Br. Does he rob, in troth I commend him.

O. Fost. It Is partly your fault, Sitra you see'r, and suffer it,

Ric. Sir, mine is a servants duty, his a sons,
Nor know I better how to express my love
Unto your self, than by loving your son.

O. Fost. By concealing of his pilferings.

Ric. I dare not call them so; he is my second Master,
And methink^^ it is far above my limits
Either to check, or to complain of him.

Br. (...) Du^, then make a good construction,
And your son Robert a natural Nephews part.
To releeve his poor Uncle.

O. Fost. ^in neither well; Sir, for note but the
^tion of my estate; I Am lately married
To a wealthy Widow from whom my substance
Ch^ly does arise, she has observed this in her
(...) often complains and grudges at it,
And what (...) broils such civili discords bring,
(...) married men are ignorant of:
Enter Mistress Foster. Nay will you see a present proof of it.

M. Fost. Shall I not live to breath a quiet hour?
I would I were a beggar with content
Rather than thus be thwarted for mine own.

O. Fost. Why what is the matter Woman?

M. Fost. I Will towse 'm up, tho you regard not of my just complaints

Neither in love to me, nor preserving me from others
Injuries, both which you are tied to, by all the rightful
Laws heavenly or humane, but I Will complain
Sir, where I will be heard.

O. Fost. Nay, thou'It be heard too far.

M. Fost. Nay Sir, I will be heard; some awkeward star
Threw out his unhappy ^eat my conception
And twill never quench while I have heat in me:
Would I were cold, there would be bonefires made
(...) warm defa^e, my death would be a Iubilce to some.

O* Fost. Why Sir, how should I minister remedy and know not the (...).


Br. Mother a pearl, woman, show your husband the cause,

M. Fost. Had he bin a husband Sir, I had had no cause to Complain, I threw
down at his feet

The subjection of his whole estate:
He did not marry me for loves sake nor for pity,
But love to that I had, he now neglects the love
He had before; A prodigal is suffered to lay waste
Those worldly blessings, which I long enclosde,
Intending for good uses.

O. Fost. That Is my son.

M. Fost. I, thou know it well enough, he is the Condu^ pipe that throws it
forth into the common shore.


O. Fost. And the other's my brother.

M. Fost. You may well shame, as I do grieve the kindred,
But I Would make the one a stranger, the other a servant,
No son, nor brother; For they deserve neither
Of those offices.

O. Fost. Why did I ever cherish him, have not I threat^
Him with disinheritance for this disorder?

M. Fost. Why do you not perform it?

O. Fost. The other's in Ludgate.

M. Fost. No; he is in my house, approving to my face
The charitable office of his kind Nephew,
Who with his pilfering purloind from me,
Has set him at liberty; if this may be suffered
I Will have no eyes to see.

O. Fost. Prithee content thy self; I Will see a present
Remedy; sir, go call 'm in; this worthy
Gentleman shall know the cause, and censure
For us both with equity.

Br. Nay good Sir, let not me be so imployd,
Enter Robin and Stephen Foster. For I shall favor one for pity, the other
for your loves sake,

O. Fost. Now Sir, are all my words with you
So light esteemed that they can
Take no hold upon your duty?

Rob. Misconster not, I beseech you.

M. Fost. Nay, heel approve his good deeds I warrant you.

O. Fost. And you Sir.

Step. Well Sir.

O. Fost. I had thought you had bin in Ludgate Sir.

Step. Why, you see where I am Sir.

O. Fost Why, where are you Sir?

Step. (...) ^^bt Sir, in debt.

O. Fost. Indeed that is a place you can hardly be removed
From, but this is not a place fit for one in
Debt, how came you out of prison Sir?

(...). As I went into prison Sir, by the keepers.

O. Fost This was your work to let this bandog loose.

Rob. Sir it was my duty to let my Uncle loose.

O. Fost. Your duty did belong to me, and I did not command

Rob. You cannot make a separation Sir, betwixt
The duty that belongs to me, and love unto
(...) ^^cle, as well you may bid me love my
Maker, and neglect the Creature, which he
Has bid me love; if man to man join not
A love on earth, they love not heaven, nor
(...) that dwells above it, such is my duty
A strong Corelative unto
My Uncle why, he is half your self.

(...). Believe me Sir, he has answered you well.

O. Fost. He has not worthy Sir, but to make void
That false construction; here I disclayme
The title of a brother; and by that disclayme
Have thou lost thy childs part; be thou engaged
For any debts of his, in prison rot with him;
My goods shall not purchase such
Fruitless recompense.

Step. Then thou art a scurvy father, and a filthy brother.

M. Fost. I, I, Sir, your tongue cannot defame his reputation

Step. But yours can, for all the City reports what
An abominable scould he has got to his wife.

O. Fost. If ere I know thou keep'st him company,
I Will take my blessing from thee whilst I live,
And that which after me should bless thy estate.

Step. And I Will proclayme thy baseness to the world;
Ballads I Will make, and make 'm Tavern music
To sing thy churlish cruelty.

O. Fost. Tut, tut, these are bables.

Ste. Each Festival day I Will come unto thy house,
And I will pi^^e upon thy threshold.

O. Fost. You must be out of prison first Sir.

Ste. If ever I live to see thee Shreiffe of London,
I Will gild thy painted posts cum privilegio,
And kick thy Sergeants.

Rob. Nay, good Uncle.

Ste. Why, I Will beg for thee, Boy;
I Will break this leg, and bind it up again,
To pull out pity from a stony breast,
Rather than thou shall want.

O. Fost. I, do; let him fear up his arm, and scarf it up
With two yards of rope; counterfeit two villains;
Beg under a hedge and share your bounty: but come
Not near my house, not thou in's company, if thou wilt obey,
There Is punishment, for thee; for thee there is worse;
The loss of all that is mine, with my dear curse.
Exeunt.
Manent. Stephen and Robin. Ste. Churl, Dog, you churlish rascally miser.

Rob. Nay, good Uncle, throw not foul language;
This is but heat Sir, and I doubt not but
To cool this rage with my obedience:
But Uncle, you must not then heap on such fuel.

Ste. Cuz, I grieve for thee, that thou have undergone
Thy fathers curse, for love unto thy Uncle.

Rob. Tut, that bond shall never be canceled, Sir.

Ste. I pity that in faith.

Rob. Let pity then from me turn to your self:
Bethink your self Sir, of some course
That might befit your estate, and let me guide it.

Ste. Ha, a course? sfoot I hate: Cuz, can lend me
40. shillings? Could I but repair this old decayed Tenement
Of mine with some new plaster; for alas, what
Can a man do in such a case as this?

Reb. I, but your course, Uncle.

Ste. Tush, leave that to me, because thou shall wonder
At it: If you should see me in a scarlet gown
Within the compass of a gold chain, then I
Hope you will say, that I do keep my self in
Good compass: then Sir, if the Cap of Maintenance
Do march before me, and not a Cap be suffered
To be worn in my presence, pray do not upbraide
Me with my former poverty: I cannot tell, state
And wealth may make a man forget himself;
But I beseech you do not; there are things in my
Head that you dream not of; dare you try me, Cuz?

Rob. Why, forty shillings, Uncle, shall not keep back Your fortunes.


Ste. Why, gramerey Cuz; now if the dice do run right,
This 40. shillings may set me up again: To lay't on my back,
And so to pawn it, there is never a damb'd Broker
In the world will give me half the worth on it:
No, whilst it is in ready cash, that is the surest
Way; 7. is better than 11. a pox take the bones
And they will not favor a man sometimes.

Rob. Look you Uncle, there is 40. shillings for you.

Ste. As many good Angels guard thee, as thou have given
Me bad ones to seduce me, for these deputy devils
Dam worse than the old ones. Now Cuz, pray listen,
Listen after my transformation; I will henceforth
Turn an Apostate to prodigality; I will eat
Cheese and Onions and buy lordships, and will
Not you think this strange?

Rob. I am glad you are merry, Uncle; but this is fixed
Betwixt an Uncle and a Nephews love,
Though my estate be poor, revenewes scant,
Whilst I have any left, you shall not want.

Ste. Why gramercy, by this hand I Will make
Thee an Alderman before I dye, do but
Follow my steps.

Exeunt. Enter Widow and Clown. Wid. Sir, will the Churchman come I sent
you for?

Clow. Yes, mistress, he will come: but pray resolve
Me one thing for my long service; What
Business have you with the Churchman?
Is it to make your Will, or to get you a new
Husband?

Wid. Suppose to make my Will, how then?

Clow. Then I would desire you to remember me, Mistress,
I have served you long, and that is the best
Service to a woman: make a good Will if you
Mean to dye, that it may not be said, Though
Most women be long lived, yet they all dye
With an ill will.

Wid. So Sir, suppose it be for marriage.

Clow. Why then remember your self mistress;
Take heed how you give away the head;
It stands yet upon the shoulders of
Your widdowhood; the loving embracing Ivy
Has yet the upper place in the house;
If you give it to the Holly, take heed,
There Is pricks in Holly; or if you fear not
The pricks, take heed of the wands, you
Cannot have the pricks without the wands;
You give away the sword, and must defend
Your self with the scabbard; these are pretty
Instructions of a friend; I would be loath to
See you cast down, and not well taken up.

Wid. Well Sir, well, let not all this trouble you;
See, he is come; Will you be gone?

Enter Doctor. Clow. I will first give him a caveat, to use you
As kindly as he can. If you find my mistress
Have a mind to this coupling at barly-breake,
Let her not be the last couple to be left in hell.

Doct. I would I knew your meaning, Sir.

Clow. If she have a mind to a fresh husband, or
So, use her as well as you can; let her enter
Into as easy bands as may be.

Doct. Sir, this is none of my traffic; I sell no husbands.

Clo. Then you do wrong, Sir, for you take money for 'm:
What woman can have a husband, but you must
Have custom for him? and often the ware proves
Naught too not worth the Impost.

Doct. Your man's pregnant, and merry, mistress.

Wid. He Is saucy Sir. Sir, you will be gone.

Clo. Nay, at the second hand you will have a fee too;
You sell in the Church, and they bring 'm again
To your Church-yarde, you must have tollage:
Me thinks if a man dye whether you will or no,
He should be buried whether you would or no.

Doct. Nay now you wade too far, Sir.

Wid. You Will be gone, Sir.

Clo. Mistress make him your friend, for he knows what rate
Good husbands are at; if there has bin a dearth
Of women of late, you may chance pick
Out a good prize; but take heed of a Clerk.

Wid. Will you yet Sir, after your needelesse trouble,
Be gone, and bid the maids dress dinner.

Clo. Mistress, it is fasting day to day, there is nothing but fish.

Wid. Let there be store of that; let bounty furnish the
Table, and charity shall be the voyder.
What fish is there, Sir?

Clo. Marry there is Sammon, Pike, and fresh Cod,
Soles, Maids, and Playce.

Wid. Bid 'm haste to dress 'm then.

Clo. Nay mistress, I Will help 'm too; the maids shall first
Dress the Pike, and the Cod, and then I Will dress
The maids in the place you wot on.
Exit Clown.
Doct. You sent for me, Gentlewoman?

Wid. Sir, I did, and to this end:
I have some scruples in my conscience;
Some doubtful problemes which I cannot answer
Nor reconcile; I Would have you make them plain.

Doct. This is my duty; pray speak your mind.

Wid. And as I speak, I must remember heaven
That gave those blessings which I must relate:
Sir, you now behold a wondrous woman;
You only wonder at the Epithete;
I can approve it good; Guess at mine age.

Doct. At the half way 'twixt thirty and forty.

Wid. 'Twas not much amiss; yet nearest to the last;
How think you then; Is not this a wonder,
That a woman lives full seven and thirty years,
Maid to a wife, and wife unto a widow,
Now widdowed, and mine own, yet all this while
From the extremest verge of my remembrance,
Even from my weaning hour unto this minute,
Did never taste what was calamity;
I know not yet what grief is, yet have sought
A hundred ways for its acquaintance; with me
Prosperity has kept so close a watch,
That even those things that I have meant
A cross, have that way turned a blessing;
Is it not strange?

Doct. Unparalleled; this gift is singular,
And to you alone belonging; you are the Moon,
For there is but one, all women else are stars,
For there are none of like condition:
Full often, and many have I heard complain
Of discontents, thwarts, and adversities;
But a second to your self, I never knew
To groan under the superflux of blessings,
To have ever bin a lien unto sorrow;
No trip of fate? Sure it is wonderful.

Wid. I, Sir, it is wonderful; but is it well?
For it is now my chief affliction.
I have heard you say, that the child of heaven
Shall suffer many tribulations;
Nay, Kings and Princes share them with their subjects;
Then I that know not any chastisement
How may I know my part of childhood?

Doct. It Is a good doubt; but make it not extreme,
It Is some affliction, that you are afflicted
For want of affliction: Cherish that;
Yet wrest it not to misconstruction;
For all your blessings are free gifts from heaeven
Health, wealth, and peace; nor can they turnto
Curses, but by abuse. Pray let me question you:
You lost a husband, was it no grief to you?

Wid. It was; but very small; no sooner I
Had given it entertainment as a sorrow,
But strait it turned unto my treble joy;
A comfortable revelation prompts me then,
That husband whom in life I held so dear,
Had changed a frailty to unchanging joys;
Me thought I saw him stellified in heaven,
And singing Hallelujahs amongst a quire
Of white Sainted souls: then again it spoke,
And said; It was a sin for me to grieve
At his best good, that I esteemed best:
And thus this slender shadow of a grief
Vanished again.

Doct. All this was happy; nor can you wrest it
From a heavenly blessing. Do not appoint
The rod: leave still the stroke unto the
Magistrate; the time is not past, but
You may feel enough.

Wid. One taste more I had, although but little,
Yet I would aggravate to make the most
On It: thus 'twas; The other day, it was my hap
(...) ^^^ssing of the Thames,
To drop that wedlock Ring from off my finger,
That once conjoined me and my dead husband;
It sunk, I pris'd it dear; the dearer, 'cause it kept
Still in mine eye the memory of my loss;
Yet I grieved the loss, and did joy withal
That I had found a grief; and this is all
The sorrow I can boast of.

Doct. This is but small.

Wid. Nay sure I am of this opinion,
That had I suffered a draught to be made for it,
The bottom would have sent it up again,
I am so wondrouslie fortunate.

Doct. You would not suffer it?

Enter Clown. Wid. Not for my whole estate.

Clow. O mistress, where are you? I think you are the fortunat'st Woman, that
ever breathed of two shoes: the thief is Found.


Wid. The thief; what thief? I never was so happy To be robbed.


Clow. Bring him away Iug; nay, you shall see the strangest
Piece of felony discovered that ever you saw,
Or your great grandmothers Grandam before, or after,
A pirate, a water thief.

Wid. What Is all this?

Clow. Bring him away Iug; yet the villain would not Confess a word till it
was found about him.


Wid. I think the fellow's mad.

Clow. Did you not lose your wedding Ring the other day?

Wid. Yes Sir, but I was not robbed of it.

Enter Ioane with a fish. Clow. No; well, thank him that brings it
Home then; and will ask nothing for his pains.
You see this Sammon?

Wid. Yes, what of it?

Clow. It cost but six pence: but had the Fisher known
The worth of it, 'twould have cost you forty shillings.
Is not this your Ring?

Wid. The very same.

Clow. Your maid Ioane examining this Sammon, that she
Bought in the Market, found that he had swallowed
This Gudgeon.

Wid. How am I vexed with blessings? how think you
Sir, is not this above wonder?

Doct. I am amazed at it.

Wid. First that this fish should snatch it as a bait;
Then that my servant needs must buy that fish
Amongst such infinites of fish and buyers:
What fate is mine that runs all by it self
In unhappy happiness? My conscience dreads it:
Would thou had not swallowed it, nor thou not bought it.

Clow. Alas, blame not the poor fish, mistress, he being a fleg, matique

Creature, took Gold for Restorative. He took it fair,
And he that gets Gold, let him eat Gold.

Wid. Nothing can hinder fate.

Doct. Seek not to cross it then.

Wid. About your business, you have not pleased me in this.

Ioane. By my maid nhead if I had thought you would
Have taken it no kindlier, you should never
Have bin vexed with sight on it; the garbidge should
Have bin the Cooks fees at this time.
Exit Ioane.
Clow. Now do I see the old proverb come to pass;
Give a woman luck, and cast her into th'sea:
There Is many a man would wish his wife good
Luck, on that condition he might throw her
Away so. But mistress, there is one within would
Speak with you, that vexes as fast against
Crosses, as you do against good luck.

Wid. I know her sure then, it is my gossip Foster:
Request her in; here is good company, tell her.

Clow. I Will tell her so for my own credits sake.
Exit.
Wid. You shall now see an absolute contrary:
Would I had changed bosoms with her for atime,
'T would make me better relish happiness.

Enter Mistress Foster and Clown. M. Fost. O friend and gossip, where are you?
I am
Over laden with my griefs, and but in your bosom
I know not where to ease me.

Clow. I had rather help you to a close, stool,
And't please you.

M. Fost. Never had woman more sinister fate;
All ominous stars were in conjunction
Even at my birth, and do still attend me.

Doct. This is a perfect contrary indeed.

Wid. What ails you Woman?

M. Fost. Unless seven witches had set spells about me,
I could not be so crossed, never at quiet
Never happy hour, not a minutes content.

Doct. You hurt your self most with impatience.

M. Fost. I, I Physicians minister with ease,
Although the patient do receive in pain;
Would I could think but of one joyful hour.

Clo. You have had two husbands to my knowledge;
And if you had not one joyful hour between
Both, I would you were hanged in faith.

M. Fost. Full fourteen years I lived a weary maid,
Thinking no joy till I had got a husband.

Clo. That was a tedious time indeed.

M. Fost. I had one loved me well, and then ere long
I grew into my longing peevishness.

Clow. There was some pleasure ere you came to that.

M. Fost. Then all the kindness that he would apply,
Nothing could please; soon after it he died.

Clow. That could be but little grief.

M. Fost. Then worldly care did so o'reload my weakness,
That I must have a second stay; I chose again,
And there begins my griefs to multiply.

Wid. It cannot be, friend; your husband's kind.

Doct. A man of fair condition, well reputed.

Clow. But it may be he has not that should please her.

Wid. Peace Sir: how can your sorrows increase from him?

M. Fost. How can they but o'rewhelme me? he keeps a Son
That makes my state his prodigality;
To him a brother, one of the City scandals;
The tone the hand, the the other is the maw;
And between both my goods are swallowed up;
The full quantity that I brought amongst'm
Is now consumed to half.

Wid. The fire of your spleen wastes it;
Good sooth Gossip, I could laugh at thee, and only grieve
I have not some cause of sorrow with thee:
P^^thee be temperate, and suffer.

Doct. It Is good counsel mistress, receive it so.

Wid. Can thou devise to lay them half on me,
And ^^e beare'm willingly.

M. Fost. Would I could, that I might laugh another while:
But you are wise to heed at others harms;
You Will keep you happy in your widdowhood.

Wid. Not I in good faith, were I sure marriage
Would make me unhappy.

M. Fost. Try, try, you shall not need to wish;
You Will sing another song, and bear a part
In my griefs descant, when you are vexed at heart:
Your second choice will differ from the first:
So often as widows marry they are accursed.

Clo. I, cursed widows are; but if they had all stiff husbands
To tame'm, they would be quiet enough.

Wid. You Will be gone Sir, and see dinner ready.

Clo. I care not if I do mistress, now my stomack's ready;
Yet I Will stay a little and be but to vex you.

Wid. When go you, Sir?

Clo. I will not go yet.

Wid. Ha, ha, ha, thou make me laugh at thee; prithee stay,

Clo. Nay then I Will go to vex you.
Exit Clown.
M. Fost. You have a light heart Gossip.

Wid. So should you Woman, would you be ruld by me:
Come, we will dine together, after walk abroad
Unto my suburb garden, where if thou wilt hear,
He read my heart to thee, and thou from thence
Shall learn to vex thy cares with patience.
Exeunt.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Host Boxall, Stephen, Jack, Dicke, Hugh. Host. VVElcome still my
merchants of bona Speranza;
What Is your traffic Bulleyes? What ware deal you in?

Cards, Dice, Bowls, or Pigeon-holes; sort'm
Your selves; either Passage, Novum, or Mumchance?
Say my brave Bursmen, what is your recreation?

Ste. Dice mine Host: Is there no other room empty?

Host. Not a hole unstopt in my house, but this my Thrists.

Jack. Miscall us not for our money, good mine Host, we are
None of your thrifts; we have escaped that scandal long ago.

Dick. Yes, his thrifts we are Jack, though not our own.

Host. Tush, you are young men, it is too soon to thrive yet:
He that gathers young, spends when he is old:
It Is better to begin ill, and end well, than to
Begin well and end ill: Miserable fathers have
For the most part unthrifty sons; leave not
Too much for your heirs, Boys.

Jack. He says well in faith; Why should a man trust
To executors.

Ste. As good trust to hangmen as to executors:
Who Is in the bowling Alley mine Host?

Host. Honest traders, thrifty lads, they are rubbing on it;
Towardly Boys, every one strives to lie nearest the Mistress.

Ste. Give's a bail of Dice.

Host. Here my brave Wags.

Ste. We fear no Counters now mine Host, so
Long as we have your bail so ready.
Come, trip.

Jack. Up with his heels.

Dick. Down with them.

Hugh. Now the dice are mine; set me now a fair
Board; a saire passage sweet bones. Boreas.

A noise below in the bowling Alley, betting, rubbing and wrangling. Host. How
now my fine Trundletayles;
My wodden Cosmographers:
My bowling Alley in an uprore?
Is Orlando up in arms? I must be stickler;
I am Constable, Justice, and Beadle in mine
Own house, I accuse, sentence, and punish:
Have amongst you; look to my box Boys;
He that breaks the peace, I break his pate
For recompense; look to my box, I say.
Exit.
Step. A pox o'your box, I shall never be so happy to Reward it better; set me
fair; aloft now.


Jack. Out.

Step. What wast?

Dick. Two Trayes, and an Ace.

Step. Seven still, pox on it; that number of the
Deadly sins haunts me damnably; Come Sir, throw.

Jack. Prithee invoke not so, all sinkes too fast already.

Hugh. It will be found again in mine hosts box.

Jack. In still, two thieves and choose thy fellow.

Step. Take the Miller.

Jack. Have at them in faith.

Hugh. For a thief I Will warrant you, who will you have next.

Jack. Two Quaters and a Tray.

Step. I hope we shall have good cheer, when two
^aters, and a Tray go toth' market.

Enter Host. Host. So all is whist; they play upon the still pipes now,
The Bull-beggar comes when I show my head,
Silence is a virtue, and I have made'm virtuous,
Let'm play still till they be penny less; pawn
Till they be naked, so they be quiet, welcome,
And welcome.
A noise above at Cards. How now, how now, my roaring Tamberlaine, take
Heed the Sultan comes; And 'twere not for proffit,
Who would live amongst such Bears? why Vrsa
Major I say, what in Capite Draconis? is there
No hope to reclayme you, shall I never live in quiet
For you?

Dick. Good mine Host still'm: civil Gamesters cannot play for'm.


Host. I come amongst you, you maledictious slaves; I Will
Utter you all; some I Will take ready money for, and lay
Up the rest in the stocks: look to my box, I say.

Step. Your box is like your belly mine Host, it
Draws all; now for a suite of apparel.

Jack. At whose suit I pray? you are out again with the threes.

Step. Foot, I think my father threw three when I was
Begotten; pox on it, I know now why I am so
Haunted with threes.

Jack. Why, I prithee?

Step. I met the third part of a knave as I came.

Jack. The third part of a knave, s'foote what thing's that?

Step. Why a Serjants Yeoman, man; the supervisor himself
Is but a whole one, and he shares but a groate in the
Shilling with him.

Dick. That Is but the third part indeed: but goes he no further.

Step. No, he rests there.

Hugh. Come, let us give over.

Step. I thank you Sir, and so much a looser? there is but
The wast-band of my suite left: now sweet bones.

Hugh. Twelve at all.

Step. Soft, this dye is false.

Hugh. False? you do him wrong Sir, he is true to his Master.

Step. Fullum:

Dick. I Will be hanged then: where is Putney then I pray you

Step. It Is false, and I Will have my money again.

Hugh. You shall have cold Iron with your silver then.

Step. I, have at you Sir.

Enter Host, and young Foster. Host. I think he is here, Sir.

Young Foster assists his Uncle and the Host, and beat se them off; Enter the
Bowlers and steal away their Cloakes. Rob. I am sure he is now, Sir.

Hugh. Hold, hold, and you be Gentlemen hold.

Rob. Get you gone Varlets, or there is hold to be taken.

Host. Nay sweet Sir, no bloodshed in my house; I am lord Of misrule, pray you
put up, Sir.


Om. S'foote mine Host, where are our cloakes?

Host. Why, this is quarrelling; Make after in time:
Some of your own Crew, to try the weight has
Lifted them; look out I say.

Jack. There will ever be thieves in a dicing house
Till thou be hanged I Will warrant thee.
Exeunt Cheat.
Step. Mine Host, my Cloak was lined through with
Oringe tawney velvet.

Host. How, your cloak? Ine'r knew thee worth one.

Step. You Are a company of Conycatching rascals;
Is this a suite to walk without a Cloak in?

Rob. Uncle, is this the reformation that you promised me?

Step. Cuz, shall I tell thee the truth; I had diminish't
But six pence of the forty shillings by chance meeting with a
Friend, I went to a tailor, bargained for a suite, it
Came to full forty, I tendered my xxxix and a half,
And do you think the scabby-wristed rascal would
Trust me for six pence.

Rob. Your credit is the better, Uncle.

Step. Pox on him, if the tailor had bin a man, I had
Had a fair suite on my back, so venturing for
The the other Tester

Rob. You lost the whole Bed-stead.

Step. But after this day, I protest Cuz, you shall never
See me handle those bones again; this day I
Break up school: if ever you call me unthrift after
This day, you do me wrong.

Rob. I should be glad to wrong you so, Uncle.

Ste. And what says your father yet, Cuz?

Rob. I Will tell you that in your ear.

Enter Mistress Foster, Widow and Clown. M. Fost. Nay, I pray you friend bear
me company a little
This way, for into this dicing house I saw my good
Son in law enter, and it is ods but he meets his
Uncle here.

Wid. You cannot tire me gossip in your company, it is the best
Affliction I have to see you impatient.

M. Fost. I, I, you may make mirth of my sorrow.

Clow. We have hunted well, mistress; do you not see
The hare's in sight?

M. Fost. Did not I tell you so; I, I, there is good counsel
Between you, the tone would go afoote to hell,
The other the horseway.

Rob. Mother, I am sorry you have trod this path.

M. Fost. Mother? hang thee wretch, I bore thee not, but
Many afflictions I have borne for thee; were thou
Mine own, I Would see thee stretched a handful, and
Put thee a Cossin into the Cart, ere thou should vex
Me thus.

Rob. Were I your own, you could not use me worse than you do.

M. Fost. I Will make thy father turn thee out for ever, or else
I Will make him wish him in his grave; You Will witness
With me Gossip where I have found him.

Clow. Nay, I Will be sworn upon a book of Callico for that.

Rob. It shall not need, I Will not deny that I was with my Uncle.

M. Fost. And that shall disinherit thee, if thy father
Be an honest man; thou had bin better to have
Bin borne a viper, and eat thy way through thy
Mothers womb into the world, than to tempt my
Displeasure.

Ste. Thou lie Zantippe; it had bin better thou had
Bin pressed to death under two Irish Rugs, than to
Ride honest Socrates thy husband thus, and abuse his
Honest child.

M. Fost. Out Raggamustin, do thou talk? I shall see thee
In Ludgate again shortly.

Ste. Thou lie again, 'twilbe at More-gate, Beldam, where I shall see thee in
the Ditch dancing in a Cucking-stoole.


M. Fost. I Will see thee hanged first.

Ste. Thou lie again.

Clo. Nay Sir, you do wrong to give a woman so many lies,
She had rather have had twice so many standings, than
One lie.

M. Fost. I Will lie with him I Will warrant him.

Ste. You Will be a whore then.

Clo. Little less I promise you, if you lie with him.

Ste. If you complain upon mine honest Cuz,
And that his father be offended with him,
The next time I meet thee, though it be in the street,
(...) dirt upon thy velvet Cap;
Nay worse, Plestaine thy Ruff; nay worse than that,
I Will do thus:
Holds a wispe.
M. Fost. O my heart Gossip, do you see this? Was ever
Woman thus abused?

Wid. Me thinks it is good sport in faith.

M. Fost. I, I am well recompensed to complain to you,
Had you such a kindred.

Wid. I would rejoice in it Gossip.

M. Fost. Do so; choose herethen; Oh my heart! But I Will do
Your e^^and; Oh that my Nails were not pared! But I Will do
Your errand; Will you go Gossip?

Wid. No I Will stay awhile and tell 'm out with patience.

M. Fost. I cannot hold a joint still; Do wispe me, thou
^atterdemallion; I Will do your errands, if I have a
Husband; Oh that I could spit Wild fire!
My heart, Oh my heart! If it does not go pantle,
Pantle, pantle in my belly, I am no honest woman:
But I Will do your errands.
Exit Mistress Foster.
Rob. Kind Gentlewoman, you have some patience.

Wid. I have too much Sir.

Rob. You may do a good office, and make your self a Peaceful moderator
betwixt me and my angry

Father, whom his wife has moved to spleen Against me.


Wid. Sir, I do not disallow the kindness your
Consanguinity renders, I would not teach
You otherwise; I Would speak with your Uncle, Sir,
If you will give me leave.

Clo. You may talk with me Sir, in the mean time.

Exit. Robin and Clown Ste. With me would you talk, Gentlewoman?

Wid. Yes Sir, with you; you are a brave Unthrift.

Ste. Not very brave neither; yet I make a shift

Wid. When you have a clean shirt.

Ste. I Will be no Pupil to a woman; leave your discipline.

Wid. Nay, pray you hear me Sir, I cannot chide.
I Will but give you good counsel; it is not a good
Course that you ^^n.

Ste. Yet I must run to'th' end of it.

Wid. I would teach you a better, if you would stay where you are.

Ste. I would stay where I am, if I had any money.

Wid. In the dyeing house?

Ste. I think so too, I have played at Passage all
This while, now I Would go to Hazard.

Wid. Do thou want Money? Thou art worthy to be tattered
Have thou no wit now thy Money's gone?

Ste. It Is all the portion I have;
I have nothing to maintain me but my ^it;
My Money is too little I Am sure.

Wid. I cannot believe thy wit's more than thy Money,
A fellow so well limbed, so able to do good service,
And want.

Ste. Why Mistress, my shoulders were not made for a Froc^
And a Basket, nor a Coale-sacke neither, no nor
My hands to turn a trencher at a tables side.

Wid. I like that resolution well; but how comes it
Then, that thy wit leaves thy body unfurnisht?
Thou art very poor?

Ste. The fortune of the Dice you see.

Wid. They are the only wizards, I confess,
The only fortune tellers; but he that goes to
Seek his fortune from them, must never hope
To have a good destiny allotted him: yet it is
Not the course that I dislike in thee, but that
Thou can not supply that course, and out-
Cross them that cross thee; Were I as thou art

Ste. You Would be as beggarly as I am.

Wid. I Will be hanged first.

Ste. Nay, you must be well hanged ever you can be as I am.

Wid. So Sir, I conceit you; were I as well hanged then
As you could imagine, I would tell some rich widow
Such a tale in her ear.

Ste. Ha? Some rich widow? By this pennilesse pocket,
I think 'twere not the worst way.

Wid. I Would be ashamed to take such a fruitless oath:
I say, seek me out some rich widow; promise
Her fair; she is apt to believe a young man;
Marry her, and let her estate fly; no matter,
It Is charity; Twenty to one some rich Miser raked
^t together; this is none of Hercules labors.

Ste. Ha? let me recount these articles: Seek her out;
Promise her fair; Marry her; Let her estate fly:
But where should I find her?

Wid. The easyest of all: Why man, they are more common
Than Tavern Bushes; two Fayres might be
Furnished every week in London with 'm, though no
Forrainers came in, if the Charter were granted once:
Nay, it is thought, if the Horse-market be removed, that
Smithfield shall be so employed, and then I Will
Warrant you 'twill be as well furnishd with widows as
It Was with Sowes, Cowes, and old trotting Iades before.

Ste. S'foote, if it were, I would be a Chapman; I Would see for
My pleasure, and buy for my love, for money I have none.

Wid. Thou shall not stay the Market; if thou wilt be ruled,
I Will find thee out a widow, and help in some of
The rest too; if thou wilt but promise me the last, but
To let her estate fly: for she is one I love not, and
I Would be glad to see that revenge on her.

Ste. Spend her estate, were five Aldermens; I Will put you
In security for that, sfoote all my neighbors shall be bound
For me, nay, my kind Sister in law shall pass her word
For that.

Wid. Only this I Will enjoyne you, to be matrimonially honest
To her for your own healthes sake: all other injuries
Shall be blessings to her.

Ste. I Will bless her then; I ever drunk so much,
That I was never great feeder; give me drink,
And my pleasure, and a little flesh serves my turn.

Wid. I Will show thee the party; What say thou to my self?

Ste. Your self, Gentlewoman, I would it were no worse;
I have heard you reputed a rich widow.

Wid. I have a lease of thousands at least, Sir.

Ste. I Will let out your leases for you, if you will allow me
The power I Will warrant you.

Wid. That Is my hope Sir; but you must be honest withal.

Ste. I Will be honest with some; if I can he honest with all,
I will too.

Wid. Give me thy hand; go home with me, I Will give
The better clothes; and as I like thee then, we will
Go further, we may chance make a blind
Bargain of it.

Ste. I can make no blind bargain, unless I be
In your bed, Widow.

Wid. No, I bar that Sir, lets begin honestly, how
Ever we end; marry for the waste of my estate
Spare it not; do thy worst.

Ste. I Will do bad enough, fear it not.

Wid. Come, will you walk, Sir.

Ste. No Widow, I Will stand to no hazard of blind
Bargains; either promise me marriage, and give
Me earnest in a handfast, or I Will not budge
A foot.

Wid. No Sir, are you grown so stout already?

Ste. I Will grow stouter when I am married.

Wid. I hope thou wilt vex me.

Ste. I Will give you cause I Will warrant you.

Wid. I shall rail, and curse thee I hope; yet I Would
Not have thee give over neither; for I would
Be vexed; Here Is my hand, I am thine, thou art mine,
I Will have thee withal faults.

Ste. You shall have one with some, and you have me,

Enter Robin and Clown. Wid. Here Is witness, come hither Sir.
Cousin, I must call you shortly; and you
Sitra, be witness to this match; here is Man and Wife.

Rob. I joy at mine Uncles happiness, Widow.

Clo. I do forbid the Banes: Alas poor Shagragge,
My Mistress does but gull him; you may
Imagine it to be T welfe-day at night, and the
Bean found in the corner of your Cake, but
It Is not worth a fetch I Will assure you.

Wid. You Will let me dispose of my self, I hope.

Clo. You love to be merry Mistress; Come, come,
^^ve him four Farthings, and let him go.
He Will pray for his good Dame, and be drunk;
Why, if your blood does itch that way, we will
Stand together; how think you? I think here
(...) the sweeter bit, you see this Nap, and you
See this Lowse, you may crack of your choice,
If you choose here.

Wid. You have put me to my choice then; see, here I choose?
This is my Husband: Thus I begin the Contract.
Kiss
Ste. It Is sealed, I am thine; now Cuz fear no black
Storms; if thy father thunder, come to me for shelter.

Wid. His word is now a deed, Sir.

Rob. I thank you both. Uncle, what my joy conceives,
I cannot utter yet.

Clo. I will make black Monday of this: ever I suffer
This disgrace, the kennell shall run with blood and rags,

Rob. Sir, I am your apposite.

Clo. I have nothing to say to you, Sir; I aim at your Uncle

Rob. He has no weapon.

Clo. That Is all one, I Will take him as I find him:

Wid. I have taken him so before you, Sir; Will you be quiet.

Ste. Thou shall take me so too Hodge, for I Will be thy fellow,
Though thy Mistrisses Husband. Give me thy hand.

Clo. I Will make you seek your fingers among the Dogs,
Exeunt If you come to me; my Fellow? You lousy
Companion; I scorn thee. S'foote, is it come to this?
Have I stood all this while to my Mistress, an honest,
Hansome, plaine-dealing, serving-Creature; and she to
Marry a Worson Tittere Tu Tattere with never a good rag
About him? Stand thou to me, and be my friend; and since
My Mistress has forsaken me:

Enter Robin. Rob. How now? what is the matter?

Clo. 'Twas well you came in good time.

Rob. Why man?

Clo. I was goingthe wrong way.

Rob. But tell me one thing, I apprehend not; Why did
Lay thy Cap upon the swords point?

Clo. Do not thou know the reason of that? why, 'twas
To save my belly: do thou think I am so mad to
Cast my self away for ever a woman of'm all,
I Will see 'm hanged first.

Rob. Come Roger, will you go?

Clo. Well, since there is no remedy, Oh tears be you my friend!


Rob. Nay, prithee Roger do not cry.

Clo. I cannot choose; nay I will steep
Mine eyes in crying tears, and crying weep.
Exeunt.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Alderman Bruine, Sir Godfry Speedwell, Innocent Lambskin, and Mistress
Jane. Bruine. GEntlemen, you are welcome; that once well pronounced
Has a thousand Echoes; Let it suffice, I have spoke
It to the full: here is your affairs, here is your merchandise,
This is your prise, if you can mix your names and gentle
Bloods with the poor Daughter of a Citizen.
I make the passage free, to greet and court,
Traffic the mart of love, clap hands and strike
The bargain through, (she pleased) and I shall like.

God. Sp. It Is good ware believe me, Sir, I know that by mine
Own experience; for I have handled the like
Many times in my first wives days, I, by Knighthood,
Sometimes before I was married too; therefore I
Know It by mine own experience.

Lamb. Well Sir, I know by observation, as much as you do
By experience; for I have known many Gentlemen
Have taken up such ware as this is, but it has lain
On their hands as long as they lived; this I
Have seen by observation.

Jane. I am like to have a couple of fair Chapmen:
If they were at my own dispose, I would
Willingly rifle them both at twelve pence a share; they
Would be good food for a new plantation; the
Tone might mend his experience; and the other his
Observation very much.

Speed. Sir, let me advise you: I see you want experience,
Meddle no further in this case, 'twilbe the
More credit for your observation; for I find by my
Experience, you are but shallow.

Lamb. But shallow Sir? Your experience is a little wide;
You shall find I will be as deep in this case as
Your self; my observation has bin, where your
Experience must wait at door; yet I will
Give you the fore Horse place, and I will be in the
Fill's, because you are the elder Tree, and I the
Young Plant; put on your experience, and I will
Observe.

Speed. Sweet Virgin, to be prolix and ted ious, fits (...)
Experience; short words and large deeds are
Best pleasing to women.

Jane. So, Sir.

Speed. My name is Speedwell, by my fathers Copy.

Jane. Then you never served for it it seems.

Speed. Yes, sweet Feminine, I have served for it too:
For I have found my nativity suited to my name,
As my name is Speedwel, so have I sped
Well in diverse actions.

Jane. It must needs be a fair and comely suit then.

Lamb. You observe very well, sweet Virgin; for his
Nativity is his Dublet, which is the upper part
Of his suite; and his name is in's breeches, for
That part which is his name, he defiles many times.

Speed. Your observation is corrupt, Sir; Let me show min^
Own Tale; I say, sweet Beauty, my name is
Speedwell, my Godfather by his bounty being an
Old Soldiour, and having served in the wars as far as
Bulloyne, therefore called my name Godfry; a
Title of large renown; my wealth and wit has
Added to those, the paraphrase of Kinghthood;
So that my name in the full longitude is called
Sir Godfry Speedwell, a name of good experience.

Ian. If every quality you have be as large in relation ^s
Your name Sir, I should imagine the best of them, rather
Than hear them reported.

Speed. You say well, sweet Modesty, a good imagination is good,

And shows your good experience.

Lamb. Nay, if names can do any good, I beseech you observe
Mine; My name is Lambskin, a thing both hot and harmless.

Jane. On Sir, I would not interrupt you, because you Should be brief.


Lamb. My Godfather seeing in my face some notes of disposition,

In my Cradle did give me the title of Innocent, which I
Have practiced all my life time; and since my fathers
Decease, my wealth has purchased me in the vanguard
Of my name, the paraphrase of gentility; So that
I am called Master Innocent Lambskin.

Jane. In good time; and what Trade was your father, Sir?

Lamb. My father was of an Occupation before he was a
Tradesman; for, as I have observed in my fathers
And mothers report, they set up together in
Their youth; my father was a Starch-maker, and my
Mother a Laundresse; so being partners, they did
Occupy long together before they were married;
Then was I borne.

Jane. What, before your father was married?

Lamb. Truly a little after, I was the first fruits, as they say;
Then did my father change his Copy, and set up
A Brewhouse.

Jane. I then came your wealth in, Sir.

Lamb. Your observation's good; I have carried the Tallyes
At my girdle seven years together with much
Delight and observation; for I did ever love to
Deal honestly in the Nick.

Jane. A very innocent resolution.

Speed. Your experience may see his course education; but to
The purpose, sweet Female; I do love that
Face of yours.

Jane. Sir, if you love nothing but my face, I cannot sell it
From the rest.

Lamb. You may (...) his slender observation; sweet Virgin,
I do love your lower parts better than your face.

Speed. Sir you do interrupt, and thwart my love.

Lamb. I Sir, I am your Rival; and I will thwart your love*
For your love licks at the face, and my love
Shall be Arsy-Versy to yours.

Jane. I would desire no better wooing of so bad suitors.

Speed. Mistake me not kind Heart.

Lamb. He calls you Tooth drawer by way of experience.

Speed. In loving your face, I love all the rest of your body
As you shall find by experience.

Jane. Well Sir, you love me then?

Speed. Let your experience make a trial.

Jane. No Sir, I Will believe you rather, and I thank you for it.

Lamb. I love you too, fair Maid, double and treble,
If it please you.

Jane. I thank you too Sir; I am so much beholding
To you both; I am afraid I shall never requite it.

Speed. Requite one, sweet Chastity, and let it be
Sir Godfry, with the correspondencie of your
Love to him; I will maintain you like a Lady,
And it is brave, as I know by experience.

Lamb. I will maintain you like a Gentlewoman: And
That may be better maintenance than a Ladies,
As I have found by observation.

Speed. How dare you maintain that, Sir?

Lamb. I dare maintain it with my purse, Sir.

Speed. I dare cross it with my sword Sir.

Lamb. If you dare corsse my purse with your sword Sir,
I'llay an action of suspicion of felony to you;
That Is flat, Sir.

Jane. Nay, pray you Gentlemen do not quarrel,
Till you know for what.

Bru. Oh, no quarrelling, I beseech you Gentlemen!
The reputation of my house is soyld, if any
Uncivil noise arise in it.

Lamb. Let him but shake his blade at me, and I Will
Throw down my purse, and cry a rape; I
Scorn to kill him, but I Will hang his knighthood,
I warrant him, if he offer assault and battry on
My purse*

Bru. Nay, good Sir, put up your sword.

Speed. You have confinde him prisoner forever,
I hope your experience sees he is a harmless thing.

Enter George the Factor. G^^. Sir, here is young Master Foster requests
To speak with you.

Bru. Does he? Prithee request him. Gentlemen,
Please you taste the sweetness of my Garden
A while, and let my daughter bear you company.

Speed. Where she is leader, there will be followers.

Jane. You send me to the Gallyes, Sir; pray you redeem
Me as soon as you can; these are pretty
Things for mirth, but not for serious uses.

Bru. Prithee be merry with them then a while,
If but for courtesy; thou have wit enough;
But take heed they quarrel not.

Jane. Nay I dare take in hand to part'm without
Any danger; but I beseech you let me not
Be too long a prisoner. Will you walk Gentlemen.

Lamb. If it please you to place one of us for your conduct,
Otherwise this old Coxcombe and I shall quarrel.

Jane. Sir Godfry, you are the eldest; pray lead the way.

Speed. Withal my heart, sweet Virgin; Ah, ha; this place
Promises well in the eyes of experience; Master
Innocent, come you behind.

Lamb. Right Sir; but I put the Gentlewoman before, and that
Is the thing I desire
And there your experience halts a little.

Speed. When I look back, Sir, I see your nose behind.

Lamb. Then when I look back, your nose stands here.

Speed. Sweet Lady, follow experience,

Lamb. And let observation follow you.
Exeunt.
Bru. So, now request you Master Foster in, George; but hark;
Does that news hold his own still, that our ships
Are so near return, as laden on the Downs
With such a wealthy fraughtage.

Geo. Yes Sir, and the next Tide purpose to put into the River:
Master Foster, your partner, has now received more
Such intelligence, with most of the particulars
Of your merchandise, your venture is returned
With trebble blessing.

Bru. Let him be ever blessed that sent. George now call
In the young man; and hark ye, George, from him
Run to my Partner, and request him to me, this
News I Am sure makes him a joyful Merchant;
For my own part, I Will not forget my vow,
Ex. Ge^. This free addition heaven has lent my state,
As freely back to heaven I Will dedicate.
Enter Robert Foster. I marry Sir, would this were a third Suitor
To my daughter Jane, I should better
Like him than all that is come yet. Now master Foster,
Are your father annd your self yet reconciled?

Rob. Sir, 'twas my business in your courteous tongue
To put the arbitration, I have again
(Discovered by my mother) relieved my poor Uncle,
Whose anger now so great is multiplied,
I dare not venture in the eye of either,
Till your persuasions with fair excuse
Have made my satisfaction.

Bru. Mother a pearl, Sir, it is a shrewd task;
Yet I Will do my best; your father has so good news,
That I hope't will be a fair motive to it;
But women's tongues are dangerous stumbling blocks
Enter George. To lie in the way of peace. Now George.

Geo. Master Foster's coming, Sir.

Rob. I beseech you Sir, let not me see him, till you
Have conferred with him.

Bru. Well, well, ever your return to Master Foster, call my
Daughter forth of the garden.
Ex. George. And how does your Uncle, Master Foster?

Rob. Sir, so well, (...)
Same that shortly will o're-spread (...) good fortunes.

Bru. Why I commend thee still,
He wants no good from thee, no not in report:
*It Is well done Sir, and you show duty in it.
Enter Jane. Now daughter, Where are your Iusty Suitors?

Jane. I was glad of my release, Sir: Suitors call you'm,
(...) keep dish water continually boiling, but I Would
Sees such Suitors; I have had much ado to
Keepe'm from bloodshed; I have seen for all
The world, a couple of cowardly Curs quarrel
In that fashion, as the one turns his head, the
Other snaps behind; and as he turns, his
Mouth recoyles again: but I thank my pains
For It, I have leagued with'm for a week without
Any farther intercourse.

Bru. Well daughter, well; say a third trouble come;
Say in the person of young Master Foster here
Came a third Suitor: how then?

Jane. Three's the woman's total Arithmeticke in
Deed, I would learn to number no farther,
If there was a good account made of that.

Rob. I can instruct you so far, sweet Beauty.

Jane. Take heed, Sir; I have had ill handfell to day;
Perhaps it is not the fortunate season, you were
Best adjourne your journey to some happier time.

Rob. There shall no Augurisme fright my plain
Dealing: Sweet, I fear no hours.

Jane. You Will not betray me with love-powder

Rob. Nor with Gunpowder neither in faith; yet I Will
Make you yield if I can.

Bru. Go, get you together; your father will be coming;
Leave me with your suite to him, ply this your self;
And Jane, use him kindly, he shall be his
Fathers heir I can tell you.

Jane. Never the more for that, Father; If I use him
Kindly, it shall be forsomething I like in him.
Self, and not for any good he borrowes of his father,
But come Sir, (...) ^alke into the Garden; for
That Is the field I have best fortune to overcome
My Suitors in.

Rob. I fear not that fate neither, but if I walk
Into your Garden, I shall be tasting your sweetes.

Jane. Taste sweetly and welcome Sir; for there grows
Honesty, I can tell you.

Rob. I shall be plucking at your honesty.

Jane. By my honesty but you shall not Sir: I Will hold
You a hand full of Penny-royall of that in faith,
If you touch my honesty there, I Will make you eat
Sorrill to your supper, though I eat Sullenwood my self:
No Sir, gather first Time and Sage, and such wholesome
Herbs; and Honesty and Hearts-ease will ripen
The whilst.

Rob. You have fair Roses, have you not?

Jane. Yes Sir, Roses; but no Gillyflowers.
Ex. Ambo.
Enter Master Foster and his Wife. Bru. Go, go, and rest on Uenus Violets;
show he^
A dozin of Batchelors Butto^ Boy; Here comes
His father. Now my kind Partner, have we
Good news?

O. Fost. Sir, in a word, take it; Your full lading and venture
Is returned at sixty fold increase.

Br. Heaven take the glory; A wondrous blessing;
Oh keep us strong against these flowing Tides!
Man is too weak to bound himself below,
When such high waves do mount him.

O. Fost. O Sir, care and ambition seldom meet,
Let us be thrifty; Titles will faster come,
Than we shall wish to have them.

Bru. Faith I desire none.

O. Fost. Why Sir, if so you please, I'lease your cares;
Shall I like a full adventurer now bid you
A certain ready sum for your half traffic.

Bru. I, and I Would make you gainer by it too;
For then would I lay by my trouble, and begin
A work which I have promised unto heaven,
A house, a Domus Dei shall be raised,
Which shall to Doomesday be established for succor to
The poor; for in all Ages there must be such.

O. Fost. Shall I bid your venture at a venture.

Bru. Pray you do Sir.

O. Fost. Twenty thousand pounds.

Bru. Nay, then you under-rate your own value much;
Will you make it thirty?

O. Fost. Shall I meet you half way?

Bru. I meet you there Sir; for five and twenty thousand ^nds the full
ventures yours.


O. Fost. If you like my payment, it is the one half in ready Cash, the other
sealed for six Months.


Bru. It Is Merchant like and fair; George, you
Observe this? Let the contents be drawn.

Geo. They shall Sir.

O. Fost. Your hazard is now all past, Sir.

Bru. I rejoice at it, Sir, and shall not grudge your gains,
Though multiplied to thousands.

O. Fost. Believe me Sir, I account my self a large Gainer by you.


Bru. Much good may it be to you, Sir; but one
Thing at this advantage of my love to you
Let me entreat.

O. Fost. What is it, Sir?

Bru. Faith my old fuite, to reconcile those breaches
Twist your kind son and you; Let not the love
He shows unto his Uncle, be any more a bar
To sunder your blessings and his duty.

O. Fost. I would you had enjoined me some great labor
Far your own loves sake, but to that my
(...) stands fixed against; I Am deaf,
(...) of them.

(...) ^^y, Sir, if you knew all, you would not waste your
Words in so vain expense: since his last
Reformation, he has flowne out again,
And in my sight relieved his Uncle in the
Dicing house; for which, either he shall be no
Father to him, or no husband to me.

Br. Well Sir, go call my Daughter forth of the
Garden, and bid her bring her Friend along
With her, troth Sir, I must not leave you thus;
I must needs make him your son again.

O. Fost. Sir, I have no such thing a kin to me.

Enter Robin and Jane. Bru. Look you Sir, know you this duty?

O. Fost. Not I Sir: he is a stranger to me: Save your
Knee, I have no blessing for you.

M. Fost. Go, go to your Uncle Sir; you know where to
Find him, he is at his old haunt, he wants
More money by this time; but I think the
Conduite pipe is stopped from whence it ran.

O. Fost. Did he not say, he would beg for you, you would best
Make use of's bounty.

Bru. Nay, good Sir.

O. Fost. Sir, if your daughter cast any eye of favor upon
This Unthrift restraint, he is a beggar: Mistress
Jane, take heed what you do.

M. Fost. I, I, be wise Mistress Jane; do not you trust
To spleen and time worn to pity, you will
Not find it so; therefore good Gentlewoman
Take heed.

Bru. Nay then you are too impenitrable.

O. Fost. Sir, your money shall be ready, and your bills;
Other business I have none: For thee,
Beg, hang, dye like a slave;
Such blessings ever thou from me shall have.

Ex. Foster and his wife. Br. Well Sir, I Will follow you; and Sir, be comforted,
I will not leave till I find some remorse;
Mean time let not want trouble you;
You shall not know it.

Rob. Su, it is not want I fear, but want of blessing
My knee was bent for; for mine Uncles state,
Which now I dare say out-weighes my fathersfarre,
Confirms my hopes as rich, as with my fathers,
(...) love excepted only.

Bru. Thy Uncles state, how for heavens love.

Rob. By his late marriage to the wealthiest widow
That London had, who has not only made him
Lord of her self, but of her whole estate.

Bru. Mother-a-pearle, I rejoice in it: this news
Is yet but young?

Rob. Fame will soon speak it loud, Sir

Bru. This may help happily to make all peace;
But how have you parly'd with my daughter, Sir.

Jane. Very well Father: We spoke something, but did
Nothing at all; I requested him to pull me
A Catherin Pear, and had not I looked to him
He would have mistook and given me a Popperrin;
And to requite his kindness, I plucked him a Rose,
And he had almost pricked my finger for my pains.

Bru. Well said Wag, are there sparks kindled, quench
'M not for me, it is not a fathers roughness,
Nor doubtful hazard of an Uncles kindness
Can me deter; I must to your father.
Where (as a chief affair) I Will once more move,
And if I can return him back to love.
Exeunt.
Enter Doctor and Stephens Wife. Wife. Sir, you see I have made a speedy choice,
And as swift a marriage; be it as it will,
I like the man, if his qualities afflict me,
I shall be happy in it.

Doct. I must not distate, what I have helped to make;
(...) I that joined you.

Wife. A good bargain, I hope.
Enter Roger. Roger, Where Is your Master?

Clo. The Good man of the house is within forsooth.

Wife. Not your Master, Sir.

Clo. It Is hard of digestion: Yes, my Master is within;
He masters you therefore I must be
Content: You have longed for Crosses a good
While, and now you are like to be
Farther off them than ever you were; For
I Am afraid, your good husband will leave
You never a cross in the house to bless you with.

Wife. Well Sir, I shall be blessed in it: But where is he?

Clo. Where he has mistaken the place a little,
Being his wedding day; he is in nomine,
When he should be in re.

Wife. And where is that?

Clo. In your Counting House; If he were a kind
Husband, he would have bin in another
Counting House by this time: he is tumbling
Over all his money bags yonder; you shall
Hear of him in the bowling Alley again.

Wife. Why Sir, all is his, and at his
Dispose; who shall dare to twhart him?

Enter Stephen with bills and bonds. Clo. Look where he comes.

Wife. How now, Sweete-heart? what have thou there?

Ste. I find much debts belonging to you, Sweet;
And my care must be now to fetch them in;

Wife. Ha, ha; prithee do not mistake thy self,
Nor my true purpose; I did not wed to thrall,
Or bind thy large expense, but rather to add
A plenty to that liberty; I thought by this,
Thou would have stuffed thy pockets full of Gold,
And thrown it at a hazard; made Ducks and Drakes,
And baited fishes with thy silver flies;
Lost, and fetched more: why this had bin my joy;
Perhaps at length thou would have wast'd
My store; why, this had bin a blessing to
Good for me.

Ste. Content thee, Sweet, those days are gone,
I, even from my memory;
I have forgot that ever I had such follies,
And I Will not call 'm back: my ears are bent
To keep your state, and give you all content.
Roger, go, call your fellow servants up to me,
And to my Chamber bring all books of debt;
I will o're-looke, and cast up all accounts,
That I may know the weight of all my cares,
And once a year give up my stewardship.

Clo. Now you may see what hasty matching is;
You had thought to have bin vexed, and now
You cannot: You have married a husband,
That, Sir reverence of the title, now being my Master in law,
I do think he will prove the miserablest, covetous
Rascal, that ever beat beggar from his gate. But
It Is no matter; time was when you were fairly
Offered, if you would have took it; you might have had
Other matches in faith, if it had pleased you; and those
That would have crossed you; I would have sold away
All that ever you had had; have kept two or three
Whores at liverie under your nose; have turned you out
In your smock, and have used you like a woman; where
As now, if you would hang your self, you can have none of
These blessings: but it is well enough, now you must
Take what follows.

Wife. I Am new to seek for crosses, the hopes I meant
Turn to despair, and smoother in content.

Enter Robert. Ste. O Nephew are you come: The welcom'st wish
That my heart has; This is my hinsman, Sweet.

Wife. Let him be largely texted in your love,
That all the City may read it fairly;
You cannot remember me, and him forget.
We were alike to you in poverty.

Ste. I should have begged that bounty of your love,
Though you had scanted me to have given't him;
For we are one, I an Uncle Nephew,
He an Nephew Uncle, but my Sweet self,
My slow request you have anticipated
With proffered kindness; and I thank you for it.
But how, kind Cousin, does your father use you?
Is your name found again within his books?
Can he read son there?

Rob. It Is now blotted quite: for by the violent instigation
Of my cruel Stepmother, his Vows and Oaths
Are stamped against me, never to acknowledge me,
Never to call, or bless me as a child;
But in his brow, his bounty, and behavior
I read it almost plainly.

Ste. Cousin, grieve not at it; that father lost at home,
You shall find here; and with the loss of his inheritance,
You meet another amply profferd you;
Be my adopted son, no more my kinsman;
So that this borrowed bounty do not stray
From your consent.

Wife. Call it not borrowed, Sir, it is all your own;
Here before this reverent man I make it known,
Thou art our child as free by adoption,
As derived from us by conception, birth, and
Propinquitie; Inheritour to our full substance.

Rob. You were borne to bless us both,
My knee shall practice a sons duty
Even beneath sons, giving you all
The comely dues of parents: yet not
Forgetting my duty to my father;
Where ever I meet him, he shall have my knee,
Although his blessing never return to me.

Ste. Come then my dearest son, I Will now give thee
A taste of my love to thee; be thou my deputy,
The Factour and disposer of my business;
Keep my accounts, and order my affairs;
They must be all your own; for you, dear Sweet,
Be merry, take your pleasure, at home, abroad;
Visit your neighbors; ought that may seem good
To your own will, down to the Country ride;
For cares and troubles lay them all aside,
And I will take them up, it is fit that weight
Should now lie all on me: take thou the height
Of quiet and content, let nothing grieve thee;
I brought thee nothing else, and that I Will give thee.

Ex. Stephen and Robin. Wife. Will the Tide never turn? Was ever woman
Thus burdened with unhappy happiness?
Did I from Riot take him, to waste my goods,
And he strives to augment it? I did mistake him.

Doct. Spoil not a good Text with a false Comment;
All these are blessings, and from heaven sent;
It is your husbands good, he is now transformed
To a better shade, the prodigall's returned.
Come, come, know joy, make not abundance scant;
You 'plaine of that which thousand women want.
Exeunt.
Enter Alderman Bruine, Master Foster and Factors bearing or bags. Bru. So, so,
haste home good Lads, and return for the rest.
Would they were covered, George, it is too Public
Blazon of my estate; but it is no matter now;
I Will bring it abroad again ever it belong.
Sir, I acknowledge receipt of my still half debt,
Twelve thousand five hundred pounds; it now remains
You seal those writings, as assurance for the rest,
And I am satisfied for this time.

O. Fost. Pray stay Sir, I have bethought me, let me once
Throw Dice at all, and either be a complete
Merchant, or wrack my estate for ever:
Hear me Sir, I have of wares that are now vendible,
So much as will defray your utmost penny;
Will you accept of them, and save this charge
Of wax and parchment.

Bru. He they vendible Sir? I am your Chapman:
What are they, Master Foster?

O. Fost. Broad clothes, Karsies, Cutchineale, such
As will not stay two days upon your hands.

Bru. I find your purpose; you would have your Ware.
Houses empty for the receipt of your full fraught;
I Will be your furtherer, make so your rates, that
I may be no looser.

Enter George and Richard. O. Fost. I have no other end, Sir; let our
Factors peruse and deal for both.

Bru. Mine is returned; George, here is a new business,
You and Richard must deal for some commodities
Betwixt us, if you find 'm even gain or but
Little loss, take carriage presently and carry 'm home.

Geo. I shall.

O. Fost. Richard, have you any further news yet from our shipping?


Ric. Not yet, Sir; but by account from the last, when they
Put from Dover, this Tide should bring them into
Saint Catharins Poole; the wind has bin friendly.

O, Fost. Listen their arrival, and bid the Gunner speak it
In his loud thunder all the City over;
Tingle the Merchants ears at the report
Of my abundant wealth; now go with George.

Rich. I shall do both, Sir.
Exeunt Factors.
O. Fost. I must plainly now confess, Master Alderman, I shall gain much by
you. The half of your Ship defrayes my full cost.


Bru. Beshrew me if I grudge it, being my self a Sufficient gainer by my
venture, Sir.


Enter Mistress Foster. M. Fost. Still flows the Tide of my unhappiness,
The stars shoot mischief, and every hour
Is critical to me.

O. Fost. How now woman? wrackt in the heaven of felicity?

What ayl'st thou?

M. Fost. I think the divel's mine enemy

O. Fost. I hope so too; his hate is better than his friendship.

M. Fost. Your brother, your goodbrother, Sir.

O. Fost. What of him? he is in Ludgate again.

M. Fost. No, he is in Hye-gate; he struts it bravely,
An Aldermans pace at least.

O, Fost. Why, these are Oracles, doubtful Enigmaes!

M. Fost. Why, I Am sure you have heard the news;
He Is married forsooth.

O. Fost. How, married? no woman of repute would choose So slightly.


M. Fost. A woman, in whose breast, I had thought had lived
The very quintessence of discretion; and who is it,
Think you? nay you cannot guess, though I should give
You a day to riddle it; it is my Gossip, Man, the rich
Widow of Cornehill.

O. Fost. Fie, fie, it is fabulous.

M. Fost. Are you my husband? then is she his wife;
How will this upstart beggar shoulder up,
And take the wall of you? his new found pride
Will know no eldership.

O. Fost. But wife, my wealth will five times double his, ever
This Tide ebb again; I wonder I hear not the
Brazen Cannon proclaim the Arrival of my
Infinite substance.

M. Fost. But beggars will be proud of little, and shoulder at the best.


O. Fost. Let him first pay his old score, and then reckon;
But that she: --

M. Fost. I, that is it mads me too.
Would any woman, less to spite her self,
So much profane the sacred name of wedlock:
A Dove to couple with a Storke, or a Lamb a Viper?

O. Fost. Content thee; Forgive her; she will do so no more;
She was a rich widow, a wife he will make her poor.

Bru. So Sir, you have closed it well; if so ill it prove,
Leave it to proof, and wish not misery
Enter Stephen and Robert. Unto your enemy look, here he comes.

O. Fost. You say true it is my enemy indeed.

Ste. Save you Master Alderman, I have some business with you.


Bru. With me, Sir, and most welcome, I rejoice to see you.

M. Fost. Do you observe, Sir; he will not know you now?
Iockeye's a Gentleman now.

O. Fost. Well fare rich widows, when such beggars flourish;
But ill shall they fare, that flourish over such beggars.

Ste. Ha, ha, ha.

M. Fost. He laughes at you.

O. Fost. No wonder, woman, he would do that in Ludgate;
But 'twas when his kind Nephew did relieve him:
I shall hear him cry there again shortly.

Ste. Oysters, new Walfleet Oysters.

O. Fost. The Gentleman is merry.

M. Fost. No, no, no; he does this to spite me; as who Should say, I had bin a
fish-wife in my younger days.


Bru. Fie, fie, Gentlemen, this is not well;
My ears are guilty to hear such discords.
Look, Master Foster; turn your eye that way;
There Is duty unregarded, while envy struts
In too much state: believe me, Gentlemen,
I know not which to chide first.

O. Fost. What Idol kneeles that heritique too.

Ste. Rise Boy; thou art now my son, and owe no knee
To that unnatural; I charge you rise.

O. Fost. Do Sir, or turn your adoration that way;
You were kind to him in his tarter'd state;
Let him requite it now.

M. Fost. Do, do, we have pai'd for it aforehand,

Rob. I would I were divided in two halfes, so that Might reconcile your harsh
devision


Ste. Proud Sir, this son which you have alienated
For my loves sake, shall by my loves bounty
Ride side by fide in the best Equipage
Your scorns dare pattern him.

O. Fost. I, I, a beggars gallop up and down.

M. Fost. I, it is up now, the next step down.

Ste. Ha, ha, I laugh at your envy Sir, my business ^s to you.


Bru. Good Sir, speak of any thing but this.

Ste. Sir, I am furnishing some shipping forth,
And want some English traffic, Broad-clothes, Karsics
Or such like, my voyage is to the Straites:
If you can supply me, Sir, I Will be your Chapman.

Bru. That I shall soon resolve you, Sir;
Enter Factors. Come hither George.

O. Fost. This is the rich Merchant-man;

M. Fost. That Is neither grave not wife;

O. Fost. Who will kill a man at Tiburne shortly.

M. Fost. By Carts that may arise; Or if the hangman dye,
He may have his office.

Bru. Then you have bargained, George.

Geo. And the Warecarryed home, Sir; you must look
To be little gainer; but lose you cannot.

Bru. It Is all I desire from thence, Sir I can furnish you
With Wares I lately from your brother bought;
Please you go see them, for I would feign divide you,
Since I can win no nearer friendship.

Ste. I Will go with you, Sir.

Exeunt Alderman, Stephen and George. O. Fost. Take your adoption with you, Sir.

Rob. I crave but your blessing with me, Sir.

O. Fost. It Is my curse then; get thee out of mine eye.
Thou Art a bcame in it, and I Will tear it out ever it
Offend to look on thee.

M. Fost. Go, go, Sir; follow your Vncle-father,
Help him to spend, what thrift has got together;
'Twilbe charity in you to spend,
Because your charity it was to lend.

Rob. My charity; you can a virtue name.
And teach the use, yet never knew the same
Exit.
Enter Richard. O. Fost. See wife, here comes Richard.
Now listen, and hear me crowned
The wealthiest London Merchant.
Why do thou look so sadly?

M. Fost. Why do not speak; have lost thy tongue?

Rich. I never could speak worse.

O. Fost. Why, thy voice is good enough.

Ric. But the worst accent Sir, that ever you heard,
I speak a^ Screechowles note. Oh you have made
The most unhappiest bargain that ever Merchant did!

O. Fost. Ha? what can so balefull be, as thou would (...)
To make by this sad prologue? I am no traitor
To consiscate my goods: speak, what ever it be.

Ric. I would you could conceit it, that I might not speak it.

O. Fost. Dally not with torments, sink me at once.

Ric. Now you have spoke it half; it is sinking I must treat of
Your ships are all sink.

O. Fost. Hah!

M. Fost. O thou fatal Raven; Let me pull thine eyes out for this

Sad croake.

O. Fost. Hold woman; hold prithee; it is none of his fauk.

M. Fost. No, no, it is thine, thou wretch; and therefore
Let me turn my vengeance all on thee; thou
Have made hot haste to empty all my Warehouses,
And made room for that the sea has drunk before
Thee.

O. Fost. Undone for ever! Where could this mischief fail*
Were not my ships in their full pride at Dover;
And what English Carybda's has the devil dig'd
To swallow nearer home.

Ric. Even in the Mouth, and entrance of the Thames
They were all cast away.

O. Fost. Dam up thy Mouth from any farther
Mischievous relation.

Rich. Some men were saved, but not one pennyworth of goods.

O. Fost. Even now thy balefull utterance was chok'd,
And now it runs too fast; thou fatal Bird no more.

M. Fost. May Serpents breed, and fill this fatal Stream,
And poison her for ever.

O. Fost. O curse not, they come too fast!

M. Fost. Let me curse somewhere, Wretch, or else I Will throw
That all on thee; it is thou, ungodly Slave,
That art the mark unto the wrath of Heaven:
I thrived ever I knew thee.

O. Fost. I prithee split me too.

M. Fost. I would I could; I would I had never seen thee;
For I never saw hour of comfort since I knew thee.

O. Fost. Undone for ever, my credit I have cracked,
To buy a Venture, which the Sea has sok'd;
What worse can woe report.

M. Fost. Yes worse than all,
Thy enemies will laugh, and scorn thy fall.

O. Fost. Be it the worst then; that place I did assign
My unthrifty brother, Ludgate, must now be mine.
Break, and take Ludgate.

M. Fost. Take Newgate rather.

O. Fost. I scorned my child, now he may scorn his father.

M. Fost. Scorn him still.

O. Fost. I will; would he my wants relieve,
(...) scorn to take what he would yield to give:
My heart be still my friend, although no other;
(...) scorn the help of either son, or brother,
My portion's begging now; seldom before.
In one sad hour, was man so rich and poor.
Exeunt.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Mistress Jane, Godfry Speedewell, and Master Lambskin. Jane. GEntlemen,
my Father's not within; please
You to walk a turn or two in the garden,
He Will not be long.

Lamb. Your father, Mistress Jane, I hope you have observa^ in you,

And know our humors; we come not a wooing to your Father.

Speed. Experience must bear with folly; Thou art all innocent,

And thy name is Lambskin; grave Sapience guides me,
And I care not a pin for thy squibs, and thy Crackers,
My old dry wood shall make a lusty bonefire, when
Thy green Chips shall lie hissing in the Chimney-
Corner. Remember Mistress, I can make you a Lady by
Mine own experience.

Lamb. Prithee do not stand troubling the Gentlewoman
With thy musty sentences, but let her love be laid
Down betwixt us like a pair of Cudgells, and into
Whose hands she thrusts the weapons first, let him
Take up the Bucklers.

Speed. A match between us

Jane. Must I be stickler then?

Lamb. We are both to run at the Ring of your setting
Up, and you must tell us who deserves most favor.

Jane. But will you stand both at my disposing?

Lamb. Else let me never stand but in a Pillory.

Jane. You love me both you say?

Speed. By this hand. --

Lamb. Hand? Zoundes by the four and twenty Elements.

Jane. Pray spare your oaths; I do believe you do
You would not else make all this stir to woo.
Sir Godfry, you are a knight both tough and old,
A rotten building cannot long time hold.

Lamb. Speedewell, livewell, dye well, and be hanged well.
(...) your copy well, your experience will not carry it else.

Jane. You Are rich too, at least your self so say;
What though? you are but a gilded man of clay.

Lamb. A man of Ginger-bread; in faith I could find in
My heart to eat him.

Jane. Should I wed you, the fire with frost must marry
January and May; I for a younger tarry.

Lamb. That Is l; in troth I Will be thy young Lambskin; thoushalt
Find me as innocent as a sucking Dove: speak, Sweet
(...), am I the youth in a basket?

Jane You are the sweet youth Sir, whose pretty eyes
Would make me love; but you must first be wise.

Speed. Ah, hah, is your coxcombe cut? I see experience must
Board this fair Pinnace: a word in private,

Lamb. I Will have no words in private, unless I hear too.

Enter Master Bruine, Stephen and Robin. Bru. Come Gentlemen, we will make few
Winds about it; Merchants in
Bargaining must not, like Soldiers lying at a siege, stay
Months, weeks, days, but strike at the first parley.
Broad-clothes, and Woolls, and other rich Commodities, I
Lately from your brother bought, are all your own.

Ste. It Is well.

Bru. Then be not angry gentle Sir,
If now a string be touched, which has too long
Sounded so harshly over all the City;
I now would wind it to a musical height.

Ste. Good Master Alderman I think that string will still
Ostend mine ear; You mean the jarring
Twixt me and my brother?

Bru. In troth the same.

Ste. I hate no poison like that brothers name

Bru. O Fie, not so.

Ste. Uncivil churl, when all his sails were up.
And that his proud heart danced on golden ways:

Bru. As heaven be thanked it still does.

Ste. Yet Sir, then I being sunk, and drowned in (...)
Own misery, he would not cast out a poor line
Of thread to bring me to the shore; I had bin
Dead, and might have starved for him.

Bru. A better fate Sir, stood at your elbow.

Ste. True Sir; this was he that lifted me from want
And misery, whose cruel father for that
Good cast him away; scorning his name and blood;
Lopt from his side this branch that held me dear.
For which he is now my son, my joy, my heir,
But for his father hang him.

Bru. Fie, fie.

Ste. By heaven.

Bru. Come, come, live in more charity, he is your brother;
If that name offend, I Will sing that tune no more.
Yonder Is my daughter busy with her suitors;
We Will visit them. Now Jane, bid your friends
Welcome.

Jane. They must be welcome Sir, that come with you;
To thee ten thousand welcomes still are due.

Rob. My sweet Mistress.
Kiss him.
Lamb. Lounds Sir knight, we have stood beating the Bush
And the bird's flowne away; this City
Bowler has kissed the Mistress at first cast.

Bru. How fare ye Gentlemen, what cheer Sir knight?

Speed. An adventurer still Sir, to this new found land.

Lamb He sails about the point Sir, but he cannot put in yet.

Bru. The wind may turn Sir. A word Master Foster.

Lamb. You see Sir Speedwell, what Card is turned
Up for trumpe; I hold my life this spruce
Citizen will forestall the market, Oh
These brisk factors, are notable firkers.

Speed. I doubt Sir, he will play the merchant with us.

Bru. They both are suitors Sir, yet both shoot wide;
My daughter sure must be your kinsmans bride.

(...). I Will give her a wedding Ring on that condition
And put a Stone in it worth a thousand pound, Sir.

Bru. You have my hand and heart to it, be she pleased so.

Lamb S'foote, let us show our selves Gallants, or Gallymaw. ^yes:

Shall (...) ^y'd by a Cockney. A word
My (...); Do you see Sir, here be those
That have gone a fishing, and can give you a
(...).

(...). You were best go fish for better manners, or I
(...) for ^les with you.

Lamb. Zoundes are you a striker? Draw, Sir knight.

Bru. Not in my house; I pray be quiet Gentlemen.

Rob. He dares not do it abroad believe me, Sir.

Ste. Now by my life my Boy, for this brave spirit
^g thee in mine arms: lose life and limbs
(...) thou forsake thy love.

Lamb. He Is no Rival here Sir; has struck me,
And we are Gentlemen.

Speed. And hear ye, Sir, let him seek out his equals;
For some of us are in danger to make her
A Lady shortly: I know what I speak; what
I speak, I Will do; yet I Will do nothing, but
What comes from grave experience.

Ste. Speak what you please Sir, he is a Gentleman as
Good at either of you both, and shall in lists of
Love for such a bedfellow, brave him that dares,
And here lay down more gold to win her love,
Than both your states are worth.

Speed. Ha? do you know us, Sir? You grow too bold;
My experience now has found you;
You were once a tattered fellow, your name is
Foster; have you such gold to give?

Lamb. Yes, yes, has won it betting at the bowling Alleyes,
O^ at the Pigeon-holes in the Garden Alleyes.

Ste. You are ^uddy Grooms to upbraid me with that scorn,
Which virtue now gilds over; Pray ye Gentlemen
May I request your names.

Lamb. Our names are in the Heralds books I warrant you
My name is Innocent Lambskin; and this Knight,
Simply though he stands here, is known to be
Sir Godfry Speedewell.

Step. Well may he Speed Sir; Lambskin and Speedewell,
Ha? Is It so? I think I shall give you a medicine
To purge this itch of love, Sir.

Lamb. No itch neither Sir, we have no scabs here,
But your self and your Cousin.

Ste. Very good Sir, my little Lambskin. I have you
Here in Sheepeskin; look you, it is so in faith.
See, Master Alderman, these two cracked Gallants
Are in several bonds to my Predecessor
For a debt of full two thousand apiece.
Cousin, fetch me a Sergeant strait.

Rob. Yes Sir.

Speed. O let him, I have a protection, Sir.

Ste. I Will try that, Sir.

Speed. A Sergeant? Nay, then experience must work,
Legs be strong and bold; when Sergeants wait
At feasts, the cheere's but cold.
I Will shift for one.
Ex.
Lamb. Knight, knight; S'foote if an errand Knight
Run away, I were an arrand Ass to tarry,
And be caught in the lime-bush: I love the
Wench well; but if they have no hole to
Place me in, but the hole in the Counter,
I Will be goue and leave'm; that is flat
Ex.
Bru. You have scared the suitors from the mark, Sir.

Ste. I am glad on it Sir; they are but such as seek
To build their rotten state on you, and with your
Wealth to underprop their weakness;
Believe me, reverend Sir, I had much rather
You Would venture that my Cuz might call you father.

Enter Stephens Wife. Bru. We Will talk of that anon; See Sir,
Here comes your wife, the theme
Ent. Stepen's Wife. Of all her ^e, with goodness mixed, the happy
Woman that was never vexed; you are welcome
M^s Foller.

Wife. I thank ye Sir.

Ste. Wife, your two debtors were here but now;
S. Speedwell And Lambskin; A Wolf could not have torn
(...) Lambskin worse, than the bare name
(...) Sergeant: the very thought made them both
(...) take their heels and run away.

Wife. Alas, they are poor and lean, and being so;
(...) them not till they are fatter.

Ste. At thy girdle, Sweet, hangs the keys, to
(...) the prison doors or let them loose:
(...) my intent only in way of mirth to
(...) them from the presence of Mistress Jane,
That our adopted son might have no bar
Unto his love.

Wife. The match is fair; and were that knot once tied,
(...) send some Augels to attend the bride.

Enter George. Ste. Sir, here is your factor.

Bru. Are the wares ready.

Geo. Yes, and delivered Sir, to Master Foster's servants,
Who conveyed them in Carts to the Custom.
House, there to be shipped; but going with them,
Sir, I met ill news.

Bru. Ill news? what is it?

Geo. Old Master Foster's ships so richly laden,
By strange misfortune, Sir, are cast away.

Bru. Now heaven forbid!

Rob. Oh me!

Ste. How? cast away; where?

Bru. It Is impossible; they rid at Dover safe,
When he out-bought my full share in the fraught,
And paid me down near thirty thousand pounds
In wares and money.

Geo. Which had he not done, you had lost your venture:
By Master Foster's own appointment Sir, they weighed
Their Anchors up, and so to come for London;
But by a merciless storm they all were
Swallowed, even in the Theames mouth; yet
The men were saved, but all the goods were lost.

Rob. O my poor father! This loss will break his back.

Ste. Ha? What Is that to you? if in my favor you will
Sit warm, then bury all love to him,
Nay duty, hear you Sir? What shed'st thou tears
For him, that had no care to see thy heart drop
Blood? he was unnatural, and heaven has
Justly now rewarded him.

Bru. It Is a most strange Fate; he needs would buy my
Part at any rate, he cared not what; and now all is lost,

Ste. Greedy desire he swallowed, and now is swallowed:
It Is but his hyre; and I Will not pity it, no more
Than he, in his abundance, did my misery.

Wife. I grieve for my poor Gossip, his good wife,
She never met good fortune all her life,
And this will break her heart strings:
In good sooth I Will go and comfort her.

Ste. In good sooth you shall not,
Nor him, nor her at this time, gentle wife;
He scorned me in his height, now being poor,
If that he needs my help, he knows my door.
Sir, we will for this time leave you, at fitter leisure,
We Will have this marriage talked of.

Bru. At your own good pleasure.

Ste. Come wife; Go not to see your father, Sir, I charge you.

Bru. Jane, bring your friends toth'dore.

Rob. I Will help my father, though my self grow poor.

Bru. Where Is my Factor?
Exeunt.
Geo. Here Sir.

Bru. What, are the square stones, and timber
Brought as I appointed?

Geo. Yes, Sir, and the workmen, that daily ply the
Work, are in number fourscore at least.

Bru. My vows flew up to heaven, that I would make
Some pious work in the brass book of Fame,
That might till Doo^esday lengthen out my name.
Near Norton Folga^e therefore have I bought
Ground to erect this house, which I will call
And dedicate, Sa^t Marie's Hospital;
And when it is finished, o'r the gates shall stand
In capital letters, these words fairly graven
For I have given the work and house to heaven
And called it, Domus Dei, Gods house;
For in my zealous faith I know full well,
Where good deeds are, there heaven it self does dwell.
Ex.
Enter Old Foster, Richard his factor, and the Keeper of Ludgate Rich. Good
Sir, resolve not thus; return again,
Your debts are not so great, that you should yield
Your body thus to prison unconstrained.

O. Fost. I will not trust the iron hearts of men;
My credit's lost, my wealth the Sea has swallowed,
Wracked at my door, even in the mouth o'th'Thames.
Oh my misfortune! never man like me
Was so thrown down, and cast to misery.

Rich. Dear Sir, be patient.

O. Fost. I prithee get thee gone, and with thy diligence
Assist thy Mistress to keep that little left, to
Help her self, whilst here in Ludgate I secure
My body from Writs, Arrests, and Executions,
Which, well I know, my cruel Creditors will
Thunder on me. Go, get thee gone; if what
Is left they will take, do thou agree;
If not, I am here resolved to stay and dye.

Rich. I Will do my best Sir, to procure your peace.
Exit.
O. Fost. Do so, Come Sir, I yield my self your prisoner,
You are the Keeper of this Ludgate.

Keep. Yes Sir, your name is registered among the prisoners.

O. Fost. So, I have seen the fair outside of this tomb before;
This goodly apple has a rotten core.

Keep. As all prisons have, Sir.

O. Fost. I prithee bar me of no privilege due to a free
Citizen; Thou know me well?

Keep. Yes Master Foster, and I sorrow for your losses,
Yet doubt not but your son and brother.

O. Fost. O speak not of them! do not kiss and kill me:
I have no son nor brother that esteems me,
And I for ever hate their memory:
Prithee no more; I am come sick into a
Bad Inn, and look for worse attendance,
I have taken a surfeit of misfortunes, and here
Must swallow pills
With poison to recure me: I am sea-sicke, Sir,
And heave my hands to heaven; never to so
Low an ebb was Foster driven.

Keep. There be some Fees to pay, Sir, at your coming in.

O. Fost. So, so, if this old Wall-nut-tree, after all this
Cudgelling, have but one cluster left, thou shall
Have that too; if not, take off these leaves that
Cover me; pull off these white locks; rend them from
My head, and let me in my woes be buried.

Keep. Alas, Sir, this house is poor.

O. Fost. I think no less;
For rich men seldom meet with such distress,
Well, well, what book must I read over now?
What servile Oar must I be tied to here,
Slave-like to tug within this christian Galley?

Keep. Sir, being the youngest prisoner in the house,
You must beg at the iron grate above,
As others do for your relief and their's.

O. Fost. For a beggar to beg, Sir, is no shame;
And for the iron grate, it bears an emblem
O firon-hearted Creditors, that force men lie
In loathsome prisons thus to starve and die.

Enter Robert and kneeles. Keep. Who would you speak with, Sir?
Oh, cry you mercy; it is his son:
I Will leave them.
Exit.
O. Fost. O torment to my soul! What make thou here?
Cannot the picture of my misery
Be drawn^, and hung out to the eyes of men,
But thou must come to scorn and laugh at it?

Rob. Dear Sir, I come to thrust my back under your load,
(...) make the bu^den lighter.

O. Fost. Hence from my sight, dissembling villain; go,
Thine Uncle sends defiance to my woe,
And thou must bring it: Hence, thou Basyliske,
That kil'st me with mine eyes: nay, never kneel;
These scornful mocks more than my woes I feel.

Rob. Alas, I mock ye not; but come in love,
And natural duty Sir, to beg your blessing;
And for mine Uncle --

O. Fost. Him, and thee I curse,
Pl starve, ever I eat bread from his purse,
Or from thy hand; Out villain, tell that Cur,
Thy barking Uncle, that I lie not here
Upon my bed of riot, as he did,
Coverd with all the villainies, which man
Had ever woven; tell him I lie not so,
It was the hand of heaven struck me thus low,
And I do thank it. Get thee gone, I say,
Or I shall curse thee, strike thee; Prithee away;
Or if thou wilt laugh thy fill at my poor state,
Then stay, and listen to the prison grate,
And hear thy father, an old wretched man,
That yesterday had thousands, beg and cry,
To get a penny: Oh my misery!

Rob. Dear Sir, for pity hear me.

O. Fost. Upon my curse I chargeno nearer come,
I Will be no father to so vild a Son.
Exit.
Rob. O my abortive fate!
Why for my good am I thus paid with hate?
From this sad place of Ludate here I freed
An Uncle, and I lost a father for it;
Now is my father here, whom if I succor,
I then must lose my Uncle's love and favor.
My Father once being rich, and Uncle poor,
I him relieving was thrust forth of doors;
Baffled, reviled, and disinherited:
Now mine own Father here must beg for bread,
Mine Uncle being rich, and yet if I
Feed him, my self must beg. Oh misery,
How bitter is thy taste! yet I will drink
Thy strongest poison; fret what mischief can,
I Will feed my Father, though, like the Pelican,
I pecke mine own breast for him.

Old Foster, and above at the grate, a box hanging down. O. Fost. Bread,
bread, one penny to buy a
Loaf of bread for the tender mercy!

Rob. O me my shame! I know that voice full well;
I Will help thy wants, although thou curse me still.

O. Fost. Bread, bread; some Christian man send back
Your charity to an number of poor prisoners;
One penny for the tender mercy.
Robin puts in money. The hand of heaven reward you, gentle Sir,
Never may you want, never feel misery;
Let blessings in unnumbred measure grow,
And fall upon your head where ever you go.

Rob. O happy comfort! curses to the ground
First struck me, now with blessings I am crowned.

O. Fost. Bread, bread, for the tender mercy; one
Penny for a loaf of bread.

Rob. Pl buy more blessings; Take thou all my store,
I Will keep no coin; and see my father poor.

O. Fost, Good Angels guard you, Sir, my prayers shall be
That heaven may bless you for this charity.

Rob. If he knew me, sure he would not say so;
Yet I have comfort if by any means
I get a blessing from my fathers hands:
How cheap are good prayers? A poor penny buys
That, by which man up in a minute flies,
And mounts to heaven.
Enter Stephen. Oh me, mine Uncle sees me!

Ste. Now Sir, what make you here so near the prison?

Rob. I was going, Sir, to buy meat for a poor bird I have,
That sits so sadly in the Cage of late,
I think he will dye for sorrow.

Ste. So Sir, your pity will not quit you pains, I fear me;
I shall find that bird I think to be that churlish
Wretch, your father, that now has taken
Shelter here in Ludgate; Go too, Sir, urge me
Not, you would best; I have given you warning:
Fawn not on him nor come not near him,
If you will have my love.

Rob. Las Sir, that Lamb
Were most unnatural that should hate the Dam.

Ste, Lamb me no Lambs, Sir.

Rob. Good Uncle; alas you know when you lay here.
I succored you, so let me now help him.

Ste. Yes, as he did me,
To laugh and triumph at my misery;
You freed me with his gold, but against his will:
For him I might have rotted, and lain still;
So shall he now.

Rob. Alack the day!

Ste. If him thou pity, it is thine own decay:

O. Fost. Bread, bread, some charitable man remember
The poor prisoners; bread for the render mercy,
One penny.

Rob. O listen Uncle; that is my poor father's voice.

Ste. There let him howl; Get you gone, and come not near him

Rob. O my soul! what tortours do thou feel?
^rth near shall find, a son so true,
(...) forced to be unkind.
Exit.
Ste. Well, go thy ways, thou pattern of true virtue;
My (...) full, I could even weep, and much ado I had to forbear,
To hear a brother begging in a Iayle,
That but ever while spread up a lofty sail
As proudly as the best: Oh, 'twerea sin
Unpardonable in me, should I not succor him?
Yes, I will do it, yet closely it shall be done,
And he not know from whence his comforts come.
What ho, Keeper there, a word I pray.

Enter Keeper. Keep. What Is your pleasure, Sir.

Ste. What Is he that at the grate there begged even now.

Keep. One Master Foster, Sir, a decayed Citizen new
Come in. Cry you mercy Sir, you know him
Better than my self, I think.

Ste. I should do, knew he me as I would know
Him: prithee take him from the grate,
And that no more he stand to beg,
There Is ten pound to pay his score, and
Take off all his wants; if he demand
Who sends it, tell him, it is thine own free
Hand to lend him money.

Keep. Well Sir, I shall.

Ste. Spend what he will, my purse shall pay it all;
And at his parting hence, the poorest prisoner,
And all free Citizens that live in Ludgate,
Shall bless his coming in; I Will for his sake
Do something now, that whilst this City stands,
Shall keep the Foster's name engraven so high,
As no black storm shall cloud their memory.

Keep. Heaven bless your purpose, Sir.
Exeunt.
Enter Stephens Wife, and her sister Old Fosters Wife. Wife. Sister, there is no
way to make sorrow light
But in the noble bearing; be content;
Blows given from heaven are our due punishment;
All ship wracks are no drownings, you see buildings
Made fairer from their Ruins; he that I married,
The brother to your husband, lay, you know,
On the same bed of misery, yet now
He Is ranckt with the best Citizens.

M. Fost. O you were borne to wealth and
Happiness; I, to want and scorn!

Wife. Come, I will work my husband; stay this grief.
The longest sorrow finds at last relief.
Enter Clown. Now Sir, your business.

Clo. Marry mistress here are two creatures
S^e able to make one man, desires to speak
With you.

Wife. What are they, know their names.

Clo. Nay, I know that already; the one is a
Thing that was pluc'd into the
World, by the head and shoulders to be
Wondered at, and it is called a knight; the other
Is a coach-horse of the same over-ridden race;
And that is a foolish Gentleman.

Wife. O, they are my old debtors, Speedwell and Lambskin
Go call them in, and my gentle sister
Comfort your self and my imprisoned brother,
To whom commend me give to him this gold,
What good I can, I Will do for him be bold.

M. Fost. May heavenly blessings guard you from all ill:
Never was woman vexed as I am still.
Exit.
Enter Speedewell and Lambskin. Wife. Now good Sir Godfry and Master Innocent.

Lamb. I put my innocent case into your hands
Mistress, as a simple country Clyent thrusts his money
Into a Lawyers, who stands upon no great
^^^rmes to take it.

Speed. We come about the old business, the sickness of the purse Lady


Clo. And they would be loath to keep their beds i'th'counter
Mistress; they are afraid of Sergeants, Master Lambskin,
Knows that Mace is a binder.

Lamb. No truly it makes me loose for I never smell it, though
It be two streets off, but it gives me a stool presently,

Clo. I, you have bin a loose liver always,
It Is time to look to you.

Speed. Fair Lady, we are your debtors, and owe you money.
Experience tells us that our bonds are forfeit,
For which your husband threatened to arrest us; my
Shoulders love no such clappings, I love
Tobacco, but would be loath to drink in Woodstreet.
Pipes; some money we will pay ere we go hence:
I speak you see with grave experience.

Wife. I know it well, Sir.

Lamb. Had not your husband (when we went about fowling
For the Aldermans daughter) driven away the Bird
We might have bidden you to a better breakefast;
But now you must take what we can set before you.

Ent. Robert. Wife. I am content to do so: you shall find
Nor me nor my husband carry a griping mind.
Now Cuz, where is your Uncle.

Rob. He Is hard at hand, I saw him coming
With the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

Lamb. Zoundes Knight, if the Mayor come
The shoulder clappers are not far off.

Wife. O fear not, I Will be your surety Sir.

Clo. Do you not smell Poultry ware, Sir Godfry?

Speed. Most horribly, I Will not endure the sent on it.

Wife. Upon my trust none here shall do you wrong;
What is his business with the Alderman?

Rob. About the entertainment of the King
That means to visit London.

Wife. Saw you your sad father?

Rob. I did; would I might never see man more
Since he so hates my sight; the prison door,
Which gapes for comers in, that mouth of hell,
Shut me out with a churlish cold farewell;
After my fathers most unnatural part
Was played on miseries stage, mine Uncle comes
In thunder on me, threatening with black storms
To nail me to the earth, if I releeved my
Poor old father.

Ent. Stephen. Clo. Here Is my master now Gentlemen.

Ste. O Gentlemen, you are both welcome,
Have you paid this money on your bonds yet?

Wife. Not yet Sir, but here they come like honest Gentlemen
To take some order for it: good Sweetheart
Shall it be put to me.

Ste. Do as you please;
In all thy deeds th'rt governed with good stars,
Therefore if thou cry'st peace, I Will not raise wars.
E'ne order it how thou will.

Wife. I thank ye Sir; then tell me Gentlemen,
What present money can you pay?

Speed. Two hundred pound we can lay down.

Lamb. And take up seven times as much if we knew
Where to get it; but there is our lamentable ease:
Mistress, if you strip us any nearer, you will strip the
Skin and all I Will assure you,

Wife. We Will sheare no sheep so close.

Lamb. No sheep forsooth, but a poor innocent Lambskin.

Clo. You should be a Calfe by your white face.

Wife. All your two thousand pound Gentlemen we quit,
For your two hundred: go pay the money to
My Cuz, and receive your two bonds canceld:
Say Sir, are ye content.

Ste. Wife I must stand to the arbitrament.
Go Cousin, receive their
Money, and Sir make them drink.

Clo. I Will make them drink if they will; come
Gallants empty your bags, and I Will bumbast
Your bellies; this lean Gentleman looks
As if he had no lining in'^ guts, I could
Take him by the leg and hurl him into
The dog-house.
Exeunt.
Ste. How now sweet wife, what art thou
Musing on?

Wife. I must come a wooing to you Sir.

Ste. A wooing sweet, for what?

Wife. For your brother; Oh it is unmeet
For souls framed by one square to grow uneven,
It Is like a war amongst the great lights of heaven,
One cannot lose his beauty, but the other
Suffers eclipse; so brother against brother.

Ste. Would have me kiss him that would kill me.

Wife. Would you kill a man lying at your feet:
Do good for ill.

Ste. Thy songs are Angels tunes, and on thy wings
I Will fly with thee to heaven.
Thou speak as I would have thee;
His debts I have justly weighed, and find them light.

Wife. The easier then taken off.

Ste. Thou say most right,
But I of purpose keep aloof to try
My kinsman; whom I spied most dolefully
Hovering about the grate, where his father cried
With pitteous voice, for bread; yet did I chide
And rayl'd against the Boy; but my heart says
(How ere my tongue) it was drowned in tears,
To see such goodness in a son.

Wife. Such wheels in childrens bosom seldom run.

Ste. I Will lay a wager wife, that this two hundred pound
Paid by these foolish fellows, will by the Boy
Be given his father.

Wife. Troth would it might:

Ste. In doing me such wrong he does me right
Ludgate was once my dwelling, and to show
That I true feeling of his misery knew;
Albeit long since blown over; so thou wilt consent,
Within that place I Will raise some monument,
Shall keep our names alive till doomes-day.

Wife. I gladly shall agree.
To any act that tends to charity.

Enter Mr. Bruine. Bru. Come, where is Mr. Foster? Oh you lose time Sir,
Not meeting fortune that comes to kiss you.
The Lord Mayor and Aldermen stay at the Guildhall,
Expecting you, as well to set down order
Touching the entertainment of the King,
As to elect you for the following year a Sheriff of London.

Ste. Their loves outstrip my merit.
Yet since they lay that load on me, I Will bear it,
And wait in scarlet on my liege and King.
But pray resolve me, Master Alderman,
Why makes the King this visitation?

Bru. Troth Sir, to honor me, I thank his highness,
Who with my Lord the Cardinal comes along
To see the dedication of my House,
Built for the weary travelers to rest in;
Where stands three hundred beds for their relief,
With meat, drink, and some money when they part,
Which I Will give freely with a willing heart.

Ste. A pious, worthy, and religious act:
Come Sir, toth' Guildhall; Wife, look to your
Kinsman, watch him near; but do not hinder
Hi^ if he releeve his father: Come Master Alderman,
With such sweet incense up your offerings fly,
I Will build one Altar more to charity.
Exeunt.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Old Foster, his Wife, and Keeper. Keeper. COme, come, be merry Sir; do
as mourners do at
Funerals, wear your Hat in your eyes, and
Laugh in your heart.

O. Fost. I have no such fat legacy left me,
To teach me how to play the hypocrite.

Keep. No? Why look ye Sir, you shall want neither
Meat, drink, money, nor any thing that the
House affords, or if any thing abroad like ye,
Sir, here is money, send for what you will Sir:
Nay, you shall beg no more at the Grate neither.

O. Fost. Ha? Is not this Ludgate?

Keep. Yes Sir.

O. Fost. A Iayle, a prison, a tomb of men locked up;
Alive and buried?

Keep. It Is what you please to call it.

O. Fost. O, at what crevice then has comfort
Like a Sun-beame crept? for all the doors
And windows are of Iron, and barred to keep
Her out; I had a limb cut from my body
Dear to me as life; I had a son and brother too;
Oh grief, they both would give me poison first
In gold, before their hollow palms ten
Drops should hold of natures drink, cold water,
But to save my life one minute; whence
Should pity come, when my best friends do.
Beat it from this room.

Keep. No matter Sir, since you have good meat set
Before you, never ask who sent it; if heaven
Provide for you, and make the fowls of the
Air your. Cators, feed you fat, and be thankful,
And so I leave you.
Exit.
M. Fost. The Keeper is your friend, and powers true balm
Into your smarting wounds; therefore dear
Husband endure the dressing with patience.

O. Fost. O wife, my losses are as numberless as the
Sea's sands that swallowed them. And shall
I in reckoning them, my sad griefs multiply?

M. Fost. You may Sir, but your dim eyes so thick with tears do run.

You cannot see from whence your comforts come,
Besides your debts being truly counted cannot
Be great.

O. Fost. But all my wealth and state lies in the seas Bottom.


M. Fost. It again may rise.

O. Fost. Oh never.

M. Fost. Good Sir, so hope, for I from heaven espy
An arm to pluck you from this misery.

Enter Keeper. Keep. Sir, there is one without desires to speak with you.

O. Fost. Go send him in; none comes to do me good
My wealth is lost, now let them take my blood.
Enter Robert. Ha? what art thou? Call for the Keeper there
And thrust him out of doors, or lock me up.

M. Fost. O it is your son, Sir.

O. Fost I know him not:
I am no King, unless of scorn and woe,
Why kneel'st thou then; why do thou mock me so?

Rob. O my dear father, hither am I come
Not like a threatening storm to increase your wrack
For I would take all sorrows from your back
To lay them all on my own.

O. Fost. Rise mischief, rise, away and get thee gone.

Rob. O if I be thus hateful to your eye
I will depart, and wish I soon may dye;
Yet let your blessing, Sir, but fall on me.

O. Fost. My heart still hates thee.

M. Fost. Sweet husband.

O. Fost. Get you both gone;
That misery takes some rest that dwells alone;
Away thou villain.

Rob. Heaven can tell, ache but your finger, I to make it
Well, would cut my hand off.

O. Fost. Hang thee, hang thee.

M. Fost. Husband.

O. Fost. Destruction meet thee, turn the key there ho.

Rob. Good Sir: I Am gone, I will not stay to grieve you:
Oh knew you (for your woes) what pains I feel,
You would not scorn me so. See Sir, to cool
Your heat of burning sorrow I have got
Two hundred pounds and glad it is my lot
To lay it down, with reverence at your feet;
No comfort in the world to me is sweet,
Whilst thus you live in moan.

O. Fost. Stay.

Rob. Good troth Sir, I Will have none on it back,
Could but one penny of it save my life.

M. Fost. Yet stay and hear him; Oh unnatural strife,
In a hard fathers bosom.

O. Fost. I see mine error now: oh can there grow
A Rose upon a Bramble? did theree'r flow
Poison and health together in one tide?
I Am borne a man; reason may step aside.
And lead a father's love out of the way:
Forgive me, my good Boy, I went astray;
Look, on my knees I beg it; not for joy
Thou bringst this golden rubbish, which I spurn
But glad in this, the heaven's mine eye balls turn,
And fix them right to look upon that face
Where love remains with pity, duty, grace.
Oh my dear wronged boy!

Rob. Gladness o'rwhelmes my heart with joy I cannot speak

M. Fost. Crosses of this foolish world.
Did never grieve my heart with ^ments more
Than it is now grown light,
With joy and comfort of this happy sight.

O. Fost. Yet wife, I disinherited this boy.

Rob. Your blessings all I crave.

O. Fost. And that enjoy for ever, evermore; my
Blessings fly, to pay thy virtues, love and charity.

Enter Stephens Wife M. Fost. Here comes your brothers wife,
Welcome dear sister.

Wife. I thank you; how fare you brother?

O. Fost. Better than your husband's hate could wish me,
That laughes to see my back with sorrows bow:
But I am rid of half my ague now.

Wife. Had you an ague then?

O. Fost. Yes, and my heart had every hour a fit.
But now 'tas left me well, and I left it.

Wife. O, it is well Cousin, what make you hear I pray?

Rob. To support a weak house falling to decay.

Wife. It Is well, if you can do it, and that the timber
You under-prop it with be all your own.
Hark Cuz, where is your Uncles money?

Rob. Faith Aunt it is gone, but not at dice,
Nor drabbing.

Wife. Sir, I believe with your Uncles gold your father
You relieve.

Rob. You are saved believing so, your beliefe's true.

Wife. You cut large thongs of that is another's due
And you will answer't ill: now in good troth
I laugh at this jest, much good do them both:
My wager I had won, had I but laid.

O. Fost. What has my poor boy done, that you have
Made so much blood rise in's cheeks?

Wife. Nothing dear brother, indeed all is well:
The course that he has run I like and love,
Let him hold on the same;
A sons love to a father none can blame;
I will not leave your brother's ^on heart
Till I have beat it soft with my intreates.

O. Fost. 'Twill never be music it is so full of frets.

Wife. Frets make best music: strings the higher
Racked sound sweetest.

O. Fost. And sound nothing when they are cracked,
As is his love to me, and mine to him.

Wife. I hope you both in smoother streams shall swim:
He^'s now the Sheriff of London, and in counsel
Set at the Guildhall, in his scarlet Gown
With Mayor and Aldermen, how to receive the King,
Who comes to see Master Bruines Hospital
To morrow consecrated by the Cardinal,
And old Saint Marie's Spittle, here by Shoreditch.

M. Fost. I sister, he and you may sit 'bout what you will;
Heaven I Am sure prospers it, but I am ever crossed;
You have bin bound for thee great voyages,
Yet never run a ground; maid, wife, and widow,
And wife again; have spread full and fair sails,
No wracks you e're did dread, nor e're felt any;
But even close a shore, I Am sunk, and midst of
All my wealth made poor.

Wife. You must thank heaven.

M. Fost. I do indeed, for all.

Wife. Sister, that hand can raise that gives the fall.

Enter Keeper. Keep. Master Foster, the new Sheriff your brother
Is come to Ludgate, and I am come in haste
To know your pleasure, if you would see him.

O. Fost. I Will see a fury first, hence, clap to the door I prithee.

Wife. Why, it is your brother Sir.

Rob. Father let us fly the thunder of his rage.

Wife. Stand valiantly, and let me bear the storm, all hurts
That are, and ruins in your bosoms I Will repair.

Enter Stephen Foster. Ste. Where Is the Keeper, go Sir, take
My Officers, and see your prisoners
Presently conveyed from Ludgate unto
Newgate, and the Counters.

Keep. I shall Sir.

Ste. Let the Constables of the Wards assist you,
Go, dispatch and take these with you; how now,
What make thou here thou Catiffe? had come
Thou to stitch his wounds that seeks to cut
My Throat, dare thou in dispight releeve this
Dotard?

O. Fost. Get thee from my sight, thou devil in red;
Come thou in scarlet pride to tread on thy poor
Brother in a Iayle, Is there but one small conduit-
pipe that runs could water to my comfort, and
Would thou cut off that thou cruel man?

Ste. Yes, I Will stop that pipe that thou may pining sit,
When drops but fell on me, thou poysond'st it:
Thou thrus^'st a sons name from thy cruel breast,
For clothing of his Uncle; now that Uncle
Shall thrust him naked forth for clothing thee,
Banished for ever from my wealth and me.

O. Fost. Thou can not be to nature so uneven,
To punish that which has a pay from heaven;
Pirty I mean, and duty; Would thou strike?
Wound me then, that will kill thee if I can,
Tha^^t no brother, and I Will be no man.

Ste. Thou ravest.

O. Fost. How can I choose? thou make me mad,
For shame thou should not make these white hairs sad;
Churl, beat not my poor boy, let him not lose
Thy love for my sake, I had rather bruise
My soul with torments for a thousand years, could
(...) live them, rather than salt tears thy
Malice draw from him; see here is thy gold,
Tell it, none's stole, my woes can never be told.

Rob. O (...) Is nature quite forgot?

O. Fost. Choke with thy dunghill muck, and vex me not.

Ste. No, keep it, he perhaps, that money stole
From me, to give it thee, for which to vex thy
Soul, (...) turn him forth of doors, make him
Thy h^e, of Iay^es, miseries, curses, and despair;
For here I d^herit him of all.

O. Fost. No matter, lands to him in heaven will fall.

Wife. (...) Husband.

M. (...). ^other.

Rob. Dear Uncle.

(...). ^

(...) And (...), the dive^^ thumbs stop thine ears.

Ste. I Will make thee wash those curses off with tears.
Keeper, away with him out of my sight,
And do Sir, as I charged you.

Keep. Yes Sir; I will.

O. Fost. Poor tyranny; when Lions weak Lambs kill.
Ex
Ste. How now wife, art vexed yet?

Wife. Never so well content, believe me Sir;
Your mildness wears this mask of cruelty well.

Ste. I Am glad they are gone, mine eyes with rain did swell,
And much ado they had from pouring down:
The Keeper knows my mind, Wife I have paid
My brothers debts; and when he is out of door:
To march to Newgate, he shall be set free.

Wife. O let me kiss thee for this charity;
But for your Cousin Sir.

Ste. He Is my lives best health,
The Boy shall not miscarry for more wealth
Than London Gates look safe up every night,
My breath in black clouds flies, my thoughts
Are white.

Wife. Why from Ludgate do you remove prisoners?

Ste. This is my meaning wife;
I Will take the prison down and build it new,
With Leads to walk on, Rooms large and fair:
For when my self lay there, the noisome air,
Choaktup my spirits, and none better know,
What prisoners feel, than they that taste the woe.
The workmen are appointed for the business,
I will have it dispatched before it is thought on.

Wife. In good deeds I will walk hand in hand with you,
There is a fair tenement, adjoining close to the Gate
That was my fathers, I Will give it freely, take it down,
And add so much ground to the work.
It Is fairly given.
Thy soul on prisoners prayers shall mount to heaven:
The Plummers and the Workmen have surveyed the ground
From Paddington; from whence I Will have laid pipes
Long to London to convey sweet water into Ludgate;
From fresh Springs: when charity tunes the, pipe the
Poor man sings.
Enter Keeper. How now Keeper.

Keep. The prisoners are removed Sir.

Ste. What did you with my brother?

Keep. As you commanded Sir, I have discharged him.

Ste. How did he meet that unexpected kindness?

Keep. Troth Sir, as a man or'ecome 'twixt grief and gladness,
But turning to his son, he fetched a sigh
So violent, as if his heart would break,
And silent, wept, having no power to speak.

Wife. Alas good old man, some sweet bird must sing,
And give his sorrows present comforting.

Ste. Not yet, I Will wrack his sorrows to the height,
And of themselves they will then sink softly down;
Keeper, go thou again after my brother,
Charge in my name him and his son to appear
Before the King, to whom I will make known
Their wrongs against me; showing just cause
To disinherit both by course of law. Be gone.

Keep. I am gone Sir.
Exit.
Ste. Come Wife.

Wife. What Is your meaning Sir?

Ste. Thou shall know that anon.
The heavens often scowle, clouds thicken, winds blow high,
Yet the brightest Sun cleares all, and so will I.
Exeunt.
Enter, Henry the third Mountford, Pembroke, Arundell, Lord Mayor, Sheriff
Foster, Cardinal, Bruine, etc. King. O! welcome is all love, our peoples shouts
In their hearts language, make our benvenues,
Most high and sovereign; we return all thanks
Unto our loving Citizens, chiefly to you Sir,
Whose pious work invites our Majesty to royallize
This place with our best presence, accompanied with this
Reverend Cardinal; would we might, after many broils,
End our days in these religious toils;
We would work most faithfully; but bounteous Sir,
How do you call your buildings?

Bru. Unless it please your Majesty to change it,
I call it, Domus Dei.

King. The house of God, it is too good to change, pray you proceed.


Bru. These are my ends to all distressed Christians,
Whose travailes this way bends the hospital,
Shall free souccour be, for three days, and three nights
Sojourne, for diet, and lodging, both sweet, and
Satisfying; and if their need be such, as much in
Coin, as shall for three days more defray their
Futher travail; this unto heaven, be you
Testator, good my Liege, and witness with me, noble
Gentlemen, most free and faithfully, I dedicate.

King. An honorable work, and deserves large memory.

Moun. It Is a good example, it is pity it is no better followed.

Arun. But say Sir, now in some future age, perhaps some two or three hundred
year behind us, this place

Intended for a use so charitable, should be
Unhallowed again, by villainous inhabitants; say whores,
In the stead of christians, and your hospitable
Tenements, turned intostewes; would not this grieve
You in your grave?

Bru. If my grave were capableof grief: sure it would Sir.

King. Prithee be a false Prophet.

Arun. I will, if I can, my Lord.

King. Let now our Heralds in the streets proclaim,
The title, and office, of this hospital;
Make known to all distressed travellors, that
We Will accept this charitable house, this Domus Dei:
Shall be their free fojourne, as is proposed.

Enter the one way, Stephens wife, the other, Mistress Foster, Jane, Old Foster,
Robert and Keeper, All kneel. King. What are these peticioners?

Rob. Each has a knee for duty, the other for petition,

King. Rise, your dutie's done, your petitionsshall need
No knees, so your intents be honest, does
None here know them?

Ste. Yes my good Lord, there is now a wonder in your sight.

King. A wonder, Master Sheriff, you mean for beauty.

Ste. No my Liege, I would not so boast mine
Own wife, but it is a wonder that excels beauty.

King. A wonder in a woman; What is it I prithee?

Ste. Patience my Liege, this is a woman that
Was never vexed.

King. You may boast it largely; it is a subjects happiness
Above a Q^^enes; Have you suites to us?

Rob. I am the suppliant plaintiff, royal Henry
From me their griefs take their original.

King. What art thou?

Rob. Even what your Grace shall please to make of me;
I was the son to this distressed father, until he
Took his pa^ity off, and threw me from his love,
Then I became son to mine Uncle by adoption,
Who likewise that has taken away again,
And thrown me back to poverty; never was
Son so ^ost betwixt two fathers, yet knows
Not one, for still the richest does despise his heir,
And I am back expulst into despair.

King. This may your vices cause.

Rob. For that I come to your impartial censure for a doom.

King. We hear, speak on, we know the parties,
^ach one relate his grief, and if it lie in us,
We Will yield relief; it is first requisite that we
Know of you Sir, the cause of this your Sons disinheritance

O. Fost. Before I understood his virtuous mind,
Or weighed his disposition to be kind,
I did that froward work; This now great man,
Was an unthrifty wretch, a prodigal then.
And I disdained to know his brotherhood,
Denied relief to him; this child kind and good
Against my contradiction, did him relieve, as his
Distressed Uncle, at this I chide; for bade,
Still he holds on his course,
He grows more kind, and he in wasting worse;
My rage continued as it had begun,
And in that rage I threw away my son.

Ste. The like plead I, my Lord: for when my state
Had raised itself by an uncertain fate,
I took this outcast child, made him my own,
As full and free, as I my self had sown
The seed that brought him forth; for this my love,
His oblieg'd duty presently did prove
A traitor to my trust, against my will,
Succouring that foe, which I did love so ill,
Only for hating him; my charity being thus
Abused, and quit with injury, what could I then
But as his father erst, so I again might throw
Him from my love? for worse is love abused
Then newborn hate, and should be so refus'de:
I did a fathers part, if it were bad,
Biame him for both, there I my pattern had.

King. You fall betwixt two pillars Sir, is it not so?

Rob. Unhappy fate, my Lord, yet thus I plead:
For this my fathers hate I might deserve,
I broke his precepts, and did unchildly swerve
From his commission, I to my Uncle gave
What was my fathers, striving thereby to save
His fallen repute; he raged, I did it still,
Yet must consesse as it was well, it was ill,
Well in my love, me thought, ill to my fate:
For I thereby ruined my own estate,
But that mine Uncle throws me forth of door
For the same cause he took me in before,
Beats forest, against my bosom; iftwere good
To (...) from a father for an Uncles food,
In laws of love and nature, how much rather
Might I abridge an Uncle for a father?
Charitie's, a virtue generally stands,
And should dispersed be through all men's hands.
Then would you keep't alone; for when your heir
I first adopted was, charity was there:
How er'rs your judgment then? seeing you see
What was good in you, makes sin in me;
You Will say my father did it, oh throw away
That soul excuse; let not discretion stray
So far a side; if custom lawful make,
Then sin were lawful for example sake;
Nor were these wasted goods only your own,
Since part was mine having adoption;
Then do him right, my Lord, yet do no wrong,
For where my duty fai'ld my love was strong.

King. With an impartial ear we have heard your
Loving story, it is both fair and honest.

Ste. O let me now anticipate your Grace,
And casting off the shadow of a face,
Show my hearts true figure, how have I strived
To make this forced counterfeit long lived,
And now it bursts; comeinto my heart,
I have two jewels here shall never part
From my loves eye watch, two worthy to be filled,
On times best record; a woman and a child,
Now Sir, to you I come, we must be friends,
Though envy wills not so, yet love contends
Against envy and her forces; my young years
Say I must offer first, a peace in tears.

O. Fost. O let my shame my bosoms center break!
Love is to young it coyes, but cannot speak.

King. You bless mine eyes with objects that become
The theater of Kings to look upon.

Ste. The keeper is discharged Sir, your debts are paid,
And from the prison yare a new free man made:
There Is not a Creditor can ask you onght,
As your son did form, so have I bought
Your liberty with mine, and to increase it more,
Because I know bare liberty is poor
Without assistance: to raise your state again,
The thirds of mine are yours, say you Amen.

Wife. No, not to that, you are kind brothers now,
Divide by halfes that love, and I Will allow.

Ste. Thou art only wise in virtue, as thou setst down,
So let it be, half my estate's your own.

O. Fost. It whole redownes again, for I am yours;
Forget this minute my forgetful hours.

Ste. O, they are buried all Sir.

King. This union's good, such league should ever be in brotherhood.

Ste. Yet without boast, my Liege, let me relate
One small thing more, remorse of my own state,
And my dear brothers worse succession;
For that we both have prisoners been in one
Selfsame place of woe, and felt those throws
That Ludgate yields; my charity bestows
Some alms of comfort: Keeper you can speak it.

Keep. And many hundreds more Sir, you have reedified
And built it fair, adding more ground to it,
And by pipes of lead from Paddingtun, drawn
Water thither, free for all prisoners, lodgings
Likewise free, and a hundred pounds yearly, to make
Them fues for better comfort: all this is almost finished:

Kin. A worthy work, the better being done in the Founders ere,
Not left unto succession.

Ste. O my good Lord, I ever keep in mind an English
Sentence, which my tutor is, and teaches me to act my
Charity (...) mine (...) ^full is
Performance, when the Benefactor's dead.

King. What is it I prithee?

Ste. This my good Lord, women are forgetful.
Children unkind, Executors covetous, and take what they find,
If any man ask where the deads goods became,
The Executor swears he dyed a poor man.

King. You have prevented well, so has this good Alderman,
I wish you many Scholars.

Wife. You make some doubt of me in this Sir;
Did you not say that women were forgetful,

King. You have vexed her now Sir, how do you answer that?

Ste. No my Lord, she is exempt from the proverb.

Wife. No my Lord, I Will help it better, I do confess
That women are forgetful, yet never the less
I am exempt, I know my fate, and find
My dear husband must not leave me behind,
But I must go before him, and it is said,
The grave's good rest when women go first to bed.

Ste. Thanks for thy excuse good wife, but not thy love
To fill my grave before me, I would not live to see that day.

Wife. Prithee no more, I had rather be angry than flattered.

King. You have a wonder Master Sheriff, a prizelesse jewel.

Ste. Many jewels my good Lord; a brother, wife, and child,
For this I would have strove even with a father,
(...) ere rough storms did in my browsappeare,
Within my bosom it was always clear.

O. Fost. I give him to you now Sir.

Ste. I take him, and to him back do give,
All that my self behind in state shall leave.

O. Fost. And all that you gave me, I do bestow,
So in one hour become full heir to two.

Bru. I claim a third by this bonds virtue,
See as a third father, thou art heir to those.

Jane. I will not go to him father on any of these conditions.

Rob. You shall have love to boot too, sweet Jane.

Jane. Nay, and y^^ play booty, I dare not trust you.

Rob. What shall I say, (...) and (...),
Ty'de in a True-loves Knot, never to part.

Jane. I marry Sir, these are better conditions than the
Inheritance of three fathers; let me have
Love in Esse, let lands follow in Posse:
Now I Will have thee as fast as the Priest
Can dispatch us, let him read as fast as he can.

King. The liveliest harmony that ere I heard;
All instruments compared to these sweet tunes,
Are dull and harsh; I joy to see so good a child.
A woman wonder, brothers reconciled;
You worthy Sir, did invite us to a feast,
We Will not forget it, but will be your guest,
Because we will veiw these wonders over again,
Whose records do deserve a brazen Pen,
But this above the rest, in golden text,
Shall be insculpt; A Woman never Vexed.

Exeunt. FINIS.

