NEC TEMERE NEC TIMIDE
Jr. Clement Cottrell Knight. Master of the Ceremonies



HVMORS ANTIQVE FACES.

Drawn in proportion to his several Antique Iestures.

LONDON Imprinted for Henry Rockett, and are to be sold at the long Shop
under S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrie. 1605.

To the Reader.
HE that to please all humors does intend,
May well begin but never make an end:
Since every humor has his several vain,
Which in themselves strange objects do retain
I then will write at random: hit as it will,
If some be pleased, of some be impleased still.
To him that likes it best, to him I send it,
Mislike it not till you your self can mend it.
Then if my humor has done humors wrong
I Will rather mend it or else hold my tongue.
Mean while comment but rightly on the text
I will present strange fashions to you next.
Prologue.
Under the shadow of the gloomy night,
When silent sleep arrests each mortal wight,
When fayrie Oberon and his night Queen
In Cinthias honor friskes ore every green.
Sleep, parting from me, gave invention light
To find some subject for my pen to wright
When musing how the world I best might fit,
I saw how Poets humor'd out their wit.
Nay then thought I write all of what they list,
Once in my days i will prove a humorist.
When on the Sudden as I thought the thing,
I was encountered by the Fayrie King.
Mortal (quoth he) I charge thee to engage,
Thy pen to scourge the humors of this age,
Thou shall not need to make a long relation,
What thou can get by tediouse observation.
Fayries have left their low infernal places,
The several forms of humors in their faces.
Take what, and where thou list while it is night,
But send them home before the day be light.
Epigram.
O By your leave I pray you give them vent,
Here comes brave courtship gallant complement
He meets his friend nay then he keeps a stur,
Illustrous, generous, most accomplished Sur.
Kisses his hand and sends it to his foot
As if he ought some duty to his boot
Phoebus bright lamp good half an hour might burn,
Courtly contending, each does keep his turn.
Until their Courtship pester so the way,
By comes a cart, and then dissolues the fray.
Then out comes words more eloquent then Hermes,
The quintessence of all your Inkchorne terms.
As we are Alians I am sorry thoe,
It Is your defect Sir: you will have it so.
Most admirable be the words they speak,
TO express their minds plain english is to weak.
To these strange words, which these brave gallants cogge,
A courtly conge is the Epilogue.
For having now so frankely spent their store,
Needs must they part when they can speak no more
Epigram.
A Hansome fellow and a proper Squire,
A little hanging would promote him higher,
A man I tell you of the better sort,
Amongst his equals has a good report,
His dealings on the market day does rall
At newgate market, Cheap and Leaden Hall.
He is a taker, indeed is he so,
I mean a taker up of Purses thoe:
This fellow coming lately down Cheape-side,
Afemall booty suddenly espide.
It Was Market day, but quight out of his mind:
For he had left his Instruments behind.
But his conceit that is no barren spring,
With little musing had bethought a thing.
Was it the woman's luck or fortune whether
That she should wear both purse and knife together?
The Cutpurse swore and bound it with a curse,
The woman's knife should cut the woman's purse,
And did it too: good reason by my troth,
For would you that a man should break his oathe,
It Was not for need I pray conceive the best,
His humor was to cut a Purse in jest.
Epigram.
Room Sirs, I pray for Bachus Cosen here,
Whose paunch (the fatal tomb to al good cheer)
Welters in tallowe and huge cakes of grease,
Such burly fellows make good men of peace,
He is of such a huge insatiat size
His whole days work nothing but gurmandize.
He has a belly circular and round,
Is never full, O sir it is profound.
He has a huge and dreadefull fiery nose,
God bless Paul's steeple when he puffes and blows,
He dares not go vngirded not two meals,
For then his guts would fall about his heels.
Poor Painters were undone if he were dead,
They loose the pattern of a Sarzens head,
I met him once riding down Holborne late,
I surely thought the mouth at Bishops-gate
Had been on progress, out in Oxfordshire
For to devour all Mutton and porredge there.
Well blame not him, he has a care to carue,
For otherwise poor churchyard worms would starve.
Epigram.
Sweet Signeor swash was late overcome with passion
Because his life was quite worn out of fashion:
For he protests, nay and you will, heel swear
That he has bin in London half a year.
Yet all this while that he in London lay:
It Was not his luck so much as see a play.
Nay which is more, he has not seen great Hunckes,
Nor yet has bin in Shor-diteh among his Punckes.
And God forgive him he is not precise,
Much to frequent any good exercise.
Why this is strange a riddle not a rhyme,
Where has this gallant yonker spent his time.
To tell the Jest I think it will make you smile,
He has bin in the Counter all this while.
Epigram.
ONe told a Courser where he should repair,
And find a field well fraught with praunsing wate
Whither he went without let or denial
Before he bought, thinking to steal a trial.
Some two or three he backs, but does reiourne,
The dull paced Iades they would not serve his turn,
At last he backed one, whose heels did rebound,
As if his vaultage seemde to scorn the ground.
And though his rider keept him on the rack,
Ran quight away, his chapman on his back:
His courage was of such a fiery pitch,
As bore the Courser over hedge and ditch.
But seeing one he feared would reveal him,
He raygn'd him in, he did not mean to steal him
It was the owner, then he keeps a stir,
Houlds back his head, but gives his sides the Snurre.
As if indeed he could not hold him still,
But that he stole a Horse against his will.
Nothing but this, yet he was hanged they say,
Because the horse did carry him away.
Epigram.
Do you know this fellow in the velvet Jack?
His first beginning was with, what do ye lack?
But now indeed the man in age does drop,
Therefore unfit to keep a Trades-mans Shop.
And he has found the trade of bonds and libles,
The Devil found it for his own Desciples.
A Usurer, O Sir it is very true!
A faithful vnlaine and an honest Jew.
He will not stick to lend his money forth,
So he have pawn for five times more then worth.
He Will send you money upon all your state,
Be it in Lands, in Jewels, or in plate.
Heel smooth you up, and speak you wondrous fair,
Pay when you can some weeks shall break no square.
Trust not his kindness, then your case is evil,
As good to be behoulding to the Devil.
Epigram.
IF you to know this gallant do desire,
He is the offspring of a covetous sire,
No sooner is the Father dead, scarce cold,
But his brave Son beguilds his purse with gold.
Unto his Fathers Closset does he hie,
In faith he longs to see these Angels fly.
Where like some potent fellow in his fumes,
Ruffles his feathers and displayes his plumes.
And for his signet takes his fathers ring
Angel his subjects; O most gallant King*
To whom as one to pity only bent,
(Says he) I long bewayl'd your prisonment.
My father he kept you in slavery,
But I am come to give you liberty,
Next he takes care if he shall live or not,
To spend the wealth his covetous Father got.
Good faith it is true his worship lackes a man,
Heel make a shift heel spend it if he can.
Ten pound a year heel give, each day three meals,
Only to carry gold after his heels.
To bear forth presents, be his apple squire,
To make al^gge, and say Ouy Mounsire.
This being done out of the doors he throws,
To seek companions my young Master goes.
Some twenty pound this day he does disburse,
He scorns to bring home fragments in his purse,
Ere long his father must be laid in clay,
And then he swears heel make that day a day,
All the good Lands in England at the least,
Must lend their presence for to grace his feast,
Thus every day he revels and makes sport,
Why he does well his Kingdom is but short.
Epigram.
But who is this that comes creeping here,
That like the King of Hunger does appear,
O it is the brave resolved Gentleman,
That takes Physic therefore looks wan,
A strong purgation, he has had of late,
It purged his Purse and has refind his state.
His purpose is to live at rest and quiet,
Therefore has bound himself to keep a diet.
For these a week he does abstain to eat,
Not for devotion, but for lack of meat,
Alas good prodigal he knows not where to dine,
His ordinary is amongst the swine.
I was a fool (quoth he) to think this thing,
That golden Angels had bin lame of wing.
Who dares not trust his wife before his eye:
A horn plague meets him for his Jealousy.

Epigram.
A Fellow once diseased in the head,
Lived much in doubt that he was cuckoled,
He asked counsel of his neighbor by,
If any means there were the truth to try,
His friend comes ore him with a wondrous story,
Of Saint Lukes share the Cuckoldes consistory.
And says i'ft please him thither to repair,
All night to invoke that Saint with prayer,
If it were so, he did assure him well,
Ere morning come the Oracle would tell.
Till night was come my fool lived in confusion,
He was a fire to try this strange conclusion.
Well he is shipped off at Lion kaye,
For his boon voyage at Saint Lucas baye.
He landed, does unto the alter go
Whereon amazed he saw great horns to grow.
He makes his prayer, tells the post his plight,
All a cold, long, and teadiouse winter night.
And every night-Bird that he heard to creake,
He still supposed the Oracle would speak.
Mean while his friend (he did before importune)
Supplide his room and gave my fool his fortune.
Well, morn is come no voice that he can hear,
He thanks the Saint that his good wife is clear.
Having performed his obsequious rightes,
Forthwith is dubbed one of Saint Lucas Knights.
It Is for his praise I hope, he has ingroste,
A pair of horns more on Saint Lucas post.
Increast himself although his wit was worn,
For he returned heavier by the horn.
Well home he comes thinking to take a nappe,
Alas his head had quight out grown his cappe.
This made him wonder but his wife was cleene,
He rather thought Diana he had seen.
Epigram.
A Poor Slave once with penury aflicted,
Yet to Tobacco mightily adicted
Says, they that take Tobacco keeps their health,
Are worthy fellows in a common wealth.
For if (says he) Tobacco were our cheer,
Then other victuals never would be dear.
Fie on excess it makes men faint and meek,
A penny loaf might serve a man a week.
Were we conformed to the Camelions fare,
To live by smoke as they do live by air.
O how our men oppress and spoil their sense,
in making hauoke of the elements.
He can give reason for what he has spoake,
My Salamander lives by fire and smoke.
Necessity does cause him to repeat,
Tobaccos praise for want of other meat.
Epigram.
A Jolly fellow Essex borne and bred,
A Farmers Son his Father being dead,
T'expell his grief and melancholy passions,
Had vowed himself to Travel and see fashions.
His great minds object was no trifling toy,
But to put down the wandering Prince of Troy,
Londons discovery, first he does decide,
His man must be his Pilot and his guide.
Three miles he had not past, there he must sit:
He ask't if he were not near London yet,
His man replies, good Sir your self besturre,
For we have yet to go six times as far.
Alas I had rather stay at home and dig,
I had not thought the world was half so big.
Thus this great worthy comes back thoe with strife,
he never was so far in all his life.
None of the seven worthies: on his behalf,
Say, was not he a worthy Essex Calfe?
The Humors that haunt a Wife.
A Gentleman a very friend of mine,
Has a young wife and she is monstrous fine,
She Is of the new fantastique humor right,
In her attire an angel of the light.
Is she an Angel* I^ it may be well,
Not of the light, she is a light Angel.
Forsooth his door must suffer alteration,
To entertain her mighty huge Bom-fashion,
A hoode's to base, a hat which she does male,
With brauest feathers in the Estridge tail.
She scorns to tread our former proud wives taces.
That put their glory in their own fair face,
In her conceit it is not fair enough
She must reform it with your painters stuff,
And she is never merry at the heart,
Till she be got into her leatherne Cart.
Some half a mile the Coachman guides the raynes,
Then home again, birlady she takes pains.
My friend seeing what humors haunt a wife,
If he wear loose would lead a single life.
A Poor Man's policy.
NExt I will tell you of a poor man trick,
Which he did practice with a polliticke,
This poor man had a Cow it was all his stock,
Which on the Commons fed: where Catell flock,
The other had a steer a wanton Beast,
Which he did turn to feed amongst the rest.
Which in process although I know not how,
The rich man's Ox did gore the poor man's Cow,
The poor man heereat vexed waxed sad,
For it is all the living that he had,
And he must loose his living for a song,
Alas he knew not how to right his wrong.
He knew his enemy had points of law,
To save his purse, fill his devouring mawe,
Yet thought the poor man how so it betide,
I Will make him give right sentence on my side.
Without delay unto the Man he goes,
And unto him this feyned tale does gloze,
(Quoth he) my Cow which which your Ox did feed,
Has killed your Ox and I make known the deed.
Why (quoth my Politic) thou should have helped it rather,
Thou shall pay for him if thou were my father.
The course of law in no wise must be stayde,
Least I an evil president be made.
O Sir (quoth he!) I cry you mercy now,
I did mistake, you Ox has gorde my Cow.
Convict hy reason he began to brawle,
But was content to let his action fall.
As why? (quoth he) thou lookst unto her well,
Could I prevent the mischeife that befell?
I have more weighty causes now to try.
Might orecomes right without a reason why.
Epigram.
ONe of the damned crew that lives by drink,
And by Tobacco's stillified stink
Met with a Country man that dwelt at Hull
Thought he this peasant's fit to be my Gull.
His first salute like to the French-mans wipe.
Words of encounter, please you take a pipe?
The Country man amazed at this rabble,
Knew not his mind yet would be conformable.
Well in a petty Alehouse they ensconce
His Gull must learn to drink Tobacco once.
Indeed his purpose was to make a jest.
How with Tobacco he the peasant dressed.
He takes a whiffe, with art into his head,
The other stands still astonished.
Till all his senses he does back revoke,
Sees it ascend much like Saint Katherins smoke.
But this indeed made him the more admire,
He saw the smoke: thought he his head's a fire,
And to increase his fear he thought poor soul,
His scarlet nose had been a fyerie cole.
Which circled round with Smoke, seemed to him
Like to some rotten brand that burns dim.
But to show wisdom in a desperate case,
He threw a Can of beer into his face,
And like a man some fury did inspire,
Ran out of doors for help to quench the fire.
The Ruffin throws away his Trinidado,
Out comes huge oaths and then his short poynado,
But then the Beer so troubled his eyes,
The country man was gone ere he could rise,
A fire to dry him he does now require,
Rather then water for to quench his fire.
Epigram.
COme my brave gallant come uncase, uncase,
Near shall Oblivion your great acts deface.
He has been there where never man came yet,
An unknown country, I, i will warrant it,
Whence he could Ballace a good ship inholde.
With Rubies, Saphers, Diamonds and gold,
Great Orient Pearls esteemed no more then moates,
Sold by the pecke as chandlers measure oats,
I marvel then we have no trade from thence,
O it is to far it will not bear expense.
Twere far indeed, a good way from our main,
If charges eat up such excessive gain,
Well he can show you some of Lybian grauel,
O that there were another world to travel,
I heard him swear that he (it was in his mirth)
Had been in all the corners of the earth.
Let all his wonders be together stitcht,
He threw the bar that great Alcides pitched:
But he that saw the Oceans farthest strands,
You pose him if you ask where Dover stands.
He has been under ground and hell did see
Aeneas near durst go so far a he.
For he has gone through Plutoes Regiment,
Saw how the Feindes do Liars there torment.
And how they did in helles damnation frye,
But who would think the Traveler would lie?
To dine with Pluto he was made to tarry,
As kindly used as at his Ordinary.
Hogsheades of wine drawn out into a Tub,
Where he did drink hand-smooth with Beelzebub,
And Proserpine gave him a goulden bow
It Is in his chest he cannot show it now.
Of one that cousned the Cutpurse.
ONe toulde a Drouer that believed it not,
What booties at the plays the Cutpurse got,
But if' twere so my Drouers wit was quick,
He vowed to serve the Cutpurse a new trick.
Next day unto the play, policy hy'd,
A bag of forty shillings by his side,
Which houlding fast he takes up his stand,
If stringes be cut his purse is in his hand.
A fine conceited Cutpurse spying this,
Looked for no more, the forty shillings his,
Whilst my fine Politic gazed about,
The Cutpurse feately took the bottom out.
And cuts the strings, good fool go make a jest,
This Dismal day thy purse was fairly blessed.
Houlde fast good Noddy it is good to dread the worse,
Your monie's gone, I pray you keep your purse.
The Play is done and forth the fool does go,
Being glad that he cousned the Cutpurse so.
He thought to iybe how he the Cutpurse dressed,
And memorize it for a famous jest.
But putting in his hand it ran quight throw
Dash't the conceit, heel never speak on it now,
You that to plays have such delight to go,
The Cutpurse cares not, still deceive him so.
A drunken fray.
DIcke met with Tom in faith it was their lot,
Two honest Drunkards must go drink a pot,
It Was but a pot or say a little more,
Or say a pot that, s filled eight times ore.
But being drunk, and met well with the leese,
They drink to healthes devoutly on their knees,
Dicke drinks to Hall to pledge him Tom reiectes,
And scorns to do it for some odd respects
Will thou not pledge him that't a gull, a Scab,
Were with my manhood thou deseruest a stab,
But it is no matter drink another bout,
We Will intot'h field and there we will try it out.
Lets go (says Tom) no longer by this hand,
Nay stay (quoth Dicke) lets see if we can stand.
Then forth they go after the Drunken pace,
Which God he knows was with a reeling grace,
Tom made his bargain, thus with bonnie Dicke
If it should chance my foot or so should slipp,
How would thou use me or after what Size,
Would pare me shorter of would let me rise.
Nay God forbid our quarrels not so great,
To kill thee on advantage in my heat.
Tush we will not fight for any hate or so,
But for mere love that each to other owe.
And for thy learning lo I Will show a trick,
No sooner spoke the word but down comes Dicke,
Well now (quoth Tom) thy life hangs on my sword,
If I were down how would thou keep thy word?
Why with these hilts I Would brain thee at a blow,
Faith in my humor cut thy throat or so,
But Tom he scorns to kill his conquered foe,
Lets Dicke arise and to it again they go.
Dicke throws down Tom or rather Tom did fall,
My hilts (quoth Dicke) shall brain thee like a maull,
Is It so (quoth Tom good faith what remedy,
The Tower of Babelles fallen and so am I
But Dicke proceeds to give the fatal wound,
It mist his throat: but run into the ground.
but he supposing that the man was slain,
Straight fled his country, shipped himself for Spain,
Whilst valiant Thomas dyed dronken deep,
Forgot his danger and fell fast a sleep.
Epigram.
What Is he that stares as if he were afright
The fellow Sure has seen some dreadful spright
Mass rightly guest, why sure I did divine,
He Is haunted with a Spirit feminine.
In plain terms thus, the Spirit that I mean,
His martial wife that notable cursed queen,
No other weapons but her nails or fist,
Poor patient Idiot he dares not resist,
His neighbor once would borrow hut his knife,
Good neighbor stay (quoth he) i will ask my wife.
Once came he home Inspired in the head,
He found his neighbor and his wife a bed,
Yet durst not stir, but hide him in a hole,
He feared to displease his wife poor sole.
But why should he so dread and fear her hate,
Since she had given him armor for his pate?
Next day forsooth he does his neighbor meet,
Whom with stern rage thus furiously does greet,
Villain i will slit thy nose, out comes his knife,
Sir (quoth he) go to I Will tell your wife.
Apaled at which terror meekely said
Retire good knife my fury is all laid.
Proteus.
TIme serving humor thou wrie-faced Ape,
That can transform thy self to any shape:
Come good Proteus come away apace,
We long to see thy mumping Antique face.
This is the fellow that lives by his wit,
A cogging knave and fawning Parrasit,
He has behavior for the greatest port,
And he has humors for the rascal sort,
He has been great with Lords and high estates,
They could not live without his rare conceits,
He was associat for the brauest spirits,
His gallant carriage such favor merrits.
Yet to a Ruffin humor for the stews,
A right graund Captain of the damned crewes,
With whom his humor always is unstable
Mad, melancholy, drunk and variable.
Hat without band like cutting Dicke he go'es,
Renowned for his new invented oaths.
Sometimes like a Ciuilian it is strange
At twelve a clock he must unto the Change,
Where being thought a Merchant to the eye,
He tells strange news his humor is to lie.
Some Damask coat the effect thereof must hear,
Inuites him home and there he gets good cheer.
but how is it now such brave renowned wits,
Wear ragged robes with such huge ghastly slitts,
Faith thus a ragged humor he has got
Whole garments for the Summer are to hot.
Thus you may censure gently if you please,
He wears such Garments only for his ease.
Or thus, his creadit will no longer wave.
For all men know him for a prating knave.
Epilogue.
VAnish ye hence ye changelings of the night,
For I descry your enemy the light:
Fly through the western Gate see you dark gleames,
Least in the east you meet with Phoebus beams
Descend into your Orbs I say begone,
And thank your gentle Master Oberon.
Tell him how well your gestures fit our rhyme,
being roughly modeled in so short a time.
For what you see presented to your sight,
I only write to tyer out the night,
Wherein if you delight to here me sing
We Will have more trafique with the fayrie King.
E. M.

FINIS.

