HVMORS LOOKING Glass.

LONDON, Imprinted by Ed. Allde for William Ferebrand and are to be sold at
his Shop in the pope's head Palace, right over against the Tauerne-dore. 1608.

To his very Loving Friend-Master George Lee.
ESteemed friend, I pray thee take it kind,
That outward action bears an inward mind,
What objects here these papers do deliver,
Bestow the viewing of them for the giver.
I make thee a partaker of strange sights,
Drawn antique works of humors vain delights.
A mirror of the mad conceited shapes,
Of this our ages giddy-headed apes,
These fash'on mongers, self besotted men
Of kindred to the foul that wore my pen,
Are at an hours warning to appear,
And muster in six sheets of Paper here.
And this is all at this time I bestow,
To evidence a greater love I owe.
Yours SAMVEL ROWLANDS.

Reader.
AS many antique faces pass,
From Barbers chair unto his glass,
There to behold their kind of trim,
And how they are reformed by him,
Or at Exchang where Merchants greet,
Confusion of the tongues do meet,
As English, French, Italian, Dutch,
Spanish, and Scot'sh, with diverse such.
So from the Press these papers come
To show the humorous shapes of some.
Here are such faces good and bad,
As in a Barbers shop are had,
And here are tongues of diverse kinds,
According to the speakers minds.
Behold their fashions, hear their voice,
And let discretion make thy choice.
SAMVELL ROWLANDS.

Epigram.
SOme man that to contention is inclin'de,
With any thing he sees, a fault will find,
As, that is not so good, the same's amiss,
I have no great affection unto this.
Now I protest I do not like the same,
This must be mended, that deserves blame,
It were far better such a thing were out,
This is obscure, and that is as full of doubt.
And much ado, and many words are spent
In finding out the path that humors went,
And for direction to that Idle way
Only a busy tongue bears all the sway.
The dish that Aesope did commend for best,
Is now a days in wonderful request,
But if you find fault on a certain ground,
We Will fall to mending when the fault is found,
Epigram.
PRa'y by your leave, make mou^sieur humors room
That often has walked about Duke Humphries tomb
And sat amongst the Knights to see a play,
And gone in's suite of Satin every day,
And had his hat display abushie plume,
And's very beard deliver forth perfume.
But when was this'aske Friar Bacons head
That answered Time is past, O time is fled*
Satin and silk was pawned long ago,
And now in canuase, no knight can him know.
His former state, in dark oblivion steepes,
Only Paul's Gallarie, that walk he keeps.
Epigram.
Cross not my humor, with an ill placed word,
For if thou do, behold my fatal sword:
Do see my countenance begin look red?
Let that fore tell there is fury in my head.
A little discontent will quickly heat it.
Touch not my stake, thou were as good to eat it,
These damned dice, how cursed they devour:
I lost some half score pound in half an hour,
A bowl of wine, sirrah: you villain, fill:
Who draws it Rascal? call me hither Will.
You Rogue, what have to Supper for my diet?
Tel'st me of Butchers meat? knave I defy it.
I Will have a banquet to enuite an Earl,
A Phoenix boyld in broth distilled in Pearl.
Hold dry this lease, a candle quickly bring,
I Will take one pipe to bed, none other thing.
Thus with Tobacco he will sup to night:
Flesh-meate is heavy, and his purse is light.
Epigram.
TWo Gentlemen of hot and fiery sprite,
Took boat, and went up Westward to go fight
Embarked both, for Wens-worth they set sail,
And there ariuing with a happy gaile,
The Watermen discharged for their fare,
Then to be parted, thus their minds declare.
Pray Ores (said they) stay here and come not nie,
We go to fight a little, but here by.
The Watermen with staves did follow then,
And cried, oh hold your hands good Gentlemen,
You know the danger of the law, forbear:
So they put weapons up and fell to swear.
Epigram.
ONe of these Cuccold-making Queanes
did graft her husbands head:
who armed with anger, steel and horn
would kill him stained his bed.
And challenged him unto the field,
Vowing to have his life,
Where being met, sirrah (quoth he,)
I do suspect my Wife
Is scarce so honest as she should,
You make of her some use:
Indeed said he I love her well,
I Will frame no false excuse.
O! do you confess? by heavens (quoth he)
Had thou dem'de thy guilt,
This blade had gone into thy guts,
Even to the very Hilt.
Epigram.
OCeasion late was ministered for one to try his friend,
Ten pounds he did entreat him yt of all love he would
His case was an accursed case, no comfort to be found, (le^d
Unless he friendly drew his purse and blessed him with te^ pound
He did protest he had it not, making a solemn vow,
He wa^ted means and money both, to do him pleasure now.
The^ sir (quoth he) you know I have a Gelding I love well,
Necessity it has no law, I must my Gelding sell,
I have bin offered twelve for him, with ten i will be content,
Well I will try a friend (said he,) it was his chest he meant.
So fectch'd the money presently, the other sees Angels shine
Now God amercy horse (quoth he) thy credit's more then mine.
Epigram.
DIce diuing deep into a Ruffians purse,
Leaving it nothing worth but strings and leather:
He presently did fall to swear and curse,
That Is life and money he would loose together,
Took of his hat, and swore, let me but see
What Rogue dares say this same is black to me?
Another lost, and he did money lack,
And thus his fury in a heat reuiues:
Where is that Rogue denies his hat is black?
I Will fight with him, had he ten thousand lives.
Oh sir (quoth he) in troth you come too late,
Choler is past, my anger's out of date.
Epigram.
A Kind of London-walker in a boot,
(Not George a Horseback, but a Gerge a foot,)
On every day you meet him through the year,
Fot's boots and spurs, a horseman does appear.
Was met with, by an odd conceited stranger,
W^^ friendly told him that he walked in danger.
For Sir (in kindenes no way to offend you)
There is a warrant forth to apprehend you.
The Offense they say, you riding through thee street,
Have killed a Child, under your Horses feet.
Sir I protest (quoth he) they do me wrong,
I have not backed a horse, God knows how long,
What slaves be these, they have me false belied?
I Will prove this twelue-month I did never ride.
Epigram.
What feathered foul is this that does approach
As if it were an Estredge in a Coach?
Three yards of feather round about her hat,
And in her hand a babble like to that:
As full of Birds attire, as Owl, or Goose,
And like unto her gown, her self seems loose.
Cri' ye mercy Lady, lewdnes are you there?
Light feathered stuff befits you best to wear.
A deaf ear, in a just cause.
A Poor man came unto a Judge and showed his wronged state,
Entreating him for Jesus sake to be compassionate,
The wro^gs were great he did sustain, he had no help at all The Judge sat still as if the man had spoken to the wall.
With that came two rude fellows in, to have a matter tried
About an Ass, that one had let the other for to ride:
Which Ass the owner found in field, as he by chance past
And he that hired him a sleep did in the shadow lie.
For which he would be satisfied, his beast was but to ride:
And for the shadow of his Ass, he would be paid beside.
Great raging words and damned oaths,
these two asse-wrangles swore,
When presently the Judge start up, that seemed a sleep before
And heard ye follies willingly of these two sottish men,
But bad the poor man come again, he had no leisure the^.
Epigram.
A Jolly fellow Essex borne and bred,
A Farmers Son, his Father being dead,
T'expell his grief and melancholy passions,
Had vowed himself to travel and see fashions.
His great minds object was no trifling toy,
But to put down the wandering Prince of Troy.
Londons discovery first he does decide,
His man must be his Pilot and his guide.
Three miles he had not past, there he must sit:
He ask't if he were not near London yet?
His man replies good Sir your self besturre,
For we have yet to go six times as far.
Alas I had rather stay at home and dig,
I had not thought the world was half so big.
Thus this great worthy comes back (thoewith strife)
He never was fo far in all his life.
None of the seven worthies: on his behalf,
Say, was not he a worthy* Essex Calfe?
The Humors that haunt a Wife.
A Gentleman a very friend of mine,
Has a young wife and she is monstrous fine,
She Is of the new fantastique humor right,
In her attire an angel of the light.
Is she an Angel? I: it may be well,
Not of the light, she is a light Angel.
Forsooth his door must suffer alteration,
To entertain her mighty huge Bom-fashion,
A hood's to base, a hat which she does male,
With brauest feathers in the Estridge tail.
She scorns to tread our former proud wives traces.
That put their glory in their on fair faces,
In her conceit it is not fair enough,
She must reform it with her painters stuff,
And she is never merry at the heart,
Till she be got into her leatherne Cart.
Some half amile the Coachman guides the raynes,
Then home again, birladie she takes pains.
My friend seeing what humors haunt a wife,
If he were loose would lead a single life.
A poor Man's policy.
NExt I will tell you of a poor man's trick,
Which he did practice with a polliticke,
This poor man had a Cow it was all his stock,
Which on the Commons fed: where Catell flock,
The other had a steer a wanton Beast,
Which he did turn to feed amongst the rest.
Which in process although I know not how,
The rich man's Ox did gore the poor man's Cow.
The poor man heereat vexed waxed sad,
For it is all the living that he had,
And he must loose his living for a song,
Alas he knew not how to right his wrong.
He knew his enemy had points of law,
To save his purse, fill his devouring mawe,
Yet thought the poor man how so it betide,
I Will make him give right sentence on my side.
Without delay unto the Man he goes,
And unto him this feigned tale does gloze,
(Quoth he) my Cow which with your Ox did feed,
Has killed your Ox and I make known the deed.
Why (quoth my Politic) thou should have helped it rather,
Thou shall pay for him if thou were my father.
The course of law in no wise must be stayde,
Least I an cuill president be made.
O Sir (quoth h^) I cry you mercy now,
I did mistake, your Ox has gorde my Cow:
Convict by reason he began to brawle,
But was coutent to let his action fall.
As why? (quoth he) thou lookst unto her well,
Could I prevent the mischief that befell?
I have more weighty causes now to try,
Might orecomes right without a reason why.
Epigram.
ONe of the damned crew that lives by drink,
And by Tobacco's stillified stink,
Met with a Country man that dwelt at Hull:
Thought he this pesant's fit to be my Gull.
His first salute like to the French man's wipe,
Words of encounter, please you take a pipe?
The Country man amazed at this rabble,
Knew not his mind yet would be conformable.
Well, in a petty Alehouse they ensconce
His Gull must learn to drink Tobacco once.
Indeed his purpose was to make a jest,
How with Tobacco he the peasant dressed.
He takes a whiffe, with art into his head,
The other stands still astonished.
Till all his senses he does back reuoake,
Sees it ascend much like Saint Katherins smoke.
But this indeed made him the more admire,
He saw the smoke: thought he his head's a fire,
And to increase his fear he thought poor soul,
His scarlet nose had been a fiery cole.
Which circled round with smoke, seemed to him
Like to some rotten brand that burns dim.
But to show wisdom in a desperate case,
He threw a Can of beer into his face,
And like a man some fury did inspire,
Ran out out of doors for help to quench the fire.
The Ruffin throws away his Trinidado,
Out comes huge oaths and then his short poynado,
But then the Beer so troubled his eyes,
The countrieman was gone ere he could rise,
A fire to dry him he does now require,
Rather then water for to quench his fire.
Epigram.
COme my brave gallant come, uncase, uncase,
Nere shall oblivion your great acts deface,
He has been there where never man came yet,
An unknown country, I, i will warrant it,
Whence he could Ballace a good ship in hold,
With Rubies, Saphiers, Diamonds and gold,
Great Orient Pearls esteemed no more then moates,
Sold by the pecke as chandlers measure oats,
I marvel then we have no trade from thence:
O it is too far it will not bear expense,
It Were far indeed, a good way from our main,
If charges eat up such excessive gain,
Well he can show you some of Lybian gravel,
O that there were another world to travel,
I heard him swear that he (it was in his mirth)
Had been in all the corners of the earth.
Let all his wonders be together stitcht,
He threw the bar that great Alcides pitched:
But he that saw the Oceans farthest strands,
You pose him if you ask where Dover stands.
He has been under ground and hell did see,
Aeneas nere durst go so far as he.
For he has gone through Plutoes Regiment,
Saw how the Fiendes do Liars there torment.
And how they did in helles damnation frye,
But who would think the Traveler would lie?
To dine with Pluto he was made to tarry,
As kindly used as at his Ordinary.
Hogsheades of wine drawn out into a Tub,
Where he did drink hand-smooth with Beelzebub,
And Proserpine gave him a goulden bow,
It Is in his chest he cannot show it now.
Of one that cousned the Cutpurse.
ONe toulde a Drouer that believed it not,
What booties at the plays the Cutpurse got,
But if twere so my Drouers wit was quick,
He vowed to serve the Cutpurse a new trick.
Next day unto the play, policy hy'd,
A bag of forty shillings by his side,
Which houlding fast he takes up his stand,
If stringes be cut his purse is in his hand.
A fine conceited Cutpurse spying this,
Looked for no more, the for sh^llings his,
Whilst my fine Politic gazed about,
The Cutpurse feately took the bottom out.
And cuts the strings, good fool go make a jest,
This Dismal day thy purse was fairly blessed.
Houlde fast good Noddy it is good to dread the worse,
Your monie's gone, I pray you keep your purse.
The play is done and forth the fool does go,
Being glad that he cousned the Cutpurse so.
He thought to iybe how he the Cutpurse dressed,
And memorize it for a famous jest.
But putting in his hand it tan quite throw
Dash't the conceit, heel never speak on it now,
You that to plays have suc^ delight to go,
The Cutpurse cares not, still deceive him so.
A drunken fray.
DIcke met with Tom in faith it was their lot,
Two honest Drunkars must go drink a pot,
It Was but a pot, or say a little more,
Or say a pot tha^'s filled eight times ore.
But being drunk, and met well with the leese,
They drink to healthes devoutly on their knees,
Dicke drink, to Hall, to pledge him Tom relects,
And scorns to do it for some odd respects
Will thou nor pledge him tha^'t a gill, a Scab,
Were with my manhood thou deseruest a stab,
But it is no matter drink another bout,
We Will intot'n field and there we will try it out.
Lets go (says Tom) no longer by this hand,
Nay stay (quoth Dicke (lets see if we can stand.
Then forth they go after the drunken pace,
Which God he knows was with a reeling grace,
Tom made his bargain, thus with bonnie Dicke
If it should chance my foot or so should sl^p,
How would thou use me or after what Size,
Would bare me shorter or would let me rise.
Nay God forbid our quarrels not so great,
To kill thee on advantage in my heat.
Tush we will not fight for any hate or so,
But for mere love that each to other owe.
And for thy learning lo I Will show a trick,
No sooner spoke the word but down comes Dicke,
Well now (quoth Tom) thy life hangs on my sword,
If I were down how would thou keep thy word?
Why with these hilts I Would brain thee at a blow,
Faith in my humor cut thy throat, or so,
But Tom he scorn to kill his conquered foe,
Lets Dicke arise, and to it again they go.
Dicke throws down Tom or rather Tom did fall,
My hilts (quoth Dicke) shall brain thee like a maull,
Is It so (quoth Tom) good faith what remedy,
The Tower of Babell's fallen and so am I.
But Dicke proceeds to give the fatal wound,
It mist his throat, but run into the ground.
But he supposing that the man was slain,
Straight fled his contrie, ship himself for Spain,
Whilst valiant Thomas dyed dronken deep,
Forgot his danger and fell fast a sleep.
Epigram.
What Is he that stares as if he were afright;
The fellow sure has seen some dreadful spright
Mass rightly guest, why sure I did divine,
He Is haunted with a Spirit feminine.
In plain terms thus, the Spirit that I mean,
His martial wife that notable cursed queen,
No other weapons but her nails or fist,
Poor patient Idiot he dares not resit,
His neighbor once would borrow but his knife,
Good neighbor stay (quoth he) i will ask my wife.
Once came he home inspired in the head,
He found his neighbor and his wife a bed,
Yet durst not stir, but hide him in a hole,
He feared to displease his wife poor soul.
But why should he so dread and fear her hate,
Since she had given him armor for his pate?
Next day forsooth he does his neighbor meet,
Whom with stern rage thus furiously does greet,
Villain i will slit thy nose, out comes his knife,
Sir (quoth he) go to I Will tell your wife.
Apaled at which terror, meekely said
Retire good knife my fury is allaide.
Proteus.
TIme serving humor thou wrie-faced Ape,
That can transform thy self to any shape:
Come good Proteus come away a pace,
We long to see thy mumping Antique face.
This is the fellow that lives by his wit,
A cogging knave and fawning Parrasit,
He has behavior for the greatest port,
And he has humors for the rascal sort,
He has been great with Lords and high estates,
They could not live without his rare conceits,
He was associat for the brauest spirits,
His galland carriage such favor merrits.
Yet to a Ruiffin humor for the stews,
A right graund Captain of the damned crewes,
With whom his humor always is unstable
Mad, melancholy, drunk and variable.
Hat without band like cutting Dicke he goe's,
Renowned for his new invented oaths.
Some times like a Ciuilian, it is strange
At twelve a clock he must unto the Change,
Where being thought a Merchant to the eye,
He tells strange news his humor is to lie.
Some Damask coat the eflect thereof must hear,
Inuites him home and there he gets good cheer.
But how is it now such brave renowned wits,
We are ragged robes with such huge gasily slits,
Faith thus a ragged humor he has got
Whole garments for the Summer are too hot.
Thus you may censure gently if you please,
He wears such garments only for his ease.
Or thus his credit will no longer wave.
For all men know him for a prating knave.
Epigram.
A Scholar newly entered marriage life,
Following his studdie did offend his wife,
Because when she his company expected,
By bookish business she was still neglected:
Coming unto his studdy, Lord (quoth she)
Can papers cause you love them more then me:
Epigram.
I would I were transformed into a Book
That your affection might upon me look,
But in my wish, withal be it decreed,
I would be such a Book you love to reed,
Husband (quoth she) which books form: should I take,
Marry (said he) were best an Almanacke,
The reason wherefore I do wish thee so,
Is, ^uery year we have a new you know.
Epigram.
SIra, come hither boy, take view of me,
My Lady I am purposed to go see:
What does my feather flourish with a grace,
And this same do blese^e become my ^ace,
How desc^nt does this doubl^^^ fo^m^ appear
(I would I had my suit in houns-^^itch here)
Do not my spurs pro^ounce a (...) sound?
Does not my hole circumference profounde?
Sir th^se are well, but there is one thing i^l,
Your Tai^our with a sheet of paper b^ll,
Vows heel'e be paid and S^r^ants he had feed,
Which ^a^^e your commng forth to do thy deed:
Boy god-amercy (...) my Lady stay,
I Will see no counter for her ^a^e to day.
Much a do about choosing a wife.
AWiddower would have a wife were old,
Past charge of children to prevent expense
Her chests and bags crammed till they crake with gold,
And she unto her grave post quickly hence,
But if all this were fitting to his mind,
Where is his lease of life to stay behind?
A Batcheler would have wife were wise,
Fair, Rich and Young, amaiden for his bed,
Not proud, nor chutlish but of faut les size,
A country housewife, in the City bred.
But he is a fool and long in vain has staide,
He should be speak her, there is none ready made
The taming of a wild Youth.
OF late a dear and loving friend of mine,
That all his time a Gallantyouth had been,
From mirth to melancholy did decline,
Looking exeeding pale, lean, poor, and thin,
I asked the cause he brought me through the street,
Unto his house, and there he let me see,
A woman proper, fair, wise and discreet
And said behold, here is that has tamed me,
Has this (quoth I,) can such a wife do so?
Lord how is he tamed then, that has a shrow:
A strange sighted Traveler.
AN honest Country fool being gentle bred,
Was by an odd conceited humor led,
To travel and some English fashions see,
With such strange sights as here at London be.
Stuffing his purse with a good golden some,
This wandering knight did to the City come,
And there a seruingman he entertaines,
An honester in Newgate not remains.
He showed his Master sights to him most strange,
Great tall Paul's Steeple and the royall-Exchange:
The Bosse at Billings-gate and London stone,
And at White Hall the monstrous great Whales bone,
Brought him to the banck-side where Bears do dwell
And unto Shor-ditch where the whores keep hell,
Showed him the Lions, Giants in Guild Hall,
King Lud at Lud-gate the Babounes and all,
At length his man, on all he had did pray,
Showed him a theeuish trick and ran away,
The Traveler turned home exceeding civil,
And swore in London he had seen the Devil.
Three kind of Couckoldes, One, And None
FIrst there is a Cuckolde called One and None,
Which fool, from fortune has received such
He has a wife for beutie stands alone,
Graced with good carriage, and most sweet behavior favor
Nature so bounteous has her gifts extended.
From head to foot there is nothing to be mended.
Besides, she is as perfect chaste, as fair,
But being married to a jealous ass,
He vows she horns him, for he feels a pair
Have bin a growing ever fince last grass,
No contrary persuasions he will endure,
But's wife is fair and he is a Cuckolde sure.
The second.
None, and One.
THe second has a wife that loves the game,
And plays the secret cunning whore at plaisure.
But in her husbands sight she is wondrous tame,
Which makes him vow, he has Ulysses treasure.
she will wish al whores were hanged, with weeping tears
Yet she her self a whores clothes daily wears*
Her husbands friends report how is wife does gull him
Wi^h false d^ceitful and dissembling show
And that by both his horns a man may pull him,
To such a goodly length they daily grow,
He says they wrong her, and he swears they lie,
His wife is chaste, and in that mind he will dye.
The Third, One, and One.
THe third is he that knows women are weak,
And therefore they are daily apt to fall,
Words of unkindness their kind hearts may break,
They are but flesh and therefore sinners all,
His wife is not the first has trod a wry,
Amongst his neighbors he as bad can spy.
What can he help it if his wife do ill,
But take it as his cross and be content,
For quietness he lets her have her will,
When she is old perhaps she will repent,
Let every one amend their one bad life,
They Are knaves and queans that meddle with his wife.
FINIS.

