To the Honorable Ladies of ENGLAND.
Ladies, in Elder times your sex did need,
Knight-hoods true valor to defend your rights,
Of admirable actions we do reed,
Have been atchiu'd in cruel bloody Fights.
Fell ugly Serpents were destroyed and slain,
Strange mo^sters mangled, Giants hewed in twain.
But who deserved more in such enterprise,
Then worthy English, bred where we are borne?
Such as did ease and idleness despise,
For Armor more then Silk by them was worn.
These were the Champions that for Ladies good,
Would bleed as long as they had drops of blood.
Such was Sir Guy, whose story here we tell,
Valors renowned honorable man:
He loved your kind (in heart) exceeding well,
How can you choose but love his legend than?
Bestow the Reading of it if you please:
Against melancholy, that same dull disease.
S. ROVVLANDS,

The Argument.
GVy of Warwick (Son to Earl Rohands Steward) in blooming youth of Natures
spring, fell in Love with the Earls fair Daughter Phelice, whose disdaining
of him, in that he was but a mean Gentleman, and not by Birth answerable to
her Honorable estate, did afflict his cormented mind with most distressed
passions, till in a vision Cupid presents her with the Picture of Mars,
inioyning her to love Guy as the admired Champion of Christendom: Upon this
she yields affection, on condition of Adventures: which to atchiue he
departs into France, and shortly returns with Trophes of victory and prizes of
Honor: But Phelice not satisfied therewith, he leaves England again,
performing in foreign Countries wonderful acts: then returning, marries his
Love, whom after Forty days he leaves, departing on Pilgrimage to the Holy
Land, effecting in that Journey many strange things: Then supposed to be Dead,
comes back disguised and out-worne to memory, and Fights a combat for King
Athelstone, killing Colbrond the Giant of Denmark, freeing thereby the
Kingdom from invasion. After that, lives obscurely in a Cave, and comes for
Alms to his own Castle, not revealing himself till the hour of his Death,
and then he sent his Lady a Ring, by which token she knew her Husband, and
came most woefully to close up his eyes, dying her self shortly after him for
very grief and extreme sorrow.

The Famous History, of Guy Earl of WARWICK.
In Natures green vnmellowed years,
Cupid tormenteth Guy,
Inthrals his heart to Phelice Love
By object of the eye.
Canto. 1.
WHen dreadful Mars in Armor every Day,
Loved stately Juno and Bellona best,
Before he knew the Court where Venus lay;
For then he took himself to ease and rest.
When all his thoughts, unto the proof were steeld,
And all his actions managed for the Field.
A Knight of his (a worthy Englishman,)
That went like him, clad in an Iron Coat,
In Warwick with the worlds applaude began,
To be a man of admirable note.
Such was the Valor he ascended by,
That Pagans trembled at the Name of Guy.
This man composed of courage full of spright,
Of hard adventures, and of great designs,
To fight with Giants took a chief delight,
Or search some Cave that Monster undermines,
Meet with a Bore to make a bloody fray,
Or Combat with a Dragon, by the day.
Yet e're he entertained his Love to arms,
He grew devoted to the Queen of Love:
Attempting Beauties fort with fierce allarmes,
The victory of such a prize to prove,
As elder times before could never enjoy,
A sweeter face then lost old Priam Troy.
Fair Phelice, equal match to Cupids Mother,
A curious Creature, and the Kingdoms pride,
All spacious Britain had not such another,
For glorious Beauty, and good parts beside,
Twixt her and Vulcans wife no ods were known,
But Venus had a mole, and she had none.
For most directly she had Venus hair,
The same high forehead, and attractiue eye,
Her cheeks of Roses mixed with Lillies fair,
The very lips of perfect Coral dye,
Iuory teeth, a dainty rising Chin,
A soft touch-pleasing, smooth, and silken skin.
With all perfections make a pearelesse Creature,
From head to foot, she had them every one,
Mirror she was of comeliness and feature,
An English Phoenix, supreme fair alone,
Whom gazing people censures thus would grace,
Beauty lives no where but in Phelice face.
In Phelice face (this object of Guyes sight)
Were looks of Love, and glaunces of disdain,
From thence sometimes his eyes attracts delight,
From thence anon his heart deriueth pain,
One while sweet smiles do give encouragement,
Another time, stern looks work discontent.
Thus on Loves Seas, tossed by the storms of terror,
Twixt present calm, and sudden furious blast,
Resolving Love, yet finding love in error,
In freedom chayn'd, in liberty bound fast,
He sighs that Fortune does so strangely deal,
To give a wound that Beauty will not heal.
That Beauty will not heal (quoth he) fond man,
Thou wrongst thy self, and thy fair Goddess too,
By looks to know a Woman's heart, who can?
And look on her is only all I do,
I Will take another course more resolute,
To speak, to write, my honest meanings suite.
But if I should doeso, what hope have I,
That she will hear my words or read my Lines?
She is Earl Rohands heir, and borne too hye,
To condescend unto my poor designs,
Though Ia Gentleman by Birth am known,
Earledomes I want, and Lordships I have none.
Oh! Women are ambitious out of measure,
They mount aloft upon the wings of Pride,
And often match more for this worldly Treasure,
Then any loving cause on earth beside.
Which makes some wish, rather there were no Gold,
Then Love for it, should base be bought and sold.
If such she be (as not be such be rare)
What will my words, or sighs, or tears prevail?
I enter then a Laborinth of care,
And strive against both wind and tide to Sail,
A restless Stone with Scisiphus I roll,
And heap continual torments on my soul.
Then I attempt to fly with waxen wings,
Where Phoebus Chariot burns in brightest flame,
And shall be censured that in Childish things
As Love, I have begot eternal shame,
Rejected and dispisde in base esteem,
To th'enuious world, I shall no better seem.
But cease Loves coward, banish thoughts of fear*
Be resolute, and good access attend thee:
Phelice of force a loving heart must bear,
If he that shootes loves Darts of gold, befriend
And by no reason he can be thy Foe,
Because thou love his Mothers picture so.
I am resolved, go on to Phelice Bower,
And from as true a heart as Flesh can yield,
Entreat her hear me in a blessed hour,
And with kind pity all my sorrows shield,
To look upon me with remorse of mind,
That holds my life, as her Love is inclinde.
This said, to Warwick Castle he repaires,
Where the rich Jewel of his heart remained:
Earl Rohand bids him welcome, and prepares
With Hunting sports, to have him entertained,
But thereunto unwilling ear he lends,
And sudden Sickness for excuse pretends.
The Earl much grieved at this alteration,
Sent his Physician for to do him good:
Who told Guy, that his only preservation,
Consisted in the present letting Blood,
And that his Body in distemprature,
Was difficult and very hard to Cure.
Doctor (quoth Guy) it is true, I know as much,
I find my self to be exceeding ill,
But there is a Flower, which if I might but touch,
Would heal me better then my Physickes skill.
It Is called by a pretty pleasing name,
And Felix sounds somewhat near the same.
Quoth the Physician, Sir I know it not,
Nor in the Herball read of such a Flower,
Yet in this Castle is it to be got
Said Guy, it grows not far from yonder Tower,
I Will find it out my self, Doctor refrain,
Gallen had never the Art to cure my pain.
Left in his passions to converse with moan,
As in a Window he did sighing lie:
In a delightful Garden all alone,
The Empress of his thoughts he did espy,
Which to his soul did such rejoicing bring,
Fear was deposed, and Hope was crowned King.
Now is the time (quoth he) fair Fortunes sun,
Shines favorable on my gloomy cares,
Now may I end the grief that Love begun,
And boldly ask good hap, how well she fares:
Now will I enter yonder pleasant shade,
To court the worlds admired beauteous Maid.
Pheltce I come, assist me Cupid now,
Prepare an Arrow ready for my Bow,
I never went a wooing: teach me how
Good action with good speech I may bestow,
But above all things, gentle Cupid move her:
That she believe me, when I swear I Love her.
With speed unto the Garden then he goes,
Where one of Phelice Damsels lets him in,
And in a curious Arbor of repose,
Finds Citherea with her silver skin.
Whom he salutes with grace and majesty,
Beholding her with Loves inchaunting eye.
Fairest (quoth he) of all the works of Nature,
Whose equal never breathed this common air,
More wonderful than Earth can yield a creature,
For every part belonging unto fair,
Immortal creature of Celestial frame,
Eternal honor still attend thy Name.
I come to thee about the like poor suite,
That once Leander came to Hero with:
Hoping to reap thereby more lively fruit,
Then Mars attained when he deceived the Smith,
It Is only Love that I with heart present,
It Is only Love must give my soul content.
Incline sweet Lady to mine humble motion,
Compassionate the grief that I endure:
Regard my life that rests at thy devotion,
With pity take my dying heart in cure,
O let it not in groaning torments swell,
And break in twain, because it loves thee well.
Great Princes love thee, this I knew before,
And deeds of Honor for thy Name have done*
But neither King, nor Prince, can love thee more,
Then does poor Guy thy Fathers Stewards Son,
His Love to thee is so inestimable,
To counteruaile it, all they are not able.
Phelice thus interrupts his protestation;
No more of Love, cease gentle youth (quoth she)
I have a mind framed of another fashion,
Virginity shall live and dye with me,
Love is composed of Idleness and play,
And leads to vain delights, delights that stray.
Besides, it ill beseemes thee be so bold.
Inferior and unfit for my Degree:
And if unto my Father this were told,
I know it would procure reproof to thee,
The Proverb in this point might make thee wise,
That Princely Eagles, scorn the catching Flies.
And with this answer she departs thence,
Leaving poor Guy worse vexed then before:
For now in deep despair of recompense,
He never does expect Loves comfort more,
But unto sorrow, sighs and tears does give,
Wishing each day the last he had to live.
Guy, in strange passions for his Love,
Great torments does endure:
Till Phelice sees a vision, and
Does yield her patient cure.
Canto. 2.
With tired thoughts remains this woeful wight
Distracted in his melancholy mind,
Pertaking nothing that contains delight,
All things are harsh, distasteful, out of kind.
Phelice denies him Love, whose sound of breath,
Is like the Judge that doom^s a man to Death.
Like to Orestes in his frantic fits,
He tare the golden tresses from his head:
Or mad Orlando quite deprived of wits,
From whom the use of sense and reason fled,
So fares it with this Loue-tormented man,
Whose raging thoughts into disorder ran.
Society he shunnes, and keeps alone,
Accusing Desteny, and cursing Beauty,
He hates himself and is a friend to none,
Beyond the limits of all Love and Duty:
Venus (quoth he) how are thy laws forgot,
Thus to afflict him that offends thee not?
What is the cause I am rejected thus?
Who interrupts my Love to Beauties mirror?
I Will drag him hence, to roaring Erebus,
There to be plunged in Eternal terror,
I Will to Jove's Court, and there with shoutes and cries,
Make such a clangor as shall rent the skies,
Shall I be cousen'd as Orpheus was?
Assist me Theseus to revenge this wrong,
Where Is Rhadamant that Justice cannot pass?
Euridice is sold even for a Song:
Fiends, Furies, Goblins, Hidraes, for a fall,
I am prepared to manage with you all.
I Will mount upon the back of Pegasus,
And in bright Phoebus flames my self will wrape:
Then will I tumble windy Eolus,
To sleep in Thetis watery Crystal lap.
From thence I Will post unto the torrid Zone,
To find which way fair Phelice Love is gone.
Jason had luck to win the Golden-fleece,
I like the Skin, but for the Horns I care not:
Fair Hellen was a waggish wench of Greece,
Bold Mars will venture, bashful Venus dare not.
Trust a fair face? Not I, let him that list,
What Is Hercules without a Club in's fist?
Thus for a time his senses were deprived,
Being left by Love as blind as Cupids eyes,
Till reason to perfections state revived,
And extreme passions ceast to tyrannize:
For in a Vision Phelice did descry,
The power of Love, and yields her heart to Guy.
By Morpheus possessed of quiet sleep,
In dead of night when Visions do appear,
The heart tormenter, he that pierces deep,
And makes Lovers by their bargaiues dear,
Sends from his bow a shaft with golden head,
And wounds Phelice in her Maiden bed.
Before her he presents a Martial wight,
Clad all in Armor, for encounters fit,
And says; sweet Virgin Love this man of might,
Give him thy Heart, for he does merit it,
For Valor, Courage, comely shape, and Limme:
The world has not a Champion like to him.
Fair Phelice in a Vision,
Entertaines the Love of Guy,
Jnioyning him Adventures strange,
His manly force to try.


Great honor Lady thou shall gain hereby,
T'adorne thy Noble and renowned Birth:
He shall aspire unto such Majesty,
His Name will be a terror on the Earth,
He shall become a Champion unto Kings,
And by the Sword perform admired things,
Be not ambitious that thou art high borne,
Be not disdainful of a mean estate,
Be not defiled with the brand of scorn,
Be not too proud that thou art Beauties mate,
For it is in vain to strive against my Bow,
If I say Love, it must and shall be so.
Fix not thy thoughts basely on worldly wealth,
(Coin should not be foundation unto Love)
Corrupted hearts it draws away by stealth,
These money-matches cannot happy prove,
For as the goods of Fortune does decay,
So love which they beget consumes away.
I know how Plutoes golden Treasure swayes,
By deuillsh and accursed false illusion:
I know how Women's humors now a days,
Run after riches to their own Confusion,
I see the Peassant of most abject life,
With Gold enough can buy a dainty Wife.
But Phelice if thou knew'st as much as I,
How base the Gods esteem of such abuses,
When Beauty selles, and Riches comes to buy,
Which are not made for one another uses,
Thou would scorn that Maidens should be sold,
As Cattle are, for Silver and for Gold.
Love must be simple, harmeltsse, pure and plain,
And take original from true affection,
It must reciprocal return again,
Or else it does discover imperfection.
Loves inward thoughts concur with outward deeds
Such as from loyalty and truth proceeds.
Thy lover comes not for advancement to thee,
In that thy Father is a worthy Earl,
It is not Dowry that can cause him woo thee,
Had thou the Arabian Gold, or Indian Pearl:
But as great Jupiter to Leda came
For a sweet Face, His purpose is the same.
Therefore kind Virgin use him kindly well,
Make much of Guy, embrace him for thine own:
Afford him Loue-roome in thy Heart to dwell,
Let him no longer live in pensive moan,
But the next time thou do behold his face,
Give him encouragement, with kind embrace.
And with that word (embrace) he shot, and hit
The very center of her tender heart:
Feeling the wound, she starts awake with it,
Being taught thereby to pity Lovers smart,
For Cupid drew his Arrow to the head,
Because he would be sure she should be sped.
With that she fetched a sigh, a grievous one,
And from her eyes a shower of tears did fall:
Where is (quoth she) the gentle Loue-god gone,
Whose power I find is powerful unto all?
Oh call him back, my fault I do confess:
I have in Love been too too pitiless.
Sweet Boy, solicit for me to thy Mother,
And at her Alters I will sacrifice:
From this day forth, I will adore no other,
No Goddess shall be gracious in mine eyes,
But she that has imperious rule and might,
To lead obdurate hearts to kind delight.
Compassion now has worthy conquest made,
Of that strong fort which did resistance make,
One shaft had bin sufficient to persuade,
A league for Life, a truce till Death do take:
Guy more then Life does Phelice Love prefer,
Phelice affects Guy dear, as he does her.
But unto him her love is yet unknown,
Though his be made apparent long before:
He understands not that she is his own,
He feels no salve applied unto his sore,
Till forced by passions, and constrained laments*
A second suite, he boldly thus presents.
Phelice, I was arraigned long ago,
And now I look for Judgment at thy hand:
I have been Prisoner in a Iayle of woe,
So long, that speedy sentence I demand,
Oh speak unto me, either Life or Death:
For I am tired with my vital breath.
If kindness dwell in that fair shape of thine,
Express it with ( I Love:) if none there be,
Then say, I cannot unto Love incline,
And so thou make a quick dispatch with me,
Censure me sudden, either smile or frown,
I will not live thus for this Kingdoms Crown.
Phelice replied, it is not at my dispose,
To fashion Love without my friends consent,
What would you wish me to be one of those,
That are to Parents disobedient?
Shall fond affection overrule the will,
And do you good to be accounted ill?
You know my Fathers greatness in the Land,
And if he should (as there is no other like)
The love of one too mean for me withstand,
How could we bear the stroke, disgrace would strike
Nothing but death could make my sorrow sweet,
And shame would wrap me in a winding-sheete.
Doubt not of Father in this case (quoth he)
For Warwicks Earl (that honorable man)
Shall see such deeds of valor done by me,
To have dislike he neither will nor can:
Inioyne me what adventures thou think good,
That wounds and scars, may let my body blood.
Why then (quoth she) Guy make thy valor shine
Through-out the world, as glorious as the Sun,
My heart, my soul, my life, my love, is thine,
When deeds of honor by thy hand are done.
Make thy self famous by a martial life,
And then take Phelice for thy lawful wife.
I ask no more (said he) to gain thy Love,
I shall esteem it bought at easy rate:
Oh that I were at work my task to prove,
With Hercules or some such churlish mate!
Phelice farewell, this kiss thou give me,
Shall make a number kiss the ground for thee.
From England Guy to France does go,
Where deeds of Annes are done:
And thence returns Tryumphantly,
With all the Prizes won.
Canto. 3.
Enlarged from sorrows thraldom, by Hopes bail,
Guy arms his thoughts with Honors enterprise:
Imbarkes himself, and into France does sail,
Leaving fair England, where his comfort lies:
He seeks for enemies, he longs for foes,
And now desires to be a dealing blows,
In Normandy arrived, he understands,
That there was Warlike business to be dove
For valiant Knights, of diverse Christian Lands,
The race of Valor did intend to run,
A great adventure was propounded there,
Which news was music to his greedy ear.
The Prize that drew them all unto that place,
Was Daughter to the Almane Emperor,
Fair Blaunch, with such a wondrous heavenly face,
It had attractiue Beauty, full of power.
In her, such graces did unite together,
The Worthyes of the world came posting thither.
Who won the Damsel (it was thus decreed)
By manly Courage and victorious might,
Should have her mounted on a milke-white Steed,
Two Gray-hounds and a Faulcon all as white*
This was his Lot that could attain the Day,
To bear the Honor and the Maid away.
Our English Knight prepares him for the Field,
Where Kings were present, Princes did repair,
Where Dukes and Earls a great assembly held,
About the Face that was so wondrous fair,
Though only one must speed, and hundreds miss,
Yet each man there imagin's Blaunch is his.
The spacious Field where they assembled were,
Hardly affoorded room, for Armed crowdes,
The golden glittering Armor that was there,
Did dart the Sunbeams back unto the Clouds.
The pampered Horses proudly stamped the ground,
To hear the clangor of the Trumpets sound.
A German Prince of an undaunted sprite,
A first and very fierce Encounter gave
Unto an Earl, whose Valor did requite,
With blow for blow, as resolutely brave,
Till by a stroke the Earl received on's head,
He was vn-horst, falling to ground for dead.
Then Guy came forth with courage to the Prince,
And deals with him as Hercules would do:
Like force he never felt before nor since,
Such hard extremes he never was put unto.
Just where himself had laid the Earl in swound:
There down comes he, both horse and man to ground.
Duke Otton seeing this, was in a rage,
And desperate humor did incense him so,
He vowed by Heavens nothing should assuage
His fury, but the Death of the proud foe.
Prepare thee Fight to breath thy last (quoth he)
Monster, Devil, or whatsoever thou be.
They join together by a dreadful fight,
The spinters fly, and clattering Armous sounds:
The dust ascends up* and blindes their sight,
The blood allayes it streaming from their wounds:
Both their Swords brake, they light, and on his back,
Guy threw the Duke, that even his bones did crack.
Duke Ranier would revenge his Cosen then,
And for encounter he prepares next:
Quoth Guy, I find you are wretches and no men,
That with a blow or fall so soon be vexed,
But come and welcome, I am for you all,
We say in England, The weakest must to wall.
They rush together that the ground did shake,
While animating Trumpets sound alarm,
In Raniers shoulder Guy a wound did make,
Whereby he lost the use of his right arm,
Yielding himself as others did before,
Unable once to wield his weapon more.
Then for a while all stood amazed at Guy,
And not a man was forward to proceed,
Till Louaines Duke his Fortunes went to try,
Having good hope that he should better speed,
Well mounted, and well armed, he fair did sit,
On a proud Steed, that ill endured the bit.
I think (quoth he) thou some Inchanter art,
That have the force of Magic in thine arm,
I Will teach thee to believe e're we depart
Quoth Guy, for thou shall feel that I can charm,
I Will conjure thee even with an Iron spell:
My Sword shall send thee unto Heeuen or Hell.
With that he lent him such a cruel stroke,
That the other did return a weak reply,
With second and a third his Helmet broake,
Hold, hold (quoth he) I Will rather yield then dye.
Fight for a Woman! He that list for me:
I think the Devil cannot deal with thee.
Then Guy came forth with courage to the Prince,
And deals with him as Hercules would do:
Like force he never felt before nor since,
Such hard extremes he never was put unto.
Just where himself had laid the Earl in swound:
There down comes he, both horse and man to ground.
Duke Otton seeing this, was in a rage,
And desperate humor did incense him so,
He vowed by Heavens nothing should assuage
His fury, but the Death of the proud foe.
Prepare thee Fight to breath thy last (quoth he)
Monster, Devil, or whatsoever thou be.
They join together by a dreadful fight,
The spinters fly, and clattering Armous sounds:
The dust ascends up; and blindes their sight,
The blood allayes it streaming from their wounds:
Both their Swords brake, they light, and on his back,
Guy threw the Duke, that even his bones did crack.
Duke Ranier would revenge his Cosen then,
And for encounter he prepares next:
Quoth Guy, I find you are wretches and no men,
That with a blow or fall so soon be vexed,
But come and welcome, I am for you all,
We say in England, The weakest must to wall.
They rush together that the ground did shake,
While animating Trumpets sound alarm,
In Raniers shoulder Guy a wound did make,
Whereby he lost the use of his right arm,
Yielding himself as others did before,
Unable once to wield his weapon more.
Then for a while all stood amazed at Guy,
And not a man was forward to proceed,
Till Louaines Duke his Fortunes went to try,
Having good hope that he should better speed,
Well mounted, and well armed, he fair did sit,
On a proud Steed, that ill endured the bit.
I think (quoth he) thou some Inchanter art,
That have the force of Magic in thine arm,
I Will teach thee to believe e're we depart
Quoth Guy, for thou shall feel that I can charm,
I Will conjure thee even with an Iron spell:
My Sword shall send thee unto Heaven or Hell.
With that he lent him such a cruel stroke,
That the other did return a weak reply,
With second and a third his Helmet broake,
Hold, hold (quoth he) I Will rather yield then dye.
Fight for a Woman! He that list for me:
I think the Devil cannot deal with thee.
Then not a man that would encounter more,
They all were terrified and stood in fear:
And in a rage amongst themselves they swore,
What, shall a Stranger all the Honor bear
Of this great Day? what cursed fortune's this,
That all the glory of the Field is his?
Amongst themselves his happiness they cursed,
In enuyes heat, not knowing what to do,
They could have killed him, but that no man durst,
Put his own life in hazard thereunto.
If wishes might have done it, he had did,
But fight with him, not any could abide.
The Emperor, for Guy, a Knight did send,
Asking his Name and Birthplace, which he told:
Then said his Majesty, I much commend
Thy haughty Courage, resolutely bold,
Brave Englishman, that art thy Countries pride,
In Europe lives not such a man beside.
I do admire thy worth, thy Valor's great,
To speak thy praise my tongue will not suffice,
Ascend to Honors just deserved seat,
That art a second Hector in mine eyes,
This Day thy worthy hand has shown me more,
Then in my Life I ever saw before.
Come and receive thy due desert from me,
My Daughters Love is free at thy dispose,
The Gray-hounds, Steed, and Faulcon, take to thee,
Thy worthiness does merit more then those.
Hold, here is a Jewel, wear it for my sake:
Which I a witness of my Love do make.
Guy thanked his Highness for his gracious favor,
And vowed him service while his life did last,
Then to the Princess with a mild behavior,
A reverent, humble, modest look he cast:
Saying fair Lady, Fortune is my friend,
That does such Beauty to my Lot extend.
Madame accept your loyal English Knight,
To do true service when you please command it,
Who while he has a drop of Blood, will fight
In your behalf, against who dare withstand it.
To be your Husband is degree too hye,
It Is grace sufficient, call me servant Guy.
In England does my marriage Love remain,
To whom I must and will be true for ever:
About whose face Nature has took such pain,
I durst have sworn flesh could have matched it never,
But now I find (that curiously have eyed her)
There is a Phoenix in the world beside her.
And that is your self: I, dare the world deny it,
But which is fairest, eyes cannot decide,
No humane Judgment in the world can try it,
Who has most beauty, Blaunch or my fair bride:
I dare be bold to call you beautyes twins,
And Venus, black-amoore to both your skins
Oh Phelice here is thy picture in this Princess,
Me thinks though art present in her lonely look*
Thou that of my souls faculties art Mistress,
Recorded in Times brasen-leaued book,
To thee if I prove false or be misled,
Jove's fearful vengeance light upon my head.
Quoth Blaunch, thy constancy (and sighed deep)
Is highly to be praised, thou do well:
He that Loues-promise will not faithful keep,
In horror and in torments let him dwell.
But I suppose thy vows are yet to make,
And so what thy sword won, thy heart may take.
What I avouch is truth the heavens knows,
My protestations are above the skies:
Madam, the Sun declines, day ancient grows,
I Will take my leave of you in humble wise,
My body is unto repose inclinde,
Although no rest be in my troubled mind.
My troubled minde's in Warwick Castle now,
Although my Body be in Normandy:
Here I make others bend, there do I bow,
And lowly as the humble ground do lie,
Even at Loves feet I cast my self to ground,
Though victory my temples here has Crowned.
I cannot stay, I must to England back,
My mind mis-giues me Phelice is not well,
Like my sad thoughts my Armor shall be black,
I Will suite me in a mournful Iron shell:
For where the mind meets with suspicious cares,
Distrust is ever dealing doubtful shares.
Yet I have much good Fortune on my side,
That know the means how to attain my bliss:
For Phelice Love is to conditions tied,
And I do trust she is mine own by this,
By this she may, but if she more require,
There Is nothing in the world I will deny'er.
With hasty journey he is homeward bound,
Leaving the vulgar to their Nine days wonder:
Arriving safely on the English ground,
Posting to her, supposed too long a sunder,
Whom with more joy his cheerful looks behold
Then can by Pen, or Lines of Incke be told.
In France all Knights of Christendom,
To win a Princess, meet:
Guy Conquers all and winnes the Prize,
Then does his Goddess greet.


With the rewards of Victory,
Guy does his Love present:
But Phelice is not satisfied,
Him forth again she sent.
Canto. 2.
IN the supposed Haven of repose,
Hope casts Anchor for his Bark to ride,
With kind salute unto his Love he goes,
Who gives imbracements and all things beside
Befits affection, all such complements,
As Love can look for, gracious she presents.
Fair so (quoth Guy) I come to challenge thee,
For there is no men that I can meet, will fight,
I have been where a crew of Cowards be,
Not one that dare maintain a Ladies right,
Good proper fellows of their tongue and tall,
That let me win a Princess from them all.
Phelice, this Sword has won an Emperors Daughter,
As sweet a wench as lives in Europes space:
At price of blows, and bloody wounds I bought her,
Well worth my bargain; but thy better face
Has made me leave her to some other Lot,
For I protest by Heavens I love her not.
This stately Steed, this Faulcon and these Hounds,
I took, as in full payment of the rest:
For I will keep my Love within the bounds
That do enclose the compass of my breast,
My Constancy to thee is all my care,
Leaving all other Women as they are.
But sweet heart tell me shall I have thee now?
Will thou consent the Priest shall do his part*
Art thou resolved still to keep thy vow?
Is none but I half with thee in thy Heart?
Can thou forsake the world, change Maiden life,
And help thy faithful Lover to a Wife?
Quoth Phelice, worthy Knight, my joys are great,
To understand thy honorable deeds:
It seems some were in such a bloody sweat,
Their Valor, Fame, and reputation bleedes,
I give thee humble thanks that for my sake,
Such hard adventures did vouchsafe to take.
To win a Princess was a precious prize,
But sure me thinks if I had been Sir Guy,
She should have found more favor in mine eyes,
Then take a Horse and turn a Lady by,
What, is a Horse, a Faulcon, and a Hound,
More worthfull then a Lady so renowned?
Perhaps you will say it is done for Love of me
I do imagine; nay believe it so:
And though I jest, I will do more for thee,
Then thou or any but my self does know,
I Will never marry while Life's Glass does run,
But only thee: Thee, or I Will dye a Nun.
But give me leave to speak my mind (dear Love)
Let me lock up my secrets in thy breast,
I had a Vision did affliction move,
Cupid came to me in my quiet rest,
And did command me in his Mothers name,
To Love thee: thus persuading to the same.
An armed man (just as I see thee now)
He set before me speaking to me thus:
Phelice be gentle-hearted, yielding, bow,
Do not oppose against the power of us.
But all thy Love, thy loyalty and truth,
Bestow it freely on this matchless Youth.
Throughout the world his Fame shall be admired,
And mighty men shall tremble at his wrath:
To end Kings quarrels he shall be required,
His worthiness shall tread no common path,
But actions to be feared he shall effect,
Matters of moment, things of great respect.
This (in effect) he did to me relate,
And I have been obedient to his will,
Now if I would, I know not how to hate,
Of perfect kindness I am taught the skill:
Believe me Guy, for if it were not so,
This secret of my heart thou should not know.
But now my Love, before thou must possess
Thy constant Phelice in her Marriage bed,
Thou must do deeds of greater worthiness,
Then winning of a Lady with her Steed,
I Will ever Love thee, though thou never do more,
But will not grant the use of Love before.
Not grant me use of Love (quoth he) fair friend?
Why then of force I must abroad again,
I will content thee or I Will make an end
One way or other; slay or else be slain,
E're I return again into this Realm,
Thou shall confess I have fulfild thy Dream.
Assist me Heavens as I mean upright,
For I protest by all the powers Divine,
No unjust quarrel shall procure me fight,
To wrong the wronged I will never incline,
But stand for those that by oppression fall,
Is Honors venture, be it life and all.
Come my Bellona do thou gird my Sword,
Embrace my Armor in thy Yuory arms,
And such kind kisses as thou can afford,
Bestow upon me in the stead of Charms,
I think upon Ulysses loving Wife,
How thou art now to imitate her life.
Farewell my Phelice, health and happiness
Attend thee ever to thy hearts desire,
And I beseech God grant thee like success,
As I resolve my Love to thee entire.
At my return, when Mars his business ends,
My comfort is, Hymen will make amends.
And so unto Earl Rohand he repaires
And tells him, he is come to take his leave:
He must seek out where Honor deals shares,
To purchase that which worthy men receive
At home (says he) my honorable Lord,
I find that Valor, nothing will afford.
Therefore I Will search abroad what is to be done,
From Country unto Kingdom I Will resort,
By Natures course my glass has much to run,
I well may spare some years for fighting sport,
Of Idleness there is nothing comes but evil,
I hate a Coward as I hate the Devil.
Guy (quoth the Earl) thou make me grieve at this,
The news is more then I can well endure,
Thy wished Company so soon to miss,
When I did make account I had been sure
Possessed of thee, at thy late travails end,
And do thou now Iourneyes of new intend?
Remain with me, trust not to Fortunes power,
Though now she have so well and kindly dealt,
She may alot thee an unlucky hour,
That instantly her favors so have felt,
Her courtesies are most unconstant things,
Believe her not, she deals false with Kings.
Tryumphant on her wheel thou now do sit,
And with Fames Trumpe thy glory does remain*
Oh do not ouer-rashly hazard it,
Lost Honor is not easy got again,
May not one cursed and unhappy blow,
Betray thy life to thy insulting Foe?
May not a Monster or a savage Beast,
At unawares deprive thee of thy breath?
May not a Tyrant when thou think least,
Cut off thy course by an untimely death?
May not a thousand dangers on thee light,
Where but thy self, thy wronged self mustright?
(Quoth Guy) my Lord, danger he may not fear,
That to adventures does himself dispose,
He must a mind of resolution bear,
And think himself too good for all his foes.
I Will never dread I shall be ouer-man'd,
While I have hands to Fight, and legs to stand.
Therefore in humble sort I leave your Honor,
Wishing all health unto your happy State,
If Fortune take a frowning mood upon her,
Why, she shall see I will disdain her hate,
What Star soever swayed when I was borne,
I bear a mind will laugh mishap to scorn.
Guy to the Duke of Louaine goes,
And ioynes with him in strength:
Against the Emperor Reynere,
Then makes his Peace at length.
Canto. 5.
NOw Guy expects a favorable gayle,
Which to his hearts desire he does attain,
And with a speedy passage he does sail,
To seek Adventures out, in France again,
Where finding none, from thence away he hyes
To Louaine, where in siege the Emperor lies.
For Segwin Duke of Louaines hap was such,
At Turnament a Noble man to kill,
The Emperors Cosen, whom he loved much,
And took the Death of him exceeding ill,
So that a quarrel thereupon arose,
And war ensu'de betwixt two mighty Foes.
Thither goes Guy to lend the Duke his aid,
But in the way an accident befell:
For by Duke Otton he wos false betrayed,
And's life in question, which he freed well.
Otton in France before disgraced by Guy:
Had vowed where ere he met him he should dye.
And to that end, Sixteen appointed were,
To lie in Ambush and surprise him so,
All men of resolution, void of fear,
That in a Forest did themselves bestow,
And set on Guy, only with three Knights more:
The like distress he never was in before.
Now Gentlemen and loving friends (quoth he)
Show your selves English-hearted, rightly bred:
Here is some ods, sixteen unto you three,
But I the fourth will stand you in good sted*
You three shall combat six, that is two for one,
And with the other Ten let me alone.
Wherewith he drew his Sword and laid about,
That rattling Armor Echoed in the Sky:
Dealing so resolute amongst the route,
That down they drop on every side and dye.
Here lies one that has no legs to stand,
And there another wanting head and hand.
Guy quickly made dispatch with his half score,
He was not long in ridding them away,
But then remained half a dozen more,
Which two of his most worthy Knights did slay,
When he perceived them fall, he stamped the ground,
And vtter'd forth this fearful angry sound.
Ah Villains, how my soul abhorres his sight,
For these how my revenging passions strives!
This bloody deed, with blood I will requite,
You dye for it had each a thousand lives,
Two slain outright and Heraud wounded too,
Is the last cursed act that you shall do.
With force (as 'twere exceeding humane strength)
He lays upon them, blows to stagger under,
And brings them breathles to the ground, at length
C^t all in piece-meale (for the Crows) a sunder:
There lie (quoth he) and feast Fowls of the air,
Or feed those sauadge Beasts that will repair.
But these sweet Gentlemen that have resigned
Their dearest lives, even for the Love of me,
And came from England as their Love inclined,
Companions in my hardest haps to be,
I will enterre in Honorable wise.
With best Solemnity I can devise.
From thence unto a Hermit dwelling nigh,
He rode and did commit that charge with care,
Who did perform the office carefully,
And Heraud home unto his Cell he bare,
Who was not dead, though Guy supposed him slain,
But by the Hermit was restored again.
Now forth goes Guy, pensive, perplexed, sad,
Grieuing that Destiny so cruel dealt,
For left alone no company he had,
To ease the torments that in heart he felt.
Till travailing along, at last he found,
A place for Honor, very much renowned.
There did he meet with Tilt and turnament,
And entertained both glory and delight,
There Fortune yielded him her full consent,
To win the best of every valiant Knight,
Of all the Worthy men that did resort,
Not one could match him in Duke Raniers Court.
Then to the Duke of Millaine he repaires,
Where by his worth he is admired of all:
And understanding that some great affairs,
Twixt Segwin Duke of Louaine did befall,
And The Emperor, Millaine he does forsake,
And toward Louaine does his Journey take.
As he does pass upon the way, he meets
A Pilgrim, that with travail seemed faint:
Who in all humane courtesy he greetes,
And with some news entreats him to acquaint,
His longing ear, he with a sigh or two,
Said sir, with news I little have to do.
One thing in all the world is all my care,
And only that, and nothing else I mind:
I seek a man, and seek him in despair,
Because I long have sought and cannot find,
A man more dearly to my soules-loue tide,
Then all the men are in the world beside.
Why what art thou (quoth Guy) or who is he?
Of kindness be so kind as tell in brief?
I am an Englishman of Knights degree,
(Quoth Heraud) and the subject of my grief,
Is loss of one Sir Guy, my Countryman:
Guy with joys tears lights to embrace him than.
And art thou living Heraud my dear friend,
(Quoth he) and kindly took him in his arms?
Then cheerfully let sorrows all take end,
And let me know, who cured thee of thy harms?
The good old Hermit by his skill did save me,
With wholesome medicines, and salues he gave me.
Guy did rejoice, and Herauds joys abound,
At this so good and happy accident:
No angry Star in opposition found,
But each was owner of his own content.
So poasting with good Fortune on their side,
Unto the Duke of Louaine they do ride.
The City in distress besieged they find,
And very small resistance could be made,
But Segwin was right joyful in his mind,
That worthy Guy was come unto his aid.
For now (quoth he) boldly presume I can,
We have an Honorable valiant man.
Advise me warlike Knight, what is to be done,
To free the present danger we are in:
My Lord (quoth Guy) there is freedom to be won
Even by a course, my self will first begin,
Let Us issue forth upon them presently,
Our courages will make the Cowards fly.
I Will give consent to any thing thou will,
Thy project willingly I do approve:
Let limb be lost, let Life and blood be spilt,
All follows thee that comes to me in Love.
Open the Gates, lets beat them from our walls:
He lies no lower then the ground, that falls.
Then suddenly the City they forsake,
And on the Almaines resolutely set,
Where such a bloody slaughter they did make,
That many thousand lives paid Death his debt,
Of thirty Thousand that in Siedge there lay,
Scarce thirty Hundred that escaped away.
The Emperor at this was much agrieu'd,
And with new Forces gave a new assault:
Knowing the City could not be relieved,
And then their strength would weaken by default,
So comes upon them with a fresh supply,
Thinking at length to famish them thereby.
Guy and the Duke upon the walls appear,
And tells him he shall never win their Town:
For they can spare his Soldiers much good cheer,
Throwing them Victuals in abundance down.
Entreating them if they want more then that,
To speak, they shall have store to make them fat.
But now (quoth Guy) your bodies are well fed,
How do you feel your stomachs to go fight?
I am afraid you are not rightly bred,
But dunghils that will sooner crow then bite:
For still when Cowards do begin a fray,
Look ere it end to see them run away.
And so your selves have lately done we see,
Your tongs were heard, but hands there is no man feels,
Most hot to brabble and contend you be,
But wondrous quick and nimble at your heels,
We did suspect when you came here to forage,
We should have bin encumbred with your courage.
But it is not so, alas you are not the men,
Unless perhaps asleep you should us catch:
For waking we will encounter one to ten,
And never wish to have a better match,
Have at you once again, sit fast, we come,
March on my hearts, sound Trumpets, strike up Drum.
Upon the sudden, with the Foe they be,
Fighting as men that laughed pale Death to scorn:
Resolved now they would their City free,
Or never live to see the next day morn.
Much blood was shed, great store of Lives it cost,
And on the Almaines side the Field was lost.
The Duke and Guy pursues their foes in chase,
Who like so many Hares away do fly:
Wishing that they had wings to mend their pace,
So sweet is life to them that fear to dye,
But Fortune in an angry doom decreed,
Their glory, honor, fame and life should bleed.
The victors to the City then retired,
With Trophes of tryumphant glory won,
And all that heard the Action much admired,
The great Exploit so resolutely done:
But unto Guy, the Duke all thanks did yield,
For thou (quoth he) art Caesar of our Field.
My Lord (quoth Guy) I joy not half so much,
That we have wrought a freedom by the Sword,
As I should glory if my hap were such,
Twixt you and The Emperor to make accord.
Give me but leave I will endeavor it,
And put good will to a blunt Soldiers wit.
The Duke consents with thanks, and does entreat
Him take a guard of Soldiers forth the Town,
Danger that seems but little, may prove great,
I would not have thee wronged for Raniers Crown,
Go Honorable man, what thou shall do,
I Will set my hand, my Heart, my Life thereto.
Guy goes unto the Emperor, speaks thus:
High Majesty, all health unto thy Grace,
And Peace to thee, if thou say Peace to us,
And Love to thee, if Love thou will embrace:
As we are Christians let us war no more,
But fight against such as will not God adore.
We sue not to thee in a servile manner,
As dreading any power or force thou have,
For Victory does now display his Banner,
And war yields us a sweet and pleasing taste:
No cause does move it, but a Conscience cause,
To bring the Heathens to religious Laws.
Speak Raynier, and resolve what will thou do,
With Soldiers breuity my message ends:
Give me an answer even as brief thereto,
Shall we be Christian foes, or Christian friends?
Shall we among our selves that Name divide?
Or challenge those that have the same denide.
Brave Englishman, had thou spoke thus before,
Thousands (quoth he) had lived, which now are slain,
Earth should have wanted of that slaughtered store,
Which in her vastie bowels do remain.
Thou have prevailed with me, here war shall cease,
And I embrace thee as a friend of Peace.
Thy motion tends to Honor (honors Knight)
And thou shall live in Fames immortal praise:
When thou art buried in eternal night,
Thy Name shall last the longest length of days*
Thou do the Worthyes of the world exceed:
Blessed be the Country did thy person breed.
Come go my Liege (quoth Guy) unto the Town,
And with Duke Segwin there a League renew:
Our ends shall be to pull the Pagans down,
That unto CHRIST'S Religion are untrue.
My greatest joy will be to hear it said,
This is the best days work that e're Guy made.
Guy with a Thousand chosen men,
Against the Pagans goes:
And makes them curse that ere they felt
The force of Christians blows.
Canto. 6.
THe power of peace has vanquished stubborn war,
And mighty Princes worthily conclude,
The Sword shall rust in sheath before it Jar,
To be with blood of Innocents imbrew'd:
Christians in Name and Action to unite,
Against unbelieving Infidels to fight.
^uy with a Thousand men does take his leave,
so hearken further after Martial news,
And does a true intelligence receive,
That barbarous Pagans, Sarazens, and Jews,
Turks and the like, of Mahomets blind crew,
In most confused war each other slew.
To them he goes, partial on neither part,
(His Sword did favor every side alike)
They all were odious to him in his heart,
Which armed his hand with vigor for to strike,
And work amazement unto their contending,
Coming so roughly to their quarrels ending!
(Quoth they amongst themselves) what fellow's this,
Thae lays about him like a madman thus?
Of certainty more then a man he is,
For humane force would fear to fight with us,
But if he be as seems by his shape,
Had he ten thousand lives he could not escape.
Then did a haughty Pagan step to Guy,
And said to him, If valor in thee rest,
Let Us have a little sport 'twixt thee and I,
Only to see which of our Swords cut best,
Thou have a weapon there is like a Reed,
Me thinks it is too blunt to make one bleed.
Too blunt (quoth Guy) and in his anger groans:
Pagan I like thy humor passing well,
I Will whet it ere we part, upon thy bones,
And then another tale thou will me tell,
If it should fail me now, it were a wonder,
Such Lubbers it has often hewed a sunder.
Bat come, art ready? bid thy friends adieu,
And say thy prayers unto thy Pagan Gods,
For I do mean to use thee like a Jew,
Because with Christians thou do live at ods,
Look that thy head be set on sure and fast,
Or mortal man, I Will prove thee but a blast.
Then did they lend each other lusty knockes,
That sparks of fire from their Helmets fly,
The partial multitude about them flocks,
Expecting all the end and Death of Guy,
For Coldran whom he fought withal was strong,
And had been Champion to the Pagans long.
At length Guy lent him such a speeding blow,
That down comes Coldran and his strength to ground*
Pagan (quoth he) is my Sword sharp or no?
With which even now so blunt a fault you found,
Rise quick, for if thy legs thou can not feel:
Off goes thy head as true as this is Steel.
Forthwith he made him shorter by the Head,
And that unto the Emperor he sent:
The Infidels grew all astonished,
For they in Coldran were so confident,
They durst have venter'd goods, and life and limb,
On any Combat that was fought by him.
Then Heraud (to give Guy some breathing space)
Challenged a Pagan called Elmadant,
And dared him and defied him to his face:
(For valiant Heraud did not Courage want)
The Pagan somewhat hot, with fury filled
Did combat, being quickly cooled and killed.
Presently Guy unto another comes
Called Morgadour, and soundly with his blade
Lays on him, and his senses so benummes,
He tumbles headlong like a tired Jade.
The Pagans seeing their Champions thus go down,
Forsook the Field, retyring to the Town.
Where a most bloody Tyrant bare the sway,
Who hearing what had happened; full of Ire
Went armed to the Tent whereas Guy lay,
And did a Combat at his hands require,
Villain (quoth he) whom like a Dog I scorn,
I Will make thee curse the time when thou wast borne.
Know runagate I come to fetch thy Head,
For to a Lady I have promised it:
My Curres shall with thy English flesh be fed,
They must devour thy body every bit,
Come, I have vowed by Mahomet thou dy'st,
Thou can not escape by trusting in thy Christ.
And have thou given away my Head (quoth he)
Unto a Lady? it is a brave intent:
An honest man will his words master be,
And never promise more then he has meant.
Come on thy ways and take it quickly off,
Or else the Lady will suppose you scoff.
With proud disdain together then they rush,
Laying it on as fast as both could drive:
But Eskeldart, Guyes sword did so becrush,
That for his Head he durst no longer strive.
But on the sudden for to save his own:
Put's spurs to Horse, and in all post is gone.
Guy then returns to Heraud, and declares
What a bold fellow came to fetch his Head:
Who smiling at it, merrily prepares,
To tell of his Adventures, how he sped,
With a false Coward called Adelart,
That wounded him with an inuenom'd Dart.
And being hurt most dangerously so,
Was intercepted ere he could retire,
By Estellard a proud insulting Foe,
Composed of Cruelty and deuillish Ire.
But (quoth Sir Heraud) e're our fray was done,
I made them wish, it never had been begun.
For Adellart I wounded in the side,
And Estellard I curtailed by the knees:
Then left them lying, Death to be their guide,
Unto the Iayle where worms do claim their fees,
So when those two were seen to fall down dead,
All the other Pagans with amazement fled.
Why then (quoth Guy) all is quiet I perceive
These miscreants like unto Foxes fly,
But gentle Heraud ere we take our leave,
One Combat more I am resolved to try,
The General of this accursed route,
Shall be the man I mean to single out.
They term him mighty Souldan: friend I long
To make a proof if he deserve the Name,
I am in doubt they do him mighty wrong,
If might be wanting to avouch the same,
Titles of worth become base Cowards ill,
I Will try what is in him, hap what ever will.
Nay Heraud leave me, preethee do forbear,
I will be speedy; tarry in this Wood:
Go to yon grassie bank, repose thee there,
And with this Balsome, stay those drops of blood,
Ere Phoebus in the Occident decline,
Death shall conclude the Souldans life or mine.
Said Heraud, since thou will not let me go,
But do appoint this bed of Earth to bear me,
Till thou return I will converse with woe,
And will not suffer any Bird sing near me.
With longing eyes, and careful listening ears:
I Will spend thy absent time, in prayers and tears.
Guy poasts with speed, and does the Souldan find,
And thus he speaks: Art thou the man of might
Surnamed so by Tongues, and peoples wind?
Here is a Christian come to dare thee Fight,
Both Mahomet and thee I do defy,
And here is a Sword I will maintain it by.
The Souldan with a staring look, replies;
Thou Christian Slave, I Will chastise thee with Steel:
Thou art an odious Creature in mine eyes,
And thy presumption shall my Fury feel.
With that at Guy he ran with all his force:
Their Lances brake, and each forsook his Horse.
Then by the Sword the Victor must prevail,
Which manly force makes deadly wounds withal,
Cutting through Armor, mangling shirts of Male,
That at the last, down did the Souldan fall,
Sending blasphemous Curses to the Sky,
And casting handfuls of his blood at Guy.
Who presently took Horse and then retired
To Heraud, whom he found in slumber laid,
Rise friend (quoth he) the time is now expired,
An end with mighty Souldan I have made.
With that he rose with joy, and loves embrace,
And forth they travail to another place.
Guy takes a Princely Lions part,
And does a Dragon kill:
Then frees fair Osile from mishaps,
That else had fared ill.
Canto. 7.
PAssing the Deserts now, where shady Trees,
Embraced each other in their green-leau'd arms,
Where Lady Echoes dwelling best agrees,
And little Birds sing fearelesse of their harms:
They chanced to find a pleasant silver Spring,
Which water to them was a welcome thing.
His Lady sends him forth again,
Whose will he does obey:
And manfully a Dragon kills,
To part a cruel Fray.


There with the Crystal streams they cool their heat
And slake the thirst they had endured long,
There did they make the herbs and roots their meat,
To satisfy for Natures hungry wrong,
But on the so daine at the noise they wonder,
A Lion roared as if great Love did Thunder.
Heraud (quoth Guy) to Horse let us be prepared,
And leave our Dinner till another day:
Here is a sound I never was so scared,
I Will seek it out; it comes from yonder way:
Some Monster or some Devil makes this noise,
For on my life it is no humane voice.
So forth he rides, and underneath a Hill
He finds a Dragon, with a Lion met:
Brave sport (said he) I pra'y fight out your fill,
And then upon the strongest I will set,
Which of the twain that first aside does start:
I am a friend that will maintain his part.
The Dragon winds his crooked knotted tail,
About the Lions legs to cast him so:
The Lion fastens on his rugged scale,
And nimbly does avoid that overthrow.
Then toooth and nail, they crewell tear and bite*
Maintaining long, a fierce and bloody fight.
At last, the Lion faintly turns aside,
And looks about, as if he would be gone:
Nay then (quoth Guy) Dragon have at your hide,
Defend your Devils face, I Will lay it on.
With that courageously to work he goes,
And deals the Dragon very manly blows.
The ugly Beast (with flaggie wings displayed,
Comes at him mainely with most dreadful paws,
Whose very looks might make a man affray'd,
So terrible seemed his devouring jaws.
Wide gaping, grisly, like the mouth of Hell:
More horrible then Pen, or Tongue can tell.
His blazing eyes did burn like living fire,
And forth his smoking gorge came sulpher smoke,
Aloft his speckled breast, he lifted hyer
Then Guy could reach at length of weapons stroke.
Thus in most irefull mood himself he bore,
And gave a cry, as Seas are wont to rore.
With that, his mortal sting he stretched out,
Exceeding far the sharpest point of Steel,
Then turns and winds his scaly tail about
The Horses legs, more nimbly then an Eele,
With that, Guy hewes upon him with his blade,
And three men's strength to every stroke he laid.
One fatal blow he gave him in the side,
From whence did issue streams of swarty blood,
The Sword had made a passage large and wide,
That deep into the Monsters gore Guy stood:
Then with a second wound he ouertooke him,
Which made the Dragon turn, to have forsook him.
Nay then (quoth he) thou have not long to live,
I see thou faintest, at the point to fall,
Then such a stroke of death he did him give,
That down comes Dragon crying out withal,
So horrible, the sound did more affright
The Conqueror, then all the dreadful fight.
Away he rides, and lets that Hell-hound lie,
But looking back, espies behind his Horse
The Lion coming after, very nigh,
Which makes him light, to manage manly force,
But when the Beast beheld his weapon drawn,
He came to him, and like a Dog did fawn.
Like to that grateful Lion which did free
Androdus life, for pulling out a Thorn,
When for offense he should by Laws decree
Within the Theater by Beasts be torn.
The Lion came and licked him very kind,
Bearing (as seemed) an old good turn in mind.
Even so this gentle creature deals with him,
For that same benefit which he had done:
Although by Nature cruel, stern and grim,
Yet like a Spaniell by his Horse did run.
Continuing many days, with great desire,
Till extreme hunger, forced him to retire.
Now toward the Sea, Guy does his Journey take,
Imbarques for France: but by contrary wind
Arriues in Almaine, where the Nobles make
Great Triumph for him and with joyful mind,
The Emperor rejoices he is come:
And bids him welcome into Christendom.
There he is entertained with Turnament,
With Kingly banquets, Princely reuelling:
And multitudes to give their eyes content,
Attend him with their throngs, still wondering,
At all his worthy acts Report has spread,
Wherewith their ears most strangely has bin fed.
From thence he travails toward his loving friend,
The Duke of Louaine, whom he longed to see:
But ere he came unto his Iournyes end,
A wronged Lady he did worthy free:
Which violently was from her Love bereft,
And he at point of Death, sore wounded left.
Thus it befell, Terry a valiant Earl,
With his dear Love, surnamed Osile the fair,
(His precious Iemme, inestimable pearl)
Into a Forest went to take the air,
Whereas a plot was laid to take his life,
And make his beauteous Love, another wife.
Upon the sudden sixteen Villains came
Unto the Earl, and did him grievous wound:
Sir, (quoth one) thou have a wench we claim,
She must with us, lie thou there on the ground,
And the next passenger that thou do see,
Entreat him make a Grave, to bury thee.
Guy finding Terry thus, hearing his plaint,
Does comfort him in kindest sort he can:
Who with the loss of blood does weakly faint,
With face of deadly color, pale and wan,
Courage (quoth he) I Will fetch thy Love again:
Or say that Guy is but a Coward swain.
When Terry heard that name, he did revive,
For unto him Guyes worthy deeds were known:
And lifting up himself from ground, did strive
For to embrace him in deep passions groan,
Thanks gracious heavens (quoth. he) with soul and heart
For sending thee, to take my wronged part.
Which is the way (quoth he) those Villains went?
That pathe said woeful Terry by yon Oak:
Have after them, this deed they shall repent,
As I am Christian Knight: and as he spoke,
He heard a shrike, which was the Ladies cry,
So by that sound, he did them soon descry.
Coming unto them wretched slaves (quoth he)
What do you purpose with this Lady here?
In large her presently, and set her free,
You have done wrongs, that will be rated dear.
Her Husband wounded, she used violent,
Will cost you lives a piece incontinent.
With that they laughed, and said what foole's this same,
Or rather madman in his desperate mind,
That means by wilful Death, to get a name,
And have the world report he has bin kind?
The fellow sure is in some frantic fit,
And means to fight, without both fear or wit
Like so (quoth he) the fit that is on me now.
You all shall find to be a raging one:
With that he shows them Mars his angry brow,
And bids the Lady cease her pensive moan,
Saying, good Madam unto joy incline:
For suddenly these Rascals will be mine.
Then with a courage admirable bold,
At every blow some one or other dies:
Which when the gentle Lady did behold,
Oh pity, worthy Knight she cries!
These mortal wounds I can no longer see,
Be not so bloody, in revenging me.
Upon my knees I do entreat thee stay,
This is to me a terrifying sight:
Oh, with their lives thou take mine away,
If one dye more, I fainting yield my sprite,
Thou worthily mine honor have defended,
Let the revenging of my wrongs be ended.
Lady (quoth he) I cease at thy request,
Depart base Rascals, all but two be gone:
But villains you did bind her for the rest,
And stroke them with his sword (the scabard on)
That down to ground they fell, making this scuse
My Lord, we only kept her to thy use.
Then on his steed, he lets the Lady ride,
To seek her Lord, whom she had left distressed:
And Guy unto the place became her guide,
Where coming they did find him, careful dressed:
For in their absence came a Hermit by:
Which to his bleeding wounds, did salve apply.
Terry and Osile, in their joys abound,
And gracefully to Guy all thanks do give:
Be thou said they, in Life, and death renowned,
Whom we will Honor while we breathing live.
Hold, here is my hand (quoth Terry) worthy Guy
In fight for thee, I would be proud to dye.
Guy takes Earls Terryes Fathers part,
And kills the Duke his Foe:
Destroys a cruel savage Bore,
Preventing dangers so.
Canto. 8.
NOw Titans Horses, with his fiery Carre,
Had brought the Day to darkness in the West:
And Vesper, that same silver shining Star,
Which does adorn the sky at Evening best,
Appeared as bright as Cynthia in her Sphaere,
To welcome sable Nights approaching near.
When Terry, Guy, and Osile, wanting guide,
Did stray about the unfrequented Wood,
Hearing the saluage noise on every side,
Of Beasts that thirsted after humane blood,
As Bores, and Bears, and Lions, and the like:
Which to their hearts did some amazement strike.
On every side they cast a heedfull eye,
Still doubting on the sudden some surprise:
At length two Armed men they did espy,
That also listen to those fearful cries.
Each had his sword in hand, being ready drawn,
Knowing that place, did yield no Dogs would fawn.
Coming more near, Sir Heraud was the one;
The other even as dearly Terryes friend;
Who with imbracements made their gladness known
And then the Earl demanded to what end
His loving Cosen passed the Defert so?
My Lord (quoth he) to bring thee news of woe.
Thy noble Father is besleged now,
In this strong Castle, by Duke Ottons power:
Who has protested by a solemn vow,
About his ears, he will pull down the Tower,
In a revenge that thou his Love have got:
He swears thy Fathers life escapes not.
His Love (quoth Terry!) preethee Osile speak,
Acquaint this Worthy man with thy souls thought,
Have I procured thee any Faith to break?
Or bin the instigater unto ought
That is unjust in righteous Heavens sight?
Never (quoth Osile) thou have bin upright.
That wretched man, would force my Love away,
In clayming that, I never intend to give:
I will be thine until my dying day,
Thou shall enjoy me, all the hours I live,
And when I alter this determination,
Let Gods, and men, hold me in detestation.
Well spoke (said Guy,) Lady be constant ever,
And Honors blemish then, thou needst not doubt,
Keep Loves foundation firm, alter it never,
It is for Love, I raunge the world about,
And do expose my Life, to mortal danger,
In this exiled state, an unknown Stranger.
But Terry, wherefore are thy looks so sad,
That have thy Love in person to embrace?
As far as England mine is to be had,
And many years I have not seen her face,
It were enough to bring my hopes to end,
But that my Patience is a trusty friend.
My Lord (said Terry) know you not my grief?
And heard this Messenger relate the cause?
Oh my distressed Father wants relief,
I were a rebel unto Natures laws,
Not to condole with him in his extreme,
Making his troubles. my true sorrows Theme,
If that be all (quoth he) thou art too blame,
There is no cause to spend a sigh thereon:
I Will terrify Duke Otton with my Name,
Let him but hear I come, and he will be gone,
Something between us may not be forgot,
He felt my Sword in France, but liked it not.
Since that, against my life a plot he laid,
By villains that surpised me in a Wood,
But treachery, with vengeance was repayd,
Who ever knew a Traitors end prove good?
Accursed haps attend them evermore,
In brazen Bull, Perillus first did rore.
I will go with thee, to defend thy Father,
(For the oppressed I have vowed to right)
And reason moves me to it, so much rather,
Mine own abuses, therewith to requite.
This opportunity we will not omit,
In that occasion falls out so fit.
Let Us hasten on with speed unto the place,
Preventing mischief ere too far it run:
Take hold of Time, before he turn his face,
Good proves best when it is soonest done,
Go like Eneas with a filial joy,
To fetch thine old Anchises out of Troy.
Courageous Knight (quoth Terry) thy bold heart
Cannot be daunted I perceive with fear:
Composed of Mars his element thou art,
Of powerful limbs, to manage sword and spear:
My melancholy thou have banished hence,
And with strong hope, armed me in recompense.
Now all in post, they speed themselves away,
And in short time unto the Castle come;
Whereas Duke Otton with his forces lay,
Relying on his Soldiers ample sum.
But when the Captains of Guyes coming knew
They fled by night, and never bad adieu.
This was discouragement to all the rest,
To see their Leaders thus give ground and fly:
Yet did the Duke most resolute protest,
If each man in the Castle were a Guy,
He would not leave it basely, and retire:
Though life be dear, yet honors place is hyer.
Terry (said Guy) we must not tedious be,
Experience often has my tutor bin:
And taught, that when advantage I do see,
To fasten on occasion, and begin,
The enemy by fear, himself subdues,
Add force to that, and victory ensues.
We will not make our Prison of this place,
As long as there is Field-roome to be got:
It Is my desire, to meet the Dukes good grace,
And combat him, because he loves me not,
If that you will not leave this house of stone,
I Will leave you all and go my self alone.
And with those words Heraud and he depart,
Which when the Castle-soldiers did perceive,
They gave a showte, our General thou art,
Thy Honorable steps we will not leave,
We are resolved to attend thee still:
Let Fortune use us, even as Fortune will.
And thus most Valiant they do march along,
Giving the onset, fearelesse to their Foe,
Making those multitudes that seemed so strong,
Retire themselves, with slaughtered overthrow.
But when the Duke perceived his Soldiers fly:
Perish (quoth he) base villains, here I Will dye.
Where is this Englishman that haunts my Ghost,
And thus pursues me from place to place?
I challenge him to come and leave the Host,
And meet with resolution, face to face.
Let equal envy make this equal match,
All controversies we will soon dispatch.
Agreed (quoth Guy) proud Foe, I yield consent,
Repent thy wrongs, and make thy Conscience clear,
For thou have lived to see thy honor spent,
Which worthy men of all things hold most dear.
The noble minded censure him with shame,
That lives to see the Death of his good name.
Then toward each other they did mainely make,
And brake their Lances very violent,
Which being done their Swords in hand they take,
Fighting until great store of blood was spent.
For Envy did the Duke's keen weapon whet:
And on Guyes sword, Revenge an edge did set.
At length through loss of blood, the Duke fell down
And said, Now fond felicity farewell,
I am betrayed by Fortunes angry frown,
And this experience to the world do tell,
There Is nothing constant, that the earth contains,
Death deals with Monarchs, as with simple Swains*
Bewitching Vanities, seducing blind us,
Greatness has great accounts thereon depending,
As Death does leave us, so shall Judgment find us;
There is no peace unto a happy ending,
My Dying hour, yields more repentant Grace,
Then in my Life I ever could embrace.
The Immortal soul does with these words depart,
And leaves the breathles Body did contain it:
While woeful passions do afflict Guyes heart,
Now wishing to himself he had not slain it,
For true Humanity, compassion shows:
To see Afflictions, ouer-burden Woes.
Guy sheathed his Sword, and said, remain thou there,
Until I do arrive on Englands shore:
No further quarrel to the world I bear,
For Love of Phelice, I will bleed no more,
From her I have been too too long away,
And will return to challenge Soldiers pay.
So thence he rode to find Sir Heraud out,
Making his Journey through a Desert place,
Which was obscure, enuiron'd round about
With shady Trees that hid bright Phoebus face;
Where suddenly he met the hugest Bore,
That ever mortal eye beheld before.
The beast came at him most exceeding fell,
Which he preventing stands upon his guard,
And does avoid those dreadful Tuskes right well,
Laying upon the Swinish head, so hard,
That dead he left him who had many slain,
For forth that Wood, no man came back again.
When this was done, Heraud he ouertakes,
And tells him what a Christmas Brawne he slew,
Then with his purpose him acquainted makes,
Which was to bid all Foreign parts adieu,
And see the heavenly object of his heart:
Heraud consents, and they forthwith depart.
To England comes Victorious Guy,
And does fair Phelice wed:
At York presenting Athelstone,
A dreadful Dragons head.
Canto. 9.
ASsisted now by nimble winged Time,
Guy shapes his course for England, and does leave,
The bold adventures of each Foreign climb,
Loves just reward from Phelice to receive.
As Hercules twelve Labors being past,
Found time for Dianiraes Love at last.
Heraud and Guy no sooner do arrive,
But news thereof unto the King was brought,
Who heard of all before they did atchieue,
Which made him much desirous in his thought,
To see such Subjects matchless men alone,
In honoring England, and King Athelstone.
To York they go, for there the King was then,
To whom they did most humble duty show;
Welcome (quoth he) renowned Martial men,
My Princely love upon you I bestow,
Your fortunate success contentment breeds:
Fame came before, and brought us home your deed*
Guy thou have laid a heavy hand we hear
Upon the necks of Pag^n Infidels,
And sent them home by fatal Sword and Spear,
To horrors vault, where unbelievers dwells.
Devouring Beasts thou likewise have destroyed,
That humane Creatures, fearful have anoy'd.
Yet worthy man, I think thou never did slay,
Of all those Monsters, terrible and wild,
More cruel Creature, then at this same day,
Destroys what ere it meets, Man, Woman, Child,
Cattle and all, which no man dare withstand:
A dreadful Dragon in Northumberland.
I speak not this to animate thee on,
And hazard Life at setting foot a shore,
For diverse to destroy this Beast have gone,
But to their friends, never returned more,
No, I express how happy thou have bin,
To free like fears that other men were in.
Dread Lord (quoth Guy) as I am English Knight,
And faithful unto God, true to my King,
I will go see if that same Beast dare bite,
For to your Grace his Head I mean to bring.
I found his fellow with a Lion fighting,
But made him leave both scratching, and his biting.
And as I dealt with him, I Will deal with this,
Only I do beseech your Royal grace,
Command me some direction where he is,
And to your Court I Will bring his ugly face,
Or your mild favor never let me see:
Dragon or Devil, what so e're he be.
So taking humble leave, away he rides,
Unto Northumberland to find that Beast:
Having a dozen Knights which were his guides,
And brought him where the Dragon held his feast
Like Canniball, that feeds on flesh of men:
Behold (quoth they to Guy) you Caue's his Den.
It is enough said he: do you remain,
And leave me to go find out Hidra's head,
That never shall deuower man again,
Who with so many bodies has bin fed,
Here Gentlemen if you will please to stay,
Sit on your Horses and behold our fray.
Coming unto the Cave, the Dragon spies him,
And forth he stalks with lofty speckled breast,
Of dreadful form: as soon as ere Guy eyes him,
His Lance he speedy set into his rest,
Then spurs to Horse and at the Dragon makes:
That bearing ground, at the encounter shakes.
Then very lightly Guy retires his Horse,
And comes upon him with redoubled might:
The Dragon meets him with resisting force,
And like a reed his Lance in two did bite,
Nay then (quoth Guy) if to such bites you fall,
I have a tool to pick your Teeth withal.
Then drew his Sword (a keen and massy blade)
And fiercely stroke with furious blows, so fell,
That many wide and bloody wounds he made,
Which causde the Dragon yawne, like mouth of Hell,
Roaring with a most fearful hideous sound,
And with his Claws all rent and tore the ground.
Impatient of the smart he did sustain,
He thought with wings to raise himfelse aloft,
But with a stroke Guy brought him down again,
And plied him with the edge of Steel so often,
That down he fell in durty blood beray'd,
And forth his wide devouring Oven brayed.
A flake of fire seemed to issue thence,
While Guy was hewing off his ugly Head,
Now Fiend (quoth he) thou have thy recompense,
For all the humane blood thy Jaws have shed,
Upon a part of this same broken Spear,
Thy filthy face unto the King I Will bear.
The Knights with (joy exceeding) take a view,
Of that same fearful creature, strange of shape:
Admiring at his ugly form of hew,
With wonderment that mortal man could escape,
Those teeth and claws, so dreadful, sharp and long,
Composed by Nature in a Beast so strong.
When they had fixed the Head upon a Spear,
And measured out the bodies length direct:
Unto the King at Lincoln they it bear,
Who Guyes return with longing did expect,
God shield (quoth he) and save me from all evil:
Here is a face may well outface the Devil.
What staring eyes of burning glass be those,
That might (alive) to flaming Beacons seem?
What scales of harness arm that crookee Nose,
And Teeth? none such had Cerberus I deem:
What yawning mouth and forked Tongue is there,
That being Dead, may make the Living fear?
Victorious Knight, thy Actions we admire,
And place thee highly in our Kingly love,
Throughout the spacious Orb by Fame aspire,
More lofty then the supreme Sphere does move*
To the succeeding Ages of this Land,
I will remember thy Victorious hand.
Which shall be thus: the Monsters picture wrought
On cloth of Arras artificial well,
And unto Warwick we will have it brought;
There to remain, and after ages tell,
That worthy Guy, a man of matchless strength,
Destroyed a Dragon Thirty foot in length.
And place his Head here on the Castle wall,
For memory, till years do ruin it:
And Nobles make tryumphant Festival,
Afford our Knight all honor does befit.
Troy's Hector's dead and can no more atchieue:
But Englands Hector still remains alive.
By this Report the only Linguist living,
Had been with Phelice for to make her glad:
Such fame and glory to her Lover giving,
As never greater any Worthy ^ad.
Tells all the deeds of wonder he has done,
From the first action that his hand begun.
Phelice impatient of his wished sight,
Speeds toward Lincoln, like light Salmacis:
Where joyfully she entertaines her Knight,
With Iunoes kind embrace, and Venus kiss.
Guy with requital makes his gladness known:
And in his arms he now inioyes his own.
Forgetful Love, and too too slow (quoth she)
I feared thou did not mind thy dearest friend:
What, seek a Dragon, ere thou look for me,
And hazard life before thou come, or send
To know if I remain in happy state!
Some jealous woman, would suppose 'twere hate.
But sure I do not, though I speak my heart,
And wish I had bin first thou saw on shore:
Guy welcome to thy Phelice now thou art,
Thou never shall go forth a Fighting more,
No, thou have fought too much, thy looks bewray
Stern countenance, has stolen thy smiles away.
But Love, will learn thee (love) to change thy face,
And frame it, as at first when I did choose it:
Thou have almost forgotten to embrace,
I like that well; it seems thou did not use it
In Foreign parts abroad, where thou have bin,
But that lost lesson, thou must new begin.
I will (quoth he) dear Love, and ply my Book,
And kiss my Lesson on thy Coral lip:
Tell me but only when I am mistook,
In reading rashly, if I ouer-skip,
Or be too negligent in taking pain,
Why turn me back, to conne my geere again.
But Lady, one exception I will make,
What line soever you do put me to,
The Horne-booke of all other I Will forsake,
For willingly, I would not have to do
With that Crosse-rowe, cross unto many, when,
Women do teach it unto Married men.
Kind Sir (quoth she) content, I Will never choose it,
It fits two sorts, a Curtezan, a Child:
Once, as the latter, simply I did use it,
But for the other, rather, be beguilde
Then to deceive, the second Horn-booke's naught:
Teach it not me and it shall never be taught.
Guy smiled and said, come let us Warwick see,
Of all the world the place that I love best:
Because it had the bringing up of thee,
And there, first with thy Beauty I was blessed,
I love the Castle, and the Garden ground,
Where e'rst thy Venus-face alone I found.
Let Us hasten on to hear this Sacred voice,
I Guy take Phelice to my wedded wife:
And thou repeat, I likewise am thy choice,
Till Death depart us, even so long as Life.
And then the next will be, God give us Joy,
And send thy Fathers Heir, agallant Boy.
The Marriage is Solemnized,
But after Forty days:
Guy Penance vows, and Pilgrim like,
From England goes his ways.
Canto. 10.
THe happy Day (that Lovers long expect)
Is now attayn'd to give desire rest:
And all the honors Hymen can effect,
He frank bestows to grace the wedding Feast.
For Athelstone and his renowned Queen:
At this great Nuptial, in their pomp were seen.
The Nobles rich and costly in Attire,
With worthy Knights and Gentlemen beside:
Ladies of Honor (as their Loves require)
Attend upon the beauteous fair faced Bride.
There wanted nothing (wit of man could find)
To please the eye, or to content the mind.
Maskes, midnight-Reuels, Tilt and Turnament,
Acting of ancient Stories, stately shows,
Banquets, might give great Jupiter content,
Where cups of Nector plentious ouer-flowes,
Abundant all things, with a plentious hand:
As if a King himself, should feast a Land.
Soon after all these things were consummate,
Earl Rohand (Phelice worthy Father) dies:
And to his Son bequeathes the whole estate
Of Earledomes, Lordships, all his Land is Guyes.
Who is created Earl of Warwick then,
In Honors rank, with Englands Noblemen.
But in the glory of this high applaud,
Enjoying all that did partake delight,
When every tongue his Fame and Fortunes laud,
Himself conuerts his sunshine days to night,
Bethinking what the world may just be thought:
And deeming all but vain, that he had sought.
Often would he sit and meditate alone,
In looking back what steps his youth had trod:
Then to himself with sighs, and grievous groan,
Cry pardon me, thou just incensed God,
I have done nothing for to purchase Grace:
But spent my time about a Woman's face.
For Beauty, bloody through the world I ran,
In pride of heart preferring Phelice feature:
For Beauty I have ended many a man,
Hating all other, for one mortal Creature,
For Beauty I have pawned my utmost power,
But for my sins not spent one weeping hour.
My Nunquam sera I will now begin,
And vow to spend the remnant of my days,
In contrite Penance for my former sin,
That God may pardon all the erring ways,
Which flesh and blood, vainly deceived by,
Unto the world I will go learn to dye.
Let me be censured, even as mortals please,
I Will please my God in all things may be done:
Ambitious pride has been my youths disease,
I Will teach age meeknes, ere my Glass be run,
And change my choice: wealth, beauty, world farwell:
To purchase Heaven, I would pass through Hell.
Phelice perceiues his melancholy state,
And coming to him, does most mildely woo:
My Lord (quoth she) why are you changed of late?
As I share joy, let me bear sorrow too,
If I in ought have moved you to offense:
I will with tears perform due recompense.
No my dear Love (quoth Guy) no cause in thee,
It Is with my self I discontented strive:
By light of Grace, my Natures faults I see,
That am as dead, although I seem alive.
Phelice, my sins, my countlesse sins appear:
Crying, Repent thy guilty Conscience clear.
I must deal with thee, as Bauarus dealt
(A Prince of Rome) with Sygunda his Wife,
Who (from a deep impression he felt)
Vowed Chastity perpetual all his life.
Entreating thee (even as thou love my soul)
To pardon me, not urging my control.
Have thou not heard what Ethelfrida did
(A Christian woman) sometime Englands Queen?
Is Edelthrudis act of Chaste life hid,
A Princess likewise rare and matchless seen?
The first with Child, no more of lust would taste:
The second caused two Husbands both live chaste.
And can not thou (the Phoenix of a Realm)
By immitation, win immortal praise?
Leaving thy virtues an admired Theme
To the succeeding Age, of Iron days?
I know thou can, thy greater part's Divine:
Where most is Carnal, 'twill to flesh incline.
Thou did procure (although I do excuse it)
My pride, by Conquests to attain thy Love:
God gave me Valor, I did vain abuse it,
My heart and thoughts, aspired far above
The Crowns and Scepters of most potent Kings,
I held their Diadems, inferior things.
But now I gather in a total sum,
Such follies, and condemn them all to dye:
A man of other fashion i will become,
Some better Travails for my soul to try,
Not as before, in Armor on my Steed:
But in a Gown of gray, a Palmers weed.
Obscure my Journey, for i will take no leave,
But only leave my endless Love to thee:
Here is my Ring, this memory receive,
And wear the same, to make thee think on me.
Let me have thine, which for thy sake i will keep:
Till Death close up these eyes, with his dead sleep.
When this was spoke, how she did wring her hands,
With sighs and tears, may well be deemed much:
Yet wondrous meekly, nothing countermaunds,
For the Devotion of that age was such,
To hold them blessed, could themselves retire:
To solitude, and leave the Worlds desire.
Now is the Princely clothing laid away,
Wherein he gitter'd like the glorious Sun,
And his best habit, homely Country gray,
Such as the poor plain people term homespun,
A Staff, a Scrip, a Scallop-shell in's hat,
Not to be known, or once admired at.
And thus with pensive heart, and doleful tears,
He leaves the fairest Creature England had:
Who in her face a map of sorrow wears,
A countenance composed all mournful, sad,
Like unto one had banished all delight:
Wishing for slumbers of eternal night.
Guy journeyes toward that Sanctified ground,
Whereas some times the Jews fair City stood,
In which, our Saviors sacred Head was Crowned,
And where for sinful man he shed his Blood,
To see the Sepulcher, was his intent:
The Tomb that Joseph unto Jesus lent.
With tedious miles he tired his weary feet,
And passed Desert places, full of danger:
At last, with a most woeful wight did meet,
A man that unto sorrow was no stranger.
For he had fifteen Sons made Captive all
To slavish bondage, in extremest thrall.
A Giant called Amarant, detayn'd them,
Whom no man durst encounter for his strength,
Who in a Castle which he held had chayn'd them,
Guy questioned where? and understands at length
The place not far: lend me thy Sword (quoth he)
I Will lend my manhood, all thy Sons to free.
With that he goes and lays upon the door,
Like him that says; I must and will come in:
The Giant never was so roused before,
For no such knocking at his Gate had bin,
So takes his Club and Keys, and comes out:
Staring with irefull countenance about.
Sir (quoth he) what business have thou here?
Art thou come to feast the Crows about these walls*
Did never hear, no ransom can him clear,
That in the compass of my fury falls?
For making me to take a Porters pains,
With this same Club I will dash out thy brains.
Giant (quoth Guy) y're quarrelsome I see,
Choler and you seem very near of kin:
Dangerous at the Club be like you be,
I have bin better armed, though now go thin,
But show thy utmost hate, enlarge thy spite:
Here is the weapon that must do me right.
A Giant called Amarant,
Guy valiantly destroys:
Whereby wronged Ladies, captive Knights
Their liberty enioyes.


So draws his sword, salutes him with the same
About the head, the shoulders, and the side:
While his erected Club did death proclaim,
Standing with huge Colossus spacious stride,
Putting such vigor to his knotty beam:
That like a furnace, he did smoke extreme.
But on the ground he spent his strokes in vain,
For Guy was nimble to avoid them still:
And ever ere he heau'd his Club again,
Did brush his plated Coat against his will,
At such advantage he would never fail:
To bang him soundly in his shirt of Mayle.
At length through thirst, Amarant feeble grew,
And said to Guy, as thou art of humane race,
Show it in this: give Natures wants their dew,
Let me but go and drink in yonder place,
Thou can not yield vnro a smaller thing,
Then grant life that, is given by the spring.
I grant thee leave (quoth Guy) go drink thy last,
To pledge the Dragon and the saluage Bore:
Succeed the Tragedies which they have past;
But never think to taste cold water more,
Drink deep to Death, and after that carouse,
Bid him receive thee, in his earthen house.
So to the Spring he goes and slakes his thirst,
Taking the water in extremely, like
A wracked Ship that on some Rock is burst,
When forced bulk against the stones do strike,
Scooping it in so fast with both his hands,
That Guy admiring to behold it stands.
Come on (quoth he) let us to work again,
Thou art about thy liquor ouer-long:
The Fish that in the River do remain,
Will want hereby, thy drinking does them wrong,
But I will see their satisfaction made:
With Giants blood, they must and shall be paid.
Villain (quoth Amarant) I Will crush thee straight:
Thy life shall pay thy daring Tongues offense,
This Club (which is about some hundred weight)
Is Deaths commission, to dispatch thee hence.
Dress thee for Ravens diet I must needs:
And break thy bones, as they were made of reeds.
Incensed much by these bold Pagans boastes,
Which worthy Guy could ill endure to hear,
He hewes upon those big surporting poasts,
That like two Pillars did the body bear,
Amarant (for their wounds) in choler grows:
And desp'ratly at Guy his Club he throws.
Which did directly on his body light,
So violent and weighty therewithal,
That down to ground on sudden came the Knight*
And ere he could recover from the fall,
The Giant got the Club again in's fist,
And struck a stroke that wonderfully mist.
Traitor (quoth Guy) thy falsehood i will repay,
This Coward act, to intercept my blood:
Says Amarant, I Will murder any way,
With enemies all vantages are good.
Oh could I poison in thy Nostrils blow:
Thou should be sure, I would dispatch thee so.
It Is well (said Guy) thy honest thoughts appear,
Within that beastly bulk do Devils dwell:
Which are thy Tenants while thou live here,
But will be Landlords when thou come in Hell.
Vile miscreant, prepare thee for their Den,
Inhumane monster, hateful unto men.
But breath thy self a time while I go drink,
For flaming Phoebus with his fiery eye,
Torments me so with burning heat, I think
My thirst would serve to drink an Ocean dry.
Forbear a little, as I dealt with thee:
Quoth Amarant, thou have no fool of me.
No silly wretch, my Father taught more wit,
How I should use such enemies as thou:
By all my Gods I do rejoice at it,
To understand that thirst constraines thee bow,
For all the treasuee that the world contains,
One drop of water shall not cool thy veins.
Relieve my foe? why twere a mad-mans part,
Refresh an adversary to my wrong?
If thou imagine this, a Child thou art,
No fellow, I have known the world too long
To be so simple; now I know thy want,
A minutes space of breathing I Will not grant.
And with these words, heauing aloft his Club
Into the air, he swings the same about:
Then shakes his locks and does his temples rub,
And like the Cyclops in his pride did strout,
Sir (said he) I have you at a lift:
You now are come unto your latest shift.
Perish for ever with this stroke I send thee,
(A medicine will do thy thirst much good)
Take no more care for drink before I end thee,
And then we will have carouses of thy blood:
Here Is at thee with a butchers downright blow:
To please my fury with thine overthrow.
Infernal, false, obdurate fiend ( Guy said)
That seem a lump of cruelty from Hell:
Ungrateful Monster, since thou have denay'd
The thing to me wherein I used thee well:
With more revenge then ere my Sword did make,
On thy accursed head, Revenge I Will take.
Thy Giants longitude shall shorter shrink,
Except thy Sun-scorcht skin, be weapon proof,
Farewell my thirst, I do disdain to drink,
Streams keep your water to your own behoof,
Or let wild Beasts be welcome thereunto,
With those pearl drops I will not have to do.
Hold tyrant, take a taste of my good will,
For thus I do begin my bloody bout:
You cannot choose but like the greeting ill,
It is not that same Club will bear you out.
And take this payment on thy shaggie crown:
A blow that brought him with a vengeance down.
Then Guy set foot upon the Monsters breast,
And from his shoulders, did his Head divide:
Which with a yawning mouth did gape, unblessed,
No Dragons jaws were ever seen more wide,
To open and to shut, till life was spent:
So Guy tooke's Keys and to the Castle went.
Where many woeful Captives he did find,
That had bin tired with extremities:
Whom he in ftiendly manner did unbind,
And reasoned with them of their miseries:
Each told a tale with tears, and sighs, and cries,
All weeping to him with complaining eyes.
There tender Ladies, in dark dungeon lay,
That were surprised in the desert Wood:
And had no other diet every day,
Then flesh of humane Creatures for their food.
Some with their Lovers bodies had bin fed,
And in their wombes their Husbands buried.
Now he bethinkes him of his coming there,
T'inlarge the wronged brethren from their woes,
And as he searches, does great clamours hear,
By which sad sounds direction, on he goes
Until he finds a darksome obscure Gate,
Armed strongly over, all with Iron plate.
That he vnlockes and enters, where appears,
The strangest object that he ever saw;
Men that with famishment of many years,
Were like Death's picture, which the Painters draw,
Diverse of them were hanged by each thumb,
Others head downe-ward, by the middle some.
With diligence he takes them from the walls,
Where liberty their thraldom to acquaint:
Then the perplexed Knight their Father calls,
And says, receive thy Sons though poor and faint,
I promised you their lives, accept of that;
But did not warrant you they should be fat.
The Castle I do give thee, here is the Keys,
Where tyranny for many years did dwell:
Procure the gentle tender Ladies ease,
For pitty-sake, use wronged Women well,
Men easily may revenge the deeds men do,
But poor weak Women, have not strength thereto.
The good old man even ouer-ioy'd with this,
Fell on the ground and would have kissed Guyes feet,
Father (quoth he) refrain so base a kiss,
For Age to honor Youth I hold unmeet,
Ambitious pride has hurt me all it can,
I go to mortify a sinful man.
Guy on his Journey does proceed,
With painful Pilgrim life:
While Warwick Countess lives in tears
A Chaste and loyal Wife.
Canto. 11.
BEhold the man that sought Contentions out,
Whose recreation was in angry arms,
And for his Venus raung'd the world about
To find out dreadful Combats, fierce allarmes,
From former disposition allienate:
Shun's all occasions may procure debate.
In his own wrongs, by vow he will not strike,
Let injury impose what strife can do:
Abuses shall not force him to dislike,
For he has now framed Nature thereunto,
And taken Patience by the hand for's guide,
To lead his thoughts where meeknes does abide.
No worldly joy can give his mind content,
Delights are gone, as they had never bin;
His only care is how he may Repent
His spending youth about the serving sin,
And fashion age, to look like contrite sorrow:
That little time to come, which life does borrow.
His looks were sad complexion, pale and wan,
His diet of the meanest, hard and spare:
His life he led, like a Religious man,
His habit poor and homely, thin and bare.
His Dignities and Honor were forgot:
His Warwick Earldom he regarded not.
Sometime he would go search into a Grave,
And there find out a rotten dead-mans Scull;
And with the same a conference would have,
Examining each Vanity at full.
And then himself would answer for the Head,
His own objections in the Dead-mans stead.
If thou have bin some Monarch, where is thy Crown?
Or who in fear of thy stern looks do stand?
Death has made conquest of my great renown,
My golden Scepter in a fleshly hand,
Is taken from me by another King,
And I in dust am made a rotten thing.
Have thou bin some great Counsailer of state,
Whose potent wit did rule a mighty Realm?
Where is the policy thou had of late?
Consumed and gone even like an idle dream,
I have not so much wit, as will suffice:
To kill the Worms, thar in my Coffin lies.
Perhaps thou wast some beauteous Ladies face,
For whom right strange adventures have bin wrought
Even such, as (when it was my loving case)
For my dear kindest Phelice I have fought.
Perhaps about this Scull there was a skin,
Fairer then Hellens was enclosed in.
And on this scalp, so wormy eaten bare,
(Where nothing now but bone we may behold)
Were Natures ornaments, such locks of Hair
As might induce the eye to deem them gold.
And crystal Eyne in these two hollow caves:
And here such Lips, as Love for kissing craves,
But where is the substance of this Beauty spent?
So lovely, precious in the sight of men?
With powerful Death, unto the dust it went,
Grew loathsome, filthy, came to nothing then.
And what a Picture of it does remain?
To tell the wise all Beauty is but vain.
Such memories he often would prefer,
Of mortal frailty, and the force of Death:
To teach the Flesh how apt it is to err,
And post repentance off till latest breath,
Thus would he in the worlds contempt reprove
All that seduced the soul from Heavenly love.
Now for a while reuerse your view of woe,
For one sad subject, to behold another:
To see new sorrow, back to England go,
And to long absent years commit the the other,
Leave dolefuil Guy, to aged grief and cares:
And look on Phelice, how his Lady fares.
Like to a Widow, all in black attire,
She does express her inward doleful mind,
A Chamber-prison is her chief desire,
Where she to passions wholly is inclined.
She that of late was pride of English Court,
With Majesty no longer will consort.
But lives a life, like one despisde life's being,
And every day unto the world did dye:
With judgments eyes, far into folly seeing,
And noting well how fast false pleasures fly.
Leaving for every taste of vain Delight,
A huger heap of Cares, then Pen can write,
Her thoughts ran after her departed Lord,
And trauail'd in conceit more fast then he:
What place (quoth she) can rest to me afford,
That Pilgrim like, has thus forsaken me?
Oh sad laments! my soul your burden bears,
To think dear Guy, remembers me in tears.
Me thinks he sits now by a Rivers side,
And swells the water with his weeping eyes:
Me thinks that Phelice, Phelice loud he cried,
And charged Echo bear it through the Skies,
Then rising up, he runs with might and maine,
Saying sweet Echo bring my Love again.
Then comes he to a Cypress Tree, and says
Syluanus, this was once the lovely Boy,
Whom thou for feature, to the Clouds did praise,
But here is thy senseless and transformed joy.
It Is nothing now but boughs, and leaves and Tree:
And made to wither as all Beauties be.
And then me thinks he sits him sadly down,
And on his bending knee, his elbow stays
With head in hand, saying, farewell Renown,
Vanish vain pleasures of my youthful days.
My true Repentance do you all displace,
A happy end, brings sinful souls to Grace,
Ah worthy man that thus can mortify
The rebel Flesh, to conquer Adams Nature!
And for the gaining of Eternity,
Do live on Earth, as if no earthly Creature,
Dead, and alive: old, and newborn again,
True valiant George, that has the Devil slain.
As thy advice was when thou did depart,
That I should live a Vestall virgins life,
Although when I was Maid (by lovers art)
Thou did persuade me to become a Wife,
I vow by Heavens, and all the powers Divine,
To keep my thoughts, as constant, chaste as thine.
My Beauty I will blemish, all I may
With tears and sighs, and doleful lamentation:
By abstinence I will attaiue the way
To overcome the force, of sins temptation,
This sentence I have often read, and seen:
A woman's Chastity, is virtues Queen.
Ceres and Bacchus I will careful shun,
Foes to Diana, friends to Venus ever:
Unto licentious life they teach us run,
And with sobriety assotiate never.
Spare diet shall become my daily fare,
The soul thriues best, to keep the body bare.
The Courtly ornaments I wore of late,
In honor of King Athelstones fair Queen,
Even all those Jewels and those Robes of state,
Wherein so often I was glorious seen,
Shall with their price and value now supply,
Those naked poor, that in the streets do lie.
The Gold and Silver that I do possess,
About good works, shall all employed be:
The purchase of eternal happiness,
Is of all wealth most precious unto me,
All that in want to Warwick Castle come,
And crave relief; I will afford them some.
For hault and Lame, and Blind, I will provide
Some Hospital, with Land to be maintained:
For Widows, and poor Fatherless beside,
That their necessities may be sustained.
For young beginners their estates to raise:
And for repayring of decayed Highways.
This I account to be the Heavenly thrift,
Lay up your Treasure where it cannot rust:
And give the Riches, we receive by gift,
As each good Steward is inioyn'd he must,
That after this short stinted life's decay,
We may have life and everlasting day.
Rejected world thus do I take my leave,
With thee and all things thou do most esteem:
Thy shows are snares, and all thy hopes deceive,
Thy goodness is but only good to seem.
Of thy false pleasures I as much have seen,
As she that bears the title of a Queen.
Oh that I were in such unknown disguise,
(Attending on my Guy, where ere he be)
As once the kind Sulpitia did devise,
Her Lentulus in banishment to see!
Or Hipsicraca-like in man's attire,
Following her exiled King, through Loves desire.
Twould something ease my sorrow wounded-heart,
So to divide the burden of unrest:
For where affliction takes afflictions part
In hard extremes, some comfort is expressed.
Misery is more easy to abide:
When friend with friend their crosses do divide.
But all in vain I wish, would God I were,
Or thus, or thus, it naught auailes my woe:
Though straying thoughts do wander here and there
My poor weak body knows not where to go.
Unto the Holy Land I heard him say,
God send me thither, at my dying day.
I will about my Vows and see them paid,
To do the good that Charity requires:
When grace, to works of virtue does persuade,
It Is blessedness to further such desires.
And while on earth I do a sinner dwell:
I Will strive to please my God, with living well.
In this resolve, that life she entertaines,
Performing all the course she had propounded,
And such severity therein explaines,
Her sex with wonder rest amazed confounded,
To see so rare a Beauty, rich, high-borne,
Hold all worlds pleasures in contempt and scorn.
For no persuading friend that she would hear,
Which motion'd company, or recreation,
Unto their speech, she would not lend an ear,
That sought to alter her determination.
But such as came and of compassion spoke,
She did relieve, for blessed Jesus sake.
Her wandering Lord from Land to Land repaires,
To seek out places Pilgrims do frequent*
By careful years, turned into silver hayres,
Exceeding changed with grief and languishment,
For sorrow gives a man more ancient look,
Then elder time, which lesser cares has took.
His old acquaintance in those Foreign parts,
That had before most worthy actions seen,
Right bold adventures of his long deserts,
Had lost Sir Guy, as he had never been.
Those that in Armor knew his martial face*
Did not expect him in a Friars case.
Amongst the rest to whom he had bin known,
He met Earl Terry banished to exile:
Each unto other being strangers grown,
Through sorrow, which the senses does beguile,
They had forgot that ere they saw each other,
Yet Guy was Terryes, Terry Guyes sworn Brother.
Having related how their travails grew,
One's voluntary, tothers by constraint:
In taking leave with courtesies adieu,
Oh Englishman (said Terry sighing faint)
I had a friend, a Countryman of thine:
Was Justice Champion to great wrongs of mine.
Tyranny, to the face he durst defy,
And stamp his foot upon Oppressions neck:
Tell me dear friend, have thou not heard of Guy,
That had a hand to help, a Sword to check?
I have (quoth he) and known him many years:
Guy Warwickes Earl, is one of Englands peers.
What is thy Name? Terry (quoth he) I hight,
Greater by Birth then Fortunes make me seem:
Terry said he, I vow to do thee right
In what I may, my poor good will esteem.
To humane thoughts my Nature does agree,
Thou love my friend, I must of force love thee.
Direct me to the man exiled thee thus,
I Will take thy part, as far as strength extends:
If Guy himself were here to join with us,
He could but say, I Will venture life with friends.
And be assured though I simple be,
I often have had as good success as he.
Terry with loving thanks, his love requites,
And brings him to his foe, whom he defies:
And valiant with the adverse Champion fights,
Till mortal wounded, at his feet he dies,
Yet 'twas a man supposed of matchless worth:
That for the Combat they had singled forth.
When this was done, the Earl demands his Name,
Pardon (quoth he) that were against a Vow.
To no man living, I Will reveal the same,
For I have changed Name and Nature now,
Natures corruptions, I do strive to leave:
A new Regeneration to receive.
Farewell my friend, even as my soul would fare,
If we never meet on Earth, Heaven be the place:
For idle hours, I have no time to spare,
My hayres look gray, they turn to white apace,
I have great loss, in short time to redeem,
A minutes sorrow is of much esteem.
So he departs toward Judea ground,
Samarta, and Galile, to see*
Those parts, by Christian Pilgrims so renowned,
Because their Saviors choice was their to be.
Where he did suffer to redeem our loss:
Even from the Cratch, unto the bloody Cross.
Much time he spends, and many years bestows,
From place to place, about this Holy Land:
That all his friends in England do suppose,
Now Death of him had got the vpper-hand,
For no reporter came, that could relate,
His Life, his being, or his present state.
This put the world to silence, men were mute
Concerning Guy, they knew not what to say:
The dreadful Champion in the armed suit
Was neither known nor feared in simple Gray.
But did endeavor all that ere he might;
Never to be revealed to any wight.
For unto none he would his Name disclose,
Nor tell direct what Countryman he was*
Nor of his Noble mind make any shows,
But strive in all things most obscure to pass,
Until by native love, his mind was led,
To come and lay his bones, where he was bred.
Guy after many years comes home,
To England for his Grave:
Kills Colbron that great Giant, and
Dies poorly in a Cave.
Canto. 12.
EVen as the brightest glorious shining Day,
Will have a Night of darkness to succeed:
Which takes the pride of Phoebus quite away,
And makes the Earth to mourn in sable weed.
Presenting us with drowsy heavy sleep,
Death's memory, in careful thoughts to keep.
So Youth, the day of Natures strength, and beauty
Which has a splendour like fair Heavens eye:
Must yield to Age, by a submissiue duty,
And grow so dark, that life of force must dye.
When length of years, brings ancient evening on
Irreuocable time is posting gone.
This cogitation in Guyes breast appears,
By his returning from the Holy Land:
He finds himself, to be a man in years,
And that his Glass had but a little sand
To run, before his date of life expire,
Therefore to England, he does back retire.
There to be buried where he had bin borne,
Was all the cause that did induce him back:
To end his evening where he had his morn,
In doleful colors of a dead-mans black,
And let that body rest in English ground,
which through the world no resting place had found.
When he arrived on his Native shore,
He found the Country in extreme distress:
For through the Kingdom armed troops great store
Against the Foe were all in readiness.
The King of Denmark whose destroying hand,
A mighty Army did securely land.
And marched from the Coast with deuastation,
Destroying Towns, Villages set on fire:
Working such terror unto all the Nation,
King Athelstone was forced to retire
To Winchester, which when the Danes once knew,
Toward that City, all their strength they drew.
Which was too strong for Spear and shield to win,
(Invincible our walls of Stone were then)
They wanted Cannon-keyes to let them in,
Hell's pick-locke powder was unknown to men.
The Devil had not taught such murdering smoke,
A Soldiers honor, was his manly stroke.
Beholding now how they repulsed were,
That Winchester by no means could be won*
They do conclude to summon parley there,
And with a Challenge have all quarrels done,
An Englishman, to Combat with a Dane,
And that King loose, that had his Champion slain.
Wherewith a huge great Giant does appear,
Demanding where the Foxes all were crept?
Saying, if one dare come and meet me here
That has true valor for his Country kept,
Let him come forth, his manhood to disclose,
Or else the English are but Coward foes.
Why very crauens, on their dunghils dare
Both crow and strike, before they run and cry,
Is English courage now become so rare,
That none will fight because they fear to dye?
Then I pronounce you all faint-hearted fools,
Afraid to look, on manly Martial tools.
What slanders I have heard in foreign Lands,
Of these poor men for deeds which they have done,
Most false they are belyed of their hands,
But he says true, that says their feet can run,
They have a Proverb to instruct them in,
That it is good sleeping in a sound whole skin.
Thus did he vaunt, in terms of proud disdain,
And threw his Gantlet down, saying there is my glove:
At length great Guy no longer could refrain,
Seeing all strain curt'sie to express their love,
But comes unto the King, and says dread Lord,
This Combat to thy unknown Knight afford.
Although in simple habit I am hid,
Yielding no show of that I undertake:
I never attempted ought but what I did,
An end of Colbrond (on my soul) I Will make.
Palmer (quoth Athelstone) I like thy sprite:
God sent thee hither, and he aid the right.
His powerful hand lend vigor to thy blows,
And grant thy foot upon the foe may tread:
Amen quoth Guy, and with great courage goes,
Forth Winchesters North-gate unto Hide-meade.
Where that same Monster of a man he found,
Treading at every step two yardes of ground.
Art thou the man (quoth Colbrond) art thou he,
On whom the King will venture Englands Crown?
Can he not find a fitter match form,
Then this poor Rascal in a threadbare Gown?
Where Is all his Knights and worthy Champions now
I do disdain so base a Slave as thou.
Guy fights to free all Englands fears,
With Colbrond Giant Dane:
And in Hide-mead at Winchester,
Was that Goliath slain.


Giant (said Guy) manhood should never rayie,
To beat the air with blasts of idle wind:
A Soldiers weapon, best can tell his tale,
Thy destiny upon my Sword I find:
Twill let thee blood while thou have drops to bleed,
And spell thy Death for all the Danes to reed.
Thus I begin, and on his Armor laid,
That Colbronds coat was never cudgel'd so:
Who with his Club, did watch to meet his blade,
Intending to have broke it with a blow.
But Guy was sure his Sword would hold out play,
It had bin trusty many a cruel fray.
And therefore boldly he presumes thereon,
Laying about, as fast as he could drive,
Until the Lubbers breath was almost gone,
(For with a weighty Club did Colbrond strive)
Which lighting on the ground made earth give ways
As if some Devil did about him lay.
So long they held this stern and irefull fight,
That the beholders knew not what to deem:
Yet still some wounds to Colbronds share did light,
Which to the English did great comfort seem.
Besides, their Champion gave encouragement,
By active carriage, danger to prevent.
Quoth Colbrond, Englishman will thou forbear,
And sue for mercy, let the Fight alone?
Villain (quoth Guy) I scorn thy Coward fear,
I Will have thy Life, or it shall cost mine own,
We Will never part, till one be soundly sped,
The King has ventured England on my Head.
For twenty Denmarkes (if they might be found)
And all the wealth that on the Ocean swimmes,
I will not yield an inch of English ground,
Thou shall find metal in these aged limbs,
Although thy bodies height be more then mine:
I have a heart bigger by odds then thine.
Think on thy ancient grand-fire Gogmagog,
Whom Cor^neus dealt withal at Dover,
How that same Lubber like a timber-log,
Was by the worthy Britain tumbled over.
For his bold Challenge, he had such a check,
There was no Surgeon could amend his neck.
Thou art deceived in me poor silly sot,
I am untaught to bend submissions knees,
Hold me no Christian if I fail a jot,
(And for the world that title I Will not leese)
Betake thee to thy tools, honor thy King,
Upon thy manhood lies a mighty thing.
And thus I do encounter thee afresh,
With that he lent him such a powerful stroke,
It made wide rupture in the Giants flesh,
And did his furious Choler much provoke,
Laying about him in most cruel rage,
Till the next wound did all his heat assuage.
It was so mortal that it brought him down,
To lie and groan upon the bloody ground,
Forthwith a showte was heard from out the Town,
That all the Sky did Echo to the sound,
Great joy was made by every English heart:
And all the Danes with extreme grief depart.
King Athelstone sent for his Champion then,
To do him Honor for his famous deed,
Who was received by the Clergy men,
With all solemnity for such high meede,
Embraced by the Nobles, and renowned,
With Martial music, Drum and Trumpets sound.
But little pleasure Guy conceiues herein,
Refusing Jewels, costly Ornaments,
Saying with these he out of love has bin
For many years: by true experiments.
Only thanks God that blessed him with an hour,
To free his Country from inuading power.
And so intreates that he may pass unknown,
To live where poverty regards not weahh:
And be beholden to the help of none,
Seeing the world but now and then, by stealth.
For true Content does such a Treasure bring,
It makes the Beggar richer then the King.
With true Content (says he) I will abide,
In homely Cottage, free from all resout,
For I have found, Content cannot be spide,
To make abode within a Monarchs Court,
No, there is ambition, pride, and envy seen,
And fawning flattery stepping still between.
Yet gentle Palmer (said the King) agree,
Where ever thou resoluest to remain:
Acquaint thy Name in private unto me,
And this is all thy Sovereign will obtain,
Tell me but who thou art, I will conceal it:
As I am Englands King I Will not reveal it.
Why then (quoth he) your Grace shall understand,
I am your Subject, Guy of Warwick named,
That have these many years not seen your Land,
But bin where Youth, by ancient Age is tamed.
Yea, where experience taught me wit (dread Prince)
The world of many follyes to convince.
And now am come to bring my bones to Grave,
Within the Kingdom where I first took life:
Yet shall no Creature else the notice have
Of my arrival, not my dearest Wife,
Till sickness come and does my Death foretell,
Then I Will acquaint her with my last farewell.
The King with joy embraced him in his arms,
And with great admiration answers thus:
Most worthy Earl, freer of Englands harms,
It grieves my soul thou will not live with us,
Oh were thy resolutions, thoughts but now,
That my persuasions might prevent thy Vow.
But it is too late, they are grown ripe I see,
Thou art too settled in determination,
Well Honorable man, yet this joys me,
Thou bring thy bones, unto thy dearest Nation,
Where Monuments of thy great deeds shall last,
Till after Ages of the world be past.
In Warwick Castle, shall thy Sword be kept,
To witness to the world what thou have bin:
And least forgetful time should intercept,
A President, I present will begin.
The Castle-keeper shall receive a fee:
To keep thy Sword in memory of thee.
Thy Armor likewise, and the martial Spear,
That did thee service, in thy high designs,
Shall be preserved very careful there,
That all such men as have distrustful minds,
May think (if from a truth this did not grow)
A King would scorn, to cosen people so.
And in thy Chapel (distant thence a mile)
A bone shall hang of that most cruel Beast,
Which near to Couentrey remained long while,
Whose Rib by measure is six foot at least,
Destroying many that did pass that way,
Until thy manhood did the Saluage slay.
That by tradition men may speak and tell,
This was Guyes Armor, this his massy Blade,
These bones of murdering Beasts which men did quell
And this the Tomb, wherein his Corpse was laid,
This the true Picture of his shape at length,
And this the Spear, did often express his strength.
For sure I hold it an ungrateful thing,
(When thou by Natures course in dust shall lie)
No Memory should cause some Muse to sing,
The Worthiness of matchles English Guy,
Thy Contrymen would prove too far unkind,
When out of sight, they leave thee out of mind,
This said in humble duty (wondr'ous meek)
Guy reuerenceth the King, and so departs,
Some solitary den or Cave to seek,
Which he unto his mansion house conuerts.
And so lives poorly in the hollow ground,
Making his meat, of roots and herbs he found.
Sometimes he would to Warwick Castle go,
And crave an Alms at his dear Ladies hand:
Who unto Pilgrims did more bounty show,
Then any Noble woman in the Land.
And she would ask all Palmers that came there,
If at the Holy Land they never were?
Or in their travels if they had not seen
An Englishman, was Lord of that same Tower?
Who many years away from thence had been,
A Knight never conquered yet by humane power,
But there is a Tyrant whom I only fear,
They call him Death that murders every where.
If he have met him, (O my dearest Lord)
I never shall behold thy face again,
Till that same Monster do as much afford,
Unto my heart and so release all pain.
Which gracious Heavens grant, if Guy be dead,
Upon this earth let me no longer tread.
Thus did he often hear his Wife enquire,
With deep complaints from extreme passions flowing
Yet by no means would grant her kind desire,
The comfort of a hopeful word bestowing.
But look upon her as his heart would break,
Then turn away for fear his tongue would speak.
And so depart with weeping to his Cell,
Setting a dead-mans Head before his eyes:
Saying, with thee I shortly come to dwell,
This sinful Flesh I constantly despise.
My soul is weary of so bad a guest:
And does desire to be at home in rest.
My feeble limbs; weakness does sore possess,
And sickness gripes do touch about my heart,
I feel I am not far from happiness,
But am in hope my foe and I shall part,
This adversary, which I long have fed,
By whom my soul has bin so much misled.
To my dear Phelice, I will send my Ring,
Which I did promise for her sake to keep:
I may no longer time defer the thing,
For fear that Death prevent me with his sleep.
I feel his Messenger approach apace,
And poor weak Nature must of force give place.
So called a Heardsman as he passed by,
And said, good friend do me a special favor:
Even in a matter that concerns me nigh,
(My hope relyes upon thy kind behavior.)
To Warwick Castle speedily repair,
And for the Countess ask, with trusty care.
Deliver this Ring to her-owne hand,
And say the ancient Pilgrim sent the same,
That lately at her Gate with Scrip did stand,
To beg an Alms in blessed Jesus Name.
And if she ask thee where I do remain?
Direct her hither she will requite thy pain.
Sir (quoth the Heardsman) I shall be ashamed,
That never dust speak to Lady in my life:
Nay more and 't please you, I may much be blamed,
To carry Rings to such a great man's Wife.
Besides if I should loose it by the way,
Why what would you, and Madam Phelice say?
Pre-thee (said Guy) frame not such idle doubt,
No prejudice can light on thee at all:
The act is honest which thou go about,
And for it none can thee in question call.
A courteous ear the Lady will thee lend,
Upon my warrant fear you nothing friend.
With that he goes and mannerly betakes
The token to the Countess, which she seeing,
Most admirable wonder at it makes!
Ah friend (quoth she) where is my husbands being?
Husband (said he) that news I do not bring:
From an old Beggar I received the Ring.
His house was made of neither Wood nor Stone,
But under ground into a hole he went:
And in my Conscience there he dwells alone,
And never pays his Landlord quarters rent,
Ah it is my Guy (she said) show me his Cell,
And for thy pains I will reward thee well.
So he directs Warwicks fair Countess thither,
Who entering in that melancholy place,
Her Lord and she embracing, weep together,
Unable to pronounce a word long space,
Long time they two had not a Tongue to speak,
Till Guyes discretions sorrows door did break.
Phelice (quoth he) now take thy leave of Guy,
That sent to see thee ere his sight decay:
Within thine arms I do entreat to dye,
And breath my sprite, from thy sweet soul away,
Thou gave me alms at Warwick Castle late:
It Is blessedness to pity poor men's state.
Guy in repentance poorly lives,
Obscurely in a Cave:
Revealed to Phelice by a Ring,
When Death had dug his Grave.


Look not so strange, bewail not so my Dear,
Ah weep not Love, I do not want thy tears:
I have shed plenty since my coming here,
Of true remorse, my Conscience witness bears.
Thou weep'st not now, because I wept no more,
But to behold me friendlesse, helpless, poor.
Wife, I have sought the place that all desire,
Though few endeavor for, eternal rest:
The soul which to that Heaven does aspire,
Must leave the world, and worldly things detest.
It Is full of Devils that on souls do wait,
And full of snares: in every place some bayte.
Ah Phelice I have spent (and then he wept)
Youth, (Natures day) upon the Love of thee:
And for my God, old rotten Age have kept,
The night of Nature, Christ forgive it me,
Sorrow lies heavy on my soul for this:
Sweet Savior Jesus, pardon my amiss.
In that I had destroyed so many men,
Even for one Woman, to enjoy thy Love,
Therefore in this most solitary Den,
I sought my peace with that great God above,
Against whom by sin I have bin more misled,
Then there be hayres, upon my hoary head.
The other day, feeling my body ill,
And all the parts thereof oppressed with pain,
I did compose a Testament and Will,
To be the last that ever I ordain.
Lo here it is I Will read it if I can,
Before I cease to be a living man.
HIS WILL.
EVen in the Name of him whose mighty power,
Created all, in Heaven and Earth contained,
As one to dye; this very instant hour,
I leave the world and all therein unfeigned.
My soul I give to him that gave it me:
Receive it Jesus, as I trust in thee.
I owe a debt of Life, is due to Death,
And when it is paid him, he can ask no more:
A very vapor of a little breath,
Would he had had it many years before,
But here is my comfort, though he come or stay,
It Is ready for him (if he will) to day.
I owe the world the stock of wealth it lent,
When I did enter traffic with the same:
Less would have given Nature more content,
"It Is happiness to want a Rich man's name,
World, leave me naked as I did begin,
I ask but one poor Sheet to wrap me in.
I do bequeath more sins then I can number,
My daily evils, in a countlesse sum:
Even from my cradle, unto Death's dead slumber,
Those past, these present, all that are to come,
To him that made them loades to burden me,
Satan receive them, for they came from thee.
I give good thoughts and every virtuous deed,
That ever grace has guided me unto,
To him from whom all goodness does proceed,
For only evil Natvre taght me do,
I was Conceived, bred and borne in sin:
And all my Life, most vain and vile has bin.
I give to Sorrow all my sighs and cries,
Fetched from the bottom of a bleeding heart:
I give Repentance tears and watery eyes,
The signs unfeigned of a true convert.
Earth yield a Grave, or Sea become a Tomb:
Jesus unto my soul grant Heauen-roome.
Phelice, I faint, farewell true loyal Wife,
Assist me with thy prayers, thy Husband dies:
I trust to meet thee in a better life,
Where tears shall all be wiped from weeping eyes,
Come blessed Spirits come in Jesus Name,
Receive my soul, to him convey the same.
And with these words his quiet sprite departs,
While mournful Phelice well-nye dead for woe,
Her senses all to sorrows use conuerts,
And too abundant does her tears bestow,
Beating her breast, till breast and heart be sore:
Wringing her hands, till she could strive no more,
Then sighing said, ah Death my sorrows cause,
That have deprived me of my dearest Lord:
Since loathsome air my vital spirits draws,
This favor for thy tyranny afford,
Do me a good to recompense thy ill,
And strike the stroke, that all my cares can kill.
Let me not live to see to morrowes light,
But make me thus, cold, bloodlesse, pale and wan,
As this dead Carcass does appear in fight,
This true description of a mortal man,
Whose deeds of wonder past and gone before,
Have left him now at Deaths dark prison door.
Kissing his face, with a farewell of tears,
She leaves the body for the Grave to claim,
And from that place as (...) ^oule she bears,
As ever Woman that the world can name.
Living but Fifteen days after his Death:
And then through extreme sorrow yielded breath.
FINIS.

