GODS BLESSING IN BLASTING, AND HIS MERCY IN MILDEW.

TWO SERMONS SVTABLE TO THESE times of Dearth: By JAMES ROWLANDSON B. in D. and
Pastor at EAST-TYSTED in Hampshire.

ESAIAS 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more; but
thine eyes shall see thy Teachers.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for William Bladen, at the great North door
of PAVLS. 1623.

TO THE WORTHIEST GENTLEWOMAN, AND MOST virtuous Matron, Mris. ANNE BILSON,
the true widow of that famous and most learned Prelate, my L. BILSON, late
Bishop of Winchester, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel,
my sometimes most loving Patron, and thrice honored Lord: all the graces of
Gods Kingdom in this world, and the glories of it in another.
I Cannot more abhor flattery, than your self will fly at the very shadow of
it; as Moses at the sight of the Serpent. But give not back, it is no such
terrible object, which here I offer to your eyes. It is but a rod, and that a
gracious one, Gods blessing to our Nation even in Blasting, and his mercy in
Mildew. This I have somewhat ouer-boldly adventured to cast in your way before
ye were aware of it. But you know to take it up by the true end, which it to
testify mine unfeigned reverence and respect, both to your self, and to the
memory of that most honorable man, that is gone before us into his Masters
joy. I could not satisfy my self, if in the dedication of these my first
labors of this kind, I did not charge them, in the first place to visit that
Family, to which (as Gods instrument) I must refer the greatest part of my
worldly encouragements, or undergo the censure of the nine that returned not
with thanks. Two poor mites these are, o^ which neither the Lords treasury,
nor your self have any such need, but that they might well be spared; yet he
that accepted the Widows, gives me hope that neither he, nor the Widow will
reject mine. I speak not this in confidence of their worth (for slender they
must needs be, that are spunne most out of mine own meditations) but in regard
of his goodness, that has given you yours, and by his merciful acceptance
of our smallest endeavors done in truth, teaches us not to despise one
onothers services, or offices of love. That Ocean of his never exhausted
bounty, likes it well, that to his glory we should refund whatsoever good we
have received by his grace, be it less or more. The smallest drops of such
rain when they fall into that sea, find no less welcome, than the deepliest
charged rivers. You desire (I know) to imitate the heavenly Father, of whom we
must all be followers, if we will be approved children; and even in this.
Therefore I fear not to present you with this small paper-retribution. It is
all and the first gift that ever I tendered, either to your self or to any
other: a poor one (God wot) yet a demonstration of my thankfulness. Gold and
Silver I had none, or had I offered for your favors and my Lords, either
before or after that I felt them, I am persuaded that the repulse would have
been shameful, Acts 8.20.
and that too with S. Peter's detestation. Now also even this my testimony of
your goodness toward me, is more (as little as it is) than you expected, than
you desired: so abundantly do you content your self in the sole secrecy of
doing well. And yet me thinks, it is pity that virtue should be so modest as
to love obscurity, unwilling to have it self known, when vice is grown so
impudent, as not to fear the light. If painted visages (visards rather) dare
bazard the censure of a public view, should native beauty blush to show its
face? Yet your retiredness is commendable, but your contentedness with it,
much more: in that having lived sometimes in the open eye of the world so
worthily, you can now thus cheerfully deuote your self (as it were) to a more
private, not less pious course of life: Heb. 13 4. 1 Timothy 5.3.
your former condition was honorable amongst all men; and none (save they that
either know not the Apostles precept, or your self) but will say that your
present is as much to be honored. The ancient of days give you fullness of
many, and happy years, with the abundance of his blessings, that you may
continue to be (as you are) a gracious president of piety and gravity to your
sex; a long lived mother in Israel; the great comfort of your virtuous
children; of whom you may say more truly than Cornelia of her Gracchi, Haec
sunt ornamenta mea, These are my Jewels, these my abilements: Such be they long
to your comfort, still to Gods glory, whose unerring spirit of truth, conduct
you and them, with us all, through this wilderness of sin, to our promised
Canaan. And so I rest,

Your Servant in Christ Jesus, JAMES ROVVLANDSON.

GODS BLESSING IN BLASTING, AND his mercy in Mildew. THE FIRST SERMON.
HAGGAI 2.17. I smote you with blasting, and with mildew, and with hail, in
all the labors of your bands; yet ye turned not to me, says the LORD.
TWice I find this Text in Scripture, and in the same words almost; here and
in the Prophet Amos, chap. 4. verse. 9. Amos 4.9.
Here they mention a correction upon the Jews after their return from
Captivity; there, a judgment upon the revolted Israelites, or the ten Tribes.
Here the Jews were thus afflicted for not building Gods house; there the
Israelites for schismatically leaving the worship of God house.

Hence thus infer by the way, if you please: It can be no less fault to
abandon the Church than not to build it: Nor deserves it a less^ affliction,
not to repair to the Temple, than not to repair it. Understand it thus: He
that obstinately refuses to come to the Church (be he a recusant Papist, or
Schismaticke) offends no less, if not more, than the churl or miser that
holds his hand from contributing to it when there is need. For the buildings
and materials of the Temple are but the body of it, but the soul of the Temple
is Gods service in i^. And surely were not the covetous man an Idolater, as
well as the Recusant, I should less^ blame him for shutting up his purse, than
other^ for cutting off their persons, from the Temple. But it is hard to say
whether is the worse; (...). Both so bad, that there is no great choice.

Yet the Jews here in my text, though beaten with the same rods of Blasting
and Mildew, wherewith the Israelites were smitten in Amos, sinned not after the
like manner. The Temple was yet standing, when Amos prophesied to the
Israelites: which happened in the days of Jeroboam the latter, Amos 1.1.
the son of Ioash the thirteenth King of Israel, two hundred forty six years
before the desolation of it by the Assyrians, or thereabout. So the Israelites
forsook not the Temple for the ruins of it, but for the rent which Jeroboam
the son of Nebat had made from the house of David; from which time they were
turned Idolaters, and turned the glory of God into the similitude of a calfe
that eats hay. Access was not denied them, either to David's throne for
justice, or to the Temple for devotion; but because they had broken from the
house of David, Deuteronomy. 12.6. John 4.20.
they would break from Gods house too. And whereas the Lord had commanded them
for public worship to resort to the Temple, they left the place which he had
chosen, and following their master Pilot, Jeroboam, (whose policy steered all
their piety toward the landing of himself at a kingdom) carried all their
sacrifices to Dan and Bethel; and so became more brutish in their service, than
the Idoll-calues which they served. But for the Jews now returned from
captivity, let them be thus far excused; If they frequented not the Temple,
they could not, it being not yet reedified: If they builded it not again, they
had this to say ^or themselves, that they had begun to do ^t, but were
restrained by the letters of Artaxerxes, procured by the malicious suggestion,
and ^t the instigation of their bad neighbors; and so were forced to desist
from the work till the second year of Darius king of Persia, Ezra 4.24.
Ezra. 4. verse. 24. Yet though thus we might plead for them, or they for
themselves, all this will not prove them blameless: Excuse them it may a
tanto, non a toto; It is too narrow a cloak to cover all their nakedness, for
herein it leaves them bare, and open to Gods smitings: for being once enjoined
this task by God himself, and having put their hands unto it, they should not
have given it over for any dread of man. Now, that they were set about this
work by the Lord himself, Ezra 1.5.
is plain, Ezra. 1.5. Where it is said, that he raised up their spirits to
build the Temple: to wit, he stirred up theirs, by his spirit, the motion
whereof they should have held as a mandat, or equivalent to an express
command. Whence these conclusions result, which we will but a little more than
mention.

1. That the sacred suggestions of Gods spirit in stirring up our spirits to
do his will, would be hearkened unto, and obeyed with constancy. For being
divine dictates, though secretly inspired, they have an equipollency or equal
weight with the plainest precepts. But how these are distinguishable from
diabolical delusions, or concupiscentiall fantasies of men, I have showed
more largely at another time: only now receive this short direction;
Whatsoever motion would transport thee beyond thy calling, or lift up thy
thoughts above the pitch and measure of thy gifts, observe it with a jealous
eye: further if it be an incentiue unto evil, it is not a coal from the
altar, but some wild fire cast into thine heart, by Satan that old boutefeau.
And if it speak not according to the Law and the Testimony, there is deceit
or vanity, falsehood or lightness, but no light, Esaias 8.20.
no weight of truth in it

Again from the former discourse might arise another inference, as thus: That
not even the terrors and counter-commands of the greatest, should so interrupt
us in works enjoined by God, as to make us to desist from them. For, Whether
it be right in the sight of God, to obey men rather than God, judge ye, Acts
4.19.

But the maine point, issuing from the reference of this text as of a parallel
to that in Amos mentioned before, might be this: That like afflictions in this
world oftentimes befall the good and the bad; yea that lesser offenders are
sometimes chastened as more grievous sinners, and with the same rods: Gods
people corrected as forreiners, true worshippers as hated idolaters; sincere
professors as backsliding reuolters; Judah here, as Israel in Amos there; and
it may be even now the true and cheerful payer of his tithes to God, as the
fraudulent and sacrilegious man, and both with Blasting and Mildew.

This doctrine is a milk of Gods word to nourish us with comfort in all our
troubles, and suck it we may from the two breasts of the Scriptures, the Old
and New Testament: though wicked men by wresting it wring out blood, concluding
thence as those ungodly persons in Malachi, and saying, Malac. 3.14.
It is in vain then to serve God, and what profit is it to keep his
commandments? But we have I trust better learned Christ, than to esteem gain
to be godliness, 1 Timothy 6.6.
which of it self is the greatest profit; and we have better learned his
Cross, than to confound oil with the lees, though both be pressed out with
the same weight, and tumbled up and down in the same barrel; than not to put
a difference (I mean) between the religious and the profane, because both
are under the same pressure. Wheat is wheat, and chafe is but chafe, though
both be beaten out with the same flaile. Stay we but a little Gods leisure,
till at his great coming he purge his floor, Mal. 3.18.
and we shall discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him
that serves God and him that serves him not. Psalm. 58. vlt.
For verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that
judges the earth.

But now having thus compared this Text with that in Amos, let us consider it
in it self, as it offers these two things to our meditation: First, Gods
mercy in correcting this people, I smote you with blasting, and mildew, and
hail, in all the works of your hands. Then, their obstinacy in not
repenting, Yet ye have not turned unto me, says the Lord. I call this
correction a work of mercy; for besides that all his chastenings are but
hastenings of his people to repentance, and that he scourges every son whom
he receives; first, Heb. 12.6.
here I see the rod in his own hand; and it was David's choice ye know, 2 Samuel
24.14.
Let us now fall into the hands of the Lord, (for his mercies are great) and
let us not fall into the hand of man. If I must be corrected, let my father
himself, and not his vassal chasten me: his hand will not be too heavy on
me, whose heart cannot but be heavy for me. In all my troubles the Lord
himself is troubled; Esaias 63.9.
Atque dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox. How should it be otherwise? Ecclus.
2.18.
for as his majesty, such is his mercy; both are infinite, and everlasting.
This I in my Text then has mercy in it; and the next word though it speak of
smiting, yet but of smiting. It is the Lords mercy, that when we are smitten of
him, Lam. 3.22.
we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not; I smote you. You: and
it was but the earth which he smote, as parents stamp upon the ground to
fright their wayward children You: not their persons, but the fruits and
profits of their fields and vineyards. You: not the men by destroying them, but
their corn, and wine, and oil, that by diminishing these things, they might
have recourse unto their heavenly Father, and seek their meat at God. So
mothers deal with their little wantons, by taking the bread from them which
they tread under foot: so nurses with their babes, that first show the breast,
and then put it up again, to make them search the bosom, and cry for that
food which formerly they abused. Esa. 32.12.
He showed them the breasts of the earth, that should have nourisht them, fields
standing thick with corn, olives laden with their berries, and vines clogged
with their grapes, and did but show them, for he smote them with blasting, and
mildew, and hail. Nor was it want of mercy, by want to teach them the true
worth and sober use of these things. Nay he might have smitten them with the
sword of the wicked, whose mercies are cruelty; he might have trodden their
carcases as dung on the earth; or sparing their lives, he might have seized on
their lands and vineyards, with fire from heaven, or floods of water, (elements
that have no mercy) which might have made a clean riddance of all their food;
but it was only with blasting, and mildew, Pro. 28.3.
and hail, which are wont but to diminish, not utterly to perish the good
things of the land. Further he might have smitten them in the pleasure of their
eyes, and the fruits of their loins, Ezekiel. 24.16.
I mean in their wives and children; Yet it was but in the works of their
hands, in their fields which they had sown, in their Vineyards and Orchards
which they had planted, and the like. So whether we consider, First the Author,
Secondly the Act, Thirdly the Object, Fourthly the Instruments, or Fifthly, the
manner of this correction, there is mercy in all. Mercy in the Author (I) a
compassionate father. Mercy in the Act (I smote) not, I consumed, Mercy in the
Object (You) and not immediately you, but yours, only your corn, and wine, and
oil, etc. Mercy in the Instruments or rods (With Blasting, and Mildew, and
Hail,) not with sword, or flood, or fire. Lastly, Mercy in the manner (in the
labors of your hands) not in the friends of their bosoms, or the fruits of
their loins, but only in the fruits of their lands, and orchards, and
gardens, which their hands had dressed and planted. So this part of my Text
speaks of compassion and correction, like David's Psalm, that sings of Mercy
and Judgment, Psalm 101.1.
or of a merciful chastisement; of rods steept not in brine, but in the oil
of love. Yet (alas for their hardness) all this oil softened not, nor could
these rods beat them home to him that smote them, or bring them to a serious
consideration of the cause why they were thus afflicted: Yet ye returned not
unto me, says the Lord.

So then we have a general draught of my Text; wherein we see all the parts
and lineaments of it. Now mark we what matter of further observation these in
their order will afford.

And first for the Author, I smote you, 1. Author.
says the Lord. Blasting, and Mildew, and Hail, were but mine instruments, I
was the mouer, I struck you with these. The conclusion naturally issuing hence
is this:

Whatsoever be the rods wherewith at any time we are chastened, for certain
the hand is Gods that corrects us. Be it dearth, Leuit. 26.26.
it is he that breaks the staff of bread: or drought, Deuteronomy. 11.17.
it is he that shuts the heavens: or deluge, Genesis 7.11.
it is he that breaks up all the fountains of the deep, and sets open the
cataracts or windows of heaven. Be it fire, it is he that raines it: or
stormy wind, it is he that sends it. Genesis 19.24. Iona. 1.4. Psalm 68.8.
Be it earthquake, it is his presence that moves it: or disastrous aspects of
stars and planets, it is he that holds them all in his hands, Job 38.31.
that calls them by their names, that restrains the sweet influences of the
Pleiades, and loses the bands of Orion. Psalm. 91.5.
Be it plague or pestilence, they are his arrows; or war, Esaias 9.21.
it is his arm; or enemies, they are his armies; Esaias 9.11.
for he is the Lord of Hosts, and the shields of the world are his. Psalm. 47.9.
Briefly, there is no public calamity inflicted on man, or other creatures,
of which we may not say as the Prophet of the Assyrian tyrant, Esaias 10.5.
that it is the rod of Gods anger; though therewith he strike his children in
love: and a rod (ye know) cannot smite of it self, unless there be an hand to
use it. Nor may all the hands in the world move one of these rods, if God
stretch not out his arm to stir them. And as it is the Lord that sends
corrections in all common troubles, so is there no private affliction that
betideth any without his providence, or without his hand, that smites by it.
Therefore David acknowledged thus in his sickness; Psalm 32.4.
Thine hand is heavy upon me: Psalm 38.3.
And again, There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure. Esaias
38.2.
Therefore Ezekiah in his disease had recourse to God by prayer: and holy Job
bereft of all worldly comforts, thus possessed his soul by patience: Job 1.
The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. He complains not of the violence of the Shabeans, that drove away his
oxen, nor of the injustice of the Caldeans, that stole away his Camels, or of
the cruelty of both, that slew his servants: Nor does he either execrate the
fury of the fire, that burnt up his sheep and shepherds; or curse the
boisterousnesse of the wind, that blew down the house, and there at once both
killed and buried all his children: But thus he turned to him that smote him;
The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, etc. The Prophet Jonas, though a
very passionate man, (as appears by the conclusion of his prophecy) yet
patiently took his deserved affliction. And whereas the hands of the Mariners
had heau'd him over shipboord, he says it was the Lord that did cast him into
the bottom in the midst of the sea. Iona. 2.3.
Reuiling Shimei that threw stones at David, with bitter obloquies (harder to
be endured than stones themselves) was yet himself but as a stone thrown at
David by God, and therefore the holy man snarled not at that stone, but heeded
the hand that cast it; 2 Samuel 16.10.
he curses, says he, because the Lord has bidden him curse David: Who then
dare say, wherefore have thou done so.

How then may not this justly reprove impatient spirits that spend themselves
in fretting at the means, or men by which the Lord does chasten them: like
cursed Mastiues that break their teeth in gnawing those iron chains wherewith
their masters tie them, and in biting the staff wherewith he beats them. Do
but hear one complain of his incurable disease contracted (it may be) or
inflicted upon him for his intemperancie; and yet though (according to the
French proverb) he dig up his own grave with his teeth, he will both defame
the noble Art of Physic, and blame the Physician which should be honored;
not his own bad diet, not his riot that caused the hand of God to smite him.
Do but observe another whom the heavy hand of oppression (as he says) has
brought low, and hear how he breaks forth into dismal cursings, and deepest
execrations, fetched from the nethermost pit; as if he would let loose the
Prince of darkness, and all infernal powers against those that wrong him: yet
it may be, by idleness and unfaithfulness in his calling, he has suffered
his estate to come to ruin, or has let out his substance by prodigality, or
whoredom: notwithstanding all his talk is against the iniquity of men, or
the hardness of the times: not willing in the mean time either to remember
his own sins or what the Scripture has said, 1 Samuel 2.7.
The Lord makes poor.

At this time the Lord has smitten us in many parts of the land with Blasting
and Mildew. The fullness of our sins, and the empty ears of corn, do
fearfully prognosticate (o let my fear prove false) a hungry year.

But if when one shall come to a mow or an heap of twenty measures, he shall
happen to find but ten, let not the rich then complain of Blasting, or
Mildew; nor let the poor cry out upon cormorants, but let us all remember what
God says here in our Prophet, I smote you; the rich not undeservedly, and the
poor as worthily; the rich for repining at the former price, and the poor for
despising the former plenty.

To shut up this point: Seeing it is our heavenly Father that strikes,
whatsoever be his scourge, with him let us make our peace, to him our repeare.
If to the creatures we cry for comfort, all may answer us, as the King of
Israel to the distressed woman in a time of famine; 2 Kings 6.27.
Seeing the Lord does not succor you, how shall we help you with the barn
or with the wine press? 2 Chro. 16.12.
If in our diseases with Asa we seek first to the Physician, 2 Kings 1.2.
or go at all to the god of Ekron with Ahaziah, how justly may the Lord make
our maladies to be mortal, as were theirs? If in other distresses with Saul we
have recourse to the Witch at Endor, 1 Samuel 28 11.
to Coniurers, or Wise men (falsely so called) we deserve with him to be
deprived both of life and grace, for seeking so to recover losses. As therefore
David enquired of the woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14.19.
if the hand of Ioab was not with her in that close plea, and artificial
atonement which she made for Absolon; in all our troubles let us enquire if
there be not the hand of God in them; and searching we shall find it is so:
Which when we have found, let us with patience resign up our selves into his
hands, 2 Samuel 3.18.
saying (as old Eli) It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. For
whatsoever be the rod, Micah 6.9.
we have heard now who appoints it; I smote you, says the Lord.

2. The Act.
I smote] Non nisi coactus percutit; He smites not till sinners urge him: and
when he is compelled, he does but smite. Yet if he should but smite us
according to his strength, who could abide it, or endure his strokes? He
considers our weakness, and the matter whereof we are made; else we being but
as stubble, and he as a consuming fire, how could we at all stand before him,
Psalm 141.5.
and not finally perish? Therefore he smites us in mercy, and not in fury. As
a tender hearted Surgeon being to lance his child, softly handles the sore
(says Gregory) before he strikes, and then cutteth and weepeth, and weepeth
and cutteth again, Nec parcit vt parcat, nec miseretur vt magis misereatur, as
S. Jerome speaks, (for otherwise sparing would be spilling:) so deals this
great Physician of our souls; he smites but to heal us, and never strikes us
but with compassion, mixing entreaties with his threatenings, O Ephraim what
shall I do unto thee? Hos. 6.4.
O Judah how shall I entreat thee? and ever mingling tears with his strokes
which he must give us, Luke 19.41.
as he wept over Jerusalem, which Titus that scourge of the Jews, was
afterward to whip and weep for. The latter Rabbines tell us a story, or a
fiction rather (and you will not believe it if I tell you, nor will I tell it
to that end) that God has a secret retiring place, to which at certain times,
he uses to withdraw himself every day, where bewailing the desolation of
Israel, and the miserable dispersion of the Jews with many tears, he does
beshrew himself that in his anger he subverted the Temple and holy city.
This dotage of theirs (if you take it in the literal sense as they seem to
do) is little better than a blasphemy. But understand it spiritually, and the
meaning may be that of the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 8.21.
I am sore vexed for the hurt of the daughter of my people: or that of Esaias,
Esaias 54.8.
For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee: or that in the Prophet
Jonas, Iona. 3.10.
The Lord repented him of the evil that he had said. Which must not be so
understood as if God were subject to repentance or to passions; but because
he, who is immutability in the highest degree, does speak with those that are
mutable after the manner of them with whom he speaks, says Gregory. And
therefore lift up that gross relation of the Rabbines from an earthly to an
heavenly acception; and it is true, that God takes so little pleasure in
punishing of his people, that (were it possible for the thrice sacred and all
place filling Deity, to immure it self into a melancholicke cell, and there to
be dissolved into tears) he would ever weep and grieve for them. As then
David speaks of a good man, Psalm 141.5.
let us say of God, O let the righteous, my righteous and merciful father,
smite me, for that is a benefit: If we must be chastened, happy are we that we
smart by his smitings: Let him reprove us and it shall be a precious oil: For
this we may be sure of, that when his correction comes, Nec venit sine merito
quia Deus est justus, nec erit sine commodo quia Deus est bonus; It neither
comes without our merit that have deserved it, for God is just, nor shall it be
but to our profit, because he is good and gracious.

Further in this act of their correction he speaks, you see, of that which
was past and done; I smote] which again implies another note of Gods mercy:
for in that he says, I smote, he says in effect, and by consequent, that for
the present he had laid aside his rod, and now had ceased from smiting, though
as yet they had neglected to build again the Temple, for which neglect he had
thus corrected them. Surely should not he give over punishing, till we give
over altogether sinning, he should never make an end till there were an end of
us; for we are but as lead to the fire of trouble: should he never cease from
refining of us in that fire, till all our dross were purged, he might consume
our very substance, and leave us nothing. 2 Samuel 14.14.
Yet he has devised a means not to cast out his banished: and has promised
to purify and refine us as gold and silver, Malach. 3.3. Esaias 1.25.
to burn out all our dross, and to take away all our tin, but it must be
then (as the Prophets meant it) by another fire than affliction, even the power
of Gods word, from the virtue of his spirit, of which the Baptist thus; Matthew.
3.11.
He shall baptized you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Therefore the Lord to
magnify his powerful mercy having smitten this people ( I smote you, says
he) comes to try as it were another course with them: and sends them a
Prophet who by three weeks preaching and a little more, Hag. 1.1.
(for the word came to Haggai the first day of the sixth month, Id. 2. cap. 1.
and the twenty fourth day of the same month they began to build) obtained
that of them which forty years correction could not extort. Hag. 1.15.
So powerful is the word of God: so true that which he says by his Prophets,
Esaias 55.11.
The word which goes out of my mouth shall not return unto me void, it shall
accomplish that which I will, and prosper in the thing to which I send it. And
thus as the Lord will not be ever chiding, so not always correcting; and
oftentimes he does that by the word of his mouth, which many stripes could not
effect: For he is not as Moses, which could do no great work without the rod
in his hand; but laying aside his scourges he does eftsoons by the powerful
operation of his holy spirit, work the conversion of his people: for so he
speaks in Hosea, Hosea 2.14.
Behold I will allure them and speak friendly unto them; he had said before
that he would take away from them his corn in the time thereof, and his wine
in the season thereof, that he would recover from them the wool, Verse 9.
and the flax, which he had lent to cover their shame; that he would destroy
their vines and figtrees; Verse 12.
that he would make them as a forest, and that the wild beasts should eat
them, etc. But then remembering his mercy, he makes this promise; Behold I will
allure, behold I will speak friendly. O the never too much admired goodness
of the Lord, that leaves no means unattempted to procure our good! As here
when smiting could not prevail, he sends a Prophet to persuade; who yet must
tell them that the Lord had smitten them. That they may remember their
affliction wherewith the Lord has chastened them and their fathers for the
space now of forty years, they must hear of it, though it be past and done.

And this in the next place imports our duty, as before it implied a note of
Gods mercy. Conceive it thus: When troubles have done with us, we must not so
have done with them: former afflictions, though past and gone, would yet not be
forgotten: therefore the Lord here puts them in mind what he has done, what
they and their fathers have suffered; I smote you. And this very thing he
wishes them in this chapter, once and again, and the third time, to consider
of. We like it well that our children should not forget when and for what we
have corrected them: but him that remembers the rod no longer than he smarts by
it, we hold a careless son. It is an argument of a disposition almost
incorrigible, so to despise Gods smitings, as to be no longer mindful than we
are sensible of them, or no longer to sorrow for sin than we suffer for it.
Yet all of us are too too like Ioab, 2 Samuel 14.31.
that would not go to Absolon till he had set his corn on fire: and I wish a
many of us were not worse; for the Lord has sent a blasting or (as the word
here signifies) a burning wind into our fields, and yet how few (as it may be
justly feared) have recourse to God that smites them? Though that neither be
sufficient, I mean only to visit him in our troubles, then and never else to
pour out a prayer but when his chastening is upon us. Esa. 26.16.
We hold him scarce a friend that never comes to see us but when some exigencie
drives him; and it is but forced homage which we do to our heavenly King, when
by prayer and repentance we repeare not to him, unless he send a Purseuant of
affliction for us. Our greatest motives to turn unto him should be his
mercies; but if we will not stir but when the spur is in our sides, there
is but a little good metal in us. If we be generous Christians, such as so
run that we may obtain, not miseries only present, but their very memory
will hasten us. As then it is good for us to have been in trouble, so ever to
remember it. And here in few words let me heap up many reasons.

First, it is an excellent means to keep the heart lowly, still to have in
mind what we or ours have been, or have suffered. He that of a Potters son
became afterward a Sicilian Prince, is renowned for it, that he would be
served at his Table partly in earthen vessels, to remember him daily of his
former mean condition or parentage; and partly in vessels of gold and silver,
that he might not forget himself to be a King. Surely as our advancement to
the state of grace should put us in mind to walk worthy of our calling, so
the remembrance of our creation and mould of our corruption also and former
crosses for them should quell our swelling, and keep us lowly. When the
Prophet would take down the pride and boasting of Ephraim, he puts them in
remembrance of the afflictions of their father from whom they were descended:
Hosea 12.12.
Iaakob (says he) fled into the country of Aram, and Israel served for a
wife, and for a wife he kept sheep. As if he had said; If you boast of your
riches and nobility, you seem to reproach your father, who was a poor, but
an honest fugitive, and a servant. And thus the greatest houses, would they but
respect the rock from which they were dug out, may find beggerie or
poverty in their first foundations; for there is no nobility whose base on
which it stood, was not sometimes baseness, and which God cannot again
resolve into its former principles of meannesse and obscurity.

Again, the memory of former troubles keeps the mind watchful, and makes a
man more wary, for what has been may be again, and there is nothing new
under the Sun. Eccles. 1.9.
He that has once surfetted by feeding on some dish, does usually for ever
after loath it: but if he will to it again, in his sickness let him blame
himself. Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui iterum naufragium facit; He that will
needs to the sea, having once made shipwreck, if he fall foul the second
time, may thank himself. If then by thy former enormities thou have sometimes
gotten a weakness to thy body, or a wound to thy conscience, a blot to thy
name, or a disparagement to thy calling; if for thine iniquities thou have
been corrected in thy goods or friends, in thine olive or her branches, thy
wife or children, or howsoever else, forget not these former crosses, the
remembrances whereof may be sovereign preservatives against future sins.

Thirdly, as conquests in former battles add hope and confirmation to valor
in succeeding wars, so the memory of former difficulties which by grace we
have once overcome, gives strength to faith, and hope to patience, and comfort
by them both, when we shall be brought to combat with new assaults. So the
Lion and the Bear which David could remember he had slain, 1 Samuel 17.35, 36.
encouraged him to grapple with the Giant.

Fourthly, to be much and frequent in this meditation, sets a greater price
upon Gods blessings while we have them, the worth whereof we better understand
by calling to mind our former wants of them. And therefore Moses more
seriously to affect the people with a true sense of their liberty and
deliverance, so often puts them in mind of the Egyptian bondage.

Fifthly, it teaches compassion toward others in the like afflictions. If
there be ought (I say not of grace, but) of good nature in us, we cannot but
commiserate others in their troubles, when we call to memory our own. Thus to
move the Israelites to tender heartedness toward strangers and servants, that
man of God tells them again, Deuteronomy. 16.12.
that they were servants in the land of Egypt. And should not this argument
prevail with Christian masters as much, if not more than with Jews; seeing
Christ of Satan's vassals has made them free denisons above?

Briefly it stirs up the heart to continual thankfulness, when together
with the remembrance of our former troubles, we cannot but be mindful of Gods
mercies that either ceased or eased, or so seasoned those troubles, that with
patience we bore them, and that the nets being broken, our souls at length
escaped and were set free. The Church stories report, that the woman cured by
our Savior of her issue of blood, Luke 8.44.
only by touching the hemme of his garment, returning to her house at
Philippi, caused two Statues to be set before her doors, one resembling her
self an humble suppliant on her knees with her hands lifted up; another
resembling our Savior, stretching forth his hands unto her: at the feet of
which picture (covered as it were with a robe) there did grow up so high as the
hemme of it, an herb called Panace, which that age (as Pliny also more than
two hundred years before Eusebius) seemed to have held sovereign against all
diseases. These trophies which she had set up in the honor of Christ, were to
be seen (says the same Eusebius) in his time, that is, at least three hundred
years after Christ. Well, to what purpose serves this history? Thus: All are
not able with this woman to erect before our houses in the honor of our great
Physician, such monuments as may remember us of his mercy so often as we go
in or out by our doors: but all may and should daily set up before the eyes of
their mind a twofold Memento; one of their former calamities which they have
felt, by suffering; another of Gods favors which they have proved by his
delivering. Which would we do, hence would grow a wonderful measure of
thankfulness, a grace most acceptable to God for former blessings, and of a
catholic medicinal virtue against all times of future evils: for not
Crucifixes worn in our bosoms or about us, but former crosses together with
Gods ancient mercies borne in faithful memory, are powerful amulets to save
us from the evil of ensuing dangers. If then the Lord has smitten us, know it
is our duty with Ephraim to smite our selves upon the thigh, and to remember
the corrections of old. Ier. 31.19.
Could the Iron be pliable and fashionable to the mind of the Smith after a
few strokes, nor could he but willingly spare his arms, nor should it need
more often heating or beating afterward. Would our stiffness relent with the
first cross, and be conformable to God that frames us to his will, we should
save God a labor, and our selves a second trouble. I smote you (says he)
remember it, that I may smite you no more.

And thus far touching the Author and the Act of this correction: now see the
Object; You.

I smote you] not their persons (as I said before) but their fields and
vineyards, or in these, their corn and grapes, and the like. Yet in that he
blessed not these, it was as if he had blasted them. For though such things be
not our life, yet they are our liuelihood; though not the flame, yet the oil
that feeds it. And therefore to affect them more feelingly with these
afflictions, he tells them, that whiles but these things were stricken,
themselves were smitten; I smote you.

Take out this lesson then: We should be sensible of the calamities that befall
the creatures, for we are crossed if they be cursed for our sakes. If the Lord
at this time, partly by Blasting and Mildew, partly by unseasonable weather,
have weakened our staff of bread; weakened, I say; (for blessed be his mercy
that he has not yet altogether broken it) Judge we our selves, Hab. 3.8.
to be deservedly smitten: For, Behold we have sinned, 2 Samuel 24.
we have done wickedly, but the corn and other fruits of the earth, what have
they done? Nay, the profane gluttony of the times, that men feed themselves
without fear; The loathsome drunkenness of the times, that men drink by
measures, and yet without measure; The wantonness of the times, that men like
fed horses neigh after unlawful lusts, are sins that have made the whole
body of our nation foul and very filthy. No marvel then if to purge such
foulness, such filthiness, God do even now threaten us with a famine and
cleanenesse of teeth. The father of Physicians tells us, that a foul body the
more it is nourished, the more it is perished: and that a plethorique body
would require a present euacuation. And is it not in spiritual matters as in
corporal things? We are all Gods patients, and he our great Physician. Now the
body of our sins (which the Apostle calls a body of death) is grown so full,
so foul, Romans 7.24.
that without purging there can be no hope of the life of grace. It therefore
it shall please him either to take away his corn or the virtue of it, and to
send leanenesse into our souls (as David phraseth the worst of famines, Psalm.
106.15.
when men eat and are not satisfied) he does it in wisdom to procure
cleanenesse of soul. For certain if our ouergrowne sins did not require a
slender diet, we should not need to fear a dearth, Reu. 6.
that Black horse, as the Scripture calls it, after which two usually
follows the pale horse whose rider is death. But now that I am about for this
time to conclude my labor, and that I would not that it should set in so
black a cloud as is a threatening, hear I pray you the wholesome words of
instruction; Let us cease to do evil, and learn to do well, and he will
nourish us, for he has promised to feed such, even in the time of dearth.
Surely, if we will hear and obey, Esaias 1.
we shall eat the good things of the land; our store shall be plenteous, and
our portion fat: Joel. 2.25.
he will render unto us the years which the Grasshopper has eaten: I mean, he
will turn Blasting into a blessing, Mildew and Hail, into a gracious rain
upon his inheritance, and the fields shall stand so thick with corn, that
they shall laugh and sing.

But in the mean time, let us more desire that precious food of our souls,
the word of God which endures for ever, than the things of this life which
must certainly perish. And thus far touching, first, the Author: secondly, the
Act; thirdly the Object of this correction; in these words, I smote you. The
remnant you must expect at another time. Till then and ever the Lord give a
blessing to that which has been said.

THE SECOND SERMON.
HAGGAI 2.17. I smote you with Blasting, and with Mildew, and with Hail, in
all the labors of your hands: Yet ye turned not to me, says the Lord.


MY Text here parted it self into two streams, like that river Himera in
Sicilie (as it is reported) the one somewhat salt, rather well seasoned, which
I called Gods merciful correction of this people, I smote you with Blasting,
and Mildew, and Hail, in all the labors of your hands: the other fresh and
unsavory, having no salt tears of true repentance in it; Yet ye turned not
unto me, says the Lord. In the former I noted, first, the Author, (I)
secondly, the Act, (smote) thirdly, the Object, (You) (points already handled
with their several observations) fourthly, the rods or instruments with which
he smote them, Blasting, Mildew, Hail; fifthly, the manner of this correction,
or the things wherein he smote them, In all the labors of your hands: which
two last particulars (the remanents of the first part) must now be set before
you, and after that I shall present you with the second general, and all at
this time, as God shall give ability.

4. The rods.
With Blasting, and with Mildew, and with Haile] These are the rods wherewith
the Lord smote them, which though they seem to be bound up in one bundle, and
to make but one clause in my text, are yet several corrections and
distinguishable in themselves. The last of them, which is Hail, none but
knows both that it is a different thing from the other two, and how it hurts
the fruits of the earth, sometimes in the bud, sometimes in the blossom,
sometimes interrupting their growth, sometimes dashing both them and our hopes
when they are come to their ripenes and maturity. But for the two former,
neither is their difference so plain, nor their operation in annoying the
profits of the ground so apparent to sense, till they have done the hurt. And
yet if we mark it well, the Scripture does distinguish them both here and
wheresoever else they are mentioned, though generally it bring them in thus
yoaked together, Deuteronomy. 28.22. 1 Kings 8.37.
Blasting and Mildew; for first if the original here be consulted, the words
run thus, With Blasting, Amos 4.9. Hag. 2.17.
and with Mildew, and with Hail; not thus, with Blasting or Mildew. Secondly,
the Scripture never speaks of these two, but it does express them by words
that cannot be confounded, terms I mean so different in signification that
they cannot be wrought to note the same thing; for that which we call Blasting,
the Hebrew names Shidaphon; which some translate (...), that is, a corruption
of, or by the wind; the Septuagint (...), a combustion or adustion: others
vredinem; others ventum vrentem, a burning wind; others ventum orientalem, a
scorching East wind. And that which we call Mildew, the Hebrew terms
Ierakon, which comes of the root Iarak that signifies to spit, as if Mildew
were Saliua siderum, says one, an excrementitious humor, which the stars
spit down upon the fruits of the earth, and which makes them to become
abortiue, as Pliny speaks. And therefore though he seem to confound these
two Blasting and Mildew, yet the Maker of Nature, God himself, who knew more
than Pliny a searcher of it, has in his neuer-deceiuing word (as it seems to
me) put a plain difference between these two. Which Vatablus observing, sets
this note upon my text, Haec sunt duo vitia segetum, quorum vnum nimia
siccitate and aestu prouenit, alterum nimia humiditate: These are two
calamities incident to corn, whereof the one proceeds of too much drought,
the other of too much moisture. And here I do not find any Expositor to
speak so fully of this point, as my text seems to require, and I could wish;
and therefore might I but a little with your patience speak as a Philosopher
in differencing these two (I mean as a Philosopher no ways repugning the
sacred truth of Divinity) I should think Blasting, to be referred to an
hurtful wind; and Mildew, to an unkindly moisture. And first for Blasting,
the very word implies a wind: and wind of it self is by nature hot and dry,
as is the exhalation which is the matter of it. But as the son of Syrach
speaks of spirits, Ecclus. 39.28.
may I say, There be winds which are created for vengeance: so there are
hurtful winds, as there are hurtful spirits, and blasting I take to be the
effect of such. This once, Philosophy and our own experience teaches, that
wind is of a piercing nature by reason of the subtlenesse of it, which opens
and enters the pores or secret passages, in all bodies penetrable. So that
whether it be joined with frost, it lets in the cold into tender blossoms of
trees, and into other fruits of the earth in their Milk or infancy, and so
kills them in the Womb, as it were, and causes the earth or trees to miscarry
their fruits by untimely blighting: or whether it be accompanied with some
extraordinary heat of the Sun, especially in the morning, after cold and
frostie nights; it parcheth and dries more vehemently. For as wind and heat
by nature, so frost is also a drier by a certain antiperistasis, (as they call
it) when one quality encompassed with another that is contrary, is intended or
made more vehement; like greatest spirits that never express more valor, than
when they are most narrowed and enclosed in the greatest straits. Now as all
winds are of themselves hot and dry, so the Eastwinde especially, and
therefore in the Scripture we find, that to dry up fountains, Hos. 13.15.
and to dry up the fruits of the ground, Ezekiel. 19.12.
is ascribed to the Eastern wind. Yea let the dream of Pharaoh confirm what
I say: Genesis 41.6.
for the seven thin ears of corn there mentioned, are said to be burned or
blasted, and that with an Eastlie wind. So then it is the wind that does
blast, especially the East wind in those places; yet not every East wind, but
only such as by a faintie or sultrie blowing opens the pores, and provoke
sweat; as that which caused Jonas to faint, Iona. 4.8.
and which Iunius and Tremellius do translate Eurum silentem, a calm East
wind, to distinguish it from the common ruffling East wind that breaks the
ships of Tharshish. Psalm 48.7.
This I take to be blasting. That there is a blighting sometimes in thunder by
lightning I grant: but that which the Scripture speaks of here, and in other
places, is usually by a fervent (not a boisterous) but a burning East wind, as
sundry Translators give it. Besides, those hot exhalations which cause thunder
and lightning, are also the matter of the wind, as natural Philosophy
teaches. Now for Mildew, whether it be so called because it is a mild-dew, or
a milb-tewe (as some think) of the German word milben, that signifies a worm
or moth that consumes garments, because it is as a moth or consumption to some
fruits of the earth, and in some breeds a kind of worm that eats them; or
whether it be so termed, because it is a mal-dew, that is, an hurtful dew, or
because it is a mel-dew, that is, a honey dew which does this harm, is not
much material to know, nor can I determine. But either we may conceive it to
be a rotten dew, (as Philosophers call it) which by a hurtful touch stops
the growth of some fruits of the earth that are obnoxious to it, as on the
contrary wholesome dew does nourish them: or some putrefying mist which makes
them to rust, eating out their state and substance, as canker fretteth iron;
and this the Latin word rubigo (which signifies mildew as well as rust)
seems to import: For as there are winds that do blast, as well as winds that
blow vitally and refreshingly, causing the earth to fructify, which are
therefore called Zephyrus and Venti Fauonij, because they quicken and foster
the increase of the earth; so we may conceive that there are some dewes and
mists which do hurt, as well as others that do help the growth of fruits. Or
lastly, might I here interpose what I think, I should say that shrinking of
corn by Mildew might be thus: Namely, That in fields less peruious and open
to clear and strong winds, (as in lower grounds, or other places between
woods and hills) there fall oftentimes sultrie and foggie mists; and these
covering and keeping too close the fruits of the ground under them, as under
thick mantles, do cast that corn or kind of grain which is subject to this
malady, as it were, into an unkindly sweat, at such time as the ears thereof
are not yet sufficiently filled from the root. By which faint sweat is vented
that sweetness which should feed the ear. Now this sweetness once exhausted
or drawn out at the stalk or straw, sticks close unto it being burnt or made
adust, by some extraordinary heat of the Sun, as it happens, especially in
the Canicula^ days, which (as it may seem) made the Romans to sacrifice a
dog to Mildew, as Ovid tells us. So that in corn thus smitten we may behold
the straw speckled with black spots as it were of soot, which I take to be
nothing else but the sweet moisture of the reed exhaled in a faint sweat
through a foggie mist or Mildew, and then afterward by some extraordinary heat
turned into a burnt and black matter. But be it what it is: he that sends it,
knows it; And therefore leaving this speculation, seeing the Lord has but of
late smitten us in our grounds with a burning wind, and with Mildew, know it is
our duty not so much to dispute or enquire what they are, and whence they come,
as to seek how by tears of repentance to quench that fire of his anger that
sent this burning into our fields. So by maturely converting now unto him, we
shall prevent the next years like affliction, have this sanctified unto us,
and be freed for ever from the terrors of that never dying fire.

Yet I have not done with this clause, till hence I have gathered some
observations.

With Blasting, and Mildew, and Haile] With these he smote them. These then are
but rods, they are not gods or goddesses, as the heathen thought them. The
Thurij in Aelian made a Deity of the wind, and the Romans set up Mildew for
a goddess, as Saint Austine tells us. And both (o ridiculously absurd
idolatry!) offered sacrifice to them. But I will not be so unthrifty as to
spend one word in refelling so gross a superstition. A bare narration, is
confutation enough for so childish a folly. Nor had I vouchsafed so much as
once to mention it, but to reprove some Christians that laugh at these Idols,
and yet set up others in their stead. Outward prosperity who desires not? yet
to dote upon it so much, as to have our affections clung to it, and set
altogether upon the things below, what is it but to adore an idol? And yet how
many be there that even prostitute their souls before it, and stick not to
sacrifice both a good name and a good conscience to demerit it? And what is
worldly prosperity (to speak in a worldlings language) but Fortunes sultry
wind? indeed a spiritual blasting that shrinkes and blighteth virtue in her
growth? For as the river Nilus, when it rises too high, and waters Egypt
overmuch, makes the land barren, which otherwise by a mean flowing would
cause it to fructify: so the world when it comes too fast upon us with an
ouer-swelling redundancie, choakes the seed of Gods graces in us, and makes the
soul fruitless, as that river does the soil. It is an aphorism in Physic,
that fullness in the extreme is an enemy unto health: And it is an axiom in
Divinity, that excessive plenty is no friend to grace. For as misfortunes slay
the wicked, Psalm. 34.20.
so the prosperity of fools destroys them. Prou. 1.32.
Therefore Agur prayed thus, Give me not poverty nor riches, but feed me with
food convenient for me, Prou. 30.8.9.
lest I be full and deny thee, or lest I be poor and steal. Yea of the two,
adversity it self is less adverse to goodness than carnal ease and
abundance: as it is not the boystrous wind that hurts the fruit of the
earth, so much as a faint and sultry blowing. It was not the ruffling wind,
but the scorching beams of the Sun, that made the man lay aside his cloak,
as Plutarch has it in a parable.

Worldly prosperity causes many to put off the garment of holiness and
innocence, which they buckled fast unto them, whiles they were exercised with
storms of troubles. The zeal of Christians is like that ignis Graecus, which
(as a Philosopher speaks) is enflamed by pouring cold water upon it; or like
our English Ieat, that is fired in water and quenched with oil, (as a learned
country man of our own observes) for it has ever grown more fervent by
affliction, and prospered less in times of prosperity. Thus the Halcyon days
of the Church having but breathed a little between the ninth and tenth
persecution, brought forth contentions amongst the learned, and much hypocrisy
in all sorts, which provoked Gods judgments, as Eusebius notes. It is the
warmth of Goats blood (says Solinus) that dissolues the Adamant, when neither
hammer nor other massy engines of violence can break it. And it is the heat
of prosperity, which weakens virtue more than many heavy troubles. Therefore to
be too far in love with worldly felicity, that so blighteth goodness and
piety, what is it but with the Thurij to make an idol of the wind, and to be
in love with blasting? Again, give another instance; some are so far in love
with their sins, as that they hate a reprouer, and do love nothing more than
flatttery that stroketh them: and what is this but with the Romans to sacrifice
to Mildew? for honey tongues of parasites, do more hurt than hony-dewes: these
mar but that which should be our meat, but those corrupt the man himself,
who (it may be) would disrellish his faults, and abhor them, did not pleasing
adulation wrap them up in sugared speeches, and cause him to swallow them down
without sense or conscience. For other men's sins are direct objects to our
eyes, but our own sins, like our own eyes, we see not but by reflection
either of conscience within, or of others information without us. Which if they
be false and flatter us, how easily do we yield our selves to be deceived
with such sophistry. The chief reason whereof is the self-love of our own
deceitful hearts, which exposes us ouer-credulous to others deceitful
tongues, and willingly looks not on ought that is evil in us: As the mother
of the Minotaure in her natural affection to that monster could never endure
to look upon the beastly part of it; some love their sins as their own
sons, unwilling to reflect their eyes upon that monstrous foulness that is
in them, therefore they hate the very glass of true dealing, that would
represent unto them such filthiness: Whereas the deceitful spectacles of
false flattery, which shows their good parts (if they have any) greater and
better than they are indeed, they put in their bosoms, and hold such for
dearest and most intimate friends, as have learned the flattering style. Yet
the Greek Orator Demosthenes thought it better to fall amongst ravens than
parasites, for those feed upon the dead, these eat up the living. But I have
held you too long in a figure: for worldly prosperity is a Blasting, and
flattery is a Mildew, but both in the Metaphor. Come we now to the letter, and
there observe how these three rods come in bound up together with a
coniunctiue, With; With Blasting, says the Prophets, With Mildew, and with
Hail. For the two former I find in Scripture that if one be spoken of, Deuteronomy.
28.22. 1 King. 8.37. Amos 4.9. Hag. 2.17.
the other is mentioned also, and save one place that is the 41. of Genesis, I
find not any place wherein they are not brought in, coupled thus, with
Blasting and Mildew. Nor is it a wonder that Gods corrections should come by
couples at least, or by leashes as here, Blasting, Mildew, Hail, when men's
corruptions go not only by couples, Romans 13.13.
Gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and envying;
but thus in troops; There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
Land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, Hose. 4.12.
and whoring, men break out, and blood touches blood. For should not full
viols of wrath be powered down on men full of all unrighteousness, and those
other sins named by the Apostle, which are so monstrous, Romans 1.29, 30.
that but to remember them is an horror; and so many, that but to repeat them
might put a man out of breath. Yet neither are they so monstrous, nor so many,
but that (without slandering our times and Nation) we may affirm, that too
many Christians (as they would be reputed) succeed the Gentiles in those foul
evils there mentioned by the Apostle, if not exceed them also. Notwithstanding,
see the gracious lenity and mercy of our God in correcting us and our Land
only with some blasting and mildew, and some unseasonable weather in this our
last harvest: Whereas he might have given us over, as our neighbor countries,
to consume one another by intestine broiles and civil wars, or to have been
devoured and even laid waste by the sword of a forreiner. Therefore as the
Prophet speaks to Nineveh, Art thou better than No, meaning Alexandria, which
was full of people, that lay in the rivers, Nahum 3.8.
and had the waters round about it, whose ditch was the Sea, and her wall from
the Sea: let me speak to Great Britain; Art thou better (I say not, fenced or
environed, but, to Godward better affected) than Bohemia? or art thou less
sinful than France, or the Palatinate? or some other places also, in which
have been acted so many woeful Tragedies of late, whiles thou neither fearing
nor feeling the miseries of those ruefull inhabitants, satest as a spectator,
or a looker on? Are we better, I say? No; but God has been better unto us, if
so be we are bettered by it, and at length have learned by seeing our brethren
beaten before us, to fear our common Father, though we feel not his stripes:
for blessed be the mighty God of our Iaakob, our Land stands yet unshaken in
all these storms, as a rock in the midst of the sea, whiles the waters roar
with tempests round about it. Indeed he has of late smitten us in some places,
but (magnified be his mercy for ever) only with rods of men, Psalm. 89.32.
not with men-rods, only with blasting and mildew. And in stead of the noise of
drums, and the clangour of the trumpets, and clattering of armor, and the
fierce neighing of horses, and the sense-amazing terror of the Cannon, we have
heard the sound of bells calling us to Prayer and Sermon. In other places they
hear the shrikings of infants, their Rabels mourning for their children, and
will not be comforted because they are not: ours laugh and play in the streets.
For balls of wild fire that burn up others with their houses, we have felt
but blasting winds in our fields: and for streams of blood which fat other
lands with the gore of the inhabitants, we have suffered but mists and
mildewes, that have somewhat shrunk the fruits of our Land. O that we would be
thankful, he has smitten us only with blasting and mildew. Yet neither had he
thus corrected us or this people in my text, if he had not been provoked by
us. But such is the nature of sin, it angers the God of Nature.

No wonder then (and let it be our next observation) if it trouble and pervert
the course of nature, by causing the Maker to turn kindly winds into blasting,
the mornings wholesome moisture into mildewes, and soft drops of rain into
stones. God had no sooner framed this world above and below as an excellent
instrument or pair of Organs to set forth his praise, and therein appointed
man as the life and breath to sound out his wisdom and goodness in and by all
the creatures, but sin came in, and by the Serpents hissing marrd the
music: Then the heavens above began to look disastrously on the world below:
Then the elements below perniciously to mutiny among themselves, and all to
conspire man's dissolution, whose matter was compounded of them. Then began the
creatures some to rebel against him that revolted from his Maker, and the rest
to do him homage but with sighs and groans. Romans 8.22.
Then the earth by enforcement of labor to yield her fruits to nourish him;
but without labor, thousands of minerals, and herbs, and plants to poison
him. Then his own passions and affections to fight against his reason, which
should have been regent over them. Then his own humors to be at a perpetual
discord in him, till they had wrought his death. Then the father slew his
posterity which were not yet borne. Then the brother imbrued his savage hands
in the blood of his brother. Then Nature turned unnatural; nor ever do we
hear of crosses in and by the creature, till sin brought curses into the
world. This is it then that troubled Nature; this is it which yet like Ahab
troubles Israel.

It were our wisdom then, to trouble it; if we love our own peace, not to be
at peace with it, but continually to fight against it by true repentance. So
should the earth yield her kindly increase, nor should we need hereafter to
fear or burning of her fruits by winds, or shrinking of them by unwholesome
dewes. Would we power down showers of tears, how easily might we procure
showers of rain to quell such winds, and to wash away such Mildewes, when
they fall? But to complain of our smarting by these rods, or to be querulous
against these second causes, and not to heed the hand of the chief mouer, what
is it, but with those foolish people in Aul^s Gellius, to fight with the wind
that dried up their waters? or with vain Xerxes in Herodotus to beat the
Hellespont that broke down his bridge. As in all other afflictions, so in
these we must observe the supreme agent, God himself, that sends them for our
good to profit by them: For at his command the winds blow and again are
hushed, the air powers out rain or sends down Mildews upon the earth: and it
rests in his power to make our land yet more barren, if we continue
disobedient; or to fructify, if we repent. It is reported, that the river
Nilus makes the land barraine if in ordinary places it either flow under
fifteen cubits, or above seventeen: and therefore that Prester John (through
whose country it runs, and in which it arises from the hills called the
Mountains of the Moon) can at his pleasure drown a great part of Egypt by
letting out into the river certain vast ponds and sluices, the receptacles of
the melted snow from the mountains. Which that he may not do, the Turks who
are now the Lords of Egypt, pay a great tribute unto him, as the Princes of
that land have done time out of mind: which tribute when the great Turk not
long since denied to pay, till by experience he found this to be true, he was
afterward forced with a greater sum of money to renew his peace with that
Governor of the Abissines, and to continue his ancient pay. The truth of this
relation I question not: mine author is both of worth and credit eminent, and
the thing it self credible. But this we all believe, that the great Emperor
of heaven and earth, who sits above us, can at his pleasure make our land and
all the regions of the earth, fruitful or barraine, by restraining or letting
loose the influences of his blessings from above. In respect whereof, besides
many other far greater bonds of duty, we owe and should pay unto him a
continual tribute of thankful obedience. This if we will not acknowledge and
tender, he can force us; for he has dams and ponds rather, an whole Ocean of
judgments in store, which he can (when it seems him good) let down upon us
to make both the land fruitless, and the soul it self accursed that
rebelleth. Not Blasting only, or Mildew, or fire, or hail, or lightning, or
thunder, or vapors, or snow, or stormy winds, but even whole vollies and
vollumes of curses more than can be numbered, are pressed to do his will, to
afflict and vex them that grieve his good spirit by their sins and reuoltings
especially from the truth. Why then do we taint the air with rotten speeches?
Why do we with oaths and blasphemies even blast his heavens that can blast
our earth? Why send we up daily so many noisome vapors of our sins, against
him that can send to us so many wrathful messengers of his displeasure? They
of Tire and Sydon shall rise up in judgment against us, to condemn us of
folly. They would not war with Herod, Act. 12.20.
because their country was nourished by the Kings land: And shall we by
continuance in these and other sins, dare the all-commanding Majesty that is
above, by whose blessings the earth, here below, Esaias 55.10.
ministers seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats? Do we so reward
the Lord, o foolish people and unwise? Deuteronomy. 32.6.
What are we stronger than he? or have we not read it, that none can deliver
out of his hands? For how shall any hand war against him and prevail,
without whom no hand can work and prosper, as it follows in the next
circumstance?

In all the labors of your hands] In all: 5. The Manner.
It is an universal note, how shall we take it? In the largest sense; then it
would include within the curse, all their labors, whether of tillage or of
trading, whether in their ships or shops, at home or abroad, in their houses,
or in their fields and vineyards. If all their labors of what kind soever,
none excepted, were understood, then their seeled houses which they built, Hag.
1.3.
and all the works of their mechanical trades, should have been subject to
Blasting and Mildew, which were childish to think. Therefore not to extend
this universal note any further than the Prophet here reaches it: this (All)
has a special reference to their works of husbandry and tillage, in which a
great part of this people had been and were now conversant: for it is reported
of Nebuzaradan, the king of Babels Steward, after the sacking of Jerusalem,
that he left of the poorer sort of the people to dress Vineyards, 2 King.
25.12.
and to till the land. But what then? did the Lord only correct Husbandmen?
were not all the rest of that people, though no tillers of ground, as much if
not more to be blamed, for not building the Temple? for this was the principal
cause why thus the Lord smote them: Yes, I smote you (says he) in all the
labors of your hands; he means the whole people of the Jews, for in that he
cursed the labors of the plough, the curse redounded to others of their works
also. If those prospered not, all other labors and Laborers fared the worse
for it.

Whence first observe how much the happiness or misery of a people depends
upon the good or ill success of the ploughmans labors and other parts of
husbandry: for if God bless not these, it is a correction upon the whole Land
and Country. Surely the noble hand of tillage is that which feeds the world,
the King also (and he was the wisest and greatest King that said it) consists
by the field that is tilled. Eccles. 5.8.
Now if this hand that by Gods appointment reaches meat to all mouths, be
discouraged, despised, and weakened, all other hands and hearts too must needs
grow the fainter; for all are made of clay, and as their substance came from
the earth, so must their sustenance be taken thence, and how is that but
specially by tillage? Some wretched courses of life, as the Usurers, the
Brokers, the Proiectors, the Monopolists, Joshua 6.9. Number. 11.25.
and the like gathering host of Dan, are as the spleen, the fuller and bigger
their bags are, the leaner and lanker goes it with the Commonwealth: and on
the contrary, the less such fill and thrive, the fatter grows the body of the
State. But the calling of the Husbandman is as the liver; if it prosper, all
fare the better for it; if it waste, it proves Macies in corpore toto, a
consumption to the whole. Therefore to stop the plough, is in Gods account to
starve at least the poor. Such then as decay both houses and husbandry, by
joining house to house, and field to field, till there be no place for the
poor, that so they may be placed by themselves in the midst of the earth, Esaias
5.8.
are neither Caesar's friends, nor the Commonwealths, no nor their own: for
this is in mine ears, says the Lord of hosts; this sin cries so high, that
he does not only hear it, but it is a continual vexation unto him, (as if it
were some ringing in his ears that he would be rid of) or an incessant clamor
that night and day importunately solicited justice and called for vengeance:
Esaias 5.9.
For this, says he, shall their own houses one day be desolate. Yea to such
(says that Prophet) pertaines a Woe, and he cries it so loud, that another
after him answers like an Echo, Woe, for they covet an evil covetousness,
Hab. 2.10.
and consult shame to their own houses, whiles by destroying many people they
make their possessions fields of blood, purchased in effect with the hazard of
the lives of Gods inheritance for want of food: for how can they be but enemies
to the lives of many, that hinder those labors which should feed all? and
which when God smites, he would have it noted as a correction on the whole
Nation, though the curse fall immediately but upon the works of the Husbandman,
as here, I smote you in all the labors of your hands, and yet all these
labors (to speak properly) were but the labors of the Husbandman. Which
again thus offers another lesson to us:

That the sins of a whole Land or people are sometimes corrected but in some
one or another calling or trade of life, by not blessing which the Lord yet
would chasten all. The neglect of building the Temple was generally the fault
of all, of the Priest as of the people, of the Governors as of the common
sort, of Tradesmen as of Ploughmen; yet as if the Husbandman had been more
negligent than all the rest, (which is more than can be proved) his labors are
smitten for all the rest, and in them all are smitten. As when the whole body
is sick, the Surgeon labors to cure it, by opening a vein in some one part
or other, by which he does abate the rankenesse of the humors in all the
rest: so to medicine a sinful state or people, sometimes the Lord smites them
in the hand of husbandry, Hag. 1.6.
When it sowes much and brings but in a little: sometimes he lets them blood in
the arm of the soldiery, Psalm. 89.43.
When he goes not forth with their Armies to battle, but takes away the edge
of their sword: sometimes in one calling, sometimes in another, sometimes at
once in a many: yet all is but as phlebotomie, or letting of blood in some
parts, to ease the whole of that superfluity of vices that would destroy it.

If then the Lord at this time has made, not our Vine dressers to howl, for
we may say of our land, as the Poet does of Egypt, Terrasuis contenta bonis,
and it has no such need of these: but if he has made our Husbandmen ashamed
because of the harvest; Joel 1.11.
if our Clothiers to mourn because of the wool and the flax; if the poor to
cry (murmr they should not) that have mouths and no meat, hands and no
work, which (God be merciful to our nation) is a double misery; think thus
with our selves, all sorts have sinned as well as these: For we fall away more
and more. The whole body is sick, though the physic be applied to some
parts. Yet neither is this but an argument of Gods mercy, who as a shepherd,
sends his barking dogs of dearth and poverty after us his wandering sheep, not
to devour us, but to reduce us to his fold, and to keep us within the
compass of obedience to his laws. Surely he means our good in all this: for
as a man suffers those beasts which he appoints shortly to be slain, to
go in his deepest pastures and to break his hedges without restraint, to the
end they may be sooner fatted for the shambles, but keeps shorter such as he
purposes to keep alive; so deals the Lord with us: in that by these
corrections he now abridgeth our land of that fullness which we our selves
desire, and suffers us not to transgress his statutes without controlement, it
is to preserve us: did either he intend our slaughter, we should (it may be)
not want a richer feeding: or would we amend our lives, we should not lack
it, might it be good for us. But he knows that fullness of bread, Ezekiel. 16.49.
through man's corruption causes much filthiness. This if our former plenty
have brought forth, he purposes in mercy to purge us, and to make us fit for
better blessings; of which we cannot be capable till he has emptied our souls
of their natural defilednesse, and cleansed them by tossing us up and down in
some waters of affliction. Your selves will have your cups and glasses scowred
sometimes in salt, into which you power your wine or oil, but care not to have
the troughs washed, in which are served your dogs or swine. Touching such as
with the dog return to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and with the swine that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, Reu. 22.11.
is that said, He that is filthy let him be filthy; but thus he speaks to
them whom he has appointed to be vessels of glory; Esaias 1.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. And again, Wash ye, make ye clean; and if at his
persuasion they will not wash themselves by repentance in tears, he will make
them do it by troubles; for it is a work which he will have done, to which
while his people do not cheerfully consecrate their hands, he can curse them
in other labors of their hands, as here, I smote you in all the labors of
your hands.

In all] These all, are properly but all the labors of the Husbandman (as has
been said) yet because all smarted whiles but these were smitten, he speaks
it indefinitely to all, not excluding any, I smote you in all the labors of
your hands.

Which in the third place lights another candle to let us see how we ought to
sympathise one with another, in those several afflictions that befall us. I
would utter it in this proposition: The crosses that befall others in their
lawful callings, doing their honest endeavors, we should esteem partly our
own, according to that rule of the Apostle; Gal. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. So he
speaks, as if compassion were the fullness and complement of the law: and
indeed so it is, Romans 13.8. Gal. 5.14.
For love is the fulfilling of the law. These places are Scripture enough for
proof: may it please you to conceive the reason of the duty thus; A
Commonwealth is called a body, sundry callings and conditions of men therein,
are as parts organicall, or members of the same: There is an head of government
that rules all; an eye of counsel that sees for all; a tongue of utterance
that speaks for all; arms of valor that fight for all; hands of labor that
work for all. Some callings are the legs which support the rest; as the
Clothiers and others which are conversant about the staple commodities of the
land; others as feet of traffic for commutation to transport the rest. Now
all these as fellow members should work for the good of all, and should be so
combined in affection, that the hurting or weakening of any one, should make
the rest sensible of hurt done to them. For instance; If but the labors often he
Husbandman be blasted, all should feel it, as if themselves were smitten. If
Merchandise and Merchants Ships that plough the sea for us to bring in riches,
and are the walls of an Island, be discouraged by Pirates, and tempests, or any
other sad disasters at Sea or Land: If Clothiers and clothing, the ancient
honor and rich commodity of our Nation go down, all other Trades and men of
other callings should have a fellow feeling of those miseries: yea all should
pity, all should endeavor a redress, or pray for it; the Prince as the
Pesant, the Judge on the Bench, as the Prisoner at the Bar; he that holds
the Pike, as he that handles the Pen; the night-student, as the day-labourer;
for the whole body cannot be perfectly whole, if any part be wounded. And
therefore, if one member suffer, all should suffer with it. But if in stead of
commiseration and compassion one toward another in our several callings,
there be nothing but repining against, and undermining of one another: If the
Tenant envy his Landlord, and the Landlord set such rents on his grounds, that
the Tenant cannot live with comfort: If the Leuite fret at the Lawyers
fullness, and the Lawyer grudge at the Levites portion, which is Gods by his
own claim: If most malign the Courtier, and the begging Courtier would
squise all as spunges: If most abhor the Soldier, and the bloody Soldier
desire to prey upon all as a Vultur on dead carcasses: If some would have
peace, to oppress the poor, and others would have war, to rob the rich: If
some would have the seas open to return us foreign vanities, for the
necessaries of the land; and others pray for times of reprisall, again to be
fishing in troubled waters, (though goods so gotten at sea, and God knows how,
have strangely melted in the hands of many since they landed) If thus one sort
bite and devour another, let us take heed (says the Apostle) lest we be
devoured one of another. Fourthly, take notice hence of this instruction;

That when God blesses not, no labor prospers, how honest or commodious
soever the calling be wherein we labor. A more lawful calling than that of
tillage can be none: It had God for the first Author, Genesis 3.19. Genesis 3.23.
Genesis 9.20.
and Adam the sole heir of the world for the first Practitioner. Noah the
Patriarch that suruiued the old world, lived to till the new also; Genesis 26.12.
and Isaac a type of Christ turned Husbandman. Elisha the Prophet was a
Ploughman, 1 Kings 19.19.
and the greatest Kings have delighted both in the praise of it, as Solomon;
Eccles. 5.8.
and in the practice of it, as Vzziah. 2 Chr. 26.10.
And that the greatest should not be ashamed to learn the mystery of it, the
Lord (who is greater than all) is said to teach it, for thus the Prophet of the
Husbandman, Esaias. 28.26.
His God instructs him. Christ yet the more to grace it, John 15.1:
has called his Father an Husbandman, his Church a field, his Ministers
laborers in it; man's heart reformed, Gods husbandry; his own word, the seed;
good works, the fruits, Angels the reapers, and the general judgment the
Lords great harvest. Nor is it more honest than useful, for the abundance of
the earth is over all, Eccles. 5.8.
that is, there is no worldly thing comparable to the revenues of the earth,
whether we respect the universality of their use, in that all even from the
King to the kitchen boy are fed by them; or the excellency thereof, in that
they nourish life, which gold and silver cannot do. The earth as an Olive
berrie has our food without, not within; her mines and metals are too hard for
our digestion, nor need we to dig into her womb for meat; if we do but
search her outsides, or draw furrows in her surface, we shall find store of
most precious and useful riches. This, Aesope, or whosoever else he was,
sweetly conveyed to our understanding in that parable of the Husbandman, who
when he died, told his sons that he had left unto them gold, buried but a
little under ground in his vineyard: which they dug all over after his
death, but gold they found none; yet by stirring the mould about the roots of
their Vines, the next years vintage proved so plentiful, as made good the old
man's promise in effect, according to the sense, not the sound of his words. So
that whether we consider the honesty or the use of it, this calling for
worldly things has no fellow: Yet as honest, as useful as it is, when God is
not pleased to bless the endeavors of it, they cannot prosper. To build an
house, or to watch a city, are both lawful enough; and to be sedulous and
vigilant in these works, is even laudable: yet if Gods favor be not present
to work in the one, and to watch for the other, the Psalmist says, Psalm.
127.2.
that both these are in vain. It is not early rising, or going late to bed,
Prou. 10.22.
but the blessing of God that makes rich: And this has quandam vniuersalem
influentiam in omnia opera bona, an universal influence into all good
endeavors, which when God will restrain, in vain man wearieth himself.

Be this then ever in our memory, in all our works, begun, continued, and
ended in him, still to depend on his goodness, and so to glorify his name:
For as without the influence of his blessing, no labor of ours can make us
thrive; so with it and by it all our lawful works shall prosper, though the
world and malice it self should be set to cross us. When an Alderman of
London was given to understand by a Courtier, that Queen Mary in her
displeasure against the city, threatened thence to divert both Term and
Parliament to Oxford; he asked of him the question, whether she would turn
thither the Channel of the Thames or no; if not, said he, by the grace of God
we shall do well enough. When either envy of meaner men repineth, or the anger
of greater persons rages against our thriuing, we shall do well to remember
that there is a river whose streams shall make glad the city of God: Psalm.
46.4.
a current (I mean) of Gods blessings, which while he vouchsafes to our
honest labors and lawful callings, no malice of man or devil shall ever be
able to stop or auert. So whiles this river of God keeps its course, we shall
do well enough: but if his hand for our sins turn it aside (as it were)
into another channel, no wonder then if we prosper not in all the labors of
our hands.

Lastly, hence observe, that it is a just thing with God not to bless them in
their works, that neglect his work. The point rises thus: The building of
the Temple was Gods work (for this he had enjoined them) but the tilling of
their grounds, and dressing of their Vineyards were their works: They were
negligent to do the former, therefore God cursed them in the latter: I smote
you, says he, in all the labors of your hands.

To omit other proof of a doctrine so plain, even that of the Prophet shall
now serve the turn, Ier. 48.10.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. Hence infer this
conclusion; If the not builders of the Temple be accursed, how shall the
pullers of it down look for a blessing?

But what is this to us? we pull it not down. True: yet if we be not builders
of it, we are as culpable as these Jews. Yea but we have no Churches to
build: be it so; yet the Lord has a work for every one of us; yea, a Temple
which yet must be built by us, or we are accursed. What is that? S. Jerome
upon this place informs us; 1 Cor. 3.11.
It is to build up our selves a Temple unto God, 1 Pet. 2.
upon Christ Jesus the foundation and the Corner Stone; according to that of
the Apostle, Jude 20.v.
Edify your selves in your most holy faith. Yea the Prophet Jeremy tells us
what this Temple is, Ierem. 7.4, 5.
Trust not in lying words, saying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord: The Temple of the Lord (says he) are these (as it is in the last
translation:) what are those? It follows in the fifth verse, To redress our
ways and our works, to execute judgment between man and man; not to
oppress the stranger, or the fatherless, or the widow; to shed no innocent
blood, nor to walk after other Gods, etc. For this is the will, yea and the
work of God too, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
Even our sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.

1 Cor. 3.17.
Again, Saint Paul tells us what it is; The Temple of God is holy, which ye
are, 1 Cor. 3.17. So then we our selves are this Temple, which must be built
in faith, Jude verse 20. and renewed in knowledge, Col. 3.10. and reedified by
love, 1 Cor. 8.1. and repaired by repentance: for thus says the Lord; The
heaven is my Throne, and the earth is my footstool, where is that house that
ye will build unto me, and where is that place of my rest, Esaias 66.1. He
answers in the next verse, To him will I look even to him that is poor and of
a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. This then is the spiritual
Temple of the Lord, the new man is the new Temple; Psalm. 132.14.
This is his rest for ever, here will he dwell, for he has a delight
therein. The Babylonians defaced the first material Temple, and the Jews were
charged to build it again, which while they neglected to do, God smote them
in all their labors. The ghostly enemy of our souls, through envy and
malice has razed and demolisht in us that goodly frame of innocence, in which
we were created at first, after Gods own image, in righteousness and true
holiness. Now this the merciful God would, should be built again, and thus
calls upon us to do it: Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4.23.
and Put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him
that created him, Col. 3.10. This is his work, and if we make it not ours
also, that is, Phil. 2.12.
By working out our own salvation with fear and trembling, how justly may the
Lord curse us in all our labors, as he did this people? Either then let us
attend Gods husbandry, Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9.
that is, the reformation of our selves and others, or look not that he
should prosper our Husbandry, or whatsoever labor else is ours. In vain shall
we purpose to prevent Blasting and Mildew by early sowing, if we repent too
late. If we will not plough up our hearts with a godly sorrow, that the seed of
his word may take root; Ier. 4.4.
and bring forth fruit, he can make our seed-to rot under the clods, or by
corrections more than we can imagine, smite it in its growth, and even frustrate
our fairest hopes, be we never so skillful in choosing of the soil to sow in,
or in observing of the season. If we would that our earthly affairs should
prove succesfull, our greatest care should be, first, to seek the kingdom of
God, and to recover that by Christ which we lost in Adam. A Persian King (were
it Darius Hystaspis, or Xerxes, it is not certain) when the Grecians had taken
from him Sardi a famous city in Asia the less, in Saint John's time one of the
seven Churches, charged that every day at dinner, one speaking aloud should
remember him, that the Grecians had taken the city Sardi from him. Beloved,
we have lost more than a city: we have lost our souls, which are of more
worth than all the world besides, if Christ do not rescue them from the hands
of Satan. O then that we would give our Redeemer no rest by incessant prayers,
till he deliver us, and repair our ruins. O that still we would be calling
upon him to remember his loss and ours, (for ours is his) till we have
regained by him, that which at first was taken from us by the enemy, even the
Image of our God after which we were created. This is the Temple of the Lord,
and how should we mourn in our souls, and give the temples of our head no
rest, Psalm. 132.5.
till we have found out in our selves a place for this Temple of the Lord, that
we may be a spiritual habitation for the mighty God of Iaakob? Yea this should
be our care still, by repentance to reedifie the ruins of our souls; in
which work alone to thrive were even felicity enough, though we did not
prosper in any worldly labor. But alas, too many of us have too great a part
in the second general part of my text, which may speak to us as to this
people; 2 General Part.
Yet ye have not returned to me, says the Lord. Lose not the fruit of your
patience (I beseech you) in the last act: and touching this I shall have done
in a word; for here I shall but point at some few such things as might hence
be noted, and leave them to be enlarged and applied by your own meditations.

As first, the goodness of God in his corrections of us, that he intends them
to be but directions and instructions, to teach us how to return unto him, for
that was the end here wherefore he smote this people, that they should return;
and it is his aim in all those afflictions which he sends and we suffer, for
all such (...) are (...), such nocuments are documents to them whom he chastens
in love.

Secondly, the illness of man in his corruptions, that he is a runnagate from
his God, and even then unwilling to be revoked from his wanderings, when God
yet lays such crosses in his way, that if he return not, he cannot prosper.

Thirdly, the inefficacie or insufficiency of afflictions, which of themselves
are never able to reduce us to our Fathers home, if they be not sanctified to
us, or we rather unto them. Thus we find it in the parable of the Prodigal,
that it was not so much the sense of his own misery, as the confidence he had
in his fathers mercy, which made him return with this resolution, I will go
to my father. If as he had spent his portion, he had also lost the comfortable
assurance of his fathers love and relenting goodness to re-accept him, he had
still wallowed in his sins, and stayed by the trough with his unclean
fellow-feeders: for afflictions of themselves are of a destroying nature; as
corasiues they eat, but they cure not; and therefore corrections if they be
ministered unto us not corrected, not sanctified to us by grace, of themselves
(as poisons) may do hurt, but can profit us nothing to conversion. O Lord,
thou have smitten them (says the Prophet) but they have not returned unto
thee. In all our afflictions then, let this evermore be our prayer, that we may
profit by them, lest it may be said to us, as S. Austine speaks of the Romans,
who were not bettered by their troubles; Perdidistis vtilitatem calamitatis,
and miserrimi facti estis, and pessimi permansistis: Calamities have done you
no good; ye have been afflicted, and yet are as ill affected as ever. When
physic works not with the Patient, what comfort? When crosses teach not, what
hope? And therefore (good Lord) mingle thy grace with thy rods, that they may
drive us home to thee, whose arms of mercy are ever open to receive the
penitent; That so suffering with our Savior, we may reign with him, and come
at length to that kingdom of rest, where thou will wipe away all tears and
fears from our eyes.

FINIS.

